ELMUNDO
r 10 pages 3 ctvs. [ Semester, 84.00. r One afio, 87.50,
■ ■■■■■a, iiiiii, ■■■■lllllll, Oficinas? Salvador Brau, 81. tal. 833, P. O. Box 345.
MORNING DAILY.
EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
YEAR IV.
8AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published end distributed under permit (No. 801) author!' Ran Jnan. Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. 8. E febrnary 21, 1910. at the Pont Office at San Juan, Porte
by the Aet of October 6, 1017. on file at the Post Office o* leson, Bustmastar General. Entered aa second class matter, co, tUnited States of America) under the Act of march 8, 1870.
SATURDAY, JULY 8, 1922.
NUMBER 1044.
The important "bill" introduced in ■ the House of Representatives of the United States.
Requesting jurisdiction for the courts of P. R. in cases of violation of the Volstead Act.
Don Mariano R. Pesquera, Director of Prohibition in Puerto Rico, who recently arrived from the North, supplied us yesterday with a copy of the "bill" presented in the U.S. House of Representatives, by Judge Towner, requesting that the island courts be granted concurrent jurisdiction with the Federal Court, in cases of violations of the Prohibition laws. The full text of the bill is as follows: "P. S. 9270. IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES - November 23, 1921. Mr. Towner introduced the following bill which was referred to the Committee on Insular Affairs and ordered to be printed. A BILL to confer upon the Courts of the United States, for -all offenses concerning the melonal prohibition law and all laws and amendments supplementary thereto. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America, in Congress assembled: That concurrent jurisdiction is hereby conferred upon the Magistrates "and lemwiAir itiounaies of Puerto Rico with the Commissioners and Courts of the United States for the said Territory for all offenses under the act of October 28, 1919, known as the ''National Prohibition Act'' and the supplemental amendments made thereunder. The jurisdiction of the said Magistrates and Territorial Courts over the said offenses shall be the same 'Borniquen Park' TODAY. - Saturday. - TODAY. The Trail's End. with a special cast of Retreta. stars. Luneta 20 cents. -Tomorrow Sunday. 'The Discarded Woman' (La Esposa Abandonada.) -Great Retreta. - In Puerto Rico Mr. Weissman of D. L. Davis Weissman Co. (blouse manufacturers) has just arrived and is staying at the Palace Hotel and desires to make contracts with responsible agents. Advt Se plisa y forran botones , A.CARAZO, Brau St. 72 ádn.
The above-mentioned "bill", which is a bill of lading, was issued by them, as it relates to criminal offenses in their jurisdiction. ' ' The said bill, as we have said above, was introduced in the House of Representatives, and passed for study by the Committee on Insular Affairs, from which it was again returned to the House, after having been the subject of extensive HEARINGS, in which, as our readers will remember, Mr. Travieso, Mr. Pesquera and Mr. Córdova Dávila, among others, took part. Mr. Pesquera's personal impression regarding the referred bill is that it will be approved by Congress, and that it will become a new source of income for the people of Puerto Rico. THE BAY-RUN ISSUE Mr. Fesiuera also informed us that he obtained from the Government of Wash- > ingon that the Bay-Run manufacturers of the Vír. I genes and Piferto Rico, to manufacture said alcoholate with natural alcohol, and not with -poisonous- denatured alcohol- co ■ mo is being done. Mr. Pesquera offered to give us more details about this matter in due course. . In any case, we thank Don Mariano for his courtesy and kindness. II ' ,5 ALICIA GONZALEZ BLANES The beautiful and charming young lady, A'icia Gonzalez Blanos, daughter of the notable b?The most beautiful and charming lady, A'icia Gonzalez Blanos, daughter of the notable doctor Dr. Gonzalez Martinez, plans to celebrate tonight in his residence in Santurce a splendid ball, with 'which the very pretty paisauita - I our will make her presentation in so- - 1 ciedad, ' ' Immense is the animation that reigns to attend this nice event, which will bring together the most select of our social world that. with Alicia. was about to make one of its most beautiful acquisitions. The Chronicler of EL MUNDO, who has been so kindly invited to the party, has for the gentle lady, all the admiration that truly beautiful things inspire, and all the sympathy of his pen. i Echevarría is crazy " 4 3 If you are interested in one of the costumes that I am making at $2.00 per week come immediately to enter your name < in our register book. i 1 And we will also sell you at extremely low prices the best ties, mellos, very elegant shirts, socks, ladies stockings, underwear, garters, yokes, hats and I also announce to my distinguished clientele that I have received the famous English raw denim. Come and see me at Luna 50.
Have you seen the new streets and avenues that we are opening in EL CONDADO Making your house on these grounds, you will be among the most select of the capital and your house will be worth more. "Ask at our office for our site plans and information on payment facilities for our lots. Behn Brothers loe, AGENTS Tetuan and Tanca. San Juan, P. R.
Puerto Rico ranks first among all the States of the Union in the National Guard.
The little island of the Caribbean once more puts its patriotism and loyalty to the test, giving a resounding lie to those who fight and betray it.
From the latest issue of the "Army and Navy Journal," dated July 1, we gladly copy the comparative table which we insert in this report, since, as our readers will see, it shows Puerto Rico occupying the first place among all the States of the Union, for having filled the quota assigned to it in the organization of the National Guard, an important military force of the nation, first of all of them. If there had not already been many proofs of patriotism and loyalty that Puerto Rico has given, to claim with authority and, right, what in justice corresponds to it, this one that we now highlight would be enough apart from the pride that for us and for the country it must still be a source of pride to see the name of the little island at the top of the list of the National Guard, and the pride that for us and for the country it must still be a source of pride to see the name of the island at the top of the list.u of the little island at the head of so many other States, in many of which, and for many of whose children the bad concept that some of those who have dedicated their lives to create an atmosphere of suspicion and distrust of their country have made them have of Puerto Rico, has not yet been rectified. EL MUNDO is proud, therefore, to publish in its columns this very nice story, and so that the public may be aware of the work that has been done in the organization of the National Guard, we publish below some information supplied to us by the Secretary of the Adjutant General, the young José J. Acosta. Acosta: THE LEGISLATURE CREATES THE NATIONAL GUARD Riendo Don Ernesto Lopez Dias, delegate to the House, presented a draft bill, creating a Military Code and authorizing the organization of a National Guard. Said bill was finally approved on April 12, 1917. Said Law was not yet in force because when the United States entered the Gueira in the same month of its
I -r . ' ' i- ■■ ■ Anthoriird. Rfcognvxd in Per Cent, nt Authorized. Porta Ríce 91 86 Ark.c,"" 88 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■I York 8" ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■I Oregon 80 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ 79 77 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■mi indiana 77 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■II 76 ■■■■MaMBIBMBMaiaÉBMa Matsachus.tts 75 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■S Pennaylrania .... 12,172 16,229 75 ■■■■■■■■iMaHMHBMiMH Oklahoma 76 ¡o-. 73 mhbbhbhbhímmbhhhbm X""r .Jersey 4,183 72 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ 72 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ . . 4- 6,631 9,397 71 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ liel.w.r. 70 Georgia 2,487 70 ■■■■■■■■■■MMIBBIHB Nebraska 70 Ohio 12,207 69 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ 67 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■I Missouri....... 66 Virriniaj 3,471 5,267 66 South Carolina 2,709 65 Florida 65 Maryland 2.491 3,899 64 ■■■■(■■■■(■■■■■■■■■H Tinnesaee Jñ 1 - 31 * 2 100 63 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ Idaho X 907 1,440 63 A'alama >2,410 3,844 63 ■■■■■■■■■■■BMatBB Mirttwipfí 1,289 2,082 62 Xrw Hampshire' . 813 1,367 59 ■■■■■■■■■■MMBHaBi Michi "an 3,704 6,492 58 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ Kntsaa <8,588 4,600 57 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ Colorado . . ■ ..ijjgj 6 r 1,411 2,563 55 Xonh Caro ú>",Im | 2,242 4,070 55 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ |. Wyoming * * * v *'9 893 54 I 11 inte ...../ill 6,100 11,971 54 Kentucky . F 2,187 4,149 53 ■■■■MMKIMaMBS Xew MexifO . 70.5 1,319 53 ■■■■■■■■■ Wert Virtióte fiÑfcl.9¿l 2,001 , 52 , Xonk f35. -1,667 ' 51 ■■■■■■■MMHMei Louisiana 1,387 2,664 50 ■■■■■■■■■■■■ California 2,911 50 Texas 8,673 47 Hawaii .1,244 2,81' 41 ■ Ctah 624 1,493 42 ■■■■■■■■MI Rhode Island .... 721 1,811 41 (■■■■■■■■■ South Dakota . 586 1,430 40 Dist. of Cohimbia. 434 1,381 31 ■■■■■■■ Montana 373 1,591 24 Nevada 47" - Total 150,888 226,406 67
approval it was necessary to suspend work on the organization. MIIKTAR SERVICE 1 The Compulsory Military Service Act was then extended to For i to Rico, and at the conclusion of the
i Mandatory, and at the close of the war, Governor Yager applied to the President of the United States and the Secretary of War for authorization to organize the National Guard, and on (Continued on 3rd page.)
NEWS'.! OUR BUYER HAS JUST ARRIVED BY STEAM PUERTO RICO He brings us a shipment of novelties . " which we will sell at VERY CHEAP prices * Fine Stockings; Openwork and Plain; Novelty Colors. Fantasy Necklaces. Great Variety. Thin Ribbons in 2% yard lengths in all colors. Knitted, white and colored underwear for ladies. Ladies' Hats - Children's Suits. Handbags - Vanityes - Shoes - Perfumes. And many other items. COME IN TODAY ' GONZALEZ PADIN CO., INC. SAN JUAN, PONCE. MAYAGÜEZ.
Cine 'Puerto Rico' Hoy. JSaturday. Today. "La Atlántida" (Second part). A woman whose love produces death, and who, in spite of this, is desired by all men. GIUSTI PROGRAM. SPANISH GRAPE JUICE BRAND "NOEMOST" The best and most pleasant substitute for "Sitges" muscatel. SUCRS. OF L. VILLAMIL & CO. General Agents.
CIVIL SERVICE EXAMS On Monday, July 10, a SPECIAL COURSE, lasting 2 months, will be opened for TYPIST AND MECHANOGRAPHERS who wish to prepare for the Civil Service examinations. Government subject matter will be dictated at 80; 90, 90, 10Ó and ¡ 120 words per minute. Day and evening classes. Modest prices, for inquiries, contact the reputable ROYAL GREGG COLLEGE, Allen 80, Tel. * 534 green, San Juan, P. R. Advt. fcmSw INSUPERABLE Constant Stock | VILLAMIL.
Rural teachers and small employees will not have their salaries reimbursed.
The salaries of employees who do not reach $800.00 are not included in the rebate.
Yesterday the report submitted by the Economic Commission to the Legislature and the Governor of Puerto Rico was approved. From the data we have learned from said report, it is concluded that the Treasury situation is more satisfactory than was believed when the balance sheet for the past fiscal year was drawn up on June 30, with a surplus of approximately one million dollars; that the income tax will exceed by more than one and one-half million dollars what was estimated to be produced; that certain items taken from the original funds to pay the interest on the public debt can be returned to those funds from the sinking fund from which they should have been taken, and that there will also be a sum of $600,000,000 in the Treasury of $600,000,000, which is the sum of $600,000,000 which should have been taken from the sinking fund, and that there will also be $600,000,000 in the Treasury of $600,000,000 in the Treasury of $600,000,000. The report also states that the sum of $600,000 more will be available for the next budget, and that by such measures, if in addition the excise or internal revenue law is amended, so as to produce what was estimated by the Legislature in estimating the general revenue, the obligations of the coming year may be covered and the salaries of the officers and other employees paid in full. It is indispensable, says the report, that the Excise Law be amended, for if it is not, at the close of the next fiscal year, instead of what is needed to meet the budget, the deficit will not fall below one million dollars. The Commission concludes that Germany will be looking abroad for money (United Press, via AH America Cables) i
I that, in any case, a meeting of the Legislature is essential to carry out the demands of the present conflict situation. There is, above all, in the report, a very sympathetic note which will serve as a relief to the rural teachers and small employees; and that is that the Committee has resolved, that in accordance with Section 2a, of the Budget Act, SALARIES UNDER $800 ARE NOT COMPENDED IN THE REDUCTION, AND HAS AGREED TO COMMUNICATE THIS ABI TO THE AUDITOR. We are therefore very pleased to announce that the regular teachers, whose salaries only reach $702, according to the budget, and those of the lower employees who reach the above-mentioned amount, will not have to pay any reduction, even if the Legislature does not meet in extra-ordinary session. The report contains other very important ¡maths of recommendation to the Legislature. We do not give it to our readers in full, because at the time of the compilation of our edition, the copies were not yet ready, nor were they sent to the Governor, and we could not be furnished with the one we requested; but we can assure you that the data supplied here are accurate and are the most important, for, thanks to an oversight on the part of the gentlemen of the Commission, the report was for a long time in the hands of our reporter, our porter. ! It should also be noted that the minorities voted against the report only on certain points which they considered to be of a political nature. * - i
LONDON, July 7.-The 'Daily. M>11' ¡ t locates a dispatch from Berlin saying that the Union of Germanic Industry held a secret session last night after conferring with the Allied Guarantees Committee at which several projects were examined with a view to substituting the 'forced borrowing by credits obtained abroad. The purpose of the Germanic Union will probably be submitted to the Keichs tag and it is thought very likely that this high Body will give its approval. TOMORROW SUNDAY -800- GIFTS -800A package of chocolates will be given to each person at two o'clock in the afternoon. We will also give away two velocipedes, two air rifles and tfáis boxes of bom bones. We will exhibit' the famous belt 'The Seal of Satan' by the colossus of the cinema EDDIE POLO Prices: Children 5 cents.
TODAY. - Big Event. The remarkable Professor Herman will divide a young lady into two parts in the presence of the audience. Other wonderful acts of illusionism. The colossal French film "EL REDIL" By Raul Capellani and Manuela Prudot will also be shown. Tomorrow, Sunday. Reappearance of Professor Herman. The great film, "The Dangerous Young Woman," by Marie Prevost. NOTICE Members of the Real Sen Juan Foot-Ball Club* are advised that the meeting which began last Sunday, will be continued tomorrow at two o'clock in the afternoon, at the Casino Español. Reel San Juan Foot-Ball Club, E. García CADORNIGA, President. Advt
THE PORTO RICO BASE-BALL ASSOCIATION INC. IS hereby notifies the general public that according to the report of our, engineer, the Base Ball League Stands at stop 8 threaten PE| LIGRO and that therefore, this association has not authorized anyone to make use of the same and declines all responsibility in case of accident. I July 8, 1922 . !PURCHASE quaí tro or six-cylinder automobile, in good condition. Five passengers. State minimum price, make and time of use. P. O. Box 923, San Juan. Advt.
today. COLOSSAL PREMIERE. TODAY. We are pleased to announce the premiere of the most sentimental drama of the year, based on the life of a violinist and entitled: "HUMORESQUE" íZ (paramount (¡picture Cosmopolitan Production, masterfully played by i stars -VERA GORDON, ALMA RUBENS AND GASTON GLASS. Super-Special U| TOMORROW. - TOMORROW. ORIENTAL SOULS. The most thrilling and luxurious cinematic tragedy ever produced. MORNING AND EVENING.