THE WORLD
8 Pages 3 ctv", Semester. 844N A afle.f7.B8 < > - -
>4 1 sesees Offices} Salvator Brtu" M ; Tel. m P. O, Bex 341 ' > < - - t t" . t
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO IV. '
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
PabUrteá aad éiaWbaSW aa<"r pmm , b" -*. a" " hmm e, i "Lf, a 1¡" m tk< Fotl Otile. the Sea Jua, Parto Bieo. By order of Ao PrseUft, A- 8. Bor brass, ''ifiif OenaraL Batané M Meoad el*M Mnary M, ISIS. et the Peet Ottoo at Baa taa. Porta Bl oTfteitod BtatZ "rf dSítaa "d" "ve
SATURDAY, MARCH 18, 1922.
NUMBER 949.
The Editor of the English section of "The Times" summoned by the Grand Jury.
Yesterday throughout the day, and as we announced in due course, the investigation which the Grand Jury has been conducting in connection with certain complaints which have been presented to the above-mentioned body was continued. Almost all the government officials and private entities that were summoned testified, with the exception of Miss Ligget, the Deputy Commissioner of Instruction, who was on the island yesterday. She will appear next Monday at 2:00 p.m., which is when the Grand Jury is scheduled to reconvene at the close of yesterday's session. After considering the terms in which the editorial published yesterday in the English section of "The Times" was written, the Grand Jury agreed to summon to appear on Monday at two o'clock in the afternoon the editors of the newspaper, "The Times Publishing Co. "or the author responsible for the editorial mentioned above, in which the Grand Jury's actions are commented upon in such terms as might be interpreted as a censure of the present one on the occasion of the investigation which it has been conducting. As soon as this capital became aware of the summons decreed by the Grand Jury against the Republican organ, the public began to comment in different ways on the aforementioned fact, as well as on the article that was the object of the attitude adopted by the Jury. THE JUDICIAL COMBINATION Although it is already known that the persons have been chosen who will be part of the judicial combination that will be made due to the vacancy that occurred in the District Court, first district, of this city, due to the resignation of Judge Campillo, the appointments have not yet been definitively resolved, because due to the indisposition of Mr. Mestre and the affairs of the "Quo Warrantos", the Governor and Senior Mestre have not yet been able to deal with this matter properly in order to resolve it definitively. We understand, according to our reports, that the Governor "WINS" For sale at half price a "TRUCK", make "RHODIA", two tons, -completely new, for further reports address J. S. Noa, Stop 6 i/j, Puerta de Tierra. Advt.
IMPORTANT NOTICE TO CONTRACTORS The best sleepers in Santo Domingo timbers at the lowest price. Call, visit or write to ROLAN & TEJEDOR, Box 1356. Phone 395. San Juan, P. R.
"La Ciudad Condal" Moved to San Jose No. 5. GREAT SALES IN GENTLEMEN'S FOOTWEAR AND SUITS Rodriguez Torres & Co.
1 1 >'> Hi H ", 4r<"l "*"l H"! 1 Mill 1 1 1 11,i ; BEHN BROTHERS, INC. : (HOUSE FOUNDED IN 1906) BANKERS ; / Berwind White Coal Mining Co. > * Lancashire Insurance Co. ; AfOIÜBS d& < Compagnie Genéralo Transatlantique. í . I Windward Island Line - Pacific Argentine. I Brazil Line La Veloce. VJ EL CONDADO - Venta de Solares. ; Esquina Tetuán-Tanca. San Juan, P.R.
The judicial combination is still under study
is pending an interview with the Attorney General, to resolve these judicial appointments as soon as possible, since there is an urgent need to definitively cover these Courts in order to normalize the work pending in them. THE DILEMMA, MESSRS. In an editorial article that appeared yesterday in the organ of the Republican Party, in praising the perso nulity of the present Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, Mr. Toro Labarthe, in one of the paragraphs, it is stated that he is the only one to have been appointed to the Court, in one of the paragraphs it is stated that the information published so many days ago by EL MUNDO regarding the fact that we knew from close friends of Governor Reily that the Chief Executive did not sanction or consent to the work of discrediting publicly initiated by Mr. Toro Labarthe against other honorable colleagues of his in the Governor's office, is untrue, and in which we also said that the Governor had expressed to his friends that the attitude assumed by Mr. Toro was neither proper nor correct, for if he had any complaints, they should have been made to him and not in the press. Many days have passed, without Mr. Toro or "El Tiempo" itself having been able to officially deny this information. * ¥ as the article "faith yesterday, was from Redacción here you have, gentlemen of "El Tiempo" or Mr. Toro Labarthe, - if he is the inspirer of the mentioned article, - the following disjunctive: Our information is absolutely true, or you get a "statement" from the Governor, by virtue of which the Chief Executive declares that he sanctions the attitude of one of his heads of Departments, presenting and accusing before the public vindictiveness the actions of any other of the members that compose his executive cabinet, with which you can only succeed in destroying the veracity of our information, since it was that and nothing else what we said in itDo it, if you can, and nothing else-.
The Central Board of the Unionist party met on Wednesday
Last Wednesday a meeting of the Central Board of the Unionist party took place. This meeting was of great importance because the leading body of the majority party had not met since the last session of the Senate. We are informed that the purpose of this meeting was to acquaint the members of the Board with a letter received from Mr. Córdova Dávila, giving an account of his recent dealings with Congress and discussing the Humphreys resolution, requesting a Congressional investigation of Governor Kelly's charges. We are also told that a letter was received from Representative Campbell, in which he requests a date for the holding of hearings to discuss his bill creating the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. - i A GOVERNMENT BOAT WAS FOUGHT BY THE FLAMES IN CATANO In front of the town of Cataño, a Government boat - the "Quarter- j master" - was totally destroyed by the flames. According to reports, the person in charge of guarding it left it alone in the early hours of yesterday morning, while he was on his way to Rio Grande to ■ run an errand. Shortly after the caretaker left, we are informed, the vessel began to burn until the flames consumed it completely. It is assured that the origin of the fire is dobs to that several puppets got into^ the boat to pay the reMo of the cigarette hill near the gasoline tank, catching fire this one.... Federal authorities are investigating the incident. TRIBUTE TO JUDGE TOOTE The Ponce bar held yesterday, as a farewell tribute to Judge Mr. Foote, who has retired to San Juan, an act of cordial affection for the probated official. GREAT EXHIBITION AT THE "OLIMPO" The "Olimpo", which conquered such an enormous success with the famous cupletista Paquita Escribano, will celebrate tomorrow, Sunday, a splendid performance. The great theater will exhibit the beautiful "film" titled "Man's Toy", that will please the numerous concurrence that attends this show.
The hand that drafted the famous Treaty of the Pacific is still unknown.
POROUS WOOL CLOTHES rn Nice Colors and Elegant Cuts avO.UU ENGLISH ALPACA CLOTHES rn Serious Colors. New Cuts to lu. uO ENGLISH YARN RAW DRIL <n nn Best cut and workmanship to l¿"VU PURE YARN RAW DRIL 40 Kfl English, special workmanship to lOiJU.
SANJUAN.
Victory Garden TOMORROW SUNDAY In the 9:00 p.m. heat, "The Three Musketeers" Round 6.
TOMAS ALCALA, a well known employee of the Municipal Public Works Department during the Unionist administration, has been ill in Ponce for a few days. May he get well soon are our wishes. A. CARAZO, Brau St. 72. j AdTt -
BIG PRE-SALE PRE-SALE LAST WEEK LOW PRICES--GENTLEMEN'S CLOTHING--First Cut and Tailoring--RedUCED PRICES.
i RAW SILK SUITS 16.50 ' Premium Cut & Sew a i PALM-BEACH SUITS IQ QQ 1 Genuine, Premium Quality a 1 FINE CASIMIR SUITS nr nn Beautiful Paints and Fashion Cuts a ¿viUu PURE ENGLISH YARN SUITS Qp On Special Crash (crash) a Z.U.U.U.
Wool Pants at $5.48 and $10.00 -Cashmere Pants at $5.48 and $5.48 Hats - Caps - Underwear -- Shirts - Ties and Socks VERY SPECIAL PRICES THIS IS THE LAST SEASON - APPROVE NOW GONZALEZ PADIN CO. INC. SANJUAH. ROUGE. MAYAGÜEZ.
Dramatic accident occurred in the Senate
(Translated for EL MUNDO) WASHINGTON, March 3. An incident with all the characteristics of a drama occurred this morning in the Senate, when Senators Henry Cabot Lodge and Oscar Underwood, two of the American delegates who signed the Pacific Treaty, stated that they did not know who drafted the clauses of the four-power treaty. -Who is the father of the child," asked Senator Joseph Robinson, of Arkansas, in the course of a fiery speech, in which he fought hard against the treaty. The mystery concerning the birth of the child was not made clear by the replies of both senators, who confessed their ignorance as to the hand that wrote the covenant. Senator Robinson's plea was directed to Senator Underwood. All eyes converged upon the senator from Alabama, but the hero called upon to shake the curious senators out of their slumber was one of President Harding's illustrious delegates, who confined himself until the close of the conference to moving as directed and signing whatever Mr. Balfour placed before his eyes. THE CONFESSION OF MR. UNDERWOOD'S CONFESSION LEFT THE SENATORS PATIDIFIED TO THE SENATORS to' -to "I can answer the Senator," began Mr. Underwood, "that he who speaks to you is not so well informed about the Pacific treaty as he might be in regard to other agreements which occupied the attention of the conferees. When the discussions on the Quadruple Alliance began, I was hastily summoned to Washington on account of the death of one of my relatives. While I remained in the capital, the Conference was pursuing the difficult and entangled task of reconciling views on certain inconsistent clauses of the treaty, on which the Japanese and United States delegations were not in agreement. I am not in a position to express my views.
Victory Garden TODAY SATURDAY TODAY The most resounding artistic event of the present age, DANTON made by the most celebrated actors in the world, among whom the immense Jannings stands out.
I am not the only one who drafted the treaty; but I am willing to say that the agreement met with my approval from the very first moment. senator lodge, in the course of an interesting debate, declares that he does not know who wrote the treaty. The veteran legislator, alluded to, answered thus, in the course of the following dialogue: -Can the senator for Massachusetts tell me," asked Mr. Robinson, "the name of the person who wrote the Pacific Treaty? -It was written by many hands. -How many. -Four, at least. -Whose hands were they? -I don't know. -Who wrote the first part of the Convention? -I also don't know. -Who proposed it to the Conference? -I cannot say. -Very well. Mr. Lodge then added: -I can say, however, who wrote the first remarks? -Who was it? -Mr. Hughes. Senator Robinson then continued, stating that his opinion was suggested by Mr. Balfour, chairman of the British delegation, although he probably did not put his hand to the drafting of the document. Senator Lodge, who is a dry, laughing old man, did not abandon his gentle spirit as his colleague from Arkansas spoke. Reporters say that many times his gaze met that of his sidekick Senator Underwood, and both, in a distant nod, seemed to murmur, unperturbed: -That way give me all of them..... WEDDING IN ISABELA Tomorrow, Sunday, in the chapel of San Antonio, in Isabela, the beautiful and distinguished se. fiorita Esther Quevedo and the correct ca ballero Luis Lluch Mattel will be married. For the act, which promises to be very lucid, we have been invited by the very approbable parents of the bride, Don Francisco L. Quevedo and his wife.
ft prosecutor Massari recommends that the case against Mr. Javier Cuevas Zequeira for pro- , ringing Maniera
A few days ago the press of this capital gave an account of the accusation before the courts of which Mr. Javier Cuevas Zequeira, of Carolina, had been the victim, who was accused of having desecrated the American bank. The accusation was that Mr. Cuevas Zequeira, crossing the road in his automobile, had tripped over the flagpole in front of a rural house, knocking the flag to the ground. In the telegrams that were sent to the prison, as well as in the complaint that was filed, it was alleged that Mr. Cuevas Zeqiífeira had committed this act maliciously and intentionally, and that once the flag was thrown to the ground he had trampled on it. It was also said that the teacher, Miss Wolkers, had cried at such an outrage, which she protested energetically. When the case was brought to the attention of the District Attorney, Mr. Mariari, he made a thorough investigation into the matter, and after obtaining the testimony of numerous witnesses, he submitted a report to the Justina Department recommending the dismissal of the case. the cause, since from the investigation it is clear that there was no malicious intent on the part of Mr. Cuevas Z-queira, who as well as his companions, did not realize that they had stumbled over the flag, since it was raining and they had borrowed the curtains of the mobile car. It seems that this event was given a certain exaggerated importance for personal reasons, making it appear more serious than it should have been, in what had been simply an unfortunate coincidence. PASSENGERS RETURNING FROM NEW YORK The following passengers returned on the steamer "Caracas" which arrived yesterday in San Juan from New York: William S. Simmons, Juanita San tiago, Ferdinand Santiago, Pablo Delgado Gaston Induni, Emilio Colón, Ralph C intre, Spencer B. Greene, Florence A. Hills, Jesus Rivera Ruben A. Bagley, Tomasa Rivera, Acacia Valdes Manuel Garcia, Cayetano Fraile Priscilla Cosmo, Victoria Cantre, Marcelo P.ive-a, John S. Lcvercok, George H. Davis.
It is assured that no investigation will be made of Gov.
Yesterday there was much talk in political circles in this city to the effect that the investigation so. licited by Mr. Córdova Dáviia, before the United States House of Representatives, into the Administration of Mr. Reily in Puerto Rico, will not be carried out, because the body, it is alleged, has no jurisdiction to indict the Governor, since he is an appointment made exclusively by the President of the Republic, who will be responsible for the good or bad administration of the Governor. It is assured that the majority is aware of this matter, and it is reported that the Central Board met last night for the purpose of dealing with it. SECRETARY'S CABLE? Yesterday, two prominent Republicans, who were at the "Colonial Bank" were talking about a cable which they say Governor Kelly has received from the Secretary of War, which cable, they said, appears to be favorable to the high official. The '-wounded gentlemen went a little further in their appraisals, for they claimed that the message implied a further demonstration of confidence, on the part of the President to the Governor. The Supreme Court of Washington has issued a writ of certiorari for the purpose of reviewing the decision of the Boston Circuit Court which reversed our Supreme Court's decision against the plaintiffs in Martorell v. J. Ochoa* and Br. Otio's two cases from different parties involving the same legal issues have also been admitted for review. The local attorneys for J. Ochoa and Br. Soto Gras and Siaea, inform us that the issues involved are of great transcendence for the titling of the country, even though the amount involved in the Ochoa case is not of great importance, and that within the order granted the highest Court of the Nation will have the last word on such issues. THE "CREDITO Y AHORRO PONCESO" BEGINS CONSTRUCTION OF ITS BUILDING The "Crédito y Ahorro Ponceño" Bank, has begun to demolish the building in front of Degetau Square, corner of Amor Alley, with the purpose of starting the construction of its new building that will give greater enhancement to Ponce.
Today : SATURDAY : Today the popular theater "OLIMPO" will show the extraordinary movie "MARIDOS Y ESPOSAS" MARIDOS DE SEDA Y ESPOSAS DE PERCAL. 2 TANDAS. Prices 30 and 20.
EL CONDADO El Condado is the only place dedicated exclusively to residences in San Juan. Healthy, fresh and with constant sea breeze. WE SELL houses and lots; houses for cash and lots for cash and installments. Behn Brothers Inc., Agents Tetuán and Tanca. San Juan.