ELMTJNDO
I H I I I II! ■l i t- " 12 pageJVétvs. " ;; Semester, $4.00 i i " One year, $7.50. " - " - " - - - 4-M1* I II1 H-H-rH-LlILI-H-'H-
'W'I til! J-H-H-H-H-M I i i i i i i i j ■! t Offices: ;; í Salvador Brau, 81. t Tel. 833, P. O. Box 345. --
DAILY MORNING PAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
i YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of October 6, 1917, on tile at the Post Office of I San Juan. Porto Rico, By order of the President. >. S. Bur le "on, postmaster'-General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919, at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rico, (United States of America) under the Act of March 3, 1879.
| SATURDAY, OCTOBER 21, 1922.
| NUMBER 1133.
The Auditing Department has ordered an extensive and thorough investigation in the municipality of this city.
The audit department has ordered a thorough and extensive investigation in the municipality of this city, which was begun yesterday morning by two employees of the department. -- >1 ■■■■■■■■! UM H public commentary attributes this action to certain declarations made by Souiront, or to the desire to find something to discredit the work of Mr. Martin Travieso; the resignation of Mr. Aboy has been officially denied; even though rumors are growing that it is true, it has been officially denied.
Yesterday afternoon, we were really surprised to see an infinity of groups in front of the City Hall of this capital. They were numerous people related to local politics who seemed to be commenting, in different ways, on something very important that was apparently happening. At first, we came to presume that it was some political meeting that was being held in the halls of the City Hall; but then we learned that by the Audit Department, two employees had been sent to the Municipality with instructions to carry out an extensive and thorough investigation. THE SENSATION OF THE SEASON VALENTINO Dorothy Dalton in the powerful drama 'Es Mi Hombre' MORAN, OF THE LADY LETTY Special prices for children PRICES Tarde; seniors 20 children 15 Night: seniors 35 children 20 TOMORROW SUNDAY PROGRAM MONSTRUO La Revista Portorriqueña ESTRELLAS DOMINICANAS vs. "Puerto Rico'', "Ponce" and "Mayagüez" The colossal extraordinary tape "El Desaparecido" "REPORTED MISSING" in seven acts and the Pathé News numbers 78 and 79. PRICES Morning and Afternoon: 20 and 15 cts. Evening 30 and 20 cts. SAT. TODAY. Premiere in Santurce The monumental drama 'Luces y Sombras' (The Deep Purple) by Victor Serrano. Tomorrow Sunday: "Por el Honor de una Mujer" (For a Woman's Honor). (For a Woman's Honor)
tigation in the books of the Administration. We were further informed that as soon as the Audit inspectors arrived, Mr. Diez de Andino, who currently holds the position of Municipal Commissioner of Public Service, ordered the Auditor of the Municipality to place at the disposal of said employees all the books of the Administration and to give them all the facilities to carry out their task. The said investigation, we are informed, will take about two months to be made, and in regard to the causes which have prompted it, although officially it has been given the character of being an investigation of those ordinarily customarily made in municipalities, the public has begun to give it as its determining motive that it is for the purpose of ascertaining whether some of the charges said to have been made against the Township by Souffront i er his statements to the Governor are true, and also that several alleged irregularities in the administration were denounced by some Republicans. Talking to some people regarding this matter, we were told that it had attracted attention that one of the persons in charge of making the investigation was not an account investigator and only a division chief. This fact has attracted attention, because in the Audit Office there is a body of investigators, which are the ones used to do work of this nature. THE AB0Y ISSUE Last night we were informed from La Fortaleza that the rumor that the Treasurer had resigned from his position was unfounded. None of our Editors were able to locate Mr. Aboy last night; but public opinion continues to comment favorably for Mr. Aboy, the fact that he is willing to resign his post rather than submit to the mandate to remove officials who in his judgment are good and faithful doers of their duty. Cinema "Puerto Rico" TODAY. SATURDAY. TODAY. "The Secret of the Mill" Production based on the novel of the same name, which won the Nobel Prize in 1921. GIUSTI Agents Wanted Apply Program - 77 Allen St., Puerto Rico.
I "Lo, Diablos de la Plaza" i PERFORMANCE BY BALANCE 200,000 S X ? Pares Zapatos Baratísimos Sues, de Gamarra < I CRUZ 18. SAN JUAN. |
President Harding will suggest to Congress to amend the Volstead Act.
If it is not amended, Puerto Rico will lose its coffee crop Several foreign steamship companies with agencies in New York have filed injunctions with Federal Judge Hand to restrain the American Government from interfering with the loading of liquor on board the vessels of these companies until a Court of Justice has ruled on the legality or illegality of the procedure being used under the latest provisions of Daugherty. The cases have already been argued and are pending resolution. The latest impression on this important question is that President Harding will suggest to Congress that the Volstead Act be amended. The amendments to the Volstead Act are expected to affect the Philippines, Puerto Rico and foreign bars. Without these announced amendments, Puerto Rico will not be able to obtain steamers to transport its coffee crop to Europe, and the Philippines will also suffer serious disruption of its commercial life. TAMAKI MIURA, THE FAMOUS DIVA WHO VISITED PUERTO RI CO. A U.S. newspaper reports that the famous Japanese diva, Tamaki Miura, who, as our readers will recall, visited Puerto Rico some time ago, while in Honolulu for a season, received a communication from her country, accusing her of being a traitor to her homeland. The accusation against Tamaki is based on the fact that the artist made statements in*favor of the emancipation of Japanese women, expressing that the day will soon come when her colleagues in Japan will be liberated from the tyrannical domination of men. BARTHOU HAS PRESENTED TO THE COMMITTEE ON INDEMNITIES THE FRENCH PLAN PARIS, October 20. Barthou has this afternoon presented to the Compensation Committee M. Poincaré's plan for the financial control of Germany including the Reich bank and the public finances. The project amounts to an Allied receivership over Germany.
ADDING MACHINE *and* RECORDING BOX For sale at San Justo 15, warehouse, very good price and almost new. San Juan, P. R.
. LADIES AND LADIES EARN 50 per cent of their value ofre- l cemos nice suits for ladies and ladies. LA ESTRELLA. S. Brau No. 41. C. PEREZ ALVAREZ
New Prices on Gentlemen's Goods WHITE SHIRTS. /h <| r'TT DAILY SHIRTS d* 1 T A Collared shirts, white, from Ik I Kll Good madras shirts, there are \ I Sil very strong and cool cloth; the And many to choose from, worth $2.50, *r I we are offering on special sale at " " ■ for this week only at - ■ White T-shirts and shorts of Or. a bordered handkerchiefs, very resdas, to best Slip colored clothes, guaranteed, do not fade, Zjí* M a r, ° r ' Cahda¿ SUPen ° r 18 PÍe " we liquidate a large consignment at.. * * t Union Suits, united suits of ca- Knitted T-shirts with sleeve r A miseta and shorts of short te- 7 short, its Pe rior quality, are worth the JvL" the is very comfortable, reduced to ... ■ double, there are all sizes at " " Mercerized socks, the me- Ties we have the great assortment for everyday, all colors KI If do in colors, very good quality, value $1.00 now at tr VV" na> is |¿ n re b a j a da a * ' WOODS SHIRTS 4 AO SILK SHIRTS. - (TAAO Bargain, we have over 200 doc. \ UX Great occasion, great \"IUX shirts of oamisas we give away to this t fantasy, the best to wear, T J U U price, great assortment in co-list take advantage now that there are po- /■ lor to ... " " " " cas a U GONZALEZ PADIN CO. INC. SAN JUAN GENTLEMEN'S DEPT. PONCE. MAYAGÜEZ.
- GOMAS CORDON 32x4'/ 2 For fifteen days we give them at twenty-five dollars. Order them before they run out. 1 i A. BETANCES Co. San Juan, P. R.
Latest reports account for sales of sugar made at $5.58.
In the financial centers of this cinty we were informed yesterday that the latest Puerto Rican sugar transactions had been made at the price of $6.58 a quintal. We were also told that the amount of sugar held by the centralists of the country was relatively small, so it is believed that the rise of the rich product will continue. Among the financiers the most flattering hopes reign, and many believe that the time of reconstruction and economic flourishing of Puerto Rico will not be long in coming. BIG NEWS TOMORROW SUNDAY AT THE WLTO" The Puerto Rican magazine "filmed" in the athletic fields of Ponce, of the "base-ball" challenges, celebrated there, among the formidable "Estrellas dcminican\s", "Mayagiíej", "Ponce" and "Puerto Rico" ninth teams, will be exhibited at the "Teatro Rialto" Sunday. Given the importance of these challenges, which were attended by huge audiences from all the towns of the Island, we have no doubt that on Sunday the nice coliseum will be invaded by all the enthusiasts of this sport, who will applaud to delirium the popular players on the screen, which will reproduce the most amazing plays of young after young. In the same film will appear the coronation of Queen Julita I, proclaimed under these challenges. The aforementioned magazine is full of news from the country, such as the scenes taken from the last great Masonic excursion to San Germán and Cabo Rojo, in honor of the sovereign representations of the lodges of Venezuela, Cuba and Santo Domingo, etc. The Rialto businessmen deserve the most enthusiastic congratulations for the acquisition of these magazines of purely regional affairs, which give us the opportunity to admire the events that, due to the rough and constant nature of our labors, we cannot see, and which the Cinematograph offers us, so that we may contemplate them, with all fidelity in their details, from an armchair.
The Frauda Chamber of Deputies gave a vote of confidence to the Government.
The "Sampak) Correia" will leave Port of Spain today (United Press, via All America Cables) PARIS, Oct. 20.- By three hundred and eighty-nine votes to one hundred and forty-eight the Chamber of Deputies gave its confidence to the government presided over by M. Poincaré. The Chamber declared itself in recess until Tuesday to discuss the national budgets. The "Sampaio Correia," according to reports 'bequeathed here last night is preparing to leave Port of Spain today for Georgetown, capital of English Guiana. POINCARE CALLS ON CURZON TO HURRY PARIS, Oct. 20.-M. Poincaré has addressed a note to Lord Curzon to make haste with regard to the holding of the forthcoming Orlente peace conference. The government of France as sa be has suggested the thirteenth day of November for that event to take place. PARIS, Oct. 20.-Because of the ministerial crisis in England the conference of technical advisers which was to discuss questions on the Orient has been postponed. It is very likely that Mr. Poincaré will meet tonight with the British Ambassador on this matter. -- LONDON, Oct. 20.- In the event of Lord Derby's not accepting the war portfolio two names are being bandied about for the secretaryship of that department: those of Griffith and Boscawen. The former has stated which reserves his reply and the latter is very silent. Lord Curzon will continue to act as Foreign Secretary. THE "ELECTIONS" IN NARANJITO ' XNaranjito, October 20, 1922. EL MUNDO, San Juan. H)ty 1,500 Unionist votes, but not a single one for the Coll. A. A. LOPEZ.
The new or- den on the Volstead Act has made an impression in the commercial centers of San Juan.
The authorities at Washington, replying to the Izquierdo house, anentcs ne la tunea ftndlos, upholding their original order on liquor.-It is almost certain that this Line will suspend its calls with Pto. Rico.-It is assured that others will do the same.-The Dutch Company has already withdrawn its steamers.
With regard to the latest dispositions of Daugherty, with respect to the Volstead Act, we have again exchanged impressions with the San Juan shipowners, who are extremely alarmed at the consequences which these dispositions will have on the substantial interests of commerce in general, The latter will be weakened by the absence of a large number of ships which now call at our ports, and which in a few days will have to give up calling at Puerto Rico, for fear of the rigors of the said Volstead Act, as it has been lately put into effect. In the opinion of the shipowners, the case is more serious than it seems, since it will bring as a logical consequence that Puerto Rico will be left without communications with foreign countries. '■ WASHINGTON MAINTAINS THE ORDER The Izquierdo house, which is one of those taking the greatest interest in having this matter settled as satisfactorily as possible, addressed several days ago to the authorities "in Washington the following cablegram: "Kindly inform us whether the President's recent order affects li- ¡ cors driving aboard a foreign vessel, in transit, duly manifested and covered by running conoqments, destined for a foreign port, which are not discharged at this port but continue to their destination on the same steamer." To this dispatch they replied from i Washington as follows, "Sobrinos de Izquierdo y Co." General Agents, Pinillos Line. The order of the President does not affect the liquors described in your cablegram and they may be taken to their destination abroad, provided the vessel has left the port of origin on or before October 21. All vessels departing after this date from foreign ports must deliver the Cine 'Puerto Rico' Tomorrow Sunday 22 Morning and Evening. The first four episodes of j the monumental "Fists and Adventures" series, by William Duncan, entitled: "Challenging Destiny" Matinee: Episode 15 finale of "Goddess of the Jungle" and episodes 1 and 2 of Charles Hutchinson's sensational series, entitled; ",THE DOUBLE ADVENTURE". Great gifts. Current prices. NOW ARRIVING * The new "OLDSMOBILE" 4 CYLINDER model. Come and compare its price, quality, elegance, etc. with those of other brands in its class. Two different types: 5-seat Touring and 4-seat Semi-Sport. It's surprisingly precious. PIETRANTONI & SOJO "La Tienda de Goma" San Juan, P. R.
I liquors upon arrival at U.S. ports. E. W. CAMP, Chief, Customs Division, Washington. Mr. Rodriguez, Chief of the ci- , tada house, informed us yesterday that, e:i in view of this situation, they have advised the general office of the Pinillos Line in Spain, which will surely, decide to exclude from the itinerary of their ships the calls at I Puerto Rico. It is assured that this possible pension will be followed by other steamship companies. ANOTHER LEAVING The house <te Villamil, agents for ; Dutch steamers, received yesterday í a cablegram from their general office i in Amsterdam, informing them that* the ; Dutch Company has decided sus pender its calls in Puerto Rico, owing to the circumstances it creates (Continued on 3rd. Teatro Olimpo Today Saturday, October 21 Today ALICE CALMOUN in her highly original drama u Lí Emperatriz I ópez*| ly second v last performance of the Zarzuela v Variedadei painting PAQUITA SICILIA, IZOUIERDITO Y CURRO PEREZ -Sunday, October 22- The most sensational of all premieres! The Homecoming The film that touches hearts and delicately moves all souls Night of spirituality and art! Night of great success A NEW WORLD RESURGES A NEW WORLD RESURGES Reliable news makes us firmly believe the early restoration in the city of Athens due to a formidable push j of the Greeks of the Ovde, remain, i j do in the possession of CORTES & SE. GURA, Inc. "EL MUNDO ELEGANTE" (Formerly) "El Puerto Rico Elegante" (The Elegant Puerto Rico) And being close to the opening of this modern establishment of men's and children's clothing, fancy goods and novelties in general* invi. ! we kindly invite you to pay us your first visit. We assure you that our stock is completely finished, and our prices will be exceedingly low. When you need your suit, don't forget "The ELEGANT WORLD" FOR RENT: Concrete house at Parada 15. Ernesto Cerra No. 9. Santurce, P. R. For $40.-Inform phone 880. A*"""
J DR. FRANCESCHI CABALLERO i I I j Specialist in Diseases of the Stomach-Liver- i i ' I Intestines-Rectum. . Office: Alien 78. Telephone 1192, San Juan. |HOURS: 9 a.m. to 12 noon. M.-2 to S P. M. ■H l-H-H-H 4-H-I- t-W ■!■■!■■!■!■ ! I H "l"!-I' bi 1 1 1 1 1 H-H-L I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 I ¡ I-