the mondo
♦■HUI ll¡l!lll!'ll 1 HH-H-1 12 pages 3 cts " f Semester, $4.00. | A "Ro. $7.50,
1 Office"! T Salvador Brau, 8T. J T "l. 833, P. O. Box 345,
DAILY MORNING PAPER, EXCEPT SUNDAYS
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of October 6, 1917, on file at the Post Office o< San Jsian Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. 8. Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919 at 'the Post Office at San Juan, Porto" Ri co, (United States of America) under the Act of March 8, 1879.
SATURDAY, JUNE 17, 1922. NUMBER 1027.
YEAR IV ( SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
The bids of the San Juan City Council were awarded to "The Bankers Trust Co.," of New York, which bid $103,679 thousandths!
A dispute was initially established but was satisfactorily resolved by attorney Mr. John Thomson.
UNITED PRESS (Via "All America Cables") (NEW YORK, June 16.-Six bidders were presented for the issuance of San Juan City Council bonds for the borrowing of two million eight hundred thousand dollars for the aqueduct and sewerage, plus five hundred and fifty thousand dollars for schools. The best bids are from The Bankers Trust Company, for $103,679,000, all or none. Watkins and Company bid $102.98 thousandths for the first issue, and $101.98 thousandths for the secondThe award has not yet been made because of some dispute concerning the manner in which the bids were made, which did not conform to the method stated in the advertisement. NEW YORK, June 16.-The San Juan bonds were placed this afternoon with The Bankers Trust Company, which offered and accepted the sum of $103,679 thousandths. NEW YORK, June 16- Attorney John Thompson, a bond expert, has stated that the dispute which originated at first among the bidders for the San Juan City Council bonds was due to the confusion of Watkins and Co. whose bidding was made separately. - SPAIN WOULD BE WELL ADVISED TO JOIN THE SYNDICATE FOR THE RECONSTRUCTION OF EUROPE-HAS SAID THE r** -- p*. The notable Catalan politician Mr. Francisco CSambó in a speech he delivered this morning in this capital stated that it is in the interests of Spain that this nation should immediately join the Syndicate for the Reconstruction of Europe, a measure, he said, that will avoid economic complications. The distinguished statesman also declared that with Spain's entry into this
Mr. Cambó said that he was happy to learn that the Spanish government had recently notified the British government of its decision to join the international concert for the reconstruction of the European economy. To this end, a National Committee will be set up in Madrid, guaranteed by the government. JOURNALISTS LEAVE THE HAGUE PROTESTING...DO ENERGETICALLY . THE HAGUE, June 16.- Hundreds of journalists from Europe and America who had come to this city to attend the international economic conference left today for their respective countries, because they were forbidden to enter. Before embarking, the representatives of the press left a strong written protest against the decision of the lecturers. AN ARMED GUARD EXPELED JOURNALISTS FROM THE NEARS OF THE PEACE PALACE THE HAGUE, June 16.- An armed guard, on orders from the Dutch government and international representatives, expelled this morning from the vicinity of the Peace Palace all the journalists who had come to the capital to publish information relating to the work of the assembly. The representatives of the press, at the insistence of the armed guard, were forced to abandon their positions. i A NEW NOTE FROM THE COMMITTEE ON INDEMNIFICATIONS TO GERMANY, i PARIS, June 16-The Allied Committee on Compensations has today sent a note to the government of Germany approving the conditions set forth by the Ebert government regarding the obligatory loan of forty thousand thousand marks to be issued shortly by that government. This note, according to the statement of one of the members of the Committee, discusses at length the question of the autonomy of the Reichbank and the recently made public reports on the financial state of the Reichbank.
the financial state of the Teutonic era. 1 The Compensation Committee also makes clear the intentions of the Allied governments with regard to economic matters and the payment of general compensation commitments. A REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT TO OVERTHROW THE <- m -- "r EBER1 _ BERLIN, June 16- The Socialist newspaper "Freiheit" reports from a source which is considered authoritative that reactionary elements in the country are preparing a formidable revolutionary movement to overthrow the government of President Ebert. The movement according to "Die Freiheit" will start very soon. TWO THO THOUSAND PEOPLE ARE HOMELESS IN ¡ -- . LONG ISLAND NEW YORK, June 16.- Two thousand people are homeless because of the horrific fire in the suburbs of Arverne, Long Island. -, I i j i > |- ¡ i ! -, 1 NEGOTIATIONS FOR LIj QUIDING THE MEJI- - CANAS t DEBTS HAVE BEEN SUSPENDED . MEJICO CITY, June 16- It is reported that the negotiations that were being carried out in Washington to settle the debts with the United States government have been suspended, due to certain technical difficulties that have arisen at the last minute. This has been stated to this government by Mr. Adolfo De la Huerta. The Hague, June 16.-The distinguished Brazilian public man, Mr. Ruy de Barbosa, who has been bedridden since Saturday, was unable to attend the inaugural sessions of the Permanent Court of Justice. The absence of the Brazilian representative was greatly felt by the members of the Tribunal. TODAY THE NEW CONSTITUTION OF IRELAND WILL BE PUBLISHED LONDON, June 16. Mr. Winston Churchill has stated that to-day the constitution of the Irish Free State will be delivered to the newspapers for immediate publication, AMBASSADOR RICCI WILL NOT RETURN TO WASHINGTON THE HAGUE, June 16.-News spread here with strong hints of reality say that the Marquis Della To rreta, formerly Foreign Minister of Italy will replace Ambassador Ricci, Italy's minister in Washington, and who as is known embarked Sunday for Europe. OF INTEREST House No. 6 Calle de Colomer is for sale for immediate delivery. It consists of 5 rooms and another one for the service; it has an affirmed entrance for automobile. Information will be available at Carretera 106 (bajos) Santurce. SEE Niagara Falls and The Great "Larkin" Soap Factory at the "TRES BANDERAS" movie theater Saturday and Sunday.
"Victory Garden" SENSATIONAL SHOW Tomorrow Sunday Santurce Premiere of "Ninety-Three'' Every lady or lady who attends the VICTORY GARDEN tonight will be given a beautiful box of chocolates "PAGE AND SHAW" It will be screened, in the three batches, at - 4:30.7:30 and 9:00.
Compagnie Generate Transatlantiqué Vapof French Vapof "MACORIS" Expected in this port on the 22nd of the current with destination La Coruña and Le Havre. Admits cargo and passage for these ports. For further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. Agents. Edificio del Teléfono. r Tanca y Tetuán. San Juan, P. R. Tel. 257.
I cd i WMfln | I
The Norwegian steamship "ORLANO" has arrived directly from Denmark with a cargo of the well-known and reputable
PORTLAND CEMENT brand "CABALLITO" Low prices and special discounts during unloading. Write down the quantity you are interested in to take advantage of the discount, sues. FROM L. VILLAMIL & CO. PHONE 522. MARINA.
SPANISH GRAPE JUICE BRAND "NOEMOST" The best and most pleasant substitute for "Sitges" muscatel. SUCRS. OF L. VILLAMIL & CO. General Agents.
It is not true that the Ledo. Cayetano Coll y Cuchí has held conferences with Mr. Reily.
For some time now, and as our readers may have noticed, Ledo. Cayetano Coll y Cuchí, perma nece, it seems, away from any political activity, and has been seen to remain isolated, without taking any part, in recent political events. With this motive, and perhaps with the purpose of doing some harm to the illustrious President of the House, who is still by his enemies, the rumor was spread yesterday that the Ledo. Coll y Cuchí, from time to time, used to hold some conference or other with Governor Reily at the residence owned in Guainabo by the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. W'ilson. It is good to note that Mr. Coll y Cuchí also has his summer residence in those parts. This information having been supplied to us by friends of the well-known Unionist leader, and although we did not give him absolute credit, we went, nevertheless, to seek his confirmation at the Fortaleza. He, Secretary to the Governor, obtained for us the following statement: "That the rumor circulated was wholly untrue, as the Governor had never been to Mr. Wilson's residence, nor did he know where Mr. Wilson's residence was. However," he added, "you can state that the Governor and Mr. Coll y Cuchí, although they have not seen each other for some time, are good friends, and that the Governor thinks highly of the speaker, whom he considers an excellent person. The planet Mars will be closer to the Earth tomorrow "On June 18, that is tomorrow, the planet Mars will be closer to the Earth. The distance between the two will be forty-two and a half million miles; commonly this distance is 63 million. In view of the progress made by wireless telegraphy, it is natural that Marconi should try to find out if it is possible to communicate with Mars, supposing that from this planet an attempt is being made to send signals to the inhabitants of our own planet. The thing is not as fantastic as it seems. Two years ago, rare and specific waves were picked up, the origin of which could not be determined. It was believed that
LfofeTO TODAY - SABADQ 17 - TODAY Presentation of the Superb Dr. ma by Victor Hugo EL 93 Giusti Program . Each Lady and Miss attending the Evening Tandas will be presented with a box of Page & Shaw chocolates. TOMORROW SUNDAY TOMORROW Puerto Rico Premiere of the Super-Production 'HIJOS INGRATOS' Where Is My Wandering Boy Tonight (La Pelfmla. qu¿ Oprime el Corazón) , Matinee at 10:30 and Tan da Especial at 4:30 a Toda Orquesta y las Dos Tandas de la Noche (Bruno & Vázquez Program).
Mr. Horace M. Towner, it is assured, will become governor of Puerto Rico as soon as Congress, now in session, is adjourned.
With the exception of President Harding, the entire national Administration is opposed to Mr. Reily.
The political situation, as it now stands, is to some extent incomprehensible. The political situation, as it is at present, is to some extent incomprehensible. For some months now, and with great probability of being effective, the removal of Governor Reily has been on the table as the essential and sole question to solve the political crisis. This has not only been the object of the attention and comment of the public opinion and the press here, but the adoption of this measure by the national administration has been given as probable by the press in the United States. It was even asserted that it was all a matter of waiting for some time and that those in charge of finding a solution to the embarrassing situation were studying the means to carry out the change in the island administration, without detriment to the person to whom the President delegated his confidence and gave his unconditional backing. Such was the truth of this version that it was even thought that the cessation of the campaign initiated in Congress against the Governor was due to the desire of the congressmen friendly to the cause of Fort Rico to offer an opportunity to the national Executive to settle the issues, without having them, by virtue of a legislative action, to resort to procedures that could imply that they were due to atmospheric phenomena or to some social disturbances. However, these two possibilities seem to be ruled out by the fact that the signs ceased as abruptly as they had begun. I When all causes of disruption continue to exist, it is not absurd to suppose that the signals picked up at that time were due to attempts made by Mars to communicate with the Earth." The above information appeared a few days ago in the important ' London newspaper "Daily Mail", and being of rigorous topicality, we in seríamos it today, since it coincides with the : cablegrams published yesterday by THE ■ WORLD, in which it is reported that Marconi has Jogrado receive waves I coming from extraordinary distan i cia, believing that they come from Mars [ whose inhabitants, taking advantage qui I zá the smaller distance with the earth, | will be striving, perhaps for comuni| carse with our planet. ENGLAND WILL NEARLY INAUGURATE A GREAT IMPERIAL AIR SERVICE LONDON, June 16 -A powerful corporation has been established, with a capital of approximately twenty million dollars for the purpose of operating a regular air service between this capital, Bombay and Melbourne, MARCONI ARRIVED IN NEW YORK NEW YORK, June 16.-In his now "Elettra" arrived in this city today the noted Italian inventor Marconi. Marconi, as he told representatives of the press, intends to give several lectures in the United States on the advantages of radiography.
This would have caused some disgrace to the members of the Cabinet, since by doing so they would have embarrassed the Executive, which would have been accused of having given rise to the congressional action because of the indifference with which they had remained indifferent to the events that had occurred on the island. As it was, and in view of the possibility that at any moment the removal of the Governor might take place, the press had to throw into publicity an infinity of names as probable successors of Mr. Reily, and among them, and as the most certain, was lately mentioned that of Representative Horace M. Towner, 2 who is judged to be the most likely. Towner, 2 who is judged an ideal candidate because of the full knowledge he has of all matters relating to the government of Puerto Rico, having been for many years chairman of the Committee on Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives, which is called upon to study and report bills relating to the country. In these days, and that is why at the beginning of this report we expressed our uncertainty in judging the current situation, things have apparently changed and it is not possible to say with absolute certainty what the final outcome of the conflict will be. On the one hand, and according to letters received here from the public, which is the reason for which we were informed, the Chamber of Commerce met yesterday in the session held yesterday by the Chamber of Commerce, it was agreed that the Committee that is managing the visit of the American sailors to the island, would go to Culebras, in the company of Mr. W. Lee, President of the Section of the Chamber of Commerce, and Mr. W. Lee, Chairman of the Section of the Chamber of Commerce. W. Lee, President of the San Juan Section, to greet the Admiral of the Squadron that will be arriving there shortly, and to request, personally, that the sailors that make up said naval unit be allowed to come to visit San Juan. DON JOSE MARIA LOMBA According to news received in this capital from Spain, last Thursday, the distinguished and prestigious gentleman Don José María Lomba embarked in the port of Cadiz, bound for Puerto Rico, a person who enjoys great sympathy in our society for his correct conduct and fine personal qualities. The excellent gentleman Don José María Lomba, who was for some time in this town Consul of Spain, has remained in the peninsula for a long time. The news of his early arrival on these shores has produced great rejoicing and contentment in high social circles. - A. CARAZO, Brau St. 72
-deserving more credit, we have learned that Mr. Towner, seems disposed to accept the Governorship of Puerto Rico when Congress closes its session, a thing which leads us to believe that a change in the administration of the island may be a certainty, and on the other hand, however, we have learned that letters have been seen sent directly from President Harding, and that he has been sent to us by the President of the United States, and that he has been sent to us by the President of the United States. Harding to Governor Reily, in which the Je fe of the national Executive insists that Mr. Reily has his absolute confidence and unconditional backing. The news, in general, that we have here from different sources, all agree that the national administration, with the exception of the President, is in favor of the convenience of making a change in the Government of the island so that the political unrest through which the country is passing, and which is greatly damaging almost all interests, may cease, being a real obstacle for the development of the activities in all senses, by the intense concern that this has produced in the public opinion that does not cease to hope for a final solution to the conflict in any sense that it is, whenever it favors the aspirations and desires of the country that is the only way in which it will be possible to restore normality in the political, economic and financial life of the Island. OFFERS OF SUGAR FOR LOCAL CONSUMPTION HAVE BEEN MADE. At S6.75 The reputable Pesquera office gave us yesterday the following note on the local sugar market: "Refined sugar, at $6.75; raw, at $4.5 8. Offers of refined sugar for local consumption, at $6.75, have been rejected, on the pretext that the refinery does not have sufficient stock. It is assured that the market will hold firm and that, if there is any drop, it will be there by August. o® TODAY. Saturday. TODAY. EL ZORRO Extraordinary at * current prices. ' - TOMORROW SUNDAY - Colossal Fiesta. Retreat, fires, etc. and "Wild Honey" By Priscilla Dean.
4 Have you seen the new streets and avenues we are opening in THE COUNTY By making your home on these lots, you will be among the finest in the capital and your home will be worth more to you. Ask our office for our urbanization plans and information about the payment facilities for our lots. Behn Brothers Inc., AGENTS Tetuán and Tanca. San Juan, P. R.
Permanent BARATILLO in La Mueblería "EL PORVENIR". 1000 beds in various styles of $10, $13.75, $14, $15, $15, $16, $17, $17, $18, $20, $25 and $30. Unbeatable prices with royal mattress. Salvador Brau 89, San Juan. Hudson Speedster For Sale. Will report: P. R. Commercial Corp. tel. 252. San Juan.