_____ EL.nUNDO
WlllilH-lllIIÜHMI 16 pages 3 ctvsf tJ -smsstrs, $4.00, One year, $7.56,
I 1 1 I ! Hint ¡-¡-1.1..H-W Office"? J Salvador Brau, 8f" I Tal. 833, P, O, Box 345< í í-I-H-t 1 I I-I I I I I I I I I H-H | 1.1.1.1.1
MORNING DAILY, EXCEPT SUNDAYS '
ARO IV, I 8AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
[t he opinion issued by Judge Aldrey'in the case of "CertiorSn' v. Judge Chas. E. Foote
The following is the full text of the opinion issued by Judge Aldrey in the case of "Certiorari" against Judge Foote, and to which the members of the Court adhered. As will be seen, in the referred opinion it appears resolved, on the basis of a technicality and without going into the merits of the issues raised; However, in accordance with what we reported yesterday, and in accordance with the fact that nothing to the contrary is resolved in another proceeding, the current situation of the Arrillaga-Meatre case, as far as this aspect of the matter is concerned, is the same as it was before Judge Foote's orders were issued, that is to say, in free possession of the Grand Jury documents and free to act; for while it is true that the Supreme Court did not rule in its opinion that the Attorney had the power to appear before the Grand Jury and personally conduct the proceedings in a case, it is equally true that it did not decide the issue - denying him that power.' * The People of Puerto Rico and the Hon. Salvador Mestre, Attorney General, Petigonario v. The District Court of San Juan, First District, Hon. Charles E. Foote, Respondent Judge. " i.. 371 - - - jir" ■® k T4'ionari. Opposition of the Court issued by Mr. Aldrey, Judge. San Juan, Puerto Rico, July 13, 1922. By virtue of a writ of certiorari which we issued in this case at the request of the Attorney General of Puerto Rico we have before us the proceedings in the District Court of San Juan, First District, pursuant to a petition made to him by the District Attorney of that Court, Rafael 'Arrillaga Urrutia. That petition reads as follows: "First Judicial District of San Juan. In the District Court.-Ex parte, The District Attorney of the District of San Juan, First District.-PeticionaVictory Ganden JULY 16. JULY 16. the stupendous blockbuster Lucrezia Borgia and her rival -M E R I S T AProgram Antilles. SPANISH GRAPE JUCO BRAND "NOEMOST" The best and most pleasant substitute for "Sitges" muscatel. SUCRS. OF L. VILLAMIL & CO. General Agents.
No.-)No. 908. -Motion.-To the Hon. District Court, Judicial District of San Juna, First District:- Com now appears the undersigned prosecuting attorney and respectfully submits: That on the sixth day of April, 1922, this Hon. Court entered an order directing that the report rdnd by the Grand Jury of this District of the fifth day of April, 1922, in relation to certain acts charged against E. Montgome ry Raily, J. R. Hull and W. Kessinger, shall remain in the custody and in the possession of the District Attorney of this District. "That said report was based on documents, papers, affidavits and exhibits, which were in the possession of said Grand Jury and which today are in the possession of the Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Hon. Salvador Mestre, who refuses to deliver them to the appellant, even though the latter has requested their delivery several times because he needs said report, papers, documents, exhibits and affidavits to make a study of the matter that will allow him to reach a final decision in the matter; for & while it is true that on several occasions he has seen such reports, papers, documents, exhibits and affidavits in the possession of the Attorney General, he has never had them in his own possession, with that calmness, and detention which the study of a matter, in which he has the greatest responsibility, requires. "Wherefore* requests that an order be issued requiring the Attorney General or any of his assistants in his absence, to immediately deliver to him the said report, documents, papers and all other documents in his possession which served as a basis for the grand jury in rendering its decision. The said Grand Jury, in order to issue the above-mentioned report, in order that the undersigned may determine what may be appropriate in relation thereto. z "San Juan, P. B., June 2, 1922, (s.) Rafael Arrillaga Urrutia, District Attorney of the First District of San Juan, P. R.- Sworn and subscribed before me, by Rafael Arrillaga Urrutia, attorney and neighbor of San Juan, whom I know personally, this 2nd day of June, 1922, (s.) C. Marrero, Secretary of the First District Court. "After being presented in court, the prosecutor Domingo Massari went in writing on the same day before said court alleging that he had been appointed by the Attorney General Prosecutor in commission for said court and withdrew the petition made by prosecutor Arrillaga. He filed on the same date another motion '(Continued on 3rd. page.) TOMORROW Splendid Dancing Tea at the HOTEL CONDADO - VANDERBILT from 3:30 to 6:00 P. M. Dancing Teas every Sunday.
:: ::: I > - ■ > I ' * ■ '; Have you seen the new streets and avenues that ¡; we are opening in THE COUNTY - Making your home on these grounds, you will be us- < ted among the finest in the capital and your home will be worth more to you. Ask in our office for our plans of ur- -- banization and information on the facilities <' for the payments of our lots. ¡ ; I Behn Brothers Inc, AGENTS % Tetuán and Tanca. San Juan, P. R. i X w . y ;:
i .ud d.rtnbuUd under permit (No. 801) author' " "a by the Act o f -October 6. 1917, on <]. Bt the Port Offle. of I Ran Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the Preeidont, A S. Burleson, Poetmaatar General. Entered - aecond d.... metta* I 21,1919, at the Powt QfSce 8u Jniu Porto Rico, (United Stetet of America) under the Act of warrh 8. 18 79
ANARCHISTS FIRED FOUR SHOTS AT PRESIDENT MH.LERAND RESULTING IN INFRUPTIVE ATTACK.
A HUGE CROWD GATHERS AT THE CHAMPS-ELYSÉES TO PROTECT THE PRESIDENT, ; !
(Unitd Press, via AU America Cables) PARIS, July 14.-While returning this morning from the party held at Longchamps on the occasion of the fourteenth of July, the President of the Republic, Mr. Milierand, was the object of a serious attack which endangered his life. The attacks launched against the person of the President's of the Republic were unsuccessful, for when the assassins unloaded their weapons, mistaking the carriage carrying M. Milierand, the chief of the Paris police, N. Nau 1 din, who was following a few steps behind the presidential carriage, interposed himself and was slightly wounded. Immediately an immense crowd gathered at the site of the attack, having lynched the anarchists. PARIS, July 14.- Immediately upon hearing the detonations of the projectiles, President Milierand jumped out of the carriage, hat in hand, to go towards the po" licy, who, as is known, was slightly wounded in the head of the carriage. The president was surrounded by the crowd. The dente was surrounded by a platoon of pbMcías armed with carbines. I M. Milierand did not want to im I portañola to the attack and gave orders to follow the route to the Champs Elysees. THE NEWS PRODUCED EXTRA ORDINARY ALARM IN ALL PARIS PARIS, July 14.- The news of the criminal attack on M. Milierand was immediately circulated throughout the capital, which is crowded with tourists on the occasion of the festivities of July 14. The Champs Elysées are jiglo-' iterated and 'the Elysée Palace which is
the President's residence is under surveillance by detectives and policemen. The police have received orders to arrest all the communists who are in this capital. i At the meeting held this afternoon by the Chamber of Deputies, M. Leon Daudet, I pronounced a vigorous speech saying that if the authorities do not arrest the anarchists who live in Paris, they will soon be arrested: , During those of the District Court, which will probably begin* di 31, Judge Foote says he is willing to convene special uotcroiiso On the occasion* d "i Supreme Court ruling, reversing the orders of Judge Foots in the Arrillaga-Mestre lawsuit, I the matter dtí Governor and the Grand Jury, returns to the íiapete of public news, po" what are made iníi nity of eating tirios about what will now be the procedure to be followed by the Hon. "Attoumey General, in connection with this matter. I Our reports sog .do that the Tri ; buqal of > -'Hflr.. dfbide is Max de> * questions, - efet"' pending approval by the i "Atorney General" of the rule of said Court requesting two months' vacation, commencing on the 31st day of the current month. In a communication addressed to the Attorney General by Judge Foote, Judge Foote stated that, during the vacation, he is willing to convene for a special term, if circumstances so require. To date, it is unknown what the Department of Justice will resolve. However, the said Court has given orders that a petit jury will be empaneled next Wednesday and will be in office until the last day.
The French political notables have been assassinated. . - THE CRIMINAL WAS CAPTURED PARIS, July 14.-In the late hours of today's afternoon the authorities reduced to prison the individual Gas tón Bouvet, twenty-three years of age, who in the first moments declared that his primary intention was to assassinate the President. Bouvet is being held in the preventive custody for the assassins. THE RHUR STRIKE HAS CONCLUDED NEW YOBK, July 14-News | tclegríhcas received from Berlin say I that the efforts of the Minis Vo of Labor in the matter of the Rhur strike has met with the most complete successes. ■ The strike movement according to the same reports has been concluded in that region. LORD NORTHCLIFFE 0£NEW ILL AGAIN LONDON, July 14. -Reigns great in quietude the 'numerous friends known jjgriodista TrOTWTtWfflcsWíc with mctMVRrelrel partei facultative published yesterday that'a his copraqon has relapsed again. The heart attack of which Lord Nbrthcliffe was a recent victim has brought serious toxic disorders interims. WHAT IS WIEDFELDT GOING TO BERLIN FOR? BERLIN, July 14. - Officially it has been denied tonight the news that Otto Wiedfeldt, who is going to this city will be appointed Foreign Minister to replace Rathenau. The trip of the aforesaid Ambassador . is due solely to parti 1 cular matters.
I MARYLAND CASUALTY CO. I (The Company of Trust). ' ffl P /i ... Capital and Reserve: $16,000,000 ® l More than SIX HUNDRED FIVE MILLION DOLLARS PAID to its policyholders. gP i | ffl P 1 ACCIDENT AND ILLNESS POLICIES g P FOR MEN AND WOMEN ® P ' S* you are the victim of an accident, or you become ill; who pays for you and your family's expenses? WS A "UNIVERSAL POLICY" from Maryland protects you in these cases wherever you are in the world. pl Our "UNIVERSAL POLICY" is a guarantee for you and your family members. fie g FOR FIVE DOLLARS A YEAR, YOU CAN GET S ¡g A THOUSAND DOLLAR ACCIDENT POLICY P We issue protection policies against all kinds of accidents. fi9 ye We insure automobiles Against all risks. S3 fie We insure against glass breakage, and we provide bonds. S3 WE GIVE THE MAXIMUM BENEFIT FOR THE MmIMUM COST Maryland Casualty Co. Costa & Santini gg (THE TRUSTED COMPANY) General Agents sfü m f VICTOR BRAEGGER: Manager. g Telephone 1282. p. o. Box 914. Si SO] i San Juan, P. R. 1 , i , i , - . - ...., , --i-H I I l- M l¡i¡ i i i ¡ I .¡-H' l'1 I 1 H-'l t¡ I-"...". 1 1 I 1 I 144 I I I I I I I I I H ¡lili . iiCOMPAGNIE l VAPOR FRANCES "SAINT RAPHAEL" l ;; Will leave on the 17th of the current for the ports of San Pedro de Macorís, Santo Domingo; Jacmel, Les Ca" " yes, Port an Prince and Santiago de Giba. It admits passage and cargo for the above mentioned ports. For further information please contact BfcHN BROTHERS INC. Agents, ü Tanca and Tetuan" San Juan. ' Telephone Building, Tel. No. 257. " -H-I-M-HM-H-I'II 1 1 1 1 H "M Illi Ill'll | M [ M | ¡ Il-M I I I-H-H-H-I-I I UM I IM h-M-HIIII I
SATURDAY, JULY 15, 1922. | NUMBER 1050.
The opinion of Chief Justice del Toro in the mandamus case against prosecutor Arrillaga.
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PUERTO RICOi The People of Puerto Rico and the Hon. Salvador Mestre, Attorney I. General, Petitioners. v., Hon- Rafael Arrillaga. Hon- Rafael Arrillaga Urrutia, i District Attorney of the District of San Juan, j First District, Respondent. 207. MANDAMUS. Opinion issued by Presiding Judge del Toro. San Juan, Puerto Rico, July 13, 1922 The Attorney General of Puerto Rico filed in this Supreme Court a petition for the issuance of a writ of mahdamus directed to Prosecutor Art-illaga of the District Court of San Juan, First District, ordering him to transfer to the Judicial District of Mayagüez in obedience to an order he received from the Attorney General which he had refused to comply with. Since the request was first considered, the opinion of the judges of this Court was not unanimous as to whether in a case of such nature the extraordinary writ of mandamus was appropriate. Finally, it was agreed to issue an order to show cause in order to have an opportunity to learn the facts and study the law more closely. The order of the Attorney General to the District Attorney, is as follows: Department of Justice of Porto t "2.- ' Hcn- Rafael Arrillaga Urrutia, District Attorney of the First District, Saín Juan.- J Sir:,- I hereby, by virtue of the authority conferred upon me by law, order you to proceed immediately to the District Attorney's office in the District of Porto t "2. I hereby order you to proceed immediately to transfer to the District of Mayagüez and to take charge of the Prosecutor's Office of said district until further order of this Department, handing over all the matters you have under your knowledge to the Hon. Domingo Magpari, Prosecutor of the Second District of San Juan.-Atty I tely, Salvador Mestre, Attorney General." And the Attorney General alleges that his power to issue the order and the duty of obedience by the District Attorney arise from the following legal provisions: "The Attorney General shall be in charge of the administration of Justice in Puerto Rico." Art. 14 of the Organic Act. Puerto Rico' HOY. SATURDAY. TODAY. Premiere in Santurce of the grandiose film production, entitled 'The Beggar Countess" by Lee Parry. Tomorrow: Matinee and Evening. LOS SALTEADORES DE LA MONTAÑA O LOS JINETES ROJJOSEp. 5 and 6 by Chivato. Want lid. Free Smoking? Read the ad for the new Marea SPORTS Fine Cigarettes NON PLUS ULTRA Cosmopolitan Productions presents VERA GORDON, ALMA RUBENS and GASTON GLASS in HUMORESQUE A "Paramount Picture".
"....'.The Prosecutors of the District Courts shall be under the administrative inspection (supervision) of the Attorney General in all matters pertaining to their respective offices, passing such reports and rendering such services as may from time to time be required of them by the Attorney General." Art. 69 of the Political Code. ..._. The Attorney General, in special cases, may order that the Prosecutor of one district change places with the Prosecutor of another district, for such time as the Attorney General deems necessary." Second paragraph of Sec. 64 of the Political Code, as amended by act of 8 March 8, 1906. The amendment consisted of the editing of the second paragraph transcribed. When the change of sovereignty occurred in Puerto Rico, there were, in addition to the Municipal Prosecutors, those of the Criminal Courts of Ponce and Mayagüez and those of the Territorial Court of Puerto Rico established in San Juan. The Autonomous Constitution of 1897 created the position of Secretary of Grace and Justice, an official appointed by the Governor. The Governor was vested with the supreme authority of the Colony - Art. 41 of the Constitution. During the military period, General Order No. 114, 1899, was issued, by virtue of which the Island was divided into five judicial districts. A District Court composed of three organized in each^districtcT and jlara ca® General Ordfcii No. 118, 1899, complements the previous one In its section 10 it expresses the following: "......Each District Court shall have * j d a Prosecuting Attorney who' shall represent the law in criminal cases and in appropriate civil ca- jes." The Department of Justice of the Island Government had been organized by General Order No. 98, 1899, creating the office of Attorney General, in substitution of the Secretary of Justice, with the same functions as those which usually correspond to the Attorneys General of the States of the Union. In 1900 the civil government was installed. The Attorney General was given all the powers and functions which by law corresponded to the Attorneys General of the territories and the po (Continued on 3rd. page.) TODAY. - SATURDAY. - TODAY. Premiere in Puerto Rico. Wanda HAWLEY HARRISON FORD HELEN JEROMY EDDY and JACK MUCHAlL in the superb cinedrama POR un BESO Precios Corrientes. Tomorrow Morning Dorothy DALTON in her latest triumph . i Adventuress Romantic Morning and Evening. Current Prices. Jcsé de Diego Anniversary The best memento that can be made in honor of the illustrious compatriot is to offer him one of our magnificent wreaths of chemically dissected natural flowers, whose appearance will remain unalterable for three years. Purchase one of these wreaths, which we sell at special anniversary prices. HERNANDEZ, STEFFENS & CO. Cristo 16. Tel. 1321. Buttons are plated and lined A.CARAZP, Brau St72 am, '