ELM3NDO
[Offices: £ Salvador Brau, 81. f Tel. 833, P. O. Box 345.
12 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00. One year, $7 50.
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of oetobcr 6, 1917. on file at the Post Office ot San Juan. Porto Rieo. By order of the President. A. S. Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered aa second class matter, februarv 21. 191". at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rico. (United States of America) under the Act of march 3. 1879.
SATURDAY, APRIL 22, 1922.
NUMBER 9791
"IT IS TIME TO BE CONVINCED THAT MR. W. HARDING WILL NOT REMOVE MR. REILY",--WE HAVE BEEN TOLD BY LCDR. FRANCISDEXTER HAS TOLD US IN A LETTER FROM THE PRESIDENT TO GOVERNOR MR. E M. REILY SPEAKS OF AN UNCONDITIONAL ENDORSEMENT.
At the Secretariat of La Fortaleza, one of our editors had a brief conversation with your distinguished American lawyer, Mr. Francis H. Dexter. The conversation concerned the latest news received from Washington regarding the situation in Puerto Rico. Mr. Dexter told our Re dactor that it was time they were convinced that President Harding would not remove the Governor. -What you say is very gra ve, Counselor," we told him. -I have reasons for saying so. What are they?" we asked. -I have seen a recent letter from President Harding to the Governor, in which he tells him that he need not be impatient, for he (the President) is sure of his integrity and honesty, and is confident that he will do a profitable work for the country. -But this letter, we insist, is subsequent to that of the Grand Jury and that of Díaz Collazo? -Yes" later. What is more, in it the President shows himself to be supporting the same criteria as the Governor regarding the Díaz Collazo bribery and that all the charges against him are the product of a political plot". . After some consideration, Mr. Dexter agreed with our reporter that perhaps to this attitude of the President is due the attitude lately adopted by the Secretary of War, of turning over to the President the whole file relating to the Puerto Rico question" "thus washing his hands of it like Pilate". THE BARRACKS AT WELLING TON UNDER FIRE FROM THE ...... ... ENEMY DUBLIN, APRIL 21.-The revolutionaries are attacking Wellington Barracks with cannon and machine guns.
He then spoke of the Campbell Bill, of which Mr. Dexter expressed the opinion that he considered it a failure and that what should have been called for was simply a reform in the present Charter, to the effect that the Governor elected by the people and appointments by the Governor and Senate of all officers, including those of the Supreme Court, should be provided for. He censured from the "Bill ' Campbell" that of the Commissioner *tcsi- i dent of the United States.
"Alonso Riera and Co. Inc," large warehousemen of raw tobacco in San Juan, have bought the very important commercial firms of "Alonso Riera and Co.'', that is, the heirs of Manuel Alvarez and Herminio Madera, both partners in that firm, and have also bought "Madera, Garcia Tobacco Co." "Madera Vigil and Co.", "Madera, Vigo and Co." and "Madera Hnos.", thus forming a powerful corporation, the largest that has ever been constituted in Puerto Rico, which has earned enthusiastic congratulations to our good friend Don Herminio Madera. The main offices of Alonso Riera and Co. Inc. are on the second floor of the Tobacco Palace, of which the corporation is the owner. "The Board of Directors has been constituted as follows: President, Don Herminio General Manager, Don Florentino Mi randa; Vice-President, Don Bautista Teatro "America" TODAY SATURDAY TODAY AT 8.45 P. M. Company of Zarzuelas, Comalias and Varietés Soria-Sicilia Attractive New Program -Great Success Paquita Sicilia with new couplets ISABEL SORIA with new songs-COMEDIES Tomorrow Sunday at 4 P. M. Great Matinee Reserve your Location.
LILY'S' PAPER VASITOS Finished to receive ORDER FROM Sties, of A. Mayol and Co. San Juan, P. R. Plies and button liners A. CARAZO, Brau St. 72.
The receipt of the letter from President Harding by the Governor was later confirmed to us by a reliable source, and later we were informed by someone who said he had seen the correspondence that it did exist but that it had other paragraphs in which the President informed the Governor of the critical situation that all this had created for him in Washington and that he wished the differences to be settled as soon as possible or be ready for the time when he would call him to the capital of the Republic.
THE MOST IMPORTANT SOCIETY HAS BEEN CONSTITUTED IN SAN JUAN.
Madera, dcín Manuel Madera and Don Don Donato Vigil; Treasurer, Don Jaime Pizá; Sub-treasurer Don José Madera, and Secretary, Don Celso García. In such an important corporation, all the wealthiest people of the country and the tobacco manufacturers are shareholders. Don Herminio Madera, President of the aforementioned corporation, will leave for Mayagüez and Ponce with the purpose of opening branches. We are pleased to send our congratulations to the new firm "Alonso Riera and Co. Inc.", to which we predict excellent results. The elements that constitute the powerful corporation "Alonso Riera and Co. Inc.", are of great prestige, extremely well known in the business world, where they have gained the confidence of the public. Mr. Herminio Madeta and Mr. Floren tino Miranda have been at the head of large corporations that have contributed intensely to the prosperity of the country, which should feel very satisfied with this new organization. The contract was signed before the Notary GiEriel de la Haba, of the law firm "Texidor y de la Haba". IMPORTANT If you wish to eat well, go to Cristo 11, where meals are served at reasonable prices. We have fresh and ventilated rooms. Cinema "Puerto Rico" TODAY SATURDAY TODAY The sensational movie "Bouclette" or "El Angel de la Media Noche' 4 interpreted by the famous . GABY DESLYS Tomorrow Sunday "DIOSA DE LA SELVA'' and the colossal drama "PAGANDO CON SU VIDA".
Today - SAhajo - Today; i "What Every Woman Ignores" ; by Stuart-Holmer, Mabel Julienne and Scott. 9,500 FEET. "UNIVERSAL" Program ■ French Steamer "MñCORiS" Expected in this port about the 23rd of the current pro- < - cadent from Bordeaux bound for Puerto Plata, Cabo Hai- < > tiano, Port-au-Prince and Santiago de Cuba. - ► This same steamer will call at this port about 5 * J next May bound for Coryne and Havre. She will admit cargo and passage for the above ports. ! t ' For inquiries contact ¡ í í BEHN BROTHERS INC. AGENTS ' t Telephone Edf. Tanca-Tetuán - SAN JUAN, P. R.
"THIS GOVERNOR SHOULD HAVE TAKEN A SHOT OR LEFT"-THE REPUBLICAN UDER REPUBLICAN MR. MONTILD AGREED THAT THE REPUBLICANS SHOULD LEAVE THE BIERNO TO THE MAJORITY AND CONFORM TO THE VOTl.
In order to ascertain the true opinion prevailing in a political party, it is our practice, and we believe it to be the best, to try to obtain the opinion of the prominent men of such parties, but who at the same time are not the active elements at the head of the collectivities, since they by their very position acquire the habit of thinking what they say and not saying what they think. In almost all the political parties there are men of true reputation and unimpeachable executions in detention of their ideals and doctrines, and they are used to think what they say and not to say what they think.
The most important thing is that they are not only a party of the same ideals and doctrines, but also a party of the same people. However, they remain aloof from any political activity. On this occasion, yesterday we fortunately met Mr. Fernando J. Montilla, a prominent member of the Republican party and who during the season he has remained in Puerto Rico has been a good friend of Governor Reily, with whom he has conferred on several occasions, and we had a good time chatting with him. Mr. Montilla, was the candidate
WHICH, ACCORDING TO DR. COOPELAND, PRODUCES AN ENORMOUS DAMAGE.
Now that the advisability of protecting {Now that the advisability of protecting the country's industries by consuming what they produce is being discussed, we believe it is appropriate to deal with the report submitted by the Director of the De. The report of the Director of the Department of Health of the City of New York, Dr. Coopelani, on the North American cigarette product, is given by the Chief Sanitary Officer of the City of New York, Dr. Coopelani. The Chief Sanitary Officer of New York says that the fact that the American cigarette is prepared with certain chemical products with the purpose of making it more agreeable to the consumer's taste, has brought as a consequence that after a careful analysis of the effects that such chemical compositions produce in the human organism, it has been concluded that the aforementioned cigarette is a danger to the consumer. Such is the number of people falling ill as a result of this, that the aforementioned professional considers that it is necessary to place the aforementioned cigarette on the scale of heroic products whose use is punishable by the laws of all countries. The opinion of this very competent professional, must be taken into account in our country, where the cigarette that concerns us has been and is being brought by traders, to be offered to the native public that does not PARQUE BORINQUFN TODAY SABADO HOY LOS TRES MOSQUETEROS en matinée, second day Hoy Hoy Cine Imperial Y Victory Garden Clara Kimball Young in "PASAPORTE AMARILLO" Programa "San Juan Film".
| The "San Juan Film" program is a program that will help you to understand the disastrous consequences that medical science points out to those who use such products. In Puerto Rico we have had the cigarette industry established for years. This industry manufactures a healthy product, which has also been examined by science, without having been able to prove the existence in it of anything that could cause harm to the individual's organism. The raw material used in the manufacture of our cigarettes is all from Puerto Rico, since our country is well acquainted with the tobacco used in the manufacture of the product. 1 And since the statistics announce an enormous increase in these last years ■ in favor of the foreign product, which comes here to supplant ours, we believe it convenient to cite this fact given to publicity in New York recently, so that the consumers of foreign cigarettes on the Island may be aware of the consequences that await them with the product they prefer. It is a necessity to protect our cigarette industry, and today more than ever Bcricquen El Cine a Orillas Del Mar. TODAY SATURDAY TODAY THE NOVEL OF AN EXPOSURE (Anne of Green Cables.) By Mary Miles Minter. 20 cents. Matinee at 3:30 P. M. "THE THREE MUSKETEERS" (The Three Musketeers). Tomorrow, Sunday: "His Temporary Wife". NOTICE On the occasion of the annual stocktaking, our establishment will be closed on April 25 and 26 [Tuesday and Wednesday]. Los Muchachos Suc". of A. Mayol & Co.
In the days in which he was to make the Departmental appointments, Mr. Tons yH| wrote to New York, telling Mr. Montilla that if he could have his name in case the <fl nator should ask him for a candidate for Commissioner of the Interior, which shows the rootedness and prestige the gentleman enjoys in the Republican party. H During our conversation, Mr. Montilla began by telling us that he was first and foremost a defeated man. That he had nurtured ■ feelings not only for the 1 of the leaders of his party, but for Muñoz Rivera himself, of whom he had founded the B ral Americano party with that he was fully convinced of the Americanization of Puerto Rico and the future salvation of the country and of the education of his children in the United States, where he would like to see them continue to develop their iB tivities. Regarding political matters, Mr. Montilla expressed his opinion that he liked to discuss his views within his country because he was "disciplined and that he had already expressed his ideas about the current situation among his aiB. H In referring to the policy of the Governor, he told us that he had arrived here with good news that he did not know what had happened to him and that he believed that the Governor had never (Continued on page 6a.)H (Continued on page 6a.)H been able to do so, since it is of vital importance to the wealth of the country. H Ours is to be preferred to the foreign. And, when the strange thing pulls H defects that we have pointed out, there is no justification for those who knowingly ingest in their orgauB that which will hinder the normal functions of the same, causing consequent disturbances in the iH and the expenses that always bring coB any illness. The product is recommended for its purity. therefore, to prefer it, by dividual and collective. B ZINC ZINC AND LIsB WIRE AND GRAMPS >B Roofing paper. Doors and Call, visit or write ROLAN Y TEJEDOR B Box 1356. Tel. 395. Terra;. Stop 2 1|2- ■"cinelunJ Presents today on MatinéeB and Night, ia first dayB the incomparable French producciB. "TRABAJJCl adapted from Emilio Zola's beautiful noB. ■ This film is distributedB by San Juan Film ExchanB Extraordinary prices.
1 i Auction Auction Wednesday, April 26, 1922, at 2 P. M. On Carretera Nueva, Parada 14, west side of the "Rafael Cordero" School, in Santurce. | 15 COWS "HOLSTEIN", "JERSEY" and "GUENSEY" calved and about to calve. 2 BULLS "HOLSTEIN". ISIDORO D. DELGADO,, I Jesse Shoemaker. Public Almonedero!
Compagnie Generala Transatlantic SERVICE INTER COLONIAL VAPOR FRANCES "SAINT RAPHAEL", a vessel expressly suited to travel on the WEST INDIES, will arrive at San Juan on the 24th of the current with destination Mayagüez, San Pedro de Macorís, Santo Domingo, Jacmel, L " Cayes, Puerto Príncipe and Santiago de Cuba, touching at the same ports on her return. Book your ticket in time. Take advantage of the opportunity to travel with all the desired comforts in these countries. Good French food and well-stocked canteen. * FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT BEHN BROTHERS INC. Agents TANCA/TETUAN . TELEFONO BUILDING SAN JUAN TEL. NO. 257
IGLESIAS ADMITS GOVERNOR REBUTTED HIM AT SENATORS' MEETING
THESE GENTLEMEN HAVE RA-ZON-DUOMR. REILY After the senators' meeting at La Fortaleza we had not heard again from the Socialist leader, Mr. Iglesias, who, according to press reports, was combated by the Governor at the aforementioned senators' conference. Yesterday, we did call on him, and after a brief exordium, our conversation fell on the above-mentioned matter. - Mr. Iglesias said that, during the meeting of senators at La Fortaleza, and when dealing with Jos. judicial appointments for the "mixed districts", as one or the other claimed the right they had to have their respective candidates accepted, the Governor decided the matter, stating that "these gentlemen-the Unionists-were the ones who were right, and that in the aforementioned "mixed districts" the majority had been Unionist. THE ULTIMATUM? Many consider that the attitude assumed by the Governor, with respect to Mr. Iglesias, has all the aspects of an ultimatum to the Socialists. And eyewitnesses assure that the Governor's action has been final, that Mr. Reily, always so kind to Santiago, did not accompany him, as on other occasions, out of the presidential office. Many hope that if things are not settled in that sense, the socialist leaders will be compelled to launch a letter-manifesto, like the one that the republicans gave birth to, explaining the differences that they had been holding with the Chief of the insular Executive. Otherwise, some believe, the predicament that Mr. Iglesias enjoys among his people would be diminished, and the pedestal in which his co-religionists have placed him would collapse. WINDS OF FROND... Another socialist leader believes that the winds of frond for the minorities have already begun to blow from the top of the Government Palace. And the referred politician affirms that the bomb will explode very soon, before the Governor's definitive trip.
BASE BALL WINS For $3.07 I send you a glove in the color of your choice by return mail. Order today, don't put it off until tomorrow. Contact Julian Collazo Phone 7. Box 119. Dr. Veve St. Esq. Baldorioty. COAMO, P.* R. Advt.