elawndo
Oficinasí o Salvador Brau, 81. ? Tel. 833, P. O. Box 345. ? i > X
10 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00. One year, $7-50.
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR IV,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published "nd distributed under permit (No. 801) aulhori "r<l by the Act of October,6, 1017.* on file "I the Post Office o* Sen Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the Preaident. A. B. Bur&son, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, febrnarv 21. 1919. at the Poet Office at Ran Juan. Porto Riwo. (United Staton of America) under the Act of march 3. 1879.
SATURDAY, MAY 6, 1922.
NUMBER 991.
senator king delivered his announced speech in the senate.
Mr. Goldsmith was arrested yesterday and released on bail.
- Prosecutor Arrillaga Urrutia yesterday issued a warrant for the arrest of Abe Goldsmith, charging him with malicious arson and fraudulent destruction of secured property. Both charges are related to the fire that destroyed Mr. Goldsmith's business establishment located on Salvador Brau Street in this city early Thursday morning. The Prosecuting Attorney set bail for the defendant at $5,000 in the first case, and $3,000 in the second, assuring, however, that said bail will be increased as soon as the Public Prosecutor's Office acquires all the evidence relative to the facts. THE DEFENDANT. According to our reports, the defendant alleges that he was in Bayamon on the night of the occurrence, and is therefore ignorant of all the details concerning the same. THE WITNESSES. Among the evidence of the Prosecutor, according to news reports, are the declarations of witnesses who say they saw the accused leaving the establishment at the time the accident occurred. The Prosecutor continues to practice the investigation. Yesterday, several witnesses were called to his office and their statements were taken, and according to last minute reports, Mr. Qoldsmith posted bail and was released on bail. SALE AT PUBLIC AUCTION On Friday, May 12, 1922 at 2 p. m. I will sell by order of the District Court of the First District of San Juan, to the highest bidder and for cash, all the remaining stock of the fire that occurred in the warehouse of R. Borrás y Co-, 78 Alien Street, San Juan, P. R. R. R. MARTINEZ REYES Marshal of said Court. Teatro America Today - SATURDAY - Today CAMILLE or The Lady of the Camellias , CURRENT PRICES Tomorrow -SUNDAY- Tomorrow In the First Tanda "LADRONA DE CORAZONES" WITH Viola Dana In the Second Tanda ENSUEÑO Do not miss Today and Tomorrow
WOODS Metal-I ath Tips Paris Doors and Windows Corrugated and Plain Zinc ** Elbows-Branches-Bottoms Galvanized Barbed Wire Twisted Square Rods Top Gas "Luz del Mundc" 150o. Certain-teed" Roofing Paper "Certain-teed" Paints "Certain-teed" Ridges and Gutters Portland Cement ; Channel-lath Mosaics Grampas If you are interested in saving money on these items, call, visit or write to ROLAN & TEJEDOR Box 1356 Phone 395. I San Juan, P. R.
The political situation, in 1...concerning the struggle which still rages between the" p irty of the majority and Governor Reily, is becoming more and more incomprehensible and complicated. The question, as it stands at present, presents two aspects, apparently contradictory to each other, like two completely opposite poles, or like the obverse and reverse sides of a medal. One is the intense campaign being waged in Washington by prominent elements in Congress who favor and insistently request an investigation for the purpose of securing the removal of Governor Reily from office, to be duly prosecuted if guilt is found in his wrongdoing, and the other is the policy of armistice and waiting which has been initiated here for the purpose of intervening in the nomination and recommendation of officials for public office in the island government. Some days ago, and now we would like to remind you, when confirming certain cable information published in this newspaper, we reproduced a wide information that appeared in the newspaper, "Cebollas de Canarias", "1 Tasajo de Postas y j Mantas. The office of "LA LINEA AZUL", AUTOS DIARIOS BETWEEN SAN JUAN and PONCE, has been moved to the street RECINTO SUR in the first floor of the Hotel Moderno, in front of the EDIFICIO de CORREOS.
i , ■ --- g I DECLARE THAT GOVERNOR REILY SHOULD BE REMOVED FROM HIS POSITION FOR BEING THE PRINCIPAL CAUSE THAT TUMULTY AND CONTROVERSY REINFORCE ON THE ISLAND.
The Governor has been offered his unconditional support by significant personalities in the country.
Córdoba Dávila has written announcing that the Governor's downfall will not be long in coming.
He has written in the main newspapers of the American nation, giving an account of the conviction Harding had reached, in the sense "that Governor Reily was not the right person for the position and of "his purpose in selecting a better one, and thus end once and for all the political conflict created in Puerto Rico". The President's idea, however, was not followed by action, and perhaps, according to the opinion of authorized persons, the Governor succeeded in stopping such action by announcing to the National Administration that he had called the Senators to discuss and settle the situation with them. It should be noted that the meeting of the Senators was held on the 18th of last month and that it was during those days that the series of dispatches were received from Washington giving an account of the President's opinion after having conferred with the Secretary of War. From the lips of some prominent leaders we have heard the opinion that if the Governor would appoint the Department Heads who were rejected by the Senate, from elements of the Unionist Party and in agreement with the Party Leadership, and rectify, in a word, those acts of his which have occasioned the protest against him, a definite and true understanding might be reached. (Continued on page 8a.)
we must win the affection of the puerto rican people by granting them more liberal rights.
MORE LIBERAL - SAID THE PROMINENT NORTH AMERICAN LEGISLATOR : (UNITER PRESS) (Via "All America Cables'') WASHINGTON, May 5. -Sen- , dor King delivered his announced speech in the Senate, in which he called for the immediate removal of Governor ReTy, accusing him of being the cause of the tumultuous situation prevailing on the island and of the angry con- ! trovers'a which has maintained a deep resentment against the United States in Puerto Rico. We must win the affection and consideration of the Puerto Ricans," said Senator King, among other things, "by granting them the political rights that a cultured and civilized people deserve. Only in this way," he added, "will we be able to put the Puerto Rican problem on the road to a frank solution. 1 J. o Senator King finally asked for the approval of his lev bill, granting the island the right to elect its own governor. WHITE HOUSE DENIES REPORTS THAT PRESJ HARDING CONSIDERS NAME OF GEORGE CHRISTIAN f FOR GOVERNOR OF i PUERTO RICO (UNITED PRESE) (Via "AJI America Cables'') WASHINGTON, May 5. -The House
The Executive Council approved the municipal budgets, with amendments to some of them.
The list of teachers' salaries was also approved. An ordinance of Carolina was rejected.
As announced, the meeting of the Executive Council was held yesterday at the Governor's office. The following matters were brought up. "The Treasurer recommends: , The salary schedule for high-school teachers for the school year 1922-23 as submitted, by the Comisiomdo ; dp Instruction is approved subject, however, to such deductions as are indicated in the budget law: and in a communication subsequent to the Treasurer's report, the Commissioner of Instruction proposes to lower the number of employees so as to cover the totnl with. 155,582.60, in the amount of $191,000 of the present budget laid on the table until the next meeting of the Council to be held next week. That the Carolina ordinance imposing a one-fourth cent excise tax on each quart of leBlanca has emphatically denied the reports circulated that Mr. George Christian, now private secretary to President Harding, is the President's nominee for the office of Governor of Puer to Rico. Mr. Christian has stated that he does not know the source of such information.
NEWS! NEWS! JUST RECEIVED Our buyer who has just arrived has brought us many new items. HALF-HANDKED SOCKS - BELTS - STRAPS - SILK Purses camera shapes. Earring - Screens - Fans - Children's Socks. < Swimwear. For Ladies, Gentlemen and Children. And many other items. ALL AT VERY SPECIAL PRICES Come right away. Gonzalez Padin Co., Inc. SAN JUAN PONCE p MAYAGÜEZ
B0R1NQUEN PARK TODAY. SATURDAY. TODAY. ELSIE FERGUSON in the luxurious drama < "His Parisian Wife." and Magazines ( POR ESOS MUNDOS and MAGAZINE GRAFICO , Luneta 20 c. ( Matinee at 3:30 P. M. LOS TRES MOSQUETEROS , Adults 15 c. ChildrenvlO c. Tomorrow Sunday?" "LA ESTRELLA REPORTER" (The Star Reporter.)
WU PEI FU HAS A TRIUMPH PEKIN, May 5.-General Wu Poi Fu's General Staff issued the following communiqué to the public this morning: "The beaten and demoralized enemy is retreating forty kilometers from the capital. On their way the soldiers of Changt Solin destroy the stations of the railway and the bridges, in order to avoid their pursuit. We have captured many prisoners/' Se plisa and f orran buttons A, QARAZO.arau St 7?,
JRAN PRICE REDUCTION AT THE ' Hotel Gondado-Vanderbilt a FOR THE SUMMER SEASON ( o Room with private bath, for two persons $5.00 per day. . Room with private bath, for one person, special rates. s Our plan has been changed. e Our guests will be able to take L _ rooms without being obligated to take meals at the hotel. Visit us once before you check in and you will be convinced of the quality, the delicate treatment, and the careful service of our hotel. The Administration.
9-- The Grand Jury of* the Federal Court is acting diligently to ensure the
The Grand Jury of the Federal Court is acting diligently to ensure that it is produced and sold in that jurisdiction because the ordinance was adopted by a majority and not by two-thirds of the members as provided by law. Same recommendation for identical reasons with respect to the Carolina ordinance imposing 5 cents on each ton of cane. The same with respect to the ordinance of said municipality imposing a tax of 5 cents for each quintal of sugar. And for the same reasons it recommends the disapproval of the ordinance of Carolina imposing 40 percent of 1 percent as special tax for the economic year of Í9Í2. " i That the ordinance of Cabo Rojo imposing a special tax of 20 and 1011.00 of 1 percent, for the years 1922-23 and 1923-24 to 1949-50, respectively, for the payment of interest and amortization of a loan of $30,000, is approved. The Council reaffirmed its previous resolution insisting that the sale of the municipal bonds must be made by public bidding. The following borrowings were reconsidered with the following result: Caguas, that the $40,000 earmarked for the construction of (Continued on page 8a.) MffUTO Hoy -SABADO - Hoy Magno acontecimiento rodolph val Entino y ALLA NAZIMOVA en la insuperable e inmortal obra CAMILLE MUSICA ESPECIAL ADAPTADA DE pA OPERA "TRAVIATA" Matinée a toda orquesta We wish to put on record that the modern version of this work will SODMENTE SODMENTE S premiere at the "RfALTO". The one that another cinema announces for this evening is another film that premiered in San Juan a long time ago where neither Valenttino nor Nazimova are working, and which is called "LADV OF CAMILLE".
Compagnie Generale Transatlantique VAPOR FRANCES "Saint RAPHAEL" She is expected in this port on May 10 next coming from Santo Domingo and will continue her voyage to LA GUADALUPE and MARTINICA She admits cargo and passage for the mentioned ports. For further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS Jnc. Agents Tanca-Tetuan, Tel. 257. San Juan, P. R.
According to reports which have reached us, we understand that the Grand Jury of the Federal Court, which has recently begun its work in the present judicial term, is actively at work in the clarification of important irregularities said to have been committed by some Government officials. Judging from the reports referred to, these investigations relate, as in the case of Shanton, to certain offenses committed in connection with the Volstead Act and with the custody by certain authorities of beverages which have been confiscated on the complaint of violators of the law. We do not know how serious the charges now pending before the Grand Jury may be, for it is to be wondered at that the experience of Colonel Shanton has not served as a lesson; but at any rate it is to be trusted to the justice in which the members of the above respectable institution are inspired. Among the cases, we are assured that there is one in which we are trying to find out about the disappearance of a considerable quantity of beverage that was confiscated in Fajardo. So far it is believed, and this is the public rumor, that in this action of the Grand Jury of the Federal Court, there is a very high number of Government officials. I - . -vtq RESOLUTION INTRODUCED IN SENATE i SAW INVESTIGATE MINERS' STRIKE WASHINGTON, May 5 -A resolution was introduced in the House of Representatives today ordering an investigation of the causes which gave rise to the formidable miners' strike, as well as creating a federal agency to prevent future strikes from occurring in the nation. ' P. & J. LINES PAGE & JOMES, MOBILE, Ala. STEAM SERVICE BETWEEN MOBILE AND PUERTO RICO x DEPARTURES: "Hancock Couity", April 20 "Lake Giltedge", May 10 "Hancock County", May 25 "Lake Giltedge", June 15 The most direct route to the pipelines of the Central and Southeastern United States. When passing your orders indicate shipment via Mobile. For more information contact BEHN BROTHERS", INC. "Tetuan Tanca. - Telephone Bldg. San Juan. Tel. No. 257.