ELMUNDO
4-1-4 I mt H-M I I I 14 141 I-l'4-b t T2 page# 3 cts i i f "¿mA H00. F.> A arto, $7.58, ? ; ;
4 "W'! 1 1 t MI 1 H t 1 I I I 11 1 I II Office*? ; * Salvador Brau, 8T< : Tal. 833. P. O, Box 345< ■
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
~
- "--i SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
I Published .30 dietributad under permit (No. 801) , "uthorir.ea hy the Ad of October 6, 1817, on file at the Post Offic. o< I | | San Jnan. Porto Rieo. By order of the Preeident, A. 8. Bur leson, Postmaster General. Entered aa second class matter, U 8 febrnary 21. 1819, at the Poet Office .M Ban Juan, Pwto Ri<", (United States of America) under the Act of march 8. 1879 fl r 1 - "*
SATURDAY, JULY 1, 1922.
NUMBER 1039
IfastendroSpinióii dd tóre Historian of Puerto Rico aceróte the flag leaves solpl star.
District Chief of the PÓncía Indfiar, Dear Sir;I am pleased to answer your letter of inquiry: * -? ~ The present Puerto Rican flag, of the lone star, was born with the York Revolutionary Club. On December 22nd, 1895, there was in "Chinney Coner Hall" a third assembly of Puerto Ricans and the "Puerto Rican Section of the Cuban Revolutionary Party" was constituted, and there it was agreed to adopt as the Puerto Rican flag the same Cuban flag with the same colors inverted. This is recorded in the minutes of that day (third minute). I have a complete copy of this document and the names of all the Puerto Ricans who attended. When in 1913, the ''Union of Puerto Rico" party put in its program the ''Independence" as a goal, the leaders Luis Muñoz Rivera and José de Diego took the same flag of New York as the flag of that final aspiration. 3. This flag, then, symbolizes the aspiration of nationality. With that aspiration, José de Diego died. Muñoz Rivera, an able politician and opor- I ¿rtúHÉ& who, while residing in Washington, the opinion of the Central Government, upon his return to the Homeland, thought it convenient*to include in the program 1 Ima of siMj>ártido the solution "State", I I I as a counterweight to the solution "In- 1 dependence' ' and leaving to Congress lia. responsibility for what it did. ■ He died without being able to carry out sd plan. 4. -The English people, practical people in the gobi "po "ÉB#nrtnto of their colonies, until they reached the '<ran J m'Jrtto Empire, where ! /* n *' - ' subditos su terrtSie 'm3' (Continued on 3rd. pagj SPANISH GRAPE JUICE BRAND "NOEMOST" The best and most pleasant substitute for "Sitges" muscatel. SUCRS. OF L. VILLAMIL & CO. General Agents.
rtlBTA FROM CAPTAIN HURTADO M, DR. COLL Y TOSTE ON THE PORTOWÍQUENA FLAG AND WITH TESTACION BEL NON. HISTORIA-" Dote DE PBEfeTO rico
San Juan, Puerto Rico, .Juafc) 29, 1922. Hon. Cayetano jMn X Toste % Historian dejMprto Rico, San -Juan, P. fc. Respectable Sir:- I would greatly "esteem you would have the goodness to nnormanne, in your official caráctrtj of Historian of BRerto Ric" on the points a. -When (ué creádtólrtWtóera pnertorriflueña* and pfe- qqHK b. -What do the red and white stripes aplp mean; the blue triáqguK'blue and the star was contiené.^_jk T 8.-4|*é symbolizes didha flag: A Nation; A State; >A Territory; A Colony or a po litical grouping, and in what text or statute are the data to which I refer. Thanking you for any information on these.axtremes, I subscribe to you' with fSBpéínsideration. -f Very respectfully, Migurt HURTADO, Chief of District Insular Police. * * * íak. Villa Los Pinos, 30 - Mr. Miguel Hurtado, ' > i jr"=sB5====xss3Se l'JomlMroé Wüfifos If Para* Séñoras y Niñas || 'Atibamos de recibir pre- i H ♦ciesos sonr.brúrrs m: > los de última moda, estilos sencillos y muy bonitos, un >gran suftido pana escoger. Prices from . $1.50 and up. Visit our departments. GONZALEZ PADIN CO.
H'H'1 I I I I I (I !■ I l-H "I ■"■ !■■!■■!■ !■ !■ Ill Ü The North American Higienic - Co. Inc. - (KLINODENT) ;;; :: DIVIDEND DISTRIBUTION " Notice is hereby given to all holders of preferred stock of this corporation, that the Board of Di- *; -- rectors has agreed to distribute the 7 percent dividend, - - - which is to be collected at our office, Salvador ... " Brau No. 30, within the next ten days, as of. " of this date. After this period, a check will be sent to you ;; -- for the amount corresponding to each shareholder, in the di- " rection in which they appear in our books. ::: Dr. j. toro :: " Pres. " Illi I I I I I l l ¡ L l I I FHIH-l-i-M I I I I I 1-1- bHH- -" l'l "4 +■!'* Illi M- H-H-H-I- H 1 1 1 i I- i- i- I- !■■!■! lili M 1-1' I- I -1-I--P I- l-l l-H I NOTICE | " The splendid meal at the Hotei "Vander County- .... " bilt" -from 7:00 to 9:00 P. M.. followed by a grand ball by invitation, given by the Fourth of July holiday committee, will take " ** place on the third of July and not on the fourth, as was announced in -; #this paper, in yesterday's issue. As there is " great demand for tables, those interested are begged to ¡I ■ - apply early for theirs. ;;; -I-I 'l H"! l ! l l l i ! ; i .H-H-H-H-l-M-l-H"!--!-!-
■"H4i "M "4 lilililí lllllllllllll II IM-1 1 1 1 tiIH lfH'1 I III II Ill IM- 1111 I íTS? ii COMPAGNIE GENERALE TRANSATLANTIQUE | ii For Santander and St. Nazaire p By French Steamer ''HAITI" of 8,620 Tons. - This luxurious and comfortable liner will leave on July 13 for the above-mentioned ports of Fort de France (Martinique). "The fast steamer ST. RAPHAEL of the same Company will return in San Juan, departing on July 10 - ;; the passengers who wish to take advantage of this steamer "HAITI" making the transfer di- " " f recto in Martinique. Take advantage of this opportunity. Book your ticket in time. For further information contact - BEHN BROTHERS INC, Agents. -- Telephone Building. J '* Phone 257. - ... San Juan, P. R. Tanca and Tetuda :: 4 imi-H H44-M-11 1'M 1111 11 M I i 1111| 111 I U4-M4rlfr l IH4HHI 11 í 11 11| M>l 1*1 1 1 III h i I'
10 WE WERE EXHALING, MR. HUYKE
mine. We expected it, however, and it has not been expected. Having achieved its purpose, having been discharged from office, having satisfied its excessive ambition for influence and power, no longer needing our help and our efforts, having revived the corpse, although still orphaned of the confidence of the country, which hates it more and more every day, its most irreconcilable enemy and its most bitter detractor, it accuses us of being a foreign newspaper and a partisan newspaper. How dastardly, Mr. Huyke! It was neither a foreign newspaper nor a partisan newspaper when it gladly served as a stepping stone to Huyke's rise. It was not a foreign and partisan newspaper, when it published, making Huyke sign for others, articles that he himself wrote, in order to raise in the island a halo of political prestige that he did not have and to attribute to himself a popular sympathy that he did not enjoy. But now yes, now, when EL MUNDO realized the purposes of when our merciful work of resuscitating the corpse had been accomplished, we decided to lend ourselves to his work of destroying and perverting the collective knowledge of the country with his politics of grudges and personalities, with his practices of unbridled and harmful intransigence, and with his slogan of serving the enemies of the land, whatever the harm might be; Now yes, we repeat, we are for Huyke, a foreign newspaper and a partisan newspaper, without taking into account that EL MUNDO was the only one that gave him a place in his Americanist campaign, without caring to challenge this newspaper, a man who had forgotten, after conquering the high peaks, the commitments and duties that he had contracted with his people, and who had forgotten that he was a man who had forgotten, after conquering the high peaks, the commitments and duties that he had contracted with his people.to his people and his party. '(Continued on 3rd f pag.) HOt. SATURDAY 1. TODAY. BruÉD & Vázquez Film Co, present# the best and latest production of the divine CLARA KIMBALL YOUNG entitled Paying with her Honor (Charge it.) Every woman should see it. TOMORROW SUNDAY 2 This great film will be repeated at the "VICTORY GARDEN" If your car is not working properly, bring it immediately to Lino Pereira, a recognized expert in all brands. Hato Rey, Stop 30, Phone 535 Black Santurce. Advt. "CINE PUERTO RICO" The grandiose drama in 8 parts "THE SUPREME POWER" Based on the novel "Eugene Grandet" by Balzac, and starring Rodolph Valentino and Alice Terry starring the "Four Horsemen".
The accusations made by Táyer, the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Buyke, from the party's organ of the party, are
The accusations made against us by Táyer, the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Buyke, from the ranks of the party organ, which he has not had the courage to join despite the fact that he has been defending and upholding the policy and ideals of that party, do not surprise or concern us. Accustomed^J as we are to witnessing "Hás great ruinousness and the most tremendous ingratitude, it is right that we ftúremos with the greatest of indifferences the attitude assumed by the man, who, despite his medlo ' cridade and lack of political Üeto, owes his popularity and *, its signifi cation to the benevolence of that same perineo to which so denounces and accuses, so that SMMt-to the light those delations and "Knones when far from nu®SÉ^B ; The same perineum, which he so denounces and accuses, so that he could not receive, in the middle of the pedio, the thrust that he knew in our*-defen sa that we had necessarily dq to stink him. There were times when, during a political con. vention, the leaders of the Union appeared before the highest court of their party to obtain for their appointees the deserved reward for their heroism and political loyalty. Many names fell into the ballot box to fill the positions of public responsibility before the country. Huyke's was one of them. On that night he still held the high offices of President of the Chamber of Delegates and Chairman of the Party. The urn was opened wide, the names of the most representative representatives of the country were repeatedly rung for an hour and a half, and the names of those of the victorious canai-! data were repeatedly proolamadus i fnfclamente. Moments later, everyone left the hall satisfied and happy with the victory won and the triumph obtained. Huykq, on the other hand, with tears in his eyes and a black rancor in his soul, desMorning Sunday, July 2, morning. Beautiful day of Italian Art. Francesca Bertini will appear in her latest creation entitled "LA SIERPE" The best production to be shown tomorrow in San Juan and Santurce. Premiere in Pto 1 _Rieor -.1 . t FOR RENT IN THE CONDA DO, New concrete house. 1 with ocean front, and next to the Borinquen Park. It has 7 bedrooms and all other modern conveniences. Information: Phone 242 black Santurce and 285 San Juan. Auction On Saturday, July 1, 1922 at 10 A. M. I will sell in Public Su- ¡ basta the stock that was sal- ' ved from the incident occurred in the es- 1 táblecimiento of Mr. Llamas in the Street of San Jose Not" 41. Reinaldo VIZCARRONDO. Almonedero Público.
- ' cend the sclerae of the Senate, i nervous and pale, under the weight of 1 the most shameful of defeats.
His partiíh) through a : magna Assembly, was throwing him from i J the summits, Tí. Jas which he went by ; the' assault and and con- i denying him, distilling him to the simple 1 status of rank and file Midado, as < payment for the sef i of his petty i betrayals. < Envy. and rancor kindled 1 in the alm**dc .that idol of ba- < rro pulverize or at a single blow , ' for the folunt id of his party and ¡ '<Oe *the applause of the country, which, perhaps because of the disappearance of this < nefarious leader, gave to the party, in the i following election campaign, the < most colossal and definitive of vic 1 tortas. ' Fuí iSntoh gs, when defeated < do* and uátítrecj j, needed to replenish 1 se of atriíel típe and raise his i ewijtefense of his poli 11 tica and of america-. 1 pizacióm Hujye needed to con- ] gradate co]Mfc governmental powers ; mental, p^®get by the ■ ¡.halagq, what aMm public opinion ] denied him by betrayals. :] And it was. enKces, when "EL i MUNDO' WjMade of the de- i rrota sufraBOfor aauel a man, ; he acog'ó in benevolent < Mente his carrmaña, even knowing ] the damage it could ocasio i nar impartial nature of i our newspaper. Moments die í Hyon when it seemed that THE MUN ' W. had become the personal or < gWP Me John B. Huyke. < And Iq gusto, because ¡i noz-doled wflK defeat, des < ambered, jfflMjlado, in the worst ] of lofe des1flB|H in the most amar < ga of flEaKes and with the most < indelible stigmata on ] ■ 'nsignificaaBa intelec 1 tual, and agsuien cuisititos -help < in his va that to the ?m pezar stA&mnaña o EL MUNDO, 1 was unJH|áver pcMticeü % Pét üub artíciAs am "Ebanistas, ep púanio a qm countryside, the, Jfrebenda was not made to wait, and des of Washington, B. Htyke. received 1<M thirty téhnarios A|tpa go of his betrayals. THE MüJfDO did not receive, on the other hand, any pre TOMORROW SUNDAY GRAND DAY OF ITALIAN ART AT THE OLIMPO For tomorrow, Sunday, the Cin® "Olimpo" will present one of the most grandiose produc- ■ clones of the season. and the best of all the films to be shown in San Juan and Santurce. It is the latest creation of the eminent tragic Francesca Bertini, entitled ''LA SIERPE". ''LA SIERPE" came to Puerto Rico with "Countess Sara", both films considered the two best productions ever made by the Eeri tini. ''LA SIERPE" will be exhibited in the morning matinee and in the two ■ evening showings, and we dare to predict the 'Olimpo' theater a ■ complete success with the film "La i Sierpe". "EL FIGARO" As old custom in this esi táblecimiento, warns his numerous dientela that the barbershop "El Fígaro", will not open on July 4, glorious day, i therefore has to shave and re : cut on Monday. Pedro Trujillo Güil. I " . ' -TODAY SATURDAY TODAY- ¡ Superb premiere of the production ; 'Man to Man' | special in seven parts Performed by HARRY CAREY Tce™ ■ÍÍÍBÍLÜfF¡ i INSUPERABLE í Constant Stocks L; VILLAMIL 'HHlHNIIMHUIIIMNHIUHIIinmmiMnMUtimiHIIHmWIHKHIIM a -- - - - - - Buttons are plated and lined A.CARAZO, Brau St 72 ¡
French Chamber of Deputies begins preliminaries for Wash. treaty discussions.
Mr. William H. Taft, President of the Supreme Court of the United States, was the object of an expressive tribute paid him by the Press Circle of this capital. It consisted of a splendid luncheon, at the end of which several speeches were delivered. the chauffeur who drove the car of the assassins of minister rathenau was arrested berlin, june 30.-The police of franckfort arrested the chauffeur who drove the car of the assassins of minister rathenau. Five Hamburg individuals, on whom suspicions rest, were also reduced to prison. In the San Juan racecourse and in addition to the brilliant races that will take place in the Puerta de Tierra League, also for the benefit of the charitable institution, a grandiose challenge of "base ball" will be held, in which the formidable horses will be pitted against each other. Will the formidable "Army" and "Navy" nines face each other? On the Fourth of July, next March, a glittering society ball will be held at the Vanderbilt County Hotel, admission to which will cost one dollar. For the high and noble purpose which the efforts of the learned da nias of the "Children's Home" signify, we do not ttu- ¡ give that these events will be well attended. GINGHAN'S IMJES Models New and just received, there are . for Ladies and Girls, " beautiful colors very well combined and very i cheap. > Visit our departments We have many items at Reduced Prices GONZALEZ PADIN CO. l *-==5SSKS== "
(United Press, via All America Cables)
PARIS, June 30:-The Committee on Political Affairs of the Chamber of Deputies has met under the chairmanship of M. George Leygues, to discuss and submit ittego a report relative to the international treaties of the Washington conference. GERMAN GOVERNMENT CHIEFS TAKE PRECAUTIONS BERLIN, June 30.-The first ivii nisters of the federal states met here this morning to discuss with President Ebert and Canci I Iler Wirth, the security measures to be taken to prevent future aggressions against government personalities. It was agreed to present a bill in the Reichstag to severely punish the instigators and promoters of the "plots". i MORE HONORS TO THE PRESIDENT-ELECT OF ARGENTINA PARIS, June 30.-The President-elect of Argentina, Mr. Alvear, was honored at a luncheon held last night at the City Hall. Marshal Joffre and Slefior Hanotaux were the speakers of the evening. TAFT BEFORE THE LONDON PRESS CIRCLE LONDON LONDON, June 30.-The President I hoF^-Isabado- TODAY Paquita Sicilia ' And The Supreme Power Prices 25 and 30 cts. needed for Central in Venezuela a Mechanic and Chemical Azuoartro. I F R. Villalobos. -Hotel Palace, SAN JUAN. t T T Advt. t
, t , ,¡, ¡, ¡ ,,,,, ,¡ ¡,,,, , t , 11 <■ í"-I- }"WH "4"4-4 "b" ■ ■ ■ H ' ■ ' - Jj- :: . > " Have you seen the new streets and' avenues that ¡ " we are opening in the ! ' ' | THE COUNTY ■ > By making your house on these grounds, you will be us- I > ted among the most select of the capital and your house ¡ ¡ ' I will be worth more to you. Ask our office for our plans of a '' " banization and information on payment facilities for our lots. ¡ ' ' : . Behn Brothers Inc. agents :: Tetuán and Tanca. San Juan, P. R. ¡¡ : : * - : * * * * * * ;; ****"♦ ei"®"s i 11 "♦♦♦♦<■ ! p" iX - - ---- i
; | pgtóTO mahana LaAflantida I la. PART. GHJSTI PROGRAM. ■H 'H I I I ll'Will 1 11-""t4I 1 1 IJ | | | lili I I-.I- I- I:-!-!-! -I b l I i l I I I l-i-H-I IH ¡ I I I ! !"HIHI H M 1 1I I ! I ! :: Compagnie Generate Transatlantique ;; Pleasant and Interesting Excursion to the GUADALUPE and THE LUXURIOUS STEAM "SAN RAPHAEL" -- Departing from this port on July 10 to return on July 17. Round trip ticket in first class * $60.00 . Take advantage of this opportunity for those who would like to spend a week enjoying all the pleasure offered by a French steamship in Avillian waters. For further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. Angeles. ... Telephone Building, San Juan, P. R. . Tanca and Tetuan. Telephone 257. H-H--I--I- I l 1 H I I I lili 1-1-4-M 1 I- H I I I I I I I I 11 1 l-l l l lililililí