ELMUNDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50
" i T'í * a r'n'TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT'H Oficinul Salvador Brau, $1 Tel. 533 P, O, Box 345 ■Í "H I I I t
MORNING DAILY, EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO.
31, IMO. "" the Port Qfflee st 8u Juan. Porto "loo. üniud BtrtZ Stath. Art "f *¿íh "1 "T"
SATURDAY, JANUARY 28, 1922.
NUMBER 908.
A close fight is announced in the Conclave which is to be held to elect Pope.
(POE CARLE FRANCES) ROME, January 27.- The" struggle for the election of the new Pope continues to get firmer and firmer. The newspapers publish the names of Cardinals Merry del Val, who is supported by the Peace Group of the Conclave, and Cardinal Gasparri, an eminent Vatican figure and a continuator of the policy of Benedict XV. The Sacred College comprises 6 Cardinals ranging from 80 to 90 years of age; 19 from 70 to 80; 23 from 60 and 14 from 50 to 60. Cardinal Maffi is 64, Cardinal Batti 65, Cardinal Lafontaine 62 and Cardinal Laurenti 68. A key event of the upcoming Conclave is that Austria will have no representation in the elections to elect a Pontiff and this is of extraordinary importance considering that the Catholic Government of Austria was in previous years a decisive factor in the Conclaves, having exercised the right of veto on several occasions and especially in 1903, when Cardinal Rampolla was elected. With the recent death of Cardinal Armáraz, the number of foreign Cardinals reached 29 against 31 Italians. The American Cardinal O'Connell is in favor of the election of Merry del Val and Cardinal Daugherty favors the election of Gasparri. From today until tomorrow the Cardinals of Quebec and Rio de Janeiro are expected. Se TEATRO AMERICA TODAY- SATURDAY 28 -TODAY Big premiere The exciting film Blood and Sand in 6 large parts Come see Vicente Blasco Ibáñezi author of BLOOD AND SAND and "The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse" "n the afternoon and in the two evening tandas PRICES VESPERTINA 25 CTS. EVENING * 35 CTS.
announces that the Conclave will begin on the date fixed, that is, February 2, and that only 55 Cardinals will attend. 1 It is assured that in the first scrutiny will reach votes Cardinals Merry del Val, Gasparri, De Lai, Pompani, Lafontaine, Beggania, Lugaldí, Maffi and Mercier. ✓ , NEW CANON BRUSSELS, January 27.-The newspaper "Le Soir" announces that on the sixth of February will begin at Liège the tests of a new model for cannon I which will be of decisive importance ' in future wars. The cannon has been invented by the French engineer, MDelaware, who will personally direct the tests. ' THE FOREIGN CURRENCY TRADE BERLIN, January 27.-A bill has been introduced in the Reichstag by which the tran sections and exchanges are to be regularized in order to prevent speculation in the exchange of foreign currencies. The aforesaid bill, if approved, will be put into effect on March 6. 200 DEAD AND THOUSANDS WOUNDED IN EGYPT LONDON, January 27.-A dispatch received by the "Central News" reports that nationalist disorders have been reproduced in Cairo, having resulted in two hundred dead and thousands wounded. . British troops quelled the riots. VENIZELOS ARRIVES IN HAVANA AND IS RECEIVED WITH A FULL DISCHARGE OF QUESTIONS HAVANA, January 27.-The former president of the Council of Ministers of Greece, Eleuterio Venizelos, arrived here this morning with his wife. The illustrious Cretan politician was received at the pier by several members of the Colony of his country and by an army of representatives of the Press, who overwhelmed him with presumptions and insinuations for interviews. Venizelos refused to make political statements of any kind.
Crushed Stone FOR PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION OF THE J : BLUE LIMESTONE ROCK. | QUARRY QUARRY "VALLE ZENO" - ~ < ; Customers are increasing daily. We can offer you a j - list of several tens. Ask any of them about the qualities of this material and the concrete hardness resulting from its use. - Delivery is made to Ja work. { - Call at phone 604" San Juan. I R. del Valle Zeno SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO I ' X j-j-j-ju-t--.... .. .............. y
EL CONDADO | - El Condado is the only place dedicated exclu- " ; sively to residences in San Juan. 5 Healthy, fresh and with constant ocean ' breezes. '; - - WE SELL ' -; houses and lots; houses for cash and lots - cash and installments. Behn Brothers loe, Agents - Tetuan and Tanca. San Juan. " - "*
Mr. Santini supports the "Bill" decidedly - , i Various opinions expressed about the Campbell Project.
The dispatch from Mr. Cordova Davila, received yesterday by wireless, and which included the full text of the letter di1 rigid to the Unionist commissioners who - remain still in Washington, has pro- - duced general rejoicing among the members of the Unionist party, who con- ■ ■ fide in the prompt passage of the refe- . rred bill, as the same- , mo carries the aspirations of the party in r the attainment of a large government of its own. According to the opinion expressed by different conspicuous elements of the majority party, the aforementioned letter reveals the personal interest that the illustrious Representative Campbell is taking in order to have the aforementioned bill presented by him for the consideration of the Congress become a law as soon as possible. In a gathering of prominent political personalities, impressions were exchanged yesterday with respect to the important bill, and although they all favored it in principle, they pointed out some points of the same which they consider susceptible of amendments. Among the points pointed out by them is, for instance, that of dissolving the Public Service Commission to create a single Commissioner, alleging that it did not seem right to them that the great amount of responsibility involved in the matters under their consideration should be placed in the hands of a single person, and someone was of the opinion that a Public Service Commission composed of three members, one of whom would be chairman, with fixed salaries and of some consideration in order to obtain persons of solid prestige, intelligence and reputation for their work, and who could devote themselves exclusively to the work of the Commission, and who would be able to devote themselves exclusively to the work of the Commission. The beautiful production of the colossus Blasco Ibáñez will be exhibited in a special screening at 9:00 p.m. at the "Puerto Rico" movie theater, tomorrow Sunday, which makes us presume that the popular theater will be completely full of spectators. All Santurce is eager to see the magnificent production "Blood and Sand", rival of "The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse", that Don Ramón Lloverás ¡ has decided that everyone knows, to enjoy the exhibition of such an admirable photodrama. The popular cinema "Puerto Rico" deserves, every day more, for the beautiful shows that it offers, the great sympathy that the public gives it. IMPORTANT We participate to our clientele ha- ■ ber received a great assortment ofi Footwear. We look forward to your visit. J. MEJIAS A CO. Stop 19 Santurce, p. R. Advt. HILO for Tobacco guaranteed Superior class STUBBE BROS. INcJ
is that in the Campbell project there is the ti interest in dissolving the present Commission to take that job away from the Heads i of Departments. ■ | Another of the things that have divided opinion e" the question that the Department Heads are to be appointed from among the members of the Legisl- - latera, which will cause them to have executive and legislative peder. Some con- , come to the view that this is a measure that would provide. I chosa, inasmuch as it will make the Department Heads morally responsible to the Legislature for their actions and bring the two branches into complete harmony; while others believe that this measure puts us back in the situation of the Foraker Act, when the Department Heads were at the same time members of the Executive Council of the time (a body that served as the Senate). In any case, we can categorically affirm that, apart from the political interest of some and of two minority parties that seem willing to fight it, the unanimous opinion openly favors the mentioned bill, which puts in the hands of the children of the country a greater and broader formula of Self-Government. Mr. Travieso was of opinion that with respect to those details, susceptible of amendment, which we have enumerated : ' above, they should be held 'hear, j inga' opportunely to get it passed to be fcna perfect Law as far as possible. With the purpose of knowing your opinion regarding the Campbell bill, yesterday we visited, in your office of the Bank of No- ; Splendid offices The world of business in Puerto Rico is modernizing to such an extent, that there are many respectable houses which by their luxurious installation, can compete with the most reputable in New York, Philadelphia and other large cities. We have thus discoursed at the time of touring the splendid offices that have installed Messrs. "Santini Fertilize Co." and -'Costa and! Santini,' ', two firms that enjoy great credit and prestige in the country, on the second floor of the "Bank of New! Scotland," in the most central point of San Juan, that is to say, where the most important business begins. I And we have seen the splendid insta ■ lotion of the two mentioned j firms i at the time of going to greet the dis I linguido gentleman Don Nicolas Santini, , prominent member of them, who has arrived from New York, in union with his most worthy wife, who , is already completely well d esalud, for which we hasten to congratulate him very effusavamente. Mr. Santini is now at the head of his business, which is becoming more important every day. In the spacious premises, the offices of Saginos, Fertilizers, Sales and Commissions in general have been comfortably and luxuriously installed, under the charge of very competent employees who meet the public, on all occasions, with great affability and courtesy. We are pleased to congratulate Messrs. "Santini Fertilizer Co." and "Costa and Santini", for their magnificent installation, and at the same time we wish them, for the great sympathy they enjoy excellent business. .
==INTERESTING FILM== "THE COLLECTIVE" in its ART This beautiful film will be shown in the following cinemas: RIALTO * Monday, January 30 TRES BANDERAS Tuesday, January 31 " OLIMPO . Wednesday, February 1 It is extremely interesting for how instructive and beautiful this Agricultural-Industrial film is. You will see beautiful panoramic views of the tobacco countryside, tobacco plantations, manufacture of cigars and cigarettes by machine, etc., etc.. Don't miss it. You will like it very much.
1 va Scotia, to the distinguished politician Don i Nicolas Santini, prominent member 5 of the conservative wing of the Unionist Central Board. Mr. Santini, learning of the object of our visit, was pleased to oblige us, and, replying to a question from us, said: "Bill Campbell, not only satisfied my aspirations as a Puerto Rican and as a Unionist, but also as a loyal American citizen, who gladly accepted such an honor, but also as a loyal American citizen, who accepted the honor as an American citizen. I do not understand," he continued, "how my distinguished friend Huyke has conceived in his article of to-day, views which are really in conflict with others of his previously published, and with which I agreed on many occasions, though not on all occasions. My surprise was, therefore, very great, when I read this morning what Mr. Huyke expressed in his article. I believe that neither republicans, nor socialists, nor independentists, nor -1 autonomists, nor anyone who has an exact conscience of what true and loyal patriotism means can be against a bill which is ■ the synthesis of the noblest and most loyal of the aspirations of a people, anxious for broad liberties and an almost perfect rule of law. It is Autonomy in its broadest meaning, with the strong and determined support of a Nation whose history and democratic procedures have the admiration of the whole world; and it is now time for all the good sons of Puerto Rico to unite in perfect conjunction so that the aforementioned project will not have the slightest (Continued on page three) HOUSE OF SPAIN IN PTO. RICO CENTRAL BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONVOCATION In compliance with the provisions of Article 13 of the clauses of Incorporation, I hereby and in the name of the Central Board of Directors that I have the honor to preside, convene the Ordinary General Meeting, which (as agreed in the meeting held on February 27, 1921,) is to take place in the city of Mayagiez at nine o'clock in the morning of Sunday, February 19 of this year. The Assembly may only be attended by delegates of the Local Boards, provided they meet the conditions required by Article 24 of our Regulations. San Juan, P. R., January 13, 1922. Dionisio TRIGO. Vice-President. ADVERTISEMENT OF THE "TANAMO" FIRE. There are opinions that it was caused by a light bulb that was certainly not the "Alpha" sold by Rivero Chaves and Co. Salvador Brau 75, San Juan. Advt CINEMA LUNA TODAY. Matinee and Evening. TODAY. JUDEX Fourth Day. Don't miss.
PASTEURIZED MILK Soon to be served at home and at leading Restaúrenos and Soda Fountains Tel. 93-4 Dr. JAIME BAGUE Rio Piedra*.
American troops have received orders to withdraw from Camaguey, Cuba 1
(English Cable) Havana, January 27- It is officially announced that the United States Government has ordered the American troops stationed in Camaguey to be withdrawn immediately. This news has produced an excellent impression in the country. THE BURIAL OF THE POPE CONSTITUTED AN IMPORTANT MANIFESTATION OF Mourning ROME, January 27- This afternoon took place the burial of the remains of Pope Benedict XV, having attended the imposing act a great crowd, in which there were people from France, England, Austria and other European nations. The ceremony took place in the crypt of St. Peter's and the corpse of the former Pope was placed next to the tomb of Pius X directly in front of the statue of Queen Christina of Sweden. The pious act was attended by all the Roman Cardinals, as well as by those who had come to this city to take part in the Conclave. Also present at the funeral were numerous Bishops, Archbishops and other high ecclesiastical dignitaries and all the diplomatic representatives of the Catholic countries. SANCHEZ GUERRA PRESIDENT OF THE CONSERVATIVES MADRID, January 27. The general assembly of the Conservative party, the results of which were so eagerly awaited by the public, elected the distinguished politician Sanchez Guerra, president of the Congress, to direct the destinies of that party. The former Minister of the Interior, Conde de Bugallal, was elected rice president. - THE ILLUSTRE POLITICIAN MR. CAMBO IS ILL MADRID, January 27. - Don Francisco Cambó, illustrious Catalan politician, is one of the victims of the terrible influenza which has again made its appearance in the Kingdom. Although the disease that afflicts Mr. Cambó is not, for now, of care, the doctors have recommended him absolute rest and tranquility. I | tp' Ultima Hora CHANGE OF ITINERARY The cars of LA LINEA AZUL now leave San Juan daily for Ponce, via Guayama, at 12:00 o'clock meridian instead of at 1:00 p. m. as was the former custom. Office, San Justo No. 9. Tel. 1054, San Juan. Advt. A. CARAZO, Brau St 72, San Juan.
Adding-Bookkeeping -Calculating JBmrougrr® Among so many Models of Machine Machines" of Accounting. Sum? and Ti Cálcala* ©urrougiis, that are manufactured you will find yours from $150.00 Finlay Waymouth & Lee
MADRID, Jan. 27.- Her Majesty Queen Victoria, who had been stricken with influenza, forcing her to confine herself to her rooms for five days, continues to improve from her ailments and it is expected that tomorrow she will be able to visit the Palace gardens. THE WORKERS' FEDERATIONS HAVE TO SYNDICALIZE MADRID, January 27.- The Ministry of Labor is putting the finishing touches to a project for the compulsory syndicalization of the workers' federations. The newspaper "El Sol" announces, gnu this project will give rise to numerous conflicts in the country. THE BENI SAID TRIBE IS SUBDUED. - MADRID, January 27.- The situation of the Moors is very serious at this moment. The Spanish troops undertook this morning a terrible offensive in Beni Said that has forced the tribes to partially submit to the armies of Spain. In the military circles there is great excitement, because new news from Morocco is expected. VIRNA'S CABINET RESIGNED VIENNA, January 27.- The President of the Cabinet has this morning tendered his resignation and that of all his Ministers. The crisis has not yet been resolved, although different names of politicians to replace the resigning ones are already being mentioned. Ultima Hora We already have in stock the incomparable FISK PREMIER 30x3 Vy rubber for Ford, which we will sell for $13.50 each minus the COSTUME DISCOUNTS. This rubber is BIG, STRONG, TOUGH, and is COMPLETE. GUARANTEED MINT For sale at all of our subagencies on the island and on San Juan. THE PISK TIRE STORE ADRIAN NELSON Distributor "Parque Borinquen" El Cine a Orillas Del Mar. TODAY. o-O-O-O Saturday. o-O-O-O TODAY. "El Principe Escultor" (The Prince Chap) By Tomás Meighan. Interesting drama in 7 acts. Luneta 20 ctvs. Tomorrow Sunday: "THE IMPOSTOR" (The Love Cheat).