ELMUNDO
| 10 pages 3 ctvs. Semester. $4.00. | One year, $7 50,
! I Offices? Salvador Brau, 81. f ' - Tal. 833. P. Box 345.
DAILY MORNING, EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
. ' ANNUAL IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and ditrtributód under permit (Mo. 801) authorited h" the Act of October 6. 1917. on 61" at tba Post Office <d San jnan. Porto Rico, By order of tba Praaident. A. S. Bar tenon Postmaster General. Entered as second claea mattax, february 81, 1019. at the Post Office at San Juan. t P<yto R "eo. ZVnited S"""e"" of tmero-""" nnder the *<t of march 3. 1879.
SATURDAY, JUNE 3, 1922.
NUMBER 1015.
Mr. Reily in constant conferences with all his advocates.
Governor Kelly is holding daily conferences with the attorneys who will represent him before the courts if the indictments handed down by the Grand Jury of the District Court, First Section, should prove to be well founded. One of Mr. Reily's lawyers who visits the Fortress most assiduously is Mr. Fcliú, who seems to be the one most interested in the Governor's getting out of the difficult situation created by the Grand Jury's report. WEEK OF PARTY AT THE "PUERTO RICO" CINEMA The week that begins next Monday and ends on Sunday the 11th will be a week of great events for Santurce, because at the "Puerto Rico" cinema there will be magnificent parties, of which the referred neighborhood, which is one of the most populous in the country, will keep the memory. Don Ramón Lloverás intends to make of the Puerto Rico the favorite cinema of the public, each one of those nights, in which there will be splendid illumination, that will turn into a river of light all the new and great ' goddess facade of the mentioned cinema, that has honors of palace. There will be retreta each of the evenings, by three bands of music, fireworks ártificiaks, and, above all, mu- i cjios gifts. Two contests of sympathy and beauty will be initiated in the last of which (that of the "Selec tion Film Service" whose rules have been published in the principal newspapers of the island) a prize of $700 may be won. The sympathy contest, which is special to the "Cine Puerto Rico" will begin on Monday, and on Tuesday that of beauty. As a prize for the Sympathy Contest, the "Cine Puerto Rico" will give a beautiful and large mufieca, of real value. It will also offer free open-air films, projected on a special screen in front of the splendid billboard. In short, that the "Cine Puerto Rico" begins a new life that responds to the sympathies with which its very large clientele so justly favors it. BELFAST, June 2. -It is reported that during a fight last night three police officers were killed. IMPORTANT! By means of the present notice, I am pleased to inform my clients that as of May 20 of this year, Mr. Tomás H. Quiñones has ceased to be my employee and therefore he is no longer authorized to intervene in any way in everything related to my business Luis GARRAFON. Alien 77. San Juan -Advt. Victory Garden TODAY. Gala Saturday. TODAY. Debut. Debut. Do the Spanish dramatic company "Adams-Nieva" with the cblosal 3-act drama PADRES Note: At 730 there will be film! only.
< - < ¡; . Have you seen the new (ralleys and avenues that ; ' ' we are opening in THE COUNTY ¡ - By making your home on these lots, you will be us- ¡ I ted among the most select of the capital and your home ! ¡ ' will be worth more to you. .¡ Ask at our office for our ur" ; banization plans 0 information on payment facilities for our lots. Behn Brothers Inc., ¡; AGENTS Tetuán and Tanca. - San Juan, P. R. ¡ ► ■ ¡ - A. ' '
fl "Attorney General" required to make entre-.
ga to the San Juan prosecutor'of the Grand Jury documents, with threat of contempt if he does not comply with the order.
The District Court, section la. currently has two prosecutors-Attorney Arrillaga requested that the Attorney General be ordered to turn over the Grand Jury documents.-Attorney Massari objected in another manner. -The Court declared the request of the first one admissible! "The Attorney General orders the transfer of Mr. Arrillaga to Mayagüez, and appoints Massari to replace him; but he continues to act, because he believes that the Attorney General's order is illegal.
In connection with the documents of the" Grand Jury, now in the possession of the "At- ¡ torney General", Mr. Arrillaga, of the District Court, first section, presented to the Court the following motion yesterday: FIRST JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF SAN JUAN. IN THE DISTRICT C0BT2 Ex-parte. w , The District Attorney of the District of San Juan. Pri mer District. Petitioner. No. 008. To the Honorable District Court, Judicial District of San Jw First District: , . Cerrtnardce á'JófS he 5 undersigned' ascal and respectfully submits: . That on the sixth do a bril'of 1922 this ho- ■ notable Uorie issued an order dispoI níng that the report rendered by the i Grand Jury of this District of five atril nineteen hundred and twenty-two in relation to certain acts nue se iin patan a. E. Montgomery Reiljr, J. KHull and W. Kessinger, be left in the ! custody and possession of the District Attorney of this ' lArtdto. Which report .was based upon do ; cutnenloa, paperwork, affidavits and exhibits, which were in the possession of said Grand Jury and which are now Jo .The same as the report before said Grand Jury, in the custody of the Attorney General of Puerto Rico, the Honorable Salvador Mestre, who refuses to deliver them to the appellant, "nn when he has requested their delivery several times because he needs said report, papers, documents, exhibits and affidavits to make a study of the matter that will allow him to reach a final decision in the matter; for if it is true that on different occasions he has seen said reports, papers, exhibits and affidavits in the possession of the Attorney General, he has never been rewarded whoever delivers a lady's Swiss watch, lost in the "America" theater, or on the route between the aforementioned theater and Alíen 72, on Thursday night. Address to "Puerto Rico Ilustrado".
He has had them in his own, with that calmness and detention that requires the study of a matter, in which he has the greatest responsibility. Therefore, he requests that an order be issued requiring the Attorney General, or any of his assistants who may replace him in his absence, to immediately deliver to the person appearing the said report, documents, papers and all other documents in his possession which served as the basis for the said Grand Jury, so that the undersigned may determine what may be appropriate in relation to the same. " San Jnan, F. R.. <nnio 2/ 1922... (s) Rataeí Arrillaga UBIÍUTIA ' Flaca l leí First District of 8. Juan i Puerto Rico. Sworn and subscribed before me, by Ra fací Arrillaga Urrutia, lawyer and ve ciño of San Juan, whom I know port I soiialiuente, today the doo day of June 1922. (Fixed.) O. MARRERO. Secretary First District Court , The prosecutor Massari, transferred yesterday, by i oríen of the ''A'orney" to the section pri mera "j of the District Court, filed the following motion to dismiss. requesting Judge Foote to leave ■ the documents in the possession of the "At-¡ I torney": í IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE DISTRICT OF SAN JUAN, P. II. PRIMEE DISTRICT I Ex-parte. ¡ The Ffsce.l of the District of San Juan, First District. Petitioner. i No. 908.' I i MOTION TO DISMISS t Appears Dqmiugo Massari in his capacity as District Attorney in Commission dgl First Judicial District of San Juan, duly appointed by the honorable Atttorney General of Puerto Rico, yi before the Court respectfully submits: That the Prosecutor in property, honorable Rafael Arrillaga Urrutia requested from this honorable Court an order to require the honorable Attorney General or any of his Assistants the immediate delivery of the report, documents, papers and what exists in his power relative to the investigation practiced by the Grand Jury of San Juan, relative to charges challenging E, Montgomery Reily, J. R. Hull, and W. Kessinger. that the undersigned District Attorney in the ca900 CONSTRUCTIONS This figure is estimated to be the number of buildings now existing between San Juan and Santurce. Juan and Santurce. It is said qne for; many of them La Ferreteria Merino ' is supplying materials. Advt.' "CINEMA, MOON" TODAY. Premiere in Pto. TODAY. The drama in 5 acts '-The Alter Case" Prices Corrientes. A. CARAZO, Brau St 72 Advt.
It is the opinion of the undersigned that such documents are in the proper custody of the Honorable Attorney General of Puerto Rico, and that in my judgment they are better kept than they would be in the office of the District Attorney of San Juan of the First District, and that by virtue thereof the undersigned Prosecuting Attorney requests the Court to consider them as being in the custody of the Attorney General of Puerto Rico.The Court's decision to dismiss the motion, subject to the undersigned's request that the Court, in due time and when it deems necessary, will request said documents, except for the best opinion of the Court in this matter. San Juan, P; R" June 2, 1922. Dgo. MASSABI, Fiscs# del bistplo Primero, en Comisión! The prosecutor *' having learned of the 'dMÓeión presented by c' prosecutor Masrati. tadicó a new sollci tud e-H the following terms: FIRST JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF SAN JUAN IN THE DISTRICT COURT Ex-parte, The District Attorney of the First District of Sau Juan, First District, Potidonario. No. 908. MOTION Appears the undersigned Prosecutor and ¿■espetuosamente .before this honorable' Corto exposes: hvisó MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN . I WATER SUPPLY SERVICE As of May 27 and until further notice, the water supply service to San Juan, Puerta de Tierra, Santurce and Río Piedras will be interrupted from ten o'clock at night until five o'clock in the morning of the following day. This measure has been taken due to the low amount of water that the PIEDRAS RIVER has these days. Rafael DIEZ DE ANDINO, and Commissioner of Public Service, Police and Prisons, Acting. 1,1 1 1 I 1 I 1 I I 1 I I I |-| l 1 M-l-H-í -- SATURDAY, JUNE 3 T '' the unsurpassed " ' CLARA KIMBALL YOUNG " II in her loudest hit II "THE WORLD VIRGIN" II I - To each lady who attends today "- '' to this cinema, will be given a - ' II 8 x 10 photograph of the divine X CLARA quo worth. 50 cents, -- 1 1 much more than the ' ■ - ticket is worth. -■ -- Tomorrow! - .tomorrow! ;; MATINAL AND EVENING ; ; ; 1 1 1 Presentation of the applauded 1 1 - - - artists t "FAY AND FLORENCE" 1 1 I; and premiere of the colossal drama ;; I! "JDEY OF HERITAGE" 1 1 I ce", the eminent actress II -f / ANA Q. NILSON ;; I I I Matinal 20 and 15-Evening 30 and 20 > > >
cough twenty-two, e n in connection with certain acts charged against E. Montgomery Reily, J. R. Hull and W. Kessinger, be left in his custody and in the possession 'of the District Attorney of this District. That said report was based on documents, papers, affidavits and exhibits, which were in the possession of said Grand Jury and which today are in the possession of the Attorney General of Puerto Rico, honorable Sal-' vador Mestre, who refuses to deliver them to the appellant, even though the latter has requested him to deliver them several times for needing said report, in order to obtain it. The said reports, papers, documents, exhibits /* affidavits for the purpose of making a study of the matter; for it is true that on different occasions the said reports, papers, exhibits, exhibits and affidavits have been delivered to the appellant, who has refused to deliver them to the appellant. ' "ferments, exhibits and affidavits in possession of the Attorney Genera! has never held them in the proper bu- ' vas, with' that calm and detention which the study of nn matter requires, gn the wrong he bears the greatest responsibility. I And requesting an order of roqueri-1 miento to the Attorney General to make immediate gutrega of said in- í forme, and related documents. WHEREAS: In accordance with the Law, it is the exclusive competence of the Prosecutor of this Court to investigate and present to the Grand Jury the charges for all the offenses within the jurisdiction of the Grand Jury. / WHEREAS: For the due fulfillment of his duty, it is necessary that the Prosecutor of this Court have the power to investigate and present to the Grand Jury the charges for all the offenses within the jurisdiction of this Court: The Prosecutor of this Court has in his possession the <locu:heuto3 alleged in his motion. FOR THEREFORE: having regard to sections 11 and 40 of the Organic Law, articles I Jos 64 and 71 of the Political Code, as amended by Act No. 7 approved on November 9, 1917, section 21 of the Grand Jury Act approved on June 18, 1919, and the Grand Jury Act approved on June 18, 1919, and the Grand Jury Act approved on June 18, 1919, and the Grand Jury Act approved on June 18, 1919. (Continued on 3rd. page.) The -HOY- SATURDAY -HOY- THE TEST OF VALOR (UNCHARTED SEAS) I - by RUDOLPH VALENTINO and ALICE LAKE Grand Retreat - Luneta 20 ctt. \ MATINEE AT 3:30 P. M. Admission 10 cfs. ! MI ICDI CQ FOR REASON OF ABSENTEE: owner, all home furnishings sold. Magnificent opportunity for those interested. Notify phone 635 blue, San turce. Advt,
That on today's date the undersigned filed a motion and filed with the Clerk of the Court, which in summary, requests the Court to issue an order directed to the Attorney General of Puerto Rico or any of his assistants, 'to deliver to the undersigned Prosecutor all papers and other documents concerning the investigation conducted by the Grand Judge, against Mr. E. Mont Kelly' J. R. Hull and W. Kessinger. That about an hour ago I received do'. I received about an hour ago a communication from the Attorney General in which I was ordered to go to Mayagüez and deliver to the Attorney General all the papers, documents and files of this Prosecutor's Office; as the *ie "*--Att¡omey does not conform to the provisions of articles four of the Political Code and forty-nine of the Jones Act, that in the opinion of the Prosecutor General, that in the opinion of the Attorney General, I should be ordered to go to Mayagüez and deliver all the papers, documents and files of this Prosecutor's Office, as the *ie "*--Att¡omey does not conform to the provisions of articles four of the Political Code and forty-nine of the Jones Act; Jones, which in the opinion of the undersigned Prosecutor is subject to the same article four and six of the Political Code, the said communication of the Attorney General has no effect or value whatsoever and therefore I am the Prosecutor of the Judicial District of San Juan, First District. And as such Prosecutor of the Court of the First District of San Juan, First District, I ratify the foregoing motion and file it with the Clerk and request the Court to issue an order on the merits. ! San Juan. P. R. June 2, 1922. (Fdo ) Rafael Arrillaga URRUTIA,, ¡ | - Prosecutor of the First DistrWf. Having heard the motions in open Cqrtg the judge Footc declared with place the prosecutorial dol Arrillaga, and issued the following writ, requiring the ''Altor noy", to make delivery of said documents: / F.N THE DISTRICT COURT OF¿ JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF SAN riJAN P. R" FIRST DISTRICT Ex-Parte, -'-rRyvtsr-, ¡ The District Attorney of San Jnan, First Dis trito. Petitioner. CIVIL No. 908. MANDATE TO THE MARSHAL -I WHEREAS: In this case an order was issued which copied to the letter reads as follows: "WHEREAS: On this morning of today he filed in this Cortg the Prosecutor thereof, Lic. Rafael Arri llaga, a motion in which he alleges: That on April six da m|l nineteen twenty-two this honorable Court issued an order providing that the Informo rendered by the Grand Jury of this District of cineo of April one thousand nine hundred~5OÓ superior quality wool pants of $5.50 and $7.00 Manufacturer: M, SAVINO. San Francisco No. 52. PARIS PUNTS (ALL SIZES) Calilhd - Price - Service ■ Holán, Tejedor &. de Hostos I| Box 1356. Phone 395. San Juan, P. R.
Another "mandamus" will be filed against Governor Reily!
The office of the Puerto Rican Federation of Labor informs that in compliance with the agreement adopted by the Extraordinary Assembly held by the directors of the labor organizations affiliated to the institution, a writ of Mandamus will be filed in the Supreme Court, requesting Governor Reily to appoint a member of the Federation to the Mediation and Conciliation Commission, as provided by the Law in force on the matter. We are informed by the organizer gChernl. Mr. Rodríguez Vera, that a member of the institution was on the Mediation and Conciliation Commission and that upon Governor Reily's arrival in Puerto Rico he was replaced by a member of the American Federation of Labor, without the Governor having given any reason for such change, nor having completed the term of four years for which the incumbent was appointed. When this occurred, we were told by the organizer, we made formal protest to the governor and he promised to comply with the law by "giving each labor federation the participation to which they are entitled," but he has never retraced his steps and at the present time the Commission is composed of socialist elements of the American Federation of Labor who were appointed by Governor Reily and the representatives of the employers. Asked by Mr. Rodrigue# Ver* ' why they had not proceeded earlier to es tablecor the judicial appeal, he replied that they,- were awaiting the resolution dM "course interposed before the Supreme Court, by Lic. JiBíncz (Continued on 6a. pag.) i TWO GREAT FUNCTIONS OF THE CINEMA "PUERTO RICO" i Tonight, Saturday, will celebrate d ■ cinema "Puerto Rico" one of its most splendid exhibitions, which will take i rán to him enormous gtntío, as always happens there.
The gentle artist Lya Mara will delight the audience in the grandiose production LA AVENTURA DE UNA HEREDERA, which is one of the most interesting productions® that have been "filmed" so far. A comedy ehis cough-ima will also be shown. Sunday's showing will be another great event. IMPORTANT THE ASSEMBLY of ' EL ANCORA" announced for 61 May 7 had to be answered by 1" lack of aJateucia of the dp Associates recess them* to take resolutions and has been appointed Sunday, June 11 of the current month at 9 A. M. in the Offices of the Society. IrabeL IS ABSOLUTELY NECESSARY THE PRESENCE OF ALL the insured and those that cannot concur must delegate in another subscriber of their locality or of Ponce. Advt. * - - - ■" - 1 - - - ■ ■■ ; ■W-i-d-b-H-H- 1 I 1 1 1 !' 1 I-1-1 l-l-m-l-i- : $ 2400.- j of 7 and 4 passengers at $200 ' l ; monthly with good ¿a- ;; ' rantías -SIN INTEREST-FREE ; ' ' ; Only 4 cars left. ;; ; ; The Union Commercial Corp. " : Commerce St 29-31. Phone 863-941. ; ;; SAN JUAN, P. R.
Teatro u América" TODAY'S DEBUT OF THE VIOLINIST TOMMY RUSSELL, THE 25 WISE MONKEYS AND THE 7 ACTS PREMIERE MOVIE "VICTIMS OF MARRIAGE" Price Upper Floor 20 cts. and Lunettes Lower Floor 30 cts. D0S TANDAS MATINEE dedicated to children at 20 cts. with the® monkeys and evening movie at 2/30 and 4 P. M. -POS TANDAS- Tomorrow Sunday, Matinee and Evening THE WISE MONKEYS, the violinists Russell and the interesting premiere with Viola Dana POLICHINELAS DEL ALAR, a great success. , . . MONDAY 5 TO SUNDAY 11 inclusive, week of new attractions coi THE HUERTANICA-CARDOSQ -Evening premieres every evening