EL MONDO
14 pages for 3 cents< Bi-monthly, $4.00 One year, $7.50,
Offices? Salvador Brau, 81. Tsl. 833, P. O. Box 345.
MORNING PAPER, EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published and dintributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of October 6. 1917. on file at the Post Offica of Ran Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the Preaident, A- 9. Bur leson. Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, Febmary 21. 1919, at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto RI eo, (United States of America) under the Act of march 8. 1879.
YEAR IV,
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 9, 1922.
NUMBER 1175.
An artificial pearl factory will be installed in Ponce.
We have reports that two prominent chemists of French nationality have arrived to the island, with the purpose of establishing an important factory of artificial pearls. According to reports, Ponce will probably be the city where the new factory will be established, given the climatic conditions of the Pearl of the South. The initiators of the referred business, who carry letters from Ledo. Guerra-Mondra-gón, for the Mayor and other important personalities there, in order that the visitors be provided with all the necessary means in connection with the desires that lead them to that town. POINCARE AND MUSSOLINI, TOWARDS LONDON PARIS, December 8.-At seven thirty-four this evening Poincaré and Mussolini will leave for London.
IOS NERVIOS i ■ ; with all care and rolidtud ' S H is tantamount to ensuring i O ■f good success and the greatest possible feli= OT ■J cidade.Attack then 1W Ef end delay the least discomfort V® nervine and insomnia with the VI d*-i] t BROMIRAl jl A which being entirely ínofensi* Zi k var and per thousands of doctor; m| prescribed and recommended /ffl| ■| have been credited in mibiK HI Iones of cases Effects at ■ I the 20 minutes of the intake. For sale in the bobeas !'W ■ glass tubes of 2° tablets, ........i|ra
ZINC ACANALADO Y LISO Cumbreras-Canales Quality -- Price - Service Rolan, Tejedor & de Mostos Apartado 1356. Tel. 395-200 Sah Juan, P. R.
At San Juan will soon be established the station for an important aerial machine service.
One of the most powerful air machine companies in the world intends to establish in San Juan an "air station,'' which will begin operations early next month, judging from news received here from Aeromarine Airways Inc. of New York. The first apparatus, as we understand, will arrive in this city around the 20th of this month, on one of the merchant ships that make the crossing between the island and the United States. As an interesting note for our readers, we can inform that the pilot of that first ship is Mr. C. J. Zimmerman, who has resided in the country for more than 15 years, and is related to a well-known American family residing here. The President of the initiating Corporation, Mr. C. F. Reeden, has stated in relation to the new activities of his Company in Puerto Rico, that the reasons that impel him to establish that business are based on the desire to BIG FUNCTION AT THE "OLIMPO" THEATER MARANA SUNDAY Tomorrow will be exhibited at the "Olimpo'' Theater in the morning and evening runs the most extraordinary production that has come to Puerto Rico during the last three months. All the public of San Juan and Santurce who have not yet seen this beautiful production should come tomorrow to the Olimpo to witness the greatest triumph of the season: "LA TORMENTA''T ¡ BASE - BALL | LIGA INSULAR X Domingo 10 de Die. 1922 Ó DOS JUEGOS I ?. R. SPORTS' g vs - 'COLLECTIVE' S To the League on Sunday.
They have to investigate the possibilities offered by South America and the West Indies for the establishment of such a business. The first apparatus to arrive in the country, is of the "U. S. N. Coast Patrol," which has been converted into a six-passenger machine, with an average speed of 85 miles per hour. The engines are of the "Liberty" make and have 400' horse power. Mr. Zimmerman, who will inaugurate the service here, is an expert aviator who served in the U. S. Army during the war. According to Mr. Zimmerman, San Juan will be the "Head-quarters," and the main staging point connecting the other stations to be established in the West Indies and South America with the United States. It is probable that if the business prospers, instead of 4- or 6-passenger machines, aircraft capable of carrying 14 or 16 passengers will be brought here. The "Aeromarine Airways'' has established a service between New York and Atlantic City and a service between ! Cleveland and Detroit, on the Great Lakes. In the winter, the company maintains regular daily service between Key West and Havana and from Miami to Bimini and Nassau in the Bahama Islands. In air operations the Aeromarine Company has established a magnificent record, surpassing all others achieved by European aircraft in its maritime flights. During the last three years the "Aeromarine Com- ! pany's" air- ! pines have flown 1,000,000 mi- j lias, having carried twenty thousand passengers without registering even one ?.ccMwite. 0LEMENCFAU FN THE LICEO ! INTERNATIONAL WASHINGTON, tf'cember 8.-M. Clemenceau will deliver this afternoon sn announced lecture at the International Lyceum. The full Foreign Relations Committee, as well as numerous Senators and Governors of several States are arranged to attend the event. probable that former President Wil< son will also attend.
Blouse Workers THE LARGEST BLUSE MANUFACTURING HOUSE IN PUERTO RICO, the one that has work for you all year round, the one that pays you the best prices, the one that has agencies and workshops all over the island, NEEDS WORKERS who are experts in the manufacture of blouses. Write to us and we will let you know which is our agency or workshop closest to your home. We will pay you as soon as we receive your work. * United Needle Workers of P.R., INC. BLUE BIRD-BLOUSES'' AGENTS P.O. Box 1312. Phone 1322. SAN JUAN, P. R.
ELEVATE A PRAYER TO HEAVEN FOR THE SOUL OF DOÑA PROVIDENCIA DEL RIVERO QUIÑONES DE ORTIZ ALIBRAN Born in Naguabo on December 14, 1882 and Died in San Juan on November 30, 1922. Her widower Mr. Juan Jo "é Ortiz Albriu, her mother Mrs. Isabel Quiflonea widow of del Nivero, her children Juan José, Isabel Providencia, llamón, María, Luis, Concepción, Josefina, Soledad, Enriqueta and Gerardo, her siblings, parents-in-law, nieces, nephews and other relatives. They invite you to the FUNEXAL MASS to be celebrated on Monday, the 11th of the present, at nine o'clock in the morning, in the S. I. Cathedral and that will be applied for the eternal rest of the soul of the deceased. The limo. Sr. Bishop of Puerto Bico, Dr. Jorge J. Caruana, I grant 50 days of indulgence to all those faithful who attend these honors and pray for the eternal rest of the deceased.
PARK Today. Saturday. Extraordinary. Premiere in Santurce. The glorious production. Love and Sacrifice (After the Show.) by stars JACK HOLT, LILA LEE AND CHARLES OCLE Tomorrow: Sunday. "Husband's Curse" (GRAND LARCENY).
Details of the fight, in which Nero Chink, fell exhausted under the blows of the Cuban champion Esparraguera
WITH ONLY HIS ATTACK OF JABS OF LEFTS AND RIGHTS TO THE JAW, ESPARRAGUERA KNOCKED DOWN NERO CHINK IN THE FIRST ROUND. This one could only give two good jabs. The important newspaper "El País" of Havana gives an account, as follows of the fight between the Puerto Rican boxer Nero Chink and the Cuban champion Santiago Esparraguera, which took place recently in that capital: Cuban fanaticism overflowed last night at the Stadium de Ma riña when Nero Chink, dejected, ex hausto, stunned, fell by a formidable right to the jaw thrown by Esparraguera, to remain on the ground for a few seconds more with a right to the jaw. The fight was a great success, but it was perhaps more than just a desire to win than a desire to win. It was perhaps more than the desire to see the Cuban triumph, the surprise, very pleasant * surprise for us certainly, to see him triumph so widely in a single round. Nero Chink only gave two good blows to Espariaguera, one with his left to the stomach and the other to the jaw. In the remainder of the round, which he cured three-quarters, Chink, unaware of his bad timing in pe- " lear at a distance instead of working the infighting, was a continuous target of the terribly strong jabs of the cu , baño and his one-two combination, by which he went to the ground. i jL WEIGHTS AND THE RELAMPAGO ROUND Santiago Esparraguera came up weighing 169-1'4 pounds, and Nero Chink, 164 and 3:4 pounds. Serving as seconds for the former corporal were masseur Valdes and Suarez, Casala's favorite assistant. In Chink's corner were also the chief second Fello Rodriguez and Lalo Dominguez. Acting as judges were Mr. Foster and Sedaño and Referee Ríos, Delegate of the Commission Mr. Ebra. 1 At the sound of the bell. Esparraguera came to meet Chink reaching him with a left jab to the jaw. They walked away and he repeated again co
THE "PUERTO RICO" CINEMA ANNOUNCES A GREAT PROGRAM Santurce will parade tomorrow, Sunday, at the popular Lloverás cinema, where one of the last photodramas full of interest, beauty and emotion that have come to the island will be exhibited. An excellent music band will give a brilliant concert outside the cinema to remind all of Santurce that the ''Puerto Rico" is celebrating that night one of the most brilliant shows that it offers to its numerous and enthusiastic sympathizers. The ''Puerto Bico" will be celebrating.
Xmas. and New Year ARE COMING IF YOU LEAVE YOUR GIFTS AND TOYS SHOPPING TO THE LAST MINUTE YOU ARE SURE TO ENCOUNTER SOME HARDWARE - Why not do your shopping well in advance * WE OFFER QUALITY, SERVICE AND PRICES González Padín Co., Inc.
Saturday, December 9, 1922 A good premiere and a great success! MAY ALISSON In the beautiful photodrama in 6 acts "Casamiento Originar Película del Circuito Bruno y Vázquez Sunday 10th. Extraordinary night! Sensational premiere! "The Storm" 8 colossal acts! A monument of feeling and art! All passions in beautiful and sublime exaltation!
The U.S. will not shirk its involvement in international affairs but will not become a party to any treaty or alliance.
(United Press, via AU America Cables) i WASHINGTON, December 8.- President Harding came before Congress today to read his annual message. The message contains important problems of most urgent attention, both domestic and foreign, and outlines a very extensive general plan of legislation. The President calls for the repeal of the law authorizing the establishment of a Railway Labor Board and asks that legislation against the frequent strike movements in the country be put in force, strictly enforced to the letter. NO TREATIES, NO ALLIANCES, NO NOTHING The President's message goes on to say that the United States Government will not shirk its involvement in various international problems, and adds that it will not allow the rights of American citizens to be abridged anywhere, no matter which country or government exercises such an attack on the very spirit of the Constitution of the United States. Secretary Denby AT WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON, Dec. 8.-Mr. Denby, Secretary of the Navy, paid a visit to the White House today, connecting with his right wing. He repeated thisp punches swiftly to the chin and only once did Chink respond with blows to the stomach and jaw. The Cuban smiled and attacked again. With a hard left he made Chink groggy, made him hesitate* with a formidable jab and then, Chink discovered by his visible exhaustion as a result of the blows received, he unloaded his right to the tip of the jaw that made Chink stagger and finally fall heavily to the ground. At the count of 7, he tried to get up but fell again totally unconscious. This was in the last quarter of the round. Esparraguera's fists may have been for poor Ñero the horrible nightmare of a whole night ' tiring and cruel.
On the question of international agreements, the President emphatically assured that the American government is not willing to be a party to any treaty, alliance, intelligence, pact or League of Nations, which could twist the glorious destinies of the nation. THE FOUR POWER TREATY The message suggested that the Four Power Treaty be extended to all countries of the world for the purpose of abolishing wars and conflicts. The President emphasized the fact that the United States government, by convening the conference for Disarmament, the conference on Tacna and Arica and the present conference of Central American countries, showed its good purpose to work for a noble international intelligence to establish, definitively, an era of peace in the world. The message covers other issues of an internal nature. For Christmas Premiere For Sale: splendid concrete house To be finished on the 10th of this month. Can be delivered on the 15th. In one of the most visible and important places in the County. Wilson Avenue. Double driveway. Close to public square, trolley, park and sea baths. IS CARRIED OUT BY ITS COST. Ask for information 357 green. Santurce, or in the house itself under construction. It is left in mortgage half of its value at ten percent per annum. Advt. lOETMPOÍ -' Tomorrow, Sunday. + - - - The greatest triumph of the 4* "; T .. season. Premiere at Santurce. "THE | ii STORM! " By HOUSE PETERS. j
The case of Messrs. Pesquera will be ruled on the 12th.
In an attentive letter sent to us yesterday, and for which we thank him for his spontaneous courtesy, the Horn Judge of the Federal Court, Mr. Arthur F. Odlin, informed us that the decision in the contempt case before the Court against Mr. Pesquera and Mr. Mayo, will be rendered by him, in open court, on Tuesday, the 12th of the present. MR. R. H. TODD STATES THAT HE AND MR. REILY SIGNED THE CABLE ENDORSING MR. GAY Our information of Thursday, asserting that a cable had been sent to Washington, to endorse the rom ! bramiento of Mr. Gay as Postmas- ■ ter of San Juan, has been ratified by the distinguished politician Don R. H. Todd, who told us that, indeed, dil cho telegram had been sent North, over Governor ' Reily's signature and his own . By means of these lines is, at last, clarified this matter, to which, at first, were given supposed, twisted interpretations. TODAY ■ ■ SATURDAY TODAY Debut of the ndtable Illusionist .DR. SAA CONDE WALDEMAR and premiere of the 6-act comedy. America in Berlin (Yankee Double in Berlin) by the applauded comedian: BEN TURPIN ** (El Bizco) TOMORROW SUNDAY H.B. WALTHALL in the portentous'drama Guilty Innocence and farewell of the aristocratic Magician OR. SAA CONDE WALDEMAR NOTE:-Variety will work Sunday in all day and evening runs.
cyl VISO Court Administration of the Central Vannina 11a. AMORTIZATION In the drawing held today for the redemption for the current year of FIFTY BONDS OF FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS each issued by this Corporation, the following numbers have been redeemed: 33 96 206 236 390 39 97 209 268 395 44 101 2I0 271 398 50 109 211 291 437 53 121 213 292 471 70 124 214 296 479 71 163 220 300 482 75 165 231 332 504 81 166 232 346 510 88 192 233 380 511 Which is hereby made public in order to bring to the attention of the Bondholders, ceasing therefore to accrue interest, and the amount thereof may be collected at the BANCO TERRITORIAL Y AGRICOLA of this City together with the due Coupon No. 22. San Juan, Puerto Rico, November 27, 1922. CENTRAL VANNINA, INC. M. d e J. CANINO, S. LARRAZABAL. Judicial Administrators. |..¡_H-H-I-l-l--tII-l-!-I-l-t-I~i:-b-l-bI-í--l-l-l-*-l-II ! t I 1 H t-M I t 1F !■ lilililí I l-.I -tVISIT "LA ESTRELLA" SALVADOR BRAU 41, and you will be satisfied with your purchase in quality and price.