ELMUNDO
<■1'1111 II II 10 pages 3 ctve. Semester, $4.00. One year, $7.50,
■ Offices! ; Salvador Brau, 81. ; - Te! 833, P. O. Box 345 ■ - 9
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
. ANNUAL IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of oetober 6 1917 on file at the Post Office "f Ran Juan. Porto Rico. By order of th. President. A. 8. Burleson. Postmaster General. Entered a. second X. matter February 21. 1919, at the Post Office_ at 8an Juan, Porto Ri eo, (United State, of America) under the Act of march 8, 1879.
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 1922
NUMBER 1103.
The attitude of the leaders, vis-a-vis the policy enunciated by Governor Reily.
To amplify our information given yesterday, regarding a possible understanding between all the parties of the country, ¡ we visited yesterday several leaders of the i Union, as well as Mr. Iglesias, ■ who offered us the day before d'ar us his opinion on the matter. We will begin today with Ledo, i Lastra Charriez, who has just arrived i from the North, and to whom the "reporters," as he himself declares, had not ; been able to make him speak For us, spoke the rebel delegate to the House, in this manner: "What is my opinion? I will tell you, friend Pietri. If it is Reii ly who has seen a benefit for the Country in the union of the political parties, I can assure you that such a union would be shameful, destructive and unworthy. On disembarking yesterday from New York I was questioned by some friendly journalists, and in reply I told them all, that on returning I had found on the island only a few more dead and the same gravedigger. I am plainly of opinion, that good ideas may be defended, even by bad men; but sometimes evil is so trampled upon in the heart of man, or of some men, that man or men are inhibited from defending anything that does not become evil by its own defense, destroying all vir j tude in ideas and all practicability in their practice. i Mr. Reily is one of these. He only serves to bury the living, whose moral punyness was covered up in the good old days because showing character was ridiculous. It is also not undeniable that Mr. Reily has a great ability to choose advisors who resemble him. San Juan, my friend Pietri, is very similar to a cemetery, whose gravedigger is Mr. Reily. This in regard to the union of the political parties, in relation to the benefit that the Governor foresees for the country. On his lips, one more lie. Now, the union of the political parties in earnest, without taking into account Reily, who is not worth it, congratulations, not congratulations, something else! Political parties have reason dfe to exist in peoples where sovereignty has been declared and recognized permanently. But in countries like Puerto Rico, where the "status" has not yet been resolved, there is only room for one grouping that defends the Puerto Rican personality. If only - concluded Mr. Lastra - we were all marching along the same path and towards the same end. Only in this way would each and every Puerto Rican be doing his or her duty." LCDO. M. GUERRA MONDRAGON In his professional office on Tanca Street we visited the notable jurisconsult M. Guerra Mondragón, and to our questions on the matter he told us the following: "A period of restoration is imposed. To see restored the order and tranquility that should prevail in the city.
A.CARAZO, Brau St.72 Advt, plies and covers buttons.
BASE-BALL In the Island league Parada Ocho. Sunday, September 17, 1922. TWO BIG CHALLENGES, morning and afternoon. At 9:30 A. M. and 2:30 P. M. Sharp. PONCE VS. PUERTO RICO A la liga de la ocho, early! 7 The Lions of the South are coming for a rematch!
In Puerto Rico, where the status has not yet been resolved, there is only room for one group to defend the native personality," says Ledo. Lastra Charriez: "A rapprochement between the militant parties is to be desired by men of good will," affirms Ledo. Guerra-Mondragón: "Mr. Iglesias spoke about
In any good government, a rapprochement between the militant parties is to be desired by men of good will. I would go so far as to sacrifice positions already acquired to see Puerto Rico free from this regime. That is the Union! But the Union is also dignity, and to compromise with the principles that are the soul of our own life, would be to betray them in the vilest way. I am with Barceló, and closer to him than ever. The path he has taken is the only path to follow." We also saw Don José E. Benedicto, former Treasurer of Puerto Rico, in his law office, located in front of the Plaza de Colón. The probated ex-public official, aware of our wishes, and "convinced" by our dialectic to "say something", expressed himself as follows: "I have never been in favor of a constant struggle between the political parties of the Island. I believe that after the elections, the struggle should cease, and that all parties are obliged to cooperate for the good government and administration of public affairs. But the present difficulties do not stem precisely from disagreements among the political parties. They have been developing their respective programs in accordance with their ideas and points of view and as far as the circumstances of the moment have permitted. It would be a great thing if the parties could reach a good agreement, but that is not the solution to our difficulties. Another is the reason of our ills, of this terrible political crisis, and until this cause is not eliminated the effects -will last." IGLESIAS STILL HAS HOPE Senator Iglesias again yesterday conferred with an Editor of ours, (Continued on 3rd. page.)
Kemalists asked to respect the neutral zone.
(United Presa, via AU America Cables) CONSTANTÜNOPLA, Sept. 15. The High Commissioners of the governments have this afternoon addressed a joint letter to the chief of the Kemalist troops to refrain from crossing the neutral zone. The Allied representatives state that the Kemalists are masters of all their actions, but state that the Allies will be able to exercise their rights to the end, FRANCE REAFFIRMS ITS POLICY OF MAINTAINING THE NEUTRALITY OF THE DAR. PARIS, September 15.-The head of the Government, M. Poincaré, stated this morning that at the meeting of the Cabinet held at Rambouillet it was agreed to send a note to the Government of England. This note, added the President of the Cabinet, was sent today. PARIS, Sept. 15.-The French Government declares in the note sent at noon today to London that it will continue its policy of maintaining strict neutrality in the Dardanelles area. He trusts that England will at all times maintain the views of this Government. GENERAL PELLE COLLABORATED WITH THE ALLIED REPRESENTATIVES JARIS, Ýetiemrbo with JA note that was sent today to the government of England, another one was addressed to General Pello to associate with the allied representatives in Constantinople in order that they seek a conservative solution for the sovereignty of the Straits. KEMALISTS HAVE RESPONDED TO NOTE / LONDON, September 15.-News transmitted to the Quay d' Orsay by General Pelle says that Jos Kemalists have responded this afternoon to the note of the Allied Commissioners giving the assurance that they can count on the respect of the neutral zone. This report has been given to publicity on an "unofficial" basis. BERGMANN AND FISCHER IN COMMUNICATION WITH BERLIN PARIS, September 15.-The German financial experts Messrs. Bergmann and Eicher are "in communication with" the Berlin government. The date of their return to Germany is not yet known. BELGIUM CALLS FOR MEASURES TO BE TAKEN TO. The Belgian delegates to the Society of Nations have submitted a resolution to take the necessary precautions for the relief of the people of Georgia, which, as is known, was invaded by the Germans, and which will be discussed by the Society tomorrow. Olympus Theater TODAY SATURDAY TODAY, i-isia mi -bu - T Del Odio AI Amor intense tragic drama by the famous star POLA NEGRI
Palm Beach in colors in r a Legitimate , $10.00, $12.98, $13.98 and $15.00 English Dril of pure yarn well wet and handmade $12 - $13.50 $16 $18 and $20.
PALM BEACH. -The best assortment in fancy colors. Sizes Price $5.50 Legitimate.... $10.00 CASIMIR'S SUITS.-Suitable for dress, in tobacco and gray colors with white dots. "Styles a "n r a new. Price <pO.Ju
Dril, Khaky, Palm Beach and Cashmere Loose Pants all colors and sizes. Very Cheap Prices.
. A"- A SPECIAL - 11 R gl R gl R gl i 4 V V *n ecru, off-white- % V U 3 I I I-> eos, tobacco, own ■ I _____ for school. SIZES 8 TO 17.
WOUNDED IN THE BELLY II In aranjito, at the moments when Jose Morales Acosta was going to lend tina < pistol to Secundino Morales Sa escaped a shot, wounding the latter ' in "the belly. The Justice of the Peace practiced the conaiguiente Investigation of the case.
Teatro San Agustin TODAY SATURDAY TODAY "BARRABAS" (First Day)
Good and CHEAP SUITS FOR GENTLEMEN AND CHILDREN
English Cashmere (with vest) of pure wool and latest fashion $20.00 Kirschbaum's clothes. The best made, the most elegant and the most economical. $35.00
SUITS FOR BOYS FROM 8 TO 18 YEARS OLD
BLUE SERGE. -The ideal and very special suit for all uses, top of the line navy blue. "¡n rn Price. "pO.dv ELEGANCE AND ECONOMY- In the most elegant, fine and economical suit you can see. Co- <?19 Ca lores chosen . Price.
BLUSHES BOMBACHAS Fine percale to lists and of ' Iviessit, styles with collar and Sport. Nice colors in all sizes. Very Cheap Prices.
GONZALEZ PADIN CO. INC. SAN JUAN. PONCE. MAYAGÜEZ.
RUN OVER BY A CAR On McKinley Street, in Sábana Grande, the car driven by Eran cisco Torres, ran over Francisco Jucino, fifty years old, causing him contusions. The driver was denounced.
Important cablegram from the Resident Commissioner in Washington, D.C.
When Mr. Córdova Dávila learned of the resolution adopted by the Chamber of Commerce of Puerto Rico, he sent the following telegram to Mr. Antonio R. Barceló: Hon. Antonio R. Barceló, San Juan, The cablegram from Lee is signed as President of the Chamber of Commerce. He cannot evade his responsibility by saying that it is his personal act. The attitude of the Chamber of Commerce shows that in spite of the corruption existing in the Reily Administration, there are still honest men of good sense in Puerto Rico. I hope that these men, far from hindering my efforts, will help me to free the jsla from this painful situation. We are all interested in an honest and decent administration. Córdova DAVILA. ? Storm Threatens East and South Coast of Puerto Rico - At four o'clock yesterday afternoon the Weather Bureau, had the courtesy to communicate to us the following: The center of the storm is apa rently east of Martinique, moving very slowly to the west. At this time there is no immediate danger of disturbance reaching Puerto Rico. Further information will be furnished tonight at ten o'clock. Owing to the announced bad weather the ships in San Juan Bay were yesterday undocked from the docks, some of them having 1 suspended departure for fear of being caught in a gale on the high seas. ULTIM NOW Last night, at eight o'clock, the following report was communicated to us from the Weather office in San Juan, related to the atmospheric situation, which, as can be presumed, has similar characters for this Island: "A storm of moderate intention (Continued on page 8a.l
Regarding the Nationalist Assembly to be held tomorrow in Rio Piedras, the following is the Administration's statement
Says the Administration:-"The new Nationalist party which is now rising will positively have absolute freedom of action for the complete development of its political propaganda and will likewise be amply protected in its various campaigns, but will not be able to obtain anything from this administration."
As our readers know, tomorrow will take place in one of the theaters of Rio Piedras the constituent Assembly of the new party in formation, which will have, as its only ideal in its program, the attainment of the independence of Puerto Rico. The Nationalist Party, in the present historical occasion, has found great advantages and disadvantages to loader to the political life of the country, and according to what we have been told by conspicuous leaders of the expressed movement, it seems that they feel more the first ones than the second ones, since, judging by said reports that have been supplied to us, the idea has traces of becoming a reality given the enthusiasm that prevails among important political leaders of the island who intend to attend tomorrow's act. The aforementioned movement, under the present circumstances, has found the advantage that the ideal, until recently defended and maintained in the Union program, has been eliminated from the program (according to the opinion of the radical nationalists) and the result of said elimination has been completely contrary to what was expected, since the national Administration has continued to maintain in P. R. the same state of affairs, without any consideration being given to this sacrifice of the ideal carried out by the majority party. The vast majority of the united party has been discouraged by it and trusts that the present situation is merely an actant of the moment which will one day disappear and then the rights of the party will be fully recognized and it will once again regain the influence of the national powers, since the force of opinion before the country is something that has not been asked for; The party will be fully recognized and will again regain the influence of the national powers, since the strength of opinion in the eyes of the country is something that has not been asked for; but there is, however, a growing number of impatient people, in whom all faith that justice will be done to the country has been lost, and these are the ones who support and second the nationalist movement that is to begin in the near future.
nationalist movement which is to be initiated in a formal and decisive manner in tomorrow's Assembly. The most important disadvantage facing this movement is the hostility and dislike with which it may be viewed by the governmental powers, both insular and national, since the people who seek to defend this movement will have to do so disinterestedly and in the certainty that they will be deprived of all favor and privilege by the government, which will see in them an ■ enemy force. "This, as some nationalist interests have said, will greatly favor us because we aspire to defend the nationalist ideal with absolute purity and without any purpose to follow government perks, but to conquer the heart and will of our people, so that they may be grouped in a strong community that will defend the unique ideal of the country. The program that we intend to adopt in tomorrow's Assembly," Mr. Alegria told us, "can be perfectly understood by a child of first grade, and our aim is to achieve a grouping in which there is no duality in which some claim that 'the ideal has been removed from the program, while others claim the opposite. ' ' On the occasion, then, of the celebration óe that act tomorrow we pai'ace opor , tuno consign here, the opinion that we have collected from people very allega i ¿as and friends of the Administration and I centers of government 'in the island with respect to the attitude that the government will assume in the case that c i nationalist party is founded. "There will be no fear -we have been told- that the Administration will hinder the campaign of that party, with a persecution contrary to the principles that should govern in a democracy such as ours. In a free country all ideas can be defended, as long as they are within the order and the law. The "Union of Puerto Rico'' until the Free State accepted the Tnde ¡ penñ'ancia in its program and oon es** ideal reached the power and in it has remained for many years. The Administration, however, will concede nothing to the nationalists.'' In reference to this matter nothing ¡ has been officially stated; but we hope, nevertheless, that in accordance with the outcome of tomorrow's Assembly we shall be able to report on the opinion prevailing in the other spheres of the Government in connection with this matter. RUSSIA WANTS TO PARTICIPATE IN DARDANELS DISCUSSIONS LONDON, September 15.-Early this morning a note was received from Moscow in which the Soviet Government made it known that it would not take into consideration any agreement concerning the Dardanelles unless Russia did not participate in the discussions. MAGNIFICENT OCCASION In the house located on the road to Santurce, stop 20, spacious and comfortable, can have 1 to 3 comfortable rooms for single persons or married couples without children, who wish to rent it, for a modest monthly stipend. The major advantage is that it is feasible to offer these rooms, with the right to use the rooms of the house and table, if appropriate. Please contact the same house where you will be informed, or telephone 399 green, Santurce. Advt. Í+++-H..I.Í..I..I.1.H 1 I !| HIH.l 1 Hx| WE BUY ero- j chet lace in large quantities, t í Send samples and price to I f Box 989, San Juan. Payment T cash. f
The government of Greece is set to hold in Thrace.
- (United Press, via All America Cables) LONDON, Sept. 15-<The Greek Delegation in this capital has published a report in 'which it is stated that the Hellenic armies are disposed to remain at all hazards in Thrace, in spite of the Bulgarian threat. For this purpose, says the commonwealth, the Athenian government is ready to make all sorts of sacrifices. I WHAT THE UNITED STATES CONSUL GENERAL IN ESMIRNA TELLS ATHENS, September 15.-The United States Consul General in Smyrna, who arrived in this capital today, on behalf of the Pytheus, has declared to the representatives of the press that the crimes committed by the K 1^ nalists against the Armenians are impressive and that the situation of the Christians is an. j gustious one. The murders are numerous! i s|r¡os and even thousands of children were * killed by inquisitorial medies I &s. The Consul says that he has no words with which to describe such atrocities which must not pass without a condemnable sentence. THE . THE COMMITTEE ON INDEMNITIES HELD A MEETING . NI0N ... PARIS, Sept. 15.-The Compensation Committee held a biannual meeting last night to discuss the question arising between the governments of Ald¡nania and Belgium. M. Dubois, chairman of that body, told one of the representatives of the United Press that no final action had been taken as no official note has yet been received from Brussels notifying Germany of its refusal to pay its debts. It is possible that tonight, Dubois said, an ablution to the conflict will be sought. A NOTE FROM SOVIET TO THE U.S. AMBASSADOR IN BERLIN LONDON, Sept. 15.-The Moscow Government has sent a letter to the U.S. Ambassador in Berlin, Mr. Houghton, indicating the desirability of initiating with all haste negotiations for a trade agreement between the North and the Russian Government. The U.S. Ambassador, upon receiving the note, declared in a mocking tone that the Red officials are victims of their own delusions. Mr. ANATOLE FRANCE GOES TO JERUSALEM PARIS, September. The distinguished U. terato Anatnlio France told a group of his most intimate friends that he will leave in a few days to Jerusalem, where he will remain for several months. The author of "The Island of the Penguins" will be accompanied by his wife. THE HEALTH COMMITTEE OF THE SOCIETY OF NATIONS GENEVA, September 15.-Mr. Vicuna read the annual report of the work carried out during the past year by the Health Committee of the League of Nations. Borinquen Park' TODAY SATURDAY TODAY ALICE BRADY in the Realart drama "Cásate y Verás" (THE NEW YORK IDEA) TOMORROW SUNDAY ELENA HAMMERSTEIN "EVIDENCIA" ISE alqúilaI a house in Santurce. Stop 43. Will inform Pesqueras. Phone 561.