ELMÍJNDO
10 pages 3 ctvs, -amsstrs, $4.00 A year, $7.50
iiiiiimiiiiii iitih ri i rv [ Salvador Bran, $1" E Tai. 833, P. O. Box 345 HUllllll i-HM II1II I.."
MORNING DAILY,
"XCEFio lmJMINGOS
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) satborixed tbe Aa ot oetuber 6. 1917, os Ale at the Post Office o* 1 Ran Juan. Porto Rico. By order of tha President, A. S Bur ieion, Postmaster General. Entered a" second class matter febmarv 21. 1919. at the Poet office at Ran Juan, Porto Ri - ." Km-Hea 1 nndor the Set of march 8 187" fl
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 7, 1922
YEAR IV,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
NUMBER 1121.
There are several reasons attributed to the trip of the Resident Commissioner in Washington, Mr. Félix Córdova Dávila.
Since it became known in this capital that the Resident Commissioner, Mr. Córdova Dávila, intended to make a trip to the island, an infinite number of comments have been made by the most significant personalities of the Unionist party concerning the real reasons for the Commissioner's trip. In a conversation held between two important leaders of the Union, one of them, reasoning about what would be the most possible motives for this trip, said that judging by the way in which Mr. Córdova had proposed this trip, he would be able to say that he would not be able to understand the reasons for the trip. Córdova had this time raised the question of Puerto Rico, before Congress, and in whose speech he had requested the passage of a Resolution for the President of the United States to deliver to Congress the report rendered by General Banholdtz on the political situation of Puerto Rico; the aforesaid Unionist said that since the aforesaid report, as he understood, was absolutely contrary to the permanence of Governor Reily in Puerto Rico, if the Resolution of Córdova Dávila were approved, a very difficult situation would be created for the President, due to the fact that if the aforesaid report were delivered by the President of the United States, the President would be in a very difficult situation, due to the fact that if the aforesaid report were delivered by the President of the United States, the President would be in a very difficult situation, due to the fact that if the aforesaid report were delivered by the President of the United States, the President of the United States would be in a very difficult situation, never seen until now, by the number, the enthusiasm and the overflowing, in any spectacle in San Juan, favor that makes us contract new and greater commitments with the kind public, we are pleased to warn you that, due to the considerable number of people who could not see the great film 'FASCINACION', as well as the program that governed the reopening of the RIALTO. 31 the same program will be repeated tonight, and that not only the matinee but also the evening performances will be entertained by the full orchestra. It only remains for us to thank you all most expressively. z BRUNO & VAZQUEZ.
■ me would produce a great effect on the ■ Congress prejudicial to the Adminis- , tration, and if it refused to deliver- , it would establish it doubt whether it was indeed a report contrary to the - Governor. "In view of this situation-said the pre"' cited leader-it is quite possible that President Harding has conferred with Mr. Córdova Dávila, res- , pecting the manner in which a decorous settlement might be arrived at for , both parties, without the necessity 1 of provo I car an action on the part of the Coni gress at its December session. And it is quite possible that he has given him private ins- , truce ions for the party directors, as to how they should act to bring about a favorable change in the increasingly difficult situation." Others are of the opinion that Mr. Córdova Dávila upon learning that the party was going to send ; a commission to the United States i ¡ to participate in the elec- | j toral Campaign and request the removal of the ¡ (Governor, realized that such an ¡.action on the part of the party, if not i i done in due form, might i ' cause a definite failure, believed , i opportune and convenient to go ahead ¡ to make a trip to the island to (Continued on 3rd. I I I I DON R. M. PIETRANTONI I On the last steamer which arrived from the ¡ i United States, our distinguished friend, Don R. M. Pietrantoni, leader of the Republican minority in the Municipal Assembly of San Juan, ' and one of the most competent and active businessmen in the commerce of Puerto Rico, returned to the country. Mr. Pietrantoni returns to the country after having carried out very important mercantile transactions in the North, which represent many dollars for our good friend. EL MUNDO celebrates the happy return of I ñefseSor Pietrantoni, for whom we have always felt the most cordial affection.
NEW SERVICE DIRECT FROM NEW ORLEANS, LA. -BY THE LONE STAR STEAMSHIP COMPANY - The steamer 'SOUTHSEAS' will arrive from New Orleans on Oct. 6 with general cargo and lumber, etc., for San Juan and-other Island ports. The next steamer 'MUNISLA' which is advertised to leave GALVESTON, Texas on the 4th. BEAUMONT, Texas, on the 6th. HOUSTON, Texas on the 5th. NEW ORLEANS, La. on the 9th. Will come direct to all ports in Puerto Rico. Importers are begged to order their cargo from New Orleans and other gulf ports by the steamers of this company, the freight rates of which are the same as those of the other Lines. VILLAR & CO., INC. AGENTS
DR. FRANCESCHl CABALLERO Specialist in Diseases of the Stomach, Liver, Liver and Rectum. Office: Alien 78. Telephone 1192, San Juan. HOURS: 9 to 12 A. M.-2 to 6 P. M.
Com pagni e Generale Tra nsatla ntique. FRENCH STEAMER "MACORIS" Expected in this port from 8 to 10 of the current from HAVRE, BORDEAUX and LA CORUÑA and will continue voyage to CAP HAITIEN, PORT AU PRINCE and SANTIAGO DE CUBA. ADMITS CARGO AND PASSAGE FOR THE ABOVE PORTS For further information please contact Behn Brothers Inc. Agents. TANCA and TETUAN. TEL. BUILDING. San Juan. Tel. No. 257.
The Socialists and some Republicans were preparing to distribute numerous circulars in Wash.
ington to discredit prominent personalities belonging to the Unionist party.
They were also proposing, by making charges of a personal nature, to justify the dismissals and administrative changes made by the Governor.
We were informed by his friends that he is completely averse to attacks of a personal nature in the campaign which the minorities are going to initiate in his defense. Among other reasons for which the Governor was alleged to have intended to remove three high-ranking judicial officials, two prosecutors and a District Judge, whose names were disclosed, some time ago it was insisted in San Juan that the Governor intended to remove three high-ranking judicial officials, two prosecutors and a District Judge, whose names were disclosed. We did not welcome the species in our columns, because we considered it excessively drastic, since against these threatened officials there were no charges of any kind. And we always believed that the news was pure invention of the popular fantasy, so given to these ailments of unbridled tropicalism. But today, we can report, for the first time in our history, that the news was purely a fabrication of popular fantasy, so given to such uninhibited tropicalism.
A few days ago a rumor reached our ears that the Socialists, in combination with some Republicans, had conceived the idea of circulating in Washington and among the United States press, numerous circulars containing serious attacks of a personal nature against conspicuous personalities belonging to the majority party, for the purpose, as we were informed, of detracting authority and prestige from the campaign which, against the Governor, the shoulders of the 1? Union, and, on the other hand, to justify many of the dismissals made by Mr. Reily. To confirm these rumors, and as it seemed to us from the beginning that it was a Republican-Socialist combination to flatter the Chief Executive, we sought, thinking that the Governor had been aware of it, to know the opinion of those close to him, who told us that, indeed, there was such a purpose on the part of Republicans and Socialists.
The fact that the Governor is opposed to the implementation of such a policy, is the fact that both he and the Central political authorities have criticized the Unionists, in their first campaign against the Governor, for having used in their attacks oargos of a personal nature, and it would be doubly reprehensible to the Administration if now the supporters of Mr. Reily were to use the same words in his defense. Some prominent Unionists having been asked for their views in regard to this Socialist project, express regret that it should not be put into practice, as they are absolutely certain that such attacks would be so inconsistent and false, or would fall of their own weight, that no one but themselves could be harmed by them. For our part, we have only to say that we have embraced this information because the reports furnished to us deserve our full credit, and because it is in this way to counteract the campaign of the majority party against Governor Reily's administration, and the fact, moreover, that their aims are of such a nature, that they are rejected even by the very person whom they are intended to benefit by them.
"The plan, we were told, was proposed to be put into effect by the socialist commission which intends to go to the North, under the pretext of working for the benefit of the laboring classes. Regarding the Governor's opinion on this matter, even though they could not assure us if he had been informed of this project.
Schoolchildren,...! We have just received Pojr Ultimo Vapor Khaky Pants 75 - 85 and $1.25 Khaky Shirts all Sizes $1.25 Blouses Bombachas in Colors 60 - 75 - 85 - 1.00 and 1.25 Military Youth Hats $3.50 Fine Shoes with Brown Rubber Heels, Strong and Durable at 2 - $4.00 Ties 25 and 50 - Stockings 25 and 35 GONZALEZ PADIN CO., INC. SANJUAN. PONCE. MAYAGÜEZ.
PARQUE B0R1NQUEN TODAY SATURDAY TODAY CONSTANCE BINNEY and REGINALD DENY in "A HOUSE OF HOMES" (39 East), ... Superb premiere in P. R. Tomorrow Sunday: "ONE LIFE FOR ANOTHER" by Helen Jerome Eddy
GREAT EXCURSION TO SANTO DOMINGO $40 00 ROUND TRIP $40 00 On the 12th of the present day, President Yicim will take possession of the Dominican government, an act that promises to be very interesting and of great importance, in addition to the celebration of the day of the discovery of the New World. The BULL* INSULAR LINE announces an excursion on the steamer "l . tubre at 3.00 in the afternoon, with the right to return on the MARINA trip, at the rate of $40.00 round trip, departing from San Juande October 17. For more information: BULL INSULAR LINE INC. TeL San Juan No. 1255.
Don Julio C. Gonzalez gives us several details about his resignation as an executive member of the Nationalist Party.
As our readers know, Mr. Julio Cesar Gonzalez, Nationalist leader, published the following letter in yesterday's press; San Juan, P. R., October 5, 1922. Señor Don José Coh y Cucni, -President of the Partido NacionalisFa Ciudad. My dear friend and compatriot; I present to you, in an irrevocable manner, my resignation as a member of the Supreme Council of the Nationalist Party. At the same time, I request my resignation for the time being as a member of the aforementioned Party, until such time as the accusations made against said Party in today's press are cleared up. And with feelings of my deepest consideration, I remain with you, your friend and compatriot About this letter, we exchanged pressures with Mr. Gonzá lez himself, who, upon our questions, informed us that he cannot belong to a party that public opinion accuses of being in collusion with Governor Reily, who must be condemned as an enemy by all Puerto Ricans, and especially by the nationalists, whom he treated so badly, exasperating them with the constant insults he hurled against the Puerto Rican flag;ña, to which Mañana domingo 8 de Octubre. Grand premiere in Puerto Rico. The super dramatic production Su Noche de Bodas by the celebrated actress Marie Prevost plus an international revue with the latest Base-Ball game featuring the celebrated slugger BABE RUTH and a comedy in 2 parts by the famous dog BROWNIE 11 Don't miss .
He called it a "dirty rag" on several occasions. Mr. Gonzalez says he is not satisfied with the passive attitude adopted by the Nationalist Party with respect to Governor Reily, against whom, at this time, Mr. Gonzalez has had to protest the aforementioned collectivity, denouncing once again before the powers of Washington the arbitrary actions of the National Administration in Puerto Rico. There is another very powerful reason, according to Mr. Gonzalez, that compels him to adopt the attitude he has lately taken. It is the responsibility that, in his opinion, all those who are trying to divide the Union for the benefit of Republicans and Socialists, who undoubtedly will be, if they are not already, those who are taking advantage of the situation, are taking on before the country. The distinguished politician expressed that he, as a Puerto Rican, does not want to bear the sambenito of having contributed to (Continued on 3rd. page.) t-H-l I ! H-4-I I 1 [ 1 H-M l 1 . * * * -- DUTCH STEAMER " -- (MOTOR VESSEL) will leave " ~ today afternoon for SANTO DOMINGO CITY, J ± SAN PEDRO DEMACORIS, " £ SANCHEZ, PUERTO PLA- " :: TA. HAITI, JAMAICA and " J SANTIAGO DE CUBA ;- ;; Admitting cargo :: Sues, from L Villamil & Co. £ " - AGENTS. " .... Tel. 1520. San Juan, P. R. " J" ' -
Tel. 1520. San Juan, P. R.
>If you knew that this was going to happen... You wouldn't hesitate to do this Ú PCPAMrA* H I |/ ""TOM '/ ij \ ii i I I ' i *■ | XSf. A BEHN BROTHERS Inc. INSURING INSURANCE, GREAT AMERICAN INSURANCE CO. I New York. Agents ¡ PHOENIX INSURANCE CO. I j ' Hartford. Generals of: i LANCASHIRE insurance so. I (Now united with Royal Ins Co.) Liverpool. PHONE 257. _ SAN JUAN, P. R.