THE WORLD
- pages 3 "Iva, Semester, $4.00 One alfo,$7.M
VTT" " " " " " * - " Ofldnasi Wvater Brut 81 Tel. 838 P.O. Box 8M **
DAILY EX MORNING,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Pablided and dl "trib*tod (?°* 801 > -***<>">--* tt. Ao" to Mtober #, iSlf, oa Sle to the P<xt Orte" ef Caa Juan. Porto Bieo. 8y order of th" PrtndMt. A. ". Bw ito "m General. Botorod m ooooad "Imo nattoc, tobrury Si, 1B1". to th" Peto OfSoo to San Jm, Porto Meo. United States to Amarlea nnder the Ato el toareh S. 1ST"
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 25, 1922.
NUMBER 932.
MRS. SEPULVEDA AND IGLESIAS ABRAZANSET1ERNAMENTE ¥ RECALL THE PACT.
£! ax-candidate for Washington for the Republican eípartldo visited the Free Federation yesterday. Coincidentally, one of our editors was there. The Republican leader came into office, as freely as if he had fought in his own office. Greetings... Words ...and immediately went to Mr. Iglesias, with whom he embraced him in a close, strong embrace Lenine's disciple let himself be done, patient, resigned, like a blessed man. After this transport of jubilation, the breva" .... And he speaks lightly, in a rush, of _ ■ \*s things.... By dt - TiTT t the effusion of the meeting and the , am , JAD of the initial impressions, lg j j>s in conclusion that Mr. Igle' he former candidate for Washington, ímei t ha1,ian seen since the return of icor <° to the island ' -P° r 080 amboí POr 7 i they spoke of the North Gobernaal trip; of the campaign there; of the jj 'o of "Tanamo", etc. etc..... 'uestra presence there seems that co1 * the politicians, whose suspicion j t >to one fanned more and more the n , admonishing fibers of represen2 ce Alonso: There are Moors on the coast! 8 "io notwithstanding the measures taken j we dare to swear that Sr. SeJ veda was speaking to Iglesias of a ▼", and effective merger of republican socialists for the next olee nes of 1024. / -Wow,- we interrupt- from here then the Law * Zctoral will have been amended and there will be no coup!... JUNTO A LA BARANDA. Next to the railing of an ante pep. from which one can contemplate the ca- - the two omigos and aos were /armed when Mr. Sepulveda was laataba: '-You go, comrade Iglesias I 4*> If we had united we would not have needed the ve. da here of the STRONG MAN, to Acer what we would have helio. In speaking to Mr. Sepulveda he was referring to Mr. Roily's "broom", sets we could appreciate later. THE "TALES", ETC.... Mr. Sepulveda seems to be very given to "tales" and "guachafita'! Speaking, later, with our editorial staff, he compared the Union to a barrel, so that the two main bows of Diego and Muñoz would have been broken off.
Diego's and Muñoz's main arches would have been broken, and at the slightest impulse, all its staves would have spilled out. ENDUELADA, thus, the Union by the cx-Judge, we continue talking. S! Mr. Sepulveda believes that, at present, the Unionist party revives the type of an old deluded cobbler, .in a tale he knows. Our interlocutor made us the story. In synthesis; A man who goes in search of the GORDO of the Lottery, - that according to him he WON, - and returns, with a broken leg, for 'all gain. Between this character and the Union, Mr. Sepúlveda says that there is a great analogy... The ex-Jnez said goodbye. Before leaving, he announced to Mr. Iglesias: -Well? We will talk later, because NOW.... THE "BILL" CAMPBELL LS THE JONES LAW, WITH HIGHLY REACTIONARY ADDITIONS- IGLESIAS SAYS: "In Eíutesis, we reproduce the statements about the "bill" Campbeli, made in the Senate by the socialist leader, Mr. Iglesias: "No people is a Free State when it does not possess its political right established by popular sovereignty and much less when it lacks the most fundamental authority to develop its wealth and administer its own economic life. The Campbell Bill grants political franchises to one party and denies the country what is most precious and fundamental: the means of obtaining its economic emancipation. It is not and does not represent the internal independence of the country, nor the economic autonomy of the free colonies of England, nor does it represent the sovereign and sovereign Shield in the national association. THE CAMPBELL BILL IS THE RE-PRODUCTION OF OUR CHARTER, WITH ADDITIONS THAT ARE HIGHLY REACTIONARY. It contains no article tending to solve our serious financial problems. It denies the people the right to new elections, so that popular sovereignty can give its verdict at the ballot box. A sort of virey is imposed upon us, copying the policy of England of more than a hundred years ago, with the power to suspend the laws, the right of inspection of the government, and the supreme authority of , (Continued on pg. 6a)
BEHN BROTHERS, INC. (HOUSE FOUNDED IN 1906) BANKERS / Berwind White Coal Mining Co. \ Lancashire Insurance Co. Agents . i Windward Island Line - Pacific Argentine . \ Brazil Line La Veloce. EL CONDADO - Sale of land. Esquina Tetuán-Tanca. San Juan, P. R.
< CATTLE CATTLE For vajídr "Montoso" arriving on the 28th of the present, I will receive twenty-five VW" Holsthein and fifteen Jersey, all of superior quality V <flie I will liquidate at situation precies. These cattle may be seen at and ql Government stable, behind the University of Puerto Rico I in Rio Piedras. at any hour of the day. .< EZEQUIEL MONGIL, Box 132, Tel. 634 Santurce.
German Neo Salvarsan manufactured by FARBWERKE VORM. MEISTER LUCIUS A BRUNNING HOECHST A MAIN Declared PURE and LEGITIMATE by the U.S. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH AFTER ANALYZED Imported under License No. 211836 by Pesquera & Pesquera, Inc. I Telephone 561. Edificio Bouret. San Juan, P. R.
A MOST INTERESTING LETTER FROM THE ILLUSTRIOUS JUDGE TOWNER ON THE PRESENT POLITICAL PROBLEM OF P. R.
February 13, 1922. i Hbn. Félix Córdova Dávila, House of Representatives, Washington, D. C. My dear Judge Córdova Dávila: Thank you very much for having called my attention to the cablegram of Don Antonio R. Barceló. In reply to your request that I should make some further encouragement about the matters dealt with in the cablegram, let me say the following; In one of the cablegrams President Barceló says "that a general meeting of the United Party will be called for the purpose of declaring that the Campbell project is the "sole aspiration of the party" and that "the meeting will make a frank and sincere statement in favor of America''". I am very pleased with this change in the party's policy. You will remember that a year ago in letters from me to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives," I stated: "That there was firm ground for working for a larger form of self-government, but that this desire had been greatly impaired in its prospect by active pro-independence propaganda. Here it would have been possible to consider the appointment of your own fellow citizens to the highest offices; but there is no possible support for independence. At the same time I expressed the hope at that time that the Unionist party would make its policy clear, so that it could not be said that its policy and purposes were to "secede from the United States". All indications are that there is a good prospect of this being done, and I am glad that there is no party on the island whose policy and aims are to separate the island from the United States. TOMORROW'S GREAT EXHIBITIONS AT THE "PUERTO RICO" CINEMA The "Puerto Rico Cinema" continues to exhibit the most interesting films that come to this country, and the cultured public of Santurce is delighted, as they flock every night to the popular cinema to admire all the interesting and beautiful scenes of the films that are exhibited there. For tomorrow the "Puerto Rico" cinema will exhibit two marvelous films that constitute the last word in modern cinematography. These are "The Perfect Woman", by the inimitab(p and salacious Constance Talmadge, and a film by 1* distinguished Italian tragodiante Francesca Bertini of the series that compose "The Seven Capital Punishments". Since the "Universal Film Co." did not receive the episodes it had promised for tomorrow with the "Puerto Rico", Mr. Hoveras decided to exhibit these two gems of cinematography, thus benefiting the large audience that fills the seats of the popular 21 stop cinema every night. - We have just received five Dodge cars and two Dodge buses at the new prices. Visit us and choose your car. ANDREU, AGUILAR A CO., SAN JUAN, P. R. Advt. "Teatro América" Company of Comedies and Dramas "ADAMS-NIEVA" Matinee at 4:30 P. M. Premiere of Muñoz Seca's comedy "CELOS" In the evening at 8:30 P. M. The drama of Manuel Linares Rivas "Cobardías' ' ' PRICES Luneta Ground Floor D0.75 Lunty Upper Floor 0.50 Palcos 6 Tickets 5.00 Tomorrow Sunday jnatinee and in the evenings great estenos.
This will make possible the consideration of some changes in our? relations and of any legislation tending to improve conditions in Puerto Rico. The problem of independence, which the United States could not consider for discussion, having been eliminated, we are at liberty to consider any modification in the Charter affecting our relations, or affecting in any way your interests and welfare, if it is so proposed. In connection therewith, careful consideration will be given by our Committee and by Congress to the Williams bill, the Campbell bill, and any other formula determined to affect the relations of the Island with the United States. In one of the cablegrams President Barceló says: "I have conveyed to the people of the island the statement of. Judge Towner, that he will resolutely support the wishes of the Island as soon as these wishes are frankly expressed," I fear that such a statement, in connection with the statement that the Unionist Party will declare that "the Campbell bill will be the sole aspiration of the party," will produce a mistaken impression. I am not prepared at this time to make a statement with respect to the Campbell Bill. In the preparation of the bill I was not consulted as to its provisions, and did not even know of its main features until it was pro seated by Mr. Campbell. A w owed TO THE TRADERS AND INDUSTRIALS OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN As the date is near for the Municipal Assembly to proceed to the apportionment of the patent assessments for the fiscal year 1922-23, notice is hereby given to all the merchants and industrialists of this Municipality subject to the payment of that tax, that all of the merchants and industrialists of this Municipality, subject to the payment of this tax, that in accordance with the Law they must present in this office, before March 15, next, the affidavit of the volume of business done during the preceding calendar year, making it on the form provided by the Municipal Treasury. San Juan, February 23, 1922. Raf. D. ANDINO, Municipal Treasury Commissioner.
GAIN/ Value $5.00 for $2.08 On account of the manufacturer we liquidate a large consignment of magnificent shoes for young ladies, they are similar to the engraving, in brown color, very well made and of great durability, their current value is $5. 0 A A A A A we liquidate them in ta- Jh ¡ M X maños from 1 to 5'A a V V APROVECHE THE GAIN GONZALEZ FADIN' CO. San Juan, P. R.
I presume that the hearings will be agreed upon and at them every opportunity will be given for discussion and for the expression of opinion. In such con-1 1 ferences there should not only be ex-1 1 treme sincerity of expression, but also a mutual spirit of forbearance and tolerance of differences of opinion, so as to arrive, we hope, at a common agreement and compromise as to what should be done to achieve the welfare and happiness of the people of Puerto Rico and the continuance of the ties of interest and friendship between the people of the Island and the people of the United States. It should be remembered, however, that changes in the Organic Act affecting the relations of Puerto Rico with the United States are matters of great concern and should be carefully considered. Radical changes are always dangerous, and only when it appears that conditions under the existing status are clearly counterproductive to the best interests of those affected, < 1 are the changes justified, i' IF such conditions are shown to exist, in seeking a remedy we must precede in a careful manner to be sure that it is what is desired, and will necessarily be found by our action. It must also be remembered that whatever change may be desired, it will have to be approved by the Congress of the United States in consonance with American ideals and practices, which our countrymen think best adapted to the attainment of the welfare and happiness of any people affiliated with us, and indeed with any people who desire good government, peace and prosperity everywhere. (New York Times, February 13) SAN JUAN - The Unionist party has adopted a new platform declaring that the creation of a Free State always associated with the United States will be its sole ambition in the future. This resolution was agreed upon after much debate which lasted until Saturday morning. The party decided to officially eliminate the independence ideal from its program. THELMA COSTE BRUNO She is in San Juan and will show off her spiritual beauty tonight in the salons of the Casino of Puerto Rico the beautiful and charming Miss Thelma Coste Bruno, whose presentation in seriousness during the Carnival season has been a novelty in the elegant world. Subtly aristocratic with eyes of heaven and hair of gold, Thelma I, the gentle Queen of Guayama, will imprint one more note of ideality and poetry to tonight's party. today Teatro Olimpo today ¡'The Black Panther' - in seven acts, by the eminent actress Florence Reed. In 7 "reels".- Extra - ordinary ; The most sumptuous presentation of deco- , rados, luxurious costumes, pretty scenery and beautiful and pretty women New and amazing photographic effects It is pleated and lined buttons A. CARAZO, Brau St 72. "Victory Garden" Tomorrow, Sunday, in the second batch only "The Three Musketeers" THIRD DAY
PRELIMINARY HEARING IN THE CASE OF "DISBARMENT AGAINST THE UCDO. TORMES
Yesterday at half past two in the afternoon began in the Supreme Court. the preliminary hearing in the case of "disbarment" presented by the iscal of the Supreme, against the Ledo. Leopoldo Tormes, of Ponce, so that he be suspended in the exercise of his profession for having committed certain criminal acts, which in the judgment of the People's Representative disqualify him for the performance of his profession. The Clerk of the Court read the request for "disbarment" and the parties being ready to discuss the questions of law raised by the defendant, the Hon. President of the High Court granted half an hour to each of the parties to support their respective arguments. Representing Mr. Tormes, f.sisted l^s 1 , the following attorneys. Ledo. Sepulveda, Fornaris, Brown, Martinez Nadal, Honoré,, the defendant himself and his sister Miss Tormes. Ledo. Martínez Dávila, attorney-at-law - also of Ledo. Tormes, did not attend this preliminary hearing, although we were assured that he would attend the final hearing of the case. Appearing on behalf of the People were the Supreme Court Attorney, Ledo. José L. Figlueras and Ponce District Attorney Ledo. Agustin Font, the latter for having conducted all the investigations of the facts charged against Ledo. Tormes, in the request of the "disbarment" that follows him. He took the floor, first, the Ledo. Brown, for' sostesupágfluo adding that I personally harbor feelings of high regard and affection pira the pnablo of Puerto Rico. I will gladly assist in any way possible to bring about a full understanding of the fact that your countrymen are American citizens, of whom I am sure, with a better understanding of what that citizenship means, they will learn to cherish it as the highest and best civic honor that can be obtained. It would be an act of folly, both for the people of America and of Puerto Rico, to indulge or encourage a spirit of distrust or hostility of one against the other. Reiterating the assurance of my personal esteem, I am cordially and sincerely yours, Horace M. TOWNER.
The Court ruled on the motion to strike out certain aspects of the application, on the grounds that they were insufficient to constitute sufficient cause to declare the disqualification of the disqualification and the preliminary objections filed to the same. He separately analyzed each one of the charges, objects of the Prosecutor's request and cited a collection of jurisprudence to prove that the defendant, if he had committed any crime, had not done so in his capacity as attorney and that therefore, in order for the disbarment to prosper, it was necessary that he had previously been convicted by a Court of Justice of the crime he was accused of. He further alleged that Ledo. Brown further argued that the said petition did not allege bad faith on the part of Ledo. Tormes in carrying out the acts charged against him. The Supreme Prosecutor, Mr. Figueras refuted the allegation made by Mr. Brown, qualifying it as having made use of an unnecessary technicality in cases such as the present one, since the remedies of ' "disbarment" are broad and liberal and the Courts that issue a diploma to practice law do not need, according to the jurisprudence he cited, to wait for a Court to declare a professional guilty of a crime, in order to suspend him from the practice of his profession, since it is deficient that from the facts it is proven that the conduct of the defendant is of such nature, that in his functions as a professional he may represent a danger to society. In response to a question asked by Hen. Judge XHolf, Mr. Figueras said that the Supreme Court itself, in a conspiracy case that he, as prosecutor of Aguadilla, filed against Ledo. Torregrosa, in declaring that there was no conspiracy, insinuated, however, that a "disbartment" proceeding was followed, which was successful despite the fact that the defendant did not plead guilty in the criminal action. He added that it was not necessary in appeals of this nature to use the technicality of common accusations, such as "intentionally and maliciously", since this is evident from the facts denounced. He offered to present to the Court a (Continued on page 0.)
POESIAS DEL DR. RAFAEL DEL VALLE A limited edition of Dr. Del Valle's POESIAS COMPLETAS is now on sale. Those who wish to obtain copies can go to the main bookstores in San Juan and the Island. Price per copy: $1.50.
EL CONDADO El Condado is the only place dedicated exclusively to residences in San Juan. Healthy, fresh and with constant sea breeze. WE SELL houses and lots; houses for cash and lots for cash and installments. Bohn Brothers Inc. agents Tetuan and Tanoa. San Juan.
GALVANIZED IRON RIBBED AND SMOOTH REBAR ALL SIZES UNBEATABLE PRICES NEPHEWS OF EZQU1AGA