ELMWNDO
♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦MM 12 pages 3 ctvs. semester, H>00 One year,|7.H
rT riff t r r r 11 r v v vvt Offices; Mvsist BrfUi n : TcL UJ P, o. Box Mi "
DAILY EX A.M., EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
AAO IV. 8AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO,
-athori A 8. I
PabUaeá aad distributed ender pmJt (Me. SOI) Mthorised by u, aet et eetebee 8, 1 "H, "b lie at the Peat Ottos of Sen Porto Bloc. By .order ef the fteeident, A 8. Bar lasen. Poetmeter GeeanL Batered ee seeend olese sutter, febraary >1. l "l". at the Poet Ofdoe at Ban Jui, Borto Biso. United "tetes of America undse the Aot ef mareh 8. 18W
SATURDAY, MARCH 11, 1922. I NUMBER 944.
Licdo. Soto Grao makes an extensive study of the legal question of the "Quo Warranto."
Important opinions of Supreme Court Justices McLeary and Sulzbacher.
Upon learning that Francisco Soto Grao, Esq., with moti ▼o of a Guayama lawsuit and with the objective of challenging the Resolution given in e' case by Judge Diaz Cintron, had studied at length the question of the legality of the appointments of officials made by the Governor against the advice and consent of the Senate, an Editor of ours visited the esteemed jurisconsult in order -that, in view of the topicality of the matter, he might give us his opinion as to the nature and efficacy of the "Quo Warranto'* remedy sought to be established to challenge the capacity of the department heads, Lippitt, Toro Labarthe and Wil son. - "The situation .brought about by the attitude of the Governor-commenced dicta-appointing public officers without the advice and consent of the insular Senate is not only chaotic from an administrative point of view but almost hopeless as to the means of review before the Courts of Justice.'' -What, in your opinion, is the remedy le gal for that situation. -Both the Supreme Court of the United States and our Supreme Court of Puerto Rico have resolved that the only way to bring before the Courts the legality of the appointment of public officials is by means of the "Quo Warranto'' rite. But this writ can only be issued in the name of the State, that is, The People of Puerto Rico, the latter naturally represented by the Attorney General or a District Attorney. No citizen may urge the issuance of the writ in his own right, JA the question involved is of interest only to the sovereign power and only it may appeal the validity of the acts performed by its officials affecting the appointment to the office he holds. And for all legal purposes the _ acts performed by illegally appointed officials are valid.
And for all legal purposes the acts performed by illegally appointed officials are valid and effective, cannot be attacked collaterally or by any other means other than the aforementioned 'Quo Warran to' and exercise their powers such officials, because they are de FACTO but not de JURE. This theory has also been upheld by the Supreme Courts of Washington and Puerto Rico.'' -How does one initiate the appeal? - "Now, the difficult part is to get the initiation of the rite of "Quo Warranto'', the only remedy for the review by our courts of the Governor's illegal appointments. Our "Quo Warranto'' law, even though one of the most liberal of its analogues in the United States, leaves to the Attorney General and District Attorneys the power to allow writ petitions when interested by citizens. If such power is discretionary and is exercised, even if erroneously, it would not be reviewable by writ of mandamus which only proceeds when the duty is manifest and does not involve discretion. The law uses the verb MAY in English, which has sometimes been regarded as postessential and sometimes as imperative. A discussion of its meaning in this particular case would carry us too far, and for the purposes of what in the present circumstances should in my opinion be the attitude of the Attorney General, it is of no importance." -¿ ? -As the leave to be granted by the Attorney General is simply to file the application and the application must also be allowed by the Court, before going into its merits as provided by the statute, it is clear that the Attorney General will do his duty by giving an opportunity to the injured parties to ventilate in the Courts such sacred rights as the intervention of the elective branch of the government (insular Senate) in the administration of the common cause.
Then the Court will decide for its part whether or not to grant permission to file the petition, perhaps with greater freedom of action than the Attor' ney General, being at the same time the representative and servant of the People of Puerto Rico, whose rights have been violated, legal adviser to the Governor. | What about the personal interest of the petitioner? 1 - "Another question, no less important, is whether the word "retator", which has been translated as "other person", used in the law to designate the person who urges the Attorney General to file the "Quo Warranto" petition, should be interpreted as granting the right to petition to any citizen or whether the petitioner must have suffered personal injury in the challenged appointment. Many States of the Union have amended the "Quo Warranto" statute so that it does not require that the petitioner have a personal interest in the matter and only requires that the competent Court believe that there are sufficient public policy grounds for an inquiry into the legality of the appointment. Our law will surely be amended in this sense in the next session of our legislature, thus avoiding the technicalities that today hinder the rapid progress of this urgently needed purge of responsibilities. But in all (Continued on page three) SEfrOB HERNANDEZ USERA CONGRATULATES MR. BARCELO Yesterday morning the Head of the Union, Mr. Barceló, received a cablegram from Lic. Hernández Use. ra, resident in Madrid, in which he warmly congratulates him on the triumph of the former in the Assembly held by the majority party on February eleventh. -Yesterday, it was also assured in the political circles of the city, that Mr. Barceló had received another message from Washington, in relation to the important events that are taking place in that Capital. We were unable to obtain confirmation of this news, despite having spoken with the head of the Union.
Today Today The sensational special production "Husbands and Wives" Equity Program, performed by HOUSE PETERS Women, Men and Children. Don't miss this colossal film.
EL CONDADO El Condado is the only place dedicated exclusively to residences in San Juan. Healthy, cool* and with constant ocean breezes. WE SELL houses and lots; houses for cash and lots for cash and installments. Behn Brothers Inc., Agents Tetuán and Tanca. San Juan.
- sr'e w o^^-■^e ,, I Rosita Guerra e"- ■i At the "Puerto Rico" Cinema - - - - ■ Tonight, Saturday, will be a night of jubilation for Santurce. *The cupletista Rosita Guerra, so praised by the newspapers of Cuba and Mexico, will make her presentation in that popular cinema, where she will resume the series of triumphs she has achieved everywhere. "In addition, a beautiful comedy and one of the *: best dramas of Juan Centella, in six acts, will be exhibited.
Notice to the_Commerce "La Bul! Insular Line Inc. announces that it has made arrangements with the "Luckembach United American Line" which trades between San Francisco, California and New York by means of which it can accept the following articles on a "knowing basis" to Puerto Rico: Beans at $0.86 per 100 lbs. Canned goods in cans at $1.00 per 100 lbs. Shipments destined for the port of San Juan will also be charged 2-l|2 cts. per 100 lbs. as unloading duty." Advt.
Victory Garden
TOMORROW SUNDAY In the 9 o'clock evening batch. The wonderful production, more interesting every day, "The Three Musketeers" FIFTH DAY.
The commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, Mr. Toro Labarthe, does not want to 'talk more for now'.
Despite this, he gives us his report on the issues that are being discussed.
Yesterday we visited Mr. Toro Laharthe, Commissioner of Agriculture, to see if he had any new statements to make about the latest comments made about him in the San Juan newspapers. Mr. Toro told us that he had nothing new to add at this time. However, the distinguished Commissioner put in our hands a speech of his, in which there are categorical statements regarding the issues that have been discussed in the press, in relation to the points of an economic nature, outlined by him, publicly, since EL MUNDO inserted the paragraphs of his letter to Towner. Therefore, guessing, perhaps, Mr. Toro's thinking, we copy what follows: DEFENSE OF PROPERTY "Many small landowners have lost their farms because the people of Puerto Rico have been so zealous in the collection of their TAXES, that if after a short time they DO NOT COLLECT, they sell or auction that plot of land, without worrying that perhaps the welfare of a family depended on it. The tax per pound Tax enjoys the privilege of a longer term for its amortization, and at six percent interest, while the land tax accrues twelve percent with a peremptory term for payment. The Corporations in economic crises have the recourse of surrendering to the CORTES DÍ77USTICIÁ, and passing into the hands of RECEIVER, they wait for the crisis to pass, and when the economic situation improves they always find some remedy and keep their properties. For individuals the procedure is quicker; SUSPENSION OF PAYMENT OR BANKRUPTCY. In the first case the reputation of a useful person in society is also destroyed." Then follows a little story of Mr. Toro, which for not being too long-winded, we silence. Moving on, and always in search of what is most similar to the issues that the press has been dealing with in these days, we find in the speech the following, about the
the following about the current appraisal system: THE APPRAISAL "The appraisals are not as fair as they should be. The farmers do not know how to defend themselves; they are forbidden to use the lawyers who are familiar with the laws of the INVISIBLE POWER, and to avoid more work, with the opportunity that the appraiser gives them to go "en alzada" to the Board of Review and Equalization in San Juan, whose visit provides many expenses, they resolve to accept the tax, and thus it can be understood that the cane lands, vegas for the most part, located next to towns, and roads, which allow turning by car, are appraised on average at $172 cuerda; and the coffee lands, in the height, that to arrive to them it is necessary to pass by bad roads and dangerous paths, of gredilla, are appraised in average of $93.79 cuerda. The average yield of sugar per cüerda can be estimated in Puerto Rico at 40 quintals of sugar, which enjoys a protection of
2 quintal, or $80 per cord!!!! This is conclusive proof that the small proprietor is an orphan in the spheres of the Government of his country, or that he is not yet prepared to enjoy the liberties of the times, for lack of association and cooperation". As it is not possible to reproduce all of Mr. Toro's speech, we close this information with what he said about taxes: TAXES. "Taxes are not always fair. It has already been authorized up to two percent on the value of the property, and-applying them they say IS NECESSARY, IS INDISPENSABLE, BLE, TO IMPEL THE PROGRESS OF OUR PEOPLES. The report of the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, according to the report of the Governor of Puerto Rico to the Secretary of War for the year 1920, shows that the property of this Island is valued as follows: urban property, $54,123,004; rural property, $54,123,004; rural property, $54,123,004; rural property, $54,123,004; rural property, $54,123,004; and rural property, $54,123,004.
| SABADO Y DOMINGO 1 Presentation of the brilliant tonadillera í -- PAQUITA ESCRIBANO | Saturday night show. New couplets. Price 75 ctvs. I Sunday: Matinee at 4:30. Great Female Afternoon Tanda $ couplets and his lecture theme "Sobra-lys men" T * ** Price: Lunettes numbered W - T Sunday Night: Great Gala performance with new couplets. and 3: Numbered Lunettes 75 ctvs. t
PARQUE BORINQUEN The cinema by the sea. Today. Saturday 11 Today. Mildred Harris at the Furst National drama: 'THE HABIT' (The Habit.) LUNET 20 CTVS. Tomorrow Sunday: ' "The Eternal Don Juan" (Occasionally Yours.)
Budweiser
MOON" CINEMA TODAY Matinee and Evening. TODAY i First day of "The Headless Horseman".
NAVIGABLE CANAL I NEW YORK, March 3.-The Delaware I and Raritan Canal has been opened yesterday * I to navigation. The canal extends from Borientotai to New Brunswick.
Mantecados Spoons j At $2.00 and $2.75 thousand, sold by Porto Rico Paper & Supply Co. Luna 76. San Juan, P. R.
E. R. SMITH Schooner WOOD currently unloading WE OFFER at unbeatable prices an attractive assortment which we guarantee to be of first quality If you are interested in good lumber that meets profitable conditions, please contact us before making your purchases. VILLAR & COMPANY INC, Telephone 1450 P. O. Box 201 SAN JUAN, P. R.
BEHN BROTHERS, INC. (FOUNDED IN 1906)
Agents of
-(Berwind White Coal Mining Co., Lancashire Insurance Co., Compagnie Generale Transatlantique, Windward Island Line, Pacific Argentine. Brazil l,ine ' La Veloce.
EL CONDADO-Venta de Solares. Esquina Tetuán-Tanca. San Juan, P. R.
German Neo Salvarsan manufactured by FARBWERKE VORM. MEISTER LUCIUS A BRUNNING HOECHST A MAIN Declared PURE and LEGITIMATE by the U.S. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH AFTER ANALYZED Imported under License No. 211836 by Pesquera & Pesquera, Inc. Telephone 561. Edificio Bouret. San Juan, P. R.
BONCE SPORTS CLUB
With the general cooperation of the Club Rotarlo de Ponce, who donated the sum of $100.00, the Club Deportivo de Ponce, by "ledio de la S.cción Ateneísta del misuáb, initiates the celebration of a contest of philosophical-social character. under the following conditions: the. The contest is open to all Puerto Rican residents and to all Puerto Ricans. All Puerto Ricans residing outside of the Island may submit their written works. 2a.- The works will be sent to the President of the Ateneis- . t" Section of the Ponce Sports Club, Mr. Frank de Porrata Doria, no later than April 30, 1922, when the deadline for admission ■ to the contest will be closed. The papers should be sent: (a) By mail; (b) Typed; (c) In quadruplicate; (d) With a single copy to facilitate later identification of the author; (e) Without a signature, name or any other sign revealing or indicating the author's name. 3a.- The essay or study in which the author develops his thought shall not be less than six thousand words nor more than twelve thousand; and the exact number of words contained therein shall be expressed in figures at the end of the work. 4a.- The author of the work that deserves the highest qualification will be awarded $100.00 and a diploma of honor; and the author of the work that follows in merit will be awarded $50.00 and a diploma of honor; the Jury of the contest reserves the right to award one or more honorable mentions to the authors of the works that follow in merit. 5a.- The Ponce Sports Club reserves the right to publish the awarded works. The Jury will be composed of members designated by the Ponce Sports Club; 7a.- The Ponce Sports Club reserves the right to declare the prizes void due to insufficient entries, in the opinion of the Jury, in the works presented. 8a. - Upon publication in our daily press, after April 30, 1922, of the titles and slogans of the awarded works, the respective authors must immediately send to the President of the Ateneista Section of the Ponce Sports Club their names and a fifth copy of the awarded work. 9a.- The theme of the contest is: "IN CONVENIENCE AND ADVANTAGES OF LUXURY"; The Ponce Sports Club hopes that the theme will deeply interest all those who are concerned with the study of social problems, and, in advance, extends the most cordial and expressive thanks to those who take part in the contest. Ponce, P, R., February 28, 1922. Frank de Porratu DORIA, President of the Ateneista Section of the Ponce Sports Club. Advt.
Teatro America Hoy Enorme Exito Hoy La estupenda obra de VICTOR HUGO en 7 actos, MARIA TUDOR Tanda vespertina, y por la noche a precios corrientes, siendo extraordinaria. It is pleated and lined buttons A. CARAZO, Brau St 72.
: Butter í "MORNING GLORY" - has no composition whatsoever, en- - traning only in its prepa- . ration fresh cream of the ' purest quality, without this being ' mixed from day to day. . FOR SALE BY: - . Colmado LuiñaL Colmado Font. Plaza Provision Co. Standard Grocery. - Distributors for P. R. i R. J. Delgado & Go. Tanca No. 2. Tel. 1104 San Juan.