ELMBNDO
8 pages 3 ctv", Semester, >4.00 A year,I7.W
i, L Pficlnug Salvador Brgu, VE : Tor, 533 P. O, Box 346
EX A.M. DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR IV. "fl"|
| SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
0 program of the Union repealed by the resolution to be presented today to the Party Assembly.
But the essence of liberty and sovereignty of the fifth base remain in all their splendid virtuality," says Ledo. Rafael Rivera Zayas
The Ledo. Rafael Rivera Zayas, prominent jurist and one of the most talented Puerto Ricans in our country's politics, made important statements yesterday regarding the Resolution to be presented at today's Unionist Assembly, and the results of the Campbell Bill. The eminent lawyer, with irrefutable arguments, demonstrates the importance of the bill and responds, thus to our questions Do you believe that the Resolution published in "La Democracia" eliminates the fifth base of the Union's program? -Yes, sir. The entire political program of the Union of Puerto Rico is repealed by that Resolution. But the essence of freedom and internal sovereignty of the Fifth Base remains in all its splendid virtuality in the new Resolution. What do you think about the aforementioned Resolution? -This Resolution is a political program defining an ideal that is the only one attainable and the most convenient to permanently crystallize the relations between Puerto Rico and the United States. It is the one which best fits the historical reality imposed by the fata) gravitation of a small, fio, people of different rasa, language and customs and of culture and personality definitely ■ xcrmadeB within the political and geographical orbit" of a large, powerful and different people in all its fundamental characteristics. Under this ideal of Free and Associated State and under this program, the small people will have its own personality and its own life, with the advantage that its external sovereignty will be linked and represented by a powerful Republic, which is today the most influential international factor and the most intense moral director in the political and economic movement of the world. With this ideal Puerto Rico is saved from the definitive death of its personality which will inevitably lead to the incorporation called for by the Republicans, as a dissolving process prior to its admission as a classic and incorporated State of the Federal Union. I am sure that the patriot! mo of the Union of Puerto Rico will enshrine this Resolution as its only political program and at the same time will strip the Republican Party of its power to dismantle it.
I FORMIDABLE EARTHQUAKES IN PANAMA (CABLE FRANCES) PANAMA, February 10.- Additional news from the district of Finoga- ( na in the province of Laron announce that numerous villages are suffering the effects of a strong earth tremor, which has caused numerous damages. The government has not sent boatloads of food and medicine to help those who are suffering.
Yesterday at five o'clock, as announced, the religious solemnity began in the Church of Santa Ana, on the occasion of the inauguration of the high functions of his office by Bishop Caruana. At the entrance of the church there was an arch with the inscription "Ana Maria Stella". In front of the temple, and next to the adjacent buildings, there was a crowd of ladies and gentlemen of the most distinguished of our society, among which were the Isabqjinas Ladies and the Knights of Columbus. On leaving the Church Monsignor (Continued on p. 6.) of the artificial and galvanic life which has been deriving from the gratuitous suspicions with which our adversaries interpreted the Fifth Base of our program. What about the Campbell Bill - I am in favor of the Campbell Bill, which is the result of the enormous fermentation of ideas in regard to our problem, aroused by the propaganda of the Unionist Commission in the United States, and the desire of this people to do us justice. This Bill defines once and for all the political status of Puerto Rico and as a system of government it offers the fundamental principles on which the Free and Associated State is to be based. It has its defects, as all human and experimental works, but it will surely undergo amendments that will improve it, and the defects that remain will gradually disappear as we demonstrate our capacity for self-government.
BEHN BROTHERS, INC. I " (HOUSE FOUNDED IN 1906) J BANKERS " / Berwind White Coal Mining Co. < \ \ Lancashire Insurance Co. Age is le Compagn e Generale Transatlantique. ? I Windward Island Line - Pacific Argentine. "Brazil Line La Veloce. " ' THE COUNTY - Sale of Land. "I Esq ina Tetuán-Tanca. San Juan, P. R. r <- Excursion to Venezuela jRANDES CARNIVAL FESTIVALS IN CARACAS Splendid opportunity for a short, economi- S S S S co interesting trip on the steamer CARACAS which will sail from San § Juan on the 17th of the present. § We request Correspondence I Sobrinos de Izquierdo & Co. Agents. - |
PabUdíed and dl.tribut.d inte p "nrt" (Mo. 801) rtthoriirt to the te" rt "etoter e, 1S1T, "a file rt tte Pert Otaca rt " ten Jnan, Porto Bico. By orter of the Prorttent, 8. Bw 1- on. P "rtat*rtor General. Bntereá m oeeond elaee Brttac, > fabrwy SI, 1818. rt the Port Office et fia* Joan, Porte Moa. United States ef tewriM ondee tte Art "f march 8. l "T8 r
THE UNION REAFFIRMS AND RATIFIES ITS DECLARATIONS OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CHARACTER.
At the Unionist Assembly c today the Ledo. Tizol will present the following motion: V PR CUATO, the Union of Puerto Rico is not only the defender of Puerto Rican dignity and personality, but also the guardian of the material interests of all Puerto Rico, and of the welfare and progress of our most numerous, most suffering classes, and most in need of bread and comfort. THEREFORE, THE PUERTO RICO UNION DECLARES: FIRST, That it reaffirms and ratifies its declarations of a social and economic character, as expressed in its Program of September 11, 1920, and recalls what it has done in the past in this respect as the best promise of what it has yet to do in the future. SECOND.-That he will use every means in his power and will use his best endeavors to obtain from the Congress of the United States and the Sas administration in Washington all such measures as may be necessary for that purpose. This motion has already been signed by many of the delegates who will attend the important political event.
EMERSON ARRIVES IN NEW YORK SERIOUSLY SICK James A. Emerson, ex-Senator of the State and receiver of the Hudson Navigation Company, was taken from the steamer Puerto Rico to the hospital in a very serious condition. Emerson had sailed for Puerto Rico some time ago with the purpose of regaining his lost health, which he had accomplished during his stay on this island, but within days of sailing he was again taken ill, and it was feared that he would die on board. THE TELEGRAMA ON THE CARTELS IN VEGA BAJA Mr. Bernard Silva informs us the following: "On Thursday a news item was published, taking as a basis a multiple telegram sent to all the newspapers of this capital, in which they wanted to make it appear that in Vega Baja they had appeared inviting the workers to come to San Juan, where a demonstration and rally would take place, in which Messrs. Reily and Iglesias would take part. It was further alleged that the case had been consulted with the Secretary of the Governor, Mr. Hull, who denied such a claim. 1 The genius of the case is that the signs in question were put up during the night by Unionist elements, in order to create difficulties for the workers. Such an alibi also gave rise to the Governor's circular on the agricultural strike." FIRE IN A CANAVERAL In the Bayaney neighborhood of Hatillo, in a cane field belonging to Don Enrique Marín a fire occurred, burning ten ropes of said plantation. The losses were estimated at two hundred dollars. The police investigated the case.
"Parque Borinquen" El Cine a Orillas del Mar , TODAY- Saturday 11 What's Worth While By the very famous Claire Windsor and Mona Lisa. Superb Paramount drama. 20 Cts. Merchants & Quincalleros One hundred thousand pesos worth of merchandise. See how they were acquired by M. Rodriguez & Co, Allen 75, on page 5 of this newspaper. Ja Hora Sounded The "Bill" Campbell, arrives on time. But EICHLER, he's on your time. Who's Eichler?
CUSTOMS CHIEF, MOORE, GIVES HIS OPINION ON BILL CAMPBELL'S STEEL MILL.
FEAR Q. WITH THE NEW "STATUS "NO BORICUA WILL BE PRESIDENT OF THE U.S.A. Yesterday we visited in his office in the Federal Building, the distinguished Chief of Customs, Mr. Moore, who, among other things, told us more or less the following: Customs, Mr. Moore, whom we asked for his opinion regarding the Campbell bill. Mr. Moore, among other things, told us more or less as follows: -No real progress can be made so long as laws are passed that cam well the name or designation, without nn change in present conditions. The desires and ambitions of a people cannot all be satisfied by legislation alone. For example, the designation of Puerto Rico as a "Free State" under the law will mean very little to the majority of the inhabitants of Puerto Rico. Not only that, but such a designation might be regarded as a very marked and definite territorial separation of Puerto Rice from the mainland of the United States; and perhaps that itself would lead to pregnant problems, as to whether citizens of the United States born in Puerto by reason of such birth, even after the island ' had been transferred to the United States, would be qualified to sfr THE CENIRAL BOARD HAS NOT YET CONTEEMED TO THE LUDO. L. SANTIAGO CARMONA Yesterday morning we greeted Mr. Carmona, chairman of the Workmen's Compensation Commission, and asked him if he intended to attend Saturday's meeting. Mr. Carmona told us that this was his idea, but that up to now he was undecided, since the Central Board had not sent him the data he had requested regarding his expulsion from the Party and which he intended to present for the consideration of the assembly, in accordance with the Union's Rules of Procedure. Mr. Catmona is willing to discuss his case before today's meeting, since, as he told us, he has the right to be told why he has been expelled from the Party, - ? In case the Board does not answer, then I will bring a notary to the assembly to draw up the minutes, recording the irregularity committed to my detriment," concluded Mr. Carmena. - .-->- -ir - CASA DE ESPAÑA EN PTO. RICO CENTRAL BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONVOCATION In compliance with the provisions of Article 13 of the clauses of Incorporation, I hereby and in the name of the Central Board of Directors that I have the honor to preside, convene the Ordinary General Meeting, which, (as agreed in the meeting held on February 27, d" 1921,) is to take place in the city of Mayagüez at nine o'clock in the morning of February 19, 19 of this year. The Assembly may only be attended by delegates of the Local Boards, provided they meet the conditions required by Article 24 of our Regulations. 1 San Juan, P. R-, January 13, 1922. Dionisio TRIGO. Vice-President. Advt. Victory Garden .Tomorrow Sunday in the second batch only 'The Three Musketeers' x > . the. day PRICES: 30.80 AND 30.20.
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 1922. I
THE PROSECUTOR FIGUERASRA-. YESTERDAY HE GAVE AN ACCUSATION OF DISBARTMENT AGAINST MR.TORMES.
Yesterday, at two o'clock in the afternoon, the prosecutor j Figueras, of the Supreme Court, filed before the said Court, a petition of DISBARTMENT, requesting the can criation of the title of attorney to Ledo. Leopoldo García, representative to the House of Representatives for the Republican Party, and resident of the city of Ponce. ZZ In said petition it is alleged that Mr. Tormes has committed several irregularities in the practice of his profession, which constitutes sufficient cause for the filing of said request. According to reports that have reached us, the Department of Justice is also investigating another analogous case, in relation to another lawyer and politician of this city who, if the facts alleged are true, will be subjected to the same DISBARTMENT process. TERRIBLE ACCUSATION I AGAINST LLOYD GEORGE (English Cable) DUBLIN, February 10.- The Irish leader De Valera has launched a manifesto in which he accuses Lloyd George of pursuing a policy of dividing Ireland into two antagonistic States. TIFASOR BATTLES ACTIVE MADRID, February 10.- The Tifasor bat- , ries have bombarded the : base of concentration of the Moors, dis persandolos. The offensive is continuing. In my opinion, a profound inlrstlcia comma; would be caused by other legislative niñlfclos of the present generation, if they were to establish such a "status" in Puerto Rico, making our future citizens, educated in American methods of action and thought, proscribed in the nation, of which we would always remain a part. -ó-,.? -I have read the proposed Camp| bell bill, and it seems to me* similar to other territorial legislation of the , old days. The word "State Li I bre," is a whimsical phrase All our states are "free states." The bill adds a few salaried positions in the budget and places some federal positions in the hands of local authorities. These are some of the easy-to-fix incompatibilities. However, I do not believe that this new law is an improvement on the Jones Act. We shall continue to have the same old Puerto Rico, but dressed in a new suit, which we shall get tired of as soon as it breaks down". FRANCE AND THE HISPANO-AMERICAN COUNTRIES PARIS, February 10.- The Government has expressed its astonishment that the Spanish-American countries have not been invited to the forthcoming Genoa Economic Conference. A protest will be made to the Italian Government. I'W Third Day of the great French work iMiir Twisted square rods SURPRISING PRICE Call or visit ROLAN & TEJEDOR Box 1356. Phone 395. Stop 2 112, San Juan, P. R. Advt. FOR SALE A 30 foot long, 29 foot keel and eight foot beam motorboat with a 15 horsepower "Buffalo" engine in superb condition. will report, Sobrinos de Portille, San Juan, P. R. It plisa forran buttons A. CARAZO, Brau St 72.
NUMBER 920.
Great optimism reigned yesterday among all the leaders of the Union Party in order to attend the Assembly.
It is expected that a complete unanimity of opinion will prevail at today's Assembly - Delegates confer with the Central Board / _____ VSKTV
| WASHINGTON, Feb. 10.- Senator Lafoyetto held a hearing with Senator Johnson of California on the Pacific treaty, to agree on the policy of opposition to be pursued by the two legislators when the treaty comes up for discussion in the Senate. A commission from the Municipality of Caguas, composed of Messrs. Chiqué, Jiménez, Torres and Berrios, visited Governor Reily, for the purpose of interesting him in influencing the Executive Council, so that it will pledge the good faith of the people of the Port in the contracting of a loan from the Municipality. According to reports, the Governor informed them that he would do everything in his power to "please them, especially since the Municipality of Caguas, according to what they had told him, was in excellent economic conditions. The commission took leave of the Goberna-: der highly satisfied with the cordial welcome they received from the -Chief of the Island Executive, DIED SUDDENLY J In the "Maleza" neighborhood of Naguabo, Valentín Nieves, 50 years old, died suddenly. Doctor Ramón A. Ríes certified that the death was caused by a heart condition. IN. THE "PUERTO RICO" CINEMA Next Monday will be exhibited the beautiful production "The Broken Door" by Bessie Barríscale and Margarite de la Motta. Although this admirable 'film* is extraordinary, it will be exhibited at current prices. "The Broken Door" has caused a sensation among those who have had the good fortune to see it in private exhibition.
- .lee"' Throughout the day of yesterday an infinite number of delegates from all the towns of the island have been arriving in this capital, for the purpose of attending the Assembly of the Unionist Party which is to be held today. As soon as the representatives of the Local Boards arrived, they went to the halls of the Senate, where they exchanged impressions with the members of the Central Board, who were gathered to know the mood in which the delegates were coming. Our editors exchanged impressions several times with several of the representatives of the island and with some members of the Central Board and the unanimous opinion of all of them is that in today's act, notwithstanding its importance and transcendence, a spirit of absolute harmony and concord will reign, among all the elements of the different tendencies that exist in the heart of the party. From the impressions gathered among some of them, we can assure that the Unionist party will leave the Assembly stronger and more united than before; such is the good will and patriotism with which the representatives to the Assembly are saturated. One of them expressed himself to one of our Editors in these or similar terms: - "We come ready to do all that is necessary for the good of the party and the country, no matter what the attitudes to be adopted and the paths to be followed. The present situation must be solved at all costs so that the prevailing abnormality may end and our affairs may be channeled without stumbling blocks or disturbances. On the other hand, it is necessary that we save at all costs the disaster that would mean for the country the obtaining by our adversaries of the power waves". - The Resolution published by "La Democracia" and which has been signed by radicals and conservatives, seems to have the almost unanimous endorsement of the Assembly. (Notwithstanding this, there are some other (Continued on page three) SALVARSAN ALEMAN LEGlíftdO We are informed by Dr. Lopez de la Rosa, that he has just received through the Pesquera and Pesquera sefiores, the famous SALVARSAN ALEMAN ILEGITIMO, which he makes available to the public, at extremely modest and conventional prices. *,
OLIMVO" THEATER
SATURDAY 11 ' Reappearance of the famous violinist Madame Thais and the beautiful film "La Calatea Moderna" in 7 parts. Success - No Missing -
SUNDAY 12 The beautiful production. THE UNCONQUERTABLE WOMAN in 7 actJ3 by the beautiful actress RUBYE DE REMER plus new numbers by the famous violinist Madame THAIS.
EL CONDADO El Condado is the only place dedicated exclusively to residences in San Juan. Healthy, fresh and with constant sea breeze. WE SELL houses and lots; houses for cash and lots for cash and installments. Behn Brothers hic, Agents Tetuan and Tanca. San Juan.