THE MONDO
f i ► i '10 pages 3 ctvs. ¡¡ Semester, $4.00. One year, $7*50.
Offices; J ! Salvador Brau, 81. '; Tsl. 833, P. O. Box 345. ¡ i" 1 j ■" ." .... - ... .. .
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (Mo. 801) eutjtrised by the Act of October 8 1917 on file at the Post Office oF Ran Jnan. Porto Rico. By order of the President. £ t Bar W, Puetmastee General. Entwed a. second el... ¿2tX febHiary SI. 1910, at Port Office at Rm Jnan, íünifd Rtatiw nf Americannrier the Act of march 8. 1879.
SATURDAY, MAY 27, 1922.
NUMBER 1009.
MOK INDEMNITY COMMISSION SUFFERS 0. IS VICUÑA OF SOPIADOS ATTACKS.
At his office in the Free Federation, we met Senator and Socialist leader Santiago Iglesias, with whom we had a long discussion on various economic and political questions. Among the issues Mr. Iglesias mentioned to us was the one concerning the Workers' Compensation Commission. Mr. Iglesias made a great praise of this organism, of which he expressed himself in the sense that it was one of the Laws that had more spirit of humanity. "I have heard it said by the detractors of that Commission - Mr. Iglesias told us - that 86 per cent. of its income is paid in salaries and only 14 per cent. in workers' compensation, a statement which I consider highly exaggerated, I therefore think it would be appropriate for you to record a "standart" of the aforementioned Commission, which would clearly specify the percentage which is destined to attend to accident claims and which is destined to pay the salaries". Mr. Iglesias continued his remarks by mentioning the fact, which he described as unusual, that the shipping companies did not pay the Workmen's Compensation Commission, on the grounds that they were not covered by the Laws of Puerto Rico. Mr. Iglesias then appealed to the fact that Puerto Rico was not incorporated into the United States and that, therefore, the laws of Puerto Rico are and should be applicable to those companies. The lawyers," the gentleman told us, "should study this question and raise it before the courts of justice, so that it will be possible to make it possible for the workers on the docks to obtain the benefits of the law. We have not yet been able to interview- ' us with the President of the Compensation Commission, to learn his opinion in regard to these questions í raised by Sanodor Iglesias; but we hope that they will be discussed at the next session of 'the ' Commission, and by that time we shall be in a better' condition to com- : pleasure Ja curiosity of Mr. Iglesias, who seems to show himself keenly interested in the life of this important Government agency, ' which is, in his opinion, what will give most benefit to the needy working classes of the country. - lidy RENE Sa is in San Juan on his way to Havana the famous imitator, ¡ transfonnizta and canzonetista Lldy Re ¡ né. Before embarking for the island, he intends to perform in several theaters of this capital and we have no doubt that his debut will be an artistic triumph, as attested by the numerous chronicles of important newspapers of the various countries he has visited. We hope to see him soon to ■ appreciate his artistic merits, and we are pleased to greet him wishing him good success. l4 rtlT ° TODAY. SATURDAY. TODAY. Grand Premiere Belle Bennett in Spirit and Matter . and grand concert by the Bros-Grandio-Alameda CURRENT PRICES * TOMORROW. - TOMORROW. Grand Matinal at 10 % A. M. Monster Program FRANK MAY in Mellow Tongues 'l l, and concert by the Bros." Grandio-Alameda In the evening the same program CURRENT PRICES Se piba y forran botonea A. CARÁZO, Brau St 72 ,
THE UNIVERSITY WILL CONFER UPON EMILIO DEL TORO THE TITLE OF DOCTOR IN MILD
The learned professor of the University, Mr. O'Reilly, had the courtesy to inform us yesterday that at a recent meeting of the Faculty it was unanimously agreed to recommend to the Board of Trustees the name of Ledo. Emilio - Toro Cuevas, Chief Justice * of the Supreme Court, to be conferred with the ■ honorary degree of Doctor of Laws. The ceremony, which promises to be most brilliant, will be held in the University's auditorium during the graduation exercises to be held on June 14, next Saturday, Mr. Del To' ro will be presented with a splendid banquet by the Faculty and members of the Board of Trustees, to be held at the Condado Hotel. THE MUNICIPALITY OF ARECIBO SOLD ITS BONDS DIRECTLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAW. Arecibo, May 26, 1922. EL MUNDO, * i San Juan. The Municipality of Arecibo, considering its bonds as municipal property, announced the sale of the same at public auction in newspapers in the United States and Puerto Rico. Deserted for lack of imitators, the municipal administration, respectful as always of the Law, agreed to sell its paper directly in the most advantageous manner for the public interest. I beg you, therefore, to exempt Arecibo from your public information given today with respect to the agreement of the Executive Council. Manuel LEDESMA. Public Service Commissioner. WEDDING AT PUERTA DE TIERNA Tonight at the San Agustín church will be the marriage of the esteemed young Miss Guadalupe Félix Sierra and Francisco Castro Abreo, who enjoy great sympathy in the said town. The church and its surroundings have been decorated for this event, which promises to be a most beautiful one, with a true display of art and good taste. May the angel of happiness spread its wings in the new home which will be fixed in Caguas. THE FACO WORSHIPPERS The police of Puerta de Tierra surprised the individuals Cándido Ferrar and Benito Agosto transporting two 11j trunks of rum, which was taken from them. Both were denounced. FURNISHED HOUSE. J Foreign couple request furnished house in SanturJ ce, to stop 44 or San , Juan. Call phone 962, Santurce. Advt. PROTECTION Motivated by the great demand that exists for the rubber 30 x 3'ó FISK PREMIER, we have run out of stock that we had in Puerto Rico and wanting to protect our clientele, we have decided to sell until further notice the rubber 30 x 3'4 BLACK NON-SKID at $15.50, MINUS THE CUSTOMARY DISCOUNTS. This way you buy for LITTLE MONEY, a high quality rubber. THE FISK TIRE STORE Adrian Nelson, Distributor. San Juan. Puerto Rico. We have just received an extensive assortment of Accounting Books. Check our prices PORTO RICO PAPER & SUPPLY Company - Luna 76 San Juan. P. R o "FARMACIA AMERICANA" Calle Loiza, Esq. Parque. Stop 44. Tel. 991. Santurce. Modern and guaranteed establishment, owner: LUCIANO RAMOS.
LLOYD GEORGE'S SPEECH TRANSLATED INTO A VIOLENT AGITATION AGAINST GOVERNMENT CHIEF BIERNO, WHO DID NOT ADMIT THE INTERPRETATIONS.
TALK OF MINISTERIAL CRISIS AND THE PROBABLE RESIGNATION OF LLOYD GEORGE RETURNS [
(United Press, via All America Cables) LONDON, May 26.-The House of Commons, which resumed its sittings today to follow up Lloyd George's speech on the Genoa conference, was the scene of turbulent scenes. The goo's chief's ene m'gos! .nn-> directed violent insults at him and there was a moment when the parliamentarians were on the verge of coming to blows. LONDON, May 26.-Mr. Lkyd George continued on the floor by pointing out the results of the Genoa conference and political relations with France. There he gave the Chief of the Cabinet to the agreement smoked between Rosta and Germany and said qvc said treaty with the reservations introduced in its text, constitutes a perennial threat to Europe. LONDON, May 26.-The situation has become more complicated in the last few hours.
T - l i on the occasion d" -the negative firmo of : Lloyd George * answer the.-i inteipcla ! 5 ctions. The President of the Cabinet has declared that on the eve of the Hague Conference there should be no political debate, since the Government must retain full freedom of action for the meeting of the Conference. It seems that in view of the statement made by the Head of the Government, some of the questioners have decided to postpone the debate, but remain unyielding. < I I I i LONDON, 26.-Notwithstanding the entreaties of iMr. Lloyd George there have ■ been presented# in the House of 105 Commons two demands for Interpela1on on the general policy of the go' government and its international policy of Genoa. As it is for the House to hear them and to fix the date for these intarpe laclons, which, moreover, have not, 1 it seems, the scope and importance which the other ' would have had, it is expected that !
It is expected that this afternoon they will be put to a vote, and if approved they will be acted upon immediately. s LONDON, May 26. Lloyd George, speaking on the subject, has stated that he abides by the vote of confidence given him by the House before the Genoa conference, and that he still considers unnecessary and inopportune any debate on the basis of political interpellations. LONDON, May 26.-The political situation that seemed somewhat cloudy was clarified today when the head of the government Mr. Lloyd George accepted the criterion of his opponents and consisted in answering the interpellations. Mr. Lloyd George set forth with all the necessary amplitude of facts and details the policy pursued by England at the Genoa conference and did so with such admirable precision and (Continued on page 6a.)
"-| THE BENEFITS. OF INDUSTRIAL REASON.
When we decided to assist the ' activity of our industrialists in the branch of tobacco processing, in the cigarette factory, we always believed that our consuming public would appreciate the reasons that would be put forward to obtain their aid in favor of the native industry which greatly needs it. Days have passed, and, indeed, the cigarette-consuming public has changed both its mind and its procedures, deciding in favor of aid to our own. I In the most recent report rendered by the Department of Agriculture and Labor, we find the following paragraphs, which may be said to be an immediate consequence of our attitude toward the public protection which we have been requesting for our industries.
? The aforementioned report says: "The general state of business on the island is tending to normalize. From a few days if estj> ha s" have been received <®munfolBM®*W*e*e?tte'TSepari tamento coming -from different points of the Island sending completely encouraging reports Nb 'there is no doubt that the efficient campaign carried out in the press in benefit of the native Tobacco Industry has obtained satisfactory results. The whole country has cooperated in the noble campaign to raise one of the main industries, which was on the way to failure. ' ' ! We are pleased with these manifestations of the aforementioned Department, because they say that we have not plowed, as it is commonly said, in the sea. The country needs someone to guide it, not only in its governmental administrative order,
j but in the painful path of daily life, showing it where it can make regrettable stumbles and how it can avoid them. . - We believe we can fulfill a sacred rfhsfo'n, by helping the people to have many industries; to protect, defend and maintain those which they now have in small numbers. The cigarette > our needs help and it is the duty of the consuming public to lend it whatever they demand, since it benefits the people in general and especially the working classes and commerce. They are the people who love what is theirs and defend what is theirs, and protect what is theirs, those who live well and those who enjoy a certain well-being. These are the peoples who keep what belongs to them and make continual progress. | Let us do the same, if we want "1 I ours also to walk along such a bri- . liant path.
González Padin Co. --- Always on the Dial SOCKS AND MESH SOCKS THIN RIBBONS IN RETAZOS. New colors, new patterns aca- Large 2% yds. great variety bados to receive, at current prices. of heats, all widths, worth more 49c. 89c. 99c. V' $ 1.50 ' give 90 cts. one. -- at 65 one to choose FORAMA WALLETS LAMAKA BELTS AND NECKLACES. NEW. (.new scents, varied shapes that New models all very nice and just arrived at reduced Jirecios. in all colors finished 75, 98, 1.25 V* 1.00 arrive. * 25c 50c 75c v* $1 00 N^2vo B ?Jri?o S nnííí A ?. RAS - GIRLS' SUITS AND New sutndo, new and nice co - CHILDREN t t án 8 "úTrvi ra \ n ec New styles, finished to receive, 4>j.uU $5.00 a large assortment, low prices. JAPANESE KIMONAS FOR ' $I "50 $2.00 $2.50 $3.50 LADIES. ' - b'YEAR SUITS. All on bargain during this se- "P| ira ladies, Gentlemen and Boys, the mana, beautiful colors in all the best assortment on the island. sizes. from 98c. for ladies 98c. $1.48 1.98 jr $2.96 from 50 for men Gonzalez PadiirCo. Inc. SANJUAN. PONCE. MAYAGÜEZ.
"PARQUE BORINQUEN" Today. super-special program. COSMOPOLITAN PRODUCTION Presents: El Interior del Cáliz "The Inside The Cup" 8 acts. A Paramount Picture (English and Spanish titles).
To the Ladies! Corresponding to the request of some of the elegant ladies of "El Rubi" I am pleased to inform you that from today I can offer you an exquisite service of Coffee, Chocolate and Sandwiches. Try them and you will be one of our best customers. "EL RUBI. Salvador Brau 32. Phone 807.
Victory Garden Tomorrow. SUNDAY. Tomorrow. "Home without Children" Vibrant and powerful drama, which raises a vital question for all men, and in a singular way, for all women: The longing to be a mother. "THE ETERNAL STORY OF HUMAN EGOISM".
At yesterday's session the Executive Council approved the ordinance of Adjuntas providing for a loan of one hundred and fifty thousand dollars, as well as the ordinance imposing a special assessment of sixty of one percent on the assessed valuation of the property for the amortization of said loan. -The salaries of the employees in the office of the Adjutant General were approved. At the close of the meeting of the Board, the special committee, appointed for the purpose of considering the provision of the Board on the sale of bonds at public auction of those municipalities which passed their borrowing ordinances prior to the enactment of the new Municipal Law, met. i The matter was discussed within the aforementioned Committee, and will be reported on at the next meeting of the Executive Council. i The aforementioned Committee, after discussing the matter at length, resolved to call the promoter of the matter, Mr. Vélez Alvarado, for Monday, so that he may report on the reasons he has for the Council to repeal the agreement. THE IRISH LEADERS HAVE ARRIVED IN LONDON LONDON, May 26.-The Irish leaders Messrs. Griffith and Duggan arrived in this capital today, and immediately went to confer with the head of the Government and the Ministers who were in Council. The conference dealt with the recent agreement signed between De Valera and Collins. i Tomorrow' Michael i CARMEN FERRBR DE tJONZALEZ J ■ ' On the 20th of the present, at 5:30 in the morning, and after receiving the Holy Sacraments, died in the city of Arecibo, the very cultured and vir- j tuosa lady, Carmen Ferrer de Gonzalez. The death of the referred lady, has: been generally felt, because she enjoyed great sympathy, being related to families of this capital, among them that of the Pruna Ferrer spouses. I Our deepest condolences to her bereaved family and may the Maker give them the necessary resignation to bear such a great loss. TODAY. - SATURDAY TODAY. The production which has obtained I : so far the most de-"! finitive and resounding triumph in the island, i ! "BLOOD AND LOVE" where Corsica opens, like a red carnation, in a drama of passion and revenge, before the eyes of the spectators. Giusti Program. IMPORTANT NOTICE We hereby advise 1 the Doctors and Pharmacists , of the country, that we have just received SALVASAN legitimate "GERMAN", the prices of which we will quote on request. All sizes are available. Diego Agueros & Co. Box 16. Phone 675. 60 Allen St., San Juan, P. R. PARIS POINTS (ALL SIZES) Quality - Price -- Service Holán, Tejedor & de Hostes Box 1356. Phone 395. San Juan, P. R. "CINE LUNA" i HOY Matinee and Evening. TODAY ( Premiere in Puerto Rico of the ' beautiful drama in 5 acts, "BODY WITHOUT SOUL" | Current Prices. '
IMHK SHAN SUMMONED TO A MEETING OF ALL THE WARDEN OF THE ISLAND.
The Committee appointed to study the industrial plan of the Department of Agriculture, where, as our readers will recall, joint meetings have been held between that Department and members of the Chamber of Commerce, the Federation of Leagues, and the other Departments. The report rendered by the said Committee refers to the plan to be followed for the organization of the internal market of the island, with the object of having all the foodstuffs produced in the country, which at present are imported and which can, however, be produced here. ? According to our reports, the Chamber of Commerce has enthusiastically welcomed the project of the Department, ' and proposes to work in cooperation i with it, for the encouragement and preparation of native products, ' so that they will come to market pre- ■ seated in the best possible manner, subject to the standards, adoptai, two by the Island Trade and that of 'Jjl I ¡ the United States. The referred plan of organization > is vast, it seems, and today the purpose of convening all the Comi- ¡ sionados of ptblieo service of the is- - I I I la in order that to the i construction of covered and uncovered markets, and thus imprint ■ greater impetus to the new plan, which counts, among other" things, with ' the construction of good country roads, to facilitate the transportation of the fruits. For the greater success of the enterprise the aid of the Ejei- cutjvff and the Legislature will be needed, which will be requested in due course. DON RIOARftO HMÜQUERA Coming from the United States, the distinguished gentleman and active businessman Don Ricardo R. Pesquera, partner of the reputable commission house "Pesque ra y Pesquera," has arrived in this chapter. Our excellent friend Don Ricardo, has spent a long season in the metropolis on business affairs, having achieved the greatest successes in the negotiations that brought him there. EL MUNDO sends a cordial greeting of welcome to the sympathetic friend, Mr. Pesquera. I In Vega Alta, a spark that flew from a piece of reed from the Central Carmen, fell on a hut, burning it completely. TÑiroAméijra ADAMS NIEVA COMPANY today today GREAT SUCCESS LAST TIME The Great drama second part of La Mujer X entitled "Evangelina" Tomorrow Matinée at 4 P M. "Amores y Amoríos" In the evening "La Malquerida" | Farewell of the Company PARQUE BORINQUEN TODAY. Saturday. TODAY. PREMIERE "El Interior del Cáliz" '(The Inside of the Cup.) With an all-star cast. Matinee at 3:30 PM. M. "THE THREE MUSKETEERS" Adults 15 cts. Children 10 cts, Mañasa Sunday: "The Easy Life'' x _ (The Easy Road.) J
TODAY,