THE WORLD
i i i i i i i i i i i i i i j i-t-i ill ¡ ; 14 pages for 3 cents. ; ;; Semester- $4.00 A Ufo, $7.50, i...... ■
I *1111! IIH-M-MH-IMI III Oficinal ; Salvador Brau. 8T. ; -Tel. 1222. P. O. Box 345.Í
MORNING PAPER, EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
YEAR IV,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published end distributed tinder permit (Mo. 801) ftntWised by the Aet of October ", 1017, on file at the Post Office of San Juan, Porto Rico. By order of tha President. A S. Bur leson. Postmaster General. Entered aa second elaaa matter. febmary 21, 1919 at the Post Office at San Joan, Por|g. Ki eo, (United State, of America) under the Act of march 8. 1879.
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 16, 1922.
NUMBER 1181. j
Dr. Osborn was examining the different crosses yesterday, using a special microscope.
The Republican lawyers had in their possession copies of some photographs which they took of different crosses, similar to those which are the subject of the expert examination.
Throughout yesterday, the examination and analysis of the ballots in the election lawsuit in this city by expert witness Dr. Osborn continued in Judge Foote's private chambers. Mr. Osborn continued to take fo- i t ographs of numerous ballots, and in the afternoon proceeded to the minute analysis of each of the crosses on the ballots, using for this purpose a special double-lensed microscope, through which, we are assured, it is easy to observe the minutest features of the hands, as well as the fibers of the paper. During the examination of the ballots Mr. Osborn repeatedly conferred with Mr. Guerra Mondragon, and the Republican lawyers took careful note of the number of ballots being portrayed, yesterday's having amounted to twelve or thirteen, and also noted down any important details they observed, perhaps for the purpose of using them in their favor when the report of the suit is offered in evidence. Although the work which Dr. Osborn has been "smoothing out is extremely laborious, and is further delayed by the fact that for the disclosure of the plates he has to go back and forth from the Court to the Photographic Gallery, we have reports that within a week it is almost probable that he will have finished his work and be in a position to issue his report. There is real public anxiety to know the opinion of the authoritative expert to the extent that daily the representatives of the press are besieged by the public who preHOY SUCCESS TODAY "CÍeo la Francesita" - WITH - Mae Murray Monte Blue Prices: Matinee Over 35 Children 25 Evening Over 60 Children 35 Victory Garden SATURDAY DECEMBER 16 Premiere of the 2nd day of the beautiful film, " The Son of the Night TOMORROW SUNDAY - Success Assured 6 acts of Hilarity. The Bey of Laughter HAROLD LLOYD "Lnquitas" in his best 6-act comedy "EL CONSENTIDO DE ABUELITA" Three showings at 4:00, 7 1'2 and 9:00 p.m.
We can only say that at no time while we have attended Dr. Osborn's examination have we been able to ascertain from him whether or not he has made any statement or advanced any judgment as to whether or not there is any fraud in the work of Dr. Osborn. We can only say that at no time while we have been attending to Dr. Osborn's examination have we been able to detect in him the slightest indication that would lead us to predict what his final opinion will be. Immediately we approached the aforementioned gathering and indeed, there were Messrs. Feliú, Tous Soto, Geigel, Bazán, Sifre and some others that we do not remember. On the table there was nothing of portraits, but a few moments later in (Continued on page 6a.) BL NOISY SUCCESS OF LAST NIGHT Can be noted Uq more success the Rialto Theater after last night's 4eTrePíRunfo with the incomparable tape "dejuxe" "Cleo, la Francesita". In spite of the rain, the first run was sold out, besides the fact that the price of the tickets was the highest ever paid for any film in Puerto Rico, after "The Four Horsemen". All the artists who take part in this film are worthy of special mention, besides Mae Murray and Monte Blue, and we can assure you that no film has been seen here with more luxury and greater expense. The public's favor in this case seems to us to be justified in the extreme. Today this film, worthy of being seen by all, is repeated at the Rialto. ' NTBELUNGO. I TLf NERVES! R n cure them and procure yourself a W .*■ good sleep, using of the S H best, safest and most H V/ harmless .of all ■/ painkillers, of the VB !í v "knoll" *11 IV in glass tubes of 2J Zg BV tablets, the success of which millions of ggy cases have corroborated. Effects at 2(7 jg| . minutes after taking In M K each package there are ins" ■ E| i tractions for use. ■ S i Every good pharmacy ■ : dispenses Bromural K Great discounts on all of their own items for Christmas gifts at Felix Lopez Jewelers Rings, watches, silver bags, buckles.
Cinema Puerto Rico TODAY -- SATURDAY TODAY THE 4TH DAY OF THE "MAN OF THREE FACES" TOMORROW SUNDAY:- Premiere in Puerto Rico of the lo. and 2nd. Episode "El Genio de las Tinieblas" and a comedy grao and Variety by the well known Duet "LES TRIANON'' Prices:- 15 and 20 Cts.
The horrifying scene that occurred yesterday morning at the dock of Mr. Benitez Rexach.
One man succumbs tragically, when two boats collide, and another was relatively badly injured.
Yesterday, at eleven o'clock in the morning and in the Marina de San Juan was recorded a scene of those who, so tragic, pro-1 ducen the most absolute stupor among the spectators, and bring the deepest mourning at home. We refer to the unfortunate event that occurred on the dock of Mr. Benítez, who came to "catch the lines".
We refer to the regrettable event that occurred at Mr. Benítez's dock. IN A YOLA i In order to "catch the ropes", the individuals Antonio Fuente and Luis Quiñones left in a yacht. The pe-
- Quiñones, who could only swim, jumped into the water, managing to save his life by a miracle. The blows ' he received in various parts of his body were caused by the propeller of the steamer, when he came to the surface, after having disputed his life to fate, swimming under the water. The other, the hard-working Fuentes, could not swim. Sensing the tragedy, as we are assured, he tried to climb over the side of the schooner nearby, but was unable to do so. Hanging from the gunwale, he was caught by the iron mass of the "Governor John Lind", which, on colliding, broke his body into pieces, which fell into the water. THE GUARD PEREZ . I - 1 1 1 The guard Leonardo J. Perez was the first to arrive at the site of the occurrence, and after learning of what had happened, he notified the District Attorney. THE REMAINS HAVE NOT APPEARED T d The remains of the unfortunate Fuentes, at the time of writing these lines, have been found, except for a certain part of the thorax floating in the sea, and some fragments of the skull and the encephalic mass, which remained adhered to the sides of both boats. The dinghy that Fuentes and Quiñones were on was smashed to pieces. Among its wood, one of our editors was able to see some pieces of clothing, property of the unfortunate Antonio. TO HOSPITAL í Luis Quiñones, who as we said before, received some blows, was immediately admitted to the hospital, where he has improved somewhat. THE AUTHORITIES Witnesses belonging to both vessels have been called to testify about the unfortunate event we have just described. The alarm, on the occasion of this unfortunate event, has been immense. It is believed that the accelerated speed of the "Governor John Lind." was the cause of this tragedy. i - PARK TODAY SATURDAY TODAY Grand Opening, "GRANDMA'S BOY" by Comedian Wizard HAROLD LLOYD (LUQUITA) TOMORROW SUNDAY INNOCENCE CULPED (The Long Lane's Turning) Dec. 30.-"Peacock Alley" by MAE MURRAY , GOMAS "BELL CORD" r Those that give best results r in our climate. Ask for prices to A. BETANCES & CO. i- Exclusive Representative. SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO. Advt.
■Ar f- M -J/W h 1/ ■ bsx I m \ G*1 A / í *y The schooner "Melbourn P. Smith" and the steamer GovtFiTW John Lind", to which duals we make reference in the course of this information.
Rexach, and in which, as a result of the collision of the steamer ' ' Governor John Lind" against the schooner "Melbourn P. Smith", was tragically killed the individual Antonio Fuentes, j and with injuries of relative importance his companion of fatigues Luis Quiñones. The details of the incident are as follows: THE "POVERNOE JOHN LIND" ' The "Governor John Lind", is an American cargo steamer, belonging to the "Baltimore Line'', and lately arrived at our port. Yesterday morning this ship, for the purpose of unloading a manure brought from the United States, decided to dock at one of the sides of Mr. Benitez Rexach's dock, where the schooner ''Melbourn P. Smith'' was anchored at the time. When the ''Governor John Lind'' came within reasonable distance of the wharf, orders were given for someone to saTEATRO LIBERTY Tomorrow Sunday ''The Storm'' Colossal success by House Peters. Prices:-35 and 25 Cts. "MUSIC FOR THEATRES!" Latest releases for Orchestra OR Piano received. Also Pianola rolls. Write BORINQUEN MUSIC CO. Box 661. San Juan, P. R. Advt. Good News A good number of retailers have just received new shipments of PET brand Unsurpassed Evaporated Milk by the latest steamer of Bull Insular Line, Inc. Order it at your grocery store today. Try it and be convinced of its excellent quality.
The small vessel stood alongside the schooner, waiting for the lines to be cast from aboard the steamer. The "Governor" continued to advance. According to our reports, the steamer was marching rather rapidly towards the wharf, and had to pass the schooner, which was anchored in the foreground. On board, surely, they did not measure well the distance that should be left between one and the other ship, and the "Governor John Lind" went against the schooner, violently, producing the terrible collision. j QUIÑONES SABIA NADAR ' > The yola had not been able to leave between the two ships, and when already the peULTIMA HORA "*■ A LAS CENTRALES DE PUERTO RICO . According to the Associated Press Cable of December 13, the Central "Estrella" of Camagiiey, Cuba, has been blown up by the explosion of one of the ! CALDERAS being many damages, personal and to property, which has ccasoned. We are willing to insure your ■ CALDERAS responding for personal accidents and property damage. Being cautious is a GIFT of intelligence. Insure your Cen- ¡ tral's BOILERS TODAY. Maryland Casualty Co. offers you its services. For inquiries: Maryland Casualty Co., Costa & Santini, General Agents, Victor Braegger, Mag. Ins. Depf. Nova Scotia Bldg., Bouret Bldg., Telephone: 1282-1560. San Juan, P. R. Advt.
Great Aguinaldo to the Public! It is offered by "LA ESTRELL A", Sal vador Brau 41, with the price reduction on all the articles it sells.
The Federal Court will consider whether it has jurisdiction to grant U.S. citizenship to Puerto Ricans who are not U.S. citizens.
To the Puerto Ricans who renounced it when the Jones Act was implemented here. Soldevila briefed the Court for an hour and the Judge reserved his decision.
Yesterday it was argued before the Federal Court by Ledo. Soldevila, the application for admission to U.S. citizenship filed by Mr. E. B. Rodriguez, who is one of the portorxiqueflos who renounced said citizenship within the six-month term established by the Jones Act, upon its implementation in Puerto Rico. As our readers may recall, this case was brought before the Court last Monday, but at the request of the attorney for the Aryan petition, the Judge granted a period of time which expired yesterday at 4:00 p.m., to study the matter. The Judge's criterion in this matter is that the Court has no jurisdiction to grant American citizenship to those who have previously renounced it, because, in the opinion of the said official, since these persons do not enjoy any citizenship, their STATUS sóMUSSOLINI SAYS THAT NOTHING HAS HAPPENED BETWEEN ITALY AND YUGOSLAVIA...... (United Press, via All America Cables) ROME. Minister Mussolini has declared, answering the questions of several journalists, that the relations between Italy and Yugoslavia are very cordial, adding that nothing has ever happened between the two governments. Mussolini denied the news published by the London press that diplomatic relations between Rome and Serbia were on the point of breaking down. A TRADE TREATY BETWEEN FRANCE AND CANADA PARIS, December 15.-A trade treaty has been signed between France and Canada, giving both governments mutual facilities for export and import trade. TOMORROW SUNDAY ~ The grandiose production dedicated to the ladies of Puerto Rico "Corazones Humanos' f We bet that no other theater today will exhibit a production of the caliber of Corazones Humanos 5 TANDAS 5 I ZINC ACANALADO Y LISO Cumbreras-Canales Quality - Price -i Service Rolan, Tejedor & de Hostos Apartado 1356. Tel. 395-200 San Juan, P. R.
The Court has stated that it could be resolved by virtue of an Act of Congress, which would cover such extremes. However, the Judge stated that his criteria is subject to rectification, and if the interested parties demonstrate to him that the Court has jurisdiction to grant the citizenship they now request. Mr. Soldevila briefed for an hour, differing his opinion from that of the Court; he provided the Court with copious case law on the subject, and stated that by virtue of the Naturalization Act, passed by Congress in 1906, Puerto Ricans do not have to renounce, upon becoming American citizens, their allegiance to any foreign sovereign or King, since by means of that legislation the sons of the country will pledge their allegiance to the American people. Ledo. Soldevila cited several cases, demonstrating that the said. The 1906 Act was made expressly for Puerto Ricans and Filipinos, and being in force, as it is, the case of the natives of the island who renounced their American citizenship, "is covered by it, so that the Federal Court," said the lawyer, "may grant to those Puerto Ricans their American citizenship. Mr. Soldevila gave a history of the Act that confers jurisdiction to the Court to hear such cases, and after citing numerous case law to that effect, he called the Court's attention to the fact that the Jones Act in one of its sections also confers power to the Court to rule on that issue. The Judge took note of the case law and other documents cited by Mr. Soldevila and announced that he reserved his decision. Let the Dance Continue Check our prices and do not buy before talking to us. Nougat Alicante "Eoselló" la. Can .... .65 Sobresada Mallorquína. Pound ... .90 Marzipan Cadiz Spanish Legitimate. Pound . .... 1.00 Marzipan Toledo Spanish Legitimate Spanish Marzipan Case of 3 Lbs. One ..., 3.00 Assorted French Bonbons. Pound .... 1.25 ! Catalan Sausages Can 95 Catalan Sausages Can ...... .95 We will be posting prices for all the items we have. COLMADO FONT Sues, de F. Font & Hermano ♦ "Rjeal" Y ¿TMontecarlo TODAY SATURDAY TODAY The grandiose production that has so far broken all the "records" in the United States "The Storm" I No faite to that eventf
BASE BALL LIGA INSULAR PARADA 8. TWO SENSATIONAL CHALLENGES Sunday, December 17, 1922-10:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. <^/layaguez f vs. 'BostoiiStars' Inauguration of the great American Boricua season, where the "fans" will have the opportunity to see true stars of the North American "Base Ball**. The ninth MAYAGÜEZ will be presented with its old line up. -A la Liga de la ocho, on Sunday.