ELWNDO
8 pages 3 ctv". -arnaatr", *44M Ua¿U47Í"
htró Mf " ríAa - w e a w * - - - >. 1. a - - -
MORNING NEWSPAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
■ ¡ I ' a' A* ***- 4l1 ' i
-"/i UAN, PUERTO RICO. * '* z ' * . -
Jt e - o< .r fj. ísis. o< | Ran Juan. Porto Rico. B" ordor of rtie Provident. A. 8. ButXeson, Postmastag General. second class matter,* I februarv 21. 1919. at the Poet* Office at* Ran Jaan. Porto (United Stafts of of march 3. 1879 | ■ .- ..r ' r 1 ... ■■ ■ Ñ" ' - 'Oau. ■-
r- ■ . 4 ■ ■ SATURDAY, APRIL 1, a®i- __/J
RtNUMERED 9"1V.7" ¿
|Lr formidable huello da iberos semtidirad'a today.
) 4 " W 1 - ME. JA \ LAST HOUR }**' a b r 'l 1 - a ma ' KLZ ¿¿a). The Sqpretary of Labor ■renunciarlo has se■JÍros reports that boy will be declarad} the ■Juelga of miners-4e the Pennsylvania carVboniferous region. CARGLINA TRIUMPH IN THE PONCE TOURNAMENT t ' * Ponce, March 31/>922. ■ THE WORLD, ♦ W I San Juan, P. R. Carolina, triumphed class "C't." games. ■ Se' broke seven* records- ResultaIdo parolina 89, Arroyo 22, Coamo 9- ■ Huyke president- Much anima-, ■ tion. Three bands music. I, ♦ ' José A. BAX8EIRO, Correspondent | I 7, LODO. JOSE R. (¿UlfWJNES' I Be is quite improved from Blencla that for some days retuVo*en him ¡ our distinguished eljo. Bven lawyer, licensed ai ■Sones, one gives the elements dejpáí worth -% nuejti good Tfo8e¿ai." - I THE WORLD< s^nte-inmense joy ■ü consign estMdriraa, since licenci ai Ofitfiq" e! fie our besta■es friends. I-- ■ t Mr I I TODAY i I Ua-film more I loítfteL nffMg.>n*n cé" tama.tjírteltt níujer másala ~ae™ ■ tos United States f Body and Soul' ■ Don't miss that wonder!
The U.S. Attorney's office is conducting a major investigation. The U.S. Attorney's office is conducting a major investigation.
According to our reports, Judge Sallar and Mr. P. M. Cox, of the United States Attorney General's office, have lately arrived in San Juan for the purpose of conducting an investigation in connection with the ? 4 The fiBull Lina," according to our notices, claims from the Federal Government the sum of $107,000 for services rendered to the transport during the voyage of the steamship ''Cornelia''. This bar eo| *worked hard making repeated efforts until the desired success was achieved, it being reported that the exce. Uente' assistance rendered by the ''Cornelia'' was what saved the ''Northern Pa .qific'' from becoming a wreck among the rocks that held her. Nevertheless, the "Northern Pacific", when she ran aground off the "Morr%" she was carrying on board the illustrious General Pershing, seems to have been unfortunate, for in addition to that incident, it is reported that the "Northern Pacific" was burned several weeks ago off the coast of the United States, when she ran aground off the "Morr%". On that occasion the "Northern Pacific" was not seriously damaged, nor was the Commander of the "Northern Pacific" blamed for the accident. On the report to be rendered at Washington by Mr. Salify and Mr. Cox, may the solution of this matter, which is now the subject of a part of the said proceedings, depend? T)OííA ANA RÜQUÉ DE DUPRBY '.At her residence in Eío Piedras is ill the distinguished sefiora doña Ana Roqué de Duprey. EL MUNDO wishes the notable writer a speedy recovery.
NOTICE TO THE OWNERS OF RTOmVILES - "OVERLAND" ' "WILLYS*KNIGHT" We are pleased to announce that we have been appointed representatives for the entire Island of the John N. Willys Export Corporation. " . > We wish to make it known that we already have in our possession a large assortment of spare parts □for the OVERLAND 4, 61, 69, 71, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, B3-B, 84, 84-B, 85-4, 86, 88-4, 88-6, 89 and 90. We would also like to advise those of you who have ordered these magnificent and economical cars that the first order of these cars will arrive in the first half of April. Brunel Saenz & Co. San Juan, P. R., March 27, 1922. Tel. 1057, Alien 92. -c-i- - 1 - BEHN BROTHERS, INC. (HOUSE FOUNDED IN 1906) BANKERS , S Berwind White Coal Mining Co. Lancashire Insurance Co. Compagnie Generate Transatlantique. Windward Island Line - Pacific Argentine. Brazil Line La Veloce. EL CONDADO - Sale of Land. Tttuán-Tanca corner. ' San Juan, P. R.
The District Court found Mr. Willis Sweet! acquitted of the offense of contempt ■ - -- a -
At lis two o'clock yesterday afternoon the District Court of this city, first district, presided over by the Hon. Jujz Charles EFoote, was constituted to hear the contempt case against the editor of the English section of the "El Ticntpo," Mr. Willis Sweett, on the grounds of contempt of court. Willis Sweett, on the occasion of an article he published on the 17th of this month, in which he made some comments in relation to the actions of the Grand Jury in a very important investigation being carried out by the aforementioned organization. Defendant Sweett appeared, assisted by his attorney, elvli 4 eenciado DAter. Prosecutor Diaz tdllazo sustained the, indictment. After lectuni h was given the order of the Cbrte* to post, cfiüsq, t of the constestacióp which to the same was timely filed by 61 interested, jl LcHo. Dextír made of the p Jabra, expgc sártiose in t in-J , glés,> ■ ' He began by speaking of the ¿ualid®-/ des and merits personates that hdor-,1 naban al sejiot dé qqién di-J jo que hajgía* resided so long! in the island, that necessaryKiente'íltényiJ to feel as much if not 'more affected, 1 than he could "eñtir j>pr tados Unidos* * ♦ ♦ ♦ He spoke of all the dragos\de ,gon-' fianza and lifibía dí fen<ido in the .Estados Unidos and island V|manifestó qut* in all^los had "condticijo always as' im perfect 'ciiídada- - of the priego biteiestar i of this land and and y" ?*ferentqi with all the 'inst^tud Mr. Dorter said that he did not par ticipate in the same political idois of Mr. Sweett, but that he recognized in him a true advocate of the betterment and progress of the island,rasi as well as a fervent love for the , "And this is easily explained-- ► - , ■ added Mr. Déxter. We are all Americans, and our nation does not need to be protected and defended, but Puerto Rico does need our protection and our help, and I can say emphatically that Mr. Sweett has been in Puerto Rico the champion of the movement to get as much affection for the island as possible from our great nation and from those of us who live here with the good and kind Puerto Ricans. He said that after his God and his religion, there was nothing that commanded more respect and consideration than the Courts of Justice and that he was sure that Mr. Sweett had the same feeling and that "for that reason he doubted that in the mind of his defendant, he had the least intention of incurring in contempt of Court. "The paragraphs under discussion and he explained to the Court how Mr. Sweett, in the said article, had been in contempt of the Court. The paragraphs under discussion and explained to the Court how Mr. Sweett, in that article, has done nothing more than to realize the honor- : bility and respect that the institution of the Grand Jury deserves, calling the public's attention to the fact that it should in no way hncer co- ; 'Cine Puerto Rico' ! Presents today : A Man's Home ; by six stars and "Cásate y Verás" , , By Luquitas. ,,, By Luquitas. Special program of ■ SELECTION FILM SERVICE.
The film was not only a film about the deliberations of such onanism, but also about trying to bind its delicate and serins lbs yBrbeRjnos JHtuacimnes so delicate and serins yBrbeRjnos politics. * He said finally that for some time the country has seen the* 1 ¥" has seen vtsando a ven *dfera confusion and disorientation regrettable, due to' the political a* ontecimienW, which at last seem to have t^y "mo jgpn ¡ the abraZb of Saláwtg, eñ qtte "lqs <fos powers more a|tol dfl *paffc, which táK ' acerbically Se yitlcaron, dbppp er t ' the arnica and #e "arestan to realize Í'en d . What - tai Vez tc&is .these things Ihajsan -anormal situation; v Di jo Olía apLudi'aJla pGrand Jury $ Fftcal, to tr "4ar We arelar |6r and the qlspe>o of the referftlkJM" mf "mó,' but that ■wanted 4ue should -pon njderarsebpsifr cpretjón permanent3G "snte, n6 that by yn ex pjbso of cejjd of a fuérh law, t' an injusjuscj *íeñfc t; Swe€tt. ■HeI termídl request be wfIgjan; to his of 1 Sfcido. A > J, Use of the floor the Oiiptófegto nmo that L ittorcaíD. 1 * j* ' ñu <10 ¿ñmarwn- 1 mátieas automobiles pregirn-' tar to whom they belonged fuimor informa two that were for Mr. A "Rivero Chaves and Ce.", of this cLity. For not having dedicated before this finna to such business>fuimo3 to visitlte mos sincerely that what h<n brought these gentlemen ¿ to the eT a!0 'ente-1 ramente unknown, and in a word, lo mejoréue has been imported d$ Puerto Rico from the here. This rubber is called "Lee" and its superiority over the others lies in the fact that, being pneumatic like the others, it is not emptied by nails or any other sharp material. Moreover, this rubber has the privilege of giving a much greater travel than any other, for it is composed of fourteen layers, three of which are protected by a metal nipple, which prevents the nail from reaching the tube. Our friends showed us a certificate, which they will give to each purchaser, which fully guarantees that if a rubber in the exposed conditions, is emptied, they will deliver in cash the amount prescribed in the certificate, that is, from $3.00 to $10.00 according to the size of each rubber. This marvel, we are sure, will produce a true resolution in Puerto Rico, because this gum guarantees, besides greatly favoring the public in general, that a modest, a lawyer, a nurse or any businessman, can, with absolute security, announce his appearance at a certain point, lack of appearance often implies death, without missing the appointment given by him. Messrs. Rivero Chaves and CoT vle- , nen, besides greatly favoring the general public, to resolve many conflicts, by virtue of which .besides auguring good business, we sincerely congratulate them. A. CARAZO, Brau St 72, Advt.
FOR RENT ' A beautiful warehouse just finished on the best site on the Malecon, it is all concrete, with iron doors and windows, measures 700 meters ; square. It is leased all or in parts. Will inform CiONZALEZ PADIN Conwanv Inc.
- CEMENT "PORTLAND" > Twisted square rods. ; PARIS POINT * Call, visit or write to i ROLAN Y TEJEDOR : Box 135®. '■" Phone 395. ' embankment. Stop 2-1)2
. He began by saying that even though he fra young than his distinguished colleagues Mr. IJexter and Mr. Sweett, the intelligence- and skill of who*, all recognized, he was going to refute them mlhlfestaojones made by Ledo. Dextfer and p. sbsteneq¿the hcüsAjón formulated, mspirán dosq solely in the high spirit of d&nsíddración and respect in which he had been steeped precisely in the aameriama, in. where-dijjb-banals of justice are by Ale* tes fc At(omey Generals *, dqjas Legislatures, of the press, of Tos governors and Miata above.' of the President himself, according*há that- , given demonstrated from Jackson's time to W.ilsoin quiert recently left the (Usa Blafica. He spoke about the faithful "power of 'n pren sa, which he said t was limited and expounded, quoting paragraphs from autoriopinione|, that the liberty of the preflsa n<> should not and could not open up as "libertin i je and that the haíJio that the accused had, occupied charges of was no reason why he should be to .be to of guilt pot the crime committed i i t was committed. He said that there was no reason to argue that a sentence against the accused could be a kind of obstacle to the free action of the rest of the press, for he said that all journalists were obliged to know their duties to society, and above all the respect and respect that should be due to the institutions established to safeguard that illicit society. I iWtad ¿'ñor i Sweett and analyzed the paragraphs of his . article, the tones of which-he said- I left no doubt as to the commission of the desao itp and the premeditated ini tion to intimidate the Grand Jury, as stated in the order "to show cause." He further stated that the Grand Jury studied and thought long and hard about the action to be taken before rendering its report, a statement which is evident from the fact that the report was rendered three days after his article was published and after hearing Mr. Swéett himself in his defense. He concluded by saying that he asked the Hon. Judge to do justice, as was his wont, and that he could submit a memorandum of authority in connection with the case law he had cited, and submitted the case to the Court. The Honorable Judge then ruled in these or similar terms; "Considering the order to show cause, which has been the basis of this proceeding, considering the answer of the respondent, and considering further the report of defense counsel and the prosecutor, the Court finds that Mr. Sweett, in writing the article, was not in contempt, nor did he intend to be in contempt, and acquits him. Many of Mr. Sweett's friends congratulated him as he left the court. -- - "America" Theater In the afternoon q 4.30 P. M. great matinée with the film of Dog" I Colcharles Chaplin and end of "EllPactO/lDférnar the evening two tandas Luisa de Lerma New Milables flamenco and asturiánados. Colossal success. Mañanaixrran farewell with a great matinée at 3.30 P. M. and in the evening the great film "RASCAME LA ESPALDA" and Luisa de Lenai. Success. - - - - ■ -
r-. rw r SIXTO PACHECO OPTICO * Office for eye exams and Cristq|es fitting. San Justo 14 and 1)2. Opposite the Mallorquína.
Lanofa sensational] is ef sápuéstó imm tended between the EjecutTnría Union.
J - The sensational note for days has been the announced understanding between the Union and Governor Reily. Readers are already familiar with the matter where he has been given the right measure, and" that the resqpra of mine and the other party is at the end of the day .... And so we can that it is not yet,-although it is) prdtamen- the tráscendúntales dónsecuan; pías of the interviews' between the Gober. and. the Direction dél Pagtido. - "After all id' ant "ior comments are lóuchos., *- Yesterday he said to several alnigol MHÉMk "ente lifier republican these words, imbued with beatific unction: -Uhos and others-republican", sociM lists querríf draA-han compromútiícra all political fa*community of Puerto be mejaran aside paciones póúticfls najas, to raise us on unmíanoMle iporalidad and of enfundes fienfiríamos right- exclude*a the others; peroi" not so" It has acted badly by t$g.s parties. Guilt has become collective. We could prove it, if we were to make a critical history of our politics, since the arrival of Mr. Reily; but we refrain* from such a work, for fear that those political passions, always inflamed here, will give our attitude a torpid interpzetacioA Unionist leader then spoke thus, corroborating the above: -I believe that .aqtfl must be abandoned, as unproductive, the pohtica of hatred and intransigence. It is necessary to calm down the ánd everything. And this, with all the more reason, because in the present political and economic situation, it would be necessary and desirable that they should be abandoned.
PACIFIC ARGENTINE BRAZIL LINE Steamship Service between San Francisco California and Puerto Rico. This Company will maintain a jngiréuaft service between the Pacific ports and Puerto Rico, and expects the cooperation of the trade to this end. Steamer "WEST JAPPA" of 8,800 tons will sail from San Francisco, California, April 25. Send in your orders for this opportunity. BEHN BROTHERS INC, AGENTS. TANCA AND TETUAN. SAN JUAN, P. R. l l l l l 8 i "tt " i I " ¡ ""-H" THE COUNTY ' The County is the only place devoted exclusively to residences in San Juan. Healthy, fresh and with constant sea breeze. WE SELL homes and lots; cash homes and lots * cash and installment. Behn Brothers Inc., Agents Tetuan and Tanca. -San Juan. x" Excellent Steamship Service between Beaumont, Houston Galveston and Puerto Rico. March 1, 1922. -Lake Florian Expected on the 29th. Lake Slavi Outbound from Beaumont 27. April, 1922. Lake Florian -To load at usual ports 10 to 15. Lake Slavi -To load at usual ports 25 to 30 v Magnificent treatment to her cargo. All kinds of Order your shipments via LYKES * M. BERRIOS A CO. General Agents. Tel. 318. San Juan, P. R. ' P. O. Box 777.
hs sulfurs po-,. tan cope with its* eomlmúisl.
L ■'Tfiagnífica' ímpresNñ Demos iteogiÁo ífihncieroa of e%ciUj fenced azucajeik DesJe hápo prios*eAeÍado a conocerse muy' favOTab.es*nfffc 1 xas d "l sugar market in NneSl art Betos reports cause excellent bte Impression in our local vareado and v¡ efl I03 circles where s#* * follow* with interest tafias Á Aipresl$|* 11-gfidaa of the Narts, s""rel*. i ciaren with the "eferifia infiustria. jáyqr nos^ecií'un hómbre > Óe, uan:- to lose the hopes df qrw, pocon filt&a always that those alzA Jíruscle, the qiu" Serien making the zafia U prices "comical, can make ftente ccmpromisqg,,pending thatx I-ezó the deséqnilibfio in the prices d "l sugar. Per another parta-jfontíuó-de-leaving aside the apr "ciack>neVatit apr "ciack>neVatit geradas on the possible ESTIMATE * of the 1921-22; it is certain QH0 that of the* zafra v ! nueVjs hikes in the* J - 1 ■ * 'Supreme VtenturZ 1 P "i Olympus Theater -HOY- SATURDAY -HOY-* See tonight that matevillous production, the most, dei art mndoSF in which take part "fi¿s stars 'dar J ■ proper ¡¿rnngnitud*. 1 DUSTIN FABNUaí AND KATHRYN g í-JWams ' all mutual recriminations, and that ® 1 to all equally reach errol res and responsibilities. <-