ELM1NDO
12 pages 3 cts Semester, $4.00 One year, $7.50.
Offices! Salvador Brau, 81. Tel. 833, P. O. Box 345.
MORNING' NEWSPAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR IV 4
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Un< \ er p * rm j t 801> ? u '® t^L ed , by th ® Act of ootober 6, 1917. un file at the Post Office of J fsthrnarv *91 iQiQ Prudent- A. - leaon, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, U fehmary 21 ; _l_9J_g r " tbe PuM Offlce_"t SUn Jn "n._Pogt<y ■ eo, (United Swim of America) under the Act of March 3. 1879 |
The Republicans will not be able to take over the Municipality, if they win the suit, before eight months, according to the Ledo's criteria. Martinez Nadal
"There are certain rights that the Unionists have--he has told us--which cannot be curtailed."
Having a friendly discussion with the Ores. Reinaldo Panlagua, Jr. and Licenciado José Ramón Quiñones, we met yesterday with Ledo. Rafael Martínez Nadal, a notable lawyer and prestigious member of the insular Senate for the Republican minority. The well-known politician was talking about different current political topics, and he did not have to change the conversation with the arrival of one of our editors, with which Mr. Martínez Nadal proved that he is not one of those who are intimidated by the presence of a reporter. Of course, as his talent and his political performances are the result of his words and his deep-rooted cas allow him to challenge the indiscretion of reporters with the sincerity and frankness of his ideas. Referring to the current political situation, regarding the position of the Unionist party, in the present and in the future, Mr. Martinez Nadal issued his personal opinion and even launched a prophecy of the result that the elections of the year one thousand nine hundred twenty-four will have, and in which prophecy he assures the almost absolute disaster of the party that, at the present time, means the majority of the public opinion of the island and that has the "control" of all those positions that depend on the popular will. Cojno and in order to consider ourselves asrterteadoz to publish the*others manifestations that the republican leader made to us, which we consider of rigorous actuality, since they refer to the litigation that is being ventilated before the Courts of Justice, we are going to publish also, what, according to what Mr. Martinez Nadal told us, constituted his inevitable and infallible augury. He said that the "Union of Puerto Rico" would not be able to withstand the shocks of this adverse situation and that in the next elections the Unionist party would lose, to the Republicans the districts of San Juan, PqXce and Mayagüez; to the Republicans the district of Humacao, and to a Republican-Socialist coalition that would be called the Progressive party, they would lose the district of Arecibo, the district of San Juan, PqXce and Mayagüez.
the district of Arecibo. He left only the Guayama and Aguadilla districts to the Union and said that they would probably carry a senator and a representative "at-large" One thing Mr. Martinez-Nadal did not explain in formulating such a com- pilated prophecy was the manner or the study he made by virtue of which he arrived at that conclusion. We cannot say, for example, whether it was the product of a thoughtful and patient analysis of the situation, whether it was due to political calculation or whether, in the manner of the great pythonesses of history, such a categorical statement is based on astrology or on any of those other things that serve as instruments to penetrate the immense and imprecise distances of the future. And having left the deep-rooted prophecy of the Republican leader standing, let us move on to what we believe to be of more importance in his conversation, since it is of more immediate interest, because it avoids the long wait of three years for its confirmation, as is the case with prophecy. Mr. Martinez Nadal was telling us that this, (pointing to the asphalt of the street) ! the Municipality of San Juan, would be in the hands of the Republicans in eight months. - "Ah, but was it not before Christmas?"'-asked one -' 'No,' replied Mr. Martinez Nadal, 'it cannot be before eight months. The Unionists have certain rights that cannot be curtailed.'" --"So then," they replied, "those rights that could have been taken away, have they been taken away? -I did not mean that," added the able polemicist promptly, "if some have been, it is because of the ability of the Unionists to defend them, and because they have not been sufficiently defended by the Unionists. *But, in any case," they said, "you insist that the Republicans, in order to achieve their aims, have to spend eight months. -Necessarily,' I replied. And Mr. Martinez Nadal began to make calculations as to the terms LAUSANNE, December 1.-The Political Commission of 'a conference has begun to discuss today the exchange of prisoners between Greece and Turkey. Cinema "Imperial" TOMORROW SUNDAY Inauguration of the matinees at 10 A. M. with the portentous premiere of the serle: "The Perils of the Yukon" - by - - - WILLIAM DESMOND and a superb drama in 5 acts by HERBERT RAWLINSON DO NOT FIRE Full Orchestra and Presents. Same program in the evening. 2 - Tandas - 2
of which, legally, the Unionists may avail themselves, should they obtain an unfavorable result in the suit, to establish their appeal to i the Supreme Court, and further the reasonable time he thinks the case may take before the appellate court, with the haste with which it may be heard, being a case of public interest, and on the supposition that the judgment of the lower court, if favorable to them, would be affirmed by the Supreme. i Mr. Martinez Nadal, when someone told him that he had forgotten that the case would then be taken to Boston and Washington, as the only argument against this, limited himself to saying that, with two unfavorable rulings, the Unionists would not take the case to Washington, because the bond they would have to pay would be large. Thus, from one of the most authoritative figures in the Republican party, our readers know one truth, and that is, the consequences of the election litigation will not be so immediate as to be worth celebrating or feeling so prematurely. FEDERAL COURT JUDGE DISMISSED AN INDICTMENT PRE-SENT BY ATTORNEY WELLS "WWW vié "nf.'h. CflU KWjtt trial for assault and battery followed against the subject Pedro Arce, who was charged that at about the month of June he attempted to prevent the Customs inspector, Mr. Angel Arée, from performing certain acts in connection with the discharge of his duties as such Customs inspector. The defendant was defended by young Mr. Be- , ni ció Sánchez, and the prosecution was sustained by prosecutor Wells of the aforementioned Court. While the evidence was in evidence, the ' Ledo. Sanchez filed with the Court a motion asking that the complaint be dismissed on the ground that it was defective. After considering the request for dismissal, the Judge declared it admissible, and the defendant was acquitted.
TOMORROW SUNDAY We present the production of the year. The most moving film The Storm 8 parts by I House Peters ■ I Price: 35 Cts. Luneta.
FOR SALE a stable on San Francisco Street, between Cruz and 'jí. San Justo. The best place to detail in San Juan. Information: Box 707.
ZINC ACANALADO Y LISO Cumbreras-Canales Quality - Price - Service Rolan, Tejedor & de Mostos Apartado 1356. Tel. 395-200 San Juan, P. R.
II I I I H 1-d I I 1 I 1 I 1 1 1 U I i i | !■■!■.] | m [ ¡ -H-.l ■!■■■! I I I 1H--1M ■!■-{ 0 :-:BASE BALL CAMPEONATO DE LA SERIE INSULAR - LIGA INSULAR ., STOP EIGHT SUNDAY, DECEMBER 3, 1922. MORNING AND AFTERNOON ;; THE MOST SENSATIONAL OF THE SERIES HUMACAO STARS vs. RICO SPORTS - - 1ST INSULAR LEAGUE, SUNDAY! - -
The $ fzquiaga house took the bqena pro at the auction| held yesterday at the Mayor's Office 'r JEv.
I BID THE 20,000 TONS OF PIPES FOR THE AQUEDUCT POk $907,000 According to the announcements published in the press, at ten o'clock yesterday morning the auction for the supply of 20,000 tons of pipes [ of different sizes for the projected aqueduct of this city took place in the office of the Commissioner of Public Service of San Juan, at ten o'clock yesterday morning. At the time indicated in the announcements, the Mayor, Mr. Diez de Andino, stated that the auction was to be held, and then ordered the Secretary to begin opening the bids submitted, which he did. Some fourteen bids were presented, the most favorable proposal being the one presented by the house of Ezquiaga, representing the "United States Cast Iron Pipe and Foundry Co.", for which reason he awarded the good pro of the auction to the latter. The budget fixed by the municipality amounted to $800,000. That of the proposal favored with the good pro I amounted to the sum of $907,000. The rest of the bids, according to our information, exceeded one million dollars each. According to the terms of the deal, the house of Ezquiaga has undertaken to deliver the auctioned material during the first ten months of the coming year, time which, possibly. will be invested in the &S "works proyé.UiW* Mr. Manuel Mendía. managing partner of the house of Ezquiaga. personally attended the celebration of such an important public auction. MUSTAFA KEMAL RETURNS TO ANGORA i CONSTANTINOPLA, Dec. 1. -The Eiationalist leader of the Angora government, Mr. Mustafa Kemal, has returned to Angora last night from Brasa. the Angora national assembly will probably meet tomorrow to discuss the situation created at the Lausanne conference on the occasion of the Turkish claims in Asia Minor.
I NUMBER 1169.
The American representative at Athens, Mr. Caffery, asks in a note to M. Gonatas, for the liberty of King George, on behalf of his Government.
The policy of the United States the agreements of the conference.
(United Pfreas, via AU America Cables) ATHENS, December 1.-The American representative in this capital, Mr. Caffery, has placed in the hands of M. Gonatas a note in which he requests the liberty of King George, in the name of his Government. WASHINGTON, December 1.-The Department of State has reported that the United States Government will follow the same policy as England in regard to the naval and military treaties of the Washington conference. Secretary Hughes has made it clear that the said treaties will not be put into effect until ■ rejected or ratified by France and Italy. THE NEXT ELEGANT WEDNESDAY AT THE "RIALTO" The novelties that make up the program of the next Elegant Wednesday at the Rialto have already been chosen. The movie that day will be a beautiful production by the sympathetic actress Dorothy Dalton entitled "The Idol of the North," and $100 in coins will be distributed among the 20 most people attending that night's show. The Charity Band will play re ■ treta, and colorful fireworks will be burned in the Rialto Square. Due to the great success obtained in the ■ inauguration of these elegant nights, it is useless to repeat that, next Wednesday the Befo Coliseo on Salvador Brau Street will be filled from boat to boat by the San Juan public that knows how to appreciate extraordinary shows. And since we are talking about something extraordinary, when do the directors of the Bruno and Vazquez Circuit plan to launch the movie "Prisionero de Zenda" in the theaters of their chain? We are anxious to admire such a portentous work of the canvas, P. PINILLO.
The governments of the United States, England and Japan, which have sanctioned them, are impatiently awaiting the attitude adopted by Italy and France in order to choose their positions. KING JORGE OF GREECE OFFERED TO ABDICATE THE THRONE ATHENS, December 1.-King George, when he learned that Prince Andrew is being tried by the Revolutionary Committee abroad, expressed his desire to abdicate the throne. The King remains a prisoner in his country, but it is believed in some official circles that it is very probable that at the meeting to be held tonight the military government will agree to deport him. M. Gonatas, head of the Military Cabinet has taken charge of the government in company with General Melinteris. THE BRITISH NAVAL MISSION ASKS FOR PASSPORTS ATHENS, December 1.-The British Naval Mission this morning asked the Government for passports in order to embark immediately for England. GREEKS AND TURCO-BULGARIAN BATTLE ON THE BORDER ATHENS, December 1. -Details are officially confirmed concerning the encounter which occurred yesterday on the frontier between Turkish-Bulgarian troops and Greek soldiers. f (In the combat which lasted two hours and thirty minutes, twenty-eight Turkish-Bulgarian soldiers were killed and numerous wounded. The Hellenes had few casualties. DEMOCRATS TOOK ON REPUBLICANS WASHINGTON, Dec. 1.-Democratic senators have introduced a bill to authorize the federal government to intervene with the
'PARQUE' i TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY Premiere in Santurce The Most Original Comedy Ever Produced 'Quién Quiere un Gordito' (THE ROUND UP) - by - ROSCOE FATTY ARBUCKLE Tomorrow Sunday. THE MAN OF STONE -H-HU I I I H-H ü ! | M I I ! I I | I H. :: CEMENT "CABALLITO" í :: UNBEATABLE í - - Competition price. t :: Sues, by L. VILLAMIL A Co. T t-bH l ! I í 14-H-H-H-! I I l-H-l-WI! OLIMPO" THEATER TODAY, SATURDAY, DECEMBER 2. The thrilling drama of Circuito Bru nó y Vázquez Palabra de Caballero by WILLIAM S. HART SUNDAY, DECEMBER 3 Premiere in Puerto Rico of the monumen tal dramatic production in 7 acts "RAZA DE IÍEONES" Delicate poem of seQfhniento and art. ♦ r-.
in connection with Washington < in order to prevent the continuation of the lynch mob in the country. The Republicans, as is known were going to introduce a bill of equal indo . le, but have lost the initiativx CLEMENCEAU IN SPRINGFIELD NEW YORK, Dec. 1.- In union with the representative of the * (Unite l Press" Mr. Bradford and several pe riodists and authorities, yesterday visited Lincoln's tomb at Springfield, Cíe. mencean, who placed upon it a 1 va ious wreath. M. Clemenceau did not speak as expected, but stated that Abraham Lincoln was the most unchorus son of the United States and the most complete politician of the past generation. t VENIZELOS TO SPEAK ON MONDAY AT THE PEACE CONFERENCE LAUSANNE, Dec. 1.-On Monday next, Mr. Eleutherius Venizelos will address the various delegations to the peace conference, where he intends to explain in detail the case of the former Greek ministers executed on Tuesday in Athens. It seems that Venizelos m proposes to vindicate the actions of his country's government. MANDEL CLEMENCEUS HAS RESIGNED PARIS, Dec. 1.- Mandel Clemenceus, the most enthusiastic supporter of the Washington conference projects, has resigned his seat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, before which the projects will be brought tomorrow. Mandel has stated that he will explain in due course in the House the basis of his resignation.
TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY i SUCCESSFULLY SUCCESSFUL! Thomas Meighan and Agnes Ayres in the colossal production The Captain's Gallons (CAPPY RICKS) and a great comedy per 4 Roscoe "'Fatty" Arbuckle Ilone stab Ago.! 3 Direct freight service, § 5 between the pnertos of TEXAS GOL- £ g FO, NEW OR- g | LEANS' La, and PTO. RICO. | I M..S. GLENDARUEL| g Galveston Die. 12 S aHÑouston Die. 13 § g Beaumount Die. 15 S g New Orleans Die. 18 g g g Order your shipments by £ g this line. I Villar & Co. Inc,,,-Agents |
IMPORTANT NOTICE We wish to inform our favorers that our buyer has just arrived and as usual has brought us s MUCH NEW ! DON'T MISS TO COME THESE DAYS TO GONZALEZ PADIN CO. Gifts for Easter and New Year >/ Toys of all kinds and many other novelty items. VISIT US GONZALEZ PADIN CO, INC. SAN JUAN PONCE MAYAGÜEZ
DON JOSE LEMA The distinguished gentleman and active businessman Don José Lema, proprietor of the well-known firm "La Favorita" of this capital, has returned from Spain after having been absent for a long period of time visiting the main cities of the old metropolis. Don José Lema returns to Puerto Rico in the company of his beautiful and cultured wife. EL MUNDO sends to such esteemed travelers a cordial greeting of welcome to this society in which they enjoy general sympathy. PARIS, December 1. -Tomorrow (today) the Compensation Committee will meet to discuss the last note received from Berlin.
DISTINGUISHED TRAVELERS On the steamer "Antonio Lopez" returned from the Spanish Peninsula, after having spent a short season of recreation, during which he had occasion to visit the most charming cities of the old metropolis, our most esteemed friend Don Antonio Gomez, a highly cultured gentleman who enjoys great and well-deserved sympathy in San Juan. With Don Antonio Gomez also comes his beautiful and distinguished wife, a very cultured lady with whom our young friend has just married. We send to so valuable social elements a cordial greeting of blenverida.
Sociedad Española de Auxilio Mutuo y Beneficencia de Puerto Rico The Members of this Institution are summoned to attend the General Meeting of the same, which will take place on the 10th of the present and time of two o'clock in the afternoon in the Meeting Room of the Sanatorio-Hato Rey, Parada 37. 51 President. AVELINO VICENTE. San Juan, P. R. December 2, 1922.
DR. FRANCESCHl CABALLERO Specialist in Diseases of the Stomach-Liver-Gut-Gut-Rectum. Office: Alien 78. Telephone 1192, San Joan. HOURS: 9 to 12 A. M.-2 to 6 P. M.
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 2, 1922.