ELM1NDO
< > - pages ® Semester, $4*00 One year47.
.- .. ' OfMnaei Wyüw Brtu. 81 TH. m P. O. Box 34* 4
MORNING JOURNAL,
. EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO. ,
PubUaktei and diatribntad andar p "raüt ÍM.... MI) MtboteM b> Ua 1. "t aawbar * 1S1T, "a a tía al Ua Poal OttM te flan Jnan, Porto Btea. By ordar te tha Praiddant. A 8. Bw i MO n. Poataaatar Sanaral. Jtatarad aa aooond elaaa Mattel, íabivary 11. 101". al Ua Peal OMm at tan Jaaa, Porte Rleo. ünlted States te Anorten nadar Ste áte te ear.h 8. ItTR
SATURDAY, MARCH 4, 1922.
NUMBER 938.
Interesting clarifications from the Commissioner ofAgriculture and Labor.
Yesterday afternoon our editor, Mr. Vargas, visited Commissioner Toro Labarthe at his office in the Department of Agriculture and Labor. In view of the repeated expressions of protest made in the daily press in connection with Mr. Toro's statements in the letter to Judge Towner, our Editor wanted to offer him an opportunity to rectify or ratify the concepts expressed by him in said communication, and Mr. Toro made the following interesting statements: "I learned yesterday of your statements in connection with my WEAKNESS to inform you of something which I considered it advisable to be in the public domain. The letter to which you refer may be summarized in three requests: (1) -Convenience for Puerto Rico of an investigation by Congress to consider the effects of the Jones Bill. Congress to consider the effects of the Jones Bill in Puerto Rico, before considering the Williams, Nollan" Campbell and King Bills. (2) -Limitation of land control in Puerto Rico by the Congress of * the United States, if the . Legislature of Puerto Rico has no power to do so or cannot accomplish that object by NECESSARY AND EQUITABLE tribute.
The Puerto Rico Legislature again denied its registration on the grounds that it violated the Foraker Act. If I remember correctly, the resolution of the Court was that this matter was within the competence of the Attorney General of Puerto *Rico. In nineteen hundred and ten, at the request of Mr. Grieff, Administrator of the Central Guánica, the Sugar Producers Association of Puerto Rico, being President of the same distinguished compatriot Don Eduardo Gidrgetti, I went to Washington in the company of Don Lucas P Valdivieso, of Ponce, and Don Francisco Quiñones, of San Germán, to appear as representatives of said Association, in a "hearing',' before the Committee on Insular Affairs of the United States Congress, to appear before the Committee on Insular Affairs of the United States of America, in a "hearing',' before the Committee on Insular Affairs of the United States of America.
If we were to stop our attention on the problems that surround us, we would see that the tobacco problem we have been dealing with is of capital importance for the economic well-being of Puerto Rico, which we are pursuing. It is unquestionable that, with less demand for the cigarette product made with our tobacco, there must be a great drop in the demand for the raw material of the same. Our tobacco farmers complain about the low prices prevailing in the U.S. market for raw tobacco. If this tobacco of ours dedicated to the manufacture of cigarettes comes to join its misfortune to the superior tobacco that enjoys a low price in the foreign market, a new conflict will present itself to our farmers of the aromatic leaf, a conflict that no one can foresee in its future consequences.
(3). -Activate the implementation of the Federal Farm Loan Bank. I am interested in clarifying that I have not yet formed an opinion as to whether in Puerto Rico it is necessary to limit the control of lands for corporations and civil societies to five hundred acres, one thousand or three thousand. Our Organic Charter stipulates that a corporation shall not control more than five hundred acres. My respected friend Mr. Benedicto told me that he had studied the best way to solve the problem of the con- } trol.of the lands by the corporations - and at first glance he believed that by tenths in ten years the corporations could realize the lands they currently control. Mr. Benedict has also informed me that his father, being Registrar of Property, refused to register a corporation's land, because it would have passed the corporation by five hundred acres. The matter went to court and the estate was registered. The Registrar was not concerned with whether the corporation owned other land for the registration that had been requested. Then another farm of more than five hundred acres was presented to him for registration, and Mr. Benedic
We must bear in mind that the cigarette of Puerto Rico is made with special tobacco, which has no other market than the one offered by our island. If we consume the foreign product which comes with the deliberate purpose of displacing ours from this market which corresponds to it, there is no doubt that we lend a favor to the foreign industry, and cause an enormous damage to our tobacco, to our industry, to our worker in general as well as to the general interests of the island. We must be subject, with neatness and strict observance, to the Law of Demand and the Law of Supply,
SQUARE RODS WITH TWISTED GALVANIZED IRON CUTTING Call, visit or write to ROLAN & TEJEDOR Box 1356. Phone 395. San Juan, P. R.
BEHN BROTHERS, INC. ¡i (HOUSE FOUNDED IN 1906) BANKERS -- i Beryvind White Coal Mining Co. *Lancashire Insurance Co. Agent js of Compagnie Generale Transatlantique. J Windward Island Line - Pacific Argentine. "" I Brazil Line ' La Veloce. THE COUNTY - Sale of Land. "" ■ Esquina Tetuán-Tanca. San Juan, P. R.
German Neo Salvarsan manufactured by FARBWERKE VORM.M EISTER LUCIUS & BRUNNING HOECHST A MAIN Declared PURE and LEGITIMATE by the U.S. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH AFTER ANALYZED Imported under License No. 211836 by Pesquera & Pesquera, Inc. Telephone 561. Bouret Building San Juan, P. R.
Senate, in connection with the limitation of land, according to Bill Olmstead. In Washington we were to join Mr. Luce, President of the Central Aguí rre, Mr. Dillingham, President of the Central Guánica, and Mr. Armstrong of the Central Fajardo. The representatives of these three corporations insisted with us that we ask for a much larger limit than three thousand acres, WHICH was then the amount considered by the sugar growers of Puerto Rico as a convenient limit, and my companions can refer to my firm attitude on that occasion. Later, as a member of the Legislature of Puerto Rico, I submitted a private (Continued on p. 7)
It is necessary and indispensable to defend
what are infallible. Our farmers, workers in the fields, in the workshops and factories, our people in general, should prefer, for their use, our cigarette to the cigarette that comes to us from outside. When the demand for the article is little, and when the stock of the same is much, the market is produced the fall in price, and comes, if such a state is maintained for some time, disorganization and disorder and as inevitable consequence the ruin of the industry and of the product. Our farmers do well to defend their tobacco, and to seek the best prices for it. It is a "'just, legitimate aspiration. But we must not neglect what we are obliged to cooperate so that those in-, dústrinj who use that tobacco here ?n the elaboration of various products, do not suffer from foreign competition nor have to become impatient or intraqui". lizarse by our ihdifeajií.'.i or our lack of protection. The country must be made by us, corn as much as is ours in it. And that, we can do it by protecting everything that contributes to the progress of Puer-.
The American press against Governor Reily, as well as the American press against Governor Reily.
TRANSLATED FROM THE "NEW YORK EVENING POST" OF FEBRUARY 20 Governor Reily's petty adversaries hit the nail on the head when in November of last year they complained that he lacked the "sanity and discretion" which are indispensable to occupy such a high office. EIKs do not strengthen his case by scrutinizing and bringing to light the charges made against him when he was the postmaster of Kansas City fifteen years ago. The main problem* to be investigated by the Congressional Commission is the acts committed by F.eily during the year 1921, and not those committed in 1904-1904.
those committed in 1904-1909. The main specific accusations against him are that he dismissed Puerto Rican judges without cause, and annulled the authority of other judges by threatening them with dismissal; that he pardoned minors solely for the purpose of pleasing the Socialist party, and that he placed three departmental chiefs, appointed virtually by American corporations, in a manner "contrary to the spirit of the Organic Law. But! ! behind all this there is something ! much more important, which is his "toughness and discretion". The most serious charges against Reij ly simply refer less to his actions than to his tact. Coming from the
Mr. Reily visited the Repto, of Sanitation.
Yesterday morning Governor Reily visited the Sanitation Department for the purpose of attending the hoisting of an American flag on a flagpole which has been erected in front of the main office of said Department. i The ceremony was enlivened by the Benevolent band, in assistance of the children of the Santurce Asylum, who paraded, militarily, before the United States flag. Dr. Lipitt addressed the immense concurrence, explaining the object of the ceremony, and was warmly applauded by all the sanitary employees who were assembled there. - Yesterday we were informed that it was to our benefit, because the reduction made in these duties would be added to the selling price of sugars in general, which would also benefit Puerto Rico. Mr. Aboy concluded by saying that there was no danger of any kind with the announced duty reduction for Cuba.
The Grand Jury transferred for Monday, at two o'clock in the afternoon, the investigation it intends to carry out, regarding the declarations of Mr. Toro Labarthe, published in Thursday's EL MUNDO. It is reported that the referred judicial body will summon, with the same purpose, other high officials of the insular Government, among which, it is assured, Governor Reily will have to appear. SPANISH NEWSPAPERS CALL FOR GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN MEXICO (From our special English and French wire service) MADRID, March 3.- Commenting on the protest of the Chamber of Commerce sent yesterday to General Obregón, President of Mexico, on the occasion of the infractions to which some of the "SI lIMus "sp*ñoies were subjected, the newspapers of this city and especially the daily ABC call for the immediate intervention of the Spanish Government in Mexico." WE OFFER VENEZOLAN MAIZE GOOD QUALITY - Convenient prices B. Fernández & Unos., Sucre. Marina, San Juan
Missouri campaign, he apparently thought it intolerable that he should be expected to remain aloof and aloof from the political parties of Puer to Rico, and he went into them up to his neck. It was proper for him to declare vigorously his opposition to any pro-independence sentiment; but it was most improper for him to make clear, in a manner that left no doubt, his enmity against the Unionist party which governs both branches of the Legislature, and only one wing of which desires independence; declaring publicly that he was the patron and friend of the two minority parties. We must take it for granted that he provoked too much; we are obliged to remember that his friends said that the Unionist leader, Antonio R. Barcelo, wished to govern him, and when he could not, he declared war. But a governor of greater gentleness, moderation and caution would not have allowed himself to be dragged into a free for all fight of the three Puerto Rican political parties. - The governorship of Puerto Rico, as well as that of the Philippines, is no less diplomatic than administrative. The "record" of Governor Reily's administration may be brilliant; but Reily as a diplomat is a failure. It is precisely in the Caribbean Sea, where the American administration has been the target of past criticisms, and that is why we must employ in those lands, (Continued on page three) " i AL PUBLICO DE SAN JUAN La notable tonadillera espa- ' ñola PAQUITA ESCRIBANO traj bajará solamente en el teatro , M OÍWnpo",* de Santurce, , has yet made arrangements to work in another theater in San Juan, due to the short time she intends to remain in Puerto Rico. i This is from Paquita's representative. Therefore, whoever wishes to admire the remarkable star, should not miss the performances at the "'Olimpo".
Wait for 'BEBITA' TO BE RECEIVED SOON
BIG SALE PRE INVENTORY The traditional sale that this house, makes every year before practicing its Balance Sheet COME TO ' BUY GOOD AND CHEAP COVERS-SHAIRS - THERMOS Household linen and Kitchenware We want to lower our stock as much as possible and we have marked some prices that ARE ASUSTING CHEAP SEE OUR WINDOWS AND COMPARE OUR ITEMS GONZALEZ PÁDIN CO. Inc. SAN JUAN PONCE MAYAGÜEZ. \ .. - -
Victory Garden TOMORROW SUNDAY, ON THE SECOND TANDA ONLY, THE THREE MOSQUETEROS FOURTH DAY
THE HISPANIC AME-1 BICANO JOURNALISTS IN BARCELONA I ! MADRID, March 2-The Minister of Grace and Justice communicated to the pe-, ric distas that a congress of Spanish-American journalists will be held in Barcelona, after the inauguration of the exhibition on electric industries is verified.
Cine Luna: -HOY Matinee and Evening TODAY "J U D E X" ULTIMATE JOURNAL Plating and lining buttons A. CARAZO, Brau St 72.
EL CONPADO El Condado is the only place dedicated exclusively to residences in San Juan. Healthy, fresh and with constant sea breeze. WE SELL houses and lots; houses for cash and lots for cash and installments. * 4 j Behn Brothers Inc, Agents J Tetuan and Tanca. San Juan. ' / " . - , í 1 ■
GILLIES & WOODWARD Is pleased to inform its numerous clientele of this city and the island of having moved its establishment from Plaza Baldorioty to the Be lava 1 Building, Tanca corner South Precinct. PLEASE CALL YOUR FRIENDS THERE SAN JUAN, P. R. PHONE 234.
The alteration of Cuban sugar duties will not affect estaioMiaenP.il.
WASHINGTON, February 24.-The reduction of the present import tariff imposed on Cuban sugar will probably be the result of the restriction which Cuba will make on its total sugar exports, so that they will not exceed the normal amount and shipments to the Union sugar industry. This information was obtained this afternoon from an authoritative source at the White House, where it was stated that although a definitive agreement on the subject had not yet been reached, there had been several informal recommendations to that end. After numerous conferences and discussions on the sugar situation in the United States and in Cuba, it appears, according to this information, that the question of whether, in the event of a reduction in Cuban sugar production, a reduction in the tariff currently levied on that product in the United States would be agreed upon as a consequence, has been discussed. The prevailing impression is optimistic among the well-informed. In order to know the importance of this matter in relation to Puerto Rico, we visited yesterday Mr. Aboy Benitez, President of the "Association of Sugar Producers", with whom we exchanged impressions on the matter.... We were informed by e&eñor Aboy that the Con greso, is at present controlled by the beet interests, who want to impose* Cuba the condition that it reduce the "oduction of sugar to, TWO MILLION® tons, offering it, on camnt) of this, that the import duties would be reduced < poro ■' says Mr. Benitez -general, ral opinion in that country, according to news I have, is against such reduction and I believe that nothing practical will be done in that direction. But, in the event that such a reduction should be made in the import duties on Cuban sugar, there is no need to hurry: It would result in