elmBndo
bHIHIIIIIIimiflHH". 12 pages 3 fts " Semester. $4.00 One year. $7.50. H-H4H 11 HIM l< I II !!! 11"
< ! !! ?! HfH Hll'i I I I ! I I I " : OficIhMf ; Salvador Brau, 81, - -- Tel. 833, P. 0. Box 345. -
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) "uthi.riied by the Act of October 6. 19 L7, on. file at the Poet Office of .v' th * President A- " Bnr leson, Poetmaster General. Entered as second class matter. n<lrV - ' at Post' Office st San Juan, Porto ..R" co. (United States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1879.
YEAR IV,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Before the federal court yesterday were heard the preliminary objections filed in the case against the Sees. Mariano R. Pesquera, José t Benedicto et al.
Prosecutor Wells filed another information in the contempt case against Mr. Pesquera.
The hearing of the preliminary objections filed by attorneys Miguel Guerra Mondragó®, Jaime Sifre Jr., Castro Fernández, Martin, Hugh R. Francis and Juan B. Soto on behalf of defendants Ernesto Díaz, Ne gTón Benitez, Luis Sanquírico, José de León and Joaquín L. Miró was scheduled for yesterday before the Federal Court. As our readers know, the holding of this important hearing had already been scheduled for a previous date and was postponed for yesterday, since Prosecutor Wells requested its postponement alleging that he was not sufficiently prepared to discuss it. In the first place, the preliminary objections were raised by Ledos. Sifre, ' Martin, Castro and Francis, who argued their arguments to the effect that the "indictment" filed before the Court did not adduce facts > '<C.-'íSí*v V '5 ? ' ' í* / TODAY " SATURDAY TODAY rijn.ii na.. . j - j.. ■- For the second and last time: 'Love And Sacrifice' (AFTER THE SHOW) Extraordinary -Tomorrow Sundayin all five daytime and evening runs: Eugene 0' Brien in the magnificent drama 'THE PERFECT LOVER' (THE PERFECT LOVER) Pathé News and a comedy.
sufficient to constitute a conspiracy offense. The report of the Ledo. Sifre, without this being to the detriment of the other .'c- 1 trades, who were also brí-l llantíssimo, was, it may be assured, an I very extensive exposition of all the questions of fact and law which are involved in the transcendental pro- j Among the infinity of jurisprudence- I tending to prove that in the referred ¡ "indictment" the facts determinative of the alleged conspiracy are not specified, and that if there is any violation, it is, according to the terms of the indictment itself, a violation of the insular laws and not of the Volstead Act. In the said indictment it is alleged that the defendants conspired to steal alcohol from a shipment in transit, and the Ledo, i Sifre said that such a crime would be a simple theft, but never a violation of the Volstead Act, and that it would be a violation of the Volstead Act.) WITH ALL MY HEART I record here my deepest and most sincere gratitude to all those good friends who in these, the most painful moments of my life", have known how to have a phrase, a tear or a prayer of consolation, to lend me a lenitive to the immeasurable sorrow, to the noble and enormous trial by which Fatality has wanted to acrisolate my soul, on the occasion of the death of my wife, Rosario Termos de Coll Vidal, and of our son, q. e. g. e. May these words also be accepted on behalf of the Tor-mos-Torres and Coll-Vidal families. With all my heart, my friends: thank you, thank you very much! Antonio Coll VIDAL. Olimpo Theater SATURDAY, NOV. 18, 1922. Great Artistic Event! In honor and benefit of the great Amalia Molina with a monumental program, combined with 10 of her best songs and dances. Also the very fine French drama "El Hombre de las Tres Caras" TOMORROW! SUNDAY 19 TOMORROW! Final farewell to the star AMALLA MOLINA - with one of her best programs AND the Puerto Rican premiere of the great movie - "EL MILLONARIO" !
BASE-BALL ! Island League. Parada Ocho. :: AMERICAN SEASON :: COtECTIVE:-Saturday 18, 3:30 P. M. ;- *; PONCE:-Sunday 19, two games. ■ ■ ■ ;; NOTE.-New players expected from Sto. Domingo. - 111 i-i l'H 1111111 i'M-i n 11 i-i-m-ii 11 i-T-i-i n y 1111 [ 1 111 n n n i '' MUNICIPAL THEATER C0Mp lMííl AT,CA Camila Quiroga 6 ONLY FU NCIONES 6 DEBUT COMING SOON DEBUT I I i'i-M 1 II llllllllllllll 1 4 "M'*I I 1 "I : DR. FRANCESCHl CABALLERO | - - Specialist in Diseases of the Stomach-Liver- ' í ' I Intestines-Rectum. Office: Alien 78. Telephone 1192, San Juan. - ' ' HOURS: 9 a.m.-12 noon. M.-2 to 6 P. M. ; I
¿M. FRANKLIN BOUILLON TO TAKE PART IN TOMORROW'S CONFERENCE? PARIS, November 17.-The Paris Echo assured that M. Franklin Bouillon, French diplomatic representative in the negotiations of the Mudania treaty, will take part, as. technical adviser in the conference to be held on Sunday between Messrs. Poincaré, Schanzer and Mussolini.
THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE, LCDO. CAY. COLL CUCHI, PRESENTED TO PRESIDENT HARDING HIS VIEWS WITH RESPECT TO THE
VIEWS REGARDING THE FUTURE OF PUERTO RICO, DECLARING THAT HE IS A DETERMINED ADVOCATE OF GOVERNMENT OWNERSHIP, INITIATING THE ELECTION OF A GOVERNOR BY THE PEOPLE, OF PUERTO RICO'S RIGHT TO ENACT ITS OWN TARIFFS
New York City, November 10, 1922. Mr. Editor of EL MUNDO, San Juan, P. R. My dear friend: The accumulation of false news and personal attacks published in the island press during my absence from the Island has not concerned me to the extreme of rectifying them, leaving for my return to make known to the country my political efforts in Washington and the reasons that determined me to adopt an attitude in open opposition to Mr. Barceló. Of course, nothing of what has been published is close to the truth; and no correspondent or news agency has obtained any statements of any nature from me. But in its October 23 edition there appears an information from the "United Press" about statements of mine concerning South American politics, which do not correspond exactly to the truth. A representative of that agency visited me and asked me for an interview on Pan-Americanism, knowing my speech at the Ateneo de Madrid in December 1921. In this interview he expressed the same ideas as in Madrid. As I have had the honor of discussing with President Harding my views on the subject, I believe that the greatest rectification consists in transcribing what, in writing, I have expressed to the President, namely: 'The speaker has been, and is, a decided defender of absolute home government for Porto Bico, Including de election of governor by the people, and the right for Porto Rico to make its own tariffs; but this speaker has refused, and will refuse, to participate in any policies that are hostile to the United States because it is in open contradiction of his principles.
his principles. He believes that, in the present international situation, it is the only salvation of the world that all the people of the three Arne, rich should form a block for the development of their resources of this continent, its the only means of saving Europe from total bankruptcy by letting the surplus of our wealth to cover the tremendous losses and destructions of the Great War. It is the Ann belief of the speaker The coronation of the queen of the 'Rialto' Very soon will take place with the luxury and pomp that the case requires, the coronation of the very beautiful and gracious sovereign of the palace of the photodrama, Miss Zofaida Rodriguez. to ceremony, there will only be a single tanda which will begin at half past eight in the evening. Before the gala performance that will precede the party, there will be a retreta in the garden adjacent to the theater, burning magnificent and colorful fireworks. On the terrace of the luxurious coliseum, there will be a reception where refreshments and sweets will be distributed to all those who have tickets for that night. The company Bruno and Vazquez informs us that it intends to spare no expense to make the tribute worthy of the beauty and virtues of such a charming sovereign. The stage of the Rialto will be specially decorated by the Director of the same, Mr. Germán Castañera, whose good taste and artistic talents are proverbial. The Court of Honor will be compues-
that it is harmful to the Central and South American Republics to have the division at present existing between the two policies called 'FanAmericanism' and ' Hispano-Ameri canism', the first meaning the union of all the Americas, with the exclusion of Spain; and the second meaning, the union of Spain with Central and South American countries to the exclusion of the United States. During his recent visit to Madrid and talking with the leading men of Spain, the speaker advocated a policy of open friendship from Spain towards the United States, because Spain was the only European nation that by virtue of a common language, a common ideal. and4femmon traditions, was to have an everlasting influence over all the South and Central American Republics, while the United States was to have an everlasting influence over all the South and Central American Republics. tral American Republics, while tha United States because of its Republican institutions, its democrat!" soul, and its enormous wealth and power, was the only nation capable of securing the real commercial and industrial development of the Spanish Americas, and of ensuring the liberty of the Spanish-American nations against the strongest powers of the world. The speaker is convinced that PanAmericanism, excluding Spain, will (Continued on 3rd. page) be carried by a group of young ladies of our good society who will wear the oriental costume that is so much in evidence in women with dreamy eyes and hearts of fire. Taking into account the recognized liberality and splendor of our friends Mr. Bruno and Mr. Vazquez, we do not believe we are wrong in predicting a royal party, full of pomp and splendor, for which we congratulate the distinguished "Sultana" Zcraida I.
WE REALIZE...! At very low prices. Good Merchandise. Gentlemen's suits at $5.75, $7.50 and $10.00. Fine and nice shirts at $1.48, $1.98 and $2.98. Shirts and underpants, good at 19c., 50c. and 75c. Socks, good quality 15c., 25c. and 50c. Hats fancy styles 98c., $1.50 and $2.00 Upper Broadway Shoes, $4.50, $5.00 and $7.00 MANY OTHER ITEMS AT REDUCED PRICES We need to make room for Christmas Gifts and Toys. Take advantage to buy now, everything is good and cheap. GONZALEZ PADIN CO. INC. SAN JUAN - - PONCE. - MAYAGÜEZ.
THE NEW CABINET BRASI. The new Cabinet which took office on Wednesday consists of the following persons: Vice President State; Foreign Affairs, Ooimbra; Interior, Felix Pacheco; War, Alves; Navy, Carvalho; Public Works, Sa; Agriculture, Calmen; Finance, Vidal. I
PARK TODAY - Saturday. - Special. Premiere in Santurce. FLORENCE VIDQR in 'The Voice of India' (The Bronze Bell.) - Tomorrow: Sunday. - "Social Orgy" (Dangerous Water.) Afternoon Retreta.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 1922. NUMEROUS?
Will the Argentine Government ask for explanations from the United States for the naval mission soon to be sent to Brazil?
Wash. Administration begins campaign for subsidy of American Navy.
(United Prass, via AH America Cables) WASHINGTON, November 17.- I State Department officials, referring to the article published in the Buenos Aires newspaper "La Prensa," which reports that the Argentine government is likely to request immediate explanations from the U.S. government about the naval mission that will be sent to Brazil, have said that the Argentine government is likely to request immediate explanations from the U.S. government about the naval mission that will be sent to Brazil, have said that the Argentine government is likely to request immediate explanations from the U.S. government about the naval mission that will be sent to Brazil: rwill be sent to Brazil, have stated that no note from Buenos Aires has yet been received at the Department of State, but have made it clear that the American mission that will soon march to Rio de Janeiro, is not going to direct naval construction work in the Brazilian shipyards, as has been erroneously said in official circles in Argentina, but will exclusively carry out work of an instructive nature near the sailors of that Republic. WASHINGTON, November 17. ' ' ' A GREAT COMMERCIAL SUCCESS l We record with pleasure the news given us by our friends Messrs. Rivero Chaves and Co. that they have obtained from the manufacturers of "Lee" rubber large discounts so that they can offer the public a limited price. Messrs. Rivero Chaves and Co. propose to sell their nail-protected rubber at a price almost equal to that which is not, and under these conditions, the Lee rubber having achieved such a noisy success in the market, with the present prices the owners of automobiles in Puerto Rico are in luck. Lee rubber is often called the aristocratic rubber of Puerto Rico because it is the HIGH LIFE rubber. In due time these gentlemen will publish a list of buyers so that the public can see who are the consumers of this famous rubber. Advt. --HH-H- I I I WM I 1 i ! I 1 1 1 1 ¡ ¡1 i t-h " FOR SALE a - estab- í :: miento on the street of San * Francisco, between Cruz and t - - - San Justo. X .. The best place for detail i in San Juan. X - Information: Box 707. í f t? t f f rt f . T
The Administration today began the campaign to make environment for the merchant marine subsidy, a bill to be introduced in Congress in the special session beginning Monday. Chairman Harding has been conferring all morning today with Republican congressional leaders and then received Speaker Gillete, with whom he talked for two hours. A further meeting will be held this afternoon with only the congressional leaders to agree on special provisions to be presented to the House next Wednesday. PARIS, November 17.-It is reported that the Turkish delegate, Ismet Pasha, will leave for Lausanne in the early hours of Sunday evening. *-H- 1 111 I-I-I 1 I I I ! Hl | | ! [ | t-l-l" i Mr. Buyer | lie Mata ;; Puerto Rico. Z i: Dear Customer: - ' ' ' ' i ' ;; Two letters to inform- *; " marle you that for the last 'I " steams we have received al- íí .. rededor three million feet of Pl- " -- CHIPEN WOODS of good quality, " and we have no doubt that you have so- ■ - bid our prices an- -- ;- tes to buy. X Yours, with the good de- ;; " seos of always, ;; : ROLAN, WEAVING & HOSTING " P.O. Box 1356. ;; Tel. 395-200. " SAN JUAN, P. R. -; ■ -I -!-! ■i-H -i-l-W-l-l 1 i i i 4-M-I- 1 I ' A CHALET FOR RENT In magnificent condition and splendidly situated in San Juan Moder- x no, near the Sea. Will inform on phone 595 S&nturce.
:-:BASE BALL:-: HUMACAO LEAGUE SUNDAY, NOV. 19. 1922. -- TWO BIG CHALLENGES:- 9:30 A. M. AND 3:00 P. M. MAYAGÜEZ v" HUMACAO STARS -H-M- l -l' I l M | I-I-H- l ! I I H-l+M H-l -l l l l H ■H-H-H-i-1 ■! I 1-1-I ! I I 1 I H-I l-l-I-11 ! I-i-I I I I- 1 I I I I I 1-I I I I'Dt ! ! I4-I-I-I- H- ! !■■! I A CURRENT BOOK l "Of America and Spain" - - Problems and orientations. :: (From 1920 to 1922.) :: -by - | RAFAEL HERNANDEZ USERA i: Foreword by the CONDE DE ROMANONES In all bookstores. In New York: "BRENTANO'S and DUTTON'S. "In Washington and Paris: "BRENTANO'S".