ELMUNDO
rmw! mili wri'iTi 10 pages 3 ctva. Semester, $4.00. One year, $7.50.
Offices? Salvador Brau, 81. Tel. 833, P. O. Box 345.
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of October 6. 1917 on file at the Post Office of San Juan./ Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. S. Bur leson, Postmaster General. Entered ae second class matter, Febmary 21, 1919, at the Post Office at Kan Juan, Porto Rico (United States of America) under the Act of march 3. 1879.
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 2, 1922
NUMBER 1092
THE COHN OF U POLICE IMPOSED ON MIRANDA 30 DAYS SUSPENSION AND (5) FINE
Yesterday the Commission of the Insular Police met again to continue dealing with the matter of tective Miranda. He appeared together with his lawyer, Mr. Triarte. After examining all the evidence, the Commission found that there was reasonable doubt as to the charge of whether or not Detective Miranda hit the students. The Commission further found proven the charge that the detective was carrying a phete on the night of the events, as well as that, when testifying Miranda, in the original investigation initiated by Colonel Bennett, made erroneous statements regarding the manner in which the events at the Municipal Theater unfolded; ' The two students testified again, stating that Miranda had not done anything, and that the captain and Detective Ruiz Borrilla were the ones who had beaten them. La Camisón, however; 'agreed to suspend for 30 days the deflective Miranda, and to impose, in addition, $5 muí ta. The 30 days' punishment of Miranda began to take effect from the day the Colonel decreed the suspension of the detective, two months ago, so that his sentence is considered to have been served. As for Captain Hurtado and Detectives Lafontaine and Ruiz Sevilla, we have heard nothing, so we believe they have been exonerated both by the Colonel and by the Police Commission. THE ITALIAN MINISTER (OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS IS PROBABLE TO LEAVE FOR PARIS (United Press, via All America Cablea'. ROME, Sept. 1.-Mr. Schanzer, Minister of Foreign Affairs, is very likely to leave Monday for Paris. < M. Schanzer will confer with M. Poincaré. ' - TOMORROW MONSTROUS MATINAL AND EVENING PREMIERE Seena Owen and E. K. Lincoln in the beautiful and luxurious drama "Cosmopolitan" in 7 acts: La Mujer que Dios fiambró ("THE WOMAN GOD CHANGED") English and Spanish titles. A PARAMOUNT PICTURE INVITATION The finest and most aristo- ■ crete variety in French perfumery i finished, to receive, is displayed in j the showcases of the PHARMACY CA j PELLA. An exceptional < and unique gift that will excite your pro i metida, wife or friend. Visit us. j Low prices, as in everything' PHARMACY CAPELLA Salvador Brau 46 - Phone 1237 ¡ <
FOR YOUR Tobacco and Sugarcane SEEDS Ask for Subscription Prices at the SANTINI FERTILIZER CO. Building "Banco Nova Scotia" Teh. 1280-1*2
Good Opportunity Due to owner's absence, well set up establishment for sale. If interested, call Phone 48. P.O. Box 238. Bayamón, Puerto Rico. M A A _ _ _ _ _ . - - * _ A
NEXT MEETING OF THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE INTENDS TO DISCUSS THE MATTER OF MR. BENEDICTO.
President Harding's visit to Puerto Rico will not take place at this time.
Someone was to tell us a few days ago that, during the Celebration of the Feítejps 2. purpose of closing the National Guard camp, at Arecibo, Mr. Harry F. Be sosa had promised the Governor and Mr. Aboy, Jr. that the agreement which had been adopted to close the National Guard camp, at Arecibo, would be approved by the Governor. that the agreement that had been adopted by the Chamber of Commerce supporting Mr. Benedicto in the position of Treasurer had passed because he did not attend the meeting; but that nevertheless, he intended at the next meeting to raise the question again and to determine the attitude that the Chamber of Commerce would adopt in this respect. The report was so exaggerated and so much in doubt that we had to question it, that we did not want to say anything until, on our return to this capital, we had the opportunity to exchange impressions with Mr. Besosa, whom we wanted to offer an opportunity to lie or ratify said information. Mr. Besosa told us that, indeed, being in Arecibo, at the National Guard Camp, he exchanged impressions with the Governor and Mr. Aboy, Jr, In order to complete the quarterly payroll as soon as possible, the exercises of the National Guard Service Company for the month of September will be held on the following dates: Sunday, September 3 Tuesday, September 5 Thursday, September 7 Sunday, September 10 Tuesday, September 12 Thursday, September 14 This is communicated to all members of said organization so that no one will be absent. L. SANTAELLA. Capt. 1st. Inf. P. R. N. G.. * Advt. Seliquidana$9.90 a few second hand typewriters which are in good condition: brands "Oliver" -- "Fox"-- "Pittsburg and others. Also some "Remington Jr." and "Remington No. 10" at $12 -$25 -$35 and others. Take advantage of these Bargains! GONZALEZ MOM GO. ( S Watch this space where you will apa- § X rec all information- com- S g plete on equipment and access- 5 o rivers for Radio from the Radio x Corporation of America. I MARCUS W. PURVIS § X Distributors. g S Box 1316. San Juan, P. R. ñ
The Chamber of Commerce had said that it was an arbitrary act of the Chamber, since he had been denied the power to propose a cable program, stating that there was no chaotic state of the country's economic situation. If in order to defeat, on that occasion, my proposal," Mr. Belosa told us, "it was alleged that the Chamber should not intervene in political affairs, for the same reason it should not now have approved the resolution supporting Mr. Belosa. and the Governor and I intend to put on record at the next session of the House; that if that dispatch of mine was political because it involved an endorsement of the Governor, this Resolution, in my view, is equally political because it means a censure of the Governor's actions. THE FORTHCOMING IMPEACHMENTS. With extraordinary insistence it is being promoted that there is the intention to decree, in the coming week, a series of dismissals and changes in the judiciary. This news we have not yet been able to confirm officially, and although we have information as to the judicial combination which the Governor has in mind, we do not wish to advance, at this time, any names, as a mistake on our part might cause some embarrassing difficulty to the officials who are to be removed from office, that President Harding would be coming to visit the island in the next month, "we asked the Governor yesterday, who told us that the rumor was unfounded inasmuch as next month Congress would still be in session, and that then would come the election period during which he would have to remain in Washington. For now," tel Goberna-dor told us, "I don't think the President will make his trip to Puerto Rico effective.
THE NEW TREASURER TOOK OFFICE YESTERDAY AND ALMOST ON THE SPOT ASKED THE HONORABLE JUDGE BONNER FOR HIS RESIGNATION.
At nine o'clock yesterday morning, Mr. Ramon Aboy, Jr. and Mr. Juan Gallardo were sworn in as Treasurer and Deputy Treasurer of Puerto Rico. An hour later, Mr. Aboy, Jr. sent for all of the heads of the Negociado to his office, and upon greeting them, he told them that he wanted them to give them all of their cooperation and effort to carry out a task as efficient, if not more so, than that of Mr. Benedicto, and that for this he was counting on the help and competence of his subordinates in the first place. He instructed the chiefs to extend his greetings to all employees and also to give them the same instructions that he had given them, among others, that they should not talk about political matters in the office, and that they should remain loyal to the Department and the Government. Although Mr. Aboy, Jr. has not yet agreed to grant us an interview regarding the intentions and plans he intends to develop in his Department, we are pleased to include here the statements we have heard from him in private conversations. After speaking of the positions he has held in his father's business firms, he said that while he has managed interests amounting to two million dollars, he can manage interests amounting to five million or more. -The only difference is that those were my father's and these belonged to the people of Puerto Rico. Besides, when you're prepared, it's very easy to get up to speed on the affairs of an office." Iglesias, who was listening to our conversation, and apparently did not want Mr. Aboy, Jr. to continue speaking to us, interrupted the conversation to say: "Anyway, Mr. Aboy, all you have to say is that when Mr. Benedict was appointed Treasurer, everyone thought he would marry, because they thought he was just a good Notary, and yet, he gave a very good result". -Not only that," Aboy replied, "but it is a question of balance. If, at the end of the year, my balance sheet shows one
Gentlemen's Items at Special Prices
Pure madras shirts the real lava shirt, ble colors garantí- a ftA zed at $ ó.vv Silk and mercerized socks, all colors and sizes, es- rApecial at Jvt. Gentlemen's black and yellow straps with nickel buckle JQ.
All Cheap Good Quality
Madras shirts, large assortment of colors and sizes, quality £upe- 1 'jr ñor, marked down to l./J Colored silk crepe shirts, wide list, special Collars, large assortment, hard and soft, are Ide brand, mu- □vEAr chos styles to ||.
UNION SUITS. Sleeveless cloth T-shirts and pants and HCp shorts special at "Jv. Cloth T-shirts and pants the freshest for this J season, ¿rrepressed to 431.
HILO T-SHIRTS knitted, short and long sleeve, all sizes available at ÍJt. * _ _ Gentleman's ties, beautiful colors, silk knitted at vJl.
Gonzalez Padin Co., Inc. SAN JUAN, PQNCE. MAYAGÜEZ.
Mr. Aboy Jr. announces that there will be no more changes for the time being.
or two million dollars more than Mr. Benedicto's balance sheet, for I will have been more successful. That's all." - "And if you succeed in that," said Iglesias, "by virtue of citing a wise plan to properly appraise the properties and collect the largest amount of contri butions, you will have made the best Treasurer." The above dialogue will give an idea of the good intentions animating the young man. Treasurer, i THE REMOVAL OF MR. BONNER When Mr. Bonnter was obliged to relinquish the office of Auditor, Mr. Benedictp appointed him Inspector of Flanks, in his getting Judge Bonner not to be left helpless after halter rendered him such good and efficient ser vices to the Island Government. Later the new Treasurer, Mr. Aboy, asked Mr. Bonner to resign. We do not know at this time the reasons for the decision adopted by Mr. Aboy, Jr. To fill the position held by Mr. Enrique Castro, Chief of the Internal Revenue Bureau, Mr. Aboy, Jr. appointed William Amy. THE RESIGNATION OF MR. GONZALEZ FONT! According to our reports, don. Abe. lan&j Gonzalez Font, Deputy Treasurer of Mr. Benedicto, when the latter received the letter from the Governor asking him to resign his office, delivered to him his resignation as "Assistant' su yo, to take effect as soon as Mr. Benedicto left the Treasury. Mr. Gonzalez Font has been a competent employee and has held various positions of responsibility and importance in the Government of the Island. He is now preparing 2. to embark for the North. PACIFIC ARGENTINE BRAZIL LINE Departures from San Francisco for Ponce and San Juan. SS West Jappa September 20. SS West Kattan October 17. SS West Notu November 15. Order your shipments by direct steamship and avoid delays. BEHN BROTHERS INC. Agents. San Juan, P. R. I HOTEL í H Dondado-Vanderbilt ;- BRAN BAILE ;; " FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE CROSS " :: RED AMERICAN. " " September 4. ::: bridge í: " TICKET $1.00 " 41 I -I -I-t-I-I-I-t -I-I -I I I Uli H-H-I' I- 1 !■ 1 1 1 A.CARAZO, Brau St.72 is pleated and buttons lined.
The Sensation of the Day f' . ■■■■■■ Suits, shirts, hats, collars, ties, umbrellas, garters, yokes, belts, socks, stockings, caps, suspenders, underwear B. V. D., pajamas, flannel and colored pants. All this we are doing at extremely low prices. Come right now and you will save money. 50 Luna ECHEVARRIA. Moon 50 I finally got my money back £ If you have your automobile .*. that you don't! use it and wish to sell- *t' y lo, visit us and you won't waste your X time making infruc- *£ tuous offers. X Y Information: ♦ ¿ Box 1355. Phone 1525 X 9 -- Offices 25-26 2d floor. Edi. f $ ficip Bouret. San Juan.
TO THE RETAIL PHARMACEUTISTS OF SAN JUAN, AND LIMITED TOWNS We have opened a new department, wholesale and strictly cash sales, at very limited prices. to put us in a position to favor retail pharmacists as much as possible so that they may be able to meet the present competition in the market. J. M. Blanco, Inc. 56 San Francisco, San Juan, P. B. Advt.
Teatro San Agustin TODAY SATURDAY TODAY The super-production "ESPOSAS FRIVOLAS" First Chapter The $1,500,000 Movie Tomorrow Sunday the 2nd Chapter.
We are about to receive an important shipment of CEMENT "LEHIGH PORTLAND" on the steamship "OZAMA". Special Prices while unloading lasts PLACE YOUR ORDERS NOW. SANTINI FERTILIZER CO. Pier No. 6. Phone 517.
UNBOXEADORFAMOSO
Boxer Andres Balsa, na. tural of Galicia (Spain), who arrived yesterday in this port on his way to Cuba, where he is contracted for important fights. Balsa is well known in Puerto Rico, where some years ago he spent a long season. IN A CONTRRABANDO SURPRISED IN YABUCOA THERE ARE COMPLICATED KNOWN PERSONS Last night, in a raid carried out by the Commissioner of Prohibition and his agents, in Yabucoa, they surprised an important contraband of liquor that was hidden near the sea, in the farm "Dos bocas", that Mr. Domingo Quintana has in his possession. Fourteen "drums" of alcohol and 26 boxes of different fine liquors were seized. In connection with this matter, the names of certain elements of San Juan and the island, who, according to what we are assured, are involved in the importation of said alcohol to the island, which seems to have been discovered in different places along the coast of that coast. BALFOUR'S NOTE ON THE DEBTS, TO THE BASKET. PARIS, September 1. The Compensation Committee agreed to reject by a majority vote the 4th Balfour note concerning the mutual cancellation of all Allied debts. The decision of the Committee was transmitted by wireless to England.
PROSECUTOR WELLS GIVES ORDERS TO PROCEED AGAINST THE SMUGGLERS OF THE SPANISH STEAMSHIP ".
On board the Spanish steamer "Antonio L&pec.'-' the Customs Inspector, Mr. Santiago, in the moments in which he went to take some bottles of liquor which several individuals were trying to remove from the ship, was violently assaulted by a large number of workers on board, who knocked him to the ground, giving him strong blows. The Inspector pulled out his revolver, but when he tried to fire, the weapon was snatched from his hands, without him being able to avoid it. Santiago struggled on the ground as best he could, until the intervention of one of the ship's officers calmed down the enraged people, who in the paroxysm of the ATTACK shouted: "we are going to throw you into the water"! Inspector Santiago, whom we saw yesterday, shows countless bruises on all parts of his body. Yesterday morning, the prosecutor Wells, of the Federal Court, having learned of the incident, summoned all the Customs inspectors and held a very tense conference with them, at which he gave final instructions as to the attitude that the Customs inspectors should adopt towards the counter-attackers, whom, he said, should be made to respect by shooting them to avoid a repetition of scenes like the one of the night before last. Inspector Santiago, according to our reports, could not swear a complaint against anyone, because he did not know any of his aggressors. trial against prosecutor quiñones postponed Guayama, Sept. 1, 22. EL MUNDO, San Juan, P. R. In front of a large turnout, the District Court today heard a motion for a stay of proceedings filed against Judge Segarra in the municipal court. Judge Arroyo, Justice Department sent Hon. Cintron, judge of Ponce, to see the case, but Judge Arroyo notified him that he had postponed the date to begin using leave of absence. Carlos Llauger and Roberto Todd Jr., represented Judge Fernandez; Martinez Davila represented Quiñones. After debates and presentation of arguments, the twentieth day was set for a new appearance. The contempt case pending before the municipal court, scheduled for today, was also postponed. SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT, is® A Majestic Premiere in P. R. Seena Owen and E. K. Lincoln in the beautiful and luxurious 7-act "Cosmopolitan" drama "La Mujer que Dios Cambió" (The Woman God Changed.) - English and Spanish Titles. A Paramount Picture "EL FIGARO" This barbershop salon will be closed all day Monday as it is a holiday. Pedro TRQJJLLLO.
BASE-BALL MAYAGÜEZ VS. HUMACAO IN THE HUMACAO LEAGUE. TWO BIG GAMES 9:30 A. M. AND 3 P. M. SUNDAY SEPTEMBER 3, 1922 Fans from all over the island are invited. Be in Humacao early that day. HUMACAO BASE BALL ASSOCIATION.