THE WORLD
10 pages 3 Semester, $4.00, jf One year, $7.50m i* I Offices: Salvador Brau, 81.
I Offices: Salvador Brau, 81. ¡ Tel. 833. P. O. Box 345. ¡ j
MORNING DAILY, EXCEPT SUNDAYS,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
Published and distributed under permit (No. |O1) euthoriied by the Act of October 6 1917 on file at the Post Office "1 Ran Juan. Porto Rico. By order of the Preeident. A. 8. Burleson. Postmaster General'. Entered a. second claw matter fehmary 21. 1919. at the Post Office at Ran Juan, Porto R "eo, (United States of America 1 under the of march 3. 1879.
YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
saturday, may 13, 19fi2.
NUMBER 997.
The Lalo affair. Coll y Cuchí and the telegram from Don Antonio have been * the subject of many comments.
Interesting statements by Ledo. Lastra Charriez
Public opinion has returned to ,fl jar its attention to political matters that now seem more serious than ever, on the occasion of the" decisi vas manifestations made by Mr. Barceló in the telegram he sent to "La Democracia'' from Fajardo in relation to the question raised on the occasion of the announced defense of the Governor that the eminent lawyer and unionist leader Cayetano Coll y Cuehí was said to have accepted. Many have applauded Don Antonio's attitude, which they describe as energetic and courageous, in recognizing that in contacting the Fortaleza, the men of the party could be harmed, since he says that the Governor seems to want to drag in his fall anyone who offers him the opportunity to do so. In connection with the matter of Ledo Coll and Cuchi, some exalted people have judged, at first glance, the matter unfavorably for the President of the House, while others believe that as the facts have been re tetted by Mr. Coll and the cqfa'ps, the Governor and the President of the House have been able to find a way out of the situation. Coll and the cqfa'ps have not been disproved by the Governor, the matter is not of such importance that what has been conceded is not that Mr. Coll had accepted the Governor's defense in the case, but the task of reviewing the record and rendering an opinion, which may well have been favorable or contrary to the Governor, depending on the merits of the case. Finally," they add, "this did not even happen, since Mr. Coll did not even have the opportunity to review the documents. Some are of the opinion that the truth of what happened was that the Governor was trying to set up a trap for the Attorney General, to obtain a statement favorable to him from Mr. Coll y Ouchí and thus be able to destroy that of Mr. Mestre, if the latter was against him, or in the event that Mr. Coll gave him an opinion contrary to his own, to provoke the Attorney's dismissal on the grounds that the latter had given him in Parque Borinquen TODAY Saturday. TODAY IT 'The Rookies Return.' By Douglas McLean and Doris May. Pathe News. Box office: 20 ctvs. Matinee at 3:30 P. M. "THE THREE MUSKETEERS" Adults 15 stvs. Children 10 ctvs. Sunday morning: "PAPA MIO" . (Old Dad.) ' It is plated and lined buttons A. CARAZO, Brau St 72.
Private papers: from the Grand Jury to Mr. Coll y Cuchí. Mr. Coll y Cuchí. Fortunately, none of this happened due to Mr. Mestry's refusal to hand over the Grand Jury's documents, which has led some to say that now it can be said: "Nothing happened here, despite the things that could have happened! Having gathered the above comments, we must make the following clarification regarding Mr. Barceló's telegram: "It is not true that there could have been a misinterpretation on the part of our "reporter" when taking the interview, since it was dictated by Mr. Coll y Cuchí to my stenographer and corrected by him, once the transcription had been made. Our Editor only intervened in formulating the questions and provoking the interview to which Mr. Coll y Cuchí gladly agreed" WHAT THE LCDO SAYS. LASTRA CHARRIEZ Yesterday afternoon and regarding the comments made in connection with the Ledo affair. Coll and Cuchí, we heard Ledo. Lastra Cha rriez: ''I am not concerned with the good or bad performances, of the men who lead our collectivity; the only thing that worries me is the attitude of the Unionist Party and I know that this one stands firm, firm, and in an attitude of protest before the tyranny of E. Mont Rally '' '' '' ''Besides - continued the vice-president of the House - I am really dumbfounded, not before the attitude of some of our politicians but before that of some funclona(Continued on page 2aí DANCE IN CAYEY Tomorrow will be celebrated in the halls of the Union Circle, in Cayey, a dance of confidence. I Municipal Theater Company of Comedies, Zarzuelas and Varietés SORIA-SICILIA Today-Saturday, May 13, 1922 -Today Aristocratic Tanda at 5.30 P. Mdedicated to the fair sex with the comic play "AN IRRESISTIBLE WIDOW" I and great Variety act. At §.45 P- M. The zarzuela in one act "YA SOMOS TRES" Humorismos e by Fernando Flaquer. Songs by Paquita Sicilia. Singing number by Isa- ; bel Soria. Prices for evening and night seats, respectively: Box seats with 6 tickets $2.40 $3.69 Luneta 0.40 0.60 Balcony 0-20 0.30 I General Admission '■ 0.20 0.30 , Gallery 0.10 0.15 i Minos a Luneta 0.25.
OLIMPO Theater Tomorrow Debut of the duet His paño-Argentino. Huerta nica -Cardosa 2 Tandas: 7 and a half and 9 and a quarter. Original show. Highly comic. From the main theaters of South America. POPULAR PRICES. II | |.| 1 I 1 j. Great existence of the accredited . CEMENT "LE HIGH" PORTLAND Ask for price from SANTINI FERTILZER CO. and KORBER & CO., Inc. SAN JUAN
LOST Checks lost and endorsed by Félix V. Lopez. Reward will be given to whoever finds and returns them to said gentleman. Naguabo, P. R. Advt.
PUNTAS PARIS (ALL SIZES) Quality - Price - Service Holán, Tejedor 4 de Hoslos Box 1356. Phone 395. San Joan, P. R.
Expert in Blouse models are needed. Address Harry Line 4-6 Infanta Luisa, Marina. Advt.
WOOD at $38" Millar F. Benitez Rexach. Pier 6 ■ .
RUSJA'S REPLY TO THE MEMORANDUM EUE DELIVERED ATER TO M. SOIANZER.
i RUSSIA'S RESPONSE TO THE MEMORANDUM WAS DELIVERED YESTERDAY TO M. SCHANZER. THE EXPECTED DOCUMENT REITERATES THE SO VIET'S DESIRES TO COMPLY WITH ANY OF THE 'I AGREEMENTS ADOPTED BY THE CONFERENCE (French Cable) GENOVA May 12- - Georges Tchitcherine yesterday placed in the hands of ' j M. Schanzer, Minister of Italy at the economic conference, the Soviet Government's iesponse to the recent memorandum of the Alia two governments. In official circles the news began to be whispered that it was very likely that the Russian and French delegates, as well as the head of the British Government, Lloyd George, would resume the direct talks which they had been engaged in on the outstanding questions to be dealt with in the Russian reply. This statement was made in view of reports circulating in political circles in Rome and Paris to the effect that Mr. Tchitcherine had promised to read out at a private meeting the terms of the reply, in order to hear the observations of the Russians.
The assumptions were not borne out by these suppositions. These assumptions were not confirmed since Tchitcherine immediately placed in the hands of M. Schanzer the document in question, which was then read out at the conference. The head of the Soviet delegation, speaking afterwards to the journalists, stated that the delay in sending the reply was due to the disagreements between Joffre and Litvinoff, caused by clause seven of the memwandum, with which the said delegates were not in agreement. The Russian is considered here, with the exception of the Cominist circles, as a conciliatory document and comments with full satisfaction on the reservations imposed by the delegates, which are insisted upon in order to comply with any of the agreements approved at the Genoa conference. The reply may be summed up in several essential points: 1-The suggestion that all economic and financial problems relating to Russia should be submitted to the judgment of a Joint Committee of Experts appointed by the Genoa assembly itself.
M 2.-Russia will reserve all liberty of action in regard to her claims concerning the damages produced by the Denikini expeditions and by the revolutions of Kclchak, Kerensky, etc. 3. The Soviet declares itself in favor of their demands, by way of reciprocity, provided that the Allies declare themselves equally in favor of the cancellation of the debts contracted by the Russian governments during the period of the war. 4. Russia rejects, specifying the seriousness of the proposal, the system of a mixed arbitration tribunal to regulate foreign claims, on the ground that this clause is contrary to and incompatible with communist principles. 5. The economic differences between Russia and the Allied Powers will in no way hinder the continuation of the conference discussions. 6. The Soviet Government respectfully submits the introduction of a reciprocity clause which would place all countries on the same level of economic equality. 7. -Russia cannot accede to the wishes of the Allied governments in regard to the denationalization of foreign property unless these governments, (Continued on p. 3aj
We are the cause of this situation
The pretentious social leaders who do not cease to claim that it is by the means of a spatial socialization recommended by them that the complex and precarious problem of our financially precarious situation is to be solved, are wasting their time. Nor are those who claim that the way to alleviate the situation of our working classes is to maintain an eternal struggle against capitalism, so that it will continue to increase wages, whether or not the increase is timely or not, the way to alleviate the criticism is to maintain an eternal struggle against capitalism, so that it will continue to increase wages, whether or not the increase is timely or not. The way to alleviate the critical economic situation of the island, and to make the threat of hunger that overcomes us disappear, is to promote the establishment of industries in Puerto Eico, helping and maintaining them even at the cost of the greatest sacrifices. It is also our duty to maintain the ones we have today!
We are working to ensure that they achieve a degree of prosperity that will allow them to live with the necessary ease, without the hardships that are always offered by a strange understanding. We are working to make sure that the main palace countries get good prices on the markets. We must work so that the products of our industries are consumed by our people with due preference. Tobacco today has a low price. The rich farmers of the rich countries complain about this and write often citing public aid so that the product will continue to be cultivated with the same success and on the same scale as in previous years. But tobacco will continue to be at the lowest prices if the native buyer does not decide to cooperate with the tobacco industries to keep them at a high level of production and allow them to improve their production.
Our native cigarettes are being combated by the similar ones that the foreign industry introduces in the Island with the help of the local consumer, who uses this product. Medical science has accused the foreign product of bad manufacturing quality and of being harmful to health because of the chemical compositions used in its manufacture. Let us protect our cigarette industry by consuming the tobacco we produce here, which is not only made with raw material harvested in the island, but also with the special tobacco that we dedicate here to this branch of tobacco, which is of unbeatable quality, as can be verified at any time. f
i NEWS I i NEWS! arrived this week 1 FINE TAPE RETAILS LADIES HATS <le 2 1 2 yds. new and pretty colors New models just received worth at 90 ctvs. and $1.00 we have great variety i at 65 c. one to choose from at $1.50 - 2.50 - 3 and 5.00 SHADOWS AND PARAGUAS FOR LADIES' NECKLACES AND BELTS NEW New models, beautiful cuffs New styles just arrived a great assortment true fantasies at $1.50 - 2 - 2.50 and 3.00 at 50-75- 1.00 and 1.50 FANTASY VANITYBS AND HALF HALF HALVES. BAGS AND BAGS Preciosities just received new styles of great fashion all colors. from P íe l 6,1 colors and silver plated. to 49 - 89 - 99y 150 to 98-148 - 198 and 3.00 "vSÍ. R " l " " ""t S ' 8or " y NiS "- *"*> " Pr " ¡ " B*™-' tisimos. >da and buy a lot of good things with little money. GONZALEZ PAD1N C0" INC. "AK II-AV LA CASA Q UE VENDE DE JODO i SAN JUAN PONCE MAYAGÜEZ
I B Executive Committee for the erection in Ponce of the monument to Muñoz
Rivera visited this capital yesterday and it will be inaugurated next November 15th I
Yesterday we had the pleasure of greeting in > Sen Juan the distinguished gentlemen from the city of the South, Don Guillermo Shuck, Ledo. Domingo Sepúlveda and Ledo. Luis Yordán Dávite, who are part of the Executive Committee for the erection in Ponce of a monument to perpetuate the memory of the illustrious Torrican who has disappeared. One of our editors exchanged brief impressions with the aforementioned friends and learned that the purpose they were pursuing in coming to this city was to raise from the Adasna the 40 packages that will contain the magnificent pedestal on which the beautiful bronze statue that has been in the possession of the Executive Committee for some time now will be placed. The said pedestal is made entirely of marble from Italy, artistically carved by the reputed Catalan sculptor Narcfn Gosch Eoix, under the direction of Alfredo Weicherg, architect residing in Bar- ¡ 1 cotona. Thanks to the valuable help <tol well-known Spanish financier, Don Manuel ' Gonzalez, of Salinas, the' cempafiía of steamships of Messrs. Pinillos. of Barcelona, has made free of charge the transport to Puerto Rico of the pedestal of the statue, and by the intervention, thus mioma, of the CONFERENCE OF MRS. COLL Y TOSTE Y HERNANdATlOPEZ f On the 17th of the current day itovxrá to : effect in the halls of the Colegie EsI, calen" Gregg Shorthand, of te stop ' | 21 Santurce, a very important conference in charge of tos distinguished gentlemen Dr. Coll y Tosté y Ledo. Juan Hernandez Lopez. The lecturers will develop the theme "Progress of commerce and its "tí-i , liczdes in Puerto Rico." FOR GEORGETTI'S MANSION Various building materials have already been ordered for Mr. Georgetti's "unctuous residence. These materials are the best of the best and are being supplied by Ferreteria Merino - Advt. : ' I TODAY SATURDAY TODAY The. beautiful Norwegian actress LEE PARRY in the stupendous drama eu 10 ar/os 'THE DEATH OF THE GRAND DUKE''' Prices Corrientes 1 I TOMORROW TOMORROW PROGRAM OF 5!0NQR Sunday, Mavo 14 PORT RIOO PREMIERE of the sensational film "DETERMINATION" "DETEEMTNAWlON" i i i, 12 acts.- . 12,000 Feet.- X*A peücula that broke all records at the "EMPIRE" Theater in Syracuse. Matinee at 10 lf2 A. M. Special run at 4 1|2 P. M. I I* Evening two runs as usual.
Mr. Gonzalez, the railroad will haul the 40 bundles to the city of also without charge. The members of the Committee, after having obtained the lifting of the aforementioned packages at the Customs Office and having them on their way to Ponce, visited His Lordship the Bishop, to obtain from him the cession of the surface of some land belonging to the Church, where the statue will be placed. To this visit they were accompanied by the Ledo. Naughty and hope that everything will be settled satisfactorily. Asked by us the members of the * Committee, if they expected to inaugurate the statue in the near future, they attested that if a hundred difficulties were overcome they hoped to inaugurate it on the 15th of November, when the sixth anniversary of the death of the hero will be celebrated. The act of the inauguration of this monument is going to be a real event, and it will be attended by representatives from all parts of the island since-according to our reports-it is the best and most valuable statue that has been erected so far in Puerto Rico as a tribute to the unforgettable pcrtorrqupño. | LOg DETECTIVES OF SANTURCE PROVIDE GOOD SERVICE The Chief of the detective Luis Benitez and Juan N.Soto Mayor, arrested yesterday at stop 11. Bb. and sa Ayato dfi Mr. Enfile Lales, who in April was aurtraíde vn watch valued at $ 80. When <1 Mr. Laleu noticed the disappearance of the relay, he notified the detective, the "nal, searching in the room of. the maid found under the mattress several pieces of clothing and the relay. Judge Aybar sentenced " Bosa to 25 days of eánceL - RESULT© OF THE COMPETITION* - QUEEN OF MAY OF THE 'ROYAL GREGG COlfEGIO. * Margarita Martí , 22,28$ Ma. Luisa Gallisa 20,500 Teatro América -Today Huge Success Today- new by ios eminent Spanish artists HERMANOS CRAHDIO-ALAHEDA and the pelfeula in 7 acts 1 "The Supreme Judge" Tomorrow Sunday Matinée at 3:30 P. M. and the movie* "La Loca del Castillo".
San Juan Racing and Sporting Club NOTICE For general knowledge, we make public that this Corporation, in extraordinary session held on May 12, 1922, has agreed - by dad to suspend for an indefinite period of time, the races in its Hippodrome. ' z x z