ELMUNDO
Fl I VI I I I Vil 1'1 ¡ I I I I | I I I I 12 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year, $7.50, 111! I 1 b h L 1.1 1 1 I 1
- ■ - - - ■ i-i " i i -i i i i i i | '| Offices: Salvador Brau, 81. Tel. 833, P. O. Box 345.
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
n ■ II I ' .j.... --i. ■. -1-TT Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authi-rhed by the Act of October 6, 1917. on file at the Post Office of | Ran Juan. Porto Rico. By order of the Preeident. A. A Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered aa second class matter, | Febmary 21. 1919. at the Post Office at Ran Juan, Pgfto Ri co, (United States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1879.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 1922.
NUMBER 1145.
The District Court gave three days' time to the Mpal. Assembly of Toa-Al-ta to remit to it the entire procedure followed by it in the appointment of one of its members.
f Two legal appeals have been filed in the District Court, Section A, in relation to the administrative crisis of Toa Alta. The first, a "Certiorari", is filed by Mr. Adrián Cheveres, against the Municipal Assembly of Squel pueblo, requesting a review of the procedures of said official body, with respect to the appointment for delegate of said Assembly, made in favor of Mr. Agustín Guardiola López, who did not have the endorsement of the local Unionist Committee, as alleged by the petitioner. Mr. Cheveres alleges in his lawsuit, presented through Mr. Castro Gonzalez, that back on the 21st of November, 2001, Mr. Guardiola Lopez was a member of the local Unionist Committee. Castro González, that back on October 21, the Municipal Assembly of Toa Alta met to fill a vacancy that occurred within the Assembly, due to the resignation of Mr. Evaristo Díaz; that on the same date, the local Unionist Committee passed a resolution recommending the petitioner to fill the aforementioned vacancy of Díaz, as delegate to said assembly for the Unionist Party; that after the communication sent by the local Committee was read before the Assembly, the president of the Assembly, Mr. Jo sé N. Guardiola, Mr. Jo sé N. Guardiola, who at the same time is President of the latter, presented to the consideration of the Assembly my personal recommendation, in favor of his relative Agustín GuBrdiola López, to fill the vacancy in reference; that the Assembly of Toa Alta, attending to the personal recommendation of the Nieves, and forgetting that of the local Committee of the Union, appointed the said Guardiola to fill said position, in flagrant violation of Article 22 of the Municipal Law. For all of which the petitioner Mr. BAMQtEZ BUSINESS COLLEGE This great college directed with remarkable expertise by Professor Don Esteban Bamirez, has opened a new fcur so of Accounting and Civil Service and two courses of English, for beginners and for advanced. The Accounting course consists of Accounting, Arithmetic, Commercial Law, Cali graphy and Commercial Methods. The Civil Service course consists of all the subjects necessary for the Stenographers' and Typists' examinations. The excellent school now occupies magnificent premises on the second floor of the "Sonreí Building. The new 4-CYLINDER "OLDSMOBILE" model has arrived. Come and compare its price, ; quality, elegance, etc. with those of other brands in its class. Two different types: 5-seat Touring and 4-seat Senu-Sport. Surprising price. PIETRANTONI & SOJO f "La Tienda de Goma" í San Juan, P. R.
I Cheveres, requests the Court to issue a "Certiorari" against the respondent Assembly, so that the Secretary of the same may remit to the competent Court the proceedings in the matter at issue, so that they may be reviewed. The petitioner concludes by requesting the Court to revoke the resolution of the Assembly of Toa Alta, by virtue of which Guardiola was appointed to fill the vacancy caused by the resignation of Diaz. Judge Foote, in accordance with the merits of the request, issued an order giving the Toa Alta Assembly three days to submit to the Court, duly certified, all the proceedings related to the aforementioned matter, for the hearing of the case on the 7th of the current date. QUO WARRANTO" At the request of Mr. Felix Monclova, of Toa Alta, the Attorney General appeared before the aforementioned Court, and requested the authorization of a "Quo Warranto" recourse so that the right of Ra món Martínez Quintero to exercise the position of delegate of the Municipal Assembly of Toa Alta be reopened by the Court, since, according to a complaint filed by the Attorney General, he is a delegate of the Municipal Assembly of Toa Alta, and that, according to a petition filed by Mr. Martínez Quintero, he is a delegate of the Municipal Assembly of Toa Alta, and that, according to a complaint filed by the Attorney General, he is a delegate of the Municipal Assembly of Toa Alta, according to the petition formulated by Mr. Monclova, the said subject is illegally holding the mentioned position and usurping the functions and rights inherent to the same, i In the text of the petition Mr. Monclova, through his attorney Mr. Castro Gonzalez, alleges that on October seventeenth and seventh, the Toa Alta Municipal Assembly held a meeting on October seventeenth and seventeenth, and that he is illegally holding the said position and usurping the functions and rights inherent to the same, i In the text of the petition Mr. Monclova, through his attorney Mr. Castro Gonzalez, alleges that the Toa Alta Municipal Assembly held a meeting on October seventeenth and seventeenth. Olimpo Theater TODAY SATURDAY, NOV. 4. TODAY , Noche e Arte y Naturalidad! Sensation and Life! The thrilling French drama: The Man with Three Faces A production of extraordinary merit. The only one that has surpassed "BARRABAS" Sunday, November 5th A splendid program full of attractions. Premieres of two magnificent films and a great Graphic Magazine. S500.00GRATIFIGAGI0N I have been authorized to make the offer of the above gratuity, to be paid by proof in addition to that already received, which will make CERTAIN the CON* VICTION of the man who assaulted the President of the Grand'Jury of the Federal Court on the night "of Saturday, the 21st day of October, 1922. The person furnishing the reports will be entirely protected by the Federal authorities. H. S. HUBBARD, United States Marshal. Advt.
HrrtHffl 1 1 11 M 1111 I l "l 1114 1 I ■!"' 1 1 1 H-H-l-M" 1I1 III Ilili" :: DR. FRANCESCHI CABALLERO Ü ... Specialist in Diseases of the Stomach-Liver- * I I I I Intestines-Rectum. I ' Office: Alien 78. Telephone 1192, San Juan. ■ - HOURS: 9 to 12 A. NI.-2 to 6 P. M. e - - - " 4 I 11 I I I i 1 I 1 I 1 I-I--1-Í -1I i I I I l-l-H t -l 4 l>l-H+l-W+!| I 1 1 1 I | 11.1 We have one lot left of Belgian Portj land Cement which we are offering at $2 a barrel. It is a little slow setting but good. Excellent for plastering, etc. Korber & Co, Inc.
The present concern, on the occasion of the latest news received, is based on the manner in which the settlement of the political conflict will be arranged.
Reasons why next week's big conference is considered of the utmost importance A skillful stratagem brought the dismissal of the municipal judge of Toa Alta to a halt.
The latest cable news ; arriving in this capital from Washington, have caused that in all ■ the people who closely follow the current political conflict, only one concern prevails: what will be the basis on which the understanding will be agreed upon to put an end to this controversy that for so long has kept the island in an enormous public expectation, and whose disastrous effects are being felt in all orders, mainly in the economic field. As soon as we learned that Mr. Barceló had held his announced conference with President Harding, and we had news of the result of the same, we had to exchange impressions with different important personalities of our political world, with the purpose of inquiring their opinion regarding the favorable or adverse result that is to be expected as a consequence of the conversation that the chief magistrate of the Republic held with the maximum leader of the majority of the public opinion of the island. As is natural, almost all the mentions of our public men remain reserved, because they consider the situation very delicate, especially if one takes into account that Mr. Barceló has not wanted to make public the details of his interview; but in spite of that, we have been able to sound out the sentiment and the way of thinking of some of them, and it seems to us to be in a position to advance to our readers, - of course, with the consequent reserve, - what in our opinion is the criterion that prevails among the majority of the public opinion of the island.
£ prevailing among most of the principal Puerto Rican politicians, in relation to the turn which, possibly, in the near future, the political situation of the country is to take. i THE FIRST IMPORTANT FACT Extraordinary importance has been attached, and we have been told so, to the fact that Mr. Barcelonez, the President of the Republic, has been the first to be informed that Mr. Barcelonez, the President of the Republic, has been the first to be informed of the fact that Mr.- to the fact that Mr. Barceló, on this occasion, visited the President completely alone, for in this way, we have been told, Mr. Barceló and the President have had a good opportunity to discuss with absolute freedom and complete frankness the problem of the island. The presence of other politicians at the said conference would perhaps have been a great obstacle to dealing at length with the situation and particularly with some other question of a personal nature, which it would have been necessary to discuss in the course of the interview. $ "If the satisfaction and optimism of Don AntdNp*Ehos have said- had not been made public; the fact that he had gone to the Conference all alone, was a sufficient reason to suppose that the said interview would have been a frank success". As our readers know, in one of the recently arrived dispatches, it was said that Mr. Barceló assured that, within three or four weeks, the conflict would be solved, "in one way or another". In order to clarify this phrase and in order to determine what
In order to clarify this phrase and in order to determine what the much talked-about success consisted of, we asked one of the aforementioned friends, and he told us that precisely this phrase of Mr. Barceló's revealed the policy he had followed at the conference and the way in which he presented the problem to the President. If we look closely at this statement, we will understand that the Chief of the Party, who knows how necessary it is for the country to put an end to this state of affairs, in his conversation with the President, in explaining the prevailing abnormality in the government of the island, asked him only to put an end to this situation, in whatever form it might take, since this would satisfy the aspirations of the whole country. Surely the President, who could not in any way allow unrest to persist among the majority of a people who have been loyal and noble, had seen clearly the intention, finding the right moment to rectify the error, if any had been committed, and had made this time the formal offer to discuss the situation definitively in order to put an end to the controversy. The success, therefore, is due to the fact that Mr. Barceló had only demanded that the Administration put an end to the prevailing anor mality in the government of the island, without entering into partisan demands that could be interpreted as of personal and not patriotic interest. THE IMPORTANCE OF THE NEXT MAGNIFICENT CONFERENCE Regarding the announced conference (Oontlnúa en la Sra. pag.)
APPROPRIATE WINS FOR NOVEMBER GENTLEMEN'S SUITS REDUCED BY HALF Straw Hats OF THEIR COST I Water Cloaks I For Butler Men's Model 1923 CF7C <1 f|AA 'at $10 We have just "P fOv <P|||||vV ' of Oil at $4 Receive them .I I III of Street at $7.50 Affordable Prices U I I 1 U Come See Them All Sizes.-Colors and Styles Chosen APPROVECHE....! GONZALEZ PAD IN CO. INC. SAN JUAN. PONCE. MAYAGÜEZ. ♦
FAHWUA Stop 44. Esq. Park St. Tel. 991 Sant. A modern establishment. Come to see it, we will be attentive to you, i Send your prescriptions here. We will be honest and neat in dispensing the 'same. Prop. LUCIANO RAMOS. Ask your doctor if he knows me. I He will tell you, send in confidence. Messenger and bicycle.
Cinema 1 One-Eyed Rich" TODAY. SATURDAY TODAY The sublime production by Katherine Mac Donald, "THE RAY" and a nice comedy in . 2 acts entitled "Refreshing with Heat". TOMORROW: Episodes 7 and 8 of the terrific series by William Duncan entitled Challenging Fate and a comedy in 2 acts.
Borin quen Park TODAY SATURDAY TODAY SPECIAL HOUDINI STBENO in the portentous drama: Sinister Adventure (THE GBIM GAME) Tomorrow Sunday:- Every Man's Price (Every Man's Price) Coronation of the Queen.
Mr. Moret, prominent independen* list of Rio Piedras, is in favor of changing the entire Supreme Council of the Nationalist party and says he will present a motion to that effect.
Mr. Moret, a prominent independen* tista of Rio Piedras, as we have been able to observe, says that he is not in agreement with the procedures that are being put into practice by the directors of the Nationalist Party, and to that effect he has made statements to us to the effect that he is in favor that, if the assembly that is being requested is carried out, a complete change should be made in the personnel that make up the governing body of the aforementioned Party. Mr. Moret believes, as a pure independentist, that it is preferable that the men who today lead the said movement be sacrificed, rather than GERMANY IS INTENDING TO REBUILD THE N0R=TE OF FRANCE BERLIN, November 3.-The Minister Hermes has stated that if the Jews grant the requested moratorium, the government will not undertake to make the war payments with the required haste*, but that it is nevertheless prepared to deconstruct the cities and areas of France destroyed by the war. CONVOCATION On Tuesday, November 7, at 3:30 o'clock in the afternoon, the meeting of the Civic Club will be held at the Casino of Puerto Rico. All members are requested to attend, as there will be elections at this meeting and it is necessary that all be present. Mrs. W. L. ZWIGARD. Secretary of the Ladies' Civic Club. Equestrian Novelty!!!! -TODAY- SATURDAY -TODAY-STBENOUS SENSATIONAL "ON THE TRACK" (THE, HOME STRETCH) great horse racing by the popular comedian Douglas Me. Lean CURRENT PRICES -MANANA - MANANA-"YOUTHFUL FOLLY" (YOUTHFUL FOLLY) by Ja funny OLIVE THOMAS Pathé News No. 84 and 85. 4-4-HM II H 1 I I I I I 1 1 1 I-H-M- l-H-i-b $150,000.00 CASH 1 See how they were emplea- II í dos by M. Rodriguez &. Co. II on page 4a. " 4 1 I I I I I I I I I I I I I IIIIIIIIIII H- 1
| The ideas that have given life and strength to it will be sacrificed. In line with this statement, Mr. Moret informed us that if the aforementioned assembly is held, he will present a motion asking the members to adopt a resolution declaring vacant all the positions of the members that make up the Supreme Council of the aforementioned collectivity, suggesting at the same time that new elements be appointed to occupy them, for understanding," Moret added, "that as long as those positions continue to be occupied by the gentlemen who presently occupy them, they will continue to give twisted interpretations to the actions of the aforementioned party. tations of the aforementioned Party. ' - ■■ i i AN IMPORTANT MOTION WILL BE T RESENTED TODAY IN THE FEDERAL COURT - ... I Today at 9:00 a.m. com ' { will appear in Federal Court on behalf of Sergio Seijo; Miguel Guerra Mondragon. on behalf of Ernesto Diaz; Miles M. Martin on behalf of Messrs. Leon, Suarez and Miro, and Jaime Sifre on behalf of Mr. Negron Benitez, [ in order to discuss a motion requesting the dismissal of the case against their defendants, according to the indictment rendered by the Grand Jury of said Court. THE NEW TERM OF THE FEDERAL COURT ' I _ Today morning begins the new term of the Federal Court. Judge Odlin returned yesterday from Ponce after concluding the cases there, in order to begin the sessions of the new San Juan term. The last matter decided in Ponce by the Hon. Judge Odlin was the case of Don Francisco del Moral vs. Northern Assurance Co. after a laborious four day hearing. The jury found in favor of the plaintiff del Moral, condemning the defendant company to pay the plaintiff the sum of thirty thousand dollars. Acting as counsel for the plaintiff were distinguished attorneys Hugh R. Francis, Miles M. Martin and Jose Sabater. Representing the plaintiff company was Ledo. J. Henri Brown. j-H l ! I IH-H "H-4 I I I- I I I I I I I I I I I I III I BOLIVAR PAGAN I ¡¡Attorney and Notary¡¡¡ ---♦ I w - ■ ; - Calle Fortaleza No. 23 altos. P. O. Box: 883. I I I Telephone: 1475. ;; II San Judn, Puerto Rico. 11 > l-W-l-l-1 1 H 1 I 1 1 1 l-H-l-H-H-H l I "
I ill --------Mi-- HI'HH'HMI lilililí 1-1I-I I I I | ¡. |. |. |. |..i..t.i.4..hn-! 1 I H4 I I I H-H-H-I MHH H 4 - - As of November 1 we will extend to our clients - - ;; the benefit of a 30 percent DISCOUNT on the bom. * * * II NITROGEN "EDISON MAZDA'* bulbs in accordance with -- II the US market. 1 1 1 II Buy "EDISON MAZDA" bulbs and you will be protected. '- i A. RIBOT & CO. INC. [ÍJ San Francisco No. 53. P. O. Box 144. SAN JUAN, P. R. . Vi 1 n ¡ 444 4"14 I4-I'I "H-I'H 144 1 I I I I I I ! 1 I 1 I 1 II 1 1 1 I H I I I I I I I 1 11 | Ñ I "í' I IIÜIHHI 11'1 IHI-IHI I 1 I I I i II i H-l-HM-MI.il | I I I I I I HI 1 1| CANE HARVEST i cIncrease your cane harvest : : :: using CARIBBEAN CALCIUM CARBONATE, í :: sold at 'modest prices by R. del VALLE ZENO, San Juan, P. R. I . e_e s ss v e . e . e . t t flftttfsttfftfftffaeess".,,.