THE.'VUNDO.
■"<HII1IM I11I I I I I I 111 II 12 pages 3 cts Semester, $4.00, One affio, $7.50!
I I 1 ¡ I I I I 1 I I I I I I I I I I I I I ! H * Offices: Salvador Brau, 81. ; ; Tel. 833, P. O. Box 345 -
MORNING NEWSPAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of October 6, 191?. on file at the Poet Office of San Juan. Porto Rieo. By order of the President. A. 8. Bur leson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, Febmary 21, 1919. at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rieo, (United States of America) under the Act of March 8, 1879.
í YEAR IV,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 9, 1922.
NUMBER 1097 .
Mr. Aboy Jr., fearing that he might be expelled from the Party, wanted to know what was discussed in the Central Board.
The new treasurer of Puerto Bico, Mr. Ramón Aboy Jr, of whom it has been said, regarding his appointment, that his attitude in accepting the position by virtue of the displacement of such a good unionist as Mr. Beneiic to, had not responded as was to be expected to the demands of his party, it seems that, having knowledge of the meetings of the Central Board, he came to think that in the bosom of said organism his action in accepting the aforementioned position had been discussed, and he was very impatient, eager to know in detail what had been the deliberations of the Board. On Thursday night, Mr. Aboy Jr. went to the Casino of Puerto Bi co and was procuring Don Mariano Abril; a prominent member of the Central Board of the party, and who attended the two meetings of the aforesaid body. Mr. Abril was not at the Casino at that time. Mr. Aboy Jr. went out in search of him, and after a quarter of an hour he returned without any contrary, and demonstrating his contrariety, he repeated, this time more nervously than ever, his customary cane strokes on the pavement. Later on, Mr. Aboy Jr. disappeared again from the Casillo and at about one o'clock in the morning, one of our Bedactor observed that Mr. Aboy Jr.'s car was waiting patiently in front of the house where Mr. Abril lives. The fact that Mr. Aboy's driver was sleeping in the car, made us presume that Mr. Aboy's visit to Mr. Mariano's house had taken too long. A few moments later Mr. Aboy left the house and took his car to his residence in Santurce. We do not know if Mr. Abril was able to tell Mr. Aboy about what happened at the meeting, but we can confirm that Mr. Aboy's interest in learning about what was discussed by the Management of the match *there are two versions: one, the San Juan Racing and Sporting Club. NOTICE As of Sunday, the 10th of this month, children's tickets will be charged as follows: to Grandstand, $0.50, and to the other sites the same prices as for adults. Parents or guardians of children are reminded that they cannot play "POOL" or any of the other games that take place at the Hippodrome, as it is prohibited by law. San Juan, P. R., Sept. 8, 1922 Advt. Borin quen Park TODAY. SAT. TODAY. 'Behind the Masks' by Dorothy Dalton Revista Gráfica No. 115. Vodeville No. 44. Mañana Domingo Mañana 'Social Auction'.
i Lone Star Steamship Company j Announces the inauguration of a direct service to Pto. 5 , Rico with sailings from the ports of TEXAS and NEW ORLEANS 5 * to take effect on: Sept. 20, the steamer SOUTHSEAS from the í " ports of TEXAS. ? September 23, the steamer SOUTHSEAS from NEW ? ORLEANS. October 5, the steamer MUNISLA from the ports of < i TEXAS. ' 5 October 9, the steamer MUNISLA from NEW ORLEANS. 5 VILLAR & COMPANY, INC. General Agents. 9
The first is that Mr. Aboy Jr. feared that what happened to Leopoldo Santiago Carmona might have happened to him, and the other is, judging from what we have been told, that it was for the purpose of informing the Governor of what he might find out.
In order that Mr. Aboy Jr. may not be concerned, we must make it public that with respect to what was discussed about his action, accepting the position, we have been confidentially informed that officially no agreement was reached. Before the deliberations of the Board began, someone suggested the advisability of moving a motion requesting Mr. Aboy's expulsion from the party; but this was opposed by one who thought it unnecessary. It is quite possible that Mr. Aboy will soon resign his position as Treasurer, being convinced that the responsibility is too much and the work too much for a person who has such a comfortable financial position. This same gentleman who spoke thus, expressed himself in the sense that it would not be strange if Mr. Aboy's resignation were confirmed as soon as the matter of the "San Juan Dock Co." was definitively resolved or when Mr. Aboy believed that the mission that led him to accept such an important position in the Government had been accomplished. Mr. Aboy was yesterday very annoyed with the information published by "La Democracia''. - PRESIDENT HARDING'S WIFE IS ILL WITH I ... SOME CARE .... WASHINGTON, Sept. 8.- It was reported this morning in the White House that President Harding's wife is ill with some care. A consultation of physicians is announced this evening. > t, , I
Manage to unite Republicans and Socialists.
"A few days ago we were informed two that Ledo. Parra Capo and other Republican leaders were in this capital, discussing the question of a possible pact between Republicans and Socialists. Only, we were told, two members of the Bepu blfcano Territorial Committee are opposed to such a union being made. As far as Iglesias is concerned, he is in favor that, if the pact is to be made, it must be from now on, and not in the run-up to the elections. We do not know if any agreement has yet been reached between the leaders of the two parties, but we are certain that the Bepu blican Assembly has been postponed, while the Republican leaders have been waiting for an agreement to be reached in this sense. NEW CHANGE i See the latest FISK rubber and tubing price list and you will be amazed at the price reduction. Advt . BALFOUR IN GENEVA . GENEVA, Sept. 8.- The British Representative, Mr. Balfour, opened the League of Nations debates this morning. MAGNIFICENT OCCASION In the house located on the road to Santurce, stop 20, spacious and comfortable, can have 1 to 3 comfortable rooms for single persons or couples without children, who wish to rent it, for a modest monthly stipend. The major advantage is that it is feasible to offer these rooms, with the right to use the dependencies of the house and you that, if it is convenient. Please contact the same house where you will be informed, or telephone 399 green, Santurce. Advt. Auction ' MONDAY SEPT. 11, 1922 AT i 2 P. M. FBENTE AL MUELLE NO. 5 22,000 ft. % lumber 1X4, 6,8, 10 and 12. ISIDORO D. DELGADO, Almoneden) Public ORDER YOUR PRESCRIPTIONS AND BUY YOUR PATENTED AND PERFUMERY AT WHITE PHARMACY. We serve with promptness, care and attention, and our prices are the best on the market. San Francisco 54*. Phone 35. Advt. We are SOLICITING AGENTS for work on blouses, collars and cuffs. We pay good prices. Address HUGO HAMBURGER Box 439. Ponce, P. R. Advt.
Crewmen of the "Sampaio Correia," which is due to arrive in San Juan any day now, relate their adventures of the voyage.
(From "El Heraldo de Cuba", Havana) Perhaps since the epic days of the European war, when the aviation aces soared beyond the clouds, amidst the crimson horror of battles, and searched and pursued each other in the infinite spaces, in tragic asearan-mas, until they found each other in flormidab.lps, falling wrapped in red robes of fire, and since the great transatlantic flights, the world had not followed with such nervous expectation an aerial adventure as the one that the engineer /Pinto Martins, with Lieutenant Hinton, the bad i quinist Wilshusen, the journalist Bye ! and the cinematographic operator Baltzell, have begun to realize, leaving from New York for Bio de Janeiro, across a distance of 8,500 miles. The gigantic flight of the "Sampaio Correia" has kept in constant vibration the threads of the orV3, from the time it lifted off from an estuary of the North River, in New York, until it landed, with its wings down in the Guantanamo Bay, on the night of August 1 22. i THE AVIATORS: i Surrounded by a group of journalists, in the Hall of the Seville, the aviators narrated the vicissitudes of their voyage. Here was Pilot Hinton, the hero of the transatlantic flight, from Newfoundland to Plymouth, tall, strong, muscular, with ■ adat eyes; here was Martins, with a complexion toasted by the heat of the Ama zones, a deeply Creole type; here was Wilshusen, the engineer of the 1 "Sampaio", pale, thin, a little thin, a little I I I , considered such an award null and void and without any value. Resi'ectilly, ?. DE CASTRO, ' Secretary of the Executive Council.
Z* - Dress Stylier and Cooler Spending Less Money Pure English Denim Clothing IMPORTED, WETTED, CUT AND MADE by ourselves. Dampened for M more than 48 hours, cut one by one, and handmade by expert tailors. NO MANUFACTURERS $j2°0 _ Sj300 _ SjgOO .  -O Oft tebajadas a € years to ÍOC- zados to Z * U.S. '. .  HM' Collars, large assortment, T-shirts and pants, of Head Straps- V f] \| ... ZT w - 3150c. 45c. X-,. 50c. -- - 75c.
The House That Sells ' Everything. I
Gonzalez Padin Co., Inc. I SAN JUAN, PONCE, MAYAGÜEZ. MAYAGÜEZ.
I Only House on the island with Fixed Prices.
SCHOOL NOTEBOOKS
cYou just received at unbeatable prices. Porto Rico Paper & Supply Co., Inc. Luna No. 76. P. O. Box 1411. San Juan, P. R.
The news of the trip was transmitted with admirable accuracy by Bye, the journalist, who filled the news of the "New York World", and lastly, Baltzell, a fat, restless film operator of Pathé News, who managed to print eight thousand films of the first and unfortunate stage of the trip, THE DEPARTURE FROM NEW YORK; here is the report given to us by Dr. Pinto Martins: We left New York on the seventeenth. The farewell was enli clonant. An enormous crowd waved handkerchiefs in our honor from the banks of the North I River. Since our departure from New York our ship has been incessantly fought by strong contrary winds. But we succeeded happily in reaching Charleston and Nassau. (Continued on 3rd page) ' REGISTRATION AT THE UNIVERSITY 1 I ' OF PUERTO RICO 1 It is hereby made known that the registration for the courses of Pharmacy Arts, ', Normal, Rural Teachers, and High School of the University of Puerto Rico . will be held at the "Román Baldorioty de Castro" building in Río Pie j ¿ras during the days from September t 12 until 12 a.m. on September 16. Registration for the Escuela Modelo 1 will begin on September 18 in the morning. 3 Registration for the College of Le1 yes, which has been transferred to St. John's, will probably take place on Sept. 25. The site where the college will be located will be announced later. > Students who are entering the University of Puerto Rico for the first time must present their reports or credit certificates at the time of enrollment, and those who are to enter the Normal or Rural Teacher's course must bring with them the recommendation of the Inspectors of Schools. Students applying for admission to the University High School for the first time will not be enrolled before next Thursday, September 14. No militia course will be offered to ■ students in the first year of High Es. I cuela. The other students of the High School must furnish themselves with their militia reports. The first semester fee must be satisfied at the time of the student's enrollment. C. W. ST. JOHN, Dean, University of P. R. Advt. Today Today Paramount Program The colossal dramatic production "The Straight Path" in 6 acts by MATT MOORE and GLADYS LESLIE Tomorrow Sunday. The French super-production "VENDIMIA" by Judex artists, " Barabbas and Tih-Mih. Plates and lining buttons A.CARAZO. Brau SL72
WE JUST RECEIVED CORRUGATED ZINC, ASSORTED LENGTHS. CUBAN TILE. PARIS TIPS. QUALITY - PRICE - SERVICE. ROLAN TEJEDOR Y DE HOSTOS San Juan, Puerto Rico.
WOOD
Continues to be seen about the Manatí affair.
Yesterday afternoon at 2:00 p.m. the hearing continued in the Executive Council on the petition made by the Municipality of Manatí to expropriate a parcel of land belonging to Mr. Federico Calaf, near the Manatí River, in order to build a reservoir for the sewerage system that is being planned in that town. As the hearing of the previous day, Mr. Santoni, as attorney for Mr. Calaf and Mr. Díaz Collazo on behalf of Barceloneta, appeared to oppose. Ledo. Soto represented the petitioner municipality. The session was attended by all the commissioners, except the Commissioner of Instruction. Upon questions by Dr. Amorós, a witness in the case, the Council fixed $3 per diem for each witness intervening in the matter. The Board rejected by majority, with Mr. Mestre voting against, the reconsideration of Mr. Diaz Collazo's motion to admit certain evidence he wished to present on behalf of the municipality of Barceloneta, which opposes the sewerage system of Manatí draining into the river from which the inhabitants of that municipality obtain their water supply. Authorized Ledo. Soto to continue with his evidence, the referred lawyer presented as such the declaration of the Municipal Secretary of Manatí, Mr. Vélez, who spoke extensively about the necessity and utility of the works in the project and thus justify the expropriation of the requested land. On the same subject, Mr. Soto stated that Mr. Caballero, another witness of the petitioner municipality, was going to testify, but due to being ill, he had not been able to do so, so he-■ the lawyer-■ so stated before the Council. Mr. Soto, {anuncljí íjue had finished stating* the case, except for the statement of the witness who did not pu(Contlnúa en la 6a. pag.) - J TODAY - SATURDAY 9- TODAY GRAND FESTIVAL TO BENEFI OIO DE Huertánica Cardoso TAKE PART: Several young people in the comic play EL ORDENANZA.- Alfonso J. Agua yo. A Puerto Rican girl, disciple of NELLA MAZIMOVA.- El barita no INCLAN.- EL RUISEÑOR DOMI NICANO.- LA HUERTANICA en LA SAMARITANA. -Rafael Cabrera, Pe pe pe Viñas, Nella Mazimova and Huertani ca Cardoso. LUNETAS 25 - ANFITEATRO 50 The Sensation of the Day. Suits, shirts, hats, collars, ties, umbrellas, suspenders, garters, yokes, belts, socks, stockings, caps, suspenders, underwear B. V. D., pajamas, flannel and colored pants. All this we are doing at extremely low prices. Come right now and you will save money. 50 Moon ECHEVARRIA. Moon 50
. í ... Two Large Loads. All Classes and sizes in stock. Special Quality. "MADROSADA". Special Price F. BENITEZ REXACH, Muelle 6. San Juan, P. R.
The Executive Council agrees to disapprove the award of the loan made by the Municipality of Santa Isabel.
At the Secretary of the Executive Council yesterday we obtained a copy of the following resolution regarding the loan made by the Republican municipality of Santa Isabel; *; September 8, 1922. I ( To the Commissioner of Public Service, 1 Police and Prisons of Santa Isabel. 1 Sir: At a meeting of the Executive Council held on September 5, 1922, the Council adopted the following resolution, in connection with the matter of the allotment of $100,000 in bonds to Messrs. John Nuveen and Co. of Chicago. Whereas, the evidence presented before the Council during the public hearing clearly demonstrates that the firm "John Nuveen and Co.", to whom the award was made by the Municipality of Santa Isabel, was not the highest bidder, there being a more advantageous proposal made by Mr. Xavier Mariani, on behalf of the firm Watkins and Co. of New York. I Whereas, the reasons that induced the Municipality of Santa Isabel to make such award to the house of John Nuveen and Co. are not admissible: First, because a proposal in a public auction cannot be submitted after the opening of the bidding documents without notification to the other parties; Second, because neither the Municipality nor its attorneys had the necessary evidence on which to base the conclusion that the house of Watkins and Co. i was not in a position to deliver the money as it had offered, to wit: "As soon as the documentation was ready". Therefore, be it resolved by the Executive Council of Port Bico, that the Council approve the award of said auction 3" $100,000 made by the municipality of Santa Isabel to the said firm of "John Nuveen and Co.", and with the consent of the Executive Council of Port Bico, the said firm of "John Nuveen and Co.".