THE MONDO
yi-i nun wH-i-H-M-i-i-i-i-i-i- ; 10 pages 3 ctvs. " Semester, $4.00. " One year, $7.50. -- tft ft fit f " ttetett"" .
■i-i-i d-i i i i 11111:1 h 11 ¡ m 1 : . Offices: ; Salvador Brau, 81. ; Tel. 833, P. O. Box 345.
YEAR IV.
Numerous Knights of Columbus attended New York convention.
NEW YORK, August j3.-United Press). - The fortieth international congress of the Knights of Columbus is being held today in At lant-jc City. This is the largest and best attended congress in the history of the Order, which has a membership of eight hundred thousand. The first convention of the Columbus Cavaliers was held in New Haven, in the year 1882, at which time the organization had but eight hundred members. From every state of the Union and from each of the provinces of Canada, Cuba, Mexico, Texas, Puerto Rico, Panama, Hawaii, Alaska, the Philippines and other American possessions there have been numerous representatives. This convention is considered the most historic American convention of the Knights of Columbus. The convention halls in Atantic City have seated about twenty thousand members, not counting their families, who are also present. The Bishop of the Diocese of Atlantic City, Bdo. Walsh, of Trenton, opened the proceedings by singing mass in St. Nicholas Church. -The Commissions of Delegates were received by Governor Mr. Edwa Srds and Mayor Mr. Bayer. Among the things discussed by the Knights of Columbus is to raise sufficient funds to improve the service and staffing of 362 hospitals. POINCARE CALLED BARTHOU -." . PARIS, August 4.-The head of the government, Mr. Poincaré, held a conference this morning with Mr. Louis Barthou which lasted for two hours at the office of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It is presumed that Mr. Barthou will accompany the President of the Cabinet to the London conference. Neither the government nor Mr. Poincaré has made any statements confirming this assumption.
1 H MH-H-1 I 1 I 1 I 1 I 1 I 1 1 1 1 1 I I I I 1 II-1-1-1 I I I 11 H-H 1 I lll'll-l UH ri'i-i-t-t-T-TWO BIG BASE-BALL CHALLENGES At the Humacao League August 6, 1922 PONCE vs. HUMACAO At 9.30 A. M and 3 P. M. Fans and aficionados of the Island are cordially invited. Big Bets are coacertadas. HUMACAO BASE-BALL ASSOCIATION. ■H-4-i-l-4""H-l-l-4 "bFl "i--14'l 1 I 1-1 l'l-H-1 I II i I I I I 1Í IH 1 1 1 H I-1 1 ■M-l-l-i-4--H-l-M-W-H-l l 'U 1'1 I H1H! I I I I I I I 1 1 1 1! "¡"I "1 "I l "l "I "I "I-l "H-l "H "l "i :-I "I "I "I'-H-SELLING 1 Ford truck, pneumatic tires, Delivery box in i superb condition. 1 "Borroughs" 13 column adding machine. Almost new. 4 Fire extinguishers of the best brand. 1 Scraps making machine, separating the stick. 100 pounds of guana to make bunches of layers. All Inexpensive i Call 58, San Juan. ; Write to P.O. Box 235, San Juan. Visit the third floor of the Nova Scotia Bank, San Juan. LA PLATA TOBACCO COMPANY. <1 l4i "H 4" 11 1 1 1 1 1 IMIHH4-HH II III lllllllll i-il HHIIIH 1 11 H-H-H-H l I I I I I ! 1 I 1 1 1 1-H-H-H-H-H-i-d-I-H l l l l-l 11-11 l -I I I I I 14--I-I lililililí BLUE LIMESTONE i ' We are pleased to inform our customers and the public in general, that having completed the extensions and improvements to our stone crushing equipment, we will start from tomorrow- . i na first of August to supply the orders received, being in ' ' ' conditions to attend eñcientem ente all the orders that are made to us * * * of this material. R. DEL VALLE ZENO I; TELEPHONE 604 SAN JUAN, P. R.
MORNING NEWSPAPER,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
EXCEPT ON SUNDAYS
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) uuthoriled by the Act of October 6, 1917. on file at the Post Office of II San Jnan, Porto Ric.o. By order of the President. A. S. Bur leson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, I february 21, 1919, at the Post Office at San Jnan, Porto Ri co, (United States of America) under the Act of march 3. 1879 I
LAWYERS FOR THE FORMER DIRECTOR OF THE "ASILO DENIÑOS" ARGUE THAT HIS TRANSFER IS VOID BECAUSE IT WAS NOT MADE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAW
BRILLIANT ARGUMENT PRESENTED YESTERDAY BEFORE THE "CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION" BY LCDOS. RIVERA ZAYAS AND FIGUEROA DEL ROSARIO.
The Ledos. Bivera Zayas and Figueroa del Rosario, attorneys of the former Director of the "Asilo de Niños", presented yesterday before the "Civil Service Commission", the following pleading: AT THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION OF PUERTO BICO Carlos A. del Bosario Ex parte NULLITY OF TRANSFER MEMORANDUM OF PETITIONER Pursuant to the decision adopted by the Commission to allow us to file a brief pleading on the issues involved in this case, we have the honor to submit for your enlightened consideration the following Memorandum. As the facts are now presented, they reveal two points of view from which the case may be considered. The first, looking at it as a transfer; and the second as a change in category and compensation (Be duction). We will discuss both in their order. For us there is no doubt that the facts involved in this case constitute a transfer, which, at the last minute, has been given a false color of reduction by adding certain requirements that did not appear in the original transfer order dated July 19 and which happened to arise after Mr. del Bosario's protest was filed. This circumstance is""good to take into account in order to determine the degree of good or bad faith with which Mr. Commissioner
This circumstance should be taken into account to determine the degree of good or bad faith with which the Commissioner of Health has acted. On June 20, 1922, the Health Commissioner wrote a letter to Mr. del Rosario, Superintendent of the Children's Asylum, not charging him, but expressly calling his attention to certain paragraphs of a report issued by an Inspector of the Department of Instruction, back in February 17, regarding the state of the Institution. Mr. del Bosario answered this letter denying the existence of the deficiencies pointed out and the matter remained there without any further movement on the part of the Commissioner. A little more or less 22 days after this, when Mr. del Bosario was already pausing, he had the right to think that the matter was over, he received a transfer order, expressly called so by the Health Commissioner, requiring him to move from the position he held to that of Food and Drug Inspector, a completely different position and inferior in category and salary. So far, then, we have a transfer. This is what the Commissioner himself calls it, who must know what he is talking about, since he knows or is obliged to know the Civil Service Law and its rules. And the word transfer in the Civil Service Law has a precise meaning and that is what we must presume he meant to use in the communication addressed to Mr. del Rosarla. To this transfer order Mr. del Bosario replied that he did not accept it because he considered it illegal since the consent of that Commission had not been previously obtained, and because he did not bring it to the Commission's attention, and he did not accept it. SATURDAY. TODAY. WILLIAM S. HART in the drama The Threshold of Conscience (The Toll Cate) Luneta 20 cts. Tomorrow Sunday: 'Hidalguía de Carlos' (Chivalrous Charley.i DE MOMENTO For $1200 Cash, business may be obtained from a Café-Fuente Soda installed in the San Agustin Theatre. Puerta de Tierra's most up-and-coming site-Reports at "La Mercsdita" Phone 802 Victory Garden ON THURSDAY Alegría Enharf GREAT SUCCESS. SPANISH GRAPE JUICE BRAND "NOEMOST" The best and most pleasant substitute for "Sitges" muscatel, SUCRS. OF L. VILLAMIL & CO. General Agents. The Taumaturge is a cinematic drama that will make you feel truly thrilled by THOMAS MEIGHAN-BETTY .COMPSON AND LON CHANEY in 10 acts. A Paramount Picture Caribbean Film Co$20,000.00 ' Wish to place on mortgage on finca in San Juan. Address applications to P. O. Box 437, SAN JUAN, P.R. Advt.
An American banker, located in San Juan, has purchased about $3,000,000 in municipal bonds.
Yesterday we learned that Mr. John Nuveen Jr., of the United States banking house of the same name, has been in San Juan for some days, and has come to the country for the purpose of negotiating municipal loans, having, to date, carried out bond operations with several municipalities for about $3,000,000. Among the municipalities that have sold their bonds to Mr. Nuveen are Vega Baja, Comerlo, Hatillo, Ba rrar.quitas, Aguas Buenas, and others. These operations, as well as those carried out by many municipalities with other American houses, represent magnificent business deals for those organizations of the people. All the bonds raised so far have been at good premiums, sometimes quite high, and at interest rates fluctuating between 01 5 and 6 010 per annum. A reporter of ours questioned yesterday about this particular to Ledo. Figueroa del Bosario, who is in charge of several of the contractors' and he told us that all the municipalities whose representation he holds, were satisfied, because the operations carried out had turned out to be magnificent and the interest rates had been quite high. The ailment has worsened to such an extent that the doctors have lost all hope of saving him, TODAY SATURDAY TODAY THOMAS MEIGHAN BETTY COMPSON and LON CHANEY in the greatest drama yet produced "THE THOMAS MEIGHAN" (The Miracle Man) 9 GREAT ACTS The company BRUNO Y VAZQUEZ guarantees the success of this film and recommends it to its distinguished clientele.
SATURDAY, AUGUST 5, 1922.
THE IMPORTANT MEETING HELD YESTERDAY, FRIDAY, AT THE CARNEGIE LIBRARY BY FARMERS FROM ALL OVER THE ISLAND.
In the rooms of the Carnegie Library, at the invitation of the Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, numerous representatives of the different Agricultural Leagues operating on the island met for the purpose of determining the terms and conditions under which the branch of the Federal Bank of Rural Credits was to operate in Puerto Rico. It was unanimously agreed that the presiding officer at the? It was unanimously agreed that the well known farmer from Yabucoa, Mr. José L. Berrios, president of the Agriculture Commission of that district, would preside over the Assembly. Mr. Ernest B. Thomas, manager of a branch of the Rural Credit Bank of Baltimore, which is to be established in San Juan, gave a broad and detailed explanation of the operation of this important institution and satisfactorily answered each and every one of the numerous questions put to him by the farmers present. Mentioning the Agricultural Leagues, he said that the farmers, in order to obtain loans, did not need to be associated with these organizations, and could make the loans directly; but that it was more useful for them to belong to these leagues, since in this way they would be able to be in communication with the Bank more quickly and easily and obtain loans more quickly and easily. He advised I03 farmers to join and support the Agricultural Leagues, so that they would be in a better position to obtain collection and defense, and at the same time, because they were scattered throughout the center of the island, they would be able to obtain loans more quickly and easily. Visit us. E. FUENTE & CO. Cruz 11 St. San Juan, P. R. P. O. Box 1176. Phone 944.
IMPERIAL CINEMA TODAY SATURDAY TODAY Tomorrow Sunday. Charles Chaplin c n Thomas Mteighañ in El Callejón del Contento LA VIDA FACIL y . . y Las episodios 9 y 10 de Los episodios 11 y 12 de Los 4 Secretos de Eddie Polo Los 4 Secretos de Eddie Polo Gifts to the Public. Gifts to the Public
THE MAIN ISSUE DISCUSSED WAS THE QUESTION OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FEDERAL RURAL CREDIT BANK IN PUERTO RICO.
the iMa, particularly the small landowners, these leagues would serve as a means of communication with the official organizations and would thus have an easier "control" of the resources, privileges and benefits that the government put in their hands with the creation of the referred banking institution, of an exclusive agricultural character. Below we are pleased to publish the main instructions that served as the basis for the explanations given by Mr. Thomas, and the knowledge of which will be of great use to the important meeting of today: ELOCUENT FACTS ABOUT AGRICULTURAL LOANS 1. Any farmer who owns or is about to own a farm that he himself will cultivate by his own labor. ix,aoor ajornaiaaa can be paid with money or with a share of the crops). 2. In what is the borrowed money to be invested? (a) In the purchase of land for agricultural purposes. (b) In the cancellation of mortgages or in the payment of debts contracted for agricultural purposes. (c) In the purchase of fertilizer, seed, livestock or farm equipment. (d) In farm improvements. 3. - What are the terms of the loan? (ft) The interest rate is six percent per annum, per annum in arrears. (b) Annually, with the payment of interest, an additional sum will be paid as partial payment of the principal. (c) The term of the loan may be for twenty years. (d) After five years it may be (Continued on p. 6a.)
ISSUE 1068.
American expedition to study darkest of eclipses
SAN FRANCISCO, Aug. 5 (United Press). - For the purpose of confirming Einstein's theory as to whether the straightness of the sun's ray is relative or whether it is subject to curvature by the force of gravitation, an expedition composed of many names in science has left for Oceania to study the gloomy eclipse of the sun scheduled for September 21. Numerous expeditions have left from all parts of the world for the South Seas, equipped with the most modern astrological apparatus. On September 21, a total solar eclipse will occur in Australia. The appointed bora for the eclipse will be 1:40 o'clock meridian. The sun at this time will be 32 degrees northwest of the senit. The duration db.the total phase of the eclipse will be five minutes, 19 sure, two, approximately. Integrating xa expedition that has left for Australia Mr. William H. Crocker <?ei Lick Observatory, Dr. W. W Campbell, Dr. Joseph H. Moore, astronomer Robert J. Trumpler, who is carrying 5 tons of astronomical apparatus and instruments. Mr. Trumpler left Tahiti on March 21 and carried orders to study the firmament all night: to scrutinize the Einstein group of stars. One section of the expedition sailed not many days ago for Sydney, with the purpose of setting sail for Freemantle, the most important port on the southwest coast of Aua trail*. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL TAKE CHARGE OF THE EXPEDITIONERS As soon as the expedition enters Australian waters, the expedition will be taken in charge by the Government of Australia, which has placed at their disposal all kinds of communications and facilities. The observations will be carried out near Wallal, a town where in the 6th page).
Rialto and Tres Banderas :: :: :: TOMORROW SUNDAY :: : : :: "WIVES =FRIVOLAS" THE WORLD'S FIRST PRODUCTION First Chapter
¿.¿-4-l-.I'4-H-I-I-I--I-H~{"{--H--H"}-+-H-l--H-l-l "I"!'l'¡-'!lI "I'l'l "l "I"!"l-!-ll 1 1 1 'll I 11 1 "H''I "H--I-I''1'4''1!IIH'1-1 "I-+-I--H'1'!'!'!'!-M-II 1 11 1 !!■■!-■! I 1 HI ! I I I I 1 l "H At last the pro- -. - i; Che- - - ques reader and fountain pen combi- z ' -- í WRITTEN AND PROTECTED WITH I ' IlddOS Security Fountain pen í p * 14 ;; karat gold pen, tempered by * I - - a secret process that -- produces the desired flexibility, facilitating elegant writing lines. _ > '*"--*- ** !■- An 18K. gold band protects the hull against easy breakage making it more elegant and durable. ' ' The filling process is an ingenious invention so simple and easy co m ° clean and practical. -The inner ink holder is adjusted in such a way by a hook with an air pusher that it avoids the procedure used in all other types of fountain pens, i.e. shaking them to cause the ink to flow out; it is a siphon that is automatically tightened, forcing the liquid to flow out and throwing the last drop of ink at the tip of the pen with admirable precision without ever producing smudges. The CLIP made of 14. K. gold is also a new invention that fits as well to a silk suit with a certain security as to a thick suit, without the bellows weakening with the use, it is finally perfect in elegance and texture. -- And finally the astonishment of the century! At the top of the pen contains a check or document protector against alterations, using "acid-proof red ink that interests the fibers of the paper defying professional forgers. For many years it had been a problem for businessmen to prevent tampering with documents and checks and especially after acid erasing ink came on the market for office use; it can now be emphatically assured that the "SECURITY" fountain pen with combined protector has solved the problem, because it is not only elegant, useful and practical, but also portable, which is not possible to do with the very expensive protector (machines). * GUARANTEED FIVE YEARS BY AFFIDAVIT General Agent L UIS C. PIE TRI j :: - BOX 840. SANJUAN.