ELiWÑDÓ
10 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00. One year, $750,
Office"? 1 Salvador Braií, 81. Tel. 833, P. O. Box 345.
MORNING PAPER, 7*, EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
Publinhed and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Aet of oetobe/ 6, 191?, on file at the Post Office of Ran Juan. Porto Rico. By order of the President. A. S. Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, febrnary 21. 1919.-at the Poet Office at Ran Juan, Porto Ri c<á (United States of America) under the Act of march 8. 1879.
SATURDAY, APRIL 29, 1922.
YEAR IV,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RIJO
NUMBER 985.
Mr. Toro Labarthe arrived from Santo Domingo and immediately held two interviews with Gov.
Yesterday we greeted in this city Mr. Carlos Toro Labarthe, former Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor of Puerto Rico. Mr. Toro arrived from Santo Domingo on Thursday afternoon and, according to his own statement, immediately visited Mr. Reil$, with whom he exchanged slight impressions, but because of the advanced hour he was obliged to leave it until yesterday to discuss the rest of the points which were the object of Mr. Toro's visit to the Governor. - Yesterday, at 10 o'clock in the morning, he returned ex Se. Toro Labarthe returned to the Fortress and again conferred with Mr. Reily for more than an hour. Although we cannot assure nuda, however we are informed, that the . referios interviews dealt, among other things, with the manner in which Mr. Toro Labarthe is to arrange, the affairs in which, by virtue of the AFFAL RE Honoré, Mr. Toro Labarthe is involved. By subsequent reports reaching us, we have learned that Mr. Toro left yesterday for Ponce, where, it is assured, he will confer with the Republican leaders of that city. I > As much as our REPORTERS insisted that Mr. Toro SPEAK WITHOUT QUESTIONS, he showed himself to be extremely reserved, in spite of making a thousand protestations of friendship towards us. i The public has welcomed the price reduction offered by the Merino Hardware Store after the general balance and price readjustment. Advt. Auction ■ on Monday, May 1, 1922. At 10 A. M. At 50 Tetuán St., by Callejón de Cámbaro. The sale will be made by order of THE PORTO RICAN EXPRESS COMPANY ISIDORO D. DELGADO, Almoneden) Public. !:■' ■ ' -Á' -- *. Se p'lisa y forran botones A. CARAZO, Brau St 72.
Compagnie Generate Trasatlantique; Steamer "MACORIS" ¡ Expected at this port from the West Indies on ; May 6 next bound for CORUNA*and HAVRE. Admits cargo for the above mentioned ports as well as for all the ports of Northern Europe and the Mediterranean. For further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. * ; AGENTS. Telephone Building. Tel. *257. I 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 II i I I ;" 1 I 1.1 1 ■! isesi h !♦>"♦""♦""♦♦♦♦♦♦♦""♦♦♦♦♦""♦♦+<■"<■"♦♦♦♦■"""< THE COUNTY The County is the only site dedicated exclusively to residences in San Juan. Healthy, cool and ocean breezy < constant. J WE SELL houses and lots; houses for cash and lots ai cash and installments. * Behn Brothers Inc. agents Tetuan and Tanca. San Juan. ? - < .■-.■fe, . . . >. . <
IN THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE YESTERDAY THE MATTER OF THE TELEPHONE COMPANY WAS DISCUSSED.
Yesterday, in the Chamber of Commerce, the matter of the Telephone Company was scheduled for yesterday, that is to say, the increase that the said Corporation wishes to introduce in its rates. The matter has been submitted, in due course, by the Chamber to a Committee of the same, for the purpose of considering the matter and issuing the corresponding report. ' Accordingly, yesterday faé ren-| dide the report by the said Committee, and after a slight exchange of views on the merits of the same, it was agreed to postpone the matter until Monday next, at ten o'clock in the morning. According to our news the Committee who drew up the report appear to be averse to any increase being made in the telephone service, and support their decision on intimation of arguments which softieten to the study of the House. "The Chamber of Commerce, San Juan Section, is circulating among its members a postal summons, inviting them to an Extraordinary Meeting on Monday, May 1, at ten o'clock in the morning, for the purpose of studying and discussing the rate increases, in its general service, which the Telephone Company has requested from the Public Service Commission. Given the importance of this matter, it is believed that all members of the Chamber will attend the meeting with the usual punctuality. FOR THE SEASON IN COAMO For the past few days, the distinguished businessman, a prominent member of the firm F. Betiítez Rexach and an enthusiastic member of the "Ra dio Club", Don Luis Rexach, has been in Coamo for the past few days. We wish a prompt return to our dear friend. CINEMA LUNA Today second day of "WORK" Tomorrow "THE PRINCE OF HELL" Do not miss this beautiful film. The Company guarantees it.
THE CABLEGRAMS PUBLISHED BY "EL MUNDO" FROM THE "UNITED PRESS" HAVE BEEN FULLY CONFIRMED.
THE IMPEACHMENT OF GOVERNOR MONTGOMERY ■ REIEY IS OFFICIALLY ANNOUNCED.
A few days ago, on the occasion of the cablegrams published by EL MUN DO about the possible removal of Governor Reily, many comments were made and even the authenticity of our dispatches was questioned by some sections of the public, on the ground that neither the Associated Press nor Mr. Cordova Dáviia said anything to confirm our reports. < From the beginning, however, we had confidence in the efficiency of the "United Press'' service, whose responsibility, seriousness and reputation were not unknown to us, and which agency is absolutely detached from all governmental influence and is therefore absolutely impartial and somewhat more radical than conservative when it comes to reporting governmental affairs. Thus, we waited calmly, in the assurance that the aforesaid dis- , pachos would be fully confirmed when the United States pren- ' sa arrived in this city, and yesterday we received, among countless clippings, the following which we reproduce, from the "New York Anusrican" of the twentieth of the current month: "E. Mont. Reily, of Kansas City, Governor of Puerto Rico, his dissatisfaction with whom, the natives have repeatedly said, will soon be removed by President Harding, from the office of Governor, according to what was said by a person very close to the White House. It was further stated that the President is convinced that a better qualified Governor could be found. The most recent charge, made by the natives, was that the Governor had used the public funds for personal purposes; but no evidence has been adduced in this connection. But as if the above information, which we have transcribed, were not enough to confirm our dispatches, we may add that the photograph accompanying this information was forwarded to us in the last mail by the important agency of graphic information.
WlÉh*.'. iHH s 'iliPB n * H ■M H I K _ ■ I i Kj|g ny ■ i ■ gk ; 9 I 1 I Y ink 1
The "Underwood and Underwood'' world-wide magazine with the following explanatory note attached to the photograph: "THE GOVERNOR OF PUERTO RICO, WHOSE REMOVAL HAS BEEN ANNOUNCED. "PHOTOGRAPH BY:-E. Mont. Rei
- ly, governor of Puerto Rico, who . will be removed from office, according to the latest dispatches. Reily was appointed by President * te Harding; but it is said that, the President has become convinced that Reily is not the man to govern the Island and i that it would prove unwise to consent to
'Borinquen Park' TODAY SATURDAY 29 TODAY Third and last day of Julio Terne's interesting play "MATIAS SANDORF'' Luneta; 25 cts. . Matinee at 3.30 p. m. "LOS TRES MOSQUETEROS?". Tomorrow, Sunday "DE SOPETON (All of a Sudden Peggy) Marguerite Clark
FOR THE LAST STEAM We have received Many Novelty Items for Ladies. New styles of openwork stockings. Camera shaped purses. Belts - Necklaces - Earrings - Screens; Fans - Perfumes - Lace - Ribbons in the new fashionable colors and many other items. NEW PRICES Every day cheaper. Items at half price in all Departments of the house. Come in right away. GONZALEZ PADIN Co., Inc. SAN JUAN PONCE MAYAGÜEZ
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC' ■ The establishment La Gloria, of V. Arriví &. Co. after an inventory has opened its commercial operations since April 24, which we notify our customers and friends related to said establishment.
Cine Puerto Rico TODAY. SATURDAY. TODAY Premiere in Santurce of the French su-per-production La Flor de Andalucía Arte. Luxury. Emotion. Grandeur. Giusti Program
New salary conditions to be granted to some Government employees.
Yesterday we were informed, by a person who deserves our full credit, that the Chiefs of the Transportation Bureau, Messrs. Bond and Arroyo, had given verbal instructions to five of the chauffeur employees under their orders, to the effect that as of the first of next month, they - the chauffeurs - would receive salaries according to the trips they made, and not monthly, as they had been receiving up to now. This measure adopted by the said Bureau has caused deep discomfort among the "chauffeurs", who believe that they will not earn enough for their subsistence, since there have been seasons in which they have gone 4 or 5 days without making any trips. The Chiefs of this Bureau, when questioned by the "chauffeurs "*, alleged that they had orders from above to adopt such a measure. These, according to 'reports,' will be addressed to the Governor, in the event that the aforementioned order subsists, the true causes of which are unknown to the interested parties, since it is the first time that such an event has occurred in that Bureau. DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS BETWEEN GERMANY AND RUSSIA TO BE RESUMED SOON LONDON, April 28. A dispatch to the "Central News" from Berlin announces that diplomatic relations between Germany and Russia will be resumed as soon as the Treaty of Rapallo is signed. The first cu will be Bernhard Wiedenfeld, and Kraisine will represent Russia in Berlin. P. & J. UNES PAGE & JONEy OBUE, Ais. STEAM SERVICE BETWEEN MOBILE AND PUERTO RICO DEPARTURES: "Hancock County", April 20 "Lake Gfltedjje", May 10 "Hancock County", May 25 "Lake Giltedge", June 15 The most direct route for the products of the Central and Southeastern United States. When placing your orders indicate shipment via Mobile. For further information contact BEHN BROTHERS, INC. Agents. Tetuan Tanca. - Edit, phone. San Juan. Tel. No. 257. IMPORTANT If you wish to eat biert, go to Cristo 11, where meals are served at reasonable prices. We have cool, airy rooms. Phone 897.
WOODS Metal-lath Tips Paris Doors and Windows * Zinc Corrugated and Use Elbows-Bambudos-Lowers Galvanized Barbed Wire Twisted Square Rods . Top Gas "Light of the World" 150o. * Certain-teed" Roofing Paper Certain-teed" Paints Certain-teed" Ridges and Gutters Portland Cement Channel-lath Mosaic Clamps If you are interested in saving some money on the purchase of these items, call, visit or write to ROLAN TEJEDOR Box 1356 Phone 39!K , San Juan, P. R. .... ■
THE GOVERNOR ANNOUNCES THAT THE BANCO DE ¡ CREDITOS RURALES WILL SOON BE BANKED i
Yesterday morning Messrs. Benedicto and Gandia Cordova, Treasurer and Tub-chief of Agriculture, respectively, visited the Reily for the purpose of obtaining from him some information respdt to the es tablement in Puerto Rico of the "Rural Credit Bank," a project which has been under consideration for some time by the Wash ington Government. According to our reports, the Governor told both officials that, according to the information he had, he could inform them that a branch of said federal Bank will soon be established in San Juan, which will fill a great need among the farmers of Puerto Rico. According to what a high island official told us, said banking institution will be established in the first floor of the Legislature building. F. BENITEZ REXACH Although not of care, the estimable friend, whose name heads these lines, has been ill for some days. It is our wish that as soon as possible he will be fully recovered and in a position to resume his very important business. CARPENTIER AND DEMPSEY TO FIGHT IN PARIS PARIS, April 28. -Sportman Charles Cochran, promoter of the Dempsey-Carpentier fight, has said that the two boxing champions will again meet in Paris, and that Carpentier is satisfied with the terms of the contract. Dempsey only awaits the arrival in London of the boxer Lewis, who has left New York to fight him . - . to remain there. It is understood, 1 however, that President Haad- ' ing does not believe that the Goebrnador of Puer to Rico is guilty of any "mis1 demeanor," but that the change in the - administration becomes necessary to f fix the existing conditions in * the island." 1 r With these resounding reports, the efficiency of our cable service is demonstrated once and for all, and this must be a source of satisfaction for our numerous readers, who, trusting in the information of our newspaper, recognize our efforts to provide them, regardless of the sacrifices, with an information service as truthful as it is efficient. Imperial Cinema TODAY. SATURDAY. TODAY. Colossal premiere. male and female SEVEN STARS