THE MONDO
-H+44-11 IHH llllllllllll JO pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00. One year, $7.50.
n 111 ! ¡ i riiii-iiiiii ií Offices: ' ' ' ; Salvador Brau, 81. ;; ; Tel. 833, P. O. Box 345 ; ■ H-H-r I I I I I HH I! ! I ¡| l| | 11 ' ' '
MORNING NEWSPAPER, EXCEPT SUNDAYS
I Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) .at!lotizt4 by the Act of October 6, 1917, on file at the Post Office of I I I San Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President. A. 8. Bur leaon, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, I | February 21. 1919, at the Post Office at Ran Juan. Porto Rico, (United States of America) under the Act of march 8, 1879 n
YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
The teachers have agreed to wait for the solution of their problem until the next session of the Legislature.
i resolution, are letters and telegrams, pro i cedent mainly from elements i belonging to the Parliament, who, have externalized their firm purpose 3 and good invention to solve, as soon as the Legislature meets, the problem of the teachers' salaries. In the discussion of the above-mentioned resolution, Mr. Augusto Dieppa, up to the last moment, maintained his opposition to its approval. PARIS, August 11.- About the London conference, the "Petit Parisien" said this evening: "The shadows that are accumulating in the international horigontíi ii(|srnational horigontíi acquire a character of such gravity that it will be necessary to appeal to the good sense of everyone. The shadows accumulating on the international horizon are becoming so serious that it will be necessary to appeal to the good sense of all French, Italians, Belgians and Englishmen, reminding them that the Continent is in danger of being buried in the debris of a new and more terrible war. The opinion begins to feel ener L va da-adds-with the unforeseen aspects that the political situation is taking. The London conference re1 presents perhaps the only fundamental danger to these assumptions.'' Secretary Hughes is preparing for the London conference. WASHINGTON, Aug. 11.- Secretary of State Hughes has told reporters that he is making preparations for a trip to Brazil as chairman of the official delegation of the United States Government to the international exposition to be held at Rio de Janeiro. The Commission will embark on the eighteenth day of the current month.
Yesterday afternoon the Board of Directors of the Teachers' Association met, and after an extensive discussion, unanimously approved the following Resolution, which was presented by Mr. José Maria Quifiorías, one of the directors of the Association: RESOLUTION The Board of Directors of the Teachers' Association of Puerto Rico, meeting in an extraordinary assembly, considers; 1. That the documents currently in its possession guarantee a solution to the economic problem of the Teachers' Association in the next session of the Insular Legislature. 2. - It advises the teachers to sign their contracts and to continue rendering their services for the benefit of the children and of the country, to which we owe deep gratitude for the sympathy with which they have always viewed our request for justice. It is recommended that the President address a circular letter to the Teachers of Puer to Rico giving an account of the steps taken, including copies of the above-mentioned documents. As will be noted by the terms in which the above Resolution appears, the teachers will not go on strike as was expected by some, after the agreement that was adopted at the General Assembly held recently. The documents referred to in the The President MlLLLERAND ... WILL NOT RETURN TO ... ... RAMBOULLET .. PARIS, August 11.- In the wake of the events taking place at the London conference, the Elysee Palace informed today that President Millerand will not return to Etonboullet until M. Poincará returns here. WCl The President has to conduct Jos debates of the Council da'Ministers. At the Qtrsy d' Orsay they ignore the facha "n that the Head of the government returns to this capital "THE TORTURE TEST" We are pleased to advise the public and mainly the owners of automobiles, that today Saturday between 4 and 5 o'clock in the afternoon we will make the Torture Test in the Colon and Brau squares of this dubad. In this test it will be seen how the rubber Lee will resist this terrible test without wading. We cordially invite the population of San Juan and neighboring towns to attend this event, which is of general interest. RIVERO CHAVES & CO. Advt. I lili I-I ! I 1 | 1 ! 1 ! 1 1 1 ■ iinoc. porcuent* ; :: MANUFACTURER j * * We liquidate a tegular batch - <> of fine Dress Shirts for ■ * * Ladies, they are made with Nan- * * .... sue of the best quality and adorned with beautiful embroidery on * ' ' the front and shoulders, there are all sizes from 36 to 44; * * * * they are shirts made to be sold at $2.00 each and we liquidate them at ... 98c. í " TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS GAIN - j: Gonzalez Padin Go. Inc. ; -- SAN JUAN PONCE - ::: MAYAGÜEZ -- l l-W H-l -H I I I I IltlUMI I1--
A beautiful establishment that honors San Juan In the premises that had been occupied by Mr. Mtesorana, the young and active merchant Vicente Arriví, honorably known in our commercial world, has resumed his business. With great public attendance, which knows how to attend Mr. Arriv with the courtesy that distinguishes him, he has put on sale magnificent suits and everything related to effect! for gentlemen, at prices so relatively modest, that the new store is seen at all hours inv; dido of people. We wish the sefio r Arriví excellent; business. Advt THEATER IMPERIAL CINEMA TODAY. SATURDAY. TODAY, Success of the Company of Dramas and Comedies 'Adams- Nieva' with the play in 3 acts LA CARTERA DEL MUERTO.
í Theatre 'OLIMPO'; -' Tomorrow, Sunday. First chapter of the colossal , ■ - century production < § 'Frivolous Wives' : í Monday the 2nd Chapter. * lilililí tí 1 1 1 111 1 1 1 1 i frHH'Hl 1 1 1 i H I HW 1PH 11I i I I " H t M'
We are about to lose our coffee market in Cuba.
Important statements from our friend, Don Rafael MC Camejo
We met Camejo in one of the cafés of San Juan, and with him, who, besides being an inspired poet, is an expert businessman, we threaded the thread about the affairs of Cuba, country of charm and legend, from where he has just arrived. We engaged in conversation about the political situation, but Camejo diverted the course of the conversation and took us to an aromatic sandero known to us. "Let's talk coffee'' ns he told us, and taking a sip of the one in front of him, he began thus: "Nowhere better than in Cuba could the veracity of the old song that reminds us "that there is no better coffee than that of Puerto Rico'' be proven, because the Cuban is proud, and very legitimate, to know how to make and know how to pour a cup of coffee. In any coffee shop in Havana and for the insignificant price of five cents, one can drink a cup of our coffee, prepared with fresh cow's milk, and here ..... "Our coffee enjoys an enviable reputation in Cuba. Central America', South America and Santo Domingo have made superhuman efforts to seize that market, and in spite of the tremendous difference in price compared to Puerto Rico, they have not been able to get it until now, but ..... " . "Just as in times of abundance in all countries and in all homes luxury is part of the daily budget, in times of scarcity and economies, comfort and taste are sacrificed. While Cuba was prosperous, our coffee had a great advantage in the market. The price did not matter; the quality was what was paid, and so we see that while our prices were $25 to $30 per quintal free on board, Puerto Rico, Santo Domingo and Central America had very low prices, but the people of Cuba did not pay attention and our coffee continued to sell at a premium above all others. "Our farmers made or
must have made fabulous profits. I consider that they made more than 100 percent profit, and it seems reasonable to me that having paid and having suffered for a long number of years of shortages and privations, they took advantage of the good times. But Joseph's dream has come true. The period of the fat cows has been followed by the period of the lean cows and it is prudent that our coffee harvesters wake up and reduce their utilization to a minimum,' Because this is not a question of cents more or cents less. It is a question of Central America and Santo Domingo, which for many years had their eyes fixed on Cuba as a positive escape valve for their excess production, have seen the opportunity presented to them, and have so invaded that market with well prepared coffees * ' in the style of Puerto Rico", and at such low prices, that our exporters are already beginning to feel the effects of the competition. "The greatest danger of this invasion of coffees from other origins is that the palate of the Cuban people will degenerate, as has happened to us here, and with time good taste will be lost and with it the magnificent opportunity we have of a splendid market. It is very difficult to change a person's taste after he has become accustomed to a thing, and it is also very difficult to restore it after it has become corrupt^.... "The present competition from Central America has been limited up to now to reducing their prices and preparing their coffees well, but the competition in Cuba has been generalized to the extreme of mixing Central American coffee with that of Puerto Ricd, first, in a proportion of four to one; then of three to one; later of two to one and of one to one. The mixture of four to one, as is natural, is not distinguishable. It takes a very exquisite palate to notice that the coffee is mixed. The , proportions that followed, were with.
The proportions that followed were intended to compete and to compete with the public's palate, to the point that coffee from Central America is sold in Cuba as if it were from Puerto Rico, and many of the establishments do not realize it. Others do, but since they get a considerable reduction in the price, they continue to give the public a bad product to the detriment of our numbers, our agriculture and our wealth. Already today coffee from Central America and Santo Domingo is sold in Cuba, "because of its merits"..... It is the case that many coffee importers from places other than Puerto Rico and some Cuban coffee hoarders buy empty bags of Puerto Rican coffee and pack foreign coffees, making them look like our coffee and charging them below the legitimate price, as is natural. The consequence of this is that Puerto Rican coffee is not sold in Cuba, because there* they sell one that is not, below the market price. But it is also the case that some houses that last imported coffee from our island, have to sell it below cost, because of the competition from a non-legitimate Puerto Rican coffee. .... It is not difficult to foresee that, with time, we will totally lose the market, and that is what these demonstrations of mine tend to do. i Don Jesús Bascuaá, one of the main consumers of coffee on this island, has made a good business selling the empty sacks. The houses that deal in coffee from other places, when the fraudulent business increases, will import from India bags equal to those of Puerto Rico, and there will be no lack of a printer or lithographer to make the blue labels that, according to the laws of Puerto Rico, must be affixed to each bag. The seal of guarantee used by the exporters of Puerto Rico, does not really provide guarantees, because its imitation is easy and because it can be (Continued on 3rd. page.)
GONZALEZ PADIN CO. INC. ALWAYS UP TO DATE WITH THE LATEST ARRIVALS BY LAST STEAMER
Fine Ribbons in Patchwork. Large 2 yards, great variety of colors, all widths worth over 90c. one at 65c. one at escovtr. * New Necklaces. New styles, all very nice and in all colors, all new at 25c., 50c. and $1.00. . Little Suits for Girls and Boys. New styles, just received, great assortment, low prices. $1.50.$2.00, $2.50 and $3.50 Swimsuits for Ladies, Gentlemen and Boys, the best assortment. Gentlemen and Boys, the best assortment on the island, from 98c. for ladies, from 50c. for men.
Socks. New colors, new patterns just received, at current prices. 89c., 99c. and $1.50 'Hats for Ladies. New assortment, nice new colors in fashionable styles. $1.50, $2.50, $3.00 and $5.00 Ladies' Japanese Kimonas. Tedas on sale this week, beautiful colors in all sizes. 98c., $1.48, $1.98 and $2.96 COME TODAY TO Gonzalez Padin Co. San Juan - Ponce - Mayagüez. MHBKXraaKMMaiaBBMBMBMaBI
Socks for Kids. All colors imaginable in all sizes, a special style worth 50ca 25c. and 3 pairs for 65c. Vanityes Wallets Many new and trendy styles, real fantasies at 39c., 98c., 48c. and $1.98. Middye Blouses. We have just received an extensive and varied assortment, all colors and sizes 75% $1.25, $1.50 and $2.00 Japanese and Valencian Fans. The best variety in modernist styles, beautiful landscapes to choose from. 35c., 50c., 75c. and $1.00
St. Augustine's Theater Puerta de Tierra Monday August 14, 1922 : 'La Samaritana ; de San Lorenzo' ■ By Huertanica-Cardoso. ; Great Novelty. Don't Miss.
I , I THE FLOUR HARVEST IN RUSSIA 'MIOSüU, August 11.-The Commissioner, do of Agriculture, tfañor Ossinsky has declared that the flour crop althis year to three billion bushels gross. I For this reason the government has ordered the officials who are in Europe arranging for the purchase of grain and cereals to cancel orders immediately and return to this capital.
Usabel SWEET & SWEET Chocolate Of superior quality and unbeatable prices. Ask for a sample from your General Agent A. BOOTHBY Tetuan 33 altos. Box 432. San Juan, P. R. On sale at *el Colmado Suarez.
SATURDAY, AUGUST 12, 1922
NUMBER 1074
EISr.R.Pesqueraprotestaquequeque in the program of the party of the "Union Club" was included in the bailejde "bomba".
In the program of the party with which i the "Union Club'' treated the American sailors last night, as far as we could see, there was a number whose translation is as follows: "The next and last number on this program will be the dance of the native negro known by "La Bomba,'' typical negro dance, originating from the Obi dan- ■ za of the Congo. ' ' i According to our reports," the well-known businessman Mr. Ricardo Peshensational manifestations of M. Poincaré PARIS, August 11-The head of the French government, Mr. Poincaré, has stated this afternoon the following: "For the French government, the question of the payment of indemnities is in the first place, as a matter of extreme urgency. This is the most serious problem facing the Republic at this moment. We have taken - he said - these questions to the prudential limit, to the limits of patience. We have not wanted in the least to declare war on Germany; but we are presented with a truly dreadful dilemma. We had to restrain our instincts, we had to betray our convictions, we had to fail in our sacred duty to the thousands and thousands of single soldiers in the trenches, or we had to fail in our commitment to respect the English point of view, which obliged us not to adopt sanctions. It is now necessary to resolve the situation at once, and this requires that the great work carried out by France at the expense of her sons be carried forward, resolutely, above all, to save it, to carry it through to the end. The propositions of France-he concluded-are final; the conference may discuss them, examine them, but it is not in duty bound to alter them. The previous declarations of Mr. Poincaré, by the gravity that enters into them, produced a drastic impression on the conference. Today's newspapers devote their pages to commenting on them in full. A full copy of the speech has been 'sent by telegraph to Paris. TODAY. SATURDAY. TODAY. "CARIBBEAN FILM CO." presents the eminences ThomasjTleighan, Betty Compson and Lon Chaney in the colossal drama extraordinaire "THE THUMATURG" ("The Miracle Man") A PARAMOUNT PICTURE. Cash Register One of the $1,145.00 ones for sale at $700.00, brand new. San Justo 15, low warehouse. San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., A. CARAZO, Brau St 72, San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., San Juan.
| Mr. Pesquera, a member of said Club, protested yesterday afternoon to several members of the Board, complaining that such a number was included in the program of the party to be given in honor of the distinguished visiting sailors, as it might lead their minds to an erroneous concept of what Puerto Rican society really is, which has always condemned such a spectacle, considering it in conflict with its good customs and with the advancement of its social status. Mr. Pesquera was informed by the Captain of the Police, whom he consulted on the matter, that there was in San Juan an ordinance prohibiting the celebration, in the urban zone, of said spectacle, considering it detrimental to the public moral environment. Mr. Pesquera's protest has been joined by that of other distinguished elements of this city, who yesterday censured the attitude of the Board of Directors of said organization, in which there are Puerto Rican members. PRESIDENT ALVEAR I.... PARIS PARIS, August 11.- The president-elect of the Argentine Republic, Mr. Marcelo de Aivear, returned this morning to this capital after having visited the Kingdom of Belgium where he was the object of warm and enthusiastic homage. Mr. Aivear lunched with King Albert and the royal family and then attended a grand military parade in Antwerp. Mr. Albert accompanied the President of Argentina in all the ceremonies held in his honor. The illustrious Argentine politician returns very satisfied with the attentions he was showered with in Belgium. M. PAMENTIER EMBARKS NEW YORK, August 11.- M. Jean Farmetier, head of the French economic mission will embark next Tuesday for Bordeaux. [With M. Parmetier is absent as well as the rest of the delegates. MRS. ANGELA BLONDET DE BOU Since yesterday is in this city the cultured and respectable lady whose name heads these lines, which has come to represent the Lumen Circle of Ponce in the general assembly of the spiritualists to be held in San Juan. We greet the attentive lady and we wish her a very pleasant stay in this city. * TODAY. SATURDAY. TODAY. Lon Chaney The actor of a thousand gestures in Corazón de Lobo Extraordinary film that will touch your heart. SPANISH GRAPE JUICE BRAND "NOEMOST" The best and most pleasant substitute for "Sitges" muscatel. SUCRS- FROM L. VILLAMIL & CO. General Agents.
H°y - "Today Third Night of Beauty and Art ALEGRIA ENHARTÍ and the "Human Find'' by H. Carey. Tomorrow matinee at 3. p. ul Amphitheater 50. Lunettes 25. Performance is run at 7:30.