ELMUNDO
.10 pages 3 ctvs. bimonthly, $4.00* One issue, 87JM.
Office"? Salvador Brau, 8T. T "l. 833, P. O. Box 345. ■ te.*...." a " - *T
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO IV.
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) "uthorisea by the Act of October ", 1817, on file, at the Post Offlao o* Ran J nan. Porte Rieo, By order of the President, A. 8. Burleson, Postmaater Oeneral. Entered aa second elase matter, febrnary 21. 1919. at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rico, (United State* of America) under the Act of march 8, 1879.
SATURDAY, JULY 29, 1922.
NUMBER 1062
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
The Governor addressed a letter to Mr. Barceló clarifying certain concepts
The Governor addressed a letter to Mr. Barceló yesterday, in reference to a release published by us yesterday, to the effect that the Governor had addressed a letter to Judge Towner, in connection with the request made by Mr. Towner to the most prominent men of the State of Puerto Rico to clarify certain concepts. In which letter, we stated, according to reports supplied to us by persons apparently well acquainted with these matters, that the Governor praised Mr. Travieso, whom he considered the first citizen of Puerto Rico and the person called upon to occupy the presidency of the Unionist party when Mr. Barceló resigned. In the letter, the Governor categorically denies that he has at any time discussed with Mr. Travieso the personality of the president of the Senate and head of the Unionist Party, and expresses his surprise at the information published, the origin of which he alleges he cannot imagine nor can he find an explanation for it. In recording this note, we can only add that we are unable to make public the source of these reports, which we accepted, firstly, because they seemed to us to be from an authoritative source, and secondly, because of the extraordinary importance of consulting them. At any rate, it is only fair that we (Continued on 3rd. page.) THE Vanderbilt-County HOTEL is pleased to announce, for this evening the first "COMI-DA-BAILE of those to be given every other Saturday. Magnificent Orchestra. Grand Ballroom. Please reserve tables in advance. "Teatro Cine Imperial" TODAY SATURDAY TODAY Exhibition of the revue La Samaritana de San Lorenzo and Constance Talmadge in "L% Expert in Love" Anf. 25. Lunettes 20.
■l i i " " - I buy, immediately, cash, a Dodge or Buick automobile, in j excellent condition, from 20 to ¡ i 22. If not, don't bother. 1 i Inform, telephone 54, San Juan ¡i or 962, Santurce. j
Yesterday we exchanged slight impressions with the Commissioner of the Treasury of San i Juan, Mr. Diez de Andino, who returned several days ago from the North, where he went to negotiate municipal loans, recently contracted by the San Juan Administration, and which amount to a whopping $3,000,000,000. z Mr. Diez de Andino told us, among other things, that they were shortly expecting part of the amount of these loans, in order to begin to carry out the works projected by the Administration, the first of which will be the alterations in the aqueduct of Sun Juan. In the meantime, the rest of the money will be deposited at interest in a Bank in New York, until it is needed. Mr. Diez de Andino will have to give a new bond to the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, as soon as he has taken charge of the money. MR. TRAVIESO Mr. Diez de Andino announced to us that today he will embark in New York, for Puerto Rico, the Commissioner of Public Service of Sun Juan, Ledo, Mr. Travieso, who will arrive here on Thursday of next week. 1 TODAY WILL BE ISSUED THE ORDER PA RA DAP po "PSTnx t>ht, TO f MR. JIMENEZ SICARDO Having expired yesterday the term of five days fixed by the Supreme Court to the Governor Reilly, for him to reinstate Mr. Jiménez Sicardó in his position or to appeal the decision of said Court, and not having shown no intention of appealing by the plaintiff, the referred Court will request today the corresponding order for the defendant to immediately give Mr. Jiménez Sicardó the position of Municipal Judge of San Juan. Borinquen Park TODAY! SATURDAY. TODAY! Homer Comes Home (Homer Comes Home) By Charles Ray. Graphic Magazine No. 110. Vodeville No. 45. 20 ctvs. lunette - Tomorrow Sunday: "ENTRE MARIDO Y ESPOSA" (Why Announce Your Marriage) Se plisa y forran botone" A.CARAZO, Brau St.72
HE POLITICAL SITUATION ON THE ISLAND HAS ONCE AGAIN TAKEN ON ALARMING CHARACTERS.
The conflict between the Governor and the Attorney General shows no signs of being resolved.
As the political events of the past few days have unfolded, the public has once again experienced the same uncertainty, distrust and alarm as the distrust, alarm and uncertainty they felt at the outset, The same uncertainty, alarm and uncertainty that they felt at the outset when the political events that we have been witnessing for a year began to unfold, without any presumption as to the final solution to this intricate mess in which the island administration has been embroiled during this entire period of time. The extraordinary gravity of the conflict that has arisen between the Attorney General and the Governor is something that cannot go unnoticed, and cannot be overlooked.The extraordinary gravity of the conflict between the Attorney General and the Governor is something that cannot go unnoticed, and this gravity has been further accentuated by the latest rulings of the tribunals of justice, since by virtue of one of them the Attorney General is in a position to file Grand Jury papers against the Governor, and by virtue of others, such as the last one issued by Judge Foote, the Attorney cannot participate before the Grand Jury in prosecuting the indictments against the Governor. The Governor and the Attorney, the unique fact that the Attorney is personally i TOMORROW Splendid Dancing Tea at the Vanderbilt County Hotel from 4:00 to 6:00 P. M. Enjoy a delightful afternoon at our Tees Danzantes I every Sunday.
The fact that the two officials, who are called upon to follow a policy of harmony and harmony of the laws, in order to be able to conduct efficiently the governmental machinery of the country, are in a state of affairs which is extremely bad and which necessarily entails the total estrangement of the two officials who are called upon to follow a policy of harmony and harmony of the laws, in order to be able to conduct efficiently the governmental machinery of the country. In the face of this conflict, of which all have become aware, the public assumes that the national authorities will have to act to seek as soon as possible an adequate solution for it. Some presume, having in mind that the national authorities will act as soon as possible to seek an adequate solution for the same. Some presume, having in mind that the national authorities will act as soon as possible to seek an adequate solution for the same. Applicants may apply toi LIEUTENANT UfcRUTIA at the National Guard HEADQUARTERS, FN LA PARAÍDA 2i/ 2 , PUERTA DE TIERRA (JOHN M. TUwíER WAREHOUSES ASSIGNS) every evening from 7:30 to 10 o'clock. During office hours and on weekdays, the same Officer may be addressed at the offices of the Adjutant General, Alien * IMPORTANT NOTE: Sergeants' and Corporals' positions have not yet been filled. The first to arrive will be given the best Advt.
| The first ones to arrive will have the best Advt. The majority is of the opinion that the attitude assumed by the Attorney, since it is supported by the terms of the report of a Grand Judge, as well as by original documents in his possession, is a well-founded attitude, which cannot be annulled without causing a scandal, which will reflect on the present national administration. The Attorney's removal, we are told, cannot be decreed. His position today is firmer than ever; for if President Harding were to remove the Attorney General who is prosecuting the case against the Governor, he would be faced with the grave responsibility that his action could be interpreted as an act in favor of the Governor, an official whom he appointed, and the failure of which would necessarily be to the detriment of the nominated official. The solution, therefore, to this conflict, it is the general opinion that it will come when, after exhausting all the legal means available to them, they always have the possibility of finding a solution to the conflict, and that this will not be possible. Two games Sunday July 30, 1922. VS. "Cataño Stars" Fans of the Island are invited.
Part of the borrowings of S. Juan, are about to fall'; the rest will be deposited in a bank there.
■ " > i i i " " li i I I I I I 1 1 i 1 i 1 | i II ¡ | 1 11 l-H-I-H-I-H-I-i-l-l-HH-I-l-l-l-14-I-bI'l' I-t-I-l''I-I' Idl-H-H-H-4-l-i-!- ¡ 1 1 I I I-I-H-I lilililí At last the pro- é reader of che- -yJSr'X m ques and pen of i; source combi- i ■■■■ nates ■ and Huma d. ". d. u ■ ■■■■"""■■■■"■■■■■ ' A ; > Karat, tempered by U5 * - .. a secret process that , - - ' produces the desired flexibility, facilitating elegance in the lines of writing. -- An 18K. gold band protects the hull against easy breakage making it more elegant and durable. ... The filling process is an ingenious invention as simple and easy as it is clean and practical - - The interior ink holder is adjusted in such a way by an air hook that avoids the procedure used in all other types of fountain pens, i.e. shaking them to cause the ink to come out; it is a siphon that is automatically tightened, forcing the liquid to come out, throwing the last drop of ink at the tip of the pen with admirable precision, never producing smudges. The CLIP made of 14 K. gold is also a new invention that fits as well to a silk suit with a certain security as to a thick I suit, without the gusset weakening with the use, it is finally perfect in elegance and texture. And finally the astonishment of the century! on the top of the pen with '-lene a protector of check or documents against alterations, using *: acid-proof red ink that interest the fibers of the paper defying the professional forgers. For many years it had been a problem for businessmen to prevent alterations in documents and checks and especially '¡ after having come on the market for office use the acid erasing ink; now it can be emphatically assured that the "SECURITY" fountain pen with combined protector has solved the problem, because at the same time as being elegant, useful and practical it is portable, something that is not possible to do with the protectors (machines) being these very expensive. "GUARANTEED FOR FIVE YEARS WITH AN AFFIDAVIT s I General Agent L UIS C. PIE TRl BOX SAN JUAN.
E ADERAS! jamos de recibir dimensiones que I faltaban en el mercado | LLAMENOS | lán, Tejedor & de Hostos | > 395 y 200. Box 1356. | SAN JUAN, P. R. -
* I VICTORY GARDEN "LA MUJER X" | Today the ADAMS-NIEVA Company in -- Tomorrow "EVANGELINA" |
Mr. Carmona will go to the North representing the Com. de Indem. a Obreros, of which he is president.
According to what we learned yesterday, on September 15, the President of the "Comisión de Indemnizaciones a Obreros" (Workers' Compensation Commission), Ledo. Leopol do S. Carmona, who is going to the great Republic for the purpose of attending the "International Convention of Workmen's Insurance Commissions," which will be held at Baltimore, Md. on October 13. Mr. Carmona will speak there on behalf of our "Workmen's Compensation Commission,'' whose representation* has been granted to him by that body. It is assured that among the matters which Mr. Carmona will submit to the consideration of such an important assembly will be the recent opinion issued by Judge Cdlin of the Federal Court against said official body. Mr. Carmona will provide the assembly with sufficient data with reference to this matter to demonstrate that the opinion of the Federal Judge establishes several erroneous conclusions which put in evidence the legality of the Commission and the good faith of the Puerto Rican legislators in voting the law creating that body. A Unionist legislator, with whom we spoke yesterday about this particular matter, informed us that as soon as the Island Legislature opens, his first act will be to ask the Legislature to vote a vote of censure on the Odlin; for the declarations against the Commission established by said official in the aforementioned opinion. i TODAY. SATURDAY. TODAY. The French Super-production 'A Drama of Love' Per MLLE. ZUZY PRIM of the "Teatro de la Comedia" and the latest creation ,of the comic célcbrfe, LARRY SEEMON in "AGAPITO IN THE SIERRA". Giusti Program.
I ¡i R A D I O !! The last wonder of the century. Concerts, speeches, news, etc. All over the air. We have sets from $30.00 with a range of 25 to 50 mi- S lias that can hear messages from local stations and vaperes; to sets with a range of 2000 miles. The book "AMATEUR RADIO" teaches this new wonder, 50c. § By mail 60c. a In stock, all the implements to make your own radio set. Capacitors, variometers, detector tubes and " enlargements, batteries and everything concerning radio. Come and see the apparatus at Salvador Brau No. 64. ZENO & CO.
I BIG REALIZATION of all the existenejas of the extinguished firm i ='*LA GLORIA" ■ of V. ARRIVI & CO. Former premises of "Puerto Rico Elegante" ] A large corporation with a capital of about $150,000 is about to be organized, which ] will take the three floors of the premises, we will liquidate the entire existence of this great establishment at inconceivable prices. I - x ] This liquidation will last from the first to the fifteenth of August, at which time the com- ] pany of the new corporation will leave for the United States to place orders with the ] best manufacturers in that country. I Perfumery of the best brands at half cost, silver-plated effects, J "manicure", silver and "fiberloid" cases, socks etc., etc. í Fortaleza 38 j San Justo 21. Take advantage of this unprecedented opportunity
SPANISH GRAPE JUICE Tr"; "A " Ja LaSa BRAND "NOEMOST" lf3j8S J gOfOS 08 08110 The best and most pleasant susti- A P recios cheapest in the "Sitges" muscatel tuto. QA7AD VCI A7HIIC7 SUCRS. OF L. VILLAMIL & CO. DAlAn,' VtLAZIjUtI , General Agents. San Justo 20. San Juan.
Mr. Lippitt ordered the transfer of the Director of the 'Asilo' without consulting the Civil Service Com.
Yesterday the attorneys for Mr. del Rosario, former head of the "Asilo de Niños", Messrs. Rivera Zayas and Figueroa, went to the Civil Service Commission to inquire whether the Commissioner of Health, Dr. Ifippitt, had consulted the Commission in ordering the transfer of the Director of the "Asilo de Niños" of Santurce, Mr. Cari los del Rosario. Both attorneys contend that, according to the Law, Mr. Lippitt could not order any change in the leadership of that Asylum, unless the Civil Service Commission did not authorize him to do so. i According to our reports, from the examination made by Mr. I del Rosario's attorneys of the records and minute books of the Commission, it appears that Mr. Lippitt did not consult with the Commission in this case, which constitutes a violation of the Civil Service Law. When Mr. Terry, Chairman of the Commission, was consulted on the matter, he showed a letter addressed by him to Mr. Lippitt in which he states that the Health Commission has the power to order transfers of this nature, without the need to consult the criteria of the Civil Service Commission. In view of these facts, which they consider abnormal, the lawyers ¿'the former Director of the Asylum, have requested the Commission ¡ to grant them a hearing, since they want to be heard by said body, in the hope that it will rectify its criteria, thus sparing them the trouble of taking the referred case to the Courts. WASHINGTON, July 28.-President Harding person "lmeni'e will attend i the new railroaders' conference to be held here tomorrow to discuss i-Zte 4""sefit'aE .coal.*"-**"- - The Taumaturge j is a film drama that will make you feel truly thrilled by THOMAS MEIGHAN-BETTY COMPSON AND LON CHANEY in 10 acts. A Paramount Picture Caribbean Film Co.