THE MONDO
8 pages 3 ctv", Ssmtfltrs, 14.00 A "fio,$7. W
, si Office"; I Mvatot BvSu. t| - T< 833 P, O. Box Mt
EX A.M. DAILY
EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
YEAR IV. "f I
8AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Yesterday was a day of many visits to St. Catherine's Palace.
Yesterday was a day of many "political visits" to Santa Catalina. The old halls of the Palace were filled with politicians who seemed to be nervous, fatigued. What is happening," wondered one, "What serious reason has come to alter the blissful optimism of these centers? At this the Governor came out of his private office. He exchanged effusive handshakes with those present, and returned to his office in the company of Mr. Huyke and Mr. Carmona. In the lobby, the other politicians were talking mysteriously ..... With a faint whisper, accompanying the words with slow, almost serious gestures, as well educated people usually do in the room of a sick person. And while this atmosphere floated in Fortaleza, at some distance from the historic palace, and sitting in the asses of a "Cadillac", the President of the Republican Party, and the Socialist leader, Bros. Tons Soto and Iglesias, respectively, were conferring. It is to be supposed that there they were preparing their "batteries", because shortly afterwards they also visited Mr. Reily. What happened? - we thought, once again, this continuous political hustle and bustle. A friend of ours, who thinks he is well aware of what is going on in high places, said: 'I believe that the situation for the Socialists and Republicans is serious. To deny it would be to try to hide the sun with our hands. -With "our hands"? we clarified. -That is to say, with their hands. And the friend continued: "It is true that there is a great uneasiness and restlessness. However, the mystery has not yet been solved. -Butouces, is it due to the uneasiness of the politicians that Vi. says? -It seems to me that the fact ti the sinuevos appointments against the volun Borinquen Park " El Cine a Orillas del Mar. TODAY Saturday 18 TODAY VIOLET HE MING in the play: WIFE AND MOTHER (The Cost.) and Geographic Magazine No. 82 Luneta 20 Cts. Tomorrow Sunday: UNDER THE SURFACE (Bdow tbe Surface) THEATER ' SATURDAY -2-CINEMA TANDAS-2- At 7:16 presentation of the beautiful production K "IN ACT OF SERVICE" by the beautiful actress ETHEL CLAYTON AT XAS 8:30 P. M. Reappearance of the famous Rafael Arcos with the hilarious comedy El Señor de Carvajal and the monologue Opera BAR A TA BUTACAS NUMERADAS -75 Cts.
EL CONDADO El Condado is the only place dedicated exclusively to residences in San Juan. Healthy, fresh and with constant sea breeze. WE SELL houses and lots; houses for cash and lots for cash and installments. Bohn Brothers Inc., Agents Tetuán and Tanca. San Juan.
. tad of the Senate, with whom I seem to want to reach an understanding. Our friend then added, as if weighing every word: "There are so many interpretations of Mr. Beily's attitude! Nevertheless, beware; that the Governor will not make us rejoice. The Union, which is with God, is to be saved! Yesterday morning we met with Mr. Carmona, President of the Workers' Compensation Commission. We asked him: "What do you intend to do after the attitude of the Senate? Mr. Carmona, among other things, said that he was thinking of visiting the Governor, to see what he had to say on the matter, since he really did not know what to do.7 . What Mr. Carmona told us was that, since the Senate rejected his name, alleging "reasons of distrust", he would ask the Governor to ask for explanations from the high body on this matter, since these statements put him in doubt before the public opinion. Notwithstanding all these manifestations of Mr. Cantana, when he left Mr. Reily's office and was asked about his steps by one of our editors, he was extremely reserved, saying sometimes that he had spoken to the Governor, and other times, denying it ..... -But are you returning to the Presidency of the Commission? -I don't know what you'll decide"..., (This "he" refers to the Governor). I don't want to say anything. -So you are going to leave that body in a vacuum? -You know, I have to go there to pick up some papers, but, well, I warn you that I don't want to say anything. * Indeed, Mr. Carmona told us nothing. DON PEPE TORRES On our way back from the fortress we met Don Pepe Torres. -Do you think the Governor will insist on the same appointments? Don Pepito shrugged his shoulders.... -Will he leave, then, the sub-commi rionados who, according to reports, are acting? -This cannot be. The sub-committees, legally, are unable to attend the sessions of the (Continued on page 2). A. CARAZO, Brau St 72. 'OLIMPO"' SUNDAY -3-TANDAS DE CINE-3- At 10:30 A. M. Grand Matinee with the entire Orchestra, and the beautiful film Faded Reveries in 7 parts, by MARIE DUPONT At 7:15 P. M. Presentation of the same film of the morning. AT 8:30 P. M. presentation of the great actor RAFAEL ARCOS in one of his best works ' La Señorita del Almacén and the Monologue of J. Santiago ORATORIA FORENSE
rabfiAeé aad dwtfitetaé andar paraüt (So SOI) "rthoriMé by tb, aet "t "atober e, WIT, on SI" at U" Poat OlZoo oí guJud,.Porto) Btoo. By orderof th. hróridaot, A g. Bar i WüB . íháaroL Batared M aaoond el*M matter, J tateaary SI, 1810. at th. Poet Ofiteo at San Jin, Porto Rl w. Unttod Btatee od Ameriea eader ike Aos el march ". 1ST" |
náparades after tWrre the Senate
.' 4' ■ ■ ■ ■■' II Utt prominent Republican of this city informed a friend that the enunciated assembly of his Party would take place after the Senate finished its executive session; that he would probably adopt the name of "Pro. gresist Party", since it seems that "REPUBLICAN" is a predisposition against the referred collectivity. Although we cannot say for sure, since we have not been able to meet with him, yesterday it was rumored in political circles that Mr. Huyke would attend said assembly/ THE GOVERNOR SENT THREE SOCIALIST NOMINATIONS TO THE SENATE i ■ i - The Governor sent yesterday for confirmation by the Senate, the nominations of Socialist members for the offices of justices of the peace in Guayama, Ya- , bucoa and Luquillo. These nominations were submitted to the Nominating Committee. The new exhibitions of The Three Musketeers During the exhibition of the magnificent "film" LOS TBES MOSQUETE each day more and more admired by the public, the latter observed, on Wednesday night, that the beautiful film was accompanied by an American comic filler, which did not satisfy some spectators. In honor of the truth, we are pleased to emphasize, in order to dispel some erroneous appreciations, that the aforementioned filler was absolutely indispensable, because if that part of the film was too long, it was not possible, in order to complete the running time, to add another, which would have been 4,000 feet more, corresponding to the 3rd day, since the part of the film that was not included in the movie would have been 4,000 feet more. In future days, perfectly distributed, as far as the duration time is concerned, it will not happen again what was censured by some spectators, who will enjoy the same as the immense majority of the public, with the multiple beauties and prodigies of art that the incomparable film treasures. | We are informed by Dr. Lopez de la Rosa, that he has just received through Mr. Pesquera and Mr. Pesquera, [ the famous 8ALVARSAN ALEMAN L LEGITIMO, which he makes available to the public, at extremely reasonable * and conventional prices.
What (leseaba Pietíanlonij'segiín the Sn Céigel
Yesterday we exchanged impressions with the Republican leader Mr. GéigU, regarding the incident of Mr. Fietrantcni in the meeting of the library Carueg e. Mr. Gé'grl told us that they have no grudge against Mr. Pietyantoni, since what happened there was provoked by the gentleman himself, who has been able to avoid such an unpleasant incident, as he would have wished. . and ' From what Mr. Fiotrantoni said at the meeting, I concluded that what he was asking for was a change in the direction of the collective, as he was saying that the ratio was directed against our peptide directors. Mr. Géigel believes that Mr. Pietrantoni withdrew from the meeting, inn"-, cosariamente, pue? both the 3r. TonsSoto, who presided over the act, as well as the; rest of the assembly members, qsaron with < him all kinds of deference, to the: point of allowing him more time than' to any other to speak. Mr. Géfgcl flics that he regrets pro-' iundamente the incident, about ol which I should not speak more, since he so much distinguishes and appreciates Mr. Pie i trantoni, who to of everything, is a good republican i. In PUERJO RICO, A " HEARING ''.llCERCÁ OF THE I OF THE COUNTRY WILL BE HELD ¡ A " HEARING ''.llCERCÁ OF THE I OF THE COUNTRY ¡ Senator Iglesias has declared I lately in the penado that, according to the infermes q. he possesses, there will soon' come a commission <fh Washington pa [to study the general conditions I the country; and, according to him,j^nte-dicho crga nism<> 'will have to report party representatives*:' politicians ¿e m' * Mr. Iglesias in giving account da | this, emphatically, deferred the Uni nists to that day; for he says te- : ner formidable charges to make against the Union. Yesterday at 4:45 past meridian, was run over by the electric mud uú mero 3, in the street of the Park, stop 42 and a half, Mr. José Torres, re. rider in San Juan. The contusions that Torres received on his body were of such a nature that he died a few minutes after being taken to the Municipal Hospital. The mofOTista, Gregorio Lopez, was arrested, having been demanded 500 dollars to be released on bail. ' ' ■. HAVANA, February 17. - The killers of the leader of the Liberal party, Mr. Martinez Alonso, have disappeared. Both will be prosecuted* with the consent of the Chamber, to which the victim belonged.... - -
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 1922.
2 persons perish in a horrible explosion in Utuado.
Madras shirts for everyday wear, variety in colors, ' all sizes at $2.48. We offer 3 for $7.00 . ,_L_. Fancy Top Shirts with beautiful silk stripes, all sizes at ZitiO.
Pure silk shirts, large assortment in colors and sizes . worth $12.00 come. a qq demos to OiuU Gonzalez Paáín GO. INC. San Juan, Ponce, Mayagüez
FOR RENT Fireproof warehouse of about five hundred square meters, WITHOUT INTERNAL COLUMNS and six meters high, in front of Muelle San Antonio. Address to P.O. Box 1374 or telephone 200, San Junn.
MORE THAN 100 LEGIONNAIRES CON-. DECORATED FOR WAR MERITS MADRID, February 17- E! chief of ! fc. Foreign Legion, Senor Mülán; Astray*- decorated today & more than one hundred' legionaries for war merits. The; act, 'which was attended by numerous chief" Spanish army in Morocco,; resulted tapónente, "
- I l Don Francisco Pagán, correspondent of EL MUNDO sent us the following telegram yesterday afternoon: Utuado, February 17, 1822. EL MUNDO, San Juan. j Pelegrín Torres and Inés Marcado were burned to death by an explosion of denatured alcohol in the Cabán drugstore. People en masse - accompanied victims last resting place. Constematión indescrip tibie. Building where the explosion occurred was saved from the flames. CORRESPONCSAL. THE LOCAL COMMANDER OF THE REPUBLICAN ARRESTS AT ULSTER BELFAST, February 17."- The riots continue in the city, without the Government forces to quell the disturbances which have arisen as a result of 1" discrepancy between the supporters of Collin and the friends of De Valera. The Police this morning reduced to prison the local commander of the Republican army, as well as ten high officers. The great success of the film "Matías Sand orí" Our great public agrees in affirming that the most beautiful and interesting film that has been exhibited so far in the country is the great film "Matías Sandorf", taken with extraordinary fidelity from one of the best, and above all, the most interesting novel, by the marvelous literary and* ciépeia man Juléo Vamí. The marvelous "film" has made a deep impression on our young people, some of whom enjoyed intensely, when they were young, the reading of this precious novel, with which many boys, who are men today, learned to read. For the "Rialto", the "Olimpo", as well as for the "Victory Garden", has paraded these last 3 nights, the best and most select of San Juan and Santurce. The triumph of this marvel of Jules Verne has been so complete, that numerous families who have already seen it, have decided to see it again, for which they have seats at the "Tree Banderas'' cinema, where it will be exhibited next Monday. The "Universal Film Mfg. Co.f', which has accustomed us to bring to Puerto Rico the most notable of modern Cinematography, should feel proud of its triumph, which could not be more grandiose and definitive. "Matias Sandorf" is something transcen dental, that ladies, horses and children should hurry to see. There is no film more beautiful, nor more tare, nor more instructive, than this jewel, which a glorious Latin writer has brought to the world, to astonish, teach, delight, and above all, to make you think.
BARATILO C AMKAQ VARIETY QUALITY VrtimürtJ Fixed Prices GOOD, BEAUTIFUL AND CHEAP J
Superior Silk Shirts fancy painted top variety for choose- n qa " QiUU Pretty painted madras shirts, top quality, Va. len twice as much, the da- 4 qa mos to liJU
¡VICTORY GARDEN i Tomorrow, Sunday, in the second batch i only, THE THREE MUSKETEERS THE THREE MUSKETEERS.
- NUMBER 92£. M
a . - - 1 4. ' j ion Mr. B. Pagan to be heard by the Committee jeji appointments.
At yesterday's late session of the Senate, upon the announcement by the Chair that the debate on the appointment of young Bolívar Pagán to the position of Municipal Judge of Fajardo was to be continued, Mr. Iglesias made a motion that Mr. Pagán be given an opportunity by the Appointments Committee to be heard and to defend himself against the charges that had been filed against him. Cuevas Zequeira opposed the motion, submitting to the Court a certificate from the Clerk of the Municipal Court of Fajardo, in order to demonstrate that Mr. Bolívar Pagán, in an illegal manner and in violation of the Law, had amended a sentence, ( ; lowering the sentence imposed on a convicted person who was already serving his sentence, as well as lowering the qualification of the crime. "All this- added ' H Mr. Cuevas Zequeira-with the prop- ( sito of serving the political demands of his party, in accordance with the request made to him by the socialist agitator Mr. Bolivar OchaiI." Lccfo, Martinez Nadal consumed a tumo in support of the moe ón. Mr. finally took the floor in support of his request that Mr. Bolivar Pagan be granted the requested hearing and when at six o'clock in the afternoon the Socialist Senator, Mr. Cuevas Zequeira, was still arguing, he was interrupted by Mr. Cuevas Zequeira. Cuevas Zequeira interrupted him and told him that if what was wanted was i . - 1 CASA DE ESPAÑA EN PTO. RICO i CENTRAL BOARD OF DIRECTORS * CONVOCATORY. Article 13 of the clauses of i Incorporation hereby and in the name of the Central Board of Directors which I have the honor to preside, I hereby convene the Ordinary General Meeting, which (as agreed in the meeting held on February 27, 1921,) is to take place in the city of Mayagüez at nine o'clock in the morning of Sunday, February 19, 1921, in the city of Mayagüez at nine o'clock in the morning of this month. The Assembly may only be attended by delegates of the Local Boards, provided they meet the conditions required by Article 24 of our Bylaws. San Juan, P. R., January 13, 1922. ) Dionisio TRIGO. i Vice President. Advt.
l to give an opportunity of defense to the > Judge impugned, he joined the p "tii cion and requested that the Nombiyuniéntos Committee hold a hearing ■ today at ten o'clock in the morning so that - the parties be heard and that it re cite - Sergeant Vázquez of the police, dea ■ ' tacado in Fajardo, the secretary muni- < cipa! Mr. Iglesias then requested that Mr. Pagan also be given the opportunity to bring his witnesses. On this occasion the Chair had to caution that the motion could not be made so liberal, that it would prolong the hearing as if it were a full trial, and that in regard to the evidence it should be left to the members of the Committee. Ledo. Hernandez Lopez amended the motion to the effect that the matter be returned to the Committee for consideration and report and that young Pagan would have an opportunity to be heard. i The motion of Mr. Hernandez Lopez was approved unanimously, > THE STANDARD OIL CO. SUSPENDS ITS > - > TAMPICO, Feb. -17.- The Stan- - dard Oil Co. has suspended its low > tral. On this occasion more than toll - workers will be laid off. w 3 A GREAT PARTY AT THE HOTEL j COUNTY. VANDERBILT . > For the evening prq for the Carnival Commission úna aniftiadísima meal-bailp in the aristocratic hoto). "Cojjdiido, for which reigns ta' cntusiasm®" unusual altjí aqgei of firo Juan. - í , i ' te the meal, which will begin at eight 1 o'clock in the evening, all attendees * ae ' surrender to the delights of dance, 1 There will be two magnificent orchestras and the ' hotel will offer a fantastic lighting. The cover will cost 83.00. Families wishing to separate their tables ( corresponding tables may do so -right away, requesting it from the referred hotel. LUNA CINEMA -HOY- -HOY-"JUDEX" 8th. day tomorrow "THE BROKEN DOOR'"
i BEHN BROTHERS, INC. £ , (HOUSE FOUNDED IN 1906) \BANKERS ... w" -- *: > / Berwind White Coal Mining Co. " \ œ Lancashire Insurance Co. agents, Coiupagnie Generate Transatlantique. "I Windward Island Line - Pacific Argentine. ' I Brazil Line La Veloce. < ► :* THE COUNTY-Land Sales. ' " " í" . - - ■ >' e ' '' ■ f 4 " - - - * " Tetuan-Tanca Corner. San Juan, P. R. ;; .. .4 . I Neo Salvarsan German I % manufactured by ■ FARBWERKE VORM. MEISTER LUCIUS A BRUNNING HOECHST A MAIN v Declared PURE and LEGITIMATE by the U.S. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH v AFTER ANALYZED Imported under License No. 211836 by I Pesquera & Pesquera, Inc. I Telephone 561. Edificio Bouret. San Juan, P. R. H H > H i i I 1141 > POESIES OF DR. RAFAEL DEL VALLE -' A limited edition of Dr. Del Valle's POESIAS -' II COMPLETAS is now on sale. The persons who wish l|g II to obtain copies can go to the main free- ;; rías of San Juan and leaves Island. Price of the copy: $1.50.