ELMUNDO
i -8 pages 3 cents Semester, $4.00. One year, $7-50.
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81. Tel. 833, P. O. Box 345.
MORNING NEWSPAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
The Governor does not intend to convene the Legislature for the time being.
Mr. Reily has stated that he will appoint a Republican to replace Mr. Toro Labarthe.
Since the sensational report of the Grand Jury appeared in yesterday's EL MUNDO, the leading elements of the Republican party have been visiting La Fortaleza, having conferred several times with the Governor, regarding the situation created by the publication of said report. Feliu and Todd, as well as several editors of the newspaper "El Tiempo", were seen all day yesterday at the Fortaleza. THE GOVERNOR WILL NOT CONVENE THE LEGISLATURE In the course of the interviews, which were several, Governor Reily, stated to the representatives of the Republican party that he did not intend to convene the Legislature for an extra-ordinary session, as had been said by the unioHA DIE AN INSIGNATE BELGIAN POLITICIAN BRUSSELS, April 7. -In the early hours of yesterday evening died ■1 Woeste, Minister of State and head of the Catholic party. The burial of the distinguished politician, to; which a representative of King Albert will attend will take place tomorrow afternoon THE BORROWINGS OF GERMANY ABROAD J PARIS, April 7 -The Committee on In- ' demnizations agreed at its session of' yesterday to appoint a Commission of Inter-Allied experts to study and report on the conditions by which Germany may contract borrowings abroad. The Commission will be chaired by M. Delacroix, formerly head of the Belgian government and who now, belongs to the Central Compensation Committee. The governments of Paris, Madrid, Washing ton, Rome, Brussels, Amsterdam, Berne and Berlin will reportedly be consulted. I "Be wary of derisory advertisements" - < In the feverish mind of ulgunoe advertisers already bus rubbers have an almost longer life than the automobile that uses them.... We guarantee that the new "AJAX GREY" ' is at least lgvj "l to the best rubber i qac currently manufactured and that its' cost is lower. * Brunet, Saenz & Co. Allen 92.- Telephone 105". San Juan P. R. t Advt. 1
nists. The Governor added that he had never had any idea of doing so, because such a thing would be an absolute negation of the policy he had carried out up to now. MR. REILY TO APPOINT REPUBLICAN TO REPLACE MR. TORO LABARTHE ' ' ' ■ - '* \ . f The Governor pledged himself to the Republican leaders to appoint a Re publican to replace Mr. Toro Labarthe in the position of director of the Department of Agriculture and Labor. We understand that the Re. publican leaders pledged to the Governor to continue to defend him in the "El Tiempo" newspaper, provided he returns to the party the positions in which they formerly predominated. LORD LLOYD GEORGE HAS ARRIVED IN PARIS PARIS, April 7.-The head of the English government, Mr. David Lloyd George, arrived today in this city on his way to Genoa. Lloyd George conferred with the President of the Cabinet, Mr. Poincaré. The newspaper "Petit Parisien" has stated that in this conference the matters relative to the inter-allied debt and the German demnizations, problems that will be raised in Genoa, were discussed. The English Premier left at five o'clock in the afternoon for Italy. A MODUS VIVENDI EXTENDED MADRID, April 7.-The Secretary of State announced that an extension to the modus vivendi with Norway has been agreed upon. TODAY. SATURDAY TODAY. The great film considered by European critics' as the best among the most notable films of 1921, OR THE FRENCH REVOLUTION Film "Puerto Rico" -TODAY-JUAN CENTELLA in his superior drama in 6 parts and three interesting PresentsTOMORROW > SUNDAY. NUESTRA SEÑORA DE PARIS and TRAICION two in each batch and for 15 cts.
BEHN BROTHERS, INC. 1 (HOUSE FOUNDED IN 1906) -; BANKERS i' / Berwind White Coal Mining Co. ' - < ' Lancashire Insurance Co. -i Conipagnie Generale Transatlantíque Agents. - J J i Windward Island Line - Pacific Argentine. ;; ::: ( Brazil Line La Veloce. 'I - ► THE COUNTY - Sale of Lots. *; - - - T i; Esquina Tetuán-Tanca. San Juan, P. R. " ' Gran Puesto de Leche "Santa Barbara" San Jose corner to Sol No. 20, Telephone 1481 Absolutely .pure milk will be sold to the public, coming ( from the "RIZA HNOS." cattle ranch, del Dorado, at 16 cents, and 4 18 at home. From 5 o'clock in the morning to 10 o'clock at night.
f febmery 21. ..I,e at S(ut Ju . n . P wto Klc .
SATURDAY, APRIL 8, 1922.
The Governor overflows to make some further statement in connection with the report of the Grand Jury.
Yesterday afternoon uii Editor of this paper visited the offices of the Gober--nador, for the purpose of inquiring' of the Chief -Executive if he had any further representations to make in connection with the report of the Grand Jury. At that moment, the Governor was receiving in his office the visit ■ of Messrs. Wilson and Benedict, j Comisoinado of the Interior and Treasurer respectively, with whom he was preparing to hold an official interview,'.and nevertheless he courteously attended to our representative to whom he informed that he had nothing to add to the letter published by him in yesterday's press.
As our readers know, the Governor's letter was addressed to Attorney General Mestre and Prosecutor Diaz Collazo, indicating to them, in view of the terms in which the report of the Grand Jury was written, that they should proceed to investigate the facts stated and proceed against the officials indicated in the same, if indeed the indicated violations of the Law had been committed- ¡ EL LICDO. CUEVAS ZEQUEIRA WITH EXTENSIVE FAIRNESS WITH THE GOVERNOR The Unionist Senator for the district of Humacao, Lic.
Cuevas Zequíe- - ra, visited La Fortaleza yesterday afternoon at three o'clock. The purpose of the visit was due to certain recommendations that the distinguished legislator wished to make regarding judicial appointments in the district he represents. It was agreed in said interview that Mr. Félix Renato Ortiz, who was recently appointed to the position of Municipal Judge of Yabucoa, would remain in Patillas and that Mr. Arturo Martínez would be appointed to Yabucoa. The Senator for Humacao left the Palace at four o'clock .... . .. ... ...
CUBA GIVES US A WORTHY EXAMPLE
The press recently arrived from the neighboring island of Cuba, brings us (interesting information about the measures that government intends to dictate, to protect the Cuban industries against the competition of the foreign ones that fight to take over that market. Among the industries to be defended by the Government of this island is the cigarette industry, which is seriously threatened to be annulled due to foreign competition. Cuba's cigarette factories, like ours, use Cuban tobacco in the manufacture of their product, and anything tending to combat this product will be considered a very serious threat to the interests of the island. The latest statistics published by the Government of Cuba on the importation of cigarettes show an enormous increase in the last fiscal year, for from three hundred and seventy-eight li- i
braa that arrived there in the previous fiscal year, in this last one, it rose to one thousand five hundred and seventeen hundred and seventeen pounds what was imported. In view of this, the Cubans have decided to impose a tax on all cigars imported into the island. And, citing the favor that a certain public there lends to foreign cigarettes, a learned Havana colleague says: "But what nobody has not yet been able to explain is the furor that Cubans have taken to these foul-smelling and unhygienic cigarettes, since it has been proven that they disrupt kidney functions and exert a strong preventive influence on the brain. There are doctors who classify them heroic drugs and 'are inclined to advocate their prohibition in daily consumption." You see our compatriots, what is the cigarette that has been introduced here also in order to displace the one we manufacture.
the one we manufacture ourselves. The Cubans can impose a heavy tax on every cigarette that is imported here. We cannot do that, because we are bound by the protectionist tariffs of the United States, which detains us, and because of the special situation of our political position, which does not even give us the freedom to sell what belongs to us, as is the case with the tobacco of Puerto Rico, and with the industries we have established here. Our new cigarette product is combated by that unhygienic and foul-smelling product of which the Cuban press speaks to us, and which has been qualified by some as one of the heroic drugs, for which reason they recommend its prohibition. We would like to draw attention to these statements by the number of consumers who are still in favor of it.
PORTLAND CEMENT Twisted square rods. PUNTA DE PARIS Call, visit or write TEJEDOR 1356. Tel. 395. Embankment. Stop 2-J?2
I PROTESTANT MARRIAGE Mr. Juan Figueroa Cornier and Miss Maria Ocejo were married in Ponce. We wish the happy bride and groom "eternal honeymoon.
M SUITS H *'- HATS EEffi . I NEW STYLES NEW COLORS NEW COLORS NEW PRICES P. GIUSTI CO.
A 23-passenger "MACK" GUAGUE, just built. They offer in good condition Sues, of L- Villamil & Co. In the Marina.
¡i NUMBER 678. -
The matter of the reports rendered by the Grand Jury has little to do with the
The Director and an Editor of "El Mundo" appeared yesterday before the prosecutor, Mr. Diaz Collazo.
i On the occasion of the publication of the ¡ sensational reports of the Grand JuraI do t in our issue of yesterday Judge | Foote, of the District Court, sec■' la. issued the following order in ' Open Court. "The Court wishes to call the atfncióu ' of the Prosecuting Attorney to the issue of today's EL MUNDO newspaper, in which rparecon copied the reports of the Grand Jury, which is acting in this i Court, and directs the Prosecuting Attorney to practice an investigation for the purpose of bringing to this Court all persons, in whom he finds criminal responsibility in this matter." Pursuant to the above order, Prosecutor Diaz Collazo summoned to his office, yesterday at.two o'clock in the afternoon, our 3 Director. Mr. Romualdo Real, and to r.ues1 tro Editor, Augusto Pietrt. ! LETTER FROM THE "ATTORNEY" About the same matter, the Hon. ' "Attorney", Mr. Mestro nes dir.gió t following letter: L April 7, 1022. . Mr. Editor of THE WORLD, Sir:- In the paper addressed by you in . ei issue corresponding to today's date, and on the front page, apsre- ' to the cigarette outside. Medical science considers the use of this strange product, which disturbs the renal functions and exerts a depressive influence on the brain, to be harmful to Indian health. 1 ' Our cigarette is made with pure tobacco from Puerto Rico, and to date there has not been a single doctor who has advised the prohibition of the same, as harmful to health. Let's choose what is ours, which is superior to what is not ours, and we will do not only work of collective charity, but - that we favor the interests of the country, tending to the advancement and economic strengthening of our few industries. today - at 8 P. M. - TODAY FAREWELL From the King of the Maquieta Rafael Arcos Amphitheater 50 c. Luneta 25 Borinquen Park The most delicious Cinema of P. R. Today. Saturday. Today. "A Merry Widow (The Frisky Mrs. Johnson), by Billie Burke. Pathe News. Matinée at 3.30 P. M. Tomorrow Sunday: "Marriage Squalls." MID. CHANNEL).
1 ( ce published an alleged copy of a report of the Grand Jury of San Juan, in which an account is made of Hon' E, Mont. Reily, Governor of Puerto i Rico; his private Secretary J. R. Hull and the Ron. Auditor of Puerto Rico, Mr. W, I. Kessinger, and I beg that upon receipt thereof you will immediately inform me what person or persons were the ones who furnished you with the alleged copy of the said report. * Yours faithfully, Salvador MESTRE, Attorney General. 1 LETTER FROM OUR DIRECTOR , To the letter from the Hon.* 'Attorney", our Director replied as follows: ¡ April 7, 1922. Mr. Salvador Mestre, Attorney General of Puerto Rico, San Juan, P. B. Hon. Sir:- In reply to your attentive letter 1 in which you ask me to inform you which person furnished this newspaper with a copy of the Grand Jury report published in today's edition, I hasten to state that said copy was brought to this office by the editor of EL MUNDO, Mr. Augusto Pretil, unaware that he was unaware that the said copy was brought to this office by the editor of EL MUNDO, Mr. Augusto Pretil. As Mr. Pietri is not here at the moment, it is impossible for me to give you any other information. From you very truly yours, Romualdo REAL, EL MUNDO, BEFORE THE PROSECUTOR As we said before, at two o'clock yesterday afternoon, our colleagues Mr. Real and Mr. Pietri, Director and Editor of this newspaper respectively, appeared before the prosecutor Diaz Collazo, who were summoned to the prosecutor's office for the purpose of testifying in the investigation that is being carried out for the insertion of the sensational reports of the Grand Jury, which, as our readers know, we were the first to publish. After extensive questioning by the prosecutor, our colleagues left the office of the active official, who is reported to be continuing his investigation. BASE-BALL We have just received a new assortment of Base-Ball effects and other sports. Ask for catalogs and prices * ft - - - - - A - - - - - Sues. A. Maycl & Co. San Juan, P. R. Buttons are plated and lined A. CARAZO, Brau St 72.
EL CONDADO El Condado is the only place dedicated exclusively to residences in San Juan. Healthy, fresh and with constant sea breeze. c ft WE SELL houses and lots; houses for cash and lots for cash and installments. Behn Brothers Inc, Agents. Tetuan and Tanca. San Juan.