ELMÜNDO
■hiiiiii i h i m Offices; Salvador Brau" 81* - Tsl. 833. P. O. Box 345 ■ ■ ■ I I * I ' '
12 pages 3 ct" 8 "rmstr®. $4'00" One affo, $7.50"
MORNING JOURNAL,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of October ". 1917, on file at the Port Office of Ran Juan. Porto Rico, By order of the President. A. S. Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, fehrnary 21. 1919. at the Post Office at Ran Juan. Porte Rico, (United States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1879.
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 23, ?922. , r - , x _ _
j NUMBER 1109.
The Governor offers his assistance to Mr. Barcelo during an automobile incident.
he two central figures in the current political conflict meet again face to face.
. On Thursday afternoon the president of the Unionist party, Ledo, returned from Fajardo. Antonio R. Bar ' celó in company of his son Antonio, having crossed in the way the car of these with that of Governor Reily, who apparently was going for a walk *>for some of those nearby towns. Minutes later, Mr. Barceló's car suffered a damage in one of its tires, which forced the passengers to stop at a place known as "Mameyes" in the municipality of Río Grande, in order to fix the damage. When Mr. Barceló's driver, assisted by his son, was fixing the tire of the vehicle, the Governor returned and stopped his car at that place. The Governor greeted Mr. Barceló and there was a consequent exchange of courtesy greetings between them. Mr. Barceló's son replied in English to the Governor that what had happened was of no importance and that it had only been a rubber, which was almost ready to continue the trip. The Governor asked young Barceló to serve as an interpreter with his father and "told him to express his wish that he would agree to continue the trip in his own car, so that he could avoid the inconveniences of the trip.The Governor insisted on his offer and again Mr. and Mrs. Barceló expressed their gratitude and politely declined the invitation. A political leader in the vicinity, who heard of the incident, later went to the site to ask Mr. Barceló for details of the interview, and Mr. Barceló simply told him that there had been no such conference and that it had been a mere courtesy offer, due to chance and accident. This incident, apparently unimportant, has been the subject of numerous public comments in this capital, because the first news we obtained was that on the Rio Grande highway Mr. Barcelo and Mr. Reily had held a conference of a political nature. This rumor, which, if confirmed, was naturally of extraordinary importance, led us to confirm the truth of it, and hence, as people well aware of what had happened, we learned the truth, which was none other than what we have said. In the commentary of this unexpected event, many people have gone too far, since some censure the attitude of the Governor, in the sense that he should not have even greeted Mr. Barceló, after the manifestations he has made against him several times, and others said that Mr. Barceló had made a marked snub to the Governor, declining the invitation he made to him. These comments are distracted by what others have said in judging the incident with more judicious judgment. "If the Governor performed an act of politeness, casting
i aside* the political frictions that have occurred-we have been told-he did, well, for courtesy and social ■ duty are not at odds with political ■, and if Mr. Barcelo courteously thanked ■ cied that offer, 1 i even when he declined it, without i in any way being a slight . and responded to the greeting, he did well in ' I doing so, for otherwise he might perhaps have been branded as fearful' rio and intransigent."
THE CONFLICT IN THE NEAR EAST IS GETTING FARTHER AND FARTHER AWAY FROM A SATISFACTORY SOLUTION.
CZECH-SLOVAKIA IS PREPARING ITS ARMIES FOR ACTION AS SOON AS CONO ROMANIA ORDERS THE NOBILIZATION OF ENGLISH BATTALIONS BOUND FOR NORTH ASIA.
I ' (United Pres¿ via All America Cables) L0NDRB3, setiem'bvj 22._^S e ini form that as soon as Buftiania ordo" ne the mobilization of its contingents, the Czechoslovakian government will likewise convene military maneuvers.
In a Balkan conflict, the government's alliance with Bulgaria will be considered inevitable. A representative rows READY IN MOSCOW? BERLIN, Sept. 22. - Unconfirmed reports say that a representative of Mustapha Ke'mal is in Moscow. It is claimed that he has gone there to negotiate an agreement with that government. ! MARISCAL FOCH RETURNS TO THE RHIN PARIS, September 22-M. Manginot, mini tro of War has declared quo Marshal Foch will leave on Sunday px ra 'al Rhine. The Minister declined to divulge the nature of the unannounced visit of the Germans' vindicator, THE TURKS CONTINUE TO KILL CHRISTIANS LONDON, Sept. 22.-Mr. H. i A. Jaquith, director of the Committee of So corros in has declared that the [ kemalisSas continue to kill Christians, owing to the delay of the Allies in sending steamers to pick up the fugitives. 1 . ---- BRISTOL TO ESMIRNA CONSTANTINOPLA. September 22. 1 ¡ - Admiral Bristol, of the United States Navy, left for Smyrna tonight. The second battalion of the Grenadiers of the Guard and the third battalion of Legionnaires have received orders to leave immediately for Constantinople. I FRANCE WILL NOT WITHDRAW FROM THE NEAR WEST. PARIS, September 22.-The Cabinet decided that the French Government will continue to participate in all questions arising in the Near East. On the occasion of this agreement it was stated that its contents fully reflect the ideas of Mr. Poincaré and the interests of France. PARIS, September 22.-The dominant impression in political circles "3 that if the English do not consent to the restitution of Constantinople "to the Turks, we bring to the knowledge of the dus- 1 ¡ ños of phonographers that only until the 25th of this month will be in vi. ! gor our special offer to give a VICTOR record to anyone who buys from us another CUALQUIE , RA record from the great assortment that we have in stock. . Sanchez Morales and Co., Inc., (The house that sells the best) San Juan. ' Tonco, Mayagiiez. Advt. I - I I I I Button plating and lining A.CARAZO, Brau St 72 I Advt i
i eos the Anglo-Turkish conflict will arise iu | mediately. The "Manchester Guardian" claims that the "Manchester Guardian" has been reporting that the British-Turkish conflict will arise in the middle of the day.
The "Manchester Guardian" claims that war between Turkey and England is declared today.
(United Press, via AU America Cables) LONDON, Sept. 22.- "The Manchester Guardian "* assures that war between England and Turkey will probably be declared today. THE ENGLISH GOVERNMENT HAS SEIZED THE STEAMER "EMPRESS OF INDIA'' - LONDON, September 22. In order to move the Grenadiers of the Guardii from Glasgow to Constantinople the Government has requisitioned "1 liner '"Empress of India'' of the "Canada Pacific Transoceanic Line.CURZON HAS BEEN FORCED TO STAY IN PARIS PARTS, September 22.-The Foreign Minister of England, Mr. Curzon, has been obliged to remain in this capital until Monday. Tomorrow he will resume talks with Mr. Poincaré. INVITATION TO CONFERENCE TO BE SENT TODAY TO TURKEY PARIS, Sept. 22. -Mr. Curzon and Mr. Poincaré have agreed to send tomorrow to the Turkish Government the invitation to the conference on the Orient. ARMENIAN INTERESTS TO BE PROTECTED GENEVA, Sept. 22.-The advisory body of the Society of Nations has taken charge of Armenian interests in Turkey. LLOYD GEORGE TO THE PARLIAMENTARY BAR? LONDON, September 22.-The newspaper "World Labor", organ of the "Associated Workers" publishes a very slow article against the head of the government Mr. Lloyd George, calling his policy absurd and inopportune. He says that in another country such a politician I DON JOSE L. BREÑOSA On board the "Antonio Lopez" will leave tomorrow for Spain the learned gentleman and our esteemed colleague Don Jose L. Breñosa, who until now has been acting as head of our photoengraving shops. We are pleased to wish him a happy journey.
BASE-BALL LIGA DE HUMACAO: Sunday, Sept. 24, 1922. TWO FORMIDABLE CHALLENGES. Morning 9:30 A. M. Afternoon 3:00 P. M. PUERTO RICO vs. HUMACAO These two novenas vie for first place in the north and east. x EARLY, TO THE LEAGUE ON SUNDAY
(GREEKS TO REPRESSAL LONDON, Sept. 22.-Reports Constantinople say that the Greeks of Thrace have undertaken a general massacre against the Mohammedans resident there as a reprisal for the murder of Hellenes and Christians at Smyrna. MILLERAND CONVENES PARLIAMENT, PARIS, September 22.-President Millerand has declared that he has resolved to convene the Parliament for the fifth of next October. The President did not wish to anticipate the issues involved in the convocation. THE NEW TARIFF, APPROVED BY CONGRESS, BEGAN TO TAKE EFFECT IN PUER TO RICO YESTERDAY The Chief of Customs received yesterday a cablegram from Washington informing him to put into effect immediately the new tariff approved by Congress and signed by the President on Thursday, which still increases the duties on foreign products coming into the country and creates new taxes on other articles which were entering freely. For this reason, the Customs inspectors have been instructed on this matter, which will surely determine the corresponding increase in the articles affected by the tariff. LADY RESTORED It is with great pleasure that we are pleased to report that the distinguished Mrs. Perez de Santini, wife of our particular and esteemed friend Nicolas Santini, has been discharged from the Miramar Clinic, since she is in complete good health. We congratulate the respectable lady, and her distinguished family, for the improvement she has experienced, >: Sunday, September 24 SURPRISING PREMIERE! 'EL Extraordinary German film of great teachings for women Prices; 30 and 20 cts. seat I
WE HAVE JUST RECEIVED THICK ROUGH PIECES 3x8 - 4x8 - 6x8 - 8x8 - 8x8 - 8x10 - 10 x 10 10 10 x 12 - 12 x 12 Quality, Price, Service. ROLAN, TEJEDOR A DE HOSTOS ... San Juan, P. R. . _ 2
The San Juan aqueduct would produce about $300,000 per year without wasting that much water.
Mr. Rivera Ferrer informed us that 3,400,000 gallons of water are consumed daily in San Juan.
We found the data on water consumption in San Juan provided yesterday by the City Engineer, Mr. Rivera Ferrer, rather curious. San Juan, in our opinion, consumes more water, relatively speaking, than many American cities of greater importance than ours. But, according to the data we have obtained, this expenditure of water in San Juan has its explanation. Half of it is wasted,
is wasted: it is wasted; it is not used for anything. And while those American cities devote considerable quantities of this liquid to their industries, parks, gardens, without ever spending more than 3 million gallons a day, San Juan has an expenditure of 3,400,000 gallons of water every day. THE SERVICE. r The City Engineer, Mr. Rivera Ferrer, has succeeded in organizing the Aqueduct service in such a way that the complaints of the inhabitants living in the high streets of San Juan, who sometimes lacked the precious liquid for many days, have not been repeated. The reforms introduced by the Engineer <3of the city in the operation of the "pumps", the good care being taken with the Aqueduct, so that it is maintained with sufficient pressure, is giving ex celent results. The aforementioned "pumps", two of which were replaced because they were in poor condition, are today developing more pressure than ever, which allows water to be available in the city's neighborhoods. . It is reported that 4,150,000 gallons of water are pumped out of the San Juan Aqueduct daily. Of this amount 750,000 gallons go to Río Piedras and the rest, as we said before, goes to San Juan and its barrios. If the waste of water were not so great, as Mr. Engineer informed us yesterday, instead of the $150,000 that the Aqueduct is supposed to spend this year, the income from such waste would amount to about $300,000. Nothing has ever been done, it seems, to avoid this waste, and it is now Mr. Rivera Ferrer who will begin to organize this service, perhaps the most important of all public services in the city, because the health of the inhabitants depends on it. X - OTHER DETAILS Mr. Rivera Ferrer informed us that the lack of meters is what mainly determines the enormous waste of water. Before -he told us- whoever installed a meter in his house bought the meter; but, later, and due to a certain rule of the Public Service Commission, it is up to the Municipality to install the meters, and it happens that they are not installed because the Municipality does not have the money to buy them. It has been noted that another of the causes of the large amount of water being sold is the lack of scruples of certain elements, who have even installed stopcocks in certain places of the piping, in order to use more water than they pay for. All these irregularities, we understand, will be corrected when the new water supply project is established, which is pending approval by the Interior and Health Commissioners, who have had it in their possession for the past two weeks. In the meantime, the measures taken by Mr. Rivera Rtrrer are yielding appreciable results.
The Executive Council discussed again yesterday the issue of the Manatí sewerage system.
Yesterday the Executive Council of Puerto Rico met to continue the public hearing in the case of the Municipality of Manatí on the utility and necessity of a sewerage system and other ' ■ issues. Appeared don Federico Calaf, re presented by the Ledo. Santoni, as well as Ledo. Juan B, Soto for the petitioner. For the municipality of Barceloneta, another of the opponents ¡ attended by Ledo. Díaz attended. The Municipality of Manatí finished submitting its evidence, offering the i ■ téStTftionio of Ingeninero Mr. Ramos Casellas, and the deposition of testi- i j go Basilio Velez. He also presented a letter, addressed to the Administrator of the Monserrate power plant, which the Council admitted as evidence in the matter. The Municij's evidence having been completed THE TERRITORIAL RE- i ' PUBLIC COMMITTEE MEETED YESTERDAY Yesterday the Territo- ■ rial Committee of the Republican Party met, and in accordance with what was agreed upon at the recent Party Assembly held at the Carnegie Library, the members of the same resolved to present their resignations from their offices. I I I n order that the local committees may proceed to the election of the new directing body, according to the plan which was agreed upon at the Assembly. - A Judicial Committee was also appointed to study the legislation pending before Congress concerning Puerto Rico. On the same Thursday afternoon the commissioners appointed by the Assembly visited the Governor to express to him the opinion of the Assembly concerning his policies and actions. EASTERN GALITZIA IS A MOUTHFUL THAT IS NOT FOR THE POLES. .... PARIS, September 22. -The Assembly of Nations has officially requested the Allies to establish a definitive regime of government in Eastern Galicia, in order to prevent the Polish government from annexing this territory. i : MAGNIFICENT OCCASION In the house located on the road to Santurce, stop 20, spacious and fashionable, can have 1 to 3 comfortable rooms for single persons or married couples without children, who wish to rent it, for a small monthly stipend. The major advantage is that it is feasible to offer these rooms, with the right to the use of the dependencies of the house and table, if it is convenient. ' Address yourself to the same house where . you will be informed, or telephone 399 ver-1' i de. Santurce. Advt. OFFICE For rent a spacious and well ¡ ventilated in the Belaval building. í Ask the manager in the same. * mo building. Advt
j pio the Ledo. Santoni practiced the ¿<e of his represented, which consisted of the statements of the witness, Mr. Gani dia and the Engineer, Mr. del Valle. With the giving of this evidence, the hearing was closed, and the case was submitted to the Board, by means of pleadings to be presented by the parties within ten days. ANOTHER HEARING i After the previous hearing, the hearing related to certain municipal ordinances, imposing a ■ tax on sugar processed within the respective municipalities. The latter, as well as the plants involved in the case, were duly represented. The hearing began with a long speech by the Socialist leader, Mr. Igle sias, who spoke on behalf of the municipalities, alleging the right they had to impose taxes, and stating that the plants represented there came before the Council with the purpose of requesting an intolerable privilege, which consisted of "not paying taxes, although they were the ones who did not pay the due contribution to the treasury. He spoke of the privileges that these corporations have and the huge profits they obtain every year, which, he said, has not been an obstacle for them to refuse to pay a tax that is imposed on them for altruistic purposes. On behalf of the "Mercedita" of Yabucoa, the "Machete" of Guayama and the "Fajardo", spoke the Ledos. Tous Soto and Sifre, respectively, who rebutted Mr. Iglesias' statements, establishing their corresponding points of view. Once the arguments of the different parties were finished, and taking into account that during the debate important questions were raised, which the Board would like to know, the session was adjourned to continue it next Tuesday. JOSE ANTONIO VARGAS We have had the satisfaction of greeting our esteemed friend the Ledo, Don José Antonio Vargas, a valuable intellectual element who performs with* great competence and zeal the office of municipal judge of San Sebás tián. We send the young writer and poet our warmest greetings. ,
| Blue limestone "Valle Zeno" blue limestone is a guarantee for your works. Consult your engineer or master builder who knows it. Put your orders to the telephone 604, San Juan. í R. DEL VALLE ZENO J SAN JUAN, P. R.