THE MONDO
12 pages 3 ctvs, ' Semester, $4.00. * One year, $7-50.
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81. Tel. 833, P. O. Box 345.
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
Published and distributed under permit (No.* SOI) autbixrized by the Art of oetober 6. 1917, on file at the Post Office ot San .loan. Porfo Rico. Ry order of the President. A. S. Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, fehrnary 21. 1919. at the Post Office at San Juan. Porto Rieo (United States of America) under the Act of march 3. 1879.
SATURDAY, APRIL 15, 1922.
NUMBER 9731
YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Weeks held extensive conference with Harding on the P. R. case.
(UNITED PRESS) VIA "ALL AMERICA CABLES" WASHINGTON, April 11 (12:40 P. M.).) -Secretary of War Weeks has held a long conference with President Harding, in which they discussed questions relating to the political problem of Puerto Rico. In the course of that conference Secretary Weeks showed the President a cable communication received from this Island, in which he was informed of the charge made against District Attorney Diaz Co llazo, who, according to the official version, offered Governor Reily to dismiss the charges made by the Grand Jury, provided he would appoint him to another position in the administration of this Island. RAFAEL PIETRAN TONI ANNOUNCES "ANOTHER SCANDAL'' Yesterday, while we were exchanging impressions with the Republican leader, Mr. Pietrantoni, about the political moment, he told us that he would soon give us an account of "another scandal". When asked to explain, Mr. Pietrantoni told us, among other things, that he had reports that he was being considered for expulsion from the Party, and that the matter would surely be discussed at the next assembly to be held in Mayagüez. Mr. Pietrantoni will keep absolute reserve in this matter, since he will go to the assembly to defend himself against the charges that may be made against him. IMPORTANT We are pleased to inform that the tickets for the debut of Carmen Flores at the "Olimpo" theater, on Tuesday 18, are on sale. Call Telephone 119. Santurce. Advt.
I VIGORIZANT in cascade {etiOa'i I muscular caused pen travel S [¿riqj or pon enj 'rtnedacec.- I ■ "CURATIVE for res|nado3. 'n. j ■ ■ ■Jluenaa. neúraioias.reu. | , mutism, dclo-eo of the head. ANTISEPTICO powerful pora. í ¡ ¡ wounded. confusions, -a J ¡ d¡cI e of the mouth<i. ' . j PERFUMANT delicious for i handkerchief, for" bath and pa. J | r" locadct hygiene - jvuo i Theft i- 1 j
BEHN BROTHERS, INC. (HOUSE FOUNDED IN 1906) BANKERS (Berwind White Coal Mining Co. Lancashire Insurance Co. UPHUS 08 Compagnie Genérale Transatlantique. I Windward Island Line - Pacific Argentine. Brazil Line La Veloce. EL CONDADO - Venta de Solares. Tetuán-Tanca corner. San Juan, P. R.
FOR RENT - Concrete house, four bedrooms, between stops 20 and 22, new road. For information: Phone 788 Rojo, Santurce. Advt.
PARQUE BORINQUEN TODAY SATURDAY TODAY "Matinée) "Reprise" of "LOS TRES MOSQUETEROS" First Day.
1 ZINC SANDED AND SMOOTHED ZINCWOODS AND GRAMPS Roofing paper. Doors and windowsCall, visit or write to . ROLAN Y TEJEDOR Box 1356. Tel. 395. 395. Terral.'ti": Stop 2 112-.
Senators i San Juan conferred yesterday with! Governor I
Previously summoned by the Goll dor, yesterday visited the Fortaleza " nadores unionistas por el distrifl San Juan, Señores Hernandez Lól Celestino Iriarte. According to our ■ month, the object of the visit was to confer with Mr. Reily about "I judicial appointments which are to be made, and which to the District they represent. I appointments are as follows:! tary of the Municipal Court, of Ri<l of; Clerk and Marshall of the I of Carolina and Marshall of the Col Bayamon. I A" IS EXPECTED TO SUFFER A NOTABLE DECREASE! A wealthy merchant of esUl dad h i received reports from din, participating to him that there 11 crct the free export! rice, in view of the enormous I cha collected this past year.l That same gentleman received,! well, news of the recoleccM that grain in Japan, which dican that exportB prices will be lower this year. TWO GREAT SHOWS AT THE OLIMPf THEATER! Tomorrow, Sunday, the OLIMPO theater will be showing the precious ! titled "THE MAN GOES! SO", in which William DavidsoJ will shine in a traordinai manÍM traordinai ia the second batch, will be exhibide! HOGAR DE UN HOMBRE "J is one of the best films to come out of Puerto Rico in recent years. Also on the morning tanda, from 10:30 a.m., a " disimo dance will be held among the cultured and sympathetic elements of our society. |
TEATROSTRA1 Hoy Hoy Premiere in Santurce of lal sacional film ■ BOUCLETÍ o El Angel de Media Ni ES UN PROGRAMA Giufl (Spanish & English TitiS PARQUE BORINQíl El Cine más fresco de Pto. HOY. - SATURDAY - HCH Monte Blue in The Novel of a Mael (The Jueklins) ■ Pathé News. ■ Luneta 20 centavos. ■ Matinee at 3.30 P. "THE THREE MOSOUETE| Adults 15 cts. - Children lüH Sunday Morning ■ THE YELLOW PASSPORT. ■
£ REMEMBER 5 that today will open at the "TEATRO AMERICA" the supe! French art production S ''DREAM" BY J. cA. CIUSTI & CO. g NO FALTE NO FALll g Prices: 35 ctvs. and 20 ctvs. (Spanish & English titles.) Gran Puesto de Leche "Santa Barbad San José esquina a Sol No. 20, Telephone 1481 í Absolutely pure milk, procel of the cattle ranch of "PIZA HNOS," del Dorado, will be dispensed to the public at 16 centavl 18 at home. From 5 o'clock in the morning to 10 o'clock in the afternoon.
WHAT EVERY WOMAN IGNORES.... WHAT WILL BE7.J The answer to this question will be found in the tragic production of the same name to be presented by Universal Film Mfg. C| next week in theaters in San Juan. I
The Grand Jury addresses the Attorney General through its president.
Yesterday, after Judge Foote dissolved the Grand Jury, they met again and agreed to send a letter to the Attorney General, Mr. Mestre, stating their opinion as to the fact of its dissolution. The President informed the Attorney General that the Grand Jury should not be dissolved yet, since it has not yet finished its investigations, and has not yet been able to render its last reports, related to the visits that said organism made to the San Juan Prison and the Insane Asylum. DON CARLOS FRANCO SOTO Last Thursday returned to San Juan, after a long stay in the United States, the distinguished gentleman Don Carlos Franco Soto, an element of great value that formed an important part of the judiciary of the country, where he held positions of great significance. Mr. Franco Soto comes with the purpose of taking the high position of judge of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, for which he was last appointed by the President of the United States. We send the worthy gentleman a cordial greeting of welcome. "THE STOLEN KISS ' IN SANTURCE In the night of today, as Saturday of Glory, will be exhibited in the sumptuous theater "Olimpo', of' Santurce, "The stolen kiss, colossal drama that has to produce enormous enthusiasm in the public, and in which takes part a great star; CONSTAN' CE BINNEY. As it can be deduced from the above, this will be one of the most important exhibitions that the magnificent theater of Santurce, pride of the Island, will give. "Magnificent residence for sale - in Rio Piedras, Main Street near the University. Two floors and Garage. Rent $170 monthly. Inform Apartado 98, Río Piedras. "In the feverish mind of some advertisers, their rubbers already have a hard, almost greater hardness than the authorlcvil that uses them..... We guarantee that the new "AJAX GREY" is by far the best rubber currently manufactured, and that its cost is lower. Brunet, Saenz & Co! Allen 92.- Telephone 105'. San Juan P. R. Advt.
The complaint of our enterprising men is constant against the indifference with which our country receives their initiatives in its generous efforts to offer them opportunities of life and ■ security of a certain well-being. Despair seizes them, every time they observe how this people full of ardour in other aspects of its life shows itself peaceful, stoic in the face of a problem as important as that of the solution of its economic state by the modern means that the progressive life of cultured peoples offers to duly constituted societies. If a country shows indifference for its material wealth, it is undoubtedly that the same must be shown before those other moral and spiritual problems that directly affect its entire life. A people must have its just preferences, its affection for what is its own, and its love for all that lends it personality and vL ■ da. ¡
Industry is part of the public wealth, and a prir.sipal part of the public welfare. A people without its industry is like an unattractive woman or like a wasteland in complete solitude and utter neglect. Puerto Rico industries and it is an imperious duty to defend and maintain them, if it wishes to have a personality of its own, a life of its own and a wealth of its own that will be admired by other peoples, and our tobacco wealth is fought against, but it certainly maintains the fight for the superiority of its product and for the presentation of its elaborate workmanship. But it is not the same for cigarettes manufactured on our island. The snobbery of a few who care little for the public's well-being has brought to the island a product that is today combated by medical science as an element that is extremely harmful to the health of the individual. This product is the
The responsibility lies with the people
The responsibility lies with the people, the foreign cigarette, which has increased considerably in its importation in recent times, as a serious threat to our industry in that branch, and as a greater threat to the harvesters of the rich leaf. The local market should not be invaded by this foreign bad product, which not only harms our material wealth, but also does great harm to the health of the people, who consume it without taking into account how harmful it is for those who make use of it. Since science has sounded the alarm against the foreign cigarette, classifying it in the line of heroic drugs, let us resolve not to consume this product, preferring our own, which has not received the combat of science prohibiting its use, because it is made of excellent material and made without any harmful mixes that make it harmful.
The Governor declined to discuss the question of the cablegram sent to Washington until after he has conferred with Mr. Barceló.
The Central Board met on Thursday to deal at length with the situation
Extraordinary importance has been attached by the public to the matter of the cablegram said to have been sent to Washington by the Governor, in which it is stated that the Governor, using Mr. Barcelo's name, told the Administration that he had settled all differences and ironed out all differences between the Executive and the majority party and that he and Mr. Barcelo were in agreement in discussing the political problems to be solved. Mr. Córdova Dávila denied the assertion in Washington.
The public, on the occasion of what once happened with the cablegrams sent by Don José G. Torres, has related this to what happened ■ now to Mr. Barceló, and many suppose that the Governor did with Mr. Barceló the same as he did with Don Pepe Torres.
| As will be seen in the information we published a few days ago giving an account of the interview between the Governor and Messrs. Benedicto and Barceló, we noted that during the conference a cable dispatch had been dictated to the stenographer. At the end of the interview we asked Mr. Barceló about the cablegram we had seen copied and he denied that such a cablegram had been transmitted, and we insisted that it must have been written I (Continued on page 3a).
UNDERWEAR FABRIC UNDERWEAR "REIS" is the best - the most comfortable - the most durable and the cheapest
UNION SUIT, d? fine fabric march "Reis" shorts and sleeveless T-shirt, of superior quality to other brands prefio "u " n current $2.00. -Redu- f 1| THIN SHIRTS of pure wool superior brand "Reis" short sleeves recommended by all non-medical e, all t- I KM maños, value $2.50 a * 1w w SUPERIOR SHIRTS Firm and choice paints, great variety to choose from current valar $2 and $2.50 to- 4 a A des sizes. Rcdu- I. £Ln cidas a . RESTRAY T-SHIRTS of superior knitted quality, long sleeves, are unbeatable for everyday, worth 60 cts. one there are all sizesqp. Rtduc¡dosjQg|j HARD NECKS, of the famous "Ide" brand the best imported, all shapes and sizes r" " value 25 c. hllAfo Reduced to 3 for WU kl*'
o u ¡t' 1 v!. XíflHfltík jg. y 1 wW ! £oyex\Aer unionTsuits Gonzalez Padin Co. Inc. SANJUAN. pONCE. MA YACUEZ.
T-SHIRTS AND T-SHIRTS fine cloth brand "R:isV shorts and sleeveless T-shirts, ideal pa- i r ra ra summer, quality íljjplc top 75 c. W "Vi THIN SOCKS of the mf jor quality silk in whole and striped colors, brand "Reis"'' great dad pira to choose from, su va Hi [nfo loa- 75 c. Reduced to ***V*v" WOODEN SHIRTS Firm paints g ir guaranteed, is the ipejjor and most durable for everyday wear, worth q jB $350. - We offer 3 / A per $7.00 and a i - w THIN SHIRTS knitted bl ank top with long sleeves, also long johns some pe* and others are worth at 75c. there are tedog sizes SEMI-FLAXED COLLARS. brand "Ide" do not wrinkle, always appear well ironed, are the most how- aa two, there are all ta- | III! maños a 3 per - ww.
Mr. Garios Tero Labarthe 'takes the body' to the journalists days ago.
Since a few days ago, it has been impossible for reporters to get a statement from Mr. Toro Labarthe. In his office the assaults have been sterile. -Yes... uo... I don't know-and there is no one to get the Commissioner of Agriculture out of there. On the street it is worse. When Mr. Tora passes by us, he pretends not to see us, and he does not SEE us until we shout: "Don Carlos! The Commissioner holds out his right hand to us, and it is a struggle that we then engage in, him protesting for us to let him go, and us holding him, so that he will answer us some question.... But, everything is useless. Don Carlos does not give up, according to reports, he has said that the "reporters" of EL MUN DO are expensive for him. That is why, to everything they ask him, he is content to answer: "Yes... no, I don't know...". Yesterday we saw Mr. Toro on Salvador Brau Street. He was in a hurry. We caught up with him and, among other things, asked him when he was going to give possession to Mr. Honoré... The usual phrases of Don Carlos did not take long to ring out: -Yes... no... I don't know... -and he continued to sing in a hurry. We gave up the arduous undertaking. A DRAFT BY RATHENAU GENOVA, April 14. -The Finance Committee of the Conference studies the draft of the German delegate, Mr. Ra. ihenau, concerning the stability of the exchange rate for loans and universal monetary reform. Mr. Rathenau's proposal will be discussed as soon as the Finance Committee submits its report. INVITATION I - 1 We have received a kind invitation from the "Ferreteria Merino" to visit the establishment which they own at 64 Alien Street and to see the enormous price reduction they have made in their merchandise.
TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY Sensational Event. Caribbean Film Co. presents the production of the year "Macho y Hembra" (Male and Female) 10 reels. 10 acts. Gloria Swanson, Thomas Meighan, Lila Lee, Theodore Roberts, Bebe .Daniels, Raymond Hatton and Wesley Barry. 7 great stars. MATINAL at 10:30 A. M, Full orchestra. A. CARAZO, Brau St. 72, plating and lining buttons.