THE MONDO
■H lilililí11 I | 1 H "1 1 I 11 11' ■ 12 pages 3 cts " --fnwtr®, 84.00. A afio, 87.58. -- e e e < ■ P t f t f-t-t f f t f t " t t t .
■ H "l "l "l "l I II 11111 H-l-M' ll!-f Offices? Salvador Brau, 81. ' - Tal. 833, P g O. Box 345. ■; m 1'1-W!' I' I' l- !■ I I I I I I II II II I I I I I I I I I
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR IV a
8AN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
NUMBER 1056.
Tomorrow's great artistic event at the Municipal Theater.
Tomorrow will take place at the Municipal Theater the only concert of the distinguished Puerto Rican tenor Antonio Paoli, whose voice has conquered in all of Europe as well as in the Spanish-American Republics the most resounding and flattering artistic triumphs. The magnitude of Paoli's voice, praised by the great critics of the world and rewarded with the most fervent applause by the cultured audiences of Germany, France, Spain and Italy will be heard for the joy of his compatriots in our coliseum, where undoubtedly, our public will offer to the artist who exalted the name of his country abroad, the laurels of their most fervent admiration. On the occasion of tomorrow's event, at which Paoli will sing his favorite opera "Otello", tickets are selling fast and those who have not yet bought them should apply for them as soon as possible. A SOCIETY OF LAWYERS HAS BEEN FORMED TO PLEAD THE ILLEGALITY OF THE LATEST MUNICIPAL TAXES BEFORE THE COURTS Through various business men of this city we have learned that a ' ' Society of Lawyers, Republicans, has been formed, which has been joined by several Unionists, The Society of Republican Lawyers, to which several Unionists have joined, for the purpose of offering their professional services to the merchants in the matter of the latest municipal taxes, the alleged illegality of which they are prepared to contest in the courts, if they can muster the necessary number of complainants. According to our reports, a leaflet has been circulated to this effect among the most disgruntled shopkeepers. IMPORTANT CONFERENCE On July 23rd at three o'clock in the afternoon, the Hon. Emilio del Toro Cuevas, Presiding Judge of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, will give an important conference before the Association of Employees and Workers of the Central : Plazuela. Given the prestige of the illustrious lecturer and his profound knowledge, there is no doubt that his lecture will be an extraordinary event. There is great interest in hearing the illustrious lecturer. LONDON MINERS DO NOT WANT TO JOIN THE MOSCOW INTERNATIONAL LONDON, July 21.-By eighty-three votes to eighty-one the Central Miners' Guild here refused to join the Moscow International. "Puerto Rico" Cinema TODAY. SAT. TODAY. Farewell to the much applauded Duet !"Huertánica Cardoso" and Mitchel Le- ! wis in the vibrant drama entitled "The Mutiny on Board'' Morning Matinee and Ñocha. Episodes 7 and 8 of "Los Jinetes Rojos" or "Les Salteadores de la Montaña". Matinée: Juan Centella in the exciting drama entitled "El Guapo del Rancho" and "Los Yara" Tuesday Debut of the celebrated dancer HERIMAR Precios Corrientes.
' im-i-h-i 1111:11111 H-1-I-111111111 n -h- i-bi 1111111111 ¡ i Blue Limestone ; ' We advise our customers and the general public that during the next week, and on account of the extensions and improvements that we are making in our plant, the en'Vegas of crushed stone I. cannot be made with the usual regularity, and we beg to ' ' ■ ■ in advance to excuse any deficiency which may be observed. - We promise, on the other hand, that after these days of reform, our business will acquire the highest standard of efficiency in all respects. ' í I R. del VALLE ZENO, ;; July 20, 1922. - ; ' TELEPHONE 604-SAN JUAN P. B. ;-
Mí nnd / r tí 0 ' ' 8 Q1) fathoriBeo Ü>e Act of octobw 6, 1917. on filo at the Poet Office oí II Ben Juan. Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. 8. Burleson, Poetmaster General. Entered a. second class matter february 21. 1212, at the Post Office at Ban Juan, Porto Rico, (United Statea of America) under the Act of march 8 1872* ||
Mr. Iglesias is in favor of convening the Legislature.
Yesterday we greeted in his office at the federation the Socialist leader, Mr. Iglesias, whom we asked if it was true that Mr. Reily was thinking of calling the Legislature into an extraordinary session. Mr. Iglesias could not assure us of anything concrete, as he told us that Mr. Heüy had not yet made any definite decision on the matter. However, we can report that the personal opinion of Mr. Iglesias, and therefore of all the leaders of the Federation, is that an extraordinary session of the Legislature should be called, since, according to what Iglesias told us, there are pending problems of such magnitude that only a special legislative session could resolve them. The matter of the island employees, particularly as far as the masters are concerned, says Mr. Iglesias, is something that demands the most prompt solution, and that must be solved no later than September, before the public schools are opened for the first time. Mr. Iglesias expressed himself in the most enthusiastic terms on this matter, emphasizing in his conversation that he is a strong supporter of the Legislature being convened as soon as possible, for which he will spare no effort of any kind. THE REPUBLICANS? Mr. Iglesias said he was not authorized to express the wishes of the Republicans on this matter; but he told us that his personal impressions on the matter were that the Republicans also wanted such an extraordinary session, since none of Silos was unaware of the serious problems currently facing the country. Mr. Iglesias concluded by telling us that his opinion is that all the poetic parties of the island are in agreement that the Legislature be convened as soon as possible. EBERT HAS CONFERRED THIS MORNING WITH THE COMMITTEE OF GUARANTEES BERLIN, July 21.-The President of the Republic, Mr. Ebert, has conferred extensively today with the Chairman of the Committee of Allied Guarantees concerning the terms in which the report to be sent to the Committee of Guarantees to request the economic endorsement for the financial support of the country will be drawn up. Other matters were also discussed at the meeting, but were treated with absolute confidentiality. Teatro America TODAY GBAN SUCCESS WITH THE CELEBBE DANCER OF THE "SCALA j DE MILANO" Nella Mazimova New dances of elegance Tomorrow Sunday despodida, and also premiere of the film LacafdadeBabilonia by CONSTANCE TALMADGE The last production of this artist MATINBE ALL THE TABDE WITH LacaídadeBabilonia A 10 and 15 cts. LUNETTES A bargain Sold extremely cheap, se mile of elephant grass, the best i cattle feed. Any quantity can be supplied. Reports A. RAMOS in EL MUNDO.
THE OLYMPIA', THE HISTORIC U. S. FLEET SHIP, ENTRED INTO OUR PORT YESTERDAY.
IMPORTANT GOVERNMENT COMMISSIONS AND PRIVATE ENTITIES WENT TO PAY THEIR RESPECTS TO ADMIRAL MC. CULLY
At three o'clock yesterday afternoon, the members of the various commissions invited to attend the reception of the ' ' Olym i pia", aboard which Admiral Me Cully, who is in charge of the squadron of the fleet that is making naval maneuvers in the waters of Culebra, began to arrive at pier No. 1 of the New York and Porto Rico Steamship Company. THE TUG "JOHN E. BERWIN" After a long wait, and once all the commissions were assembled, on board the tug "John E. Berwin", they all went to catch up with the "Olympia" as it entered the Morro. The following personalities, we remember among those who were aboard the "John E. Berwin": The Governor, Hon. E. Mont Reily, his military aide, Captain Lopez Antongiorgi, Ledo. Salvador Mestre, Ledo. José Ramón Quiñones, don Pedro Bolívsr. don Ramón Aboy Jr. don Manuel V. Domenech, don Waldemar Lee, don Emilio Jiménez, don Cecilio Morán, don Juan Pedrosa, Mr. Adams, and the representatives of the city press, Messrs. López Sárate, of "El Im parcial". Aldea Nazario, of "La Conerpondencia'' and Vargas, of EL MUNDO. r ■ ■--- - i COMMISSIONS OF THE LEGISLATURE In a launch of the "Porto Rico Coal Co." embarked also, with the same object, two commissions, one from the Senate, composed of the president, Hon. Antonio R. Barceló and Senators Hernández López, Jordán, Martínez Nadal and Iglesias, and the other from the House of Representatives, composed of the speaker pro-tempore, Hon. Alfonso Lastra Charriez and Representatives Guerra Mondragón (Migual), Perés i Cruz, Dones Padró and Alonso. Accompanying said committees of the i Legislature, were the ari mas sergeants of both legislative bodies: i ' THE "OLYMPIA" ENTERS THE CANAL About five o'clock in the afternoon made rti entry into the canal, the "Olympia." She is an old model ship, with a draft of 21 feet, and on February 5th she celebrated her 27th anniversary of her launching. She was Admiral Dewey's flagship during the Spanish-American War, and the floor of the main bridge is clearly marked where Admiral Dewey set foot when he was leading the naval battle of Cavite from the Olympia. On the stern there is a bronze plaque commemorating that feat. I I I THE FIRST SALUTES When she dropped anchor there was the
Olympia" and the coves were laid, the Legislature's committee boat was the first to approach the ship and the members of the Legislature were the first to board the ship. One editor, Muestro, jumped from the "John Berwin" to the "Olympia" before the rest of the party and was able to see the moment when the Ledo. Guerra Mondra- i gón was greeting Admiral Me CuUy, with whom he had a brief conversation and made the introductions of the other members of the commission. Upon being introduced to him by the President of the Senate, Mr. Barceló, the latter handed him an admirably prepared greeting message, the text of which read as follows: "To the Admiral of the Sea Guards Practice Squadron. Sir: On behalf of the Legislature of Puerto Rico, we have the honor to offer you this message of cordial welcome on your happy arrival to our shores. Wishing to offer you a fraternal tribute of hospitality, the Senators and Representatives have decided to hold an informal session in your honor, and would like you to set a date for it during your stay in San Juan, in which you and your entourage could attend said session to be held in the morning, since it is our purpose to offer you also a luncheon in the halls of the Legislature. With the expression of our highest consideration, we remain Respectfully yours, Antonio B. BARCELO, President of the Senate. Alfonso Lastra CHARRIEZ, Speaker pro-tempore of the House. Admiral Me CuUy, as soon - EílíCT© I -HOY~sÁBADO -HOY~sÁBADO -HOY-RENECEIVES on his latest triumph "The Key to the Enigma" Current Prices Tomorrow: : Tomorrow SOBERBIOUS PREMIERE THE ARTISTIC PHOTODRAMA IN 7 ACTS RODIN'S The Thinker See this important production !
He was impressed by the wishes of the commissions, thanked the tribute, stating that he was very happy to be on this island and that he was only sorry that the time he was going to stay in this port was so short. Regarding - the request of the Legis- 1 lature he stated that he did not yet fit the ¡ time at his disposal but that he would take the request of eHos ■ very much into account in order to comply with their wishes. I THE TIMES AND DAYS OF ON-BOARD VISITATION Before the Committee of the Legislature, the Admiral stated that the public would be able to visit the ship, which, although it was neither of the latest models, nor of a very high quality, was nevertheless of great historical value and said that the public would have access to the ship today:That to the ship during the day today, Saturday, from one o'clock in the afternoon until five o'clock, and tomorrow, Sunday, from half past ten in the morning until five o'clock in the afternoon except for the hour between twelve and one o'clock noon which has been reserved for lunch for the ship's crew. All day Monday the seamen will be engaged in supplying the ship with coal and the public will not be able to visit on board. THE GOVERNOR ON BOARD Accompanied by the Commission of the Chamber of Commerce and other important personalities, Governor Reily came on board, who offered his respects to the Admiral, whom he had already met on his trip to the island of Culebra. Accompanied by the Admiral and his military aide, the Governor looked over the entire ship. The same was done by the Legislative and Curatorial Commissions and other visitors. Admiral McCully went ashore at about six o'clock, accompanied by the Governor and his entourage, and aboard the "John E. Be twin". As he fanned the ship, the 17 regulation cannon shots were fired in honor of the Governor. Upon coming ashore in the Chief Executive's automobile, "1 Admiral proceeded to the residence - of Mr. Aboy Jr. which is 'an where | : he is to reside as long as he remains on . j the island. A CROWD OF A MULTICHARRIED CROWD AT THE SPRINGS On all the piers at the time of the arrival of the cruiser "Olympia", a motley crowd was to be seen, eager to see the Admiral, who is indeed a figure of distinguished bearing and personal sympathy. THE BANQUET AND DANCE LAST NIGHT, and at the Van derbilt County Hotel, a sumptuous banquet and dance was prepared for the Admiral and Marine Guards, which was judged by the Admiral's wife, the Admiral's wife, and the Admiral's wife, the Admiral's wife, the Admiral's wife, the Admiral's wife, the Admiral's wife, and the Admiral's wife.
SATURDAY THEATER OLIMPO Sunday I Debut of the Modern Art Company. Reappearance and Success of the Company. ALEGRIA ENHART ALEGRIA ENHART Luxurious Set. New Program. Sensational Numbers. A Single Tanda. Art-Luxury-Beauty. Single Tanda. 8 P. M. 8 p. Prices: Numbered Lunettes 75 cents. Prices: Lunettes Numbered 75 cents.
TOMORROW Splendid Te Danzante at the Hotel Gondaiio-Vandeibilt from 4:00 to 6:00 P. M. Enjoy a delicious afternoon at our Te Danzantes, every Sunday.
Borinquen Park TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY Wanda Hawley in the interesting drama: "FOR A KISS" (Miss Hobbs.) Current Prices. Tomorrow Sunday "HIJOS DEL DESTINO" (Children of Destiny).
Caballojobado Since July 12 has disappeared from the Maleza Baja neighborhood of Aguadilla, a bay horse, with a dark colored back and darker at the knee, with an over bone behind his left ear. Its owner Eleuterio Gomez will reward the one who gives news of its whereabouts. Advt.
.. "* l1 ' llllt ' gg====g=Ba=3==gsM8egeaseaenE=smi,jMB'!i'. l Li SATURDAY, JULY 22, 1922.
The Allies conce-' gave Germany the requested moratorium.
(United Press, via AH America Cables) PARIS, July 21, -The newspaper "La Tribune" reports in an officia l manner that 'the French government is parti-' to grant Germany a short-term moratorium in order to prevent the continuation of the depression of the mark, which would mean the financial bankruptcy of that country. THE MORATORIUM IS GRANTED TO GERMANY ONLY FOR SIX WEEKS PARIG, July 21.- In the early hours of this afternoon a note was sent to the Compensation Committee, authorized by the head of the government, M. Raymond Loincaré, in which he stated that he would be asked for a moratorium for six weeks only. 1 Raymond Loincaré in which he states that the French Government has instructed its delegate on the Committee, Mr. Du Bois, to demand the granting of a moratorium to Germany for six weeks only, covering the payments for August and September. If after this term the German Government does not comply with the conditions stipulated by the Committee then the Committee will proclaim the bankruptcy of the autonomous í'credit. THE REICHSTAG COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS WILL CONFIRM THE REPORT OF THE GUARANTEE COMMITTEE BERLIN, July 21.-The report submitted by the Committee on Guarantees of the Abaffian Governments concerning the financial control of the country will be discussed by the Reichstag Committee on Foreign Affairs until late in the afternoon. It is expected to provoke an important discussion, since important members of Parliament do not agree with the verdict of the Committee on Guarantees. the enthusiasm of the Reichstag promised to be very lucid. THE OTHER FESTIVITIES As of this writing, we are not aware of any other changes in the program of the festivities, which is to be expected if one takes into account that the Admiral was informed of the program upon his arrival in this city. OUR GREETINGS One of our editors was on board to compliment the Admiral on behalf of our newspaper, and EL MUNDO from these columns is pleased to affectionately greet, upon his arrival to the Island, Admiral Ms. Cully, to all the marine guards and the crew of the "Olympia", to all of whom, in extending our congratulations, we have the most ardent wishes that the days they spend among us will be, happily, of great and eternal remembrance. I St- X | PRESENTARA | 1 7 Noches de Arte 71 | Con la Compañía | Itaslliml í 24 > f AL I i 30 í X X X ¿ dramas, comedies and pelicu\ x i las a Precios nunca visto í: ? in Puerto Rico. i ? PAYMENTS to all 7 performances. J NEW - Collars, Ties, Shirts and Socks M. SAVINO S. Brau 52 - San Juan, P. R. Buttons are plated and lined A.CARAZO, Brau St 72 !
Work on the Capitol suspended until next year.
Yesterday we visited the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Wilson, in order to find out if it was true that the work on the Island Capitol had been suspended, as we had been told. Mr. Wilson answered in the affirmative, adding that he had ordered such suspension because of the expiration of the first contract with the construction engineer, Mr. Pons, under which contract the second floor of the building was almost finished. Mr. Wilson told us that because the plans for the second part of the Capitol were being prepared, work would probably not resume until early next year. This delay is due, according to Mr. Wilsen, to the difficulties encountered by the Department of the Interior in finding competent technical personnel to prepare the plans. The budget for the construction of the Capitol amounts to more than ONE MILLION DOLLARS. To date, more than $130,000 has been spent. The District Courts of San Juan, which at first were said to be established in the building, have lately been excluded. The Parliament and the Supreme Court, it appears, will be the only institutions to be installed there. in several states of the union the militia are mobilized washington, july 21. -In connection with the miners' strike, which is becoming more and more intense, the Governors of several States of the Union have ordered the mobilization of the military forces to prevent any disturbance of public order. In Pittsburg last night a riot broke out between the police and the strikers, in which six workers were seriously injured. LONDON, July 21.-Lord Carvan, Chief of the Imperial General Staff and Commander of the officer's camp which opened here yesterday, declared that the radio telephone system is the most appropriate for war operations. Lorfi Carvan also stated that the telephonic and telegraphic communications during the last European conflict were so efficient that only to them was due a part of the deaths in the great battles. Municipal Theater TOMORROW AT 8:45 P.M. Night of Puerto Rican glory Great concert to great orchestra of 35 professors with the best dramatic tenor of the world ANTONIO PAOLI singing in character and to great orchestra the numbers of the most culminating acts of the great opera "OTELLO" The duets with the eminent tenor, the role of Desdémona will make them the soprano YSABEL SORIA The scenes all will be *an character and accompanied to great orchestra of 35 professors This will constitute one of the greatest events that will register the history of P. R. and the whole Puerto Rico is ready in the night of tomorrow Sunday, to renew the greatest affection, to the greatest glory of the world lyrical art that has given this beHa island. Tickets will be on sale today until 12 p.m. at the Crasas y Oo. office, Cruz 18, San Juan. Tomorrow morning at the box office of the Municipal Theater. i SPANISH GRAPE JUICE BRAND "NOEMOST" The best and most pleasant sustí- - tute of the "Sitges" muscatel. SUCRS. OF L. VILLAMIL & CO. General Agents.