elmbndo
vTTTTTTTTTTTrmvTrrrrrrrffl"- 12 pages 3 cts Semester, $4.00. One afio, $7.50, [,,,'1 m-l'4-t. 1H-I-H-H-H-H-H-H- H-i-l 1' '
Offices; Salvador Brau, 81, ■ Tal. 833, P, O. Box 345. ;
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
ANNU IV.
The Governor, in company with Senor Mestre, visited yesterday afternoon the Penitentiary.
Immense public expectation was caused yesterday throughout the capital by the fact that Governor Belly and Attorney General Mestre, whom the public had supposed to have been estranged for some time on account of the latest sensational events which are already well known to our readers, were seen riding together in an automobile. As soon as we learned of this fact, we went to investigate the reasons for this unusual pairing, and we were informed that the Governor had gone, in the company of Mr. Mestre and Mr. Erguí, head of the Bureau of Prisons of the Department of Justice, to visit the penitentiary and the district jail annexed to the Presidio, in accordance with the information that we had published a few days ago, reporting the Governor's intention to learn about the progress and organization of the main institutions of the country. During the visit, these high officials were attended to in the Presidio by the second Chief, Mr. Saldaña, due to Mr. O'Neill's illness, and in the Prison by the Warden, Monsignor Lugo. Yesterday afternoon we were informed that -1 Governor had left the prison SAN JUAN BAUTISTA On the occasion of today being the feast day of the Patron Saint John the Baptist, we send to all our friends who answer to that name our congratulations, as well as to the public men among whom are Don Ju>n Bautista Soto, Don Juan de Guz imán Benítez, Don Juan Garcia Ducós, Don Juan B. Huyke, and the illustrious vice president of the Senate, Don Juan Hernandez Lopez: ' FANS The "Kodak" Department of The Porto Rico Drug Co, has just made a great reform that allows you to send your development works and copies within 24 hours of receiving them, with an expert and exclusive staff. Send us your jobs. Special I attention to island orders C. O. D. Olympus Theater TOMORROW SUNDAY VIOLET HEMING Wanda Hawley - Theodore Roberts BABE DANIELS! Raymond Hatton-Monte Blue in the colossal allegorical drama "FEMINA" "EVERYWOMAN" A Paramount Picture Extraordinaria do ''Caribbean'' I
highly satisfied with the condition in which both insti tildones are kept, as well as with the magnificent internal organization of the Presidio, as there are workshops for the work of the inmates, school rooms and cinematograph. One of the things, judging by the reports we were given, which apparently produced the best impression on the Governor, was the magnificent sanitary conditions in which the prison was kept, since it was observed that everything was extraordinarily clean, in spite of the large number of inmates there at the present time. This is doubly remarkable, considering that the prison building was built more than one hundred years ago and it is impossible to improve its conditions any further. The Governor expressed his satisfaction with the good conditions of the penitentiary and congratulated them on the work they have been doing for the benefit of the inmates of the penitentiary. MR. FIGUEROA DELIVERED A BRILLIANT SPEECH IN MADRID IN FAVOR OF PTO. RICO. Yesterday the distinguished Senator for San Juan, Mr. I fiarte, sent us a copy of the following cable dispatch that he received from Madrid, and which we gladly publish, because it refers to a triumph won by a very deserving Puerto Rican in the capital of Spain. The speech to which the dispatch refers, was pronounced by Dr. Figueroa in a Council held in Madrid by the Grand Lodge of that town and court. Here is the dispatch: June 23, 1922. Ledo- Senator Iriarte, San Juan. Grand Council luminously informed grand master Swiss national inter ¡ conference, dealing with Puerto Rican affairs. Figueroa brilliant speech. Unanimous congratulations. Dr. MOREIRA, Council Speaker. IMPORTANT NOTICE TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC! In view of the fact that the matter of the imposition of the municipal tax on theater tickets has not yet been definitively settled, Mr. Lloverás, owner of the "Puer to Rico" movie theater, requested some of his colleagues to lower the prices to those previously in effect, and this has been agreed upon to take effect as from the date of this meeting. {It has been agreed to take effect from next Monday, 26th of June. PRICES: 15 and 20 CENTS Buttons are plated and lined 1 A. CARAZO. Brau St 72
I GIFT to the City of St. John on the occasion of the feast of its Saint. 4 SHOES THAT LAST LONGER AND COST LESS - > Dominican footwear machine-made with all the modern advances ! ► s, and made with 1st. of 1st. materials, for j; Gentlemen, Ladies and Children ► S American Styles - Elegant and Durable. -! h í SOON, VERY SOON. 4 II 1 1 1 I I IHtl'l l l 1 11 l I ¡■Illl-í-t-H-frl IHIIH I-l-H-l-WWI I !!■ f LAST HOUR " For two dollars a week you can dress in the ;;; í I sastrería of Andrés Echevarría. Ask for information. Also in ;; " this house you will find at surprising prices silk " ! ' shirts, ties, fashionable collars, elegant suits, ladies and men's hosiery of the reputable !!! - j brand "Holeproot", fashionable hats, belts, he- ■ - "■ billas, underwear B. V. D., little blue children's suits ! I :: navy and Palm Beach, everything a perso- :! i * na might desire you will find here. *Andres Echevarria -- : : : : M 1 H I " 1 1 " "">♦ 11 1 lili " 111I I 1 11 1 -1 t T
8 Published end distributed under permit (Ne. 801) authorized by the Act of October 6, 1017, on file "t the Poet Of flee o* Q II Ran Jutfn. Porto Rico, By order of the President. A 8. Burleson. Postmaster General. Entered a. second class matter, II I february 21. 1910. at the Post Office at Ban' Juan, Rico, (United States of America) under the Act of march 8, 1870 |
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Mr. BARRELO AND SOCIALIST SENATOR IGLESIAS HAD A FRIENDLY INTERVIEW AT A HOTEL IN THIS CITY - ■■i "a".n I" ■ ■ ■ -■■■hi .■
FOR MORE THAN THREE HOURS THE POLITICAL LEADERS EXCHANGED IMPRESSIONS REGARDING THE PROBLEMS AFFECTING THE COUNTRY, COULD A COMBINED EFFORT OF THE THREE PARTIES IMPROVE THE GENERAL SITUATION OF THE WAVE?
Yesterday at noon and being at the Central Hotel of this capital, the Socialist leader Santiago Iglesias, in the Hotel dining room, the President of the Senate and Head of the Unionist Party, Hon. Antonio R. Barceló. ! On seeing each other, the two adversary leaders greeted each other and, at the invitation of Mr. Iglesias, Mr. Barceló took a seat at the table of Lenine's disciple. During the lunch and even at the table, the conversation between the two politicians revolved mainly on the subject of the "socialist" party and the "unionist" party. During lunch and even at the table, the conversation between the two politicians revolved mainly around the economic problem of the island, each one holding his own point of view, but both agreeing that it was necessary to work together to achieve greater welfare and happiness mainly for the working class, by virtue of a wise and orderly legislation that would grant greater benefits to the working class. ! Nothing had to be discussed with respect to { the immediate remedies, according to ' -♦- -
The polemic between Messrs. Lastra Charriez and Iriarte has been settled, with Mr. Lastra Charriez and Mr. Iriarte having addressed letters to the Director and Editor of "La Semana", in which each of them is in favor of withdrawing the personal attacks! In the heat of the polemic, which our readers are already familiar with, the latter was terminated, although Mr. Lastra remains free to continue to make his political assessments and criticisms of the public men of his party, but without entering into personalism.
The island is free to continue to make its political appraisals and criticisms of the public men of his party, but without entering into personalism, to make a work of common good so that the island can better develop its industrial and agricultural life, receiving the benefits of a more healthy and disinterested protective legislation for the underprivileged classes. Mr. Barceló took advantage of the opportunity to refute certain concepts of Mr. Iglesias, which he considered erroneous, and to express his good wishes that the worker and the laborer, as well as their families, reach the highest degree of well-being and comfort. Although nothing definite was agreed upon between the aforementioned politicians during the conference, we know, however, that, given the importance of the matters discussed and the high spirit of cordiality which prevailed during the interview, the beneficial results of this change of views will soon be realized.
NEWS THAT'tfkfififififítVSA TISFACTS
The news we have received in recent days about the situation in foreign markets is optimistic in the extreme. The general business situation is improving markedly, and it is hoped that, at an early date, this situation will bring a general reaction from all industry in the various countries. We have been preaching in these days about the need for our people to pay immediate attention to the protection of industries and, especially, to the cigarette industry, which has been going through a deep crisis due to the prevailing depreciation in foreign markets. At the present time all nations are actively campaigning for the protection of their industries and for consumers to prefer the products of their respective countries to those of the rest of the world.
The fact is that all nations are now actively campaigning for the protection of their industries and for consumers to prefer the products of their own countries to those of other countries. I Some of these peoples, such as Germany, France, England, the United States and others, are guaranteed in this respect by the fact that their industries are firmly established by the determined cooperation of their respective peoples. But not so in the young towns like ours, where the industries have always been pending of the foreign markets that requested their products with insistence for being superior to those elaborated in them. Puerto Rico is a raw material for the various industries located on its soil. This raw material, which today is scarce in its production, could be increased to the limit that the industrial capacity required to efficiently meet the needs of the island's consumption.
The manufacture of cigarettes in Puer . to Rico, if it is true that it has reached a peak, reaching some five hundred million a year, it is no less true that lately our people have allowed that foreign cigarette product, of which a good part is of very poor quality and harmful to health, to reach our market and in a short time reach eighty million the total of foreign cigarettes that the country consumes annually. By protecting the cigarette industry, the total amount of cigarettes consumed by Puerto Rico would be increased by the native industry, which would provide opportunities for our workers and laborers to work throughout the year, without fear of foreign economic depreciations. This is what is practical and what we must do if we yearn to have a dignified homeland and truly free citizens, and if we are to have a free country.
WINS! VERftADERAS GANGAS! NEW SUITS AND HATS FOR LADIES AND GIRLS, MODELS ARRIVED BY THE LAST STEAMER.
Many and very nice outfits for ladies and girls made with beautiful Chingham plaid fabrics and in matching colors, all are great novelty models, there are all sizes in all styles. See them today - Situation prices. $1.50 $2.50 $2.98 I $5.00
We have just received and put on sale the most beautiful collection of Hats for Ladies and Girls, there is not one ugly one, they are all the most beautiful and fashionable, we have marked them at the same half of what they are worth. Situation prices- -Come right away. $1.50 $2.50 $3.00 & $3.50
LacasaQu" Gonzalez Padin Co. Inc. u "'" in Sells 's> a c °n De Todo. San Juan- Ponce. Mayagüez. Fixed Prices.
Strand Theater TODAY. -- June 24. - TODAY. Rodolph Valentino and Alice Terry - EN - The Supreme Power
SPANISH GRAPE JUICE BRAND "NOEMOST" The best, and most pleasant substitute for "Sitges" muscatel. SUCRS. OF L. VILLAMIL & CO. General Agents,
St. Augustine Theater TODAY. - SATURDAY. - TODAY. CAGLIOSTRO Program 1FA __
SATURDAY, JUNE 24, 1922.
I - NUMBER 1033.
The Director of "Tica-Pica", Mr. Brau, accused of violation of the Postal Laws.
Yesterday morning our distinguished colleague Mr. Luis Brau, director of the popular weekly "Pica Pica", { which is published in San Juan, was arrested by one of the marshals of the Federal Court. The judge of the Federal Court set Mr. Brau a bail of two thousand dollars to be released on bail, which was immediately given by Mr. Enrique Zorrilla and Mr. José S. Alegría. Mr. Brau, who will have to appear next Monday before the aforementioned Court, is defended by the eminent lawyer Mr. Miguel Guerra Mondragón. The following is the text of the indictment read yesterday against the director of "Pica Pica": The United States vs. Luis BrauNo. Crim. Indictment for violation of session 211 of the Penal Code. United States of America. District of Puerto Rico. SS. I . 1 In the District Court of the United States, at iy for Puerto Rico, on the May term, 1922. The Grand Jury of the U.S.A., empanelled, sworn and instructed for the term before said, of the aforesaid Court, upon oath indicts i Luis Brau, because on the 10th day of June, { in the year of our Lord 1922, in the said District and within the jurisdiction of the said Court, he did willfully, unlawfully and criminally deposit and cause to be deposited ACCUSED FOR ALTERING. Two indictments have been filed in Federal Court against Manuel Raite, Antonio Dominguez, Erasto Baez and Pedro Ortiz, who are charged with the double offense of counterfeiting United States bank notes. The defendants have been required to post $2,000 bail in each case. TWO BIG HITS AT THE PUERTO RICO CINEMA. This evening the splendid film "Hijos Ingratos" will be shown at the "Cine Puerto Rico" in Santurce, considered one of the most beautiful films to come to Puerto Rico lately. Tomorrow, the premiere of the great film "La Muerte del Gran Duque" (The Death of the Grand Duke), the pride of modern filmmaking, will be announced. The nice Puchol sisters will contribute to the success of the show by singing beautiful and well-known cuplés of current events. Mr. Lloverás Soler assures that tonight's and tomorrow's performances will be an artistic event of true transcendence. W-l-Hri-H-h-hH-Hri-l-l-l-l-l-W-l-l-l-l I J " Cheap Furniture for co* " medor have just been received in "■ "Los Novios" - by Rafael Margarida - - S. Brau 44 San Juan. ■ - -I -I -I-I-I-I -I 11 I fr-F-H-H-H-Hri d -bH-fd-H-fr
for distribution at the San Juan post office. tion at the post office of San Juan, Puerto Rice, certain unmailable matter, to wit, various and sundry copies of the June 10, 1922 edition of the newspaper "PicaPica", said newspaper being "PicaPica", then and now a newspaper published weekly in San Juan, Puerto Rico, by the said Luis Brau and registered by said Luis Brau, as second class matter at the post office of San Juan, Puerto Rico, in which was inserted certain obscene, dishonest and lewd poetry, dishonest and lewd poem of an indecent character, to wit, a poem entitled "Despedida Boricua" and described therein as a revolutionary poem dedicated to the madman of Palacio, one Moncho, and signed with the pseudonym "Candelita", and unfit to be reproduced in this indictment, and to be inserted in the records of this honorable Court, contrary to the provisions of law for said case made and provided for, and against the peace and dignity of the United States(signed) Ira K. WELLS, United States Attorney. Next Monday, defense counsel will make technical objections to the indictment. Discussion of these points of law and the merits of the case will probably not be heard until the regre so of the Hon. Judge Odlin next October. THE WORLD sincerely regrets the setback suffered by the esteemed comrade, for whom it has all its sympathies and wishes him to come out of the said proceedings well. y. We have been informed that the District Court of Humacao has granted the socialist officials of Fajardo an extension until Tuesday morning at 9:00 a.m. to begin serving the 10-day sentence imposed on them, or to make any legal recourse they deem pertinent. Violet Heming, Wanda Hawley, Theodore Roberts, Bebe Daniels, Raymond Hatton, Monte Blue in the colossal allegorical drama FEMALE "EVERYWOMAN" I ' A Paramount Picture. Caribbean" extraordinaire. MANANA MANANA The colpsal production "EXPIATION" by the very beautiful Florence VIDOR , 1 Extraordinary at Current Prices.
i " o <> . > i > ■ > ii i > , > > ; * Have you seen the new streets and avenues that * ¡ we are opening in EL CONDADO 1 > < > < > :: By building your house on these lots, you will be among the most select of the capital and your house "¡ ; ;; will be worth more. ¡; - ¡ Ask our office for our plans of ur" > banization and information on the facilities {: for the payments of our lots. < ' ■ > < > Behn Brothers Inc, : AGENTS :; Tetuán and Tanca. San Juan, P. R. | i