ELM3NDO
| 12 pages 3 ctvs. J Semester, $4.00. One year, $7.50,
Offices? | Salvador Brau, 81. 1; Tal. 833, P. O. Box 348.
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Publinhed and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of oetober 0. 1817, on file at the Post Office of Ran Juan. ,Porto Rico. By order of the President. A. 8. Postmaster General. Entered ag second class matter, februaty 21, 1910, at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto (United States of America) under the Act of march 8, 1870.
YEAR IV,
SATURDAY, MAY 20, 1922.
NUMBER 1003.
THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL YESTERDAY APPROVED LOANS AMOUNTING TO APPROXIMATELY $1,000,000.
Yesterday the Executive Council held a meeting and passed the following resolutions: -The $500,000,000 Baya món loan was approved. The special contribution of 60-100 of 1 percent for the payment of principal and interest was approved and the good faith of the People of Puerto Rico was pledged to guarantee said loan. -Salinas: The ordinance for a $60,000 loan for school purposes was approved. - Guayama. -An ordinance was approved for a $25,000 loan, which will be paid from the "school fund". -Sta. Isabel - The ordinance for a $100,000 loan for public works was approved with certain amendments. -Transfers were approved for Yauco, Cidra, Morovis, Corozal, Aguas Buenas, Vieques, Hormigueros, Barceloneta and Río Piedras. -It was agreed to inform the Municipality of Yauco that the ordinances of the Municipal Assembly on transfers do not require the approval of the Executive Council. -It was disapproved the ordinance of Coamo imposing taxes on municipal lots granted in usufruct and currently built, and on those to be granted and built in the future. - Humacao. -It was approved the contracting of a debt of $20,000 for the construction of a new reservoir for the Aqueduct. -It was agreed to inform Yauco, DISTINGUISHED TRAVELER The day before yesterday embarked for the United States the beautiful and distinguished lady dofia Ana liernántlez de González, dignírfftíft señori wife of the prestigious gentleman Don Manuel González, president of the Casa de España. The distinguished lady intends to spend a few weeks in the North, after which she will return accompanied by her children, who are currently studying at a reputable school in the United States. We wish him very pleasant impressions on his trip. AMERICA Theater TODAY Saturday. TODAY Home without Children Vibrant and powerful drama, which raises a vital question for all men, and, in a singular way, for all women: THE LONGING TO BE A MOTHER The eternal story of human selfishness! Prices 25 and 15. PARQUE BORINQUEN , -THOY- SATURDAY -HOY- SABADO -HOY-ESTRENO! The lovely Mae Murray in THE A B C OF LOVE (The A-B-C of Love) BATHE NEWS Luneta 20 cts. MATINEE AT 3:30 p. m. WITH b "LO8 THREE HUSBANDS'' Adults 16 cts. - Children 10 cts. Tomorrow, "A LOS HOMBRES" (Don't Change Your Husband)
Coamo and Ponce that the ordinances, imposing patents of industry and commerce, in accordance with Article 49 of the Municipal Law and to which patents said ordinances are brought, do not require the approval of the Council, as they do not constitute any new patents in said municipalities. -A loan of $6.00 was approved with a Bank through private individuals for the Municipality of Coamo, for school purposes. -It was agreed to approve the salaries for high school teachers, in accordance with the provisions of the Budget Law, reducing the salaries of all employees and officials of the Insular Government. -The same agreement was reached with respect to the office personnel of the Assistant General of the Guard and of the Health Inspectors. -A special Commission was appointed, composed of Messrs. Huyke, Benedicto and Mestre, to consider the petition on the sale of bonds at public auction, with respect to those municipalities that passed their borrowing ordinances before the new Municipal Law came into effect. -Yauco's borrowing ordinance for $130,000 was approved with the condition that $25,000, deleted in the line item to build a road, be dedicated to the mortisation of two previous borrowings. WINSTON CHURCHILL TO IRELAND LONDON, May 19.-It is considered very probable that the Secretary of the Colonies, Mr. Winston Churchill, will visit Ireland, for the purpose of convening a magna assembly of all the Northern and Southern U ders of Ireland. Notice is hereby given to all members of this casino and the general public that on Sunday, the 21st of the current at 6 p. m. will be closed the contest for Queen of the Flowers that takes effect in this center. THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE Note: A shindig will be held after the scrutiny. Advt. CINE LUNA Remember that today is the Puerto Rican premiere of the colossal drama in 5 acts, "EVERYTHING BUT LOVE'' by Bessie Barríscale. Current Prices. PUNTAS PARIS (ALL SIZES) Quality - Price - Service Bolán, Tejedor & de Uestes Box 1356. Phone 395. San Juan, P. R. Strand Theater -HOY- SATURDAY -HOY- Alma Encadenada BY LYA MARA
48 HOURS IN WATER $11-$12-14.$15-$16-$1S Suits in thread or silk denim, procure from all M. SAVING brand outlets Guaranteed to last; good workmanship and elegant cut. Large assortment of well finished denim pants" from $2.00 to $3.75 WHOLESALE AND DETAIL Help this new company. Manufacturer: M. SAVING English made to measure suit fabrics. Suits made of cashmere of all colors and all sizes. # Effects for Gentlemen. SAN FRANCISCO 52. SAN JUAN, PTO. RICO.
Harmful Indifference
In commenting and reporting on all the events that have unfolded on this island since the arrival of Governor Beily in Puerto Hie® , we have tried, faithful to the line of conduct that we have been following since the founding of this newspaper, to be absolutely impartial and dispassionate in order to achieve our purpose of informing our readers of all events, so that in our attitude there could never be seen the most significant intention of favoring a certain group or contending parties in the conflict. Notwithstanding what may be said to the contrary by those who can never be pleased with the contempt of which the public opinion of the country has made them victims, we are sure that we have achieved the desired purpose and this is justified by the elementes of all parties and the Governor himself, who has given our publication his confidence by this attitude of our moderation and discretion. We have seen, if not with indifference with passivity, all those acts of the Chief Executive that have ?1cUí cause for censure by one political group or another, and in doing so has been guided by the good judgment of leaving to the partisan press the defense or centum of those acts carried out to the detriment of a particular party; but today, it is only fair that we register our protest against the indifference with' cuc Governor Beily has looked at the scandalous affairs of Fajrdo, as we understand that this demoralizes and undermines what is most respectable and sacred in any people, which is the administration of Justice. "Our silence in this matter cannot be an accomplice to an action which we consider harmful and serious, since its dire consequences will be felt by the country in general, which, frightened, will lose confidence in the Serenity and equanimity of the country.
confidence in the Serenity and equanimity that must necessarily be expected from those in charge of imparting justice ''to all equally". The comments and reports that have reached us, demonstrate to the point of evidence the indignation and despair that reiiut in all the spirits when witnessing how they have rolled down the hill, in front of the exaltation and nervousness of an official, the respect to the superior authorities, and what is more, the consideration to peaceful citizens who have been suddenly dragged to a Court as detainees to settle purely personal matters. We still remember, and they are fresh in our memory, the consoling words spoken by the Governor in his speeches around the island, when he emphatically proclaimed that he had come to govern with all parties Z that he would give justice to all equally, and always added that he would remove at midnight any judge who exceeded his duty. Today, however, we are astonished to see how Governor Retly himself overrides the official recommendations of the Department of Justice and of an impartial official such as the continental American Mr. Loret, and continues to ignore public outcry, in order to please the plans of the Republican Leopoldo Feliu and the Socialists Santiago Iglesias and Bolivar Ochart. 1 Sometimes we are reluctant to feel this reality v doubtful that the Goterna''CADILLAC 8" Model 1920. 7 "passengers. Oord suevas tires. Sold for less than half its cost or trade for a smaller one. Send m offer to apartido 998 or call Phone 259 S. J. f
LA FA VORITA San Justo 31. For the present season, just received, exclusive manufacture. Style that reigns and extraordinary attraction. The modern and suggestive model "RENA" With heels: Full and Baby Charol and black glacé, Ca' Louis. Numbering com- JmF black and white muza, Suepleta, and special widths, of black and brown, Satin silver buckles, (not satin, black and silver gray, oxidizable) Superior quality linings. hi i - bmíí. - ii (■amagas Splendid variety in fancy stockings, beautiful openwork patterns and docks on the sides, colors exactly the same as the latest fashion shoes. We carefully attend to orders placed by mail. Visit us, and you will save money on your shoe purchases. Contact us to place your orders. Phone 390. JOSE LEMA & CO. P. O. Box 442. San Juan, P. R. ...... SUNDAY 21 "OLIMPO" THEATER! MONDAY 22ND ... Two Tandas Diarias, i - " í Lunetas unnumbered. --i CARMEN FLORES i --* 7 1 2 and 9 P. M. j Farewell to Puerto Rico! | 40 and 50 ctvs. Compagnte Generate Transatlantique INTER COLONIAL SERVICE FRENCH STEAMER "SAINT RAPHAEL" vessel expressly suited for travel in the West Indies, is expected in this port from the 24th to the 25th current with destination SAN PEDRO DE MACORIS, SANTO DOMINGO (Capital) JACMEL, LES CAYES, PUERTO PRINCIPE, and SANTIAGO DE CUBA touching at the same ports on her return. Admits cargo and passage for the above ports. Good French food. Comfortable cabins, and good canteen. For further information, please contact ■ > BEHN BROTHERS Inc. Tanca and Tetuan Agents. Telephone Building. San Juan. ' , Telephone No. 257.'
f dor Beily, the responsibility for the events that occurred in Fajardo and the attitude adopted by the municipal judge, would set an alarming precedent, which, if it were to last, would destroy the sound principles on which the order and tranquility of a civilized community like ours rest. It is right that power should be granted to those who have obtained it in a good fight, whoever they may be, but that this should be done by the proper and correct means, without resorting to scandal and audacity and without exceeding the exercise of a sacred ministry, such as that of imparting justice, all this being done under the protection of the official, no longer in the rectitude of his actions, but in the support of the multitude of the people, but in the support of the crowd, which, according to information, he excited in his defense invoking principles and party doctrines, a policy that is at odds with the due process of law, since this only succeeds in bringing to the courts of justice the tides of passions, from which they must remain, for the good of Justice, completely separated. The indifference with which the Chief Executive has viewed these events and the unwillingness to take action which, if on the one hand would restore the right won by the Socialists, would safeguard the principles of Justice which ■ have been ignored and violated, to restore the tranquility and confidence ! of our society in the courts of Justice, is worthy of our protest, notwithstanding our confidence, as we trust, that when Mr. Reily comes to the conviction, as he will have come to, that he cannot and should not sanction the facts that have occurred, he will forget all partisan commitment and will place above all conventionalism the respect and consideration that he deserves for the country whose destiny he governs from the palace of Santa Catalina.
FAJARDO'S SOCIALIST COMMISSIONERS ARE ACTING WITHOUT PROVIDING THE DUE BAIL.
To the manifestations made in yesterday's press by the Auditor, have followed those of other officials who have competence in the matter and who have said that the socialist commissioners of Fajardo are acting without having rendered the corresponding bail, for which all their functions were illegal. The general impression is that the alleged officials will not find any company to provide the referred bonds, since the violent way they used to take possession of their positions gives rise to suspicions among the public. THE BRILLIANT ACT TONIGHT AT THE MUNICIPAL THEATER Tonight at nine o'clock will be held at the theater the beautiful coronation party of the May Queen of the Boyal Gregg School directed in this capital by Mrs. Maria T. Camacho de Robles. The charming queen, Miss Mar garita Marti, who will wear a royal, luxurious and tasteful attire, and the many ladies who constitute her Court of Honor, will meet at the College from where they will go to the theater. For the splendid society ball that will be enlivened by the reputable orchestra Argulnzoni, extraordinary animation reigns, as it will also be favored by many distinguished ladies from various populations. There will be a special trolley for families residing in Santurce and Rio Piedras. Said trolley will also enter through Calle del Parque. Box seats (at $4.00) and gentlemen's tickets (at $1.00) will be on sale today at the Colegio, Alien 80 and in the evening will be WBMFW uña'tbnñslón in "'ÍTitro. Tickets will be sold at 50 cents and paradise tickets at 25 cts. HXTRAORDINABIOUS SPECTACLE The Variety Company THE MIMIC WORD OF 1922 and the colossal film REMORSE in six, acts MARY MILES MINTER A single run at 8 p. m. ALL FOR 25 CENTS REMATÉ Tuesday, May 23, 1922 AT 10:30 A. M. I will sell at my office, Tetuan 47 high Various automobile effects REQUEST LIST OF Isidoro D. Delgado ALMONEDERO PUBLICO Tetuan -47 - Box 1205 - Tel. 700 Button plating and lining A. CARAZO, Bran St 72 Advt.
the bonding agencies. Furthermore, it is assured that neither the ''Attorney General" nor the Auditor will approve bail since from the merits of the judgment of the Humacao Court, "Quo Warranto" appeal, it is declared that said socialist commissioners are not duly qualified to occupy those positions. THE ATTITUDE OF MR. BENNETT The Police Colonel, Mr. Benent/, in a conference he had with the Attorney General, Mr. Mestre, expressed that the Fajardo Police was unwilling to accept the attitude of Mr. Benent/ in a conference he had with the Attorney General, Mr. Mestre. The public opinion, which comments favorably on the attitude of the Police and the Attorney General in this case, sees in it the only guarantee that the inhabitants of Fajardo have at present, before the attitude of the Municipal Judge, of whom they affirm that he continues to proceed illegally to the knowledge and patience of the Governor. We also have reports that Mr. Barceló has advised his friends in Fajardo to remain calm, since the absurd situation that the town is going through cannot be prolonged for long. Yesterday the prosecutor of the District Court of Humacao, Mr. Gómez, visited San Juan, with whom we exchanged views about the incident that occurred between him and the Municipal Judge of Fajardo. * f' The distinguished official, Mr. Gómez, is completely sui pmtiifio ae I by the Judge with respect to him, the day I that by order of the Chief of the Department of Justice, Mr. Mestre, went to investigate certain actions of Mr. Pagan, as Municipal Judge I of Fajardo. Mr. Gómez says that he requested Bolívar to hand over the documents related to the case, and that he was able to do so. ! lilililí t,.|. x y -- a H0Y ' . SABA DO. TODAY. - - Acontecinffento Sensational " - - - Caribbean Film Co. " - - - Presents the portentous pro- *" I I duce I ;; THE INSIDE THE CALIZ n '* n, < The Inside the Cup) - - - j ma 4 a of the famous novel - - - .. of the same name by former English Pri- + " mer Minister WINSTON CHURCHILL " ' ' 8 great acts. I Brilliant cast of stars. - ; - - The evening tandas a. all * ' ' : * * Orchestra. ■ * I - - - Morning. Morning. -- I! Grand matinee at 10.30 with -- - - ' the debut of the wonderful ' * I I I I concert artists ' I ;- Grandio-Alameda Brothers :■ " and premiere of the colossal " 1' production. . * Le Tentación del Diablo " This program being the same- -' 1 mo of the evening. ' *
Have you seen the new streets and avenues that we are opening in EL CONDADO Making your house in these lands, you will be among the most select of the capital and your house will be worth more. Ask our office for our urbanization plans and information about the payment facilities for our lots. Behn Brothers Inc., AGENTS Tetuán and Tanca. San Juan, P. R.