E. - L WORLD
10 page" 3 ctvs. S*m "8tr". $4.00 One year,$7.50
* - *vvvvttTVTTVVTVVTVvvTT* Office": Salvador Brau. SI Í Tal. 833 P. O. Box 34fi
MORNING DAILY.
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
2%K-- -i- f.". o,." "i. i.,",", w a. iw oa^""yrt ."'s™.
Brilliant reception 1 in honor of Major General Mr. Bullard.
Last night arrived on our beaches aboard the transport "St. Michiel," Major General Bullard, inspector general , of the first military district of the United States ,in which Fuer ' to Bico is included. ** General Bullard, who is now in his seventies, is a most affable and sympathetic person, and on his arrival he praised the Puerto Ricans highly, whom he said he regarded as his brothers. The distinguished military man was the second chief of the American expeditionary forces that marched to France under the orders of Genera! Pershing, and enjoys throughout the nation a high reputation for his brilliant performances. A committee of the Casino of Puerto Rico, composed of Messrs. Aboy, Oarbia and Quiñones, went to the dock to receive him and offer him their respects, and invited him to a reception and dance to be held tonight in his honor, in the halls of that aristocratic social center. EL MUNDO cordially greets the distinguished military man, wishing him the most pleasant impressions during his stay in Puerto Rico. JONESCO, DIMITS January 20.-The well-known politician Take Jonesco, ex-president of the Council of Ministers, has presented his resignation as deputy, for not being in agreement with the election of the new Cabinet. THEATROMUNICIPALHODAY SATURDAY AT 4 P. M. ' Extraordinary Matinee. La Senorita del Almacén ¡ ( EVENING AT 8.45. ¡ 1 La Frescura de la Fuente ■ j Morning, Sunday, Two Grand j s Functions. Afternoon and Evening. c
Yesterday the new President of theTribunalSupreme was sworn in.
-- Yesterday, at two o'clock in the afternoon was held in the halls of the Tribunal SuJ | premo the act of inauguration ■■-! of the new President of that Court, r Hon. Emilio del Toro Cuevas. The ceremony was attended by numerous i public, mostly lawyers and - Government officials, occupying r J preeminent place during the ceremo- 1 - i nia the most distinguished members ' i of the "Bar of Lawyers," and the illustrious 1 former President of that Court, Hoh. > Mr. Jose C. Hernandez. The Ledo. Toro was sworn in by Associate Justice Wolf, and then Ledo. Hernandez Lopez, vice-presiden- I I Ite of the Senate, who in a brief, but very conceptual speech, exalted 1 j the indisputable merits of Mr. del Toro, and made a history of his life in its different phases, proclaiming him a man of great intellectual faculties and of a character to all proof. The speaker's
The speaker's words were highly laudatory for the new President of the Supreme Court, who, when Mr. Hernández López finished, addressed the audience, visibly moved, and expressed his deep gratitude for the words that had just been pronounced there, extending himself in other considerations about the act that was being celebrated. Prosecutor Figueras said that he felt very satisfied, since he was the first lawyer from Puerto Rico to have appeared before this High Court, upon the appointment of its new President, Hon. del Toro Cuevas. JSL MUNDO, which has always felt the most lively sympathy for Ledo del Toro Cuevas, takes this opportunity to wish him the most flattering success in the Presidency of that High Court, where his great talent and indisputable merits have elevated him.
Chevrolet The beautiful appearance of the Chevrolet model 490 is remarkable. But even more important are the mechanical improvements that this model presents. The new Chevrolet is more spacious and more comfortable. Its paint and bodywork are superior in quality. The emergency brake lever gives you more comfort to guide it. The new Chevrolet is undoubtedly a better car at a lower price than previous models. It is the best car for its price and size. It is the most economical to maintain. 5 seats $835.00 2 seats $825.00 Santiago A. Panzardi, Inc. La Casa Que Da Servicio. San Juan Ponce Mayagüez Arecibo Guayama Crushed Stone FOR PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION OF BLUE LIMESTONE ROCK. QUARRY "VALLE ZENO" Customers are increasing daily. We can offer you a list of several dozens. Ask any of them about the qualities of this material and the hardness of the concrete z resulting from its use. Delivery is made to the job site. Call phone 604, San Juan. r. derviúráST" SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Bill granting free statehood to Puerto Rico produces immense rejoicing among Unionists WBBAN1B OPINIONS OF POLITICAL PfflNINENTS OF ALL PARTIES
At ten o'clock yesterday morning, we received from our cable correspondent in Havana, the following dispatch, the text of which coincides with that of the cablegrams published yesterday by our colleagues of the afternoon: WASHINGTON, January 20.-The chairman of the House Committee on Rules and Government, Mr. Campbell, has introduced a bill, creating a Free State in Puerto Rico. Under the bill, Puerto Rico will elect its Governor, who must be born in the island or in the United States. This official would be appointed by the island Legislature and would have the power to appoint, with the consent and advice of the Senate, all the heads of departments, as well as the judges of the Supreme Court. The United States, on the other hand, will send to Puerto Rico an official who will be the head of the Supreme Court.
BEAUTIFUL SHOW AT THE "PUERTO RICO" CINEMA The "PUERTO RICO" cinema is preparing a beautiful show, which will be extraordinarily exciting to the public tomorrow night, with a film of great merit, a true jewel of the cinematographic art, and also, as if it were not enough, with the Soler brothers, who have conquered great triumphs throughout the island. The enthusiastic impresario of the PUERTO RICO cinema, Don Ramón Lloverás Soler, has been able to be convinced that the referred 4 brothers artists vie- 1 nen better than ever of voice, of art, and above all of grace, although they see it by arrobas, and has wanted to be the first to make them known to our public, in which the Soler brothers have enthusiastic admirers. Next Monday the Soler brothers will also work at the PUERTO RICO cinema. i Üñ OSVALDO 0. VERGE \ Ciencias Ocultas. d Box 21; Telephone 893. Santurce. Puerto Rico.
- neminated "Comi.<o^fd 0 Resident of . the United States in Puerto Rico'' and , which is authorized to annul the laws which it deems incompatible with the ble i be public in ninety j days, while ap*la to the President* of . the United States. He is also empowered to restore order when disturbed, calling out, if necessary, the forces of the Government. The Commissioner referred to will direct the session of the Legislature, when the nomination of the Governor is made, as well as observe the elections. i f Puerto Rico will send to the United States two representatives, instead of one, the former will be entitled, as heretofore, Resident Commissioners of Puerto Rico in Washington. As soon as the newspapers containing the-text of the above dispatch began to circulate, in almost every j place in the capital, "a grouped per. AMERICA THEATER Hcy Saturday premiere in Pusrto Rico "Cenizas de un Anhe'o" by RUBYE DE EEMER PRECIOS CORRIENTES Tacda vespertina at 5:15 P. M. Tomorrow -Sunday- Morning Matinee.- Afternoon and Evening Tanda (Sun flayito) Marie Osborne, Henry King and Africa *in the drama "Aurr ra and Twilight" intense drama of auj'i and smiles.- Afternoon Tandas from 2;30' P. M. to 6:15 P. M. with the evening film j.-At 10 and 15 cents.
PROFIT For sale at half price: One "Rhodia" truck, 2 1 [2 tons. One "Packard" truck of 2 1|z tons. For further information contact: ZALDUONDO, MIER & CO. San Juan, P. R.
The jubilation and satisfaction which for some days had been glimpsed among the Union of Puerta Ric< - turned yesterday into a real joy when they learned of Mr. Barceló's and the envoy's decision by the Associated Press. 1 Although the prevailing opinion in political circles is that if it is realized the Unionist party has achieved the most brilliant of its triumphs, which is recognized even by the members of the opposing parties, those of us who are of the opinion that it will not happen have thought it appropriate to question the most prominent and significant leaders of the different political parties and tendencies, with the purpose of laudabli (Continued on page three) HOUSE OF SPAIN IN PTO. RICC . CENTRAL BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONVOCATION In compliance with the provisions of Article 13 of the clauses of Incorporation by the President and in the name of the Central Board of Directors which I have the honor to preside, I hereby summon the Ordinary General Meeting, which (as agreed in the meeting held on February 27, 1921) is to take place in the city of Mayagiiez at nine o'clock in the morning of Sunday, February 19 of this year. The Assembly may only be attended by delegates of the Local Boards, provided they meet the conditions required by Article 24 of our Regulations. * San Juan, P. R., January 13, 1922. Dionisio TRIGO. Vice President. Advt. Cine Luna HOY. Matinee and Evening. TODAY. JUDEX DO NOT MISS.
BEAUTIFUL WAREHOUSE. 1,000 square meters capacity: Six frehte doors. Own .for business of Provisions, effects of constructions or storage. Located near the Malecon with railroad track on the front. Stop 2'/ 2 . For rent in whole or in part. - ANTONIO LEMA. Information: San j p R DEL RIO & CO. INC.
HAVE YOU SEEN THE NEW HUDSON? Aside from the mechanical improvements that have been introduced, making it more efficient, its appearance has been greatly improved, with its sleek, fine bodywork and complete equipment. As far as prices are concerned, they are at the height of the situation. COME AND SEE IT SANTIAGO A. PANZARDI, INC. * THE SERVICING HOUSE SANJUAN PONCE MAYÁGUEZ ARECIBO GUAYAMA
VACANT SCHOOLS Teachers are needed to fill two vacant schools in this municipality. For ease of accommodation, males are preferred. Vega Baja, January 15, 1922. The Municipal Commissioner, . gives Instruction. A. CARÁZO, Brau St 72, plisa y forran botones.
SATURDAY, JANUARY 21, 1922;
The Municipality rejects the proposal of the "trolley" Co.
. All yesterday afternoon the commission of the Council of Administration, composed of Messrs. Martin Travieso, Rivera Ferrer and Diez de Andino, met. They discussed at length the proposition presented by the "Trolley" Company, and after having observed that, in their opinion, it was detrimental to the Administration, they unanimously agreed to reject said proposition. r According to our reports, the members of the Board of Directors of the "Trolley" Company, who are members of the Board of Directors of the "Trolley" Company, have been very pleased with the proposal. The members of the Board of Directors have been, for several months, seeking to reach an agreement with the "Porto Rico , , Railway "Light and Power Co.", for the purpose of alleviating a little the enormous contribution they have to pay annually to the aforementioned company for the lighting of the municipality of San Juan, but all their efforts have been in vain. The agreement which was previously in force will continue until both parties reach an agreement, or the Administration decides to establish an electric plant on its own, according to the calculations of the engineer and the Treasury Commissioner, which will be very beneficial to the capital, since it will not only permit the lighting of many places which now remain in darkness, but will also provide light at a lower cost than that paid at present to the Porto Rico Railway Light and Power Co. The Administration pays annually i to the Trolley Company the enormous sum of $55,000-00 on the average. The gentlemen who compose the "Board of Directors are inspired by the best desires > to harmonize the interests of the municipality with those of the Electric Trolley Company. We hope that this lawsuit will soon be settled.
NUMBER 902.
The Federal C. will act vigorously against high officials.
INVESTIGATIONS CONTINUE, EVER GREATER, 1 Rarely has a fact of such a strange nature come before the investigative expertise of the federal authorities as that which is now before the Federal Grand Jury, related, as our readers know, to such flagrant violations of the "Federal Motor Vehicle Act". * We have not been able to give you any advance information as to the nature of the case, but we have been able to bring it to the attention of the Federal authorities, and we have not been able to give you any information as to the nature of the case, and we have not been able to give you any information as to the nature of the case. We have not been able to advance any information on the very delicate investigations which are being carried out because neither the Federal Court prosecutors, Messrs. Wells and Crosos, nor even Judge Odlin himself, have declined to make any statements or define any views. The Grand Jury is in permanent session-nes said yesterday in the CoÜ i te-hearing the testimony of witnesses from the island and in the hands of that body is practically the gereral procedure of the serious matter, which is being investigated. It is ten days since the Federal Grand Jury has been taking statements of interest. (Ceutinúa U pá. 3a.) Circular Saws of 30" diameter, pafa sawing, wood. I sell seven (7|"coípletamente new at half cost. Luis Rexacb Tel. 1196. Pier No. 6.
OLIMPO THEATER
SATURDAY 21. Premiere in Puerto Rico. LA FRONTERA DE LAS ESTRELLAS by the famous actor THOMAS MEIGHAM PRICES: Amphitheater Lunettes ... .... . 25 Lunettes of Platea 15
SUNDAY 22THE THEATER OF THE PASSIONS in Santurce by the charming KATHERINE Me DONALDPRICES: Lunettes amphitheater ... ... ... 25 Lunettes of Platea 15
TWO TANDAS. Sunday 21 in the afternoon, Matinee for children. Retreta and fireworks, illumination, etc.
EL CONDADO El Condado is the only place dedicated exclusively to residences in San Juan. Healthy, fresh and with constant sea breeze. WE SELL houses and lots; houses for cash and lots for cash and installments. Behn Brothers Inc. agents Tetuán and Tanca. S an Juan. WOOD
From our cargo by schooner "CITY OF BALTIMORE" unloading near Pier No. 5, At prices out of competition the most varied and attractive assortment in their kinds and sizes. VILLAR & CO., INC. P. O. Box 201. No. 2. Warehouse St., MARINA.