ELMIJNDO
tt it 111 i-i-i-i-i ¡til 10 pages 3'ctvs, Semester, $4.00. One year, $7.50. ■I l l 111 1"1 1 1 1 I I I t t.t " I I I I I I f
I- - - - - - ewp "114 'Bill Offices: Salvador Brau, 81. Tel. 833, P. O. Box 34!
' TANGLE DIARY,
EXCEPT ON ? SUNDAYS
I Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) aathoriwd by the Act oí October 6. 1917, on file at the Post Office of I Ran Juan. Porto Rico, By order of the President. A. 8. Bur leson. Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, I febmary 21, 1919, at the Post Office at Han Juan. Porto Bi co, (United States of America) under the Act of march 8, 1870 H
YEAR IV. |
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
THE LCDO. JIMENEZ SICARDO RESPONDS TO THE CHARGES BROUGHT BY GOB. REILY
| HE CALLS HIS ATTENTION TO THE FACT THAT IN ALL OF THEM HIS INNOCENCE WAS PROCLAIMED ' ALWAYS PROCLAIMED, ACCORDING TO THE RECORD IN THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE. OF JUSTICE l
August 18, 1922. Mr. E. Mont. Reily, Governor of Puerto Rico (through the Attorney General) San Juan. Sir:- On the 10th of August of the current year I addressed to you a letter in the following terms: "Hon. Governor Reily. Through the Attorney General, San Juan, Puerto Rico. Sir:-After some ¿'¡as I have been occupying again my position as Municipal Judge of San Jijan, First Section, on account of the judgment of the Supreme Court rendered in my favor against your resolution, I have resolved to submit to you my resignation from my position, convinced that under the actions of your government I should not remain one more moment occupying said position. I wish this resignation of mine to take effect, if possible, as of today, Yours sincerely (surname) G. Jiménez Sicardó. To this letter of mine, which was delivered to you on the 16th itself at four o'clock in the afternoon, mg. replies with a list of charges which you say exist against me, which he goes on to list, subdividing them into "charges of immoral conduct" and "charges of dereliction of duty". Thus, I would have avoided having to answer the charges that you formulate to me and, as a consequence, I would have to recognize in you, an authority of judge that GOD knows well, I would like to deny you. First, because of the partiality with which you may have acted in this case; and secondly, because he who is the subject of serious accusations can hardly be a good judge. CHARGES OF IMMORAL CONDUCT: (a) It is true that in the year 1918, while I was Municipal Judge of Rio Grande, and while I was a grown man, I was accused of having seduced a girl of 17 years of age. This charge that you are again making against me today was at that time investigated by the then District Attorney of San Juan, Hon. Luis Campillo. On June 11, 1918, said officer submitted a report to the Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Hon. Howard L. Kern, in which he recommended the dismissal of the charge against me, since my innocence had been proven. A. C A RAZO. Brau St 72
It has really caused me great surprise to see that in the charges against me this one appears, when it has had to be removed from my record in the Department of Justice. It seems to me that it would have been very easy, next to the charge, to find the report of "Prosecutor Campillo with his recommendation to the Department of Justice and the final ruling in the case. This is a charge, Mr. Governor, of which I defended myself and was exonerated. (b) This charge is that after the year 1918, while I was a Municipal Judge in Wílo Grande, and being a married man, I had carnal intercourse with a woman and that from this, a child was born. Although when you do not make this specific charge, since you tell me that after the year 1918, I must tell you that for the date to which the above fact refers I was not a Municipal Judge of Rio Grande. I was then living in San Juan engaged in the practice of my profession, and I had taken charge of the office of the Ledo. ALFONSO LASTRA CHARRIEZ, to the absence of this one for Europe in official functions as Member of the House of Representatives. For this reason I do not know how far I will be obliged to defend myself from the charge, but in any case, I want to tell you, that it was an attributed paternity. (c) It consists the same in that in the year 1917 while I was Municipal Judge of Rio Grande, and in union with a certain Fernando C. Cogley, I had a number of fighting cocks and that I also frequented and took part in cockfighting fights. As with charge "a", I must tell you that by that time I was charged with that charge to the Department of Justice, that my conduct was investigated and after my innocence was fully proven, I was exonerated of said charge. To this end see my record in the said Department. CHARGES FOR BREACH OF DUTY: (a) This charge relates to the case of The People of Puerto Rico v. Juilio Vilá et al. I am now charged by you that according to a letter ! written by me on April 16, 1917 addressed to the then Attorney General of Puerto Rico, hon. Howard L. Kern, I admitted to having witnessed a disturbance of the public peace and that in my capacity as Municipal Judge I ordered the filing of a complaint, without having ordered the arrest of the defendants or requiring bail for their provisional liberty. In spite of the puerility of this charge, it was investigated then, or (Continued on 3rd page.)
jTeatroCine 'IMPERIAL" í TODAY. SATURDAY- TODAY ► Santurce premiere of SONANDC ► THE LEATHER or ADVENTURES OF A ► PUGILIST by Reginal DENNY I* 6 Adventures. 6' Nights of Art. ► AND BOWS OF HONOR by Sessut ► Hayakawa, in 5 acts. ► Tomorrow, finale of THE FOUR SEt CRETOS by Eddie Polo and the drami ► ADVENTURE SOUL by Roberi f Warwick. Regio matinée with CHASS WEDDINGS. CHAPT.TN -
Witnesses in the Municipal affair, subpoenaed for Tuesday.
With extraordinary insistence it has been said in these days that Colonel Benhett of the Island Police, sent to the Police Commission, the result of the events which occurred at the Municipal Theatre, on the occasion of the graduation of the students of the Central High School, and which event gave rise to an intense outcry from the press who called the action of the police an unnecessary outrage. In Colonel Bennett's report we are told that it exonerates from all responsibility those officers who have been accused by all those who were victims of the unusual outrage and attempts to place all responsibility on one of the officers who appear to be innocent in the matter. We are not aware of the report rendered by the Chief of Police and therefore do not wish to comment on it; but it is good that we record the fact that the Police Commission, it seems, has not thought the conclusion reached by Mr. Bennett in his investigation sufficient or even-handed, and intends to make another investigation of its own to decide definitively what solution should be given to such a delicate matter. For the time being, we applaud the initiative of the Commission, which has summoned the witnesses and persons interested in the matter to appear next Tuesday at the theater, with the purpose of hearing the statements of all in order to arrive at the truth of what happened and to demand responsibilities from those who may have them. We want to leave the competent authorities free to act, in the hope that justice will be done in the end in this case that had to preoccupy the public attention for so long; but at the same time it does not seem appropriate to indicate, the primary issues that were put in the protest initiated on that occasion, and that was that, the act of taking to jail two young students who committed a school indiscipline, at a school party, is an improper use of force, and that this act should be punished"), because it is a precedent that is a bad precedent, if you tieContinued on Pag. 9 SPANISH GRAPE JUICE BRAND "NOEMOST" The best and most pleasant substitute for "Sitges" muscatel. SUCRS. DE L. CO. General agents. ■A J .t " ........ ..........
IBASE- BALL TWO CHALLENGES. SUNDAY, AUGUST 20, 1922. At,10:30 A. M. At 3:30 P. M. At Stop 8. At the Liga Nueva. San Juan, P. R. Caguas, P. R. PONCE STARS AND PUERTO RICO Excursions from Ponce and other towns. A la 8 o'clock in the morning!!! A Caguéis in the afternoon!!!
He alleges that the latter is not entitled to any compensation Recently Dr. Lippitt, Commissioner of Health, sent the following letter to Mr. del Rosario, former head of the Children's Asylum: Mr. Carlos A, <?al Rosario, Santurce, P. R. Sir: You not having presented yourself until this date to perform the duties of the position of Inspector of Food and Drugs in the Sanitation Department, for which you were appointed by me on July 19, 1922, you are hereby separated from the service of this Department, without being entitled to compensation for not having on any day, after your appointment, performed any service as such Inspector of Food and Drugs. Respectfully, (fdo) W. F. LIPPITT Commissioner of Sanitation of P. R. To the above letter Mr. del Rosario replied as follows; San Juan, P. R. August 18, 1922 Dr. W. F. Lippitt, San Juan. Puerto Rico. Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge your letter of the 16th of the current date, in which you inform me that I have been separated from the service of that Department because I have not presented myself to take possession of the position of Inspector of Food and Drugs, to which I was transferred by your orders of July 19 and July 24, 1922, respectively. - In reply, I wish to state once again that at no time have I accepted such a transfer because I understand that it is illegal and arbitrary and, consequently, I did not have and do not have to take possession of the position of reference? I maintain and will maintain that I am e'. Superintendent of the Asilo de Niños ds Santurce, "d'jure", and if in the act lidad I am not in possession of this car go, exercising the functions of the same and enjoying its prerogatives and emoluments, to which I am entitled, I am not the responsible one and if you that against my express will and in spite of my protests violently threw me of the same one in open and flagrant violation d" the léy. The case has already been submitted to the courts and they will decide. Yours faithfully, ' (fdo. Carlos A. del ROSARIO. TO THE RETAIL PHARMACEUTISTS OF SAN JUAN, AND LIMITROFES PUEBLOS We have opened a new department, for wholesale and strictly cash sales, at very limited prices, in order to put ourselves in a position to favor as much as possible the retail pharmacists, so that they can face the present competition in the market. | J. M. Blanco, Inc., San Francisco No. 56, San Juan, P. R. Advt. Borinquen Park TODAY. - SATURDAY - PREMIERE 'Alma Aventurera' by Robert Warwick. Revista Grafica No. 119. Vodaville No. 49. LUNETA 20 Ctvs. Tomorrow Sunday: "BLIND YOUTH".
THE FAVORITE GENTLEMEN'S FOOTWEAR LEMA SUPERBA S MODELS OF GREAT NEWNESS AND SUGGESTIVE ATTRACTION g MADE WITH FINE LEATHER AND SUPERIOR QUALITY MATERIALS COMPLETE SATISFACTION AND AMAZING SUCCESS IN WEAR JOSE LEMA & CO. £ Tel. 390. San Juan, P. R. P. O. Box 442. g
INTERESTING "EL GALLO DE ORO" - Due to major renovations which will require this establishment to remain closed, all stock is being sold at extremely low prices. - Specialty in Spanish thread fabrics. -' : ALLEN 25. Box 320. TELEPHONE 309. j
Mr. Lippitt removes Mr. del Rosario from office of Inspector of Food and Drugs.
NUMBER 1080.
everything suggests that a complete understanding between france and germany has been initiated
TO REMOVE BRITAIN FROM CONTINENTAL AFFAIRS - A GREAT IMPRESSION REIGNS IN THE HIGH CIRCLES OF LONDON ON THIS OCCASION.
(United Press, via All America Cables) r LONDON, Aug. 18. -The business of the day in the high political circles of this capital is reports from Paris that the French Government is making a refuted and continued attempt to forge an agreement with Germany in order to separate England from all continental questions and from all matters which relate more or less directly to the economic problems which arose after the Entente implemented its sanctions and reprisals. The "Times" in its issue of this . evening, examines at length the al-1 canee and the intention of the French Government in undertaking such negotiations with Germany. i 1 THE GERMAN PEOPLE CANNOT ENTER INTO CONCOMITANCES OF ANY KIND WITH FRANCE I e "The Times," commenting on the foregoing reports, declares that the policy of France since M. Poincaré took charge of the French Government has been that of the French. Poincaré j took charge of the government, consists in ! separating the provinces of the Rhine in a f permanent manner and the annexation of the j western territories <(e said river, Í with the idea of destroying the terrl- . torial power of Germany. "The Times" adds that this purpose of the French government has touched the English government, which has always protested strongly against these aims, which emphasize France's ambitions to elevate itself to the rank of the first power in the world. He says that for this reason and for many others which are apparent to all, the German Government cannot enter into concomitance with a nation whose supreme desire is to destroy and annihilate it. u "The Times" says that both Mr. Lloyd George and his Cabinet Ministers have repeatedly shown themselves, most recently at the Downing Street Conference, to be very hostile and very opposed to France's policy. GERMAN FINANCE MINISTER HERMES WILL APPEAR BEFORE THE TO THE COMPENSATION COMMITTEE FOR . PARIS, Aug. 18.-The Compensation Committee met again this morning to discuss the advisability of inviting the German Treasury Minister to come before the Committee to present the case of his country at length and in detail. 1 One has the impression that being in Paris t'añor Fischer this one could * concur in representation of the government 'i , The Sensation of the Day . Suits, shirts, hats, cue- ¡ lios, ties, umbrellas, garters, ' yokes, belts, socks, stockings, caps, suspenders, underwear B. V. D., pajamas, flannel and colored pants. All this we are doing at extremely low prices. "Come right now and you will save money. 50 Luna ECHEVARRIA. Luna 50 Advt.
not from Berlin, even if he has to water down to give certain propositions of his government. THE COMMITTEE, HOWEVER, PREFERS HERMES If the Compensation Committee agrees to hear one of the German representatives, it is very likely that it will send a note to Berlin expressing its preference for the Finance Minister Hermes, who has a profound knowledge of the economic situation in Germany, including the amount of exports, imports and financial conditions in that country. - FRENCH DELEGATES DISAGREE WITH THE COMMITTEE'S CRITERION The Chairman of the Compensation Committee, Mr. Dubois, has stated that the French delegates will oppose the Committee's criterion for hearing the German representatives. Mr. Dubois also stated that the right to come before the Compensation Committee had already been exercised by Germany from the time it applied for the moratorium. The Committee will meet tonight in secret session to decide this question. THE FRENCH SEND A COMMISSION TO GERMANY TO OBTAIN ADDITIONAL REPORTS PARIS, Aug. 18.-The Compensation Committee agreed to send to Berlin a Committee to acquire additional reports regarding the economic capacity of Germany and the manner in which the Teutonic government would be willing to make payments in space. The Commission which is to leave shortly for Berlin is composed of Sir John Bradbury, the English representative to the Compensation Committee, and Mr. Demandete, who chaired the Allied Warranties Committee which investigated Germany's financial conditions. This Commission, according to reports, will be accompanied by a number of technical advisers. Until the above-mentioned representatives of the Compensation Committee have rendered a comprehensive and detailed report concerning the economic power of Germany, the French Government, as stated by M. Dubois, will not take definite action in regard to the serious question of the financial conditions of Germany.
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE 'Colegio Puertorriqueño de Niñas' (ACCREDITED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INSTRUCTION) J Is pleased to announce the opening of the Academic Year 1922-1923 with the following classes:- Bisexual Kindergarten attended by a teacher specialized in this grade. Complete course of Primary Instruction from first to eighth ? grade. High School (High School) up to and including the third year/ two-year Commercial Course. - 5 Gymnastics classes and gymnastics classes - Spacious gardens for all sports, basketball, tennis, etc. Piano, French, etc. 5 Female boarders admitted, half board and extern^." >5 Registration will be open from August 15 to 30, >ie ; ? 9 to 11 A. M. and from 2 to 4 P. M., weekdays. For further information, please contact the Director of the College, . 5 stop 15, telephone 117 green, Santurce.
> The first chis' pazosdelllamadoentendido Franco-German l
Informal reports, not yet denied by the government, claim that a powerful group of German financiers, led by Hugo Stinnes, has entered into negotiations with several French industrial magnates for joint industrial and financial cooperation in the Rhur region. The newspapers of the republican bloc say that if Stinnes' idea succeeds, the whole compensation problem will be solved at once by an agreement. The consequence of this measure, a high government official has stated, would be, in addition to the settlement of the reparations dispute, an increase in the limitation of German goods and thus greater industrial activity throughout Germany. ' It is reported that negotiations have begun with a chance 1 of success. 1 HUGO STINNES TO PARIS? On the occasion of the Negotiations which i, are to be undertaken between French and German capitalists i i i for the exploit. - It has been stated that Hugo Stinnes, head of the nationalist movement, which has been gaining numerous followers since the failure of the London conference, will soon go to Paris with the purpose of securing German production by means of an agreement with the French industrialists. Mr. Stinnes is very reserved as to the merits of these reports. s ---. i i THE STINNES JAIBERIES j i. LONDON, August 18.-English newspapers commenting on the intentions i of Hugo Stinnes for a fl- - nancial-economic understanding with the French capitalists 3 have stated that the powerful German tycoon has undertaken > negotiations in return for the policy of reprisals announced by M. Poincaré not to affect the areas he controls on the Rhine. "The representative of the conservative party, Mr. Hel- -, ferich, this afternoon directed harsh attacks against the government, accusing it of not having a serious program. I , , , , j- ¡ presalias and to the occupation of the Rhur ctfenca > ■.
NOTICE We announce to our favorers, that we have made ' a great discount on the reputable Spanish yarn fabrics ; Spanish brand "CASTAÑE" Buy cheap LA HIJA DE BORINQUEN j of A. M. Zomoza & Co. SAN JUAN, P. R. I-1-1I MUI 111- i 1 I II I I 1 | | H
SATURDAY, AUGUST 19, 1922. I