THE MONDO
♦ - page* 3 <rtv*" Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50 4 " -
WV < ♦ < ♦ * ♦ ♦ ♦ - r Office*! :: Salvador Brau, ti T*l. 833 P s O ? Box 34B |
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Reily says his speech at the "Municipal" was sanctioned by Mr. Harding and Mr. Weeks.
j (From the '18t. Louis Democrat") The Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. E. Mont ReUy, who arrived yesterday in St. Louis on his way to Kansas City, in which city (he intends to settle some personal affairs, was honored by Mr. Jacob L. Babler, a member of the Republican Committee, at a banquet held at the "Jefferson" hotel, * six o'clock past meridian. With Governor Belly sat at the table the following gentlemen: Major Henry Kiel, William Sacks, William Seibel, of Clayton, Louis Alt., W. H. Allen, Judge Vital Garesche, Fred Essen, Senator Ralph, Lieut. Gov. Lloyd, George Herpel, Assessor of St. Louis Country; Dr. E. B. ClemerAs, Republican state chairman, E. L. "Liv" Morse of Excelsior Springs, and George Booth. Mr. Reily had the opportunity to deny a few little things. He declined to discuss Puerto Rican government affairs, stating that he had not granted any interviews since returning to Ice United States on November 22. "I feel today in a quasi-diplomatic position" and therefore I cannot discuss the island's interests* * - declared Mr. Relly. Nevertheless, Beily had occasion to deny the information published about him in the Missouri newspapers by the members of the Puerto Rican Legislature, who came to Washington for the purpose of requesting the governor's dismissal. As our readers will recall, one of the offenses attributed to Governor Beily was that of having taken off his jacket at a social event given in his honor in order to be cooler, and this upset the sensibility of the guests. HISTORY OF A SILK SHIRT: - When Governor Beily referred to the act of taking off his jacket at the party held in his honor, with which he exhibited a beautiful and fine silk shirt, he said that the only truth in it was the following: "I had gone to the interior of the island on a trip of inspection and I went to the house of Dr. Santiago Veve for lunch. There were about twenty of us, ladies and gentlemen. The women were served refreshments in the house and the men in a pavilion. It was very hot and Dr. Veve addressed me as follows: "Governor, since it is very hot, it is only natural that we should take off our jackets. There was no lady present. And before the ladies joined us, all those gentlemen who wore suspenders put on their jackets. That is the truth, the rest is a lie," GOVERNOR REILY HAS THREE CLOTHES OF DRESS: 4. "I'm familiar with social customs and pleasant manners," said Mr. Beily, and added: "I have three suits of clothes. 1 With regard to the story that I ordered the Islanders to take off their hats to saljiarme, you know that I am not capable of doing so," said Mr. Beily.
I am not capable of doing any such thing. About the fight against . Reily by members of the Unionist party and of the Legislature, the Governor de- . clarified that he had not passed per alte i to the majority party, since he had appointed two members of his own to form his cabinet. Reily at the banquet showed himself to be very happy, apparently excused by President Harding and Secretary Weeks, from the charges made against him by the Commission. THE SPEECH DELIVERED AT , THE THE THEATRE WAS APPROVED BY THE PRESIDENT: In the banquet conversation it was consequently sa c e d that the inaugural address had been read by Reily to the President and Secretary Mr. Weeks, both of whom sanctioned the (text. The Go- 1 bernador was greatly irritated to learn that Walter McKay Jones, 1 a member of the Puerto Rican Legislature, and C. B. Kean, a former Post Office inspector, had been inquiring into his political history in Kansas City. -How!" said Relly, "I didn't want to eat at the same table that citizen was eating at the other day in Washing, ton. He is the only American, born in the United States, who, as a member of the Puerto Rican Legislature, desires secession. I was never removed as deputy postmaster of Kansas City," continued Mr. Reily. After what happened, I continued to serve in the Post Office for five more years. The man in my department who tried to harm me was dismissed. After lunch Mr. Beily informed Mr. Babler's guests about his activities on the island. He said that he was cooperating to use the sum of 165,000 to build a leper hospital. He said he had seen thirty-three people, among them two young children, living on a lonely and ugly island, which was unfit for human habitation, much less for the sick. He said that he had already obtained the sum of sixty-five thousand dollars of public money, and a donation of 25 acres of land from a wealthy Puerto Rican, and that within a year the entire leper colony would be removed from the island. He declared that the Commissioner of (Oentlaúa "a la pá. 3a.) ESPLENDIDA FUNCIONIDA EN EL CINE "PUERTO RICO" Tonight, and on the night of ma. ñaña, Sunday, will obtain the cinema "Puer to Rico" two resounding triumphs by virtue of acting in that popí Jarísimo cinema, during those two nights, the very remarkable transformer, conjurer and ventriloquist Richardine, who has been revealed like a true phenomenon in San Juan. Don Ramón Lloverás, always innovative and always eager to make known in Santurce, before anyone else, the stars that pass through Puerto Rico, has not hesitated a moment in dealing with this admirable artist, who has always produced immense impression. Lloverás is also a great trans, formista. But the transformations he makes are always in favor of the public.
EL CONDADO El Condado is the only place dedicated exclusively to residences in San Juan. Healthy, fresh and with constant sea breeze. WE SELL lots and lots; houses for cash and lots for cash and installments. Behn Brothers Inc., Agents Tetuán and Tanca. San Juan.
gablUbM and diatntratad andar panait (■-. 801) aaUortaad tba ae" oí oetobar 6, 1817, <m De at the Boat Otica af Bm Jmb, Porto Bím. By order of the Preaidant. A 8. Bar laaoa Poatmaater General. Bnterod aa aeeond elaaa aaatter, februery "1. l "10, at the Poet Office at Sei Juan, Porto Bi m. Cuitad But" ef ¿atrio" under the Art of march ". HT8
The fire that occurred yesterday in the street of the "Fortress".
Yesterday afternoon at half past one o'clock a violent fire broke out in the shoe warehouse of V. Melon and Co. located at 83 Alien Street. As soon as the incident was noticed by the policeman José R. Torres, on duty in the Plaza de Colón, the alarm was raised, and the Chief Mr. Cabán, Captain Mr. Hurtado, police forces and the public in general went to the site of the incident. THE INTENSITY OF THE SMOKE INTERRUPTED TRAFFIC The establishment that remained closed, since its personnel was having lunch, when it was opened violently to proceed with the work of extinguishing and salvage, a smoke of such great intensity began to rise from it, that it was materially impossible to remain in the surroundings of the burned house. Traffic was completely paralyzed along the entire length of that block, while the conflagration lasted. ARRIVAL OF THE FIREFIGHTERS Immediately that the voice of alarm was given, the firemen of San Juan Santurce and Puerta de Tierra, who under the command of the chief Mr. Schettini began to work with extraordinary activity in the extinguishing of the fire, began to arrive at the site of the incident. In spite of how difficult it was to save the stock due to the intensity of the smoke, the firemen and countrymen saved a great part of the stock, even though all of it was materially unusable due to the water and liquids of the extinguishers used to put out the fire. ESTABLISHMENT AND HOUSE INSURED The building in which the establishment of Messrs. V. Melon and Co. was located belonged to the Estate of Jose M. Perez, and was insured for $12,000 in the ''Insurance Company of North America", its administrator being Salvador Perez. The burned establishment was insured at $15,000 in the "Home Insurance Company" and at $15,000 the warehouse of the same commercial firm located in the adjoining house, making a total of the policies of both establishments of $30,000. LOSSES SUFFERED The losses sustained could not be estimated; but according to reports from the owners of the establishment, the stock exceeded the value of the insurance policy. Most of the stock consisted of footwear and hosiery, almost all of which has been rendered unusable, as mentioned above. THE 8 UPSTAIRS OF THE ESTABLISHMENT WERE REMOVED Upon the occurrence of the fire, which broke out in the central part of the establishment, the tenants of the upper floor, who were a family named González, hastily abandoned the house in anticipation that the fire might take on such proportions that it would spread throughout the building THE ACTION OF THE PROSECUTOR At the site of the event we saw the prosecutor Díaz'Üollaao, investigating the facts and we even saw him personally extracting from the establishment, the books and files of the tax, which he placed in the custody of the police, with the purpose of investigating them later and knowing the economic state of the commercial firm, in order to determine the greater or lesser responsibility that may fall on the owners, for the purpose of (Continued on page 5) "Borinquen Park" The Cinema on the Seashore. TODAY. Saturday 14. TODAY. CHARLES RAY in - the drama in seven acts: "THE WELL OF LUCK'' (Peaceful Valley.) Tomorrow Sunday: "HIS POINT OF VIEW'' (The Point of View) Po¿ Elaine Hammer stein. Admission 20 ctvs. 77 Allen st - TeL jyPi mF 1225, San Juan, JSgfljO P. R. We repair typewriters. ''■■■*- ? -
The Supreme Court yesterday rejected Honoré'smandamus.
Yesterday we were infoimated that" the Supreme Court, before which had been filed the 'mandamus' of Lelo. Honoré against Mr. Tor© Labarthe, stating that the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court was invoked because of the high office held by the defendant. The Supreme Court in its decision states that the reasons given are insufficient to accept the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. An editor of ours spoke last night with Ledo. Rivera Zayas, attorney for Mr. Honoré, and he told us that today the appeal of "man damus" would be filed before Judge Rodriguez Serra of the second section of the District Court. A child suffered a skull fracture and died a few moments later. At stop 2 of Puerta de Tierra, in the Covandonga pasture, an event occurred yesterday afternoon at 4:45 p.m., which due to its disgraceful consequences has been deeply regretted by all those who witnessed it and by the neighborhood in general. Electric car number 32 was coming from Santurce in the direction of San Juan, guided by driver Emilio Núñez, license plate number 117, and driver Manuel Ri vera Mejías, license plate number 74. From one of the sides of the outside of the car and holding on to one of the rods of the windows came the child Pedro Lopez, 8 years old, resident of Puerta de Tierra, who while passing near one of the electric light poles, crashed into it, fracturing his skull and falling to the ground unconscious. The ambulance then took him to the Puerta de Tierra aid station where he was given first aid, having been transferred in very serious condition and with heavy bleeding in his ears, to the Municipal Hospital where he died moments later. The authorities went to the site of the incident and proceeded to investigate the facts, having informed the prosecutor Diez Collazo, who gave orders to summon the witnesses so that they could testify today in the prosecutor's office. It is imposed by the authorities the adoption of an energetic measure to avoid that the children, which happens very frequently, climb on the hammocks and sides of the electric cars, which will avoid that we have to lament in any other occasion misfortunes like the one happened yesterday in Puerta de Tierra. TODAY? SATURDAY TODAY "Mickey" AFTERNOON AND EVENING 'HOTEL PALACE' Participates to his numerous clientele to have reduced considerably the prices of the rooms, as follows: Room with private bath for 1 person from $1.50 to $3.50 Room with private bath for 2 persons, from $3.00 to $6.00 Also have been lowered in a remarkable way THE PRICES OF THE "RESTAURANT A LA CARTE" PEDRO AGUDO, Manager. A. CARAZO, Brau St. 72. Adrt.
Raymond Poincaré lectured yesterday with David Lloyd George.
(UNITED PRESS) (VIA ALL AMERICA CABLES) PARIS, January 13.- The new head of the Cabinet M. Raymond Poincaré notified President Millerand that tomorrow the list of the polynicians who will form the new Ministry will be made known. The Prime Minister of England, Mr. Lloyd George, conferred in the early hours of today's afternoon with Mr. Poincaré, decreeing between the two notable politicians the passive continuation of the negotiations on the French-English alliance. Llayd George, who left at once for London stated that the meeting had been extremely cordial. GERMANY IS GRANTED MORATORIUM CANNES, January 13.-The eighth of March has been fixed for the commencement of the Genoa Conference. The last provisions of the Cannes Conference were, among others, to grant Germany the provisional moratorium requested by the Wirth Government. Germany will have to pay, in the meantime, thirty-one million gold marks, decennially and counting from the fifteenth, of the current month. SARRAUT TO CONTINUE IN WASHINGTON PARIS, January 13.-The President of France, M. Millerand, has begged M. Charles Sarraut, President of the French Delegation to the Conference on Disarmament, to continue on his bridge and to follow the policy hitherto pursued by the Republic in regard to the limitation of naval and land armaments. A NOTABLE DECREASE IN IMPORTS AND EXPORTS WASHINGTON, Jan. 13.-The Department of Commerce announces that the (total imports and exports in 1921 amounted to seven billion dollars, which compared with the previous afyear records a decrease of six and a half billion dollars. CUSTOMS CHIEF WAITS FOR NOTICE FROM WASHINGTON TO BEGIN CONSTRUCTION Due to several complaints made by the San Juan trade in general, concerning the poor condition of the Customs buildings, we visited yesterday Mr. Moore, Chief of this federal bureau, to whom we communicated the reports we had. Mr. Moore told us that for some time the Government of Washington has had the purpose of constructing new buildings for the Customs House, since those in this city, as well as in various ports of the island, do not meet all the conditions necessary for the purposes to which they are dedicated. The Chief of Customs stated that he had recently received reports from the Iqs. stating that the Act, appropriating two hundred thousand dollars for the construction of Customs buildings in Puerto Rico, had been passed by Congress on December 20, and that he was therefore awaiting word from Washington, authorizing him to begin the said work. Mr. Moore told us that, with the money allocated, a complete enlargement of the San Juan building will be made; one will be built in Mayagüez and the remaining ones on the island will be repaired. "CINE LUNA" Today. Matinee and Evening. "JUDEX" Don't miss, current prices. Perfumery! Perfumery! In "LA GLORIA" Fortaleza Esq. San Justo. Essences, Lotions, Powders, Creams and Soaps. From the best brands and Manufacturers. Prices never seen before.
| SATURDAY, JANUARY 14, 1922.
NUMBER 896.
Briand's resignation speech provoked misgivings in French public opinion.
(FRENCH CABLE) i 1 > PARIS, January 13.-The speech delivered in the Chamber of Representatives by the former President of the Council, Mr. Briand, moments before submitting his resignation from his high office, has aroused suspicion in the high governmental spheres, which is where the eminent French statesman wanted to reach with his shots. Although Briand has made some clarifications to a representative of the "Petit Parisien", this does not seem conducive to dispel the suspicions which his speech has provoked. THE AWAKENING TIGER ,T"~ L ' s PARIS, January 13.-Ge-rges Ciernen. ' ceau, known in France and throughout the world as the "Tiger" arrived in this city yesterday. The former president of the Council of s Minisíteos did not want to answer the questions of journalists and has enfrasr cado in a mysterious reserve. B The old "Tiger" intends to reside in Versailles and observe, from ■ there, the solution of the political crisis. B YESTERDAY THE POLITICAL PRISONERS WERE RELEASED. 1 TICOS OF IRELAND DUBLIN, January 13.-In accordance with the recent decree signed by King' ' i George, the political prisoners, who were numerous, were yesterday released. On this occasion the streets of this city were very animated and only cheers were heard for the government of King George. The animation is general. THE MINISTERIAL CRISIS IN ( SPAIN MADRID, January 13.-King Alfonso r.o has not yet designated the President j of his Government. It is believed that this afternoon the crisis will be resolved and that tomorrow the new Cabinet will take office, which is believed to be composed of conservative elements. The name of Mr. Sanchez Guerra to replace Don Antonio Maura is again being mentioned. CHILE IMPROVES THE NATIONAL PORTS i SANTIAGO DE CHILE, January 13. RICO 1 CENTRAL BOARD OF DIRECTORS i CONVOCATION ! 1 In compliance with the provisions of Article 13 of the clauses of 1 Incorporation, I hereby and in the name of the Central Board of Directors which I have the honor to preside, convene the Ordinary General Meeting, which (as agreed upon in the meeting held on February 27, 1921) is to take place in the city of Mayagüez at 9:00 a.m. on Sunday, February 19, 1921, this year. 1 The Assembly may only be attended by delegates of the Local Boards, provided they meet the conditions required by Article 24 of our Re ' i glamento. 3 San Juan, P. R., January 13, 1922. Dionisio TRIGO. Vice-President. Advt. CHAIRS For dining room and office. $30.00 per dozen. "Los Novios" Rafael Margarida. Brau 44. - San Juan.
1 -Parliament approved this afternoon the bill presented by the Minister of Development authorizing the investment of $143,000,000 in improvements for the national ports and to extend the railroads to the frontiers of the Argentine Republic. THE GERMAN GOVERNMENT HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE PRETENSIONS OF THE COMPANIES BERLIN, January 13.-The economic sub-commission of the Empire railroads has met again and has agreed to respond to the insinuations of the private companies that it is impossible at present to hand over the railways operated by the State. THE ENGLISH MINISTER LORD DERBY PRAISES BRIAND'S PATRIOTISM LONDON, January 13.- Lord Derby has written an article in the "London Times" in which he praises M. Briand's patriotism® and speaks also of 1* / alliance with France. He defended the poli- 1 tics put into practice by the resigned Cabinet I and added that, as long as /no ■ resurrection of German militarism is made impossible, France must maintain an army on the banks of the Rhine, without anyone being able to call her a militarist. Lord Derby concludes his article by highlighting the activity of the former President of the Council of Ministers. The activity of the former President of the Council of Ministers and the loss to his country of the resignation of the illustrious poUn RAILWAY ACCIDENT PRODUCES NUMEROUS VICTIMS IN LISBON LISBON, January 13.-One of the co-z ' ches of a railway train, overturned and resulted in numerous injured among whom are well known P<X..., lyrical and social persons of the country. The accident, , with such a motive, has produced impression in the country. THE RESIGNATION OF M. BRIAND AND THE WASHINGTON CONFERENCE WASHINGTON, January 13.- The resignation of the President of the French Council of Ministers, M. Brinnd, is being much commented upon among the foreign delegates to the Conference on Disarmament. The Secretary of State, Mr. Hughes in giving an account of the resignation stated that the Conference has lost one of its first supporters, PERET PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCH CHAMBER PARIS, January 13.-Parliament has again resumed its sessions, Mr. Raul Peret, President of the Chamber of Deputies, having been elected. ' AMERICA THEATER -TODAY- SATURDAY -HOY-GRAN TANDA VESPERTINA 5;15 P. M. and evening The Lady of the Camellias absolutely new copy Tomorrow evening and W TANDA VESPERTINA 5:15 P. M. The Labyrinth of Passions 7 acts- Gabrieli" Robinne- Also PILAR CONDE Phenomenal New Program Monday:- THE BLACK PRINCESS.
l BEAUTIFUL WAREHOUSE 11 - ❖ 1,000 square meters: Six front doors. Own for business of Provisions, effects of construccio" ' ' ' ' ' nes or storage. Located near the Malecon with railroad track in front. Stop 2 and 2 ' For rent in whole or in part. ! Í Í ANTONIO LEMA. j* 5 Reports: - San Jqan, P. R. *' t DEL RIO & CO. INC. "