ELM1NDO
w V ■ w V w V w B B ■ V ■ V ■ ■ ■ - a ■ ■ ■ " ■ I 14 Pages, 3 Ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year, $7.50, t aa " teeeseeoeoeoe . .
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81. * Tel. 833, P. Ó. Box 345. ■ I H I.M.,11.,1-1 I 1 I..I I I i 1
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO IV,
SAN JUAÑ, PUERTO RICO.
j,,™, n< b te n und í CT (no. 801) by the Aet of October 6. 1917, on file at the Post Office of ♦JbL.L? of ? th " President. A. 8. Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 2¿. 1919. at the Post Office at San Juan, Porta Ri eo, (United State" of America) nnder the Act of march 3, 1879.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 1922.
NUMBER 1163.
THE GREAT BUILDING OF "EL MUNDO" AND "PUERTO RICO ILUSTRADO" HAS BEGUN CONSTRUCTION ON ONE OF THE MOST SPLENDID SITES IN THE WORLD.
The building will cost one hundred and fifty thousand dollars and will have six spacious floors, besides the basement.
> A few days ago, the auction of the grandiose building that will be erected in a picturesque and beautiful site of this city was held at the Administration of this newspaper, with the offices of EL MUNDO and PUERTO RICO ILLUSTRADO. Due to the importance of the work, well known contractors of San Juan attended the ceremony, and Mr. F. B. Hatch, the most reputable and well known contractor, was awarded the contract. Thus, last Tuesday began the work of destruction and demolition of the house number 2, located on the street of San Jose corner of Tetuan, which is where the beautiful building will rise, which will come to enhance, with a bold and brilliant architecture, the ornament of this city. The site chosen to build our building I can not sor more central, my picturesque, my fresh and my visible. Near the Baldoríoty square, and bordering the wall of the street of Tetuin, where the magnificent specticu'o of the bay is sighted. THE EXTRAORDINARY IMPORTANCE OF THE BUILDING The building will cost, including the value of the land, about one hundred and fifty thousand dollars, and in it will be installed in a comfortable and elegant way, the shops, warehouses and general offices of EL MUNDO and PUERTO RICO ILLUSTRADO. We have wanted, given the circulation and importance of our newspapers, to construct a building worthy of Cine Tuerto Rico' PRESENTS HOT SATURDAY the best show that can be recorded in history. La Vuelta del Hogar in 8 parts. .. > ... and you Ira. Day of "The Man of the Three Faces" Price 20 and 25 Cts. NOTE:-As the program is extremely long, the company will show The Three-Faced Man in the two batches and La Vuelta del Hogar in the middle of the two. To Puerto Rico tonight. ■ ¡ I I I I I I I I I 1 I I I i I-b-H-1 I I I 1 I I I I :: CEMENT "CABALLITO" t :: UNBEATABLE - " Competition price. \ Sues, by L. VILLAMIL A*Co. :: d <11 I I I I , 1 , 1 , 1 ,, l I I I 1 I I !■■! I I 1 1 1 1 1 I I I | J
the ascendancy that EL MUNDO and PUERTO RICO ILU8- j IRADO have in the public opinion. And in this precisely we would like to take pride in saying that the new offices of both newspapers will be on a par with those of the great presses of Europe and America. At first sight everything has been arranged in order to offer my grandiose effect to the building; the plans of the work have been admirably executed by the remarkable architect Mr. Francisco Roldin, one of the most knowledgeable in the matter and who has highlighted in this extraordinary architectural work his mastery, his art and his experience. THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE FLOORS ' The second floor of our building will be destined exclusively to paper mills and machinery; on the second floor will be installed the offices of the two publications, which will not only have perfect ventilation, but also an excellent hygienic service in accordance with the latest and most modern innovations. On the third floor will be located all the editorial and administrative offices of both newspapers, so that the work of the editors and reporters will be completely independent of the movement and rattling of the machines. < The project calls for a large and especially comfortable building for these offices. Everything, then, has been distributed in a precise and careful way, so that the floor destined to intellectual labors will be an ornamental primordial, a place that invites to meditation and work. (Continued on p. 8) TODAY PARK - SATURDAY 25 - TODAY Superb Premiere William S. Hart in the powerful drama PALABRA DE CABALLERO (Three Word Brand) Tomorrow Sunday:-EL AMANTE PERFECTO (A Perfect Lover) " MADERAS Quality -- Price Service Bolán, Tejedor & de Mostos Telephone 395-200. > Apartado Í356.
Dominican Consulate General NOTICE TO THE COMMERCE OF SAN JUAN In view of the request made by the steamship company of the Bull Insular Line to this consular office to regularize the time of departure of the steamship MARINA. NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN for general knowledge that this consular office will accept commercial invoices up to two hours before the time fixed for the dispatch of the above mentioned steamship. San Juah, November 24, 1922 (Signed) -HUNGRIA LOVELACE. Chancellor-In-Charge of the Consulate General Dominicanof < * l 'i , i "i , 4 "l 1 I 1 1 1 l I I I ■l-j-ji I 1 I J I " 1 " " | ¡ | | [ | l-j-j -f-f [ f|T |||¡ j | | | j :: VIROL THE MOST EFFECTIVE AND CHEAPEST INCREASE VIROL ¡í :: IS NOT A DRUG and ;; VIROL has an esoecial application in cases of - - ■ :: SISIS AND ANEMIA .. The best evidence of the general acceptance which VIROL has in * ,, all over the world is furnished by the fact that this preparation tee is employed * ' ; * at present in over 3000 hospitals and sanatoriums of Tysics in In- ' '' glaterra alone. In PUERTO KJCO it is used by everyone who wants to be healthy. - , ' I All pharmacies have Virol for sale and wholesale ALONSO, ¡ *, RIERA & CO., INC, Dept. of Sales and Commissions. General Distributor®. 1HIIIIII I II I I I I I I I I I Mill-Il I H-I-l -l' l l l l l I H-I I1 1 1 1 1 fl I 1 i i t i i i i i i i i i i
Full text of the crossed cables between Mr. Harding and the minority leaders referred to in yesterday's press
Sailor Iglesias expressed the following to a reporter of ours yesterday: "In view of the cable from Washington, published today by the newspapers "La Democracia'', "El Im arcial'' and "La Correspondencia'', whose dispatch is authorized by the signature of Toijbett, in which it is stated that Senators Tous Soto and Santiago Iglesias "tried to 1 counteract the efforts of the Puerto Rican delegation*', by means of a dispatch addressed to President Harding, I wish to make public the text of the cable alluded to and also of the most interesting part of the reply.' ' The cable of reference given us by Mr. Iglesias reads as follows: San Juan, P. R. Nov. 13, 1922 Hon. Warren G. Harding, President of the United States. Sefior: Cables published in the Unionist and Independence newspapers of Puerto Rico state that the President has asked Barcelo, Travieso and Cordova to meet with him to decide once and for all the controversy sustained by the said politicians against Governor Relly. The published reports tfor the unionist and independentisto press assume the termination of the controversy with ,-1 Another additional program a week for the Bruno and Vazquez Circuit IN all likelihood Messrs. t Bruno and Vazquez will release one more program a week, due to the alarming shortage of films being Ybta in San Juan. The RIALTO has only five premieres for the coming week and according to the theater's director, Sefior Castañera, outside of the Circuit's films and the "Selection" program, it is almost impossible to document films of the caliber demanded by the Rialto's audiences. It has been rumored since very early on that the seflotes Bruno and Vázquez will present four films instead of three, as has been the case up to now. It is not yet known whether the program will be Artistas Unidos or Fox, as Messrs. Bruno and Vazquez have not yet reached anything definite in this matter. Both brands are top quality and would be a sure hit here.
A great victory for them and contrary to Governor Reily, and to the interests of all the parties represented by all the people of Puerto Rico. The Republican Party and the Socialist Party of Puerto Rico represent more than 123,000 voters in the island and have the right to be a party to any Legislative arrangement or governmental agreement which the Unionists and their co-religionists understand that the new interior decorating of the RIALTO Theater. The colors blue and violet predominate, with details in gold. í No expense will be spared so that the work will be worthy of the interior architecture of the theater. The work will be executed under the expert direction of Mr. Germán Castañera, who is an expert in the fields of drawing and decorative art. The functions will not be suspended, as everything will be done in the evenings and mornings. I It is hoped that it will be ready for the stupendous homage that is being prepared in honor of the distinguished Miss Zoraida Rodriguez, a beautiful flower of our social circles. It is very pleasing to see the activity of the Rialto businessmen preparing them in gas! in favor of the public; JUAÑ J. CADENAS. DON CARLOS CUEVAS LAFORET I These last few days has been ill, although not delicately, fortunately, the very cultured and esteemed young man Carlos Cuevas Laforet, who is at! He is in charge of the sales department of the reputable Felix Lopez jewelry store, and enjoys great sympathy, for his va ler, throughout Puerto Rico. Mr. Cuevas, now completely recovered, resumed his work yesterday, for which we sincerely congratulate him. Imperial" Cinema TOMORROW SUNDAY j Un Mentido Paraíso Extraordinary of the Bruno y Vázquez Circuit 9 great Parts 9
I is necessary for the good of the country, provided that no concession shall be construed as hostile to the olitics of proportional representation and proportional jreteonsabilídad as inau' gurated by Governor Reily and which I is now supported by more than i two-thirds of the people of Puer |o Rico. If the President would grant the privilege of holding a general hearing for the political purposes for which the Unionist party is pleading, then a delegation of representatives of all the political parties of the island could go to Washington immediately. With all due consideration, Yours faithfully, (signed) J. Tous Soto, Santiago Iglesias, Senators. - Iglesias also gave us part of the reply which reads as follows: "THE WHITE HOUSE Washington, Nov. 16, 1922. My dear Iglesias: Referring to your recent cablegram, the President has asked me to tell you that he does not color any discussion concerning Governor Reily, either with the Governor's proponents or opponents. Sincerely yours, (s/he) Geo. B. Christian Jr., Secretary of andy 'President Imposing funeral tribute to the memory of Don A. Alvarez Nava Yesterday afternoon met in extraordinary sMión the boards of the de España, Auxilio Mutuo and Casino Español to discuss the religious tribute that these entities should pay to the one who was his most glorious compatriot Don Antonio Alvarez Nava. After an extensive exchange of impressions, during which the memory of the exalted companion was evoked, who left so many lasting affections among his compatriots, it was unanimously agreed to celebrate next Wednesday in the Cathedral Church of San Juan a solemn act in memory of the deceased. So that the act may have the greatest religious splendor, several commissions were appointed, which will be in charge of organizing in due form the pious homage, giving it the appropriate grandeur. For this purpose, a resolution of the
IN ACCORDANCE WITH A RESOLUTION OF JUDGE FOOTE, THE BALLOTS OF THE CONTESTED COLLEGES WILL BE REVIEWED AT THEPLETTODES.J.
At two o'clock yesterday afternoon the hearing continued in the election suit i which has been going on in the District Court of this city. First, was called to the witness chair the superintendent of elections, Mr. Edick, who was asked if he had brought into court the ballot packages for all the polling places in this city, and as the witness was requested to bring into court the sack containing the ballots corresponding to ballot numbers 24, 25 and 26 of the first precinct, he did so, and Mr. Fe'lu then submitted to the court to accept said ballots as evidence pending their identification. Ledo. Rivera Zayas opposed, fun dándose among other reasons in that the will make dd Spanish commerce of San Juan ' his adhesion nobilísima, so that all establishments remain closed, while the imposing religious ceremony, which will be from eleven to twelve o'clock in the morning, Although in the expressed meeting it was agreed not to distribute special invitations for the religious ceremony in order to "vitar any omission Involunta- i ria, given the countless affections that here counted Mr. Alvarez Nava, it was decided, nevertheless, to invite to the act half of le* daily newspapers of San Juan, to all the friends and compatriots of the illustrious gentleman. Surely this tribute dedicated to honor the memory of Alvarez Nava will be a living and eloquent demonstration of the affection he deserved and knew how to inspire in his compatriots and friends of Puerto Rico. I Teatro Olimpo TODAY -A Great Show -TODAY Farewell of the comic actifr Jesús Xz- ' quierdrí with the comedy MI HOM- ! BRE. Three acts of laughter. SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 26th Monumental program. Cinema and. Va-, riedades. Premiere of the suggestive six-part film THE VENGEANCE OF A DOCTOR by Frank Mayo. | The latest International Novelties and the beautiful film comedy VAYA UN ESCANDALO. All at current prices.
FROM THE CAMILA QUIROGA COMPANY .... . TODAY, SATURDAY, NOV. 25, TWO PREMIERE PERFORMANCES OF THE MATINEE, "WITH BROKEN WINGS" TOMORROW, SUNDAY, 26, - TWO AMAZING MATINEE PERFORMANCES, Great Success! NIGHT, Remarkable Premiere LOS MIRASOLES L ° s ° s Maltese 28.-Penultimate Function.--BENEFIT OF CAMILA QUIROGA. The tickets for this festival are on sale.
IMPORTANT CLARIFICATION It is necessary that the public knows that the LEE CORD rubber is of price as low as any other rubber of the market, in spite of its known superiority. The nail-proof rubber is called CORD PUNCTURE PROOF. LEE CORD is a different kind of rubber. It is important for the public to know that we have not had a single adjustment in our CORD Rivero Chaves & Co. rubber, Salvador Brau 75. San Juan, P. R.
WOOD! : 1 . i - . I have just received two load. ; ments of pichipén, and I am ; selling them at prices lower than any other co- ; merchant on the market. " TAKE ADVANTAGE OF IT !!!! F. Benitez Rexach i Muelle No. 6. San Juan, Puerto Rico. " ¡
On Monday, probably, the first of the packages submitted in evidence will be opened.
The Court had no jurisdiction to enter into the examination of the ballots until the presumption which, according to the law, must be made that the returno lists are valid and that the acts of the officials who conducted and carried out the election were valid, was destroyed by the plaintiffs.Mr. Rivera Zayas further alleged that in the complaint only vague allegations are made, without specifying anything concrete that could incline the Court to accept as evidence in the case the electoral ballots. Then Mr. Feliú took the floor, citing numerous cases of jurisprudence, tending to demonstrate that the ballots are the best evidence that can be shown in evidence, and that they should be reviewed by the simple fact that they are the best evidence that can be shown in evidence, and that they should be reviewed by the simple fact that they are the best evidence that can be shown in evidence. He tried to convince the Court that the ballots are the only witnesses and "the best instrument of evidence to determine the true result of the election. Mr. Feliu said that the opposing party could not expect them to determine the errors committed, specifying them because they were in the *secret* of those sacks; and that in such a case they could bring, as well as the opposing party, a million of men who would testify that they voted in such and such a way, and that the only way to (Continued on 1* 3rd page) -HOWDAY -EXITO -EXIT. ) - TODAY - SUCCESS - SUCCESS - TODAY - Harold Lloyd (LUQUITAS) in the comedy of the year - TOMORROW - TOMORROW - 'Glass Houses 9 <GLAS3 HOUSES) by the eminent actress Viola Dana -MATINAL, MATINEE AND EVENING In the Matinee gifts to the doz with the luckiest currents. In the two afternoon batches every child under ten years of age who is accompanied by an older person will get in free. In the evening, at the end of the second tonda will be exhibited extra the funny comedy / "El Lacayito" ROSCOE FATTY ARBUCKLE Al St. John Busker, Keaton and Alice a. . - - ■ '
Great Accomplishment ♦ , *. ' of typewriters, rpbuilt; tables, chairs, desks and office effects, general. Information: "THE CANADEL", Alien 77. HH-w-bi ¡ i n i 111111 u | t | | | i.." FOR SALE, an establishment in the street of San Francisco, between Cruz and '; San Justo. ; ' ! The best place to detail ¡! in San Juan. ; Information: Box 707. 1: r..... _ _ . ■ -