THE WORLD
' Offices: -alvador Brau. ti -' Tal. 533 P. O. Box 445
.10 page" 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.OC One aAa.S7.5O
MORNING PAPER. ...
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR IV.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
PubUebM an< rtrtnbrtea andar (Mtwl i>". Mr*. - Lt" <n "WMt e. tie Jltn. tfort Lile" rt Ban Juan, Porto Bico. By order of the froeMont, A. 8. Bjk "rt "n Pnrttaartar eéoarol, Sntored -- (Mond'ala** Mttet fobmary ZL 1"18. a* the Port Offleo at Saa Joan. Porta ünfUd Htetee faaerie" ende" th. art Witritrch -.
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 4, 1922.
NUMBER 914*
An extraordinary meeting of the Union is announced for the 11th of the present.
Mr. Huyke will be invited to such an important event.
- From our conversations with the political leaders of the Union during ' yesterday we have been able to learn, among other things, that the Majority Party proposes to go to an extraordinary assembly, which, according to our reports will be held on Saturday, the 11th of the current. The object of the said meeting is to deal with various matters of capital importance and to fix the party in a firm and single direction in the attainment of self-government for the country, which is promised by the bill of the illustrious American leader, Mr. Campbell, which all Unionists hope will be approved by Congress. The Rules of the Party, it is said, may also undergo some amendments, since the possible obtaining of the Campbell bill for Puerto Rico, may print another system of government and another policy for the country, to which the future course of the Party, which holds the reins of power, must necessarily be subject. - It is taken for granted that Mr. Huyke will be invited to the aforementioned assembly so that he may freely present his ideas there, since in disEL STATUS OF DON PEDRO ARSUAGA ♦ ______ Last night, on inquiring at the Auxilio Mutuo" about the state of health of the distinguished gentleman and excellent friend Don Pedro Arsuaga, we were informed that in the last twenty-four hours the illustrious sick man has felt a slight improvement. We have sent a letter to the night clerk of the "Auxilio Mutuo" so that any person who might be able to help him could be so informed. ' 44 DEGREES BELOW ZERO PORTLAND,- Maine, Jan. 24.- The cold wave which passed through the Atlantic states, on reaching Portland, brought the thermometer down to 44 degrees below zero. The highest temperature in certain towns of the state was 24 degrees below zero. IMPORTANT If you are an employer subject to the Workmen's Compensation Law, you must keep in your business the Record Book required by the same - We have for sale that Record Book, prepared in such form, that you will be able to keep your accounts clearly and simply and with the requirements of the Law - We will send you a copy upon receipt of a money order or certified check for $1.10 postage prepaid. REAL BROTHERS. P. O. Box 345. Tanca No 1, San Juan, P. R. Advt. STUBBE BROS. INC.
These wishes have been expressed in several newspaper articles by Mr. Huyke himself. The general opinion among politicians is that the present circumstances provide the best opportunity for the holding of an assembly, since, they say, it is "a duty to say something definite to the country, after the terrible political crisis it has been undergoing for the past six months. INVITATION TO THE REPUBLICANS From the bosom of the referred assembly the political leaders believe that a fraternal call to the Republicans will emerge, to see if these, united with the Unionists, will decide to work for the attainment of the Campbell "bill", which, according to the most authorized men of the Union, satisfies all the aspirations of the Puerto Rican people. THE CENTRAL BOARD. Last night the Central Board of the Union held a meeting, with some representatives and senators in attendance. THE "PUERTO RICO" CINEMA DOES NOT YIELD ITS SPLENDID PROGRAMS TO ANY OTHER ... The "Puerto Rico" cinema offers the public more brilliant and varied shows every day. The enthusiastic "manager" Mr. Rhmón Lloverás is a J'offre'. 4 Tomorrow, Sunday, he will thrill the public with Terror", which has made so much noise in the Republic of the North. In the special batch, at 9.15 (which is at $0.20 and $02£), "The Lady of the Camellias," by the cuteness of Clara Kimlnll, who is capable of moving even Mr. Me. Klure. On Monday, "Jerusalem Delivered '; and on Tuesday, "Lightning of Jealousy." Very well, Mr. Lloverás! DON ALFONSO CALDERON This distinguished gentleman, a wealthy landowner from Carolina, was in this town yesterday on business. We reiterate our cordial greetings to such a distinguished friend. COMMERCIAL Due to the establishment in Havana, the company name "Diaz Hermanos", of this place, ceases its operations in Puerto Rito and will continue its business in the same way the active gentleman Mr. Jose Diaz Carmena. C/7VE LWA Today. Matinee and Evening. Today. JUDEX Fifth Day. Do not miss. Button plating and lining A. CARAZO, Brau St. 72. Advt.
EL CONDADO El Condado is the only place devoted exclusively to residences in San "Juan. Healthy, fresh and with constant sea breeze. WE SELL houses and lots; houses for cash and lots for cash and installments. * Balín Brothers Inc., Agents Tetuán and Tanca. San Juan.
Mr. Barceló's residence was visited the day before yesterday.
On Thursday night the residence of the leader of the party and of the majority, Don Antonio Barceló, was very well attended by the most select members of our political and intellectual world. Since Mr. Barceló returned from Washington, he has not ceased to receive enthusiastic congratulations for his recent triumphs in favor of Puerto Bico, and a demonstration of this was the countless group of friends who visited him that night. Among other distinguished people we saw Senators Hernández López, Cuevas Zoque ira, Jordán and Benítez; don Julio César González, don Manuel Camuñas, dJu Epifanio Fernández Vanga, don José de Jesús Tizo! and the composer don Rafael Balseiro who, at the request of a group of elegant ladies who were there, interpreted a few of his favorite works. Mr. Barceló expressed himself in very optimistic terms, with respect to the "Campbell bill", highlighting the great merits of the American statesman, and assuring that the people of the United States would do us justice. KILLED BY A 4WIL AUTO The Guayama police reported yesterday to headquarters that in this jurisdiction the automobile driven by the chauffeur Heribertó Martín "z, threw the girl Luisa Santiago, who died immediately. NEW YORK 28.- In the week from January 25 to 28 the cold has been very intense in this city. However, the authorities of <lue T miélrrtra as long as this Temper altitude is accompanied as it has been, by strong sunshine and clear days, influenza and catarrh will not increase. Victory Garlen TODAY - SATURDAY 4 - TODAY THE CARIBBEAN PEARL Second Tanda begins at 9 p.m.
Second Tanda begins at .9 P. M.
China has requested Japan to renounce 21 demands - - * * * * (English Cable)
(English Cable) - * * Washington, February Delegation of China today submitted to the Conference a- request that Japan renounce the 21 demands of 1915, the Chinese Government agreeing only to .five of these. FRANCOS RODRIGUEZ,' PRESIDENT OF THE ACADEMY OF SCIENCES ' Madrid, February 3.---The illustrious politician and journalist Don José 'Francos Rodriguez has been elected President of the Academy of Sciences. Mr. José María Gamoneda was elected Secretary. LA ESTUDIANTIL A BUENOS AIRES 'Madrid, 3--The Student Union has accepted the invitation to the Students' Congress to be held in Buenos Aires next month. v. y It is announced that the Argentine Government is preparing to give a cordial welcome to the Spanish Students. | ORLANDO TORMARA GABINET Ronyj, February 3.-It is announced that M. Orlarido, who has been on different occasions head of the government will be called from today to tomorrow by the King to replace Bono "i and to form a new cabinet.' ' - - -they are to be - ScENCIED 30 000, SOLIMWISI MOROCCO Madrid, February 3.-News has been circulated that the Government has the Borinquen Park The Cinema on the Seashore. TODAY. - Saturday 4. - TODAY. The sensational melodrama "LO QUE GUSTA A LAS MUJERES" (What Women Love) By the modern Venus, Annette Kelerman. Premiere in Santurce. LUNETA 20 CTVS. For tomorrow, Sunday: "ESCANDALO PARISIEN" CA Parisian Scandal.)
©The OdieIimce Co. NEW TORI. INSURANCE CO. OF NORTH AMERICA PHILABELPHIA. SURPLUS- $34,870,382.05. - We accept fire insurance throughout the Island at REDUCED PREMIUMS and quote SPECIAL RATES for home insurance. KORBER & COMPANY, Inc. GENERAL AGENTS: SAN JUAN, P. R. Fire, earthquake, cyclone, automobile, marine, land, parcel post, certified mail.
INTERESTING FILM= "THE COLLECTIVE" in its ART This beautiful film will be shown in the following cinemas: OLIMPO, Wednesday, February 1; PUERTO RICO, Thursday, February 2; LUNA, Friday, February 3;< MONTE CARLO Y REAL, of Puerta de Tierra, Saturday, February 4; CATAÑO, Sunday, February 5. It is extremely interesting for how instructive and beautiful this Agricultural-Industrial film is. You will see beautiful panoramic views of the tobacco countryside, tobacco plantations, manufacture of cigars and machine-made cigarettes, etc., etc., etc. Don't miss it. - You will like it very much.
Paris mtarusfidesfjjjída cimí if it were another Mame
- 71*" Puerto Ricw priced full of enthusiasm/ios overflows ¡ of patriotism#, in the, ipagníficas ¡fiestas of the iKtoria < celebrated in Paris. .* ' - i The cinema "Ámérfpa" offers to the public that incomparable ojÍBrtunjdad, in the night of the nteftea, á¡a ( l Be will be night of glory Puerto Rico. Our public will see/ Full of emotion, the great da, the' victorious armies, ?po" the central - of all nations Ali roas. cia in-, tera invaded Paris Ase, gfqrtoso day, to celebrate the most formidable of'the triumphs, after mips He four years of war. - The spectacle is astonishing. Our public will see, on the screen of the "America'', 'overflow Paris, as if it were a new Marne, roaring with grandeur and emotion. and * | In addition, as if it were not enough frenzy, our public will drip < also indescribably ton the precious film "The house of mud", in which he borders to colossal height Hathcrt? protagonist of the "Count * dg Montecristo"; and will be deeply moved with the funeral of José Miguel Gómez. " - "La fiesta de te-vistor ia e> Paris," above all, a real program, 'an unsurpassed, for which has also paid Mr. Lloverás unja strong object to exhibit it soon entel cinema "Puerto RicflfcAguarda to "America", llat Tuesday night, a nUevo triumph" The popular cinema of the j#Marina *will be filled * from boat to boat, and the Allied armies will receive from our public ovaÁón. Let's get ready, then, to enjoy. - BASE-BALL . * Tomorrow the teams "San Juan" and "Yale" will play in Caguas. There is great enthusiasm among the fans of both clubs. Olimpo" Theater TODAY. - SATURDAY. - TODAY. The great film "The Price of Silence" in 6 acts, by ALICE BRADY CURRENT PRICES.
The 'x-Colonel of Police, Mr. Shanffin began serving his sentence yesterday.
Noble demonstrations 'in favor of Fort Wtó* .
. and sympathy I have received during this period of my life. More< than forty<r ; persons have visited me during *this first hour I have been serving," J -| ■ "If any joy has produced for me t j this incidfent of my life it is tA know that< ¡ I have so many bnenoí friends inWe the ,, Puerto Ricans, for 1 have received proofs 11 of affection and adherence, from elements t all social classes, from* high to the humblest." k When asked if the former colonel would like to leave the island, he replied: $ < place, I love Puerto Rico. This love has cade much more with Ms reciefttaj teét > displays of affection that I have resRíao 5 de les portorriquqñqs." -|In the thirteen years that I have been living on the island, I have made close friendships . 1 with numerous Puerto Rican women of all social classes and I have obtained from time to time the support of all those good people". ña pop el amqr entrañable qqe. por esta tierrajy'por tdiios sus .I "La síncéra'hobpitalidad áe . púeblo me pone en |ales qúfl L when I think of leaving the island, nq.dM - s^|h iacer i o - " . - i de sq adraírablé plima, c|fl| Les one of the places' rf¡ás the i í land. However, as to what db I I resolve,, the fítnro will decide ,E1 sir .sfianton permrfbeéyá in A á jail Tiasta the one of A .tigrde of j, mingo, time when eftpi'riká ef t&mji t'"oídeoy i hop aoie pksíó4 qte les r - ' JÍ* '**ÍAdqúyiffi de .di&mriK " sense of "hw WHwPIntefiaWro Wywl i for a crime of contempt nrr'yerJi.i civil rights. Throughout yesterday afternoon and evening, Mr. Shanton's many friends did not cease for a moment to come to the prison to express their sympathy and support at this trying time for him. j - HOUSE OF SPAIN IN PTO. RICO CENTRAL BOARD OF DIRECTORS ' CONVOCATION j In compliance with the provisions of Article 13 of the clauses of Incorporation, I hereby and in the name of the Central Board of Directors that I have the honor to preside, summon the Ordinary General Meeting, which (as agreed in the meeting held on February 27, 1921,) is to take place in the city of Mayagüez at nine o'clock in the morning of Sunday, February 19 of this year.
At one o'clock yesterday afternoon, we noticed an unusual movement of automobiles that were heading rapidly towards the penitentiary, and in some of them it was noticed that members of the Insular Police forces were on board. > Later we learned that, at that time, Mr. Geo B. Shanton had entered the District Jail annexed to it, with the purpose of going to the penitentiary. Shanton, for the purpose of serving the sentence of forty-eight hours imprisonment recently imposed upon him by the Federal Court Judge, Honorable Arthur F. Odlin. Immediately a Bedactor of ours went to the penitentiary, where he had a short interview with Mr. Shanton, who was lying on a couch in the office room of the penitentiary, busily engaged in answering more than a few letters which he has received from his many friends on account of the unfortunate incident which has occurred to him. ■ . In response to questions from our Editor as to the motives he has had for not making use of his In answer to questions from our Editor as to the reasons he had had for not availing himself of the extension granted him by the court for the purpose of seeking a pardon from the President of the United States, Mr. Shantmi made the following statements: * "When I went to the Court to answer the charge of torture, according to the conáajcs of my lawyer and my personal judgment I pleaded guilty to the crime. I that one charged. I was guilty. I was given a sentence which I consider reasonable and I thought I should serve it. - I am highly oofiiplácido and At is fechóle larMemMh-acioéesMe amflffiW purpose of discharging 30,000 soldiers stationed ,in the vicinity of Melilla until next May. This news, which is circulating as a rumor, has not yet received official confirmation from the Government. CARDINAL MARINI SUFFERS FROM INFLUENZA Rome, February 3-Cardinal Marini has been unable to attend the Conclave because he is suffering from influenza. The Cardinal has confined himself to his rooms in response to a doctor's order. 25 MINERS KILLED IN AN EXPLOSION Santander, February 3.- In an explosion in a mine, 25 miners have been killed and numerous wounded. The Government has ordered an investigation into this event.
The Assembly may only be attended by delegates of the Local Boards, as long as they meet the conditions required by Article 24 of our Regulations. San Juan, P. R., January 13, 1922. Dionisio TRIGO. Vice-president. Advt. Teatro "America" -HOY- SABADO -HOY- Premiere in Puerto Bico Gabrielle Robinne in the drama of Passions the Triumphal March * Q "La Canción del Fuese" CURRENT PRICES Tomorrow - Sunday -MATINAL PREMIERE AT 10:30 A. M. and Afternoon Runs from 2:35 P. M. UNTIL 6:15 P. M.' The extraordinary 7-act drama "Classical Medal" "Partner of the Tide" No better film will be shown in Puerto Bico than this one.
Teatro 'Olimpo' -MACANA SUNDAY- Great function Extraordinary Presentation of the famous violinistconcertista awarded at the Conservatory of Prague, (Bohemia) Madame Thais In addition the beautiful film "The Lighthouse of Hope" By GLADYS WALTON POPULAR PRICES WE SELL A motorboat of 30 feet in length, 29 feet keel and eight feet beam with a "Buffalo" engine of 15 horsepower in magnificent condition. Will report, Sobrinos de Portilla, San Juan, P. R.
GREAT PERFORMANCE on Tuesdays and Wednesdays in our department of CUETARA HERMANOS detail.