ELM1NDO
♦ <*♦♦♦♦■""♦" ""4 ♦ ""♦" 10 pages 3 ctvs. -wvwtvrm. S4.u® A aáe,97.W
Ofldnasl "ahradar Brau. ; T< $33 P. O. Bex 343
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO rv.
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO,
uto Qto.yoi, M fo<t o<at . ■m Porto Bloc- By maM?* K 4 4? T y WwtarH m seo "m<*"too. '-bcaary M. 1918. ai *o Fort Offleo at Bu Jasa. Porte Bl Meto oí Au "rt*> "Ut""- i* uí - iSTe.
SATURDAY, MARCH 25, 1922.
NUMBER 955.
Pancho Villa offers to defeat President Gómez.
M. Sanoja, a well-known member of the Venezuelan colony in Puerto Rico, who has been residing in San Juan for some time, expelled from his country by the Gomez Government, recently arrived from Colombia. Dr. Sanoja, among other things, told us that in addition to our information of a few days ago, regarding the affairs of that country, he could inform us that during his trip to Colombia, he had learned that a Spanish subject, surnamed Alfonso, partner of a very important trading house in Barcelona, had been expelled from Venezuela. This gentleman," says Mr. Sanoja, "went to Caracas with the purpose of making some sales, and having then had to go to Maracaibo in search of more merchandise, he found, upon his return to the capital, with a government order, fixing a certain number of hours for him to settle his affairs and leave the country. Likewise," adds Dr. Sanoja, "it has happened to Carlos L. Meléndez, engineer from El Salvador, and to a gentleman by the name of Pita, who, after residing in Venezuela for six months, have also been expelled, without them knowing to date why they were banished. Doctor Sanoja gave us a copy of the newspaper "B1 Día", of Colombia, from which we cut out the following cable news: "PANCHO VILUUSE OFFERS TO TUMBLE GOMEZ" w * & MEJICO 15. -Diario "Universal", Mexico, says celebrated Pancho Villa has RAMtfP BQ "Wda to liberate'*. Venezuela from the tyranny of Gónpéz." DA EJTCÍÉNÓVA i MONTREAL, hand 24.-This afternoon have left for England the Canadian delegates to the Genoa conference Messrs. Gordon and Monrpetit. These representatives are accompanied by four technical advisers. THE HOUSE APPROVED BONUS FOR SOLDIERS * - WASHINGTON, March 24.-The House of Representatives yesterday passed the bill granting a bonus to soldiers who served during the last war. The bill, which immediately passed the Senate, was passed in the House by a vote of 383 to 80. MAX LINDER . in the hilarious comedy SEVEN YEARS OF BAD LUCK STRAND THEATER Plates and lines buttons A. CARAZO, Brau St 72.
BEHN BROTHERS, INC. (HOUSE FOUNDED IN 1906) BANKERS / Berwind White Coal Mining Co. \ Lancashire Insurance Co. Agents of Compagnie Generale Transatlantique. and Windward Island Line - Pacific Argentine. Brazil Line La Veloce. EL CONDADO - Sale of Plots. Esquina Tetuán-Tanca. San Juan, P. R. - " ~ ~ ~ " * " * " * - Q- ■ ■ " - e. e o e e. -1--V- e. e _< o
WOOD I have the Schooner "Pat Harrison" unloading with the largest and best stocked cargo that has ever come to Puerto Rico. As usual, I am selling at a better price than any other on the market. COME AND BE CONVINCED F. Benitez Rexach Pier No. 6.
IMPORTANT PERSONALITIES (CONFERRING WITH THE GOVERNOR IN SALINAS)
Mr. Lippitt wrote a letter repre- ' sentant Humphrey, making serious accusations to the country i
A representative of this paper visited the Santa Catalina Palace yesterday and was able to learn that at ten o'clock this morning the Governor had left for the island, accompanied by the prominent American financier, Mr. Wolker, without our being told where they were going or the object of the trip. Later we were able to gather the impression, in some political centers, that the Governor was in Salinas, ' where the following very significant personalities exchanged impressions with him: Don Manuel González, Don José J. Benítez, Don Eduardo Giorgetti, Don Jenaro Cautifio and Mr. Martín Travieso. | The public has given this conference an extraordinary importance, since they have supposed an attempt is being made to reach an agreement between the Government and the majority party. Some politicians with whom we have exchanged impressions have expressed their belief that it will not be possible to reach an understanding because of the state of affairs. A writer of ours, for the purpose of confirming the veracity of these reports, last night inquired of Secretary Hull, who informed us that it was Mrs. Reily who, on her return from Ponce, had stopped at Salinas, and in regard to the (Governor he told us that although it was certain that he was on the island, he could not tell us precisely where he was, although he supposed he had been invited to dine out. In addition, we were informed that the caballeas would spend the night at Los Baños de Coamo and would return to San Juan today morning. A SENSATIONAL LETTER FROM MR. ' LIPPITT In the possession of the leaders of the , Unionist party, is a letter which the . Commissioner of Sanitation, Mr. Lippitt, recently addressed to the Democratic Congressman, Mr. Humphreys, author of the Sanitation Bill. Humphreys, author of the Draft Resolution requesting that by A GREAT STAR AT THE "OLYMPUS" It is worth seeing the admirable work to be done tomorrow night ( tn the "Olympus," which is the most beautiful and '. sumptuous theater on the island, by an admirable star," pampered by our public: Elaine Hammer stein. See her in "Homeless Woman", which is a beautiful production, in 7 acts. PORTLAND" CEMENT Twisted square rods. PARIS POINT Call, visit or write ROLAN Y TEJEDOR Box 1356. Phone 395. Embankment. Stop 2-1 ¡2
i Congress to make an investigation ' of Governor Reily i's actions in Puerto Rico. In said letter Dr. Lippitt em- : piece speaking of the length of time he has been . residing on the island, of the public offices he has held and makes known that he is the Grand Worshipful Master of the Sovereign Grand Lodge of Puerto Rico. He says that the current political question being debated on the island is purely a question of Americanism and anti-Americanism, that here in Puerto Rico the pro-independence propaganda had taken such a rise that it would be impossible for Americans from the North to reside on the island, since they were the object of derision and had been displaced from public office for the sole reason that they were not Puerto Rican. i It says in the letter, as we are informed, that here the people of the United States had been the object of the most furious attacks and discrediting in the public tribunes and that the American flag was the object of mockery and profanity on many occasions. He says, moreover, that at the erection of the tombstone in the Federal building in this capital, ■ commemorating the soldiers killed during the Invasion, Governor Cox was hissed at by the audience, and ends by telling Congressman Humphreys that just as Bryan said he was an American first rather than a Democrat, he should, realizing the true nature of the political situation of the island, which, he says, is nothing else than that on page 6a.) 1
A Sos empicados del G tierno íeiseiáiáíi re bajados "neldos desde el da primero del orno ¡olio.
At the last session of the Legislature and in the Budget Law, which ¡ governs for two years, the proportional reduction in the salaries of the employees of the Island Government was specified, and this reduction is to take effect from the first day of July next. The legislators in adopting this measure, did so bearing in mind,' since the Great War had ended, that the cost of living must necessarily disappear and that due to the depreciation of sugar, the income of the Treasury would decrease considerably, thus imposing the need for savings in the budget, j| ' For this reason, by the employees of the Insular Government, in these days there is no talk of anything other than the reduction to be made in their salaries. Many of them lament if|e even the high I cost of living has hardly decreased 1 much, but the genius of them I Ise conform to the pensil that the economic crisis is such, that many corporacienes and houses of commerce have been forced to lay off many of their employees and salaries to others, and think that, if it is true that to them also set s have been lowered, however, contli larán to the front of their posts. For the information of interested persons, we are pleased to transcribe the following article (Continued on p. 6a.)
THEATER- AMERICA "COMPAÑIA INFANTIL VALDIVIESO" Great matinee at 4:30 P. M. Premiere of the film :| DREAMING WITH CHAPLIN ' movie filmed in Cuba by the minuscule- ■ i ass actor don Leopoldo Valdivieso, with imitations of Charles Chaplin. A REIR POB LA NOCHE : THE COUNT OF LUXEMBOURG Great success of the Valdivieso family v
Victory Garden Tomorrow Sunday, the sensational film entitled. "THE THREE MUSKETEERS" 7th. and last jomada. J In the 9 p.m. tanda.
rTT> THE EXCELLENT. Don Pedro Asruaga Be raza Caballero Gran Cruz del Mérito Naval y de Isabel la Católica, died on March 14, 1922, and the act of transferring the body has been arranged for Tuesday, March 28, 1922. R. I. P. His widow, Mrs. Rosario Dabán, his widow, Mrs. Rosario Dabán. Doña Rosario Dabán, his children, Don Pedro, Don Antonio, Don Juan José and Don José María; siblings, Bor María de la Santa Cruz, (nun Brígida), Don José María, Doña Catalina, Don Juan José and Doña Josefa (absent); nephews, in-laws and other relatives; the Most Illustrious Bishop of the Diocese, the Most Illustrious Consul of Spain, the Boards of Directors of the House of Spain, the Spanish Casino and the Spanish Society of Mutual Aid and Charity, the Association of Sugar Producers and the Sobrinos de Ezquiaga Mercantile. They ask their friends to attend the transfer of the corpse, a pious act for which they will keep eternal recognition. The funeral procession will be organized in the Plaza de Colón at 4 o'clock in the afternoon. No obituary will be distributed.
PRESENTS TODAY El Hogar de un Hombre With a cast of six stars. Accompanied by "Cásate y Verás" by the famous LUQUITAS Both extraordinary films by "Selection Film Service".
REGARDING THE APPOINTMENT OF MR. FRANCO SOTO TO THE SUPREME COURT
And if the socialist party should come to ab-so'vemos?-asks a well-known leader of the republican party.
It was a gently touching scene... Two well-known San Juan Republicans visited a prominent party leader to give him the news of the nomination of their co-religionist Franco Soto for Supreme Court Justice.... Among the two visitors was one who will be a delegate for San Juan at the upcoming Mayagüez assembly. blea of Mayagüez.... The other is an abo-. gado. | Oh, how I rejoice," exclaimed the visitor, giving a kindly smile. -Mr. Franco is an excellent friend of ours. I am glad of his triumph.... He is a loyal American! One of the visitors pointed out: But, frankly, I can't explain this. The THING, it SURPRISES me, to think that ALLA did not take into account the recommendations made by the "Attorney", Mr. Meatre, proposing Messrs. Benedicto, Rivera Zayas and F. Martinez, to fill the vacancy.... -Ha... ha... ha... ha!" laughed the other visitor, adding: "Irremissibly. WE ARE TRIUMPH, friends. I believe that this has been done with a second intention," said, "Mysteriously, the talker...". At the gesture made by the talkative one, the others moved their chairs closer to his, not without first having made sure that NOBODY could hear them... And the same anxious question was engraved on their political faces. -What is it? -I think," exclaimed the other at last, "that ALLA is about antagonizing the "Attorney", to see if he '& will resign his office.... - - A '
...which they will not succeed," said the visitor, who during all that time had played the passive role of oidor, and added, "because Mr. Mestre, who is smart enough, will not aggravate the situation of his party by abandoning such an important position..... With feeling we say it, but: that is the situation.... | There was a general sigh, and a few inquisitorial glances at the door of the room. Nobody! They returned to the charge. 1 The delegate to the Mayagüez assembly, as one who is bleeding and does not feel it, said: -They (the Unionists) have it well deserved. I have seen the fruits of Córdova Dávila's speeches at the Congress. They don't want broth, so three cups. -And the two friends of the Delegate, evoking, perhaps, the coming lunch hour, exclaimed instinctively: -Three cups!...-NONE OF. PACT! The conversation then turned to politics". The delegate to the assembly of Mayagüez, came out against "those conturberies with the socialists".... -No pact, in the next elej clones," he said in a burst of republican patriotism. -That is impossible! In the Assembly, I will oppose any such measure. And if we are absorbed? There was a trembling of legs in the crowd. The inquisitorial glances returned to riddle the door, and... ...late in the afternoon, as the sky began to turn purple and violet, the three friends parted. As they said goodbye, they all put their lips to their lips... (Silence! Indeed... NOBODY had ever. I spooned. I . - PUERTO RICO PROGRESSES A powerful Indemnity Insurance company has just been formed on this Island, the first company of its kind to be incorporated in accordance with the stringent requirements of the new Insurance Law of Puerto Rico. The CARIBEAN CASUALTY COMPANY, which is the name of the new corporation, has a paid-up capital of $200,000.00, and a surplus of $50,000. -The Company has a paid-in capital of $200,000.00, and a surplus of $50,000.00, or a total of $250,000.00 at the start of its business. Mr. Hernand Behn is president of the Company, and among the directors is Mr. Behn.
A "Certiorari" will be filed against Rodriguez Serra * --- ---
A writ of certiorari will be filed today before the Supreme Court by the attorneys of the defendants in the QUO WARRANTO cases heard on Thursday, requesting the High Court to review the resolution of Judge Rodriguez Serra, of the Second Section, maintaining that the Court had jurisdiction to hear the referred QUO WARRANTO cases, followed against the three Commissioners. THE GOVERNOR APPOINTS A REPUBLICAN TO SECRETARY OF THE HUMACAO DISTRICT COURT : The Governor yesterday appointed Mr. Ignacio Torres Barreto to the position of Secretary of the District Court of Humacao. We are informed that this candidate belongs to the Republican Party and has been recommended by the leaders of that party. The outgoing Clerk, Mr. Ramirez, had been officially recommended for that position again by the office of the honorable Attorney General. As for the appointment of Mr. Torres Barreto, we are assured that the high official has not been consulted in the least. THE VALDIVIESO COMPANY AT THE "PUERTO RICO" CINEMA Mr. Lloverás, who does not rest a moment to offer the public excellent attractions and attractions, which make the shows very interesting and entertaining, has contracted the Valdivieso Company, which will make his "dee! Ittnes pr<5¿!Ro. * The "Puerto Rico" will, therefore, be able to continue to count its shows as sell-outs, as the infant! performers will thrill the public. The "Puerto Rico" will include prominent financiers of the country. The Company will insure against all classes of accidents, and especially against all automobile risks, personal policies, bonds, etc. * Behn Bros. Inc. have been appointed General Agents of said company in Puerto Rico, this department being under the personal direction of Mr. Carrion, of the former firm name of Hartzell Carrion, who introduced years ago and developed with extraordinary success accident insurance in Puerto Rico. The organization of the new company leaves nothing to be desired, being on a par with the most progressive insurance companies on the continent. For which we wish it the most flattering success.
J THREAD, ENGLISH AND ITALIAN SUITS a Superior quality, in white, cream and ecru. ELEGANT CUT - EXCELLENT FIT " Wet for 48 hours. "Prices: $12-$14-$15-$16 and $17. ? PROTECT THIS NEW INDUSTRY... With $3.00 extra you can have a custom suit made in 8 hours. "Order them at all the clothing stores. "I sell wholesale and retail. -- Absolute guarantee. X M. SAVINO. MANUFACTURER X San Francisco 52. San Juan. ........ .......
EL CONDADO El Condado is the only place dedicated exclusively to residences in San Juan. Healthy, fresh and with constant ocean breezes. WE SELL houses and lots; houses for cash and lots for cash and installments. * Behn Brothers Inc., Agents Tetuán and Tanca. San Juan.