THE BOTTOM LINE
1 n PAGES. 3 CTS. y
1 n PAGES. 3 CTS 04. Salvador Brau 81. I II Tal. U3X - Box 845
MORNING NEWSPAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ASO V,
Published end distributed under permit (Ke. 801) m Ran Juan. PcrcO Mien, By order of the President. A. February SI. ISIS, at the Port Oflee at Rae Juan. I
tb" Aef of oetobor 8. Xtlf. on 41o at the Poet Oftee at n. Postmaster Genoral. Entered ae second elaas matter, fl nited Sutes of America') under toe Act of march 4. 187"
8AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
SATURDAY, JULY 7, 1923.
NUMBER 1351
4nfeeing that they would not later be utilized by the Department, many professors opted not to take the summer course.
It seems that there is an intention to bring in Continentals to serve as special English teachers.
This week saw the beginning, in Rio . Piedras, the Summer Course for teachers with the purpose of preparing them to work in a higher category during the next school year. It can be assured that the number of teachers who have been enrolled in this summer course has greatly surpassed that of previous years, and we understand that the University has been invaded by a veritable swarm of teachers from all the towns of the island. Of all the courses the one which has offered the greatest difficulties to the applicants has been that of preparing graduate teachers to teach as special English teachers. Apart from the enormous difficulties they had to overcome in order to be admitted to take the course, due to the many requirements that were demanded of them, numerous aspirants, even when admitted, abandoned their studies and decided not to take the course for fear that their efforts and pecuniary sacrifices would result in pecuniary vain We have heard, from the lips of some of these teachers, who returned to their towns, the reasons they had for abandoning their studies. | Among other things, they have told us that the Department of Instru- ction seems to have the intention of bringing in the new teachers.
Among other things, we have been told that the Department of Instruction seems to have the purpose of bringing in continental teachers to serve as special teachers of engineering, and thus avoid, as far as possible, placing natives in that important class of the teaching profession. It is believed that the purpose of the Department, in adopting this measure, is that the special English teachers, being Continental, are better able to teach English with exact pronunciation than the natives. The aforementioned teachers who thus withdrew from the Summer Course, told us that the main basis for the conclusion they had reached, that their services would not be utilized even if they passed their studies, was that the Legislature had left to the Department of Instruction the power to assign salaries to the special teachers, This was a requirement that the Department had needed to fulfill for some time in order to bring teachers from the North, since with the salaries that were previously paid, very few decided to sign contracts on the island, and in very exceptional cases, teachers with regular training were obtained. These teachers complained that the Department, with this policy, closed the way to the sons and daughters of the country who were working as teachers and wished to advance in the profession, and they argued that the Department should, if it wanted to, make the examinations for this class of teachers more rigorous and require them to have the best possible knowledge of English, as well as perfect pronunciation; but it should not take away the opportunity to improve their condition by advancing in the profession. Thus, and with the data pointed out, it is to be expected that during the next school year numerous teachers from the continent will come to the island to work as special English teachers with salaries that will be truly luxurious. INDMSJAPOLIS, July 6 (United Press). - Of the 18 balloons which started flight yesterday, three remain in the air.
Noy Saturday, July 7, 1923 Grao Holiday at the CAPEUA PHARMACY In celebration of the first healthy anniversary of its founding and out of gratitude to the kind public who have made our PHARMACY their favorite, everyone who buys al. go this day is entitled to choose a gift worth 25% of his purchase. s, perfumery, gum effects, etc. DON'T MISS ANY OF OUR GOOD FRIENDS PHARMACY CAPELIA BELENDEZ & GARCIA, INC. 46 Salv. Brau. St. Phone 1237.
Bolivar Pagan -LAWYER- Office: Allen St. Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P. R. FOR RENT in the Marina. Infanta Luisa No. 1. Local own for office with al" macón annex. Will inform: Infanta Luisa No. 8.
Cannot Replace Electric Trolleys The guaguas may find permanent positions as auxiliaries to the electric trolleys, but they have never been able to replace them successfully. It is a fact recognized by transportation experts that as soon as the population and traffic are dense enough to support electric trolleys, the guaguas cannot provide adequate service. As suppliers to the trolley lines, or as an auxiliary service, the guaguas Jian have been successful, but when the electric trolleys have suspended service, the guaguas have never been able to carry all the passengers. San Juan faces a transportation problem. Porto Rico Railway Light & . Power Co. : ; ' MANUÉL V. DOMENECH ; Director LUZ TRMSmUOON fütRZA ...
Puerto Rico will ask fia full share and an equal share in the "na of the prowess and progress of the United States, says Mr. Towner, in the important dteurso of the "Union Club".
Every Puerto Rican," he adds, "I am an American citizen, my future and my future is my own.
From the important speech delivered on July 4th at the "Union Club'' by the Hon. Governor Towner, on the occasion of such a glorious national holiday, we publish, taking them from the translation sent to us yesterday by the Executive Secretariat, the paragraphs relating to the Federal State: The greatest feat of those who raised up the nation-says the Governor-was probably the creation for the first time in history of a successful federal government,-a nation of indestructible states retaining their individual characteristics and local customs unchanged. It is well known that in the early years there was more division than harmony among the colonies. The Dutch of New York and the English of Massachusetts had little in commonThe Quakers of Pennsylvania and the Pilgrims of England never agreed-Even the Puritan Englishman of Massachusetts and the English gentleman of Virginia had marked differences.
But it VUtema by virtue of which these discordants were united,their characteristics didHpIn#, but convifiicndo in those were* cqnfirf for all without local customs. In this way unity was achieved in the . In years this federal system* grew d4"-la' ¿fccfáh and spread with its 4pe, lot thirteen states IuoMmE* Been succeeded by fortyOpIjchb magnificent that ¡■Mefctienúén from ocean, to . Ocean and d "sfrom the Lakes to the G^HrWAB' 4 three million ■ inhabitants fitoseíf'ponveirtido in one hundred and ten and %omos todaythe iqás ti- < i ca, the most ferrous, the most .progressive, the most 'prosperous d* Ilaciones. The y/perpetuity of this sisterta tteñe a* Rice significance. Porfío Rico p He of the United States raciál<?s 1 well .with language, usages and ¡ -*
Kctxunar with pride and assurance: Indera is my flag, its future is \ria is my glory."
inherited customs and fixed their way of thinking and their life are distinctive and ingrained. These can be and must be preserved. It is not necessary to sacrifice them. Indeed, it only adds to the interest of the conjunction of our destinies that Puerto Rico brings to us citizens who are so full of promise and so full of possibilities which delight us, and whose development we are deeply interested in.English language; but with the improvement of your twoftigiie system of instruction you will add to your hereditary language a knowledge of 4*1*English'which is so rapidly becoming a world language that its use will become almost indispensable . You have already adopted the American polynomial system which fits almost i conditions and which makes thought and action politic/ neI (Continued'on page) . tv- ,
We call to the attention of our many customers that an -<? IMITATION of our reputable restorative 77 ' "MALT-NUTRINE" Our stimulating, invigorating and nourishing tonic "MALT-NUTRINE" is prepared by the reputable ANHEUSER-BUSCH, Inc. factory,-St. Louis, Mo. of world renown. Don't accept any substitute - demand the legitimate Anheuser-Busch "MALT-NUTRINE" brand. When it comes to your health and the health of your children, BUY THE BEST! The large-scale preparation of this effective beverage requires exquisite care, and more importantly, its composition demands the finest ingredients. MALT-NUTRINE" is a Nutritive Tonic for Young and Old; it combines the nutritive quality of Barley and Rice and the tonic qualities of Hops and pure filtered Water . MALT-NUTRINE has proven to be one of the greatest liquid tonic foods known in the world. MALT-NUTRINE is a product of * T "*T . ANHEUSER-BUSCH who established a special laboratory under the direction of expert chemists who contributed their profound knowledge and great experience obtained in Europe, using in its preparation the most select malt and the flower of the famous Saazer hops of Boherrtia. . , . SOLE IMPORTERS KORBER & CO. INC.
Interpreting the feelings of those who have ceded strips of land for the widening, the Municipality will oppose the construction of the double track.
The Municipality will cooperate in said work, provided that, it seems, the plan it proposes is adopted.
Expanding on our information of yesterday, to the effect that at the session held by the Municipal Assembly on the evening of the third of the present, Mr. Pietrantoni made a motion to request of the Public Service Commission that in the "hearing" on the matter of the buses and the Trolley Company, to give an opportunity to the Assembly to be heard in said "hearing." In order to oppose the claims of the Trolley Company, we may add today that the points on which the municipality bases its opposition to the double track projected by the Trolley Corporation are the following, according to a document filed some time ago with the Secretary of the Commission for that purpose: "The matter should be dealt with under the following aspects: '1.-Taking into account the conditions stipulated by some of the owners when they ceded the land for the widening of the avenue. 2.-Under the aspect of vehicular traffic on the roadway. In the circular letter addressed by the Mayor to all property owners to cede the land necessary for the widening of Ponce de Leon Avenue, the following paragraph appears: "On behalf of the Municipality of San Juan, I have the honor to request your authorization to run the boundary of the enáSfeche' as well as to occupy the strip of land in question with the new sidewalk". This paragraph has been interpreted by almost all the owners as a request from the Municipality to cede free of charge the strip of land necessary for the widening and the majority of said owners have made the cession of said strip of land, solely and exclusively to be occupied by the sidewalk and not for the benefit of a particular Company even though it is of public service. * The sidewalk on the south side of the Avenue is three meters wide and several lot owners from
Several owners of lots from stop 10 to 21 have ceded the full width of the sidewalk and some more land, being 3.53 cms. the greatest width that has been taken from private individuals in the above mentioned piece. For the reasons stated above it follows that the construction of the double track as projected by the P. R. Ry. Lt. & P. Co. cannot be built by the Municipality because it would occupy the present sidewalk built a strip of 50 cms. wide along the entire length of the Avenue, reducing the South sidewalk from 3 meters to 2.50 meters. VEHICLE TRAFFIC FOR THE ROADWAY The widening of the roadway or running surface of the Avenue is nine meters between the north sidewalk sardinel and the north boundary assigned to the current roadway... This nine meter width of roadway is not sufficient for the excessive vehicular traffic on this Avenue but it has greatly improved traffic facilities and efforts should be made to increase this width and in no way (Continued on page 7)
NOTICE WATER SUPPLY SERVICE As of today, and until further notice, water supply service to San Juan, Puerta de Tierra, Santurce and Río Piedras, will be verified at the following times: IN THE MORNING Rio Piedras and Santurce from 6 to 8 San Juan and Puerta de Tlarra 9 all IN THE AFTERNOON Rio Piedras and Santurce 4 to 6 San Juan and Puerta de Tierra 7 to 9 This measure has been adopted because of the low quantity of water that the Rio Piedras currently has. The Administration is taking this measure so as not to deprive the public of this important service, especially at times when water consumption is absolutely necessary. Everyone is requested to cooperate with the Administration through an economical use of water, so that the restrictions of this interruption of service, cause the least possible discomfort.
PARQUE TODAY SATURDAY PREMIERE Exclusive for Santurce MARY MILES MINTER and JACK HOLT in "LA FE MATERNAL" (ALL SOUL'S EVE) SUNDAY:- Exclusively in Santurce "LAS GANZADAS" (Ducks and Drakes) By Bebé Daniels and Jack Holt CONEY ISLAND EVERYDAY
A MOLER VIDRIO that "EL BOSQUE DE BOLONIA" will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA in San Juan because of the great sales and the great selection.
The general public is hereby notified that the use of water for irrigation of gardens and for any other purpose than domestic, or for those industrial applications where water is absolutely necessary, is strictly prohibited. The police, and every citizen, is in the duty to denounce any infraction to this prohibition of imperious recces! dad. Rafael DIEZ DE ANDINO, Commissioner of Public Service, Police and Prisons. Advt
COMMISSIONER:-Wishes to be placed. Exceptional qualities. Wishes to work with important house or good lines on commission. Address to E. F. Box 949. San Juan.
DOLORES BUEINES DIAZ HAS DIED Her sisters Julia Bueines de Arroyo, Asuncion Bueines de Del Valle and Eugenia Bueines de Paniagua, her son Gerardo Torres, her nephews Antonio, Concepcion, Rafaela, Carmen and Julian Arroyo and Antonia and Ventura Martinez and other deu dos deny you attendance at the burial of the body, which will take place this afternoon at five o'clock, leaving from the . The funeral home, Sol 26, to the cemetery of San Juan, for which they will be eternally grateful. No obituaries will be distributed. No artificial wreaths. i t . San Juan, July 7, 1923.