THE WORLD
1 A PAGES. 3 CTS. [and srarxxsftc
1 n PAGS. 3 CTS. Ih II im. Box "M
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ANNUAL V,
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO.
Published end distributed under permit (Wo. SOI) authorized by the Ar/ of October fl. 1017, on flit at the Post Offleo of flan Juan. Porto Hiro. By order of the President. A. S. Burleson. Postmaster General. Entered aa second class matter, 'ohmary 21. 1918. st ths Post Offleo at flan Jnu, Porto Bice. (Putted State" of America) under tee Art of march 8. 1S7"
SATURDAY, JULY 21, 1923
NUMBER 1363
"In Puerto Rico- says Bolívar Pagánlo I declare it frankly today, it is indispensable at this historic moment the
coalition between the socio-lists and the Republicans is indispensable at this historic moment".
"We have great points of affinity"-he says. And he adds that he is a fervent supporter of this redemptive coalition.
In his manifestations, the young socialist leader enunciates the bases of a Program Project that he will submit to the convention of his party.
The party's political convention is about to be held in the city of Ponce, and having learned that Ledo Bolivar Pagan, one of the most determined champions of socialism on the island, intends to submit to the con- < sideration of that assembly an important draft program, we wanted to gather his impressions in this regard, and he gladly lent himself to it. -On the 25th, he began by dictating to us, the sessions of the Workers' Congress will begin, which will last until the 29th. j ] This day will begin the Political Convention, which will last three or four days.'' i -And you plan to attend these events, we asked him. 1 - "Yes, of course, I am a delegate and I will attend the Political Convention. < - Then you will not attend the Congress. Are you not affiliated with the Free Federation? -Yes, I am "affiliated also to the Free Federation. I am a member of the < Federated Union of San Jiían. Tfaro i will not attend the Labor Congress. I have refused several delegations which have been offered me. Business of my firm prevents me from being absent from San Juan during those days of the Congress. What possibility is there -we ask- of making changes in the direction of these organizations? -I understand that both the Free Federation and the Socialist Party will follow their fundamental economic and political directions. -Do you not think, we insist, that the change of Administration may determine any change in your orientation? -No. Our principles are firm. We are not at the mercy of any message, speech or letter from any governor. Our principles are far above any governor and any island or federal administration. Governors and administrations pass away, they are mere incidents. The principles remain. Woe to the men and the parties that renounce or give up their fundamental principles to accommodate opportunistic demands! The people will sooner or later irremediably turn their backs on them. -Well, but independently of that, what will be the attitude of the socialists towards the present administration?
Those who respect our ideas and recognize our right," he told us, "will be our friends and we will defend them loyally. Those who do not, will be our adversaries, and we will fight them without quarter. It is the same for us to continue fighting with the current as against it. -But in your condition of minority I must be terrible, mustn't I? -As for me, my temperament takes great pleasure and delight in opposition and protest. I like the offensive attitude more than the defensive. It is better to go against the barricade, than to be behind the barricade. A serene, conservative attitude, favored in all cases by the constituted powers and supported by overwhelming majorities, would be the most boring thing in the world to me. -According to efro, do you then like leaAibatc and protest? -T'í, of course. To be restless, to go after the future, to occupy the "vaneadas of tomorrow, accompanied or alone, defending a principle or a program against the whole world if necessary, is most pleasant. This constant
This constant restlessness, this yearning for "something better, is what makes life even tolerable. -And do you hope for a socialist victory? -Of course," he answered enthusiastically, "the socialist victory in Puerto Rico and in the whole world is more certain than the rising of the sun. Nothing will prevent it. It can be said cabalísticataen Ite that "it is written." The" tyrannies, Jos outrages, the Injustices that are daily committed by rulers and i parties qtt" are terrified of that ' victory, only what will ct Ipre cipitate that Inevitable triumph of the people and the working crowds. -Can you break with the rootedness that the ideals of the majority have in the country? i -More deeply rooted in the conscience of men was poetheism and paganism in ancient times. And more firm, more protected by force, was the feudal system of the Middle Ages, and the monarchies of the Bortones in France, of the Romanoffs in Ruria, and of the Hohenzollerns in Germany. -Obeying your terriperament of which you have spoken, what will be, then, your attitude, once the Socialists are in the majority?
-Of course, the world marches on unceasingly. Humanity will never reach its final desideratum. When one horizon is conquered, another immediately opens up before our eyes... When my party is in the majority, immediately within that majority a forward movement will begin; immediately a group will arise that wishes to go further. There will be a minority that will go after a new horizon. In that outpost will be I, and thus my fear will be pleased. (Continued on page 5).
Enameled iron pipe for electrical installations. Vz inch - $6.50 A. Ribot&Co.Jnc. TjSi San Juan, P. R. ■ -
Merchants and Quincalleros When shopping don't forget to stop at the new establishment of' merchandise, located at 87 Alien St., where you will find good merchandise, and situation prices. MOSQUITERS, T-SHIRTS and military UNDERGROUNDS, at burning prices. Goods in bundles of their own for the Quincalleros. Visit or write to:- S. VISCASILLAS : ALLEN 87 SAN JUAN, P- R., TEL. 1159.
Under the wheels of an electric cart perished yesterday an unhappy twelve year old boy.
The time has come to put an end to the vexed matter of Arecibo.
THIS IS WHAT SENATOR HERMINO MIRANDA TOLD US YESTERDAY; HE AFFIRMS THAT THE ONE WILL RECEIVE GREAT DAMAGES.
-Senator Miranda? -Server...,. -What do you think of the sentence that the Supreme Court has just handed down in the Arecibo affair? -I do not know the terms of the Supreme Court's sentence; but whatever they may be, I understand that the time has come to end this Arecibo affair, which, from a simple administrative matter, threatens to become a political matter, which may cause serious damage to the interests of the Union. --Is it true that both groups of the Union are getting ready for a fierce battle of conventions? -That is possible and perfectly regulatory; now, in situations like this, the discreet thing in my opinion is to tend by all possible means that these conventions are held in the greatest harmony to avoid the results of a bitter fight; I for my part know say that I will remain completely neutral in a" fight of this nature, and I will lend my humble assistance, in the electoral contest, to the body that will direct the next campaign. The local fights are always sterile, and their results were nothing other than to give opportunities to the opposing parties, to become by chance the majority.
-What do you think San Millan's position will be now? I believe that this is not the policy of the faction that presented Garcia Abreu as candidate; they always affirmed that their purposes were to make a healthy administrative policy, and if San Millan exercises his functions with all rectitude, it would be unfair and anti-political to create difficulties for him. -Do you think that any of the factions, which in a convention fight would be triumphant and elect the Committee, would endorse your candidacy if you were to run again for senator? -I am not worried about what they would think and do in this regard; I only care about what I must do, which is to give my Party the fullness of my unwavering support and avoid, as far as I can, that frictions arise in its bosom, which would weaken its proven vigor. Moreover, it is too premature to speak now of purposes for.
* Pharaok" A style of true novelty. It has no imitations
Who sells cheaper articles for cabañeros? Vicente Arriví (Only without Company) San Justo 17 , J Advt.
We do not know what to attribute it to, if to the negligence of the drivers and drivers, to the excess of traffic in our capital or to the lack of police organization; but it is certain that daily lamentable misfortunes happen, mainly in the Ponce de Leon Avenue that is the main artery as far as the traffic of the capital is concerned. At four o'clock yesterday afternoon, the future, which only time and circumstances will have to resolve. -Which of the two groups, in your opinion, has a chance to triumph in the conventions? -That is difficult to predict; in politics the unforeseen often presides; and thus we have seen that many who were believed to be on the cusp of immense power, have rolled over at the slightest impulse of opposing ideas.
To MOLER VIDRIO that "EL BOSQUE DE BOLONIA" will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA in San Juan because of how cheaply it sells and how well stocked it is. Advt.
The accident occurred at the origin of a collision between the electric cart and a truck, having resulted in addition, a man with a fractured leg
An immense crowd witnessing the effects of the tremendous collision that occurred yesterday afternoon between a truck and one of the electric cars. -2. The corpse of the unhappy boy Pedro Ortiz, victim <of the accident.
A collision occurred between one of the electric cars and a cargo truck, which resulted in the death of a boy about 12 years of age, resulting, in addition, another person with a completely fractured leg. THE SITE OF THE EVENT There is on Ponce de Leon Avenue, at the exit of this capital towards Santurce, and between the buildings of the Casino of Puerto Rico and the Young Christians Association, a level crossing for the electric cars, which once they cross the road, go around the building occupied today by the Workers' Compensation Commission until they come out onto the Paseo de Covadonga. All along this route, there is a considerable slope and it can (Continued on page 15)
THE FAVORITE We have just received the latest model created by Fashion for this season. The Egyptian Sandal, in white suede with blue, green and champagne inserts, is the most popular shoe in the United States. With a Spanish heel, it is of unsurpassed elegance and satisfies the most demanding tastes. Order this and other novelties at "LA FAVORITA" San Justo 31 Telf. 390 José Lema & Co. San Juan, P. R.
Bolívar Pagán -LAWYER- Office: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P. R,
A Commission of Legislators, chaired by the Presidents of the Senate and the House of Representatives and including Governor Towner, will travel to Washington, D.C., to request reforms to our organic act.
This resolution of an urgent nature was adopted last night
Yesterday 8 o'clock at six o'clock was presented to the Senate for its approval the S. O. R. 2, of Mr. Barceló, on the day of the Commission to go to Washington with the purpose of working for the reform of the Organic Act of Puerto Rico, as well as for everything related to the economic, political and social problem of this Island. In the 'Whereas of said resolution' it is declared that the time has come for a unanimous voice to be raised in Puerto Rico to request from the Congress of the United States of America a declaration of its intentions regarding the definitive regime of our island. That it is opportune that, the Legislature of Puerto Rico, composed of the representatives of the different opinions into which the island is divided, should meet in session and formulate such a petition, and establish, through a Commission of its own, before Congress and before the President of the Nation, all the demands that the present situation requires, both in the political, economic and social order. The said resolution also refers to the "I heche "gag of Puerto Rico. The Hon. Horace M. Town er. has publicly expressed his favorable opinion of the foregoing proposition as well as his concurrence and his willingness to lend his full support to a Commission so constituted. I It is authorized in said resolution that the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, Hon. Felix Cordova Davila, in his capacity as a member of the Congress of the United States and as Representative of the people of Puerto Rico, shall lend his assistance to the work of the Commission. The Commission which shall go to Washington shall be composed of the President of the Senate and four members he shall designate from this Body, and by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and three members he shall designate from said Body. The Commission shall have the power to manage and work for the reforms to our Charter. The three political parties presently seated in the Legislature shall be represented on the Commission. The Commission shall request Mr. Town . er to serve on the Commission as an ex-officio member.  M. and will end at 1 P. M. for the entire territory served by the Aqueduct. This measure is taken in view of the prolongation of the drought, and all neighbors are begged not to leave their pens open, and especially the neighbors of Santurce to suppress the irrigation of gardens, so that the neighbors of San Juan may receive the water they need for essential uses; Rafael DIEZ DE ANDINO, Commissioner Public Service, Police and Prisons. Advt. BOMBILLAS , /RIVERO CHAVESXl/ ■ W &COe W Braa 75 San Juan W
(b) that the Legislature be granted the power to legislate without. restrictions on its local affairs; (c) that the People of hb Island elect, by the vote of its qualified electors, its Governor; (d) that all appointments now made by the President d" the United States with the approval of the Federal Senate, be hereafter made by the Governor of Puerto Rico with the advice and consent of the Insular Senate; (e) That the Island be granted the power to legislate on its economic problems, regulating the acquisition of lands, imposing local or internal revenue taxes to be collected for the benefit of the Treasury of the Island, and other measures not in conflict with others of a national character; (f) That all such measures of a national character as tend to benefit education, agriculture, and other sources of the knowledge or wealth of the Island, be extended to Puerto Rico in the same proportion as they are extended to all the States of the American Union. | j Mr. Iglesias stated that he 'tanNÉMkrMtfnrtár ■ " Mr. Cuevas said that it should be increased to $50,000. Martínez Nadal agreed. | Mr. Iglesias said that the . Mr. Iglesias stated that the Dbmission could take advantage of Mr. Harding's visit to inform him of the steps that the Legislature was going to take so that he would already be on the record and when he sent his Message to Congress, he would include the reforms for Puerto Rico. Mr. Cuevas interrupted Iglesias to tell him that he had thought that the Commission should go to Washington a few weeks before the President sent his Message. The President of the Senate appointed the gentlemen of the Republican - and Socialist minorities and the Unionists Hernández Xópez, Cuevas Zequeira and Jordán, to study the referred Resolu1on or make the pertinent amendments to give an account in last night's session, during the discussion of the ■ same. - W FRANCE CONSIDERS INA. (Cable ■ The new proposals of Germany that France and Belgium should withdraw the occupying armies and return all captured paper money and material to Germany are here considered unacceptable. In the note which Germany will submit, according to reports received, all Teutonic employees who have been expelled will take up their posts again. PARK _ TODAY SATURDAY PREMIERE Exclusively in Santurce MARION DAVIE in : a VALOR DELA BELLEZA (Beauty's Worth) BERGMAN and McKENNA * American Dancers and Singers 9 Luneta 30c. B Sunday:-Exclusively in Santurce , ALICE LAKE and CULLIN LANDÍS LA PERFIDA MISS REVELL l (The Infamous Miss Revell) BERGMAN AND McKENNA Luneta 25c. Matinee. Art Acord in "Buffalo Bill" k BERGMAN and McKENNA I Children 10c Adults 20c. MONDARE WATERS / "CERECEDO HNOS. * 00,"