EL.WNDO
in PAGES. 3 CTS. I II M B- S4.M I II Du Ml Ui . "T.M
1 A PAGS. 3 CTS. I V1 Bn" AL, I r<L 1>3a * *** 141
MARANA DAILY,
EXCEPT ON SUNDAYS
YEAR V. SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
In the matter of Bernabe Sabalier against Mr. Santiago Iglesias and "Banco de San Jaan", the parties reached a settlement to cease and desist.
The Bank is obligated to maintain the plaintiff's assets untouched until the lawsuit is completely terminated.
DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO Bernabé Sabalier, Plaintiff V8. Santiago Iglesias and the Bank of San Juan. Defendants. Civil No. 45. Concerning: Nullity and nonexistence of a contract of sale and purchase (In the incident on Judicial Administration).) ORDER WHEREAS:- both parties, de- ¡ mandant and defendant, El Banco I de San Juan, through their respective attorneys, have appeared before this Court by the stipulated motion on record, requesting by mutual consent: First:- That the receivership, which was decreed by this Court in May of this year at the request of the plaintiff, be ceased and terminated, giving a prudential period of time to the receiver Constantino Fer- < nández, to deliver and render detailed accounts of the receivership that is the object of the receivership. Second: - That once the accounts rendered by the aforementioned administrator have been submitted and approved, the cancellation of the bond provided by him is ordered. Third: - That the defendant "El Banco de San Juan" will file with these proceedings a duly sworn statement of the situation of the "Melilla" property, including said statement of the real and true size of the property, determining in turn those portions that it acquired from persons other than Mr. Sabalier; of the portions that it acquired from persons other than Mr. Sabalier; of the portions that it acquired from Mr. Sabalier; of the portions that it acquired from Mr. Sabalier; and of the portions that it acquired from Mr. Sabalier. Sabalier; of the portions that are in the possession of persons other than the defendant Banco de San Juan; of the voluntary segregations verified by the aforementioned Bank after the annotation of the claim in the Property Registry, indicating the names of the acquiring persons and, in turn, an exact determination of the land that is currently owned by the Bank and that has not been sold, assigned or encumbered in any way whatsoever. Fourth: - That the Eanco de San Juan, undertakes and commits itself to maintain the state of the property as it appears from said affidavit which is attached to these proceedings, during the processing of the lawsuit and until its complete termination, taking care and preserving the property in the same conditions ¡ ULTIMA HOPA , Of the 50 pianos and autopianos that it offered to sell in 60 days, at prices espedalee the accredited factory "Kohler * Campbell", through its agent Mr.. T. Aguilar, of San Juan, 32 instruments were sold in September. There are only 18 left for October. Order your plan this week and you will save nearly one hundred dollars in the purchase of a Kohler & Campbell, whose prestige dates back 23 years, during which time Mr. Aguilar has sold more than two thousand instruments to the complete satisfaction of their holders. Advt. Dr. S. M. Halpy OSTEOPATA.
. in which he finds himself today, without varying or altering it in any way and without segregating, enagen?r or encumbering the pressure of the real estate presently in his possession from the par.e of the property acquired directly from Mr. Sabalier; and Fifth: - That the Bank of San Juan undertakes to post a sufficient bond in the amount of TWELVE THOUSAND DOLLARS in favor of the plaintiff Bernabé Sabalier to guarantee his faithful compliance with the clauses of the above stipulation and to indemnify him for any damages that may be caused to him; that likewise, the Bank of San Juan is obligated to satisfy all the expenses arising from the payment of the contributions and for other concepts that arise during the processing of the lawsuit and while in possession of the property, once the administration is lifted. WHEREAS:-The defendant Ban. co de San Juan filed the bond of TWELVE THOUSAND DOLLARS which by virtue of the stipulation he undertook to provide and likewise filed the sworn statement of the condition of the property which he undertook to furnish in accordance with the third fact of the stipulated motion, a copy of which appears to have been delivered to the plaintiff's attorney. WHEREFORE:-This Court declares and orders that on this day of today the receivership decreed by this Court over U estate "Melilla" claimed by Bernabé Sabalier that the receiver Constantino Fernández, shall cease in turn from the date of this order as such, having within fifteen days to render a detailed account, and exact account of all of his actions and operations carried out in connection with his administration, as well as of his emoluments as administrator during the period of his office, of which he will deliver a copy to the attorneys of the parties so that they may appear to challenge it within ten additional days from the date on which it is not- : tified with the delivery of the aforementioned copy, and failing to do so, the Court will consider the administrator's actions good and sufficient and will order ■ the cahcelation of the bond provided by him that the Bank of San Juan will again take charge of the administration, custody and conservation of the estate, paying the contributions and all the necessary expenses for the conservation of the property, refraining from carrying out operations that encumber, assign or transfer in any way the portions of land that the Bank owns, acquired directly from Mr. Sabalier and that have not been sold, assigned, encumbered or in any way alienated prior to the date of PARQUE: TODAY SATURDAY TODAY Special exclusively in Santurce i VIOLA DANA and JOHN BOWERS in THE ROMANTIC AGE (Crinoline and Romance) | Tomorrow Sunday MADAME PAVO REAL (Madame Peacock) with MDE. NAZIMOVA ' Matinée- PERILS OF THE YUKON A young lady who speaks English and Spanish or French, French and Spanish is requested. Apply Tea| tro Strand, Miramar, Santurce.
XX ADATE PERMANENT SERVICE UrWAuE GARAGE - GASOLINE - BRANDI WASHING p p p on r ce
Pubbihad and diatributed andar panait (No. Wl) authorized by the Aet of oetebar fl. 1017. on file at tba Peat Office at San Jnan. Peno Biao, By order of the Preeideat, A 8. Burleson, Pcatmaatar General. Bntered aa leeond elaaa natter, fabmary 21. 1010, at the Poat Office at Ban Juan. Porto Biro. (United Rtatoa of Amerieal andar toe Aet of anarch 0. 1870 : - ■ " ' i- . ...."-i!. -e.
I Venezuelan oil is coming i to make frank competition to American products on the island.
In Puerta de Tierra, two gigantic tanks are being built by the "Asiatic Petroleum Co." i Near the factory and headquarters of the Porto Rican American Tobacco Co., the Asiatic Petroleum Company is building two gigantic tanks, which, when completed, will hold several thousand gallons of Venezuelan oil, which will compete with American products on the island. One of these tanks measures 11-1 feet in diameter by 30 feet high, and has a capacity of 55,000 barrels of oil. It will be built above ground, instead of being buried in the earth, as the oil it will hold is of the ordinary kind, offering no danger. The other will be 30 feet high by 30 feet in diameter. 1 Auctions have already been prepared for the construction of these tanks, which, we understand, are already in the hands of] Mr. Eduar. do Ciorgetti, agent in Puerto Rico for the Asiatic Petroleum Co. i Although it is not yet known what is being built, it is not yet known what is to be done. Dlíimi |
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 1923
- Yesterday the architect, Mr. Roldán, and the contractor, Mr. Hatch, officially handed over the building in which the offices of the
It was a fraternal and intimate party in which reigned a spirit of cordiality and harmony.
Yesterday afternoon at 4:00 p.m., on the terrace of our new building, there was an event that has left a lasting impression on the minds of all those who attended. The intimate party, due to the prematurity with which it was organized, was, as expected, sjtacilla but fraternal and affectionate thanks to the sincerity and harmony that reigned among all the guests, who were all from our house. The event was attended by the Hon. Don José Conrado Hernández, former president of the Supreme Court and one of our own, the President of the Corporation Don Romualdo Peal, Don Cristóbal Fea! Don Matías Brea! the architect. Don Francisco F.Jpán the Contractor,
Next November the remains of the deputies to the Cortes of 1812 will be transferred to the State Pantheon, in Cadiz. Among them are those of our compatriot Don Rí-món Pcwer and the Legislature has been invited to send a representation to the ceremony i I !
1 From Spain we have received the news that on the 28th of November of this year there will take place, with all solemnity, the transfer of the remains of the Deputies to the Cortes of 1812, to the pantheon that the Spanish State has built in the Church of San Felipe in Cadiz. | Among the Deputies who attended those historic Cortes were four of American origin, and our illustrious fellow countryman Don Carne Po- . wer was its vice president and one of the members who most distinguished themselves in those sessions unequaled so far by any Spanish Cortes in terms of patriotism and high mindedness. I It has been disposed that they surrender . - ... in which the judicial administrator took charge of the possession and custody of the property, to which effect the Court further orders that the judicial administrator, Mr. Constantino Fernández, the Bank of San Juan and the plaintiff Mr. Sabalier, all through their respective attorneys, be notified by the Clerk of what has been ordered and resolved in this case by this Court, so that thus officially notified, they may proceed to comply with the order of this Court in the form and manner that concerns each one of them. Dated at San Juan, P. R., September 27, 1923. (Signed) Charles E. Foot. District Judge. - I certify:- i Eduardo Pérez Casalduc, - Clerk of the Court. The undersigned Clerk certifies: I -that the foregoing is a true and exact copy of the order issued by the Cor- í te in the present case and at the request of I don Bartolomé Paniagua in representation of the BANCO DE SAN JUAN, i book the present at San Juan, P. E. today the 27th day of September, 1923. E. PEREZ CASALDUC. Clerk of the Court. | Tor E. Gelpí, Deputy Clerk. I-
to the r<-tos lie those distinguished va- j ¡roñes the m.i> high he,ñores, that is to say | í le.- <;<- captain R.-neraí <on command in I | plaza. According to our reports, these acts were attended by official representatives from >. Peru and X enezuela, countries of origin of three of these great deputies, and we consider it necessary and a high honor for Puerto Rico to be officially represented there, as we know that the Loyal Hispanic-American Academy of Sciences and Arts, organizer of this tribute, has invited the Legislature of Puerto Rico to designate the representation of our island. As soon as we had the above reports in our possession we went to meet the Presidents of both Houses, but it was impossible to locate them, and our object was to ask them if they had received the invitation mentioned. In any case, we know that during the last sessions of the Legislature, no invitation in this respect was received, and that the only similar resolution passed was that Puerto Rico should attend the meeting of the Legislature. Puerto Rico to attend the Seville Exposition of 1925. We believe that the tributes that are to be paid to those illustrious deputies will have a great impact not only in Spain, but also in all of Hispanic America, and since one of our most distinguished patriots is participating in this tribute, it would be a great pity if our island were to be left without a presentation at the ceremony that is planned. Of course, the Legislature being in recess, it would be impossible to adopt any official agreement that would enable the country to fulfill what is almost a debt it has contracted with its illusive son; but we understand that the Governor of Puerto Rico and the Presidents of both Houses may very well designate a representative to these acts and it would be a great pity if the Governor and the President of the Legislature could be present at the ceremony, and it would be a great pity if they could be present at the ceremony.
III TIMA HARA. D0S sensational base-ball challenges ULI Ifflrl nUíln ... Sunday, September 30 in Cayey - P. R. SPORTS vs. RIBOSCH 9.45 A. M. 3.00 P. M. THE RIDERS COME TO CAYEY TO CAYEY TO CAYEY TO CAYEY
Mr. F B. Hatch, Don Sergio Romanacce. director of EL MUNDO, Mr. , Mark R Dull, Don Eduardo Escalona, . Don Mario Bran, Don A. Lopez Nns- ¡ sa, Don Luis Gomez. Mr. Joseph Be1 gouska. Mr. Andrew Law, Don Rafael Sanabria, Don Carlos N. Carreras, Don Luis O'Neill de Milán, Don Antonio . Arias and our editors, Messrs. Pietri, López Batista, Ramos and Vargas. After the Contractor, Mr. Hatch, handed over the keys to the building, our Editor, Mr. Vargas, read a letter from the President of the Corporation, Mr. Romualdo Real, in which he expressed the gratitude and congratulations of all the directors for Mr. Eoldán's success in designing the plans for the building and also to Mr. Hatch for the enthusiasm he put into the project. Hatch for the enthusiasm he put into the construction of the building. The following is one of the paragraphs of the letter delivered to Mr. Roldán: "For you, Mr. Roldán, the Company of "Puero Eico Ilustrado, Inc." will always have a memory of perennial kindness for the perfection and the success you put into the plans of this building, and for the inspiring grace that presides over it, a synthesis of the subtlety and finesse of your artistic temperament. You were the architect who conceived and created a building, but you were also the man who, in love with his own work, felt in his innermost self the satisfaction of seeing it take shape in space, by means of the prodigy of in 1 engineering, honored by the distinctions and gallantries required by the aesthetics of San Juan" "We, Mr. Roldán," he continued, "are the ones who, in the last years of our history, have been able to create a building that is worthy of being a part of the urban complex of San Juan. Roldán," the letter continued, "we are satisfied with your excellent work. This building will not mean only a robust and energetic body, without a slight amab'e. nuance that invites to well-being. We already know that it will be a little out of tune with the same landscape, eternally the same, that the eyes discover in the urban ensemble. Those who truly love the progress of the cities, do not want only sturdy and majestic buildings, but also a bit of joy and charm. To endow objects and things with pleasant expressions should be the ¡ ideal of the creators of towns, among which artists are the soul (Continued on page 2). j Water and Bacteria When the water of our aqueduct was subjected to a scientific analysis, it was found to contain 642 bacteria per cubic centimeter, which represents a danger to consumers. This dangerous problem has been solved with the use of the FAMOUS TROPICAL FRIDGE WITH FILTER that eliminates f'2 percent of these bacteria, being therefore PURE WATER after passing through the TROPICAL FRIDGE. DO YOU WANT TO AVOID diseases in your home? Then buy the TROPICAL cooler with filter today. It's an elegant piece of furniture. General agents for Puerto Rico : DIEGO AGÜEROS & CO. San Juan, P. R. Advt.
\ NUMBER 1422
The well-known attorney Mr. E. B. Wilcox will embark on the 10th for Boston to uphold the right of municipalities to tax sugars.
"I am going to prove to the Boston Circuit Court that it has no jurisdiction in this matter," says Mr. Wilcox.
I Prominent Continental lawyer Mr. E E Wilcox will embark on the 10th i for Boston, in whose Circuit Court he will defend the decision of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico in the case of the Successors of J Fautauzzi vs. Asam blea. Municipal de Arroyo, with respect to certain assessments imposed by said Assembly amounting to the sum of $30,000, on each quintal of sugar a'la for the year 1921. This case will be heard in said Court on the 16th of the present, and since it involves a matter of great importance both for the sugar interests of the island and for the Municipalities of Puerto Rico, we thought it appropriate to gather some impressions of Dr. WPcox, who in the name of Ledo C. Dominguez Rubio of Guayama, is the defense attorney for the defendant, who will go to Boston to support the decision in favor of the Municipality of Arroyo given by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico. Supreme Court of Puerto Ru-o "This case," said Ledo. Wilcox-"has been decided by the District Court of Guayama and in the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico in favor of the right or power of the Municipality of Arroyo and of all municipalities to impose a contnbuc ón on the man:if.ictum of azac'r within its jurisdiction. The case has been referred to the Boston Circuit Court and since it is a very lively question of untouchability to sugar interests, it is said that the Supreme Court ruling will be opposed by the best legal talent the Sugar Trust possesses. Not only," continued Mr. Wilcox, "is involved in the matter the duty owed to the various municipalities which have imposed the assessments or assessments to be levied in the future, but also the right of all municipalities to impose similar assessments. Wilcox, "kill'e e! ga'lo in the hands" according to the vulgar expression, to the plaintiffs, as it is his intention to prove before the Circuit Court of Boston the want of jurisdiction of that Court in purely local questions, and in which the Se verilr!) armchairs uhA Koken "Goncres!; Hydraulics-" nu- \ o--a fanrica prices kokex barbee SUPPLY IO. KOKEN 37 ?an , ' <, o Yes - BARBERS (HMRS Box !.>i ; . AR£ 1BE VERY B E5T <?nn Juan, P. R.
decision of a lower Court must i considered as final In this case, in which a question of law is also involved, according to what Mr. Wilcox told us, a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States contrary to the decision given by the Insular Supreme Court would imply an outright denial of the rights granted to Puerto Rico and by Municipal law, to the various municipalities of the island, to levy taxes within their jurisdiction. The Ledo Wi'.eox. bases its opinion on numerous cases in which the United States Supreme Court has decided that the decision of the highest court of a state is final in those cases in which it interprets the statutes of that state without violating or touching in any way the Federal const:tution, or in those cases in which it deals with taxes imposed in accordance with the laws of the state. In this connection Mr. Wilcox told us: "We do not rest absolutely upon these decisions, however, because of our uncertainty as to the view of the Court of Appeals with respect to the application of such decisions to Puerto Rico Supreme Court cases. " The Ledo. Wilcox, in his brilliant allo- . cat upholds the right of the Municipalities to impose taxes in accordance with the laws of the country of such Municipalities, and further upholds the power of the Insular Supreme Court to decide purely local questions and (Continued on 5th page.) NOTICE To all owners of automobiles DesHe today you will not have to dirty your traies by changing tires. We provide 24 hours service during the day on the highway or anywhere necessary, up to Rio Piedras. Your empty tire will be changed and your tube fixed for $1.00. New tires or tubes delivered at current prices and mounted free of charge. Phone 898 Santurce COCHRAN'S TIRE SERVICE STATION Stop 15 Santurce Ask for information regarding our Contract plan.
| I WAIT FOR THE ARRIVAL OF THE "TIGER" i Danish Portland Cement Superior Quality Guaranteed I Quality-Price -Service ROLAN, TEJEDOR & DE HOSTOS s SAN JUAN, P. R.
I Doña leonor Alonso Widow of Quigley I H H HAS DIED £ H Her sons Oscar, Herminio, Federico and J. M. Quigley, her H ■ daughter Guadalupe, and other relatives, on informing you of so H M unfortunate news, beg to attend the burial of the body act which ■ will take place today at four o'clock in the afternoon at Rio Grande, H 9 for which act they will be eternally grateful to her. ■ M No obituary will be distributed. ■