ELM1NDO
- 14 Pgs. 3 Civs. ~ Semester _ _ _ $4.00 . One Year $7.50
- 14 Págs. 3 Ctvs. - Offices: Salvador Brau 8T T< 1222-P. O, Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR V.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Pnbliihed and ¿¡"tributad under permit (No. Sol) "uthorired by the o( octo b w ", 1917. on filo at th. Poit Offlee of Ran Rico, By order of thé President, A S. par leton, Postmaster General. Entered aa second elate matter, febrnary 2t, 1919. at the Poet Gfdee at Saa Juan, Porto- Rico, (United Stataa of America) under the Act of march 8, 187¿ ¿ ¿
SATURDAY, JUNE 2, 1923.
NUMBER 1322
Mr. Lippitt, former Commissioner of Health, will be a supporter of P. R. independence, if circumstances require it.
It is uncertain whether he plans to attend the Republican Party assembly.
The news that Dr. Lippitt, ex-Secretary of Health of Puerto Rico, was planning to attend the next assembly of the Republican Party, given to a reporter of ours by Mr. Jose Alegria, turned out to be uncertain, in spite of the appearances of truth that at first appeared to be true. A companion of ours visited Dr. Lippitt yesterday, at his office on Christ Street, and the former Commissioner, im- 1 puqpt of the reporter's wishes denied that he harbored any such intentions, although it was true that he now felt inclined toward the politics of the said collectivity. -And before? we asked him. -Before, he said, my sympathies were with the Unionists to the extent that my best friends were Mr. Parcelo, Mr. Cordova, (Dr. Cox cited several other names of prominent Union leaders.) Then, upon our questions, he told us that his attitude toward the Unionists was due to their having attacked the United States government, by coming out against the governor of Mass. Mr. Cox, when the said official visited the island, and on the occasion when Messrs. Huyke and del Toro were whistled at by Unionist elements, on the occasion of their pro-American speeches. MB. LIPPITT, INDEPENDENTIST Elaborating further on the same subject, Dr. Lippitt expressed that he had advocated and advocated always because Pn?r- .......... - BRUSSELS, May 31. (French newspaper) - The police have arrested numerous strikers in Liège and Antwerp for being the principal promoters of the strike movement which has forced the closure of numerous factories owing to the shortage of coal. Fifteen directors have been charged , with forming an association contrary to i fes laws of the State. TvisT ■ J. J. ORTIZ ALIBRAN Advises his clients and friends that he has changed his office to No. 15 San Justo St., altos de Zalduondo Mier A Co. where he is, as always, at the service of all. Bolivar Pagan -LAWYER- Office: Calle Allen Esq, Cruz. P- O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P. R.
Mr. Lippitt said that if ever the American Congress should declare that our country could not be admitted as an Esthdo into the Union, then he would become a strong advocate of its absolute independence, for it has never been the purpose of the United States to perpetuate the colony in Puerto Rico. Mr. Lippitt enlarged on other considerations, and as we parted he repeated that his attendance at the Republican Assembly was uncertain. The Socialist Representative, Mr. Fiz, yesterday, in the House, made an important petition I At ten o'clock yesterday morning the House of Representatives was called to order. The minutes of the previous session were adopted without being read, and several petitions and memorials were read. The member of the Socialist minority, Mr. Fiz, requested that through the Chairman, the Attorney General be asked to deliver a letter that was said to have been sent by someone to the Department of Justice, in terms that implied serious accusations against him (Mr. Fiz) and that he had learned of this from a local newspaper. Mr. Lastra asked for the floor to express that he found Mr. Fiz's current attitude incongruent, since when the vote of confidence in the Finance Committee was discussed in the House a few days ago, Mr. Fiz had voted against it, alleging that he did so because the House should not be interested in what the newspapers said. Listening to Mr. Lastra, Mr. Fiz explained his attitude then and now to show that the case was not the same and at the same time to indicate to the House the interest for the House to know the truth of the existence of that letter and thus have an opportunity to defend himself or for the House to know them so that it could proceed against him, if there were cause to do so. Mr. Fiz stated that what he did not want was for this to remain in the shadows and for the nature of the charges, which could be false, to be revealed. According to the statements made by Mr. Fiz, he believes that the charges to which the letter to the Attorney General refers refer to (Continued on page 6) RENTED: Altos de la casa No. 71, on Alien Street. Good premises for, dwelling or office. Will inform: phone 1230.
KISS ?
Amateurs a i a Radiotelephony!!!!! THE MANUFACTURERS' AGENCY CO. Ramirez de Arellano Building -Terraplén I offered them Radio sets with a range of 25 miles - 200 miles - 2,000 Miles at reduced prices. Used apparatus for the U.S. Navy. Phone No. 1390 San Juan, or write to P.O. Box 485, San Juan. We also sell all kinds of radiotelephone parts for those who wish to make their own. These parts are sold at the lowest prices on the market.
The Attorney General requests the construction of a building for the exclusive use of the Department of Justice.
MR. COATS RAISES THE QUESTION OF THE JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS.
The Attorney General, Mr. Herbert Coats, addressed yesterday to the President of the Senate the following report: Hon. President of the Senate of P. R. San Juan, P. B. Sir: A communication was received in this Department today from the Clerk of the First District Court of San Juan, transmitting a copy of the report rendered by the Grand Jury of said court on the 25th of May, in which report are the following paragraphs: "The conditions in which the Honorable Court is working are extremely poor, since it occupies a part of a building which is not the property of the People of Puerto Rico and which it shares only by tolerance with the District Court of the Second Judicial District of San Juan, with the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico and with offices of the National Army. "This building is very old and lacks conditions to be occupied by a Court. There are no amenities of any kind and the files are in closets that do not offer security. The Grand Jury has been able to act using sometimes the file room of the Clerk's Office, other times, the Jn fados room of the Second District Court, other times, the First District Court Room and most of the times it has worked in relative comfort, by the courtesy of the Hon. Judge of this Court, who has given up his own chambers for the case.
He has also been a lime for the Clerk's Office of the Court. Permit me at the same time to point out to you that the building in which the Courts of San Juan are located, as well as the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, is not the property of the People of Puerto Rico, and on the contrary belongs to the Government of the United States, the said courts being, therefore, located there by permission or acquiescence of the War Department. You will doubtless have been struck by the publicity given at a recent date to the assassination-fco of (Continued on ta fia, page).
"This Grand Jury desires that the attention of the Legislature be called to this state of affairs - and to the fact that while millions have been expended in the construction of schools and other island and municipal works the three most important Courts of the island are allowed to dispense justice under such conditions as are disdainful of our culture and detract from their prestige, dignity and decorum. "This Grand Jury is of the opinion that this evil should cease as soon as possible and that the construction of a modern building, of proper conditions to be destined for the District Courts of San Juan and for the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, should be ordered, and recommends that the attention of the Legislative Assembly, the Governor of Puerto Rico and the Attorney General be called to the foregoing manifestations.*In compliance, therefore, with the indications made by the Grand Jury, which are copied above, I take the liberty of calling the attention of that legislative body to the situation described above, which I know to be true and correct.
I also understand that the building where the insular courts of San Juan are located is completely inadequate for the purpose for which it is destined and that it is of great urgency that a spacious, comfortable and clean building be provided that meets the necessary conditions as well as the special conditions that must be met by any building where courts of law are to be located.where courts of justice are to be located, such as: premises of an appearance that commands respect for the government that said Court represents, where oral trials are held; premises for the Judge's study room; premises for the work of the petit jury in its deliberations; premises for meetings of the Grand Jury; as well as a room for the grand jury; as well as a room for the grand jury's deliberations; and a room for the grand jury's deliberations.
NOTICE MUNICIPALITY OF BAN JU¿N WATER SUPPLY SERVICE - As of today, and until further notice, the water supply service to San Juan, Puerta de Tierra, Santurce and Río Piedras, will be verified in the following hours: IN THE MORNING Rio Piedras and Santurce from 6 to 8 San Juan and Puerta de Tierra 9 to 11 IN THE AFTERNOON Rio Piedras and Santurce from 4 to 6 San Juan and Puerta de Tierra 7 to 9 This measure has been adopted due to the low amount of water that the Rio Piedras currently has. The Administration is taking measures so as not to deprive the public of this important service, especially in times when the consumption of water is strictly necessary. All are requested to cooperate with the Administration by economical use of water so that the restrictions of this interruption of service may cause the least possible inconvenience. The general public is hereby notified that the use of water for garden irrigation and for any purpose other than domestic or industrial applications where water is absolutely necessary is strictly prohibited. The police, and every citizen, has the duty to denounce any infringement of this prohibition of imperious necessity. Rafael DIEZ DE ANDINO, Commissioner of Public Service Police and Prisons. Advt.
The top leadership of the Republican Party seems to be no stranger to the political movement initiated in Ponce.
With the attitude of the manifesto published by the Southern Republicans, about a possible understanding with the Union, it is believed that the incognito of several leading elements of said collectivity, that until the last minute they were ignoring what their true feelings on the matter would be, has been diaphanized. This circumstance, according to the public commentary, seems to be due to the completely antagonistic ipoBitions in which the different elements that militate in the Party are placed, with respect to the announced understanding. Many prominent Republicans, whose position has already been clearly defined in these days, a position which the reactionary group discounted, with the cry of "with the Union, nothing,'' are waiting in expectation, {because they understand that with the? statements they have already made in this same newspaper, they have responded amply to the idea which in their opinion should inspire the Republican Party in the future. We are right in saying that the attitude of these elements has been the object of the warmest sanction on the part of the Republican electorate, since judging by what the leader Mr. Gonzalez Mena told us about the matter, he has received many letters and telegrams of congratulations from all parts of the island. Now, we have been assured that the high Direction of the Republican Party is not completely alien to the purposes of an entente between both collectivities, meaning in support of the assertion, that Mr. José Rosario Gelpí, one of the signers of the document of Ponce, is an intímn to President Tons soto, whom he has in a high concept, as a man of the Party and to whom he consults everything, politically speaking before adopting any attitude. Something similar is also said of Ledo. R. V. Perez Marchand, who, in addition, is a member of the notarial firm of the Republican President, Ledo, Tons and Soto. As for the other signatories it is reported that they are all very ■ well known and consistent Republicans. FORMER GOVERNOR REILY LAWS SUIT AGAINST A KANSAS COMPANY DEMANDING FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS IN COMPENSATION CLAIMING THAT IN AN ACCIDENT HE WAS BROKEN IN 6 OF HIS COSTABLES From a leading U.S. newspaper we gather the following information: "Mont Reily has sued the Yellow Cab and Baggage Comnany of Ktmsas City for $50,000 in damages alleging that while riding in a "taxi cab" belonging to the company, he received injuries in a collision between the "cab" and another vehicle. "Mont Reily alleges that in the collision, which occurred between Mill Creek Parkway and Lawrence Avenue, he suffered six broken ribs; his back and stomach muscles were dislocated, causing him a severe nervous breakdown and so impairing his health that it was impossible for him to attend to his official duties. Mont Reily was governor of Puerto Rico at the time of the accident alleged in his lawsuit. His attorney is U.S. Attorney C. C. Madison." SOFOCATING HEAT Do you want to spend the summer as if you lived in Aibonito? Then stay at the Ritzy Hotel, Advt,
CLUB DEPORTIVO Cayey, P. R. B ase Balhen the splendid VVVT -_ A League of Cayey tomorrow Sunday 3 HUMACAO vs. PONCE x jumo at9,3 ° am - y2 - 30 Due to the triumph obtained by the ninth of Humacao on PORTO RICO SPORTS.- Ponce prepares formidably to snatch the championship of Base Ball to Huma- - . Cayey on Sunday, June 3.
The president of the San Juan Municipal Assembly, Mr. Ramírez Santibañez, is of the opinion that the municipalities should be given the broadest autonomy.
The mayors should have-the same attributions that the Governor has.
El Ledo. Ramirez Santibañez, responded yesterday, as follows, to some of our questions: ? -What you ask of me is an extremely difficult matter, especially now, when the capacity of the Lawyers who have had the high honor of graduating from the Law School of the University of Puerto Rico, is discussed by Molina de Saint Remy, perhaps with an inordinate passion and manifest injustice; but let us leave that and move on to what we have been asked to do, and let us move on to what we have been asked to do.
Two bills have been presented; one of a general nature and the other of an exclusively particular character; that is to say, one that affects all the Municipalities of the Island and the other that is limited exclusively to San Juan. The first of Senator Martínez Dávll", is good, even though in my judgment it should be amended; the second I must categorically state that it is an absurdity. We suffer in Puerto Rico from the mania of reforming everything old, without stopping for a moment to study the origin of our institutions and their raison d'être. When in the last &- : gislature our Municipal Law was amended and the municipalities were handed over to the Executive Council, I was discussing with some friends the inappropriateness of those amendments. It is a generally accepted principle that when a change in the governorship of a colony is about to take place, the fundamental laws of the internal functioning of my government are never amended in a restrictive manner. And if the whole country knows the bitter times that the municipalities of the Island had to go through in order to obtain their loans given to an Insular body that former Governor Reily managed at his whim, San Juan had to eliminate from the works included in its loan, the construction of an electric power plant that would have remedied the lack of light suffered by neighborhoods such as Santurce and Puerta de Terra and even in certain places the City of San Juan. ? -The bill of my friend Martínez Dávlla revives the old institution of Mayor and creates for him in the municipal facalt|adj>s similar to those that the Insular Executive has. The power of veto in the Mayor, with the power of the Municipal Assembly to pass on the same, by subsequent agreement of two thirds of its members, seems to me a wise reform of the Law. In my opinion the Mayor should have the power to veto the bill, with the power to pass on the same, by subsequent agreement of two thirds of its members, seems to me a wise reform of the Law. Success! Exito! - ■■ ■ ■ A MOLER VIDRIO that "EL BOSQUE DE BOLONIA" will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA in San Juan because it sells so cheaply and because it is so well stocked. 33 - SAN SEBASTIAN - 33
The work of the Department of Agriculture will be of practical demonstrations on the island Much attention was drawn to the request made by the new Commissioner of Agriculture, Mr. Chardón, asking the Island Legislature to approve an expense budget for the Department amounting to the sum of nine hundred thousand dollars. The young Commissioner's request seems exaggerated; but it is if it is not taken into account that it is only in this way that it will be possible to obtain an efficient and satisfactory result from the work carried out by such an important Department. "Mr. Chardon submitted to the consideration of the legislators, together with the budget of expenses, a copy of the brilliant plan to be carried out during his term in charge of this branch of the Insular Army. Speaking with the Deputy Commissioner, Mr. Bagué, one of our editors expressed the hope that even if the Legislature did not approve the appropriation requested by them, the difference would be so small that it would not alter the purposes pursued with the proposed plan. Many will believe," Mr. Bagué told us, "that we have asked a lot for something to be given to us; but it is true that we have only asked for (Continued on page 2) "Salinas Movie Theater for Sale" Good opportunity to earn a lot of money for people who are in the movie business. For information and other details about the business, please contact "CINE SALINAS", Box 24, Salinas. FOR SALE due to the absence of its owner La Fuente de Soda on 19th street in front of the Institute and in the most luxurious and most luxurious place in Santurce, excellent clientele. For information: Ramón R. Infanzón, Box 45,' Santurce, Advt.
THEATER TOMORROW SUNDAY FIRST PRESENTATION IN PUERTO RICO "SANGRE Y ARENA" ■ x rodolph ;■ ""HJfvalentino 5 -/HTBZoodontf lee ". NITA NÁLD1 tí" \ -rV-v)