ELMIBNDO
PAGES. 3 CTS. ■-meowe- m. fift.ee Va Ale _■ o- " fff.M
MPAGS. 3 CT¿" O*, "alvafioc Bna U. 1 feL IMS. m Box S4fi.
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT ON SUNDAYS SUUfflM
YEAR V
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distrihuvsü uadsr psrssil (Mu. dül> -a.hc*a "d by tas Aei ol vosobw ft, Mkl. on filo a*"he Pool Office el Hsn Jusu. Peno Rico, By order ut the Presides", A. 8. fiui lesea. Postmaster General. Knterod ae second elaso matter, febrnarr 31 1010. at the Post Office at Ran Jnau. P>"o Bl co. (United States of Amarles! andar Ue Aet of march >. 1870
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 20, 1923
NUMBER 1350 i
Yesterday the memorial approved by the Sugar Producers Association was delivered to the Governor and the Speakers of both Houses.
It has been agreed not to make this document public for the time being The memorial to be addressed by the Sugar Producers to the Governor of Puerto Rico was approved in an Extraordinary Assembly, and yesterday was delivered to the Chief Executive and to the Presidents of both Houses. When we wanted to obtain a copy of the important document for its publication, we were told by the President of the Sugar Producers' Association, Mr. Aboy Benitez, that it had been agreed not to make it public until the authorities to whom it was addressed had studied it and taken some action in accordance with the terms and demands contained therein. The aforesaid Memorial, as our readers know, is a protest to the island authorities regarding the harm caused to the financial interests of the community by the raising of the Island's Expenditure Budget to twelve million dollars and by the approval of a six million dollar loan to carry out transcendental works of imperious public necessity, such as the Insane Asylum, the Capitol, the Penitentiary and the Leprocomio. We understand that the document is of great importance and that it will have to be the object of careful study by the insular authorities, since the interests represented by the Sugar Producers are very substantial; but according to what we have heard we can inform you that the policy to be followed will be to take into account the terms of that document only as to that part of it which does not affect the general interests of the country, since it seems to be a duty of the legislators to promote the welfare of the country.The legislators should propose to the welfare of the community by carrying out as soon as possible those works which, because of their beneficial character, are essential for the purpose of raising the social and moral condition of our people to a high level. With the purpose of delivering the memorial to the Governor, the President of the Association of Producers "de Azú car, Mr. R. Aboy Benítez, and 1os se-' iiores Gerónimo Vallecillo and Pedro Giusti visited the Fortress. Mr. Aboy Benítez expressed to our reporter that the document in question would not be published for the time being. With respect to the attitude that the Chamber of Commerce would adopt on the matter, to questions from our reporter, Don Ramon expressed that it was not in his mind to say anything yet; but that perhaps later on, the opportunity would arise to publish something. GERMANS WILL ALSO HAVE DOLLARS Berlin, Oct. 19. (United Press)-The government announces that by the middle of next week a currency on the basis of so-called dollar borrowings will be put into circulation. In spite of the 'os, the marks will continue to - circulate. i'i' - * ", | f SELLS VERY CHEAP I :: SAN JUSTO -17 t - - -I A- -- A SARTENAZO Has been given to all the commerce of San Juan with the prices that the Bazar Ahorro has, Fortaleza 25. GO AND SEE "WHAT A CHEAP *<l | ■MU ■ I - - - Ü ARRIVI Í jSOMBREROS?
The Board of Trustees meets Monday to discuss the matter of the students at the University of Pto. Rico.
Don Juan describes a parable with his sick leg - Denies that the students have been ex-pelled - With the Governor The students were in procession yesterday visiting the members of the aforementioned official body - Dr. Coll Cuchí harangues the students.
i The AFFAIRE of the students of Ce P. R. University, who protested against the attitude adopted by the Dean of the said school, Mr. St. John, who, it is alleged, has expelled them from the said educational institution for not having satisfied a certain bond required by Jes to be able to do certain work in the Laooratory of the Faculty. As a consequence of the attitude ob-, served by the Dean and which has been I reciprocated in similar terms I on the part of the students, everything makes ■ think that the consequent i crisis has arisen in the University, being imnres' cindible that Jas competent authorities intervene, in order that the ñor-' i ma'idad is restored and res-; , ponsibilities are demanded to whom it corresponds. While it is not yet known who is really responsible for this crisis, there is no shortage of improvised ■ ers who, in the guise of a diplomat, have been known to be responsible for the crisis.
who, with the appearance of ridiculous dominoes, want to make two criteria prevail in the matter, as if none other than themselves were qualified to give an opinion. This case should not be judged a PRIMA FACIE, or out of mere sympathy for one side or the other. The fundamental reasons for the conflict must first be known, and then an opinion must be given, if that opinion is to benefit anyone, because otherwise, it is best to remain silent because of the Loca cerrada ..... To date, and this even the most OPINIONATED? sees it, there is only one fundamental fact, and it weighs in favor of the students. We refer to the amounts that they have already paid to the University, and for which they should receive the corresponding proportional instruction, lest it be thought that the attitude of the "Dean", at (Continued on 2nd page.)
nández, F<?dro|A. Suárez, Régulo Hernández, Isaac S. Chocrón, Gustavo Mo- ¡ loro, J. A. Pulfar hijo, Manuel S. Taborda y Co., José Antonio Romero M., Neptario Corh., Joaquín Acosta, José T. García, Daniel Henriquez, José ■ Ramón Rincótífclarcelo Acuña, Rogelio A. Cuenca, Santos Perozo M., Graciano Bríñez, Pepo Fuenmayor, Francisco Dávila, Jesús Olivares, Ramiro A. i Lizardo, F. E.wargas F., Mario Hernández, José C. Morantes, Eugenio Pul- . gar, Jaime íj. johórouez. E. Carbone B., A. I. d'Empaire, Hernán Hemán- ; dez P., MaxinoBb Chirinos, Moisés Urdaneta, Temístocles Camarillo, Leopoldo Quintero, Antonio R. Paz G., Víctor Suárez, S. González Peña, A. Molero, Oiinto B 'horquez, Santiago Morán Colina, Medardo Rosales C., Víctor Acevedo, Francisco Antonio Galué, Manuel S. Piñeiro, Heriberto Galué, Manuel Ferrer M., Arturo Urdaneta V., F. Rincón Larrazábal, Eduardo E. Núcete, i Filinto Araujo G., Antonio Ciríaco, Rafael Olaves, Natividad Ferrer, Abigail ! Villalobos U., A. I. ILnistrosa Jr., Antonio Darwich, Carlos Lalinde, Alfonso Urdaneta y Co., Marcial Pineda U., Dimas Pineda, Rodolfo Pineda, Luis H. I Tinoco. A. Bustamante G., Alcibiades Leon, Agustin Mendez. Advt.
: GONZALEZ PADIN C0" INC.
The Best there is in shirts for men NECKLINES
GONZALEZ PADIN C0" INC.
Bolivar Pagan -LAWYER- Office: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz. Ri O. Box: 583 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P. R.
Dr. S. M. Haley Has moved his offices to the > new building of "Puerto Rico > Ilustrado Inc." corner San José and Tetuán. 4th. floor.
PARK TODAY SATURDAY TODAY ELSIE FERGUSON and REGINALD DENNY in - "LAS CANDILEJAS" (Footlights) TO-morrow: DAVID POWELL and ANN FORREST in PERPETUA MARIA (Lone's Boomerang) OCT. 31st. THE LOVERS. OF A PRINCE (The Merry-go-Round) Dr. S. M. Haley OSTEOPATA
THE AMERICAN LEGION AGAINST SOVIET RECOGNITION San Francisco, Oct. 19 (French cable) (By an overwhelming majority, the American Legion declared itself against the recognition of the Soviet government by the United States. Likewise, it fought the Klu Klux Klan. WE NEED EXPERIENCED ENGLISH-SPANISH TAQUIGRAPHER with EXPERIENCE Address: Apartado No. 258, San Juan
Moving....! We are getting ready to move to our NEW BUILDING. WE DO MOVING AT CHEAP PRICES U á/ P -H" The famous shirts that are worth. B /l/¡ to $3.50 and $4.00 each in Shirts / and all sizes in beautiful K (3/ ' painted a great variety for CSCOjer Dell 4 onwards to SHIH
MANHATTAN We don't want to take them for the new house - We'd rather sell them BARA TAS! | Semi Soft® from 14 and up - z" - I - z - z 1 f" Iz - - J 1 a are worth double a (j as well as Manhattan Shirts also very nice painted all 9 /)/) 9 l /i/j Take advantage of these Bargains!' sizes from 4.50 to $3-from 6 to $3.50-from 7.50 to $5
STRIKE . Dublin, Oct. 19 (United i?ress)-Supporters of Eamon de Valera who is held by the Esta-.
"PALACE RESTAURANT" 1 1 We wish to inform our many friends and the public in general, that we have leased from Mr. Agudo, proprietor of the Palace Hotel in this city, cl Restaurant situated on the first floor and on that occasion we have introduced large reductions in prices, variety in meals and improvements in service. Our long experience in this kind of business enables us to guarantee our clientele the best Restaurant on the Island at very economical prices. Visit us and you will be highly satisfied. OTERO, ALONSO & CIA. SEGUNDO ALONSO ANTONIO OTERO. "Butler - "Chef de Cuisine".
A I> A C* 17 PERMANENT SERVICE /YkjIL GARAGE - GASOLINE - BRANDI LAUNDRIES
THE GOVERNMENT OF GENERAL GOMEZ
SPONTANEOUS MANIFESTATION OF THE HIGH COMMERCE OF MARACAIBO San Juan, P. R., October 19, 1923; Señor don Sergio Romanaece, Director of EL MUNDO,- City. My dear Director. In order that you may be so kind as to welcome it in the columns of your enlightened newspaper, I am pleased to accompany you in this Manifestation that the high commerce of Maracaibo makes to General Juan Vicente Gómez, Constitutional President of the United States of Venezuela, for his work of peace, progress and work, and which needs no comment from me, since it speaks for itself. Thanking you for your attention, it is my pleasure to repeat your Atto. H.H. and friend, Hugo FONSECA RIVAS. We are bound to the Venezuelan Nation by relations and affections, kindled in foreigners by the frank and sincere hospitality that is offered to them there, and we make public our satisfaction for the general well-being that the Republic enjoys, under the protection of Peace and Work, which dignifies the peoples and enables them to progress and civilization. With this condition we signify to the Head of the Venezuelan Nation, General J. V. Gomez, our applause and sympathy for the established and for the guarantees that it facilitates to all the guilds and workers, among which we count ourselves as merchants of this square, and we explicitly protest against those who try to interrupt the commercial negotiations that we have established in the country and Maracaibo: September 1923. Breuer, Moller and Co. Sues; J. A. Añez and Co; Ríboli and Co; Blohm and Co; V. Dis- I se', Rode and Co; Monda and Co; Chrlstern, Zingg and Co; pp H. L. Boulton Jr. and I ( o., A. A: Cuenca; I'essi F. and Co; A. Dubuc and Co; Beckmann and Co; Firnhaber and Co;Romoro and Atencio; J. and II. D. C. Gomez; DalFOrso and Co; Steffen, Anderson and Co; Bunco C< inertia! of Maracaibo, A. de Jongh; Kirschke and Co; . M. A. Belloso, M. A. Belloso; Juan E. Paris; Hernan Acevedo; Paris and Nubez Sues.; I M. A. Belloso and line: Juan E. Paris; Hernan Acevedo; Paris and Nunez Sues.; American Cantil de Caracas Branch of Maracaibo, Federick Feltman; The Royal Bank of Canada, C. Viccentini; The Caribbean Petroleum Co. Hwfa j Wynhan Jones; New England Oil Corpn., J. Kavanagh; Atlantic Oil Produ- ! cing Co., P. J. Weindell; Orinoco Oil Company, R. J. Sloon; Venezue'an Sun Í Ltd, Le O I'onm'l; Standard Oil Company of Venezuela, F. A. Dalburg; j lovin'am Pined-;; Numa P. León; Pinedo y Brigé; Amílcar Morales; Federi- , co Montiel; Héctor L. Ortiz; Eddo. Vargas; Jorge Tucker; pp. Filipe y Toledo y Co. Sms., J. B. Lagrange; Compañía Anónima Ferrocarril del Táchira, A. Rjr.cajolo (Manager); pp. el Banco de Maracaibo, Eduardo Ball (Manager); . r 'cmpañ'.a Am n;ma Ferrocarril de La Ceiba, A. Roncajolo (Manager); pp. ! Ferrocar.i'. Santa Barbara, Octavio Acosta P. (Agent); M. A. Cook and Co. F. Villalobos Silva and son, Casimiro Semprún, Delfín N. Chataing and Co., Rubén Araujo Sosa, AIí Villalobos, Suárez and Sandoval, René Bracho and Bro., - Anderson and argas, A. A. Andrade and Co., Henríouez, Villasmil and Co, Belloso Rosscl!, E. Urdaneta Ch., Amado and Co., M. H. Fernandez, Mazzey and Co., J. R. and E. Govea, Martinez and Atencio, Audio Bo-zzo and Co., Octavio Fer- i nandez, Salvador Cupello and Bro., Paz and Leon, Eduardo Ramirez and Co, Berti*Dábil a y Co., Pérez Conde y Co" Rincón Y Delgado, Peña y Co., Héctor Pons, Alfonso Rincón y Co., Eduard* J. Del- ; gado, Delfín Arcila, Ecfécio A. Oeando, S. A'jnarza hijo, Echeverría y Co., Leobigilio Naba, D. Osorio B., Teolindo Chirinos, Max Ferrer, Francisco Sambrano, Ramón Irragorri, Juan Besson, Alberto A. Parra, Luis , G. Ferrer, Asdrúbal Serrano, Domingo Guijarro, R. Belloso B., Juan Alfonso Amado, Eurípides Bracho, Alfredo Rincón B., Colina y Chacíq, Alfredo Rincón B. e hijo, Leónidas Pirela, Jesús Echeverría G., Medardo Luis Fer- i
Last Thursday, the experts of the Tariff Commission, who are coming to investigate the price of sugar, embarked for the U. S. A., on their way to the United States.
The Commissioners, before their departure, were very pleased with the hospitality they received on the island. The report of the Commission will go to President Coolidge.
The investigation of the cost of sugar production which had been going on in Puertx" Rico under the direction of Captain John A. Nye, and a group of American experts, has come to an end, and both Captain Nye and Mr. H. R. Mott, members of the commission, embarked Thursday on the steamer Ponce, to render their final report to Dr. Joshua A. Bernhardt, Chief of the Sugar Division of the U. S. Department of Agriculture. Bernhardt, Chief of the Sugar Division of the Washington Tariff Committee. The investigation covers more than ninety percent of the sugar produced on the island. After all the reports have been submitted, the Washington Tariff Commission will hold a public hearing, probably in January. The report of the Tariff Commission will then go to President Coolidge, perhaps as early as the end of January. The President, under the law, has authority to make any changes he thinks advisable in the tariff governing sugar. This investigation, directed by Dr. Berhanrdt, began in Cuba in May first, passing then to Hawaii, Lousiana, and all the beet-producing states, plus Cuba and Puerto Rico. It is now practically completed, and its distribution has been under the immediate supervision of Dr. Bernhardt. The cooperation rendered by the sugar mills of Puerto Rico has been exemplary and the members of the investigating commission are very grateful for this. The Puerto Rico Commission was composed of Messrs. John A. Nye, Richard H. Mott, Mervyn Braun and Mervyn Braun.
Mott, Mervyn Braun, and Lester D. Johnson; and had in addition the assistance of Mr. M. A. Ducot, who resided in Puerto Rico for some time, and who recently embarked for Havana. Captain Nye, who was transferred from Cuba to take charge of the investigation in Puerto Rico, was in charge of the Ceylon Consular District at the beginning of the European guerr&, but resigned his commission, pfi-~ ra to enter the American navy,' in charge of the 361st teria division, in which position he served for more fingers years. He still belongs to the rq*.' serva, with the rank of Captain. Later he was Secretary to the Senator from. Idaho, Mr. F. R. Gooding, before he was appointed a member of the I will say"' 4 !** va of the Tariff Commission. Then' Capt. Nye tried to give himself' to farming, as he owns aA. 320 acre farm near St. ríes, Id. -Tu, All the commissioners were before their departure, much com* plated by the hospitality of the la, and the assistance they received from t®*-' two of the island's sugar mills in their thorough investigation. EL MUNDO" AND "PUERTO RICO ILUSTRADO" MOVE TO THEIR NEW BUILDING The installation of our machinery, composition shops and furniture in the new building of "Puerto Rico Ilustrado Inc:", corner of San José and Tetuán, we are pleased to inform our readers, advertisers and friends that as of next Monday, the 22nd of the current month, the Editorial and Administrative offices of EL MUNDO and 'Puerto Rico Ilustrado" will be installed on the second floor of said building, where we are once again at the disposal of the public. uisoos.cion of the public. The Company of EL MUNDO and "Puerto Rico Ilustrado." ' ' ' i ARRIVI í 1 TRAJES t SAN JUSTO 17 :: READ THE ANNOUNCEMENT BY ''i M. RODRIGUEZ & Ca ON PAGE No. 5 1 ARRIVI H f SAN JUSTO 17 | do Libre have decided that the thirteen thousand persons who are imprisoned in the jails of Ireland ae de* claren on hunger strike.
R. I. P. j Mrs. Luisa Boudens de Diaz HAS DIED | and arranged her burial for today at 4 p. m. the undersigned. I husband, children and nephews of the deceased, beg her friends to commend her soul to God and to accompany her body to the Cemetery of Santurce, for whose favor they will be eternally grateful. Dr. Jose A. Diaz, Jose Luis, Ramon, Luis and Carlos Dias and Boudens, Ydalia, Palmira, Chloris and Cáxlos McCormick; Mar- s garita Gandía, Enrique Calimano Rafael Shuck and William Me M Kinley. Santurce, October 20, 1923.