THE WNDO
- 12 Pages, 3 Ctvx - Semester ........ $4.00 One Year .... .... .... $7.50
- 12 Pá S a - 3 Ctvs - " Offices: Salvador Brau 31 Tel. 1222-p. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR V.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published and di "tribu ted under permit (No. 801) authored by the of October 6. 1917, on fllo at the Post Of flee ot .an Jnan. Porto '*"- * e rofthe President. A. S. Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919, at the Post Offlee at Ran Juan. Porto Rico, (United States of America) under the Act of march 3. 1879.
SATURDAY, MARCH 24, 1923.
NUMBER 1263.
The famous alíela of the Puerto Rico Regiment, Marcial Figueroa, was killed in Cayey during a quarrel with young Losé Figueroa.
Figueroa had numerous foreign medals and decorations on his chest -Details of the horrific crime that has caused consternation in Cayey and in the Regiment of Puerto Rico.
According to a report supplied to us by our correspondent in Cayey, last Tuesday a bloody event occurred there, which produced deep consternation in that locality and in the Regiment of Puerto Rico to which the victim belonged. the facts, as related by our correspondent, occurred in the following manner: On Tuesday morning the soldier of the Regiment Marcial Figueroa, par ec" that had a slight displeasure with a gentleman of the surname Figueroa, old and feeble, who in the impossibility of sustaining a fight with ei sergeant Figueroa called his son, José Figueroa, to whom he manifested that he had been violently run over by the Sergeant. It was about half past five in the afternoon when José, armed with a .38 caliber Smith revolver, went to a store in the Morrillo neighborhood, near the Military Camp, where he waited for a propitious occasion to avenge the affront inflicted on his father. When passing the sergeant Figueroa in front of the store, the young Figueroa took out the phepholter he was carrying, firing a single shot against the sergeant, who fell to the ground mortally wounded. The bullet entered through the right ear and lodged in the encephalic mass. As soon as the event occurred, the military authorities were notified, and they arrived at the site of the tragedy, ordering the transfer of the body to the municipal hospital, where the autopsy was performed by the distinguished doctor Nogueras, who had no time to rest until he located the pro-: yectiL i The killer went to the police headquarters, voluntarily surrendering himself to the police authorities. He was imprisoned and, as of this writing, no bail has been set for him. This mournful event, which has come to put a note of sorrow in the cheerful atmosphere of "Henry Barracks'', has caused great consternation, because ser-'' Figueroa, was the only one to have been arrested.
gento Figueroa, was a very esteemed and beloved person among his confreres. Figueroa was one of the best athletes of the Puerto Rican Regiment, having won various medals as a runner, marksman and jumper. On Thursday afternoon he was buried in the Camp's cemetery, attended by a large number of friends and comrades, who later expressed their condolences to the bereaved of the unfortunate soldier.
Artesian Wells COMPLETE INSTALLATIONS FOR IRRIGATION 20 years of experience DELGADO HERMANOS YaucOj P. R.
The Po-Laco-Lithuanian Conflict
(United Press, via All America Cables) KOVNO, March 23.- Polish cavalry and infantry attacked a Lithuanian outpost in the vicinity of Memei killing five and wounding one. The Government has sent a strong note to Warsaw requesting immediate reparations. DELIRIOUS ENTHUSIASM FOR CUNO'S VISIT ... .... MUNICH MUNICH, March 23.- Reports from Munich say that the visit of Chancellor Cuno to that city has constituted a motive of patriotic intoxication. The Chancellor was deliriously ova cloned when he arrived in that city. The reception accorded to him surpassed that of Marshal Hinderburg, who was also the object of great homage during his recent trip there LONDON, March 23 - The Chancellor of Austria, Monsignor Seipel, will leave for Rome on Monday to negotiate a loan in that capital.
The important initiatives of Mr. Rafael M. Pietrantoni find an echo among the financiers of the United States.
The active and intelligent businessman of this city, Don Rafael M. Pietrantoni, whose actions in favor of the interests of the community are already known by the country, as the esteemed friend has demonstrated in all the representative positions he has held and through the statements he has made in the press, must feel satisfied and pleased today to see how his efforts and initiatives, externalized in the American press, have found an echo among prominent financiers of the North. THE "PORTO RICO AMERICAN STEAMSHIP LINE'' '' A powerful steamship company has been established in the city of Baltimore to provide service between that port and our capital. In order to give our readers an idea of the benefits of this important project, and of the interest with which this idea has been received, we will reproduce below what an important newspaper of that city says in this respect, agreeing to the project of increasing, shortly, to nine the number of steamers of the Company, which now has only four: "Five new ships will be added to the recently constituted company, the "Porto Rico-American Steamship Line", as announced last night by Captain William H. Stayton, president of the Board and president of the Board of Directors of the Company. Stayton, chairman of the Board and president of the Baltimore Steamship Company, both Baltimore firms. Capt. Stayton was the principal speaker and guest of honor at the banquet given by the Foreign Commercial Club at the Emerson Hotel. Other speakers were Governor Horace M. Towner, recently appointed Chief Executive of Puerto Rico; Felix Cordova Davila, Commissioner of the Island to Congress, and Mayor Broening. P. E. McIntyre, President of the Foreign Commercial Club, introduced the speakers. Films of Puerto Rico were shown. REQUESTS THAT HAVE BEEN MADE "We have made application to the U.S. Ship-Ping Board.
ping Board" of the United States for the purchase of five of their ships' '," said Captain Stay ton, "which will increase the total number of ships owned by the new company to nine. Four of these are presently in service and five others will be added before the end of the year." Capt. Stayton spoke about the opportunities for trade between the West Indies and Balti.(Continued on 3rd. FEDERAL COURT DENIES MOTION FOR "SEPARATE TRIAL" Yesterday at five o'clock in the afternoon the hearing was held in the Federal Court of a motion filed by Ledos, Loret and Martin, attorneys for Chief Detective Harding, requesting that their client be tried separately from the rest of the defendants involved in the case, which for contempt is pending before said Court against the said defendant and Messrs. Cay and Victor Coll and Cuchi and Mr. Bennett. The motion was duly argued, alleging that there is copious evidence in the complaint which would be admissible against the other defendants and especially against Dr. Víctor Coll y Cuchí and Ledo. C. Coll y Cuchí, but never against the petitioner, for which reason, if he were not granted a separate trial, the case would be confused, originating at the same time serious damages to the defendant. The motion was opposed by the Prosecutor, who took a brief turn in this regard and ended up requesting the Court to dismiss the request. Once the matter was submitted, the Court proceeded to rule on it, declaring the motion without merit on the same or similar grounds as those expressed by the Court on the day it denied another similar motion, filed in favor of the Police Colonel in the same proceeding. Mr. Harding's counsel noted exception, and the hearing was adjourned. PARK TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY Great Premiere "TOWARD THE ABYSS" (QUINCY ADAMS SAWYER) By A Constellation of Stars, among others Barbara La Mar, Lon Chaney, John Browers and Elmo Lincoln. Tomorrow Sunday: "COMO AMAN LAS MUJERES" (How Women Love)
Teatro "Olimpo" Paquita Escribano THREE AMAZING SHOWS TODAY SATURDAY AND TOMORROW SUNDAY AFTERNOON AND EVENING Two extraordinary films. Tonight "The Afterlife" by Ethel Clayton. Tomorrow: "Eternal Life" by Elsie Ferguson. Paquita Escribano, identified with the religious feelings of her public, will keep Holy Week and will not work again until Saturday of Glory when she will reappear with a program all premieres.
"B Mundo" has obtained the exclusive to publish the articles of Lloyd George etffto. Rico
On page seven of this issue our readers will find the last of the political articles that have come from the pen of the Hon; David Lloyd George, former head of the British Government. As our readers know, Lloyd George has sold the publicity rights to the great United States journalistic syndicate "United Feature (Syndicate)", which is the only one authorized to publish the articles of the great British politician. Well, EL MUNDO, fulfilling one of the indispensable duties of modern journalism, which is to give the public the latest palpitations of international life, has obtained through a contract with the "United Feature Syndicate" the exclusive right to publish the political articles of the Hon. David Lloyd George, on the island of Puerto Rico. In today's issue we comment on the publication of the first article which reached us yesterday, and so once every week we will insert an article by Lloyd George, at the same time and almost at the same hour that the great newspapers of New York, London, Buenos Aires, Mexico City, Havana, Paris, Berlin, etc., publish it. Berlin, etc. And our contract is not only for the publication of Lloyd George's articles, but we shall publish the latest political works of the most notable European statesmen, as the "United Feature Syndicate" sends them to us. s -- For the benefit of our numerous readers, we have not considered the high price of such a distinguished collaboration. VENIZELOS HAS HELD A CONFERENCE WITH B0NAR LAW LONDON, March 23- The former Head of the Hellenic Government Mr. Eleuterio Venizelo held an extensive conference this morning with the head of this Government, BonarYaw. The conference was also attended by Lord Curzon, in his capacity as Foreign Secretary. It is announced q. Mr. Herbert D. Coates to replace Hon Salvador Mestre (United Press, via AJI America Cabres) WASHINGTON, March 23.-A senior j Administration official has stated privately that Mr. 1 Herbert D. Coates will be appointed pa- I ra to replace Ledo. Salvador Mestre, I who recently resigned his position ! as Attorney General of Puerto Rico. Coates' appointment has not yet been announced at the White House.
GREAT FUNCTION WALLACE REID ELSIE FERGUSON ELLIOT DEXTER GEORGE FAWCETT MONTAGU LOVE 'THE ETERNAL LIFE' (FOREVER) Matir-ée 25 and 15 Night 35 and 20 M. T.
Yesterday afternoon we received a letter from) Governor E. Mont Reily, in regard to , the information published by us I about the banquet held at the Ho tel Palace, and which reads as follows: San Juan, P. R. March 23, 1923. Director of EL MUNDO, (San Juan, Puerto Rico. i Dear Sir: In reading today's issue of EL MUNDO, I have noticed, in the information of the banquet which was offered to me, that the banquet was held at the Ho tel Palace, and which reads as follows: THE FOREIGN POLITICS OF FRANCE EXPLAINED BY M. POINCARE (French Cable) PARIS, March 23.- The head of the Government, Mr. Poincaré, made at the meeting of the Cabinet held this morning a wide-ranging explanation of the attitude of France as regards its foreign policy and particularly as regards the Ruhr. The Head of the Government spoke for three hours. The Belgians arrested sixty persons in Gladbach and Bottrop accused of disobeying the orders of the High Inter-Allied Commission. DON SEGUNDO CADIERNO Our very dear friend, the distinguished gentleman Don Segundo Cadierro, a person of great importance in the commerce of San Juan, is confined in the Auxilio Mutuo, as a result of a surgical operation that was performed with great success. Our friend's condition is entirely satisfactory, so that he will soon be back at the forefront of his commercial activities. We wish Mr. Cadíerno a speedy recovery. CINEMA PUERTO RICO TODAY - SATURDAY 24- TODAY Premiere of a Pathé revue with the latest Base Ball challenge of the Yanks and the Giants, and the six-part drama in Reprisse of the Oortorican film "El Hijo del Desierto" Tomorrow. A delightful five-act comedy entitled "Li Bride Changed" By Madge Kennedy.
The Cross of Fire TOMORROW SUNDAY at the medal film co.
Governor Reily addresses a letter to us clarifying certain notions of his speech at the "Palace" banquet.
I am sure that I have been very badly misunderstood in two of the paragraphs. I am sure that this was not intentional on the part of your editor, Mr. Vargas, but because of what he himself says in his article, that 'I spoke in such a muffled voice that I could hardly be heard. ' He says, when he quotes me: 'That while President Harding is the Chief Executive of the Nation, those who are not with the flag should throw themselves into the sea' '. Of course, I said no such thing, as all those present know. What I said was this: "It is just as much for a man to throw himself into the sea as to imagine that President Harding is going to send any Governor to Puerto Rico who is not a defender of American principles." I made this clarification in referring cordially to Judge Towner. The second misquote is the following: "If President Harding is reelected, the Governor said he would come to Puerto Rico in 1924 to continue his work. What I said was this: "I have hopes of returning to Puerto Rico some day and finding that all parties and citizens favor Americanism. I hope that this will happen in 1924." Please kindly make these corrections in my obsequiousness. Sincerely yours, <f E. MONT REILY, Governor. It is with the greatest pleasure that we publish the foregoing letter to Mr. Reily's satisfaction, and we are glad that he himself expresses that if there has been any error, it was unintentional. Our Editor, at the end of the banquet, wanted to obtain a statement from Mr. Reily, in order to avoid as much as possible these annoying rectifications; but it was impossible to obtain it, because, as the Governor himself expressed to him at the Hotel, he felt extremely weak and was not in a position to do so. CUNO RETURNS TO BERLIN BERLIN, March 23.- Chancellor Cuno returned this afternoon to this capital from Munich. 'IMPERIAL' CINEMA TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY i the Mysteries of Paris' Fifth Day The best that has come into the country, <
Upcoming Firpo-Roper match
(United Press, via All America Cables) NEW YORK, March 23.- Tex Rickard has declared that he will at any moment sign the contract for the next Firpo-Roper fight, which will probably take place ex May twelfth next. ENGLISH GOODS WILL NOT PAY TAX. r ._. .. CESS .. .. ... LONDON, March 23.-According to the "Westminster Gazette" the Governments of France and England have come to an agreement that English goods shall pay neither French nor German duties. A HORROROUS FIRE AT THE CENTRAL TELEGRAPH STATION IN ROME ROME, March 23.- A horrendous fire has today destroyed the building of the central telegraph station, destroying all the electrical apparatus No personal misfortunes have been recorded.
The Chamber of Commerce addresses the "Puerto Rico Bankers Association" on matters of extraordinary importance for the country.
The replacement of the bank bills circulating here, because they are in bad condition, is requested, as well as the prompt establishment of the Federal Reserve Bank in this island.
The Chamber of Commerce has addressed to the "Puerto Rico Bankers Association", including a copy of a resolution, approved by said organization in its last assembly, which textually reads as follows: WHEREAS, it is a well known fact that the condition of the bank bills circulating in the Island is very bad; WHEREAS, it is an equally well known fact that such bank bills, given their unhygienic conditions, constitute a real danger to public health,
WHEREAS, it is an undisputed fact that such bank bills can be easily exchanged by means of their remission to the National Treasury to be destroyed when replaced by new ones and THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF P. R. : That the P. R. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE be, and hereby is, hereby is, implied, and hereby is, resolved, that the following be doneThat the Bankers Association of Puerto Rico be and hereby is requested to take the necessary measures, if it were in its power to do so, to eliminate from circulation all bank bills which do not offer the conditions required by public hygiene and which do not satisfy, in addition, those of aesthetics to which a cultured environment such as ours has the right to aspire. In addition to the above, the Chamber of Commerce has sent to the same institution, a copy of another resolution about the Federal Reserve Bank, whose WHEREAS, reads as follows: NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by the General Assembly of the Chamber of Commerce of Puerto Rico that through its Board of Directors the case be submitted to the consideration of the Bankers Association of Puerto Rico and that such steps be taken as may be deemed conducive to secure the assets of this Resolution. THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE P. R. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE.That the application to Puerto Rico of the Act establishing a Federal Reserve Bank system is necessary for the greater development of business and to give greater elasticity and extension of credit in times of crisis; That the Bankers Association of Puerto Rico be and hereby is requested to give this matter its consideration and agree to cooperate with this Chamber of Commerce until the implementation in Puerto Rico of the aforementioned Federal Reserve Bank system is achieved; and BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, by the Board of Directors of this Chamber, that such steps be taken as it may deem conducive to secure the purposes of this Resolution.
ADVT. Bruno & Vázquez Circuit ANNOUNCEMENTS PREVIOUSLY ANNOUNCED Teatro "Recreo", don I *| Antonio Aponte, Lares 63 THEATRES WHICH HAVE DECIDED TO EXHIBIT THEIR AUDIENCE THE CREME OF THE MOVIES IMPORTED IN PUERTO RICO. ADVT. LAST MINUTE: Stay at the Hotel Ritzy where you will get situational prices.
"JU 2"' Solares y Casas Piedras. Calle José de Diego 26 will inform or Telephone 36, Río Piedras- "mi