THE WNDO
1A FAGS. 3 CTS. í 0 -" -" -*
1 n FAGS. 3 CTS. I Stiv*d "r Br "w -!!! I II Vai. ms. - Box Ul
MORNING DAILY.
EXCEPT ON SUNDAY
dlrtrltated aadst vemft by tte Art ti oetebsr *■ X *L T '. *' B "n Forte B ,eo . By ti Ike ProoMsnt, A 1-oo. Porta_MWr 0 * n * n * r, L 1 " Ati'ti Z'Vave tebraary M. 1010. M"- Pert Ofileo ti "*" Jasa. P.alo Bieo. (United otate" ti ásterieeí and- tee Art ti wawb S. 18T0
| SATURDAY, OCTOBER 27, 1923
NUMBER 1356
ARO V
8AN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
t yesterday's meeting, the Equestrian Commission made important agreements, tending to prevent new irregularities from being committed at the racetrack.
If the horses listed in the official program are not in the paddock at 2:30 p.m. on race days, their owners will be severely punished. From now on, the person who appears as owner of a horse will also be responsible for any infraction committed by any other owner. Regarding the complaint filed by Mr. Pedro Nieves Román that the owner of the mare "Gitana" entered the Paddock after 3 p. m. and put her in the cage in which was placed the horse of his property ■ "Progreso" which in those mo- i ments was running in the first race; and after hearing the tes- , tigos who have reported in this in- ¡ vestigation it has not been possible to arrive at the . The I flomfetón Hípica resolves, in order to avoid further irregularities such as the complaint > by Mr. Nieves Román, to direct the Corpo- . ration to require the Judge of the Paddock to call upon the Judge of the Paddock at 2:30 p. m. on race days close the gates giving access to the paddock, and immediately notify the Jury in writing of the names of the horses listed in the program that have been taken at that time, so that the Jury may impose the corresponding punishment. I The letter addressed by Mr. Jqjto Navarro, who appears in the books of the Commission as owner of the horse "Mogrovita" together with Mr. José Miró Sauri, was discussed. José Miró Sauri, in which he requests to be allowed to run said horse in the name of the petitioner, and this being a matter not foreseen in the regulations, it was agreed to accede to the request, the Commission also resolving that in the future any person who appears as owner of a horse will also be responsible for any infraction committed by any other 1 owner. The request for pardon presented by the jockey Ramon Sanchez, known as Guarema, who was definitively suspended by the Jury of the San Juan Racing and Sporting Club, on August 19, was rejected. It was agreed to send a letter to the Porto Rico Racing Corporation informing that M the official program published, and in the second race appears to cottfir the mare "La Libertad" and before "Quintana", and as of the pro-' piedad such Mr. R. Lopez, and slnembargo. Lopez, and slnembargo in the books of the Commission "appears said animal with the name of "Quintana" and how of the property of Mr. Ramon*Uovot, Jr. PARK Today--Saturday--Today EXTRAORDINARY Lon Chaney and Virginia Valli ■ ¿. The Shock The greatest play ever written by this great actor Tomorrow Sunday Premiere in Porto Rico Ethel Grey Tervy and Philip Smalley in A SELF-MADE WIFE $7"-KEYS-$7" Cablecráficas "BENTLEY'S Box 8Í San Juan, P. R.
prosecutor gomez decreed the arrest of the corporal of the bayamon island police.
B distinguished official believes that said police officer made improper use of the checkpoint and has requested his suspension from employment and salary Yesterday afternoon we visited the Prosecutor of the District Court of San Juan, Section 1 Segunda Ledo. Ricardo Gómez, in order to know the result of the investigation initiated by said official on the occasion of the aggression of which Mr. Guillermo 8a- ■ las was the victim in Bayamón, by, it is alleged, the Ca- I bo of the Police there, Mr. Joaquín Morales. i Prosecutor Gomez told us that, effectively, he had already completed said in- . vest'gation, and that as a result thereof he had decreed the arrest i of Corporal Morales, charging him with a ( 1 offense of attempt on life, and seflalán- j 1 1 dole him a bail of $1,500 in order to be able to ! I remain at liberty, provisional. | The Prosecutor told us, in addition, that today he would address a communication to the Attorney General, indicating to him the convenience of recommending that Corporal Morales be suspended from work and salary, for having made improper use of his rifle against a citizen, which, the Prosecutor adds, disqualifies him from occupying that position, for which reason he also suggests that he be separated from the Corps in a timely manner. Extending in other considerations, the prosecutor Gomez in strong terms condemned the IMPULSTVISM that many times members of the Police Corps have shown, demonstrating in this way their absolute incapacity to be part of the meritorious institution. I The policeman," said, finally, Ledo. Gomez - must be careful and conscientious about when and how he should use the baton. | We pass on the observation to whom it may concern, especially when it has come to our knowledge that a few nights ago a guard used his BLACK JACK against a young student at stop 8, the latter being unharmed thanks to the promptness with which he stopped the police blow with his hat, which was rendered useless. SEPARATISTS LACK £1 OF TROOPS TO TACKLE SITUATION Paris, Oct. 26 (French Cable) -- Although new victories have been reported on the part of the separatists, they lack sufficient troops to cope with the difficult situation which the states of the occupied zone are going through. The separatists are now facing tremendous opposition from the people and from a republican movement engineered by the bourgeoisie and supported by the Reich, which seems to want to subdue the separatists altogether. According to news reaching Berlin, it is affirmed that this new republic will be proclaimed within twenty-four hours. CANA SANTA CRUZ 12-4 For Seed > _____ r Completely healthy and coming from fields free of Gomosis Matizado and Root Disease. Inspect by Department of Agriculture officials. | Address to Hacienda San Rafael Box, 10. Yauco, P, R. Advt. Dr. S. M. Haley' OSTEOPATH
I rlDArr PERMANENT SERVICE I I IMfwn/VwEa GARAGE - GASOLINE - LAUNDRY I i AWm VILLA - PONCE I | DKAlNUl iq , p. r. I
Ledo. Luis Abella Blimco has been struck out as attorney of record in the Bernabe Sabaliencontra San-
tiago Iglesias and the BanaAde San Juan According to order issued yesterday by the District Court, the administration of the plaintiff's assets is hereby restored.
It is undeniable that the resounding lawsuit followed in our District Court by the elder Bernabé Sabalier against the labor leader Santiago Iglesias and the Bank of San Juan, has acquired in these last days even more resonance due to the last incidents between the plaintiff's attorney, Ledo Abella, and the attorney-in-fact of the plaintiff, Ledo. Abella, and Sabalier's attorney-in-fact regarding the receivership of the plaintiff's assets. Following the final judgment rendered by the Court in the case in favor of the plaintiff and upon appeal filed before the Supreme Court by the defendants, counsel for Sabalier requested and obtained from the Court an order placing under receivership all assets alleged to belong to the plaintiff in the case and which are the subject matter of the litigation, pending final resolution of the case in the Superior Courts. The receivership having been established and having been in operation for some time, the plaintiff's attorney and the defendant's attorney appeared before the District Court and filed a stipulation of settlement with the District Court.
i and filed a stipulation requesting that the receivership be ordered to cease, and the Court, "knowing the representation held by the stipulating attorneys, issued an order revoking the previous one, that is, lifting the receivership of the aforementioned assets of the plaintiff, Beri nabé Sabal¡3r. As soon as this order was issued by the Surte, the attorney-in-fact of 3 Sabalier, Selora Fernandez, appeared before the said Court and filed a motion, and filed a motion alleging that she had not authorized the stipulation agreed to by the attorneys for the parties and requesting that the name of attorney Abella Blan be removed from the record and that the assets of the principal be returned to the same Judicial Administration as previously ordered. ' On the n íana of yesterday, the Hon. Judge Foote e of the District Court - of this ciuc| i, first district, pro- " ceded to diet: Resolution in the cuesl tion posed i by the -appellee of ■ Sabalier and S Minute Book of > (ContAw on page 6).
= GONZALBPADIN GO. INC.;
GONZALEZ PADIN GO. INC.
We Midamos.....! For Our New Building In order not to have to move a lot of goods We Prefer to Sell Them Cheap Shoes of All Kinds at Half Price Inexpensive Stockings Very Cheap Combs - Screens - Purses - Necklaces and many other novelties, very Cheap Made Clothes and Hats for Ladies and Children Suits and Effects for Gentlemen and Young Men Furniture - Household Effects - Crockery and other macho articles All Cheap!
SENSATIONAL SHIRT MAKING ---IN ALLEN 87 --- Premium Madras, all sizes, $5.00 to $2.25 Premium Madras, all youth, 1314, $3.00 to $1.90 Premium Jersey, all youth, 13¡ 14, $2.50 to $1.55 Current Madras, all youth 1.50 to 0.90 Madras current quality, all for juniors 1.50 to 0.70 Oxford white quality, all for juniors, 2.00 to 1.20 TODAY SATURDAY ONLY Take advantage of this sale to get a top quality shirt for half its value COME and SEE IT at ALLEN 87 ; ■; . V-
An interesting account given by the Delegate from Puerto Ro to the recent Convention of the American Federation of Labor concerning. the work done and the improbable task he bore upon his shoulders
"A convention of the "American Federation of Labor" in Puerto Rica is not impossible. It would only be necessary for the Legislature to appropriate a sum like the one it voted for the veterans of the Spanish-American War": Muñoz Marín.
> Our friend and comrade Don Luis Muñoz Marín, sends us the following interesting information: TRAVEL FROM NEW YORK TO THE PORTLAND CONVENTION OF THE AMERICAN FEDERATION OF LABOR Having been elected delegate to the Convention of the American Federation of Labor by the Federal Labor Union of San Juan, to which I have the honor of belonging, I met with Santiago Iglesias in New York. There I was told by Iglesias that, in addition to our work as labor delegates, we would have the opportunity and the duty to study the different forms of municipal government and the different systems of labor legislation in force in the cities and states which have given most attention to these problems, in order to submit a report to the legislature of the United States.
report to the legislature of Puerto Rico and to the Commission that has been created to work economically and politically for the island. The task seemed interesting to me and I was ready to cooperate with Iglesias to the best of my ability. Two or three days after Iglesias arrived, we left on our trip across the continent. We stopped one day in Chicago, but did not find it useful to study its problems, as a municipality as varied as that of the western metropolis has very few points of contact with the problems that so coníroned our municipalities. We wasted no time. Ein emba' go. We gave the local newspapers and the Associated Press a summary of the situation in Puerto Rico, and of the aspirations animating the labor movement and the legislature committee. We have been able to verify that our summary served for articles, some more and some less long, in a large number of newspapers published in the different sections of the United States. We gave the news to the local press with the purpose of letting the comrades residing in Chicago know that we were among them, since we did not know their addresses. These comrades did not find out in time; from letters received later we know that they read the news after we had left the city. From Chicago we went on to Milwaukee, the most important Socialist-controlled municipality in the country. It is a model city, with 400,000 inhabitants, wide, clean streets lined with old bowls, and a stillness to be savored. We visited Danie Hoan, the mayor, and for an hour we talked with him in his office, the City Hall. He explained to us the local aspirations of the Socialists and the difficulties they were encountering in carrying them out, because the legislature is in the hands of adversaries and the Charter, or municipal constitution of the city is extremely restricted. For example, a commission of experts from all the nartideos has spent a year studying the electric trolley problem, which is of such concern to San Juan residents today, and, according to Hoan, the results, although not yet officially announced, favor the city's ownership of the streetcars. Hoan assured us that the city, without lowering the standard of living of streetcar employees in any way, can provide for five cents the service that the private company provides for seven cents. But, the Charter places innumerable difficulties in the way of the realization of that plan, forbidding, for example, the (Continued on page 2) THEATER OLIMPO TODAY SATURDAY 27 TODAY Premiere of the drama by Cecil B. de Mille, starring five stars SATURDAY NIGHT 10 Reels of pure art SUNDAY 28 & MONDAY 29 Super-production extraordinaire THE LOVES OF A PRINCE or THE CARRIAGE OF LIFE" - the most sublime love drama ever put on film. DO YOU SELL PAINTINGS? Send us your name and address, we will send you a gift. Wadsworth Howland & Co. Inc. P; O: Boju272, San Juan, Puerto Rico
Police Colonel, Mr. Lewis, prohibits boxing exhibitions at Stop Eight Coney Island. Such sport is in conflict with a law passed in 1911 which considers it a "felony offense".- In recent days, the Manager of Coney Island at stop 8 offered a boxing exhibition for the benefit of the Children's Home; and the Police Colonel, Mr. Lewis, would have liked to accede to the request of a group of distinguished ladies of San Juan who wanted to accept Mr. Krause's offer, for the benefit of the children of the charitable institution. . Mr. Krause, has in his troupe besides gladiators, good boxers, whose occupation is to measure his "fists" with whoever wishes to "break bread a jaw." On the island you will find whoever wishes to measure himself with any of these boxea " dores; so it would be very interesting to see a box fight between a Boricua and a "lion," if not from Colorado, at least from Kansas. But it is the case that e'. Colonel Lewis could not accede to the ladies' plea, as such boxing exhibitions are in conflict with a law passed in 1911, which makes it a felony to encourage or take part in a fight in which a prize is offered, and even in a private training exhibition. In spite of the great enthusiasm that exists in the public of the island for boxing fights, especially since Carpentier, Firpo, and other Latin or Saxon boxers have been witnessed on the cinematographic canvas by the innumerable "fans" of boxing, the law strictly forbids residents of the island to participate, directly or indirectly, in such exhibitions. The law, prohibiting boxing reads as follows: $ (Continfii "n page 6) Sunday at the MATINAL exclusively The powerful drama premiere eh P. R. Venganza Cumplida (Railroaded) with the sympathetic actor Herbert Rawlinson and premiere in P. R. of Chapter No. 1 of the 3rd. era of the monumental play "Aventuras de un Pugilista" or Sonando El Cuero (The Leather Pushers) with the well-known actor Reginald Denny Note:- Among the attendees there will be a raffle of TWO OBJECTS OF VALUE PRICES: Seniors: 20. Seniors: 15 PLATEA:- Children: 15 BALCONY: Children: 10 Dr. S.MLHaley has moved his offices to the new building of "Puerto Rico ilustrado Inc." corner San José and Tetuán, 4th. floor. Bolívar Pagan -LAWYER- Office: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P. R. i JX-L *** ,