THE WORLD
A A PAGES. 3 CTS. /II ""*t:u. ." " M.M / y i***-
n A PAGES. 3 CTS. /I I Office "Port Him g ■ I Illustrated" BIdf. # tal- UM. >ai MI
MORNING NEWSPAPER, EXCEPT SUNDAYS c
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
rnbluaM .nd dutt.úuwa "aa" Art vi ■> um roM Uttce M ".n Jn" vLto RVn B, ordtt of A. 8. Portmartw Mtur, t.nruary >1, 1*1*. rt* th* Port Of*e" at Bea Jim, Porto Bi eo, (United 8t "t- vf ártrtioa) "n4 "r tae Art ef Marah >. 18T*
' NUMBER 1499
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 29, 1923
AQO V
The far-reaching reforms contained in the bill submitted to Congress by resident commissioner Mr. Córdova Dávila.
New jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and District Courts. Election of the governor and the impeachment power of the Legislature The heads of Departments shall be appointed by the governor with the consent of the Senate of the country, and shall be chosen from among the representatives and senators.
The following are those sections of Mr. Córdova Dávila's bill which has recently been introduced in Congress and which has not yet been published by any other newspaper in Puerto Rico. As the said Bill is for the most part based on the Jones Bill, which is known to all, we have thought it advisable to make known, cynically, those parts in which some fundamental variations are made. Here is the Bill: SEXIXTY-EIGHTH CONGRESS C. OF R. 3910 FIRST SESSION IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES December 17, 1923. Mr. Davila introduced the following I bill; which was referred to the Committee on Insular Affairs, with or- ¡ den to be printed. A BILL TO PROVIDE FOR A CIVIL GOVERNMENT FOR PUERTO RICO, AND FOR OTHER j PURPOSES Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America, in Congress assembled, 1 that the provisions of this act shall apply to the island of Puerto Rico, and adjacent islands belonging to the United States, and to the waters of those islands; and that the name Puerto Rico as used in this Act shall be construed to include not only the island of that name but also all adjacent islands, as aforesaid. i STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES I Section 2-That no law shall be enforced in Puerto Rico which would deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law, which would deny to any person of said island the equal protection of the laws. I That in all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the right to have the assistance of counsel for his defense; to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to obtain a copy of the same; to have a speedy and public trial; to be confronted with the accused's counsel; to have a fair and public hearing; to be informed of the facts of the case; to have a fair and public trial; to have a fair and public hearing. TODAY SATURDAY TODAY CORINNE GRIFFITH in FOR REASON OR FORCE (ft isn't being done this season) Tomorrow Sunday Niles Welsh and Gertrude Astor in "THE 6:50 EXPRESS" (The Six-fifty).
That no person shall be held responsible for an offence without due process of law; that no person shall be twice put in jeopardy of being punished for the same offence, nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself. That every person shall, before conviction, be allowed to give bail with sufficient surety, except for capital crimes where the proof is impossible or the presumption great. That no law shall be put in force impairing the value of the con- ¡ tracts. i That no person shall be incarcerated for debt. That the privilege i of the writ of "habéis corpus'' shall not be suspended, unless, in case of rebellion, insurrection, or invasion, the public safety may require it, and in any such case such privilege may be suspended by the President or by the Governor, provided that during such period the necessity for such suspension shall exist. That no law shall be passed "ex , post facto ' ' nor any bill : to condemn without formation of a trial. i ' Private property shall not be taken or impaired for public use, , ' except upon payment of just compensation fixed in the manner provided by the Act. Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to limit the power of the Legislature to enact laws for the protection of the life, health and safety of employees and laborers. That no law shall be passed granting titles of nobility; and no person holding any office of profit or trust of the Government of Puerto Rico shall, without the consent of the Congress of the United States, accept any gift, emolument, office, or title of any kind from any King, Queen, Prince, or foreign State, or from any officer thereof. I That no disproportionate bonds shall be demanded, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted. I That the right to be secure against arbitrary searches and seizures shall not be violated. I That no warrant of arrest or search shall be issued except upon good cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, the persons to be arrested and the things to be seized, r That slavery shall not exist in Puerto Rico. I That involuntary servitude shall not exist in Puerto Rico, except as punishment for a crime when the I 1 accused has been duly convicted. ? That no law shall be passed abridging the freedom of speech or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble in assembly and petition the Government for the reform of the Constitution.
and petition the Government for the reformation of abuses. That no law shall be made relative to the establishment of any religion prohibiting the free exercise thereof, and the free exercise and enjoyment of religious professions and worship shall at all times be permitted without distinction or preference, and no other political or religious requirement shall be made a condition of holding any office or position of trust in the Government of Puerto Rico than an oath to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the Laws of Puerto Rico. That no public money or property shall ever be assigned, applied, donated, used, directly or indirectly, for the use, benefit, or support of any sect, church, denomination, sectarian institution or association, or religious system, or for the use, benefit, or support of any priest, preacher, minister, or other religious instructor or dignitary as such. Polygamy or polygamous marriages are hereinafter prohibited. That the Legislature, as herein provided, may authorize and regulate the importation, manufacture, and sale of intoxicating liquors and drugs for medicinal, sacramental, and scientific uses only, as well as to fix penalties for violations of the laws in that respect. That no money shall be paid out of the Treasury except by virtue of an appropriation made by law, by warrant issued by the proper officer in accordance with said law. That the laws for the imposition of taxes in Puerto Rico shall be uniform. That all moneys collected by tax levied or fixed for a special purpose shall be considered as a special fund in the Treasury, and disbursed for such purpose only, except with the approval of the President of the United States. That eight hours shall constitute a day's labor in all cases where laborers and mechanics are employed in public works by or on behalf of the Government of the island, except in case of emergency. The employment of children under fourteen years of age in any occupation detrimental to health or morals or which endangers life or any part of the body is hereby prohibited. Section 3-Duties shall not be imposed or collected on exports from Puerto Rico; but may be imposed for the purposes of the island and municipal governments, respectively, as may be (Continued on p. 8.)
i EVEREADY ACCUMULATORS - We have a constant stock of accumulators for all makes of automobiles at the lowest prices on the market. We have the cheapest and best accumulator for J*. Ford. i I True service you will find in our electrical shop, the best in Puerto Rico. Distributors, Andrea, Aguilar & Co. Inc. Paseo Princesa, f z San Juan, P. R.
Dr. S. M. Haley Has moved his offices to the new building of "Puerto Rico Ilustrado Inc." corner San Jose & Tetuan. 4th. floor.
BASE-BALL Campo Atlético de Mayagüez Sunday, Dec. 30, 1923 HUMACAO vs MAYAGÜEZ TWO GREAT CHALLENGES
Dr. S. M. Haley OSTEOPATH HAS BEEN LOST A BAG CONTAINING 16 ODD SAMPLES OF MEN'S SHOES. Reward will be given to anyone who will account for it or turn it in at San Justo No. 37, San Juan. HAMILTON-BROWN SHOE <■> ...,i"" COMPANY Advt- <
HOLSTEIN BULLSHITTS, two to six months old, born in Puerto Rico. For sale at reasonable prices. i FAJARDO SUCAR COMPANY |
PADIN SODA FOUNTAIN OPEN DAY AND NIGHT TRY SKIMO ICE CREAM IT IS EXQUISITE.
FOR SALE at reasonable prices. Holstein Calves Borp in Pto. Rico two or six months old. FAJARDO SUGAR COMPANY
At yesterday's meeting of the Economic Commission, they discussed the designation of the site where the Presidio, the Madhouse and the "Leproscomio" will be built.
ALSO DISCUSSED WAS THAT OF THE UNIVERSITY OF P. R. With the attendance of Messrs. Barceló. Guerra, Hernández López, Lastra Charriez, Iglesias, Cuevas Zequeira and Alonso, the Economic Commission of the Legislature of Puerto Rico held a session during most of yesterday. The main matter discussed at the meeting was the designation of the site where the projected buildings of the new Penitentiary, the Leprocomio and the Insane Asylum are to be erected. This matter was discussed at length, and it was suggested that the case be entrusted to the Department Heads, so that they, taking into account the offers made by the different municipalities of the island, would give their opinion as to which would be the most appropriate place to erect said buildings. According to our reports, each of the Department Heads designated to carry out said study will render the corresponding report to the Economic Commission, expressing their opinion on the site, and the reasons on which they base their decision to designate this or that site. Once this work has been carried out, according to the reports, the Commission will resolve what is appropriate, in the end, according to the merits of the case and the general convenience of the country. The meeting also discussed the enlargement of the University of Puerto Rico, to which, it was said, three new buildings will be added: two in Rio Piedras for law, pharmacy and tropical diseases. (This is the last to crystallize the matter of the University of Columbia). The third building will be constructed in Mayagüez and will be destined for the engineering school. This was another topic whose discussion went on for a long time, ending the meeting at six o'clock in the afternoon. PARIS, December 28. (United Press)-Due to the heavy rains of the last few days the Seine has risen in floods and has burst its banks, flooding several houses in the Saint Denis area and its surroundings. Scores of families are leaving the flooded areas. No personal injuries were reported. AUTO COLE 8 The reputable dealers of this square Messrs. Lucas Blanco and Co. have been appointed agents of this reputable brand of automobiles so well known by people who like to have an elegant car and a powerful engine - We wish Messrs. Lucas Blanco and Co. good business in their new representation.
WOODS We have large stocks of all Assortment. Zinc Galv. grooved (assortment 0 ) 4 barbed wire. Re twisted rods, cement in Bls. "Portland Ok''. Before making your purchases visit or write to the: COMPAÑIA INDUSTRIAL DE SANTURCE PEDRO BOLIVAR S, en C. Tel. 425 Box 250 San Juan.
Ganga Great assortment of Cashmere, Gabardine, Genuine Palm Beach and Dril de hilo suits, for men and boys from 8 to 18 years old. Rodriguez Blanco & Co. BOX 1503 SAN JUAN 12 CRUZ 12
The Republican Territorial Committee has passed a resolution making it a condition precedent for Republican Olios to go on the Legislature Committee that the Unionist party disavow the Resident Com.
A copy of that resolution must be in the possession of the Chairman of the Unionist Party by this time. The Republicans do not seem to wish to have a representative of theirs on the Island Board of [lessons while Mr. Siaca Pacheco is Chairman of the same.
In the afternoon of Thursday, and previous Convocation to the affection of the president of the Party, Mr. Tous Soto, the Territorial Committee > of the Republican Party met in this capital to deal with different matters of urgent consideration. According to what we were informed yesterday, among the matters that were discussed was the one referring to the attitude that the Republicans should adopt in the face of the action of Mr. Códova Dávila, Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, presenting a Bill before the Congress of the Nation without waiting for the arrival there of the Commissioners of the Legislature. Several of the members of the aforesaid political body took the floor in this respect and expressed all their points of view on this matter, all agreeing that this had been a premeditation on the part of Mr. Códova Dávila. Mr. Tous Soto, according to our reports, stated in the Territorial Committee that he] understood that the Unió-1 nista party did not sanction this action by Mr. Córdova Dávila and that it had not been inspected by the majority party, and that it seemed to him that Mr. Córdova Dá-1 vila had not acted in bad faith even though he understood that this action greatly hindered the Republican Commissioners from standing up for themselves. After hearing the opinions of all, it was agreed by the Territorial Committee to approve a Resolution to the effect that if the leadership of the Unionist Party does not disavow this act of Mr. Córdova Dávila or make a public statement to the effect that this action has been a particular and personal one' of Mr. Córdova Dávila, the Republican Commissioners who are to go on the Co- i mission will abstain from concurring in the same, because they understand that if the Majority Party is going to act independently it is lacking in the sincerity and good faith that should reign in this work that all the political parties of the island have proposed to carry out jointly. A distinguished member of the Territorial Committee told us last night that a copy of this Resolution had been forwarded immediately to the President of the Unionist Party so that it could be duly considered and so that he would have time to reply to it, since there are so few days before the Commissioners embark. Before the Territorial Committee the question of the
The question of the recommendation to be made to fill the vacancy of the Republican member of the General Board of Elections due to the resignation some time ago of the Republican leader, Mr. Robert H. Todd, was also discussed before the Territorial Committee. There was a long debate in this respect, since many are of the opinion that the Republican Party should not make any recommendation to fill this vacancy as long as Governor Towner does not proceed to appoint Don Ramon Siaca Pacheco to the position of Superintendent of Elections, who is also the Chief of the aforementioned Board. They allege in this respect that if the Republicans make any recommendation for this position while Mr. Siaca is there, it is an acceptance of that appointment which the Party has been fighting since the very day it was made. As this question appeared to be extremely delicate and difficult, it was agreed to leave it for further discussion, and the Grim Reaper continues relentlessly cutting down lives in Ponce ■ Yesterday thirteen deaths were recorded -From November 20 to December 28, twenty-three persons died of malaria. -The immediate intervention of the sanitary authorities is necessary - - - Last night we received from our Ponce Editor the telegram which we publish below. The content of the same seems to us to be so exceptionally serious that it urges the immediate intervention of the health authorities. Our Editor calls the attention of the Health Department; but we go further and believe that in addition to the officials of that Department, the cooperation of all the doctors in the country should be requested to contribute their experience and wisdom in order to extirpate the disease, which little by little, is spreading alarm in the beautiful city of the South. Here is the telegram from our correspondent in Ponce: Ponce, Die. 28, 1923. EL MUNDO, San Juan. Thirteen deaths recorded today, three from malaria. Drs. Goyco, Pietri, attending numerous malaria cases. Porto Rico Drug consumed in December six hundred ounces of quinine sulfate. De Jesús stated that he had to increase the number of personnel to attend to prescriptions. I consulted the registry book proving that from November 20 to December 28, twenty-three people died of malaria. We called the attention of the Department of Health and authorities.
We call the attention of the Department of Health and Authorities. INTERESTING MANIFESTATIONS BY IGLESIAS When we were informed of the Resolution adopted by the Territorial Committee against the attitude of Señor Córdova Dávila, we were told, moreover, that the Socialists were very likely to adopt an identical Resolution, and with the object of ascertaining the truth we immediately got in communication with the President of the Socialist Party, Señor Iglesias, who began by stating to us that he had heard of the action taken by the Rerepublicans but not officially. I think otherwise," Mr. Iglesias began by telling us, "and I do not believe that what Córdova has done is so serious as to merit the adoption of such a radical measure as that of abstaining from going to the Commission of the Legislature. He, as a Representative in Congress, has the right to present as many Projects as he deems convenient to present and so do all the representatives and senators. So I have heard" that Senator King has introduced another Bill. I know that in this matter of Cordova the Unionist Party has had no intervention whatsoever." "And what made you think that?" -we asked him. "Well, neither the Unionist press nor any of the leaders of that party have made any statements to the effect that could be interpreted as meaning that Córdova was acting in agreement with the directors here. I could say more; but I do not want to set some against others or produce differences of a personal nature that lead to nothing. I understand that this Bill, like any other that has been presented before Congress, when it reaches the Commission, may be withdrawn by its authors, amended or changed, as it may be deemed more convenient, and then give way to the legislation that the Commissioners of the Legislature may agree to present. It is for these reasons that I believe that this matter does not lend itself to radical attitudes that lead to nothing good". Finally, he told us that he was perfectly in agreement with the statements that Mr. Tous Soto made to us yesterday in this respect; and he accepted that Córdova Dávila had acted with some festination, because he had been able to wait for the Commission of the Legislature to arrive there, and above all knowing that these Christmas days, when the Congress is on vacation, the hasty presentation of his project was not going to have any practical result.
Bolivar Pagan -LAWYER- Office: Calle Alien E "q. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone; 1475. San Juan. P. R.
! Ultima Hora! and ■■■Baaxx , X PRIVATE CABLE £ NEW YORK, Die. 29: Twelve players of the baseX ball club ALLENTOWN and a reporter of the "Allentown Morning ¿ Star"- embark today aboard the steamer "Philadelphia" bound t Puerto Rico where they will hold a series of games £ with the native clubs.
P A D A 'C* 17 PERMANENT SERVICE kJ /VklIL GARAGE - GASOLINE - BRANDI / P P WASHES.