- , ■Zn b ri IP [ b 9 wLP w)\ .Jl, y jj -
1 n PAGS. 3 CTS. I qj tí
1 A PAGS. 3 CTS. Ofi. Salvador Brau 81. I If TeL 1233 * _ B ° X 845
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ANO Vg
"<!>- nur-n-rr* nmn I g ttbh ? x,d " d di.Uibuted under permit (Ho. 801) euthori*ed by the Act of October 8. 1"1T, on filo nt the Poet Office at SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO. I Jnan -,P y JL 8. ButUimw. Po "tma "tar General. Entered second cleet matter, I fehmary 21, 1819. at the Poet Office at Ban Juan, Porto Bi ro' VUnited States of America) under V "o Act of march 8. 1H7#
IT HAS BEEN ANNOUNCED THE INTENTION OF THE REPUBLICAN SENATORS, TOUS SOTO AND MARTINEZ NADAL, TO RETIRE FROM THE FLOOR AT THE CLOSE OF THIS SESSION.
UTICA AT THE CLOSE OF THIS LEGISLATIVE SESSION.
Mr. Tons Soto will resign the presidency of the party and Mr. Martinez Nadal will resign from the Territorial Committee.
After the last assembly of the republican party, held a month ago at the Teatx®, Olimpo of this city, given the solidarity that reigned between the different tendencies that shuffled in the same rs, all hña ' think that, even in minority, the republican party promised to remain unshakable, without there being díAnciones and rivalries in its bosom. Now, however, the party seems to be content with a more intricate and difficult situation than that which existed prior to the Assembly. The question raised by the confirmation of the appointment made by the Governor in favor of Agustin B/Tont, for the position of prosecutor of the Court of Diserto de Ponco, seems to have led to a more complicated situation than was previously thought. This appointment has been on the Senate Appointments list for several days, and we have already published several reports on the subject, so it seems to us that our readers are well aware of the situation. This appointment was to be reported to the Senate at Thursday night's session; but it was left before the Committee until yesterday Friday's session. Charges were brought before the Committee on Appointments yesterday against Mr. Font, which were sustained before the Committee by the Senators of the District, Messrs. Toas Soto and Martinez Nadal; but the Committee on Appointments understood that these charges were not to be considered since the nature of the charges were to be submitted, if true, to a court of law; besides which Mr. Font was given an opportunity to defend himself, as he did. Mr. Tous Soto and Mr. Martínez Nadal, in the face of the futility of their efforts to defeat the candidate that
The following is a brief summary of the vote of Mr. Tous Soto and Mr. Martínez Nadal, in view of the futility of their efforts to defeat the candidate sent to the Senate by the Governor, have decided to cast their vote against him on the grounds that charges of extraordinary gravity have been brought against him and that they were not consulted regarding his appointment, thus breaking the established policy that all appointments shall be made through the Senators of the district. What we have said refers only to the official position adopted by Messrs. Tous Soto and Martínez Nadal in their capacity as Senators; but we understand that the aforementioned leaders, in the very bosom of the Committee while this matter was being debated, announced their intention to retire from active politics, the former resigning his position as President of the Party and the latter his position as a member of the Territorial Committee. It seems to obey this attitude of the i aforesaid significant Republican leaders to the snubbed position W which they have been placed by many of their own co-religionists of the District;* who have addressed,'behind their backs, the majority of the Nominating Committee, requesting the endorsement and confirmation of Mr. Font's appointment. The local Committee of Barros Republican stronghold, where the leader Don Oscar Guerrero resides, has sent its recommendation to the nomination, and the Committee of Adjuntas did the same, and the circumstance, in addition, that some members of the Republican minority of the House and members of the Territorial Committee endorse the candidacy of Ledo. Font, has inflamed the Senators who see themselves disavowed in an action that is their exclusive responsibility and whose attitude they adopted because that was the agreement of their districts' constituents to clarify the accusation made against the members of the minority (ContlnúA on page 6).
It is quite possible that the granting of the vote to women will be reconsidered in the Senate.
! In the session held at the Sena' do Insular, last Thursday night, the Bill of the distinguished Senator Don Juan García Ducós, to amend the Electoral Law in force, was discussed in the Total Committee, section by section. During that night's session, the discussions slipped by without any visible importance, since the sections in which there was political interest on the part of the minorities were not reached. One of our editors observed that, during one of the recesses of the Upper House, Mr. Barceló spoke about WATER! Yesterday a colleague said that the water problem was still on the table. That is what he understands, what we understand and what most of the residents of San Juan understand. But it seems that those in charge of resolving the conflict do not understand it that way. A few small, copious downpours have fallen; but the water, which should serve the Aqueduct, does not seem neither in the spiritualist centers. It is said that the liquid enters the pipes on the way to San Juan, but, due to the deficient conditions in which they are found, it goes off on a tangent, and we do not realize it. Yesterday afternoon we had water, but in such a condition that there were more than four guys who were left soapy, waiting for the fresh caress of Ja capricious maiden. And why is it necessary for anyone to bathe, you may say. Let them wait a few months, while the provisional works of Guaynabo are enabled or what is the same, while the people forget about that annoying habit of SHOWERING. Meanwhile, the sanitary facilities and the sewers are falling down with the stench, the employees get out of the way with orders that worsen the situation, and we all walk around these streets raging with heat and with a more or less dirty face. THE FRENCH ARE NICKNAMED. RAN OF 60,000,000 MARKS DUSSELDORF, July 13 (Oable française). -Sixty million marks sent by the Berlin government were captured by the French at Vohwinkel. This sum of money was sent for unknown purposes, for which the authorities are investigating the recipients. JOSE DE DIEGO ANNIVERSARY Tickets for the evening on Sunday night at the Municipal Theater can be ordered at the Theater's box office. ARE FREE
Compagnie Generale Transat'antique French Steamer "St. Raphael" It is expected in this port from 17 to 18 of the current coming from Cuba, Haiti, and Santo Domingo, following trip to Saint Martin, Guadeloupe and Martinique. Guadeloupe and Martinique. In this last point it will transfer the passengers that it will take from here to the steamer that will leave for Santander, Havre and Plymouth. Cargo and passengers are admitted for Saint Martin, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Spain, France and England. For further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. SAN JUAN, P. R. TELEPHONE BUILDING
The criterion to approve women's suffrage as an amendment to the Electoral Law prevails.
With a very distinguished group of ladies o: belonging to the Suffragist League, i- i who urged the illustrious Chief of the Majority Party to approve, as an act of justice to the Puerto Rican woman, the vote for women. On this occasion, the opinion that prevailed a few minutes later among the sei- calors, on both sides, was that if the Women's Suffrage Bill would be reconsidered.There was a moment when, while they were having the usual midnight chocolate, a heated debate on this matter was ignited among the most conspicuous members of the Senate, some favoring the granting of the vote and others opposing it for different political and social reasons. 3 1 According to the opinions which we heard in the Senate on this subject, we can be sure that the idea which now predominates is that of granting the ' i vote to women, including an amendment to the Electoral Law which is being discussed and making the granting of the ' J vote itaf? to be able to make use of this right in the elections of 1928 and with the restriction that only women who can read and write will be able to vote. '' It would not be venturesome to say that this amendment is having decided par- * * tidarity even among those who were opposed to the original Bill ' granting the vote to women; for the members of the majority ' consider that the Union of Puerto Ri1 co should further carry out its many j ' political execut- ions by recognizing this * right, which has been granted to the American 1 mnier. The fact that this law will come into force in the elections of 1928 avoids any complications that might arise in the next elections and will serve to educate the female multitudes of the island to make good use of that right which they are going to exercise for the first time in Puerto Rico.
- A MOLER VIDRIO that "EL : BOLOGNA FOREST*' will continue to be the FIFTEENTH. It will continue to be San Juan's most popular quintal, because of how cheaply it sells and how south it is. : tida that it is. 'lí Advt.
NEW SUITS....! WE HAVE JUST RECEIVED A GREAT ASSORTMENT FOR LADIES AND GIRLS Great fashion models in fine silk with Egyptian patterns at $4.98 . Others in Chinese Silk, - Canton Crepe - Silk Ratiné with nice trimmings on Egyptian motifs at $10.50 and $12.50 SPORTS SUITS, ELEGANTISIMOUS MODELS white silk pleated skirt and fancy over-blouse different styles and colors, all beautiful at $15 Elegant Suits in Canton Crepe and other silks beautiful colors and novelty styles with beautiful embellishments in all sizes at $25 Many other Novelty items just arrived GONZALEZ PADIN C0., INC. S-
: 1 USED STAINED GLASS ! ' j Liquido varias Baratísimas [ | JOSE DIAZ CARMENA t Cruz 10 San Juan, P. R. f ❖ : Bolívar Pagán -ABB.
Bolívar Pagán -LAWYER-- ; Office: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P. R. ■
No such reciprocity can exist between the U. S. and Spain.
If the ships of the latter are inhibited from visiting ports of the former, says Ledo. Salvador Suau
In relation to the propaganda that is being made about the coffee of Puerto Rico, so that the rich grain is favored by the commercial treaty of reciprocity that will be concluded between the United States and Spain, the Ledo. Salvador Suau, commenting on this matter, emphasized a fact, which in his opinion is of capital importance in this matter, since the true effectiveness of the treaty of reference would depend on it. Mr. Suau told us that he believes that there can be no such treaty of reciprocity between the United States and Spain, unless the Government of the first of these nations does not suspend the restrictions to which, by virtue of the Volstead Act, the vessels of the second are subjected in the American ports. The question raised in the foregoing brief notes of Mr. Suau is really of importance and of overwhelming logic, and we are pleased to give it to publicity for what it may mean to our interested elements in the matter which motivates these lines. IV BALWIN'S SPEECH COMMENTED IN PARIS PARIS, July 12 (French cable) - This afternoon Stanley Baldwin's speech, which was submitted to Poincaré's cabinet, was made public. The prevailing impression is that the proposals of the English Premier are acceptable. The absence of any indication to act separately has been favorably commented upon by high personalities. LORD CURZON READ THE MIS. MO MESSAGE IN THE HOUSE OF HOUSE OF LORDS. July 12. (French Cable)-A copy of the message which was read by Baldwin in the House of Commons, was delivered by Lord Curzon in the House of Lords. PARK TODAY SATURDAY Exclusive Premiere in Santuree WANDA HAWLEY in "THE OUTSIDE WOMAN" Sun. WALTHALL in "THE LONG CHANCE" CONEY ISLAND EVERY DAY BULLSHIT IB I RIVERO CHA VES / seo. W Brau 75, S. J. W
SATURDAY, JULY 14, 1924. NUMBER 1357
The administrative head of the Workmen's Compensation Commission is maturing a magnificent plan of reorganization in order to bring greater speed to the proceedings of that Agency.
At present, the Commission has more than 15,000 registered employers, who are obliged to pay their accounts to the compensation fund.
Up to July 9, the Workers' Compensation Commission held three sessions, on July 3, 6 and 9, respectively. In addition to other administrative matters of great importance, the Commission resolved fifteen (15) cases of Permanent Partial Disability and one (1) of death, ordering to pay a total of $5,045.These amounts do not include what the Commission has ordered to be paid for medical assistance, hospitalization, x-rays, medicines, transportation, advances for food and other expenses related to said accidents. Including all expenses, these sixteen cases would yield a total cash total of over $8,000.00. Here is a list of the permanent partial disability and death cases settled in those sessions: Inc. Par. Permanent: Case No. Guillermo Gonzalez; $50.00; 1586, Jose Rio, $50.00; 27993, Abad Morales, >50.00; 34097, Nicolas Be- , nitez, $50.00; 30287,Francisco Tirad% $50.00 ; 28836, Jose? Martinez, $60.00; 28005, Santiago Rosario, $60.00; 27176, Juan Quiñones, $75.00; 29408, Tomas Rodriguez, $100.00; 20319, Agustin Rodriguez, $100.00; 25868, Diego Negron, $190.00; 28686, Felix Sala, $100.00; 26238, Camilo Marrero, $200.00; 25341, Jose Justiniano, $200.00; 30980, Reyes Morales, $800.00; 12270, Death, Genaro Caraballo, $3,000.00. Total: $5,045.00. Form No. 31 is being sent to all employers to report the total expenses incurred during the year for wages paid to their workers. At present, the Commission has more than 15,000 registered employers, who are obligated to pay their dues to the Indemnity Fund. To avoid annoying inconvenience to employers, they should file their report for the year, if possible, before August 15. By filing these reports as soon as possible, the accounting work of the Commission will be greatly facilitated, since they will be the basis for determining the premiums to be paid by the employers for the fiscal year 1923-24. The Law stipulates a fine for employers who are delinquent in rendering such report. Said fine may reach a maximum of $500.00. The Chief Administrative Officer of the Commission has ordered a general review of all the cases decided by the District Referees, in which there are accounts pending payment, for the purpose of reimbursing the employers for all advances made to their employees. TORRES, Santuree 1205. BUMPERS We have just received a small batch. LUCAS BLANCO & CO. San Juan, P. R.
We have just received a small amount of money for the payment of the expenses for medicines, hospitalization, travel expenses, X-rays, etc., which have not yet been paid. During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1923, 13,350 claims for compensation were filed with the Bureau. This represents 550 more claims than in the previous year. In the fiscal year 1922-23, 12,838 cases of temporary disability, 261 cases of permanent partial disability, 2 cases of total disability and 55 cases of death were settled, for a total of 13,156 cases settled. In the fiscal year 1921-22, 15,324 claims for compensation were settled. The Chief Administrative Officer of the Workmen's Compensation Commission is maturing a plan for the reorganization of the Bureau, with the object of bringing all the proceedings of the Commission as rapidly as possible, both as regards the disposition of applications for compensation and the settlement of all employers' accounts. The *niu of the Office is now ... "Efficiency and speed in all proceedings." MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN, P. B., WATER SUPPLY SERVICE As of today, and until further notice, the water supply service to San Juan, Puerta de Tierra, Santuree and Rio Piedras, will be verified at the following times: IN THE MORNING Rio Piedras and Santuree from 6 to 8 San Juan and Puerta de Tierra 9 to 11 IN THE AFTERNOON Rio Piedras and Santuree 4 to 6 San Juan and Puerta de Tierra 7 to 9 This measure has been adopted because of the low quantity of water that the Piedras River currently has. The Administration is taking this measure so as not to deprive the public of this important service, especially at times when the consumption of water is strictly necessary. Everyone is requested to cooperate with the Administration through an economical use of water, so that the restrictions of this interruption of service may cause the least possible discomfort. The general public is hereby notified that the use of water for garden irrigation and for any purpose other than domestic and industrial applications where water is absolutely necessary is strictly prohibited. The police, and every citizen, is duty bound to report any infringement of this imperative necessity, Rafael DIEZ DE ANDINO, Commissioner of Public Service, Police and Prisons. FREE Advt i For several days we will be distributing Colgate Toothpaste, Colgate Florient and Eclat Powders, and other products from the well-known Colgate & Co. Perfumery Department FERRETERIA FINLAY SAN JUAN . ' I . . A4W .