The AflNDO
UPAGS. 3 CTS. - "- '
PAGS. 3 CTS. Ofl. jumper Braa 81. Tal. 1823. - Box U"
MORNING DAILY, EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
ANNUAL V.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
PuHithcd and distributed snder penút (No. 801) aalfceriAjd b, th, Ae.t ot oetober 0, 1"17, on Ale at "ha Pos" Offies et Ran Jnan, Porto Bieo. By order of the President, A 8, ■grietan. Poatmaiter General. Kntered aa aeeond elate matter, febnary 21. 101". et the Poet Ofdee at Ran Jean. Porto 'co, (United Statee of AmwieaV andar Vie Set of march 8, 187# 111 . n ■ ■ ■ ■■ 1 ■ ■ ■' . > ■■■ -
SATURDAY, AUGUST 4, 1923
NUMBER 1375.
"The death of President Harding is an irreparable disgrace to our' island."
So assures the head of the Unionist party and president of the Senate, don Antonio R. Barceló
The unexpectedness of the triple news, as well as the transcendence of the tragic event, had to overwhelm everyone's spirits in such a way that in the first moments, when the news of the death of the first magistrate of the Republic was received here, it was hardly possible to conceive the reality of such an unfortunate event. Hence it was completely difficult for other representative men to say anything for publicity at a time when they had barely been able to shake off the intense emotion that the news had caused them. Yesterday afternoon, however, we visited Mr. Barceló in his office at the Sonado where he was still busy sending condolence cables to the national authorities and to the President's wife! The death of President Harding," said Mr. Barceló, "is undoubtedly a great misfortune not only for the United States but also for our island. Already President Harding knew , perfectly well our problems to- I two and was in possession of all núes j btet~dcmaHdas. No one better than he , had . He had come in closer touch with the affairs of Puerto Rico, and I am sure that everything seemed to be prepared and ready, thanks to that circumstance, for us to be given, in all its fullness, the justice we deserve, and it was in that hope that we were going to go next winter to submit to the United States, In the coming winter to submit our demands to the metropolitan authorities. Nocesifriamente -continued Mr. Barceló- this painful event will be a great obstacle and that is why for us there is a double motive of feeling and regret before BE NECESITAN Para la isla agentes con experiencia en ventas a plazo. Good opportunity for experienced candidates. References are requested. Address personally to Alien 11, San Juan, P. E. Advt. I < IH H'l 11 11 11 iftfta Bag &i B lack Mills § - - - se ; ' Manufacturers of burlap - ; -; for packing tobacco. ;; Thread for tobacco and other ;- - - * uses. ;; Offers for delivery in - - - > October, at prices which do not ; I admit of competition. "- For further inquiries, address your ex- " -- portation manager VICTOR HIÑO- " JOSA, Condado Hotel, or at -- ; ;; his agents, -- -- ii Alonso Riera & Co. ii II Tobacco Palace, San Juan. II íh-hii i-i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i A MOLES VIDRIO that "EL BOSQUE DE BOLONIA'' will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA in San Juan because it sells so well and is so well stocked. Advt.
. the irreparable of '.a misfortune occurred. I In addition, it is to feel that a man, relatively young, (full of vigor and <je energies, animated of the best desires and when he still lacked much to do in "u brilliant political career, is surprised by the death so unexpectedly.** Mr. Barceló also told us that it was a real pity that fatality had interposed and prevented the visit to our country of the illustrious President, since it would have brought great benefits to the island. While commenting on this circumstance, Mr. Barceló took from his desk, yesterday's issue of "La Democracia'', and read a paragraph, in which Mr. Barceló's thoughts on the matter are expressed. Here is the paragraph: "His death has for our island a special, golden significance. It was on the way to Puerto Rico, on the way to our beaches, on the way to our palm trees whose waving canopies awaited him to greet him, and on the way to our hands that were waiting to shake his hand, that the President diverted his route to the country from whose borders he would never return. The prow of his ship was on its way to Puerto Rico: his thoughts and heartbeats were bound for Puerto Rico. How much, ptiés, may Puerto Rico lower its forehead in grief and raise to heaven a prayer for the eternal rest of Warren Gamaliel Harding. FESTIVALS IN HONOR OF TOS VETERANS On the occasion of the death of the Hon. President of the Republic, the government of the island, in agreement with the Committee AVISA - MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN AQUEDUCT SERVICE O As of today, July 19, the distribution of water will begin at 7 A, M and end at 1 P. M. for the entire territory served by the Aqueduct. This measure is taken in view of the prolongation of the drought, and all the neighbors are begged not to leave their pens open, and especially to the neighbors of Santurce to suppress the irrigation of gardens, so that the neighbors of San Juan may receive the water they need for essential uses. . Rafael DIEZ DE ANDINO, Commissioner of Public Service, Police and Prisons. Advt. Bolívar Pagan -ABOCADO- Office: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz. P- O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P. R. , ' Advt. PARQUE TODAY SATURDAY TODAY BERT LYTELL and VIRGINIA VALLI "Su Ultimo Combate" (The Right that failed) Tomorrow Sunday DAVID POWELL and MARY GLYNNE in LAS APARIENCIAS (Appearances)
C* A P A c* r PERMANENT SERVICE GARAGE - GASOLINE - WASHES I BRANDI |
Firpo's training for the meeting with Dempsey will take place in New York.
FOREST'S FOREST WAS MOVED TO NEW YORK TO TELL ABOUT THE ARGENTICAN'S PREPARATION FOR THE FIGHT * WITH THE WORLD CHAMPION (From "LaraPrensa" of N. Y.) Once the unknown has been eliminated, about the possibility of Frenchman Criqui to retain the title snatched from Kilbane, the world of sports, especially the puyilistic one, turns its eyes to the coming match between the world champion and Firpo. From one day to the next, it is expected the indication of the bgar of the fight and its date, as well as the number of rounds that should limit the bout. The latter seems unanimously fixed at fifteen rounds, taking into account the precedents of the fights between Dotosey and Carpentier, Brennan and GlbboiqF It is believed by the experts that a smaller distance would not give the contestants, if the decisive kno<A oul does not take place, the margin to record in 'clear form the superiority of the winner by points. The day , it is expected to be % late September and the battleground Polo Grounds, according to all probability. firpo will Train here Finished three matches pending Firpo in the interior, he is expected back $his home in this city at the beginning of da second week of August. Tniwedly, according to authoritative reports, he will begin preparation for the bAalla. But this time, as he declared after the victory over VWard, the Argentine will camp in a small summer village, cmno-MÉ' then, but in the very heart of New York he will do his training. Jimmy D-Forest is expected to come to the city to direct Firpo's work. It has not yet been decided which gymnasium he will choose for his pre paration, for it is general opinion that he will use the Madison Square gymnasium as before the meeting with Jack McAuliffe. THE OPINION OF THE EXPERTS The transcendence of the match in the sports centers has already begun to be reflected in the offices of the promoter Tex Rickard. According to statements from people close to him, he has already received requests for blocks of tickets for the fight from Hispanic people who wish to attend it with groups of friends. The expectation aroused is general. THE MANAGEMENT OF FOREST It is significant that the opinion of the;
r- = SEE OUR SHIRTS ■■'~ 3 YARN SHIRTS English broadcloth shirts By These are the shirts you should pred* -f fer, they are made of material manufactured 1 V expressly for making shirts. There is certainly nothing better than a single VaZen $5 each. 3- - )uran and satisfy under this value. I II All Sizes - White, Listed Their Value Males Nice Colors. 55° Few days special sale ||| each Gonzalez Padíü Co. L : San Juan Ponce Mayagüez
CURAZAO SALT 100 0|0 OF PURITY White, Coarse and Dry. Does not produce moisture or shrinkage. Very limited prices. 1 Call Tel. 478. P.O. Box 137. Moreno Maritime Company.
BULBS \HJ RIVERO CHAVES \I / yUJ acó. W Beau 75 San Juan V
MACHINE SHOE REPAIR I Affordable prices Guaranteed work NIMACA SHOE FACTORY Carretera Nueva Stop 22, Santurce
Interesting dispatch from Governor Towner to Hon. Calvin Coolidge
In the afternoon of yesterday, and through the Bureau of Insular Affairs, the Hon. Governor Towner, addressed to the new President of the Nation the following cable dispatch: "To the President, White House, Washington, D. C. Please accept on my behalf and on behalf of the People of Puerto Rico, the testimony of our full confidence and cooperation. Your high character, long experience and great ability are a guarantee that the political program approved by the people will continue to be developed during your administration. H. M. TOWNER, 4 Governor. THE DEATH OF THE PRESIDENT IN PONCE (By Telegraph) Ponce, August 3, 1923. EL MUNDO, San Juan. I Since the early hours of today the , tdudad of Ponce is plunged in a! deep mourning for having received - unexpected ncjdcla death President Harding, The national flag and the flags all nationalities of their consuls this city are half arta. The commerce, public and private offices. courts of Justice, banks will be closed all day tomorrow demonstration mourning. All the festivals announced Saturday and Sunday social centers and par ti eral ares as well as retretas, suspended. The great unionist meeting announced for Sunday was suspended. Ponce participates in the great national mourning. CORRESPONDENT of the Ohio Veterans Celebration, has agreed to suspend the receptions and festivals that were to be held in his honor, limiting the program to those official acts, such as the placement and unveiling of the tombstone. Governor Towner, Mr. Barceló and Mr. Guerra will go to Guayama tomorrow to make speeches during the ceremony of unveiling the commemorative tombstone, and it is to be expected that this act will have greater solemnity, due to the national mourning for the death of President Harding. It is possible that this ceremony may also be suspended; but until late yesterday, the reports we had were that only the festivals had been suspended and not this ceremony, which is an official ceremony.
- Among the sugar growers the idea of sending a representative to Cuba is being agitated.
[The Escuela Azucarera de la Haba- - na, according to reports received by the last mail, recently celebrated the second anniversary of its foundation, having awarded a large number of diplomas to sugar chemists, former experts to whom we owe in great part, both here and there, the stupendous numbers of sacks of sugar that the sugar mills produce. During the aforementioned act, according to reports, an extensive speech was read, praising the work of these professionals, which tends to the improvement of sugar, to the stability * of its yields, to the good sale of the product, to the cleanliness of the land and fertility of the soil, etc., etc. 1 The former Minister of Agriculture of Cu1 ba, who was present, expressed himself to the effect that how far-sighted had - been his idea of convening, a year ago, ■ the first Sugar Congress, exciting the interest of all sugar-producing countries. It was agreed that as another sugar congress is to be held next November 1, the opportunity should be taken to hold a sugar congress of an international character, in order to suggest to all sugar-producing countries to send their representatives to the event. According to reports, the sugar interests of Puerto Rico intend to send a delegate to Cuba to take part in the projected sugar congress. It is already conceded in circles totally versed to the Argentinean, that he can enter the ring with chances of winning that were unexpected for many of those who saw him fight against Willard and gave their opinion under the impression of the first moment. The idea that the Argentine fought in Jersey City sticking to the instructions of his trainer, avoiding left jabs and defensive tactics that De Forest understood to be useless in the certainty that his pupil's right jabs to the body of the Kansas giant would win the fight, has taken hold. It is beginning to be affirmed by all that Dempsey, less heavy, less tall, of less* length of stroke than Willard could not knock down Gibbons, Firpo will have in him an opo- ■ Kinte somewhat less irresistible than was ba supposed. Firpo, in turn, is said to continue > in progressive training in spite of the recentness of his fight with Willard. The Argentine heavyweight Fra, who has accompanied him to several exhibition matches, has continued to work with him and his intimates say he is fit to step into the ring in three weeks of work.
The rumor circulated that there will be no water in San Juan today is completely false.
Mr. Diez de Andino tells us that a railroad from Central Vannina will bring water to San Juan.
San Juan was assured yesterday that today, and perhaps for many more days, there was not a single drop of water because the Piedras River and the artesian wells recently opened by the Administration to deal, as far as possible, with the water conflict, did not provide enough water to fill the reservoir up to the height of the pipe through which the water passes to the tank, to the dorination filters and then to the pipeline to continue its refreshing journey to Santurce, Puerta de Tierra and San Juan. Yesterday, according to information from the Municipality, the conditions of the pipeline were difficult, more so than on any other occasion, with the water reaching 41 inches below the level of the crest of the dam. A few inches lower, as Engineer Pont assured us, and we would have no more water in San Juan. Hence the rumor that became so pronounced that the terrible threat was taken for granted. As the drought, in spite of being in a month of rain, is becoming more and more accentuated, the artesian wells opened in the vicinity of the Aqueduct hardly give water, and we cannot count on A MAN KILLED IN HUMACAO Guayama, August 3. Four o'clock today afternoon Juan Ramos, worker, was killed by a shot fired by Felipe Torres, dependent Poland "Cora,** Minor Santos Lebrón, cuartero coloriia Olimlpo, carreta tiraba bueyes destrozóle a leg. Both colonies are owned by Jenaro Cautifio. Luis Texidor Ortiz, Marshal District Court, dismissed Deputy Marshal Ulises Laboy, then appointed Pablo Lectora. Motive death President Harding dances, honor veterans suspended. Correspondent. GOVERNMENT OF PUERTO RICO DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE NEGOTIATE OF ARBITRIES IMPORTANT NOTICE In accordance with the provisions of* Section 57 of the current Excise Act, all merchants or dealers in tradable articles on which the tax has not yet been paid must provide themselves with a "Stock and Movement" book and an "Invoice" book to record the entries and exits of said articles and the payment of the taxes. These books shall be provided by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, for the payment of 50 cents each. The interested parties shall, as soon as possible, request such books at the Internal Revenue Collector's Offices of the towns in which the businesses are established. J. W. BONNER, Treasurer of Puerto Rico. Advt. The Diablos de la Plaza have already begun to receive the suggestive models of footwear selected by their buyer, Mr. Primitivo Franco, currently in the United States. Among the new styles are precious Egyptian sandals in blue, green and champagne colors that are a faithful copy of those used in the time of the Pharaohs. Advt.
1 1 epos but as a little help. Yesterday it was agreed by the Council of Administration to bring water from the Central ¡ San Vicente in large tanks, by railroad, for the purpose of raising the water level in the dam. Last night, in order to have the rumors circulating about the possible absolute drought confirmed or denied, we telephoned the Commissioner of Public Service, Mr. Diez de Andino, to whom we asked if something new had happened in the Aqueduct for which the water conflict would completely deprive us of the precious liquid for a few days. -- Nothing new has happened," answered the Commissioner. Everything remains in the same condition. Just now I have just come from the Aqueduct, where I have seen that the waters of the dam are 41 and a half inches below the crest level. -The rumor that tomorrow (today) there will be no water in San Juan is completely false," he added, "We are doing everything possible to get a railroad from the Vanina to bring water from where the Guaynabo aqueduct ends to the Rio Piedras reservoir to increase its speed. The water available to us will continue to be pumped as before, and there is no basis for the fear that it will not be pumped from the Guaynabo aqueduct to the Rio Piedras aqueduct. San Juan, P. B., August 3, 1923. A. SARMIENTO. Secretary. Advt. THREE MONTHS ELECTRICAL SALES ON DEPOSIT - OF - Electrical Apparatus Our principal business is the sale of electric current. In order to secure a permanent car- 1 ga, we sell durable appliances at greatly reduced prices. All of our employees, no matter what department they work in, will demonstrate the appliances and iron out the details of the sale until the buyer is satisfied. P. R. Railway Light & Power Co. Tel. 163 San Juan Box 368 and Agencies ■BUHBKEirañBaanBBMMa&i
THE MASKED AVIATOR I