elmBndo
-12 Págs. 3 Cts.- Semester .... $4.00 One Year ........ ... $7.50
-12 Págs. 3 Cts.- Offices: Salvador Bran 81 Tel. 1222 - P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR V.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Aet of oetober 6, 1917. on file at the Post Office of San Juan, Porte Rico, By order of the President. A. S. Bur leson, Postmaster General. Entered as second clast matter fehruarv 21. 1919, at tha Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rl co, (United States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1879.
Munich socialists organize a demonstration to protest French occupation.
(United Press, via All America Cables) ~MUNICH, Jan. 12.-The Socialists of this city held last night, an assembly at which they agreed to or ganize this afternoon a large demonstration to protest the French occupation of the Ruhr. Last night six rallies were held here, at which Socialist speakers took the floor and made a sharp attack on France's attitude. The police took the necessary precautions to prevent public order from being disturbed. During the demonstrations the Socialists gave cheers to the army. ROÑAR LAW TO DELIVER IMPORTANT SPEECH IN HOUSE OF COMMONS ON MONDAY - LONDON, January 12.-The Leader of the Government has just announced that he will appear before the House of Commons next Monday to speak on England's attitude to the occupation of the Ruhr. Bonar Law will reveal important diplomatic talks with France and the real reasons for England's non-cooperation with France in the Ruhr invasion. GERMAN AMBASSADOR DELIVERS NOTE TO STATE DEPARTMENT WASHINGTON, Jan. 12.-German Ambassador Wiedtfeldt delivered _to _L íKffetario líughes a note from Álema-T nía protesting the occupation of the Ruhr. HUGO STINNES CONFERENCE WITH CUNO BERLIN, January 12.-Hugo Stinnes has held a conference with Chancellor Cuno. The conversation evrsolved about the 1 occupation of the Ruhr. POINCARE AND BARTHOU CONFERENCE PARIS, Jan. 12.-M. Poincaré has held an interview with M Barthou chairman of the Compensation Committee, in order to agree on preliminaries for tomorrow's meeting. "SP-ORTS" Special Thread Try this Cigarette with paper I very, fine, sweet flavored, made from cereals and of Spanish provenance. We recommend it as the nicest and finest Cigarette that can be produced.
In the halls of the Court Dr. Osborn continues to practice the expert examination of the ballot papers.
The investigation of the f iscaL-Interesting manifestations of Mr. Salgado has not yet begun.
Throughout the day yesterday, in the halls of the District Court, the expert calligrapher, Dr. Osbom, continued the examination of each and every one of the ballots of College No. 26, which are supposed, by the defendants in the lawsuit, to have been tampered with. Dr. Osbom, as we have been informed, in the examination of the ballots of this College, for the purpose of making progress, will select from among the ballots, those which present the most remarkable features, to make photographs of them and then make a ruling as to the condition in which they appear. The definitive result of this new work being carried out by the expert will not be known until next Monday, when the hearing will be resumed. As to what was said yesterday in connection with the order given by the Attorney General to the District Attorney to make a thorough investigation, for the purpose of ascertaining who are the persons responsible for the alteration committed on the ballots of the 25th College, according to the recent decision- MR. J. BLUMENTHAL We have had the satisfaction of meeting in this office the distinguished North American businessman Mr. J. Blumenthal, export manager of the well-known North American firm "Fiberloid Corporation" of New York, one of the most highly reputable firms in the American markets. Mr. Blumenthal is coming to Puerto Rico on a business trip, with the purpose of making some explorations of this market, in order to intensify here the sales of the excellent toiletries of the house he represents. We have no doubt that given the prestige of the Fiberlaid Corporation and Mr. Blumenthal, he will find here an excellent market for the sale of his articles, so well known throughout the world. We are pleased to reiterate our greetings to Mr. Blumenthal, wishing him pleasant impressions in Puerto Rico. Perfumed Chloroethyl Wholesale and Retail. R. Juliá & lo. San Juan, P. R.
j mind dictated by the Court, we must say that the Attorney, it is true, held yesterday an extensive conference with Prosecutor Samalea, to whom he gave his opinion and instructions as to the attitude to be adopted by the judicial authorities; but as of yesterday afternoon, we understand that no such investigation had yet been initiated. Yesterday, at noon, we were informed that the Prosecutor, in company with some employees of the Insular Board of Elections, had been in the House building inspecting the places where the ballots were kept. Later we were also told that arrest warrants had already been issued. About five o'clock in the afternoon, one of our Editors met with Mr. Salgado, an important employee of the Board of Elections, and with the purpose of confirming the foregoing rn- 1 mores, asked him if he was aware of the fiscal investigation that was said to be taking place and if it was true that Prosecutor Samalea had been with them inspecting the premises they occupied in the building of the Chamber. "AU Salgado told us that he had learned of the intentions of the Department of Justice from what he had read in the noon press; that he did not know whether the investigation had begun, but that he could assure us that neither he nor any of the members of the Board of Selectmen had been called by the Prosecutor or notified of anything, officially, in that regard. Mr. Salgado further told the Editor that he was glad to see the proper investigation being made in the case, so that the name and reputation of the employees of the Board of Elections would not be rolling in the street and called into question. Exchanging impressions with some persons of recognized public significance, they told us, regarding the order given by the Attorney General, that, as soon as the Court reached the conviction that a fraud had been committed in College 25, it was up to the Governor to act, who, as a matter of public morals, should have administratively demanded responsibility from the person in charge of keeping those ballots without being tempered with, since this was the only way to guarantee the rights of both parties in litigation. PARK today SATURDAY TODAY Superb premiere. ANNA Q. NILSSON in the vigorous orama "Jugándose la Honra" (WITHOUT LIMIT) Tomorrow Sunday: "Una Mujer sin importancia" (A Woman of No Importance) FOR OFFICE: For rent at $30.00 splendid part of a premises, on the second floor of the "Tobacco Palace". Phone 411. Advt.
Compagnie Generale Transatlantique FRENCH STEAMER "BISKRA" is waiting at this port on January 18 for GUADALUPE and MARTINICA- This steamer makes direct connection at FORT DE FRANCE (Martinique) with the steamer 'PUERTO RICO" of the same Company leaving on the 25th of the same for SANTANDER (Spain) and HAVRE (France). We admit cargo and passengers for the above mentioned ports. For further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. Agents. Tanca-Tetuan, Edf. del Teléfono. San Juan. Telephone No. 25.
At the Condado HOTEL - Vanderbilt Splendid DINNER-BAILE Saturday, January 13, 1923. Lunch 7:00 P. M. Dance 9:30 P.M. ' ' ' Magnificent Orchestra.
The Ledo, Don Benito Fores Moraza, a Republican leader of great significance, has written to Don José Tons Soto, knowing about the Party.
From an authorized source we received reports, that the significant Republican leader Ledo, Don Benito Forés Moraza had written a letter to the President of the Republican Party, Don José Tons y Soto, sharing with him in it his irrevocable decision to separate definitively from the party to which he had been, since its foundation, lending his efforts and enthusiasm. The Ledo. Forés was a delegate to the House of Representatives for the district of Mayagüez, and in him the Republican Party always had an indefatigable fighter and one of its most characterized leaders. At the present time he holds the important position of President of the Municipal Assembly of San Germán, where he resides, and we understand that he intends to resign that position as soon as that body meets in the near future. The letter referred to above has not yet been answered by Mr. Tons Soto, as we were informed; but Mr. Forés has made to his friends the confession that he will separate from the party and resign from all active political participation. As to what motives Mr. Forés may have had for adopting such an attitude, we cannot make any categorical statement, since we are completely ignorant of them, and on the other hand, it is materially difficult for us to know how to deal with such an esteemed friend; but what we can be sure of, since we are perfectly familiar with the qualities of integrity and character of Mr. Forés, is that some disappointment in the party may have been caused by his decision to resign, and that he may have been disappointed in the party, and that he may not have been able to make the necessary changes in the party. Forés, is that he must have received some pro funda disappointment from his party for him to have taken such an extreme resolution, which, once adopted, he will not have to retract and which, surely, as we have said, will not have been for trivial reasons since Mr. Forés is not one of those who rehearses attitudes to achieve purposes by intimidating others, but his actions and decisions are always the product of meditation and analysis. A DIVISION OF FRENCH TROOPS HAS ARRIVED AT DUSSELDORF DUSSELDORF, January 12.- A division of French troops arrived here last night. Tomorrow, probably, it will continue its march to Essen. TRANSLATION To the city of Ponce has been transferred the popular and active Chief of the Insular Police, Don Antonio Monteserín, who for some time has been serving here, with the general approval. Our farewell greetings. ADVT. BRUNO & VAZQUEZ, San Juan, P. R. Quebradillas responded gallantly to the opening of CIRCUI TO by filling the Liberty. Audience was fascinated with "FASCINA CION". Carlos ROURE. A. D. V. T.
GUITARS Spanish guitars just received the EUTERPE Music Bazaar Calle de San Jose No. 6.
"DON'T FORGET ME" M'c. TODAY'S EXTRAORDINARY CIRCUIT FILM BRUNO & VAZQUEZ Gc Tomorrow Sunday Hazel Daly & Tom Mooreen 'True to their Promise' Beating the Game
SATURDAY, JANUARY 13, 1923. j NUMBER 1203.
The government of France uncovers a Communist plot for the "Bolshevik" army to attack and invade France.
One of the co-authors of the plot is Deputy ü: chin, who will be prosecuted, as well as several others.
(United Press, via All America Cables) PARIS, January 12.-The police have just uncovered a terrible plot against the security of the State in which are involved as direct co-authors, the best known leaders of French communism, Cachin, Monnou seau, Semard, Treint and others. According to the active and laborious investigations carried out by the police authorities, an international communist meeting was recently held in Essen to discuss the attitude to be adopted by the communist party in the face of the French invasion of the Ruhr area. After heated and extensive discussions the Assembly agreed, among other things, to ask for the cooperation of the Russian Bolshevik army to go to Germany to attack the French in the Ruhr. It was agreed that if the Soviet army reached the Rhine, the French Communists would immediately start the revolution in France to overthrow the government of M. Poincaré and open up the French army in the Ruhr. The police have reduced to prison the leaders Monnoseau, Semard and Treint; but the deputy Cachin, thanks to parliamentary immunity, has not yet been arrested, awaiting only the opinion of the Minister of Justice to prosecute him. | At the last minute it is reported that the Minister of Justice has sent this afternoon to the Chamber of Deputies a long statement in which he affirms that the immunity of Deputy Cachin should be lifted and authorizes the police authorities to arrest him/ ¡ DEputy CACHIN, IN JAIL ¡ - PARIS, January 12.- Accused of a crime of high treason, Deputy Ca-' ¡ chin was reduced to prison this afternoon. ♦ i | Cachin made no resistance, but refused to testify. THE POLICE HAVE OTHER DETENTIONS IN THE HOLDING PARIS, January 12-31 Chief of Police has officially stated that the investigations into the communist plot of Essen ' Base Ball INSULAR LIGA SUNDAY 14. 2 INTERESTING CHALLENGES 2 "PONCE " VS. "SPORTS" The "Riders" are ready to take off the whistle they received in ' Ponce. ¡ A LA OCHO A LA OCHO
& j adding that at any moment new arrests will be made. RUSSIA WOULD INVADE POLAND? PARIS, January 12.-At the last moment it has been ascertained that one of the aspects of the communist plot of Es-sen consisted in Russia's invading Poland, so as not to distract the German forces in the Ruhr, which would oppose the French advance. PARIS, January 12.-The Indemnities Committee will hold tomorrow (today) an important meeting to consider German demands for moratorium. It is understood that the French representatives will not present the plan which they made known at the recent meeting of the Premiers, but that it includes very important modifications as suggested by the head of the German Government in the translations he sent to the Marquis Della loneta. The decision of the Compensation Committee on the moratorium question will be taken by a majority vote, so the British delegation is not expected to stand in the way of the vote. AN ARTICLE BY HAUPTMANN BERLIN, January 12.-The great poet Gerard Hauptmann has published an article in which he appeals to the Germans for calm in coping with the events. i THE FRENCH TROOPS OF ESSEN IN THE SUBURBS OF THE CITY ESSEN, Jan. 12.-The French troops were withdrawn this morning from the center of the city, encamping in the suburbs. Olympus Theater SATURDAY, JANUARY 13, 1923. DOROTHY DALTON -EN- Los Idolos del Norte Extraordinary Success! r SUNDAY 14. Premiere in Puerto Rico of the sensational French film 'El Destino Manda' Drama in 7 acts, whose premiere in Europe was a noisy event. ■H- l-1-11 I I I I I l-l-ll I I I I I I 1 I I I I 1 I I I I 1 " PIANOS, PHONOGRAPHS, CA- " ,, MAS, FURNITURE, etc Sales ¡ ■ cash and comfortable installments se- - - - -. manals. We do not require guarantees. - > .. We extend credit all over the ! ;; world. Visit us at Alien 89. '' ■ - Across from the Municipal Theater. ' - ;; IMPORT SALES & BUSINESS ' ¡ " AGENCY INC.
AZADAS CHISPAS No. 2 and No. 3 ALAMBRE PUAS GALVANIZA. DO. - GRAMPAS. Quality. - Price . - Service . ROLAN, TEJEDOR A DE HOSTOS. I Box 1356. - Tel. 395-200. San Juan, P. R.
■ SLEEP I 9 : natural need and prin" 9 . opal basis of health has in the i M |9 excited nerves its worst ene- : B migo To catch sleep one must K B first tame the nerves),which 9/ is very easily achieved 1B F/ ron the ¡WÍFo'Sm which er entirely harmless ■t and whose success has patented- /9 Bl million cases Effects d the /B ■ L 20 minutes of Id fomd.-.Many 1 B B BE authorities have ruled in ■ | its favor counting by the thousands |Bf B| ios doctors recommending it IB ■ | It is on sale in pnnci- !■ 9 1 Armed Pa'-es in IB Bl""-V^ riQ tubes of 20 tablets. FOR SALE One adding machine, Burroughs brand, model 1923. Write to P.O. Box 1592, San Juan. Advt. CALM IN ESSEN ESSEN, January 12.-The city remains calm; reports that French troops were attacked by civilians are denied. German police are directing traffic. The factories are functioning normally. The French occupied the Kaiserhof Hotel this morning.
The Mexican government refuses to attend the Pan-American conference in Santiago de Chile.
(United Press, via All America Cablee) MEXICO CITY, January (Urgent Dispatch)-The government has declined Chile's invitation to attend the Pan-American conference in Santiago. President Obregón states that his attitude is due to the lack of cordiality in his relations with the United States. TURKS REFUSE TO MAKE ECOMIC CONCESSIONS - LAUSANNE, January 12.- The Turkish delegation has emphatically refused to accede to Allied proposals that Catholic colleges and other foreign religious institutions in Turkey should be free from the payment of fees for a maximum period of five years. It is reported that the British delegation will present its definite demands on Tuesday next on the Straits question. BRITISH AND FRENCH WARSHIPS TO MEMEL (PARIS, January 12.- The French and British governments agreed today to send several warships to Memel for the purpose of protecting the French troops there. The French government has addressed a strong note to the government of Kovno protesting against the occupation of the towns of Limeurehjt and Skista. The Lithuanian government replied that it could not prevent, given the scarcity of its forces, such an invasion. MARSHAL WEIGAND TO ESSEN PARIS, Jan: 12.-Marshal Weygand will go to Essen today to inspect the work of occupation. U.S. GOVERNMENT WILL REMAIN IN STATU QUO" WASHINGTON, Jan. 12.-Assurances are given that the Government will not act, as suggested by Germany, in regard to the occupation of the Ruhr The Government is giving consideration to the Senate request that the American expert on the Compensation Committee return to the United States.