■ ■ 9 B B
[WPAG&3CTST i I fl" ASe * " Z SS m Jw*' 'P !l v- - -- -- - ~
1 4 PAGS. 3 CTS. I /■ bflein" "Puerto " Bieo
MARIO DE LA MARAÑA, a .
EXCEPT DOMINGM
AAOV
■BAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
P.M1.1.U diatribe*- Mfit d". BOD -Ba "ir "i?to W Art MM** *. 1B1T. - *>-"< ***, ? *y* ** ■- Ja-.Beato B "eo, By totaaf tke Preaid-í, X B M"-hraerv "1. Itl" ■> Po "t OM"" -" $-■ Xa- P ato Ven CTWfA 8tet- a* A-B-1 -dar t- *W tK MB- B. IT"
V - 4 SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 1923
NUMBER 1452 >
WJy will be held at the Latoi*ia racetrack great national race between. "Zev", Wedor of "Papyrus", and "My Own" d jura-blood of Admiral Grayson.
Lk two American Mies are in contention-WWeo9tooadMal.-$50,000 price for d winner.-While "ly Own" does not have a sheet of served as "Zev" is undoubtedly a pobbdeatiaW. -There are veteran den was claim that "My Own" has a chance to win -p' (Special Dispatch for ; ' EL'. MIJNDO) NEW Nbre. 3. (United Press).-Negotiations are now closed for the holding of a great national horse race between "Zev," the famous three-year-old colt, winner of "Papyrus," the English champion, and his rival, "My Own," also an American colt, owned by Admiral C*y T. Grayson. The ten-1 race will take place today, the third, at the great Latonia racecourse. JThe distance for this great race has been arranged at one mile and tred quarters, with .a prize of 150,000 to the winner. Today other races were scheduled between the famed American Western champion "In Mamorian" and "Enchantmente," owned by Marry Payne Whitney; but all the excitement of the countless American and foreign racetracks is focused on the meeting between the two famous American rivals who will contest the championship today. Today they will dispute .the camDe "M*** bey- "Zev", taking á $50,000 preñáf will be the horse that more dMpo will have won in the world. On the other hand, "My Own," the reigning international champion, will arrest the laurels of "Zev" in the race with the winner of the English Derby, the last winner at Belmont Park racetrack. Neither of the two horses, "Zev" and "My Own.'*, .have been trained! to run the mile and three-quarter distance. Many believed that "My Qwn" was better prepared to stand this course; but "Zev's" sensational race at Belmont Park, where he beat Pyrus'' P*an?o bodies at a mile and a half without showing the slightest difficulty, decided (OoqtiirOa "n page 2).
Dr.'S. M. Haley O8TEOPATA - - - ' I M I I 1 110H H H H I I I I -H-i-H-H-H-Need ; good* deshUadoras for ; suit. We pay week * □WR|J t tW fior 5 1 / 2 days <te ' work only. W&. S f' k :
Olympus Theatre SHARES DI/LZ-PEBDIGUEDO , Sunday 4:- Matinee at 3 1 /, ' * * ' I ' 'The Pride of Albacete' ' and Variédades. Lunettes:-50 and 75 Cts. * In the evening: "L4 SBROBITA ESTA LOCA" and Variédades by Mercedes Díaz. Lunettes 75 Cts, numbered and , 50 unnumbered. - Dr. S. ML Haley Has moved his offices to the new building of "Puerto Rico Ilustrado-Inc.'' corner San José and Tetuán. 4th. floor.
■ ! S E V E ND E ' - '■ : l A lot of 800 meters in the street of San Agustín (Puer ; tata dl Tíerra) with fronts to the referred street and to that of the * ; Railroad. ■ J Also for sale is a modern machine for making ; tiiwraíóe. Inermes: "SUCRS. of L. VILLAMIL A 00.", Marina. : mrn m............. ■.. Fnm'ÁniT PERMANENT SERVICE I (á flWAUL GARAGE - GASOLINE - WASHING I 1S WTT"\ 1 Vil.1 .A PO1MCE I "KILAíPiLll io p. r.
Important resolutions adopted by the Economic Commission of the Legislature at its meeting yesterday.
The meeting was attended by the Heads of Departments to deal with matters relating to the works of the borrowing A comprehensive report was read from Mr. Last night the following official notes of the different agreements adopted at yesterday's session by the Economic Commission of the Legislature were forwarded to us: Yesterday, Friday, November 2, the Economic Commission of the Legislative Assembly of Tuerto Rico met with the attendance of Commissioners Hernández López, Guerra Mondragon, Lastra Charriez, Pérez Cruz, González Mena, Alonso Torres and the President, Mr. Barceló. Present, summoned by the Commission, were Messrs. Chardón, Esteves and Ortiz, heads of the Island Departments of Agriculture, Labor, Interior and Health and Welfare, respectively. Various communications were brought before the Commission from several Municipalities of the Island, in response to the agreements previously reached by the Commission regarding the selection of lands for the installation of the works consigned in the loan recently approved by the Legislature. The verbal reports of the Commissioners of the Interior and of Health and Welfare were heard, and to this effect it was agreed to request from them the presentation of a detailed report, in writing, regarding the conditions that the hospitals to be built in accordance with said loan must meet. Mr. González Mena, member of this Commission, was commissioned so that he, together with the Commissioners of the Interior and of Public Instruction, would present a project for the distribution of the amounts designated for the construction of school-houses. A letter was received from the Secretary of the Treasury.
In the elections to be held in Santo Nfningo, it is very certain that the Ledo. D. Francisco' J. Peynado
This has been assured to us by the Dominican political proiniiente Mr. Bernardo Pichardo who affirms that this election will guarantee an era of true prosperity in the neighboring republic.
On Thursday morning, Mr. Bernardo Pichardo, a prominent Dominican intellectual from Santo Domingo, who enjoys well-deserved prestige in the Antilles for his intense work as a publicist and educator, as well as for his activities in public life, having worked in the main political parties, arrived in the capital. As soon as we were informed of his arrival, we went to interview him at the Palace Hotel where he is staying and he was very pleased to give us his opinion regarding the current political movement of his country in the run-up to the elections that will determine the evacuation of the American troops from the homeland and the establishment in that country of a stable government of order and peace that will emanate from the will of the citizens expressed through the ballot box in impartial and peaceful elections. Mr. Pichardo has arrived in this capital with the purpose of embarking to the North where he is going with the purpose of printing a magnificent work containing the first census of the Dominican Republic. The work of drafting this work was entrusted to Mr. Iglesias, member of the Delegation that was appointed by this Economic Commission to carry out studies of a legal nature, and which is presently in North America, in which Mr. Iglesias gives a report on the work carried out to date by said Delegation, in compliance with the mission designated to him by this Commission. It was agreed to bring to the attention of those municipalities of the Island which have not yet sent their communications in response to the request of this Commission regarding the sites where the works of the loan are to be installed, so that, within one week, they may send their proposals, for the consideration and study of the Commission.
The Commission, which was set up for Mr. Iíchardo by the present government of his country, was also commissioned to take charge of its printing. Without ceasing to confess to us that the situation in Santo Domingo is too delicate to expose in the press judgments about the result of the elections that are to be held on the fourteenth of this month, Mr. Pichardo began by telling us that upon his arrival in Santo Domingo a year ago after returning from Bfcropa, he broke with Mr. Velázquez and months later joined the cause of Mr. Peynado. 1 "The electoral struggle," Mr. Pichardo told us, "is developing without friction or disturbances. The sympathizers of both contending sides and the discussions typical in this kind of contests are noticed; but everything leads us to believe that the elections will be held in the greatest order and that (Continued on page 2) THE POLICE OF SN JUAN QUEDA EA CONTENTA . The great Durham Duplex Razor Co. of Jersey City, New Jersey, through its representative, Mr. Fernando Alvarado, who is passing through this island on his trip from Latin America, has been gallant enough to present the police officers of the city of San Juan with one of its "Duplex" safety razors. So from today each policeman can go to the San Francisco Pharmacy, provided with the order of "u Captain, to pick up his razor with which the factory gives him a gift. Analyzing this gallantry of the Durham Duplex Razor Co. factory, it is clear that it has chosen the police force that always, very well presented, can show its face attractively clean-shaven before the eyes' of the public. ' Good for the San Juan police, and ' for the good sense of the Durham Duplex ■ Razor Co.
The General Board of the deredw students of the University has issued a decree establishing certain rules for sustaining the protest movement begun
At the meeting held yesterday by the Executive Council it was announced ipie the Governor will proceed to Washington in order to settle a matter pending before the Municipality of S. Juan.
Numerous ordinances and municipal matters resolved by the aforesaid body.-The meeting was presided over by Governor Towner At the meeting held yesterday morning by the Executive Council, in the Governor's offices, and presided over by the Governor, the following resolutions were adopted: The Governor gave notice of approval of the following payments from the "Miscellaneous Expenses" fund of the National Guard for the year 1923-24: Purchase from Mr. Juan Viguie of two expies of the films taken at Camp Parra, $400; for repairs of hats and shoes. $112.50; reimbursement to Mr. Olimpio Diaz, for bonds paid by members of Tito's team to the National Guard White, at Camp Perry, $180.00; salary of an elerek, $780 per annum, effective 1 4" octubri dé 1923. The Commissioner of the Interior submitted, and it was approved, a list of eight persons, lessees of land belonging to the Port Bico Township, and who have applied to the Safe Homes Commission to have their present leases, approved by the Executive Council, changed, He indicated that the Safe Homes Commission, on October 12 of this year, had approved this request, and in turn requested the authorization of the Executive Council to annul the present leases in order to obtain the right to ownership in accordance with the provisions of the Safe Homes Law.
Why is the "Duplex" more and more in demand every day? During the days that our advertising has been in action, we have noticed that the number of our razors in distribution has grown more and more exceeding what we expected. t . The reason is quite explainable, because everyone who has taken a razor, has seen in the blade its unsurpassed efficiency for unruly beards and smooth complexion. There are still two days left of advertising and you can take your case to FINLAY at the San Francisco Pharmacy, at the Porto Ric© Drug Store and you will be amazed at the proposition. 1 LU . 1H-M. H1 HWI l lili H-l-H-l-t-H-ll-Mril i I I I f I !■! !■ "■ H-I-H-H-H- i-M--1 i I I I ll-H" 1 ■ ' " ■ -=g-..s7-i -.MZ - -í- .-jr.Maag,FROM THE FACTORY -- DIRECTLY-, u I,reí yB Jg) TO THE WORKS EH PUERTO RICO 1L, LP ,o_opE=~~-- -' -' - ; - -. 4suj_ n 2 D .l n n°rffi o EVERY MONTH MÓRICA "rM|IAMA "CA - A VAPORA COMES OUT .Aoi - - -~ jgQ, -I I I -1- 7* 1 - -i-
WE ALWAYS HAVE FRESH STOCK OF U I CE ME NTO CABALLITO * DO NOT BUY ANOTHER BRAND BEFORE OE SEE S2£S CE. L VILLAMILICO Yes - ! e. --1.-. . - . II - iiMi-anii- - - - HTíi mTrliifcrfí
Interesting remarks by the Rector about the conditions imposed by him for the admission of suspended students Reorganization of the College of Law is necessary to avoid a repetition of such conflicts.
The serious situation created at the University of Puerto Rico due to the protest that all the students of the Department of Law are maintaining, continues in the same state and it is difficult to predict at this time how the conflict will be resolved. As soon as the students, on Wednesday night last, learned of the conditions imposed upon them by the Rector of the Umversnian, Mr. St. John, for the admission of the seven suspended students, they immediately proceeded to meet and after agreeing to reject them outright, appointed a Board of Directors consisting of five students, the four Presidents of the classes and one appointed by them, to direct the movement with broad powers and to take quawt.The students, with broad powers to direct the movement and to adopt any measures necessary for the smooth running of the movement, with the expe- "ea liza i transactions with the university authorities without obtaining the endorsement of a general assembly of the students. In the morning of ay-i- the said Board of Directors, on a board posted at the entrance of the University and in other public places in Rio Piedras, have exposed to the public the following interesting decree: OFFICIAL BULLETIN OF THE GENERAL BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE STUDENTS OF THE COLLEGE OF LAW 1- The Board of Directors strictly forbids the classes of the College of Law to meet to receive information, advice or suggestions from any person not authorized by the Board of Directors. Any violation of this decree will be considered as an act hostile to our movement. 2, - The Directory initiates a voluntary collection among the students of the University for the purpose of raising fon- , two for our campaign, providing that every three days oroesderá to fix in I Cuand® leave Work 1 do not fail to go to the "Bazaar Savings", I Fortress 25 that there is a large t Baratillo in dress clothes, work clothes and a large assortment of hats at any price. Apollinaris . Bolivar Pagan -LAWYER- Office: Calle Alien Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. s an Juan, P. R.
The Board of Directors authorized the Board of Directors to appoint the partners Ortiz Bomep, Isaías Crespo, Antonio Barceló and Victor M. Pons, to proceed as an economic commission in agreement with the former Treasurer of the Board of Directors, Mr. Rafael Buscaglia. The Board of Directors authorizes the students of the College of Law to attend the military instruction, considering that the Military Department is an independent organism giving the Dean of the University's jurisdiction. The Board of Directors begs the different colleges of the University to maintain an attitude of speculation, and that for now, they only give us their moral support. The Board of Directors agrees to send to the Board of Trustees of the University of Puerto Rico, a communication requesting that it conduct a general investigation of the present conditions of the University, and the causes that motivate the continuous conflicts that originate therein. BY THE GENERAL BOARD OF DIRECTORS, Signed: - Felix Ochoteco Jr_, PelaContinued on page 6 Bruno * Vazquez, Inc. Company Today -Saturday 3- Today BRUNO & VAZQUEZ Inc. PBBSENTA Huntley Gordon, Myrtle Stedman, Carmel Myers, Cullen Landis " BN MUJFB. CUBE SU HOHK The famou Mrs. Fair Afternoon and Evening TOMORROW SUNDAY Exclusively in the Matinee Two premiere productions and seven beautiful gifts.
DO YOU SELL PAINTINGS? Send us your Man and address, we'll send you a gift. Wadsworfli Howland & Co, fa&l P. O: Box 27$, San Juán, Puerto Rico
Güñpagnie Generale Traiisaliantiíiue i French Steamer "HAITI" of 8500 Tons - This luxurious and comfortable liner separates at this < port towards the 9 current coming from Cuba* Haiti and San- < to Domingo, and will continue voyage bound fori Havre, (Fran- < cia). For further information, please contact our agents in San Juan; BEHN BROTHERS INC. < : TEL . 257