THE M1ND
1 p PAGES. 3 STS. '
1 p PAGES. 3 CTS. I Ofl. Salvador Braa 81. I <> Tel 1MX ~ B ° S
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ANN V g
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
ruub.u "d and OiBtribttted under penan (No. <WH> aatnomad by tb" Act oí ootob" e, 1817, on SU at the Foot OíSe" of Han R,e °- o/ the President, A. 8. íBariaaon. Poatmaater General. Kntered ai leoond the tea matter, febrnary 21, 1918. at the Poet Offlea at Han Juan. Forty Ki en, (United Htatea of America! under tee Aet of march 8. 1878.
SATURDAY, JULY 28, 1923.
NUMBER 1370.
The new Prohibition regulations have not lowered customs receipts.
Only one foreign line, the Dutch, has withdrawn its ships.
Collector Mr. Moore says it will be some time before the effects of this decision are felt and determined.
The foreign ships have not suspended their visits to the ports of the island in consequence of the enforcement of the prohibitionist laws to the extent of causing a considerable reduction in Customs revenue, according to the Collector. Mr. Hayden' L. Moore. In his opinion it will be months before it will be possible to give definite information as to the effects on Port Bico of the possible withdrawal of foreign steamers from the Port B'co route, So far only the Dutch line has been the only one which has withdrawn its vessels from the service definite- ¡ively, in obedience to the decision that no foreign vessel shall < be allowed to enter American ports with 1 cores on board. A NEW SERVICE The Spanish lines, we understand, have proposed a new service that includes only the ports of the island and the mainland. The Atlantic tra" Maria Cristina, which was aqtfl about two weeks ago, came direct from Spain and left here for New York. This voyage, it is believed, is only a trial run. The ships of both the French and Spanish lines bound for ports in the West Indies and South America, when liquors form a considerable part of their cargo, will not call at Port Bico, but it has been proposed that they stop here on their return to Europe when they have no other liquors on board than those of the crew. The French service between the West Indies has been continued, calling at Puerto Rico on their return voyages to Guadeloupe from Haiti and Santo Domingo. BAD MONTHS Mr. Moore has said that from the Customs point of view the summer months are the "bad months'' so that there has been no particular reduction in customs entries since the new prohibitionist provision came into force on June 10. OUR TRADE IS WITH NEW YORK From 25 to 35 per cent, continues Mr. Moore, of our imports from the FASCIST LEADER ARRESTED IN MADRID MADRID, July 27 (French Cable). - "El Impartial" announces that the leader of a Fascist party which has been formed in Catalonia. with the project of introducing in Spain a policy similar to that implanted by Mussolini in Boma, has been arrested, THE ATTACKER IS CAPTURED ALICANTE, July 27. (United Press) -The syndicalist Tomás Aureliano, author of the bombing of the Pueblo Nuevo railroad, from which 150,000 pesetas were taken, has been arrested. BULLETS \ I® RIVERO CHAVEsX I / uy &co. 9 Brau 75 San Juan W A MILLING GLASS that "EL BOSQUE DE BOLONIA" will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA in San Juan because of the great value it sells and for the south it is.
The foreign shipments are coming in via New York, so that even if the direct service to Europe is reduced, the island will continue to receive European products and at least part of the customs duties will be collected here. A NEW TARIFF k The new customs tariff approved last September has immediately resulted in an increase in customs duties from $35,000 and $40,000 to over $100,000 per month, so that customs duties during the last fiscal year amounted to over $1 million. (From the "Porto Rico Progress")
Five million marks to the pound LONDON, j "Uo 27. (United Press). -The mark has been quoted at 4,200,000 to the pound sterling. London, July 27 (United Press). - The mark was quoted at twenty past eleven o'clock today at five millions per pound sterling. GERMANY THINKS OF CREATING ANOTHER KIND OF CURRENCY - b BERLIN, July 27. -In official circles calls are being made for the introduction of a new system of currency to replace the inarco. The rapid fall of this currency, which was quoted yesterday morning on the stock exchange at 760,000 to the dollar, is due to the fact that from two to three billion marks are printed daily on the government printing presses to meet the demands of the banks of the empire. N. of the R.- The last dispatch received by EL MUNDO in relation to the mark's exchange rate indicates that it is quoted at 4,500,000 per pound sterling, or nearly 950,000 to the dollar. PARIS, July 27 (French cable) - The situation in Greece has worsened in the last few hours. All the Athens newspapers, especially "The Nivosti" declare that the revolutionary movement is gaining supporters, especially among the military elements and that a ministerial crisis is imminent due to serious disagreements in the VtolzeIhta party.
DISCUSSION OF LAUSANNE TREATY TO BEGIN CONSTANTINOPLA, July 27 (United Press) - From Angora it is reported that the National Assembly has begun to discuss the Treaty of Lausanne. On Saturday, the fourth, the important agreement will be put to the vote. If the agreement is ratified, the evacuation of Constantinople by the Allies will begin two days later, on the sixth of August.
IC A P A PF PERMANENT SERVICE "Ir V1IL GARAGE - GASOLINE - BRANDI V WASHES, , L O LA Ti CE
The steamer 'SanMuan' carrying Ohio veterans left yesterday for Puerto Rico.
The Military Representation will embark at Arroyo next Thursday at six o'clock in the morning.
New York, July 27. (United Press)-A large contingent of veterans of the Fourth Ohio Regiment which took part in the Spanish-American war at the time of the invasion of Puerto Rico by Uncle Sam's troops, has just arrived in this city, coming from the interior of the country by the "Central" and "Pennsylvania" railroad lines. ' ' The veteran soldiers among whom are numbered numerous friends of ex-President William McKin-1 law, will embark this afternoon on the steamer "San Juan," of the "New York and P. B. S. S. S. Co." bound for the port of Arroyo. The object of the trip of the Ohio soldiers is to attend the unveiling j of a memorial tablet which will be placed on the site where the battle was fought against the Spanish troops, near Guayama. This tombstone j is intended to commemorate the memory of the American soldiers who fell dead in the action fought in said plaza. On the fifth of August it will be twenty-five years since the capture of Guayama by the American troops, and the trip of the veterans will mark a true event in the history of Puerto Rico. - I The steamer "San Juan" which will leave at four o'clock this afternoon today will proceed to the port of Arroyo, arriving there, Thursday, August 2, at six o'clock in the morning. SB. NADAL CONFIRMS THE NEWS For the purpose of confirming the time of departure of the steamer "San Juan" from the port of New York, we put ourselves in telephone communication with Mr. Nadal of the "New York and Porto Rico S. S. Co." and he stated that a cablegram had been received from the Main Office informing that the "San Juan" would leave at four o'clock yesterday afternoon and that said ship would arrive on Thursday, August 2, at six o'clock in the morning at the port of Arroyo. THOUSANDS OF GERMANS INVADE THE OCCUPIED ZONE DUSSELDORF, July 27 (French cable). - Since early yesterday thousands of Germans have been entering the occupied zone. Both residents of the occupied and unoccupied zones have been waiting for this moment to cross the "frontier" in order to solve pending problems. It is understood that the frontier will be closed in a few days, i The frontiers were closed on the occasion of that horrendous attack on the railroad on which the Belgian soldiers were traveling and as a result of which ten died. VARELA AND AMEL ERRIFFI TO MADRID .... MELILLA, July 27 (United Press). -Affirm that the High Commissioner in Morocco, Varela, will shortly leave for Madrid accompanied by Aniel Er-: r.'ffi. Unconfirmed rumors assure that Amel Erriffi is portaíür of Ad del Krim's overtures to submit. THE MOROS ARE REJECTED IN TIZZI AZZA MELILLA, July 27 (United Press). The enemy fired on Tizzi Aza being repulsed. The Spaniards destroyed the enemy tr.nchersa. The Moors cut the telegraph lines between Axdir, Anua, Nador, taking the wires. For days vléneSe observed great activity in the enemy camp. A DIRECT CABLE BETWEEN ITALY AND THE UNITED STATES ROME, July 27 (United Press) - The Minister of Telegraphs reports that yesterday a contract was signed between the engineer Carosio and the 'Western Union' to put a direct cable between Italy and the United States.
AVJSO MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN WATER SERVICE Beginning today, July 19, the water dls tribudon will begin at 7 A. M. and will end at 1 P.M. for all the territory served by the Aqueduct. This measure is taken in view of the prolongation of the drought, and all the vednos are begged not to leave the plumas" open, and especially to the neighbors of Santurce to suppress the irrigation of Jardines, so that the vednos of San Juan can redbir the water that they need for essential osos. Rafael DIEZ DE ANDINO, Commissioner Public Service, Police and Prisons. Advt
Of all that goes on in the$ governmental, political spheres, the Vice-President of the se- * nudanasabe ni pío, t . The alleged appointment of Mr. H. Hull to Chief of Information.
On the occasion of the "official quiet" which reigned yesterday, being a date consecrated to the memory of Dr. Barbosa, the day was somewhat ungrateful for the work of the "detect! vesca", and everywhere the reporter stuck his head, he saw nothing but closed doors, desks so ¡litarlos, resigned armchairs. The reporter, who instinctively visited all these places, started walking through squares and streets, in the hope of meeting some misguided politician, who would not hesitate to tell him something about the latest events that are brewing in the high spheres of politics and government. The moment is sensational and of great interest to some, because of the unanimous current of opinion that has been created about the second resolution. To be or not to be... That's the problem, say many. And others, like the ¡ Vice President of the Senate, Stflor Hernández López, for example, "doesn't know a thing about it all", according to what the notable politician told us, who was the only one the reporter covered in his iperiodic "raid" yesterday. I DON'T KNOW A PEEP... On resolution number two, Mr. Joan has no opinion. He prefers that the Chief does it, it seems... -But the Chief has already done it! we told him. The Vice President of the High Chamber does not enter for nothing. So, we changed the record. -And what about the appointment of the Chief of Police? WHEAT THAT DOES NOT EXIST IS SOLD IN THE UNITED STATES St. Paul, July 27-(United Press),- Senator Johnson, leader of the agricultural movement in the northwest, wrote a letter to the Secretary of Agriculture, Mr. Wallace, in which he asserts that thousands of bushels of wheat that does not exist have been sold, greatly reducing the prices of this cereal. The aforementioned Senator also asks ' that the necessary measures be adopted' to avoid fictitious sales. LENIN IS ILL AGAIN ■■■■i "ie COPENHAGEN, July 25. (United Press). From Moscow they report that Ni- , kolai Lenine is again ill.
Nothing either! Don Juan, this Don Juan of the elegant speeches, learned the news from our newspaper.... -And I thought you had RACKED - as they say nowadays - the case! -No, what the v"! -replied the Vice President of the Senate. I assure you that I don't know a thing about all that you have asked me, and I don't know a thing about it. Perhaps! we thought. Or could it be that Don Juan, hiding behind that kindly tactic, deser( cultivate the elegance of fraternally driving away his "assailants". If so, just as well! But... MR. H. HULL - As in connection with all these matters it was said that Mr. H. Hull, Director of the "Progress" had been appointed to replace Mr. Lewis, who had been promoted from Chief of the Detective Corps to Colonel of the Police, we also approached the gentleman in order to find out what was true in the matter. Mr. Hull stated that the news was unfounded, as it was not true that the Governor had appointed him to such a post. HUGO STINNES HAS VISITED KAZ7ER AMBERES, July 27 (United Press). -Unconfirmed dispatches from Antwerp announce that among the persons who have visited former Emperor William J at his residence at Dora is the well-known multi-millionaire Hugo Stinnes. Dr. Heffelrich, a well-known Pangeriranist visited the former emperor earlier this month. Prince Eithel Frederick also visited his father. Recent visits to the fallen monarch have aroused great curiosity in' Holland and Belgium. REGIA EXHIBITION In the windows of FINLAY WAYMOUTH & LEE, of fabrics dyed with the Larkin Colo* rants. Don't miss it. Bolívar Pagán -LAWYER- Office: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P. R. Advt.
PARQUE TODAY SATURDAY PREMIERE LA BUENA ESTRELLA (Sure Fire Flint) By Johenny Heines, Doris Kenyon and Edmund Breeze. Tomorrow Sunday Exclusively in Santurce May. McAvoy and Ralph Graves in THE INFIEL (The Private Scandal) The last day of Coney Island in the Park. Don't miss it. AGUAS DE MONDARIZ "CEBECEDO HNOS. & CO." ■" -á" J
"I h|ce some time ago addressed a letter to resident Gomez to abandon ama policy followed by his Gonos said last night the ex-consul da¡Venezuela, Mr. Varela.
And he adds that this has been the cause of ¿ his dismissal.
Yesterday at four o'clock, Mr. José Ignacio Valera handed over the Consulate of Venezuela to Colonel Hugo Fonseca Rivas, who arrived in this city the day before yesterday to take charge of those offices. I A representative of this newspaper in compuH of the editor of "La Democracia"® Mr. Andrés Rodríguez Vera, visited the ex-Consul, in his rooms at the "Roma" to get more explicit news from his Government about his fulminating dismissal. Mr. Vsréla declared to the journalists present that he had not received any communication other than that of his relief without explaining the reasons Gómez had for adopting an attitude which should be amply commented on by the foreign press. I told us Mr. Valera -I have served my country and during my stay in the consulate I have not done like the spies who devoted themselves to sending newspaper clippings to President Gómez where judgments or harsh criticisms against his Government appeared. I am not a person who serves as a spy, I am not an informer of my compatriots, I do not pay, as other conspirators have done, I am not an informer of my compatriots, I do not pay as other conspirators have done, I do not pay as other conspirators have done, I do not pay. I am simply a Venezuelan who in foreign countries is only dedicated to defend his fellow countrymen and to protect them when necessary. I have been dismissed because I have opened the doors of the Consulate to all my fellow countrymen.
-I am sure that the assassin of the Vice-President of Venezuela was a person of the absolute confidence of the Governor of Caracas himself. Mr. Valera ended by asking us to convey to his friends, to the press in general and to his compatriots the most expressive thanks for the courtesy that everyone has always shown him. As we left his rooms, the ex-Consul declared that he only felt one regret in leaving the Consulate: that of leaving the portrait of the "Liberator" in the Consulate. Don José Ignacio Valeja intends to embark for the United States on August 13 with the purpose of devoting himself to commerce.
He has no regard for his fellow citizens regardless of his political ideals. -Mr. Valera, is that the only reason that may have influenced your dismissal? Is there no other reason? For example, have you ever written a few lines to President Don Juan Vicente Gómez? -Yes. Some time ago I wrote a letter to the President urging him that it was necessary to dispense with certain actions put into practice by his Government and which were the cause of all kinds of criticism abroad. - That he, Gómez, should teach the people to know how to conduct themselves by the ways of law and civility. I also suggested that he should order that Americans be charged the same passport fees as any other foreign person, and that he should not make any more concessions of mines to foreign capitals since this, instead of benefiting, would harm the interests of the homeland. The President," Valera told us, "answered me that I should not give any opinion and that the Nation knew the healthy and patriotic work that Gómez had been carrying out for the benefit of his people and his posterity. And now speaking of something else, who do you think, Mr. Valera, was the author of Don Juancho's death?
MADRID, July 27 (United Press) - In political and military circles the suspension of the meeting of the National Defense Board, which was to be presided over by the King, is being cemented.
The Republican party has also appointed a political commission to go to Wash, in December, to attend the meeting of the National Defense Board.
Some elements of that party are in favor of sustaining an attitude of radicalism and protest Is there a vote of censure on Mr. Coates?-The resolution against Governor Towner will be duly processed.
'. The critical situation through which the Republican party has been passing for some months, mainly as regards its relations with the present administration, and which crisis was thought to have come to an end, seems not to be over, but on the contrary, it seems to be getting deeper every day, because there is no unity of action among the leaders of that party, as far as precedents are concerned. The result of the Assembly recently held at the Olimpo Theater in Santurce, satisfied the aspirations of all the elements within said party that held different tendencies and everything suggested that among them there was the most frank harmony.
The fact is that in that same act it was observed how, with respect to procedural matters, it was impossible to achieve unanimity of action and thought, and it was thus that when the Resolution of censure against Governor Towner was approved, in the form in which it was drafted, a group of very prestigious elements of the collectivity did not give it their approval. Even the Ledo. Don Roberto H. Todd, member of the National Committee and a significant leader, when voting in favor of "se acuerdo consigned in the Minutes that he voted affirmatively because the Chief of the Party, Mr. Toas Soto, had done so and he wanted it in favor of it. Toas Soto and he wanted at all times to march in agreement with the President of the Party, a clarification that was tantamount to saying that his vote was not the product of a personal conviction as to the goodness of the agreement, but a mere question of comradeshipAnd still continues this manifest disparity of criteria in relation to the procedures, when to tratatse within the Territorial Committee, The vote of censure that was given to this official was not approved unanimously, but rather by six votes against four, since voting against the vote of censure were Don Francisco Serveira, Don Jaime Sifre Taraza, Don Enrique González Mena and Ledo. Aponte, from Arecibo. The other six members of the Committee, who were present, voted in favor. We have made this slight digression so that our readers may become aware of the situation that has prevailed in these days, in which the Republican Territorial Committee has been meeting, to deal with important matters, in which the Vice President of the party has been appointed, in which important judicial appointments have been made, and in which by the Republican minorities of both co-legislatures a Resolution has also been approved, by virtue of which the Republicans will go with the Unionists and Socialists to request from the National Congress that Puerto Rico be granted broader and more liberal measures of government, among them the election of our Governor. For yesterday afternoon the continuation of the session of the Territorial Committee, which had been interrupted the previous week, had been announced, and our work consisted in learning the prevailing opinion (prior to yesterday afternoon's meeting) of some well-known Republicans. There was among some of them the idea that the party should continue its attitude of radicalism and protest, and we heard one or another say that he proposed to raise before the Territorial Committee the question of whether or not the resolution of the Assembly to send a copy to the President and the Congressmen had been processed by that body (Continued on page 6).