ELWNDO
Q PAGES. 3 CTS.
1 Q PAGS. 3 CTS. I Bslvador Broa 81. 1 U T,L uaa * Box '**
MORNING NEWSPAPER EXCEPT SUNDAY
YEAR V.
| Published and distributed under permit (Wo. 801) euthorired by the Art o t oetober 6, 191T, on file at the Post OfSee st I Han Jnan. Pene Hico, By order of the President, A 8. Burleson, Pcstmester General. Entered as second class matter | febmnfy 31. 1919, at the Post OfSee at Ben Juan. Porto Bleo, (United States of Ameriea) under tne Act of march S 18T9
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
SATURDAY, AUGUST 25, 1923.
Francisco M. Zeno left the Senate visibly displeased and we are assured that he has definitively left for his residence.
It seems that between the Senator for Guayama and the head of the Party, Mr. Barceló, there has been some disparity of criteria on the occasion of the discussion of the borrowing law.
During the debates that have originated both in the House and in the Senate, on the occasion of the important law authorizing a bond issue for the amount of five and a half million dollars, it has been noticed that members of the majority in both legislative bodies have not been entirely in agreement with the terms of the referred law and some of them have expressed when voting in favor of this measure that they were doing so only because it was a political issue. In order to give our readers an idea of the disparity of criteria that seemed to exist among many of the members of the majority of the Legislature, suffice it to say that in order to get the bill through it was necessary to call a caucus of all the Unionist members of the House and Senate, and even so it was necessary to put the law into effect ninety days later because there were not enough votes for it to take effect immediately. This Bill, to the best of our knowledge, is the most important measure available to the present administration to carry out its program, and it is, therefore, almost a duty of the party of the majority to cooperate with it in the success of that program, since it is the party which, because it enjoys the majorities, is the party of the government and is responsible for assisting the administration in carrying out the policy it has outlined. * Having made the above statements, it is easy to understand that there have been certain frictions among some members of the majority party, many of whom have been forced to subordinate their personal criteria to the political interest of the collectivity. 1 Yesterday evening, on being noticed at the Dinner with the report of a Committee 1 1 '■ A NEW DECLARATION OF THE FRENCH CABINET PARIS, Aug. 24.- The French Cabinet 1 meeting last night at Rambouillet agreed to endorse in everything the recent non 1 ta of M. Poincaré concerning the indem : visations and the permanence of French troops in the Ruhr. After the meeting the following official bulletin was published: "The Cabinet has carefully studied the situation created by the French note and unanimously resolves to support the attitude of M. Poincaré. The Cabinet is convinced that Germany is in excellent financial condition to pay her debts and makes 'record its resolution to remain in <1 Ruhr until Germany makes each and every payment fixed in the Treaty of Versailles.". "At the same time the French Government is pleased to state that it has the support of Belgium and that, likewise, it has the sympathies of the Italian Government." TEST Melachrino Herbert Tareyton , , Champagne Cocktail Johnnie Walker The best cigarettes that are made with tobacco Turks Bolivar Pagan -LAWYER- Office: Allen Street Esq. Cruz. P. O, Box: 883 Telephone: 1475.1 San Juan, P. R.
Francisco M. Zeno, asked to be provided with a copy of said report, and after exchanging a few words with the President of the Senate, Mr. Barceló, he left the session hall visibly displeased. STsenador for Guayama, Mr. Zeno, did not appear at the evening session and we are informed that he definitely left for his residence on the island. RICKARD SAYS THERE ARE NO OBSTACLES TO THE DEMPSEY-FIRPO FIGHT NEW YORK, August 24 (United Press)- Famed show promoter Tex Rickard, in remarks made this afternoon to the United Press representative, declared that there is no truth in the rumors circulated concerning the suspension of the Firpo-Dempsey fight. While it is true that Rickard will not appear this afternoon before the National Boxing Commission to request a license for the fight, he said that in his place Jaqk Kearns will go to request the authorization, A VAST ECONOMIC PROJECT CONCERNING ASIA MINOR BOMA, August 24 (United Press). - The newspaper "n Messaggero" reports that the governments of Italy, England and France have completed the final touches to a vast economic and financial project concerning Asia Minor. This project, according to the newspaper, will replace the old tripartite treaty providing for the construction of numerous railway networks to link the East with the West. The Turkish Government has virtually endorsed this treaty. UNITED STATES WILL BE REPRESENTED AT THE NEXT MEETING* OF THE SOCIETY OF NATIONS Geneva, August 24. (French Cable)-Mr. Grew, United States Minister in Switzerland, has informed the Secretary of the League of Nations that his Government has accepted the invitation of that body to the fiftieth meeting to be held by the League in this City. This session will be devoted to humanitarian studies in a consultative capacity. NOTICE to Public Carriers The Public Service Commission at its last meeting agreed to fix the term of fifteen days from the 25th of the present for all those public carriers who have not renewed their semi-annual licenses to do so within this period; after which time they will not be allowed to traffic and the police will be instructed to suspend from service all those vehicles which do not exhibit licenses in force. In order not to lose time they must send the receipts of the contribution to the Treasury and to the Workers' Compensation Fund corresponding to the current fiscal year. Advt.
A D A C* 17 PERMANENT SERVICE KJL A VJ1L GARAGE - CASOUNA - BRANDI LAUNDRY p p p on r ce
IS THE P. R.'S CREDIT EXHAUSTED WITH THE APPROVAL OF THE 1.5 MILLION AND A HALF MILLION LOAN?
Senator Martinez Nadal believes that the debt, including the municipal loans, would amount to $29,800,000, leaving only $200,000 to face any epidemic or cyclone that might hit the Island Mr. Gallardo, Deputy Treasurer of P.R., assures that once the five and a half million is approved, there is still a margin of $10,874,667.60 left.
Yesterday our editor exchanged impressions with several legislators regarding the advantages and benefits that the new five and a half million dollar bond issue would bring to the island in general. The House bill No. 3, of Messrs. Guerra Mondragon and Las- , tra, which was approved Thursday night by the Senate, after having introduced important amendments. | The opinions held by the members of the Upper House differed among themselves, although almost all agreed that the approval of the law would bring about very important benefits for the island and at the same time solve once and for all problems of vital importance and immediate solution, such as the insane asylum, leprocomio, highways, capitol, court buildings, island health center, etc. The Ledo. Martinez Nadal told our Editor that he did not agree with the loan, not as a matter of fact, since he recognized the difficulties that would be solved with the passage of the law, but because only $200,000 would be left for Puerto Rico, which would be of no use if an epidemic were declared or a cyclone were to sweep through our countryside, destroying plantations. It should be borne in mind," he continued, "that the loans arranged by the [ . I Municipalities amount to ten million, i ! which are included in the Thirty . mi'lones of dollars to which ®1 'fCr'dito total of the island amounts, since the good faith of The People of Puerto Rico is pledged. (Adding the total of the municipal loans with the island loans and now these five million and I gave, we shall have a total of $29,800,000, leaving therefore a margin of $200,000. In this particular, he concluded, I do not agree with the opinion of Mr. Barceló, who assures us that the ten million of municipal loans are not included in the credit of the thirty million. AFTER BONDS ARE ISSUED FOR THE SUM OF $5,500,000,000, THE MARGIN OF CREDIT AVAILABLE TO THE ISLAND GOVERNMENT WILL BE AROUND $11,000,000,000, SAYS MR. BARCELÓ. GALLARDO When we finished exchanging impressions with the senator for Ponce, Mr. Martinez Nadal, we went to the island government's office in the city of Ponce. Martinez Nadal, we went to the office of Mr. Gallardo, Deputy Treasurer of Puerto Rico, who has been performing with great success, and to everyone's satisfaction, such an important position. Once our purpose was explained, Mr. Gallardo, with the courtesy that always characterizes him, and without bearing in mind the enormous work he has before him, placed himself at our disposal, and began by telling us the following: "the valuation of the movable and immovable property of the island on June 30 of the present year was $301,746.676. When the borrowing of five and a half million dollars to be approved by the Legislature of Puerto Rico for public improvements is carried out, the available credit margin of the Insui lar Government will be $10,874,667.60. "The amount of the municipal debt contracted by means of bond issues, amounts to $10,248,500 and although the good faith of the People of Puerto Rico has been pledged, this does not Manolo en Acción En Alien 25 el lado del Cielo está el Bazar Ahorro, for since it has no expenses it sells baraI tísimo.
The municipal debt is an indirect obligation of the Insular Government, and the same, through its Treasurer, is obligated to collect and safeguard the speculative contributions that constitute the various sinking funds, from which it directly makes the payment of principal and interest to the holders of said bonds on the dates determined. That is the sacred pledge which the Island Government makes to the holders of municipal bonds; in other words, that such bonds are absolutely guaranteed. I "It is also true that in past Legislatures there have been authorized issues of Island Government bonds, to the amount of $14,450,C¡00. This amount is also not computable, because the bonds have not yet been sold, and the Mayor alleges that at mu* Inicipio ccrrespotóe.regular d traffic in guabas, and so will let the Dpto. of the Interior who is the one who has been doing it For next week has been convened Mpal Assembly. In his office of the Mayor's Office we visited the Commissioner of Public Service of San Juan, Mr. Diez de Andino, in order to know what his opinion was about the regularization of the traffic of buses in this city, since we had been told that in relation to this matter certain discrepancies of criteria had arisen between the Mayor and the Commissioner of the Interior due, as we were informed, to the fact that each one of these officials claims for himself the right to regulate the traffic of buses in the urban zone of San Juan. Our reporter gave Mr. Diez de Andino an account of the reports that had been supplied to him on this subject, and the Commissioner of Public Service (Continued on page 8) EXTRA ! Suits for Gentlemen and Young Men $ C 75 Splendid Cashmere Suits, correct cuts and careful tailoring, very fashionable styles and colors. All Sizes. Gonzalez Padin Co. San Juan, Ponce, Mayagüez lATltHDA out UMHA iOS PR t
i obligation is not incurred until the same are issued. "In the amount of $14450,000.00 is included a bond issue of six million dollars to make loans to the municipalities. This sum i can be deducted from the total of authorized ■ bond issues, and what is more, should ' I repeal said law because the muni' ■ ■ cítf'dJ have separately made Their ' borrowings, and therefore it is innece- [ sary that said law continue in nu- ¡ tral statutes. "The computation of the fourteen mi- ¡ Hones of dollars is unnecessary at the i present times, because as already I said before said ( j bonds have not yet been sold. A practical example which de' eloquently shows the truth of ! this assertion, is the following: If a person makes a loan with a bank, that person does not incur any debt or obligation until he has received the loan amount from the lending bank. Mr. Gallardo furnished us for publication a demonstrative statement i of the situation of the Insular Government i for the purpose of determining the Btajgfiju. of credit, which we copy below. The margin of credit available pa- ■ ra to contract debts the Island Government is $30,174,667.60, or 10 per cent of the total valuation of the real and personal pro- , piedad of the island, asI ' cending to $301,746,676.00. i i i From said margin of $30,174.667.60 (the following debts must be deducted: Outstanding balance today of all bond issues made, after deducting the $869,000 boI us of reimbursements which are not computable, in accordance with the Organic Law.... ... $11,825,000.00 Bonds for roads and public improvements. second half of the two million dollars authorized by Act No. 62 of 1921, and the sale of which is in progress, $1,000,000.00 Bonds for the irrigation of Isabela, part of the $3,325,000 authorized for such purpose, the sale of which bonds is in progress, $975,000 making a total of $13,800,000, thus leaving an available credit margin of $16,374,667.60. We thank the intelligent young man, who so worthily and wisely represents the second head of the Treasury Department, for the above statements, because they are the product of a well-balanced mind and a profound knowledge of the subject matter. THE BRITISH ARE READY TO LEAVE ORI. British are ready to leave the U.S.A., Aug. 24 (United Press). - As a result of the change of ratifications of the Lausanne treaty, the British are preparing to leave the East. BALDWIN AND POINCARE WILL NOT CONFER FOR NOW PARIS, Aug. 24 (United Press) -- Semi-officially it is indicated that English Premier Baldwin does not intend to confer with M. Poincaré, when the former passes through this capital tomorrow on his way to Aix-les-Bain. It is assured however that the two politicians will meet soon. Mide Enamel by Patton The best paint for wood and concrete floors. In several distinctive colors. Find out more at FERRETERIA FINLAY
NUMBER 1393
the cooperation of the socialists in the Commission that will go to Washington, will not lessen the protest that we made against Governor Towner", declares Santiago Iglesias.
The victories that are achieved in Washington," he adds, "do not correspond to Unionists, Republicans or Socialists: they will correspond to all the people of Puerto Rico in general.
Yesterday afternoon we met Senator Iglesias, from whom we requested the answer to several questions to which he gladly agreed, mind the Socialist leader. How did you admit the fact that the Socialists should accompany the Unionists on the Commission to Washington, we began by asking. I have no objection, my friend Raimos, to answer your questions," began Mr. Iglesias, "in the most concise way possible. Resolution No. 2, to which you allude, has been interpreted by the representatives of the Free Federation and the Socialist Party, meeting in convention, in the most intelligent, noble and sincere sense. We have believed that the purposes pursued by said legislative measure are worthy and lofty, and that it intends to defend the general, economic, social and political interests of our people for the benefit of all the groups in the country that work for its progress and welfare. The importance of said resolution consists in the creation of a joint Commission to appear before the President, Congress and people of the United States, to formulate and make known there the needs and aspirations of the Puerto Rican people, such Commission to be formed by men representative of the three Parties, who sit in the House and Senate of our Legislature by virtue of the will of the people. ' ' Does not such a step imply a "down with arms''! in the struggle which you I sustain against Governor Town- I er? -No, it is not a matter of acceding to the ■ wishes of the Unionists and Republicans or vice versa, as you imply in your questions, nor does it mean that the cooperation of the Socialist representatives in this particular action of civilizing policy should lessen the protest which we made at the time, condemning certain arbitrary appointments made by Governor Towner. But neither would it be wise or practical for responsible Socialists to refuse to discharge their public duties on the ground that the Governor did not do due justice to the Socialist party, and to heed exclusively the political advice given by certain Unionist leaders to Attorney General Coates and by Attorney General Coates to the Governor. ' ' Do you agree to serve on that commission? In that case, will you conform to the contents of resolution number 2? "The Socialists will go to Washington," Iglesias adds, "forming part of a Commission of the Legislature of the Catholic Academy of Education of the 8th grades. Scientific course in the 1st and 2nd years. Commercial course in two years. On the 27th, 28th, 29th and 30th of August the enrollment is open for 9-11 and 3-5 years.
Puerto Rico, without distinction of parties and assuming together the representation of the whole country. In Washington the Unionists, the Republicans and the Socialists will not triumph. If victories are won for the justice and humanity that our multitudes clamor for, these victories will correspond to all the people of Puerto Rico who want and aspire to be economically and politically manumitted. We must and will have to adjust ourselves to the fundamentals that Resolution No. *2, itself contains. Local political questions have some importance, but we organized and socialist workers do not consider them as principal. "Before now, we have expressed that the people of the Island have the right to know where they stand in the National Federation. The recent decision of the Supreme Court of the United States in the case of "Governor Yager v. Jesus Ma. Balsac'', shows that this high court considers in such a way the citizenship status of the people of Puerto Ri co that in our judgment it is a fallacy. Positively, the decision of the Supreme Court has rendered impracticable the extension to Puerto Rico of American citizenship, causing this peculiar situation, controversy in the press and parties, and establishing unnecessary and unfounded doubts about our future in public opinion." On what point do you disagree with resolution No. 2? -We organized labor, and socialists can never shirk the public duties and responsibilities we have. We have never done so - We agree with what Resolution No. 2 means, in its general grounds, uniting all the active and progressive forces of the country in a common end and for the good of the people. The Socialist minorities ' have called for this since the Legislature of 1918. Resolution No. 1, of that year was reproduced in 1921, and reintroduced again this same year of 1923. See what it says in part (Resolution of Senator Iglesias). "SECTION 1.-To appoint a committee composed of four members of the Senate, appointed by the President representing the three parties, and five members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker, representing the three parties, to appear before the President on behalf of El Pueblo de Puerto Rico, the Secretary of War and Insular Committees of the Congress of the United States and expose the serious damages and dangers experienced by the health, happiness and life of the inhabitants of the island in view of the monopoly of the land and wealth produced by labor, due to the exploitation of absentee corporations and individuals and (Continued on p. 2.) "park" today known to the people of Puerto Rico. (CONTINUED ON P. 2.) "PARK" TODAY SATURDAY TODAY. THOMAS MEIGHAN and DORIS KENYON in "The Conquest of Canaan" The novel by Booth larkington. Tomorrow - Sunday THE MAGIC CUP (The Magic Cup) By CONSTANCE BINNY '
WE OFFER TO CIGAR MANUFACTURERS a consignment of de-stemmed tobacco from the finest inland sources on the Island. Ask for prices from THE NATIONAL PRODUCTS CO. INFANTA LUISA NO. 1. SAN JUAN, P. R.