ELMONDO
-12 Págs. 3 Cts.Semester ... ... $4.00 One Year $7.50
-12 Págs. 3 Cts.- Offices: Salvador Bran 81 Tel. 1222 - P. O. Box 340
DAILY IN THE MORNING,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR V.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of October 6. 1917. on file at the Post Ufflee of San Jnen. Porto Rico. By order of the President. A 8. >ur logon, Postmaster General. Entered aa second class matter, febrnarV-JH. 1919, at the Post Office at Ran Juan. Porto Rl-o (United Stite" of America" under the Act of msrch 8. 1879.
SATURDAY, JANUARY 20, 1923.
NUMBER 1209.
THE SPARK OF WAR HAS AGAIN BEEN KINDLED IN THE BA1KANS.
Hungarian troops cross the Rumanian frontier, invading villages, while in Thrace hostilities between Greeks and Turks are renewed.
(United Press via AJI America Kabias" VIENNA, January 19-An extraordinary military activity is noticed in all the Balkan countries. The resumption of hostilities between Greeks and Turks is interpreted here as the clearest sign that war will spread along the entire Balkan Peninsula. Romania has mobilized its troops by sending large contingents to Szegedin, the point towards which the Hungarians are advancing. The conflict is considered imminent. THE HUNGARIANS CONCENTRATE THEIR TROOPS ON THE ROMANIAN BORDER i VIENNA January 19-Hungarian troops are rapidly concentrating on the Rumanian frontier. Breaking news reports say that the Hungarians have crossed the frontier on the Szegedin side, overrunning numerous villages and attacking the Rumanian vanguard advancing on that side. The beginning of the battle between the Romanians and Hungarians is expected at any moment. AN ALLIANCE BETWEEN STAM BOULISKI AND TCHITCHERINI BUCHAREST, January 19-From reliable sources it has been learned that Stambonliskí, head of the Bulgarian government, and Tchicherine, Russian Minister of State, have concluded a military agreement under which as soon as Hungary invades Rumania, the Bulgarians will invade Thrace and the Russians will invade Bessarabia. The said agreement was signed at Lausanne a few days ago. BULGARIA HAS MOBILIZED ITS TROOPS VIENNA, January 19.-A dispatch of ■ IOS NERVES | H i with all care and folicitude i H 9 . is tantamount to securing the '■ B B B good success and the greatest possible fell- B B/ city-Attack puei Hnf end delay the least Wf nervine and insomnia with the AI lílA® ttTAs Dt 11 it BROMURAL I] which being entirely harmless* vaí and by thousands of physicians ■1 prescribed and recommended /B B| have been accredited in a thousand*. E B| Ions of cases Effects á i M B| the 20 minutes of taking. K For sale in apothecaries i B B| in glass tubes of. i tablets. " PARK TODAY SATURDAY 20 TODAY 'The Prisoner of Zenda' (The Prisoner of Zenda) Tomorrow Sunday: 'FIDEL TO HIS PROMISE' (Beating the Game) SAVE YOUR COUPON The lucky number will be entitled to a free ride on the Hydrofoil 'MORRO CASTLE." -FOR OFFICE: For rent at $30.00 a splendid part of a room, on the second floor of the "Tobacco Palace", Telephone 411,
i Sofia says that the Bulgarian government has I mobilized its troops. The same desjAcho adds that Stambouliski has pledged to Russia to intervene at the psycho- ¡ logical moment when the Rumanians are unable to resist the simultaneous Russian and Hungarian offensives. THE ROMANIAN GOVERNMENT CALLS UP ALL RESERVES EUKAREST, January 19 The Government has ordered the total and absolute mobilization of troops. The royal decree further demands that the reserves of 1921 and 22 be quartered. The furloughs have been suspended. The Head of the Government will hold this afternoon an interview with General Iskeytauyi, supreme chief of the military forces. PARIS, January 19.- It is officially reported that the government of Greece has violated the treaty of Removal. AUTOMOBILES NOTICE TO OWNERS Owners of automobiles and other motor vehicles are hereby notified of the obligation imposed by law to appear at the offices of the Collectors of Internal Revenue on the island and at that of the assessors in San Juan, "Intendencia" building, to declare their respective vehicles for tax purposes for 1923-24 on or after January 15, within a period not to exceed March 15 next. Those who voluntarily fail to do so after this notice has been published, shall be denounced for "misdeameanor" or shall incur the maximum fine of One Hundred (100.00) Dollars prescribed in Article 299 of the Political Code. The transfer for sale of such automobiles and other motor vehicles, made after January 15, does not release the current owner thereof on that date from the payment of the tax due for the entire fiscal year, nor does it relieve him/her of the duty to pay it if he/she had not done so before. The Department has requested and obtained the cooperation of the Island Police so that this appraisal work may be carried out in a brief and efficient manner in order to make it a reality that all automobiles are declared and appraised at the end of the aforementioned term. San Juan, Puerto Rico, January 20, 1923. Ramón ABOY, Jr. Treasurer of Puerto Rico. Advt. WÍ[Today - SATURDAY 20- ** ETHEL CLAYTON I The brilliant dominatrix of audiences, in I one of her most notable productions. "WEALTH" Drama of extraordinary merit. SUNDAY 21~ ;PREMIERE IN PUERTO RICO! Of the very interesting and original dramatic pro*'*1 -'-ion in seven acts. "THE INGENUOUS SEX" I A great play and a great success of 'a eximia actress JANE NOVAT GUITARS Spanish Guitars just received the EUTERPE Music Bazaar Calle de San Jose No. 6.
Well...I don't laugh
i "I laugh at Mr. Lastra when he speaks to me in his letter of yesterday, published in EL MUNDO of "my ruin and my despair' '. And it is true that Mr. Coll laughs! But why does he laugh? Does laughter affirm or deny anything in this debate, nor has it ever affirmed or denied anything in any debate? Laughter, Mr. Coll, leaving the narrow framework of scientific technicality (because I do not know it), has no meaning in itself and when it says something, its meaning can only be explained by the subject himself who laughs, if it were not that laughter is an effect that only manifests itself at the push of external causes. Thus, to interpret the laughter of a clown, it is necessary to leave the psychology of the clown to study the external causes. Why does the clown laugh in front of the public, and do pirouettes? The answer is so easy! He laughs because life, vocationally, or in desperation, led him to be a clown, threw him into the circus, forced him to laugh, but his laughter tastes of grease, fried food, chickpeas and meat. I have read many times in many books, whose names I do not remember, nor the names of the authors, that there have been soldiers who, on entering battle, were always victims of an impossible laughter. The last gesture of the priest Merino, when he paid with his life for the attack against Isabel II. was a smile. - Does Mr. Col! believe that the external causes that motivate the laughter of the pa yaso, the laughter of the military in the face of the enemy and the laughter of the reverend regicide Merino, were and are congruent, normal with satisfaction and joy? This is the nerve of the matter. The sefior Coll laughs and laughs loudly because in my letter in EL MUNDO, I spoke of his ruin and despair. But what, is there any reason for Mr. Coll to laugh in this debate? Is Mr. Coll's laughter an expression of joy and satisfaction? My distinguished friend is on the wrong track! Mr. Coll has been so disturbed by the tortuous school initiated by him, with the change of front operated for some time now, in which Mr. Barceló has substituted for Mr. Coll, the place of E. Mont. Reily, who, always obfuscated, ignores neither consequence nor consistency, and what was serious yesterday, is for Mr. Coll insignificant today, and what was serious yesterday, is for Mr. Coll insignificant today, and what was serious yesterday, is for Mr. Coll insignificant today. Coll insignificant today, and what was good yesterday turns out to be bad now. This has its name, friend Coll, and without prejudice to rectify, because I do not know grammar, it is called: School of the consequence in the incon- 1 sistency. My friend Mr. Coll was saying that TODAY SATURDAY - TODAY MAE MURRAY AND MONTE BLUE in the extraordinary production "ROSA DE BROADWAY" (Broadway Rose) Tomorrow Morning Debut of the eminent Danzante TORTOLA VALENCIA in the two evening tandas. M. I. C. C. T. G. C. THE COUNTY-VANDERBILT HOTEL is pleased to announce that EVERY SATURDAY a splendid DINNER-BAILE will be held. A fine orchestra has been engaged for these dances and the management wishes to extend its invitation to all friends of the hotel. Those who reserve tables for these evenings will receive our best attention.
things said the President of the Chamber by then! -eq Barranquitas said. -(It cannot be stated here how much evil he spoke against E. Mont. Reily in the mountain village, the President of the Chamber; but we will say something: Do the readers know the legend of the mysteries of Paris? Do you remember well how much that legend says about Rocambole? Well, Rocambole with his 30 volumes of wickedness, assaults, robberies, and even worse, was a chlorate pill, (as Benjamin Guerra says) next to Reily, for the senior Coll and Cuchí. And in the Central Board? And in the Assembly of the Theater of San Juan from where fortunately Huyke deserted? And at the Manatí evening? And the saying: "The choice is clear: either the Union triumphs or Reily triumphs -no German Rockíeller.
Hugo Stinnes, the richest man in Germany, of whom the Paris Press says he will be the next Head of the German Government. TAXPAYERS NOTICE TO TAXPAYERS As announced in due course in all offices of the Internal Revenue Collectors, taxpayers are reminded that in accordance with Article 295 of the Political Code, the assessment of property as it appears on the assessment roll lately prepared, that is, for the fiscal year 1922 to 1923, shall constitute the assessment roll for the following fiscal year 1923 to 1924, after having been amended and revised as a result of the property transfers made and petitions for assessment and reassessment filed on or before January 15 of the current year, provided, however, that no petitions for reassessment and notices of property transfer may be served after said date. Notice is further given that the inspection work covered by Article 299 of the Political Code will be exercised by the Department's property appraisers as of January 16, 1923. Taxpayers should not be unaware of the opportunities afforded them by said Code to defend themselves against any assessment which they find to be unfair. Pamphlets in English and Spanish, which are on sale in all the* Internal Revenue Collector's Offices, in which the provisions of the Political Code and other laws relative to the payment of property taxes have been compiled by this Department, provide ample and complete information on the rules to which both the taxpayers and this office must submit in their procedures, in order to arrive without difficulties, to the completion of their task within the unavoidable time limits established by law. San Juan, P. R. January 16, 1923. Juan G. GALLARDO, Acting Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Advt.
can you compromise with bandits" -expressed in a voice of thunder, with a manly gesture, his eyes shining, his nerves tense and his hair in disarray? Well, Mr. Coll de Reily said all that, and something more - but time passed and that inconsistency of the Speaker has done the miracle of removing Reily as the target of his fury, to put Mr. Barceló in his place - an admirable miracle! Mr. Barceló was once proposed by Mr. Coll as supreme dictator of the Party, a proposal that the beneficiary himself and I attacked. But today, readers, for Mr. Coll, Rocambole is a chlorate pill next to Mr. Barceló. And if I were to make a century of this, no one would be surprised, or at least no one would be prejudiced against Mr. Coll y Cuchí -But, if this was yesterday, a few hours ago, I am still smoking the cigarette I lit that night, when Mr. Coll pretended to take the Chief of the Party to the summit of the dictatorship. The inconsistency of the Speaker! How I feel the inconsistency of Mr. President! Mr. Coll y Cuchí is temporarily a fighter who likes the warm caress of rest the harder he fights. (Good, very good phrase, friend Coll! It is a twin of that other sonorous one of Almanzor, in which he makes the dust of his victories msfterial for his burial. It is a heroic gesture of my distinguished contender that I admire and applaud; to be, to move and to fight to fall surrendered in the hard pe| lea without being afraid of death, to the ex| trem of being the mason of his own sepulture, is a sample of manliness that pleases me. But no laughter, this is not the time for it. Either it is true that in this struggle which you have provoked you de| tend your history and your political name, gallantly cast in ■ twenty years of combat for freedom and you must be serious as a sun. given and as a gladiator, or you will also be inconsistent in this extreme, i to the point of maintaining that you laugh, while you are weeping, not for fear j of ruin (I do not speak of economic ruin, nor of piles of gold) but for i the determining causes of that ruin. If you are laughing as your last article says, it is not true then that you have compromised your name (as a politician) as your previous article said. When the name is defended, one neither laughs nor cries. You roar like a wild beast and in the roar there is always a breath for success and a firmness for the fight. Do you have any other way to stop the laughter or to define it as a laughter product of hysteria and not of joy or satisfaction? A. Lastra CHARRIEZ. TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY EMIL JANNINGS, star of "Danton", in 'OTELO' or "THE MORO OF VENICE" IFA Program The accredited fashion shop "LA FAMA" is for sale They will inform in the same shop. San Francisco 43 i CHEAP CARS AND TRUCKS Complete buses; chassis pan buses, Trucks different tonnage; engines ready to use; transmissions; axles; complete differentials; radiators; hubcaps; sopandas; roller bearings; parts for all cars in use. Panzardi Repair Shop. 1 Stop 30 - . Hato Rey
Seventy thousand Greeks are facing the forces of Kemal Pasha at the Maritza river, where a fierce battle has been going on for some hours.
f (United Press via All America Cables) CONSTANTINOPLA, January 19. - ' The military situation in Thrace is becoming more and more serious. Greek soldiers are facing 1 the Turks on the banks of the I Maritza river; Greek patrols have attacked the Turkish gendarmerie at IpsaJa, 1 taking twenty-two prisoners. Turkish peasants at Bondjak attacked the Greek outposts, but were repulsed after ' an extensive firefight, in which thirty Turks were killed. Seventy thousand Hellenic troops are at present in the Maritza and according to the latest reports received here, that force will take the offensive tomorrow. POLAND DOES NOT MOBILIZE WARSAW, January 19.-The head of the government, Mr. Sikorki, has denied reports that Poland is mobilizing its troops. - o-W -- IS THE VIA ALSO MOBILIZING? LONDON, January 19.- A dispatch from Rome to "The Times" states that NOTICE TO THE TAXPAYERS OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN < You are hereby notified that in order to ventilate the pending matters of valuation of your property for 1923-24 tax purposes, you should appear at H office of the valuers Messrs. Vicente A. Texera (for Santurce) and Gerardo Sevillano (for San Juan) at the North wing of the main floor gallery of the "Intendencia" building, every working day from 2 to 4:30 P. M. Persons in possession of property subject to the payment of property tax that has not been previously declared, must do so immediately in order to avoid incurring the maximum fine of one hundred ($100) dollars as determined by Article 299 of the Political Code, San Juan, P. R., January 19, 1923. RAMON ABOY JR, Treasurer of Puerto Rico. Advt. AZADAS CHISPAS No. 2 y No. 3 ALAMBRE PUAS GALVANIZADO. - GRAMPS. Quality. - Price . - Service . ROLAN, TEJEDOR & DE HOSTOS. Box 1356. - Tel. 395-200. San Juan, P. R. Chloroethyl Perfumed Wholesale and Retail. R. Julia & Co. San Juan, P. R.
the government of Yugoslavia has mobilized its troops in the contingency of a Bulgarian-Russian alliance. News from Belgrade says that the situation is extremely serious; war is inevitable and will irremediably break out when the Russian government mobilizes its troops. ROMANIA SENT EIGHT REGIMENTS TO THE FRONTIER LONDON, January 19.- Berlin news reports that the Rumanian government has sent at noon today eight regiments to Szegedin, to contain the Hungarian advance. GREEKS ON THE MARITZA RIVER PARIS, January 19.-Greek troops have reached the right bank of the Maritza River. GREEKS AND TUIDS FIGHT TO DEATH PARIS, January 19.- The latest dispatches say that a great battle has begun between Turks and Greeks along the Maritza River. Many dead have resulted, as reported by "Le Matin". A PROCLAMATION FROM PLASTIRAS ATHENS, January 19.- Colonel Plastiras has this afternoon issued a proclamation addressed to the troops in which he makes a patriotic appeal to the fighters who have marched into Thrace, from whom-the country expects them to do their duty to reconquer the piece of national soil held by the Turks. I Chronicle of the Spanish-American War in <¡ Puerto Rico ¡! - BY - ¡í ANGEL RIVERO MENDEZ. FORMER CAPTAIN OF ARTILLE- <! RIA DEL EJERCITO ES- ' PASOL This book, unique history, do- '! cumentada, de la Guerra His- S panoamericana, ¡ será puesto a '> la ventna en los últimos días del presente me8 al prec¡(> d<¡ " (Sj.OO) CINCO dolores cada ¿ ejemplar. Contains 350 photo- S engravings, 15 colo- !* res plates and seven maps, bound in cloth and in quarto. <! Address orders to the re- ' presenter of Sers, de Riva- S deneyra. ' ( CLOTILDE G. DE GONZALEZ i| Tetuán 26. Box 523 ' SAN JUAN, P. R. <
®Norwegian steamer "EIDSVAAG' has already arrived with another cargo of the "j unsurpassed I] PORTLAND CEMENT BRAND 'CABALLITO Delivery from the side of the ship at extremely low prices. Sues, of L. Villamil & Co.