I"-' - ~ '■ _■ v WfeoEP'gfll/ B W. W
I B W ■ -: "LMa;s=r.TX■i" 11 ■
1APAGS.3CTS. |h assrsarA
DAILY TANGLE DIARY.
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO V.
F PublMlM< S and "AoMtatod "ader pemtt (Re. tal) -< "Motar A lili, in Ito st the íL" Office et I Q-rn iZW Peno Biee, By order of tta PreÍMang A A A BetleeoSL PoehMeter GeneesL Betered es weed elees asttar, I ■" the Pert Office M fiee Peen. Verte Bice (Uefted fitetM of Asertes! seder tee det ef emreh fi. 18V"
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 22, 1923
NUMBER 1416
8AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
i"£caf én producers must not harbor too many pretensions about the supposed boom in the rich grain ff
i H Yesterday afternoon. the San Juan Municipal Asean-. ' bisa was constituted, 1 raudo several matters which were included in the agenda. 1 The Ledo. José Martines Dívila, member of the Republican minority, requested 1 of the Presidency that through the Secretariat the Commissioner of Public Works, Mr. Marques, be asked to inform about the reasons that the referred official had for authorizing the construction of a wooden house that is being built on Ponce de León Avenue, in Puerta de Tierra, despite the existence of an ordinance that prohibits such construction. Mr. Martínez Dívila went into detail about the shocking mystery of the construction of this building. San Justo 13 5 and 15. Open all day for viewing. 1 will inform Arturo Carreras. Telephone > 291, Santurce, from one, three and seven to ' nine o'clock in the afternoon. Advt. I . ; & KOKEN Ubg? se vendoi shoks ®3eL COHÍMSS NBMllllJJV COS MHOS A FACTORY PKOOS, m, tic. -MtaEVBRrBEST
■ W 11 1 " ' i H i ■ ■ ■ i 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1" 1 1 1 1 1 1 ■ I WOODS (THE BEST QUALITY PICHIPEN) :: - - SMOKE - PRICE - SERVICE - i: Holán, Tejedor & de Hostos -.
"■■■tetoteEMEMMaaaHEaaEafeHiteHBteHaMHteteateM A RsKy' SATURDAY AND SUNDAY A GOZAR MONTE EN THE --CATERPILLAR" ENH. "D-_ D_-" rarque Donnquen THE BENEFIT BAND WILL AMENIZE THE ACT " ?. '¿í. -i- - - '- - - - ?<- 'F * -.... . : -
Expanding on details about the coffee market and the possibilities or not that the rich bean has of being sold at a good price this year, we insert below what a prominent trader of this market, whose main business is the purchase and sale of the rich product, told us yesterday. Here are his statements: ' 'First of all, he said, we have ' that last year's coffee crop was short. Consumption is increasing more and more and the exportation is not declining as much as had been presumed. Owing to the general abnormality in i business, on account of the sudden . fluctuations which ' articles often undergo, no one this year had made stocks of coffee for speculation; i and this, logically, established the con-.
THE MPAL. OF SAN JUAN TAKES CARDS IN THE SUBJECT OF THE SUPPOSED "MYSTERY HOUSE" k The Com. of 0. P. of San Juan explains to the referred organism the "mystery" of the mentioned construction -
- and..he added that given the interest that this ' azntata Babia awakened in public opinion, he could not but resort to the Municipal Assembly, so that it would clear up any doubts, since his opinion on the matter was that the builders of the mentioned construction were violating an ordinance adopted by the municipality of San Juan, tending to prevent the construction of wood in the Ponce de Leon Avei nite. i t THE SB. MARQUES The President of the Assembly, Mr. Ramírez Santibañez, sent for the Commissioner of Public Works, who was informed of the wishes of the Republican representative, inviting him to give an explanation on the matter under debate. J Mr. Marques stated, then- - cef, that it was not a question of any cons 1 tftction, but of the repair of a k cate, according to the data he ■ had, and the legal sanction established by te ordinance created for that purpose. Mr. Martínez Dávi'a, however, insisted that it was a construction, which had been done in the most MYSTERIOUS and secret way, in order to mislead the Administration of the purposes that guided the authors of the work. The speaker said that he had the most colorful reports about how the house was being built. He assured that, contrary to all construction, the works were being carried out there "from the inside out". "From the inside out, so that no one was fully aware of the true intentions of the builders (Continued on page 4) Bolivar Pagan -LAWYER-- - Office: Callo Alien Ésq. Cruz. > P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan. P. R. r -im- -1 r ■■■■ mi FOR A FEW DAYS I 1,000 New mosquito nets at <1.15, 4,000 beds, with mattress at $11.98. Very precious cribs very ' Buy at EL CIELO. 'Hl -a--,-r-rr-- i - - -i FOR RENT A beautiful, spacious office. Can diverse into two if desired. Belaval Building Booms 7-8. ¿ ¿ ¿ _ ■
A prominent merchant tells the reasons for the rise in the price of coffee.
The following price of coffee beans was so high that the few holders of the same unnecessarily raised the price to more than thirty cents a pound. But everything always returns to its level, and so we have that in less than a week the price has fallen to twenty-one cents, This was to be expected because the new crop, somewhat delayed by the way, is already beginning to be harvested and by the general appearance that it presents before the end of this year we will have coffee at fourteen cents again, first cost. The Brazilian market is the one that regulates world consumption; and as the production in that country is excessive, to the point of deserving the control of the Government to avoid the depreciation of the grain, hence there should be no pretense that the little coffee of Puerto Rico can reach prices that are not, more or less at the level of those quoted in other producing countries- The recognized superiority of our coffee does not establish a major difference in relation to that which JK produces in other countries."In the neighborhood embazas, of Yabucoa, Maria Buadrado, 88 years of age, committed suicide, hanging herself The suicide had her mental faculties somewhat disturbed. * At Thursday's meeting of the San Juan Board of Directors, the board voted a $2,000 appropriation for the purpose of having the Municipal Commissioner of Public Works, Mr. F. de Marques, go to Belgium to inspect the quality of the pipes. F. de Marques, to go to Lie ja, Belgium, so that he may personally examine the quality of the pipes for the Aqueduct, acquired by our Administration, by virtue of the auction that was awarded to Mr. Enrique Vidal Sanchez, and of the quality of the pipes for the Aqueduct, acquired by our Administration, by virtue of the auction that was awarded to Mr. Enrique Vidal Sanchez, and of the quality of the pipes for the Aqueduct. Enrique Vidal Sánchez, and of which we had to deal with, opportunely. The trip of Mr. Marques is included among the conditions stipulated in the auction of the referred material. Our friend, according to reports, proposes to embark on the 4th of next month, via the United States. A MIRADOR AND TWO ROOMS are for rent. Address: Tetuán 40, altos. Of various styles for all cars. * Price from $16.00 to $28.00 : Lucas Blanco & (or. SAN JUAN, P. R.
The Cornisón Hípica Insolar, in anticipation of q. scandals occurring at the racetracks, requests from the Colonel of the Polida, to redouble vigilance at those places.
Those who take part in such riots will be arrested and will not be allowed to attend the Equestrian Eversions in the future.
Yesterday the Island Equestrian Commission met again, having agreed, among other things, to donate to the Cruz Hoja ¡ ftmeríranr, the sum of one thousand dollars to be sent to the victims of the earthquakes in Japan. It was resolved that as from this date no races involving eight horses should be held at the racetracks unless a permit is obtained from the Riding Commission. It was approved to change the name of the horse "Ven Holts", owned by Mr. R. Al- j coba to "Caribbean". It was agreed to reply to Mr. Alejan- j dro Méndez in relation to complaints filed by an official jockey, indicating a copy of the amendments to the regulations correcting the deficiencies ( jmw ót ssftaladas. At the request of Mr. Enrique Castro, article 88, section A for the sale of horses was agreed upon. Below we are pleased to publish the resolution adopted by said commission in relation to an incident that occurred at the Quintana Racing Park, ADOPTED BY THE INSULAR RACING COMMISSION IN ITS SESSION OF SEPT. 21, 1923, 1923 The Oomisión Hípica Insular has learned of the unpleasant incident occurred at the Quintana Racing Park, Ol Sunday, September 18, 1923, at the end ]g. torcera race and where gjprtft. pólice from the stands, protested. tajimHfioad sánente by ta dectete dd jando, awarding d prize to -te yosna MARQUESA E. The IndJtate had all the eazactcrós <"or a riot, coming to the promoters threw ptefiruz on direction to the jury booth, having to resort > the public force to subdue them to the peden. In order to avoid these incidents, which undermined the order and order of the Department of the Treasury, ARBITRATION DEPARTMENT IMPORTANT NOTICE TO MANUFACTURERS, TRADERS AND INTERESTED PARTIES, IS HEREBY NOTIFIED that the Arbitration Act, in English and Spanish, "proved on July 28, 1923, with amendments incorporated therein until this W, IMS, has been offered for sale at all Internal Revenue Collectors. which could be obtained by the cancellation of an Internal Revenue stamp of 25 cents on J. W. BONNER, Treasurer, Advt. Dr. S. M. Haley OSTEOPATA ■ ■ -- ■ -- - ■■■
The following is resolved by the Racecourses and in order to avoid a repetition for any reason of the ¡scandal occurred on Sunday 16 of the current year at the Quintana Racing Park; 1 resolves the Insular Equestrian Commission to address the Colonel of the Insular Police, requesting him to redouble, if possible, the vigilance in said shows, requesting him to instruct the police, that if acts of this nature are repeated, to proceed to arrest and denounce the promoters or those who participate in such riots; thanking him, that once they are convicted, to communicate their names to the Insular Equestrian Commission to manage the Corporations that own the racecourses. The action that the vanguards of the racetracks are planning to develop in order to prevent these individuals from entering the racetracks.
The action that the Unionist vanguards plan to develop in this capital is not only against the Local Board but mainly against the Administration.
Last Thursday night, in the Bouret building in this capital, another meeting of the Unionists who are fomenting a movement of protest against the current municipal administration and against the current Local Board of the Party took place. i Speaking to some of those who attended the said meeting we have been informed that the purpose of the protestors is to secure the victory of the Unionists in this city by changing the methods which are being put into practice by the local directors and by which a large majority of the electorate has been thoroughly displeased. I *"If it is not achieved-we have been told -that the procedures being employed by the administration and by the Local Board are radically changed, it can be assured that the party will go, at the next election, to a certain defeat. They have also told us that if it is true that this protest movement is also directed against the Local Board, it is also true that it is more directly directed against the municipal administration, which is, according to them, where most injustices have been committed against good and honest NQMists. The main reason alleged by the Protestants is that the local directors, when told that they should not put off elements reputed to be good Unionists in favor of Republicans and Socialists, have replied that they should preferably attend to the latter, since this is the best way to arouse the interest of the adversaries to make their adhesion to the Union. The Union. I As for the statements that Mr. Iriarte made to one of our editors and which he tried to cast doubt on "Democracy", we must say that they were an exact reflection of everything Mr. Iriarte told us in the conversation we had with him, and Mr. Iriarte should have been the one to rectify us if we had made any false statements. We provide 24 hours service during the day on the road or anywhere necessary, up to Rio Piedras. Your empty tire will be changed and YOUR tube fixed for $1.00. New tires or tubes delivered at current prices and assembled for free. Phone 898 Santurce COCHRAN'S TIRE SERVICE STATION Stop 15 Santurce Ask for information regarding our Contract plan. FUEGO on Fortaleza 52 next to "El Cielo" is the Bazar Ahorro offering the lowest prices in San Juan. (There is Manolo who was with Arriví. Advt. A MOLER VIDRIO "EL BOSQUE DE BOLORU" will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA in Saa Juan because of how cheaply it sells and how well stocked it is. AdVt.
The "La Democracia" which was not a witness of our interview. Dr. Jaime Bagué ex- ■ plains how he heard the ¡ "Sonada" of the Agriculture agents ¡ The movement was motivated by the fact that the strikers refused to take some exams < - ¡ ( Having learned that the agents of the Department of Agriculture and Labor, in Mayagüez, had gone on strike, we visited the Sub-Co- 1 ' missionary, Dr. Jaime Bagué, with Dr. Bagué, to see how he heard about the ¡ "Sonada" of the Agriculture agents. Jaime Bagué, with the purpose of having him inform us of the motives these agents had for taking such a radical resolution, and furthermore, the decision the Department had taken to resolve the matter. 1 Dr. Bagué, with the kindness 1 which is characteristic of him, told us ' * * f that the holiday was really of no importance, and that, having occurred seven or eight days ago, it had been satis- < (Continued "on the 8th page) "
k rTT7^^^^7T l p l l "^ERV^ g AV>I-i GARAGE -GASOLINE -WASHING I BRANDI .- -yr
Everything we published about Mr. Iriarte was an exact copy of everything he told us in the interview he had with us.
We were correct in the information we published and we can add today that Mr. Iriarte not only told us Jo that we have published but he told us something else. "He told us that in the primaries of 1917 the Central Board had used two for one against them and that in spite of that they had won the elections." And as for the Central Board not being able to do anything against them even if the others protested, what Mr. Iriarte told us was that the Central Board did not have the power to reinstate a legally constituted Committee unless its actions were in conflict with the fundamental principles of the party and that the only recourse left to the opponents of the present Board was to wait until the primaries were held in January and then present their candidates and fight to bring them out triumphant. But Mr. Iriarte, and this we noted in the previous report while recognizing that the opposition of the present Local Board members is sufficiently strong, had the noble trait of assuring us that he and any of the other members of the Committee were willing to appear before a footaltetorth h Mapdnder of any charges made against them.
MRTA. MARGARITA RUIZ I HAS DIED - H Her sister Carmen, her nieces Mundita and Mar- H got Ruiz and other relatives appeal to the pia- ■ doso sentiment of her friends and relations to attend the K burial of the corpse, an act which will take place this H morning, at eleven o'clock, in the cemetery of San- ■ turce, leaving the funeral cortege from the mortuary house located in the street "Lopez Landron" stop 43 and a half. H Esquelas will not be distributed. H 1 I l l fi 9 " > I i " I I I ♦♦♦♦■" | Circo Hipódromo Alemán | " TODAY SATURDAY AND TOMORROW SUNDAY, AT 8:30 P. M. " <- TWO ROYAL FAREWELL PERFORMANCES, AT POPULAR PRICES. - 20 NUMEROS DE GRAN ATRACCION ¡ ¡ For the first time the BULL "BORICUA", native of Bayamón? ' ' ' ' I the horse "ARECIBO" of Senator Miranda, trained in a short "> ; I time by the tamer Nelky. ' ' ' ■ > The camel, acrobatic games, the mule, all the horses and the - - í ¡ lions and tigers together in the cage, doing difficult jobs. A spectacle never seen before, due to the tension between the lion "" " and the tiger. . * ' :: SUNDAY AFTERNOON AT THREE MATINEE o WITH FULL PROGRAM ': DHALLISTAS & QUINCAllfflOS We are getting the choicest assortment of fabrics, knitwear and lace. All new and great fantasy. Our prices, without discussion, are the lowest in the market. Ask for samples and prices. We serve by C. O. D. P. O. BOX 1341. SALVADOR BRAU ST., 55 < FARM OAKS £ CO.