THE WORLD
-12 Págs. 3 Cts." Bimonthly ... M w $4.00 One Year ... ... $7.00
"12 Págs. 3 Cts.- Oficinal: Salvador Braa 81 TeL 1222 - P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR V.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published distributed under permit (No. 801) *athul4""d by the Act of October 8, 1917. on file kt the Poet Offlce of Ren Juan. Porto Rico. Hy order of the President, A. 8. leeon, Postmaeter General. Entered t>e second elau matter, fehmarv 21 1P19 at. th" Poet Jnan. nf np3*"v th a nf ft 1R7O
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 1923.
NUMBER 1233.
Mr. Santini demonstrates the serious damage caused by the present Workmen's Compensation law.
Absolutely impartial, as EL MUNDO always is, in all the matters it submits to public scrutiny, we have wished to know the very authoritative opinions of the distinguished gentleman Don Nicolás Santini, representative of one of the most powerful Insurance Companies of the American Union, about an article published in this newspaper, regarding an alleged campaign to abolish the Workmen's Compensation Law in force in the island. For the accomplishment of our purpose. and in the assurance that the readers, whom we serve with the utmost honesty, will be grateful for any reports we may give them on so important a question, we will go to the offices of Mr. Santini, which are splendidly installed, as befits the volume of business represented by him, on the main floor of the building of the Bank of New Scotland. Mr. Santini's office is as severe as it is elegant and simple. It occupies the corner of the regal mansion, and the first thing one notices upon entering it is a beautiful portrait of the illustrious Muñoz Rivera, his dear friend. On the table there are numerous letters from the United States, which, when we entered the office, Mr. Santini began to read. Although most of them, judging by the letterheads stamped on the envelopes, were from businessmen, bank magnates, we could see that some belonged to personalities who enjoy extraordinary infuence in national politics. With the courtesy that distinguishes him, we were received by such an excellent gentleman, who, because of his extraordinary culture, we were sure that he would relieve us of our work. Mr. Santini is a man of ¡ letters, perhaps because his temperament as an artist and fighter forbids him to devote himself only to those of exchange. In EL MUNDO, as well as in "La Democracia "* and other important publications, he collaborated many times. Fraternal and close friend of Muñoz Rivera, he accompanied him in strong political crusades, and became an orator. Mr. Santini, as soon as we explained to him the purpose of our visit, pretended to excuse himself, because he did not attach importance to the work on the Workers' Compensation Law to which we referred earlier. And after repeated entreaties, in which we weighed, as Aquilas argued, our very firm resolution to say something to the public, he resolved to speak. -As far as I am personally concerned," he said, "I must tell you that the Costa & Santini Hunt, of which I am a partner, is the strongest Insurance Company of its kind in the United States, and we are, of course, open to any competition, should it arise, for which we are perfectly prepared, and I can assure you that our Company, the Maryland Casualty Company, offers greater advantages, both to the employer and the workman, than the present Casualty Commission.
i Compensation Commission. During the year 1921, our Company paid, in claims, the phenomenal sum of $11,475,530, according to the report for the same year, which it submitted to the Government. i The profits will correspond, in fair reciprocity, to your correct and generous action, will they not? Mr. Santini? I -Here you have - he immediately replied, showing us a book- the official data that serve as an answer to your question. Our Company only earned 1 3 8 10 percent (three and eight tenths percent) on the year's transactions in the balance sheet to which we referred. And this admits of no comment," he replied with emphasis. -And this admits of no comment," he said with emphasis, "for it reveals that there is no speculation. -The public is perfectly convinced. Now then; as in one of the (Continued on page 7) A commission of socialists visits the Acting Governor According to yesterday's press, the Acting Governor announced that he would issue 'a proclamation, communicating to the strikers on the South Coast of the island to refrain from continuing to carry out acts of violence such as those lately imputed to them by public opinion, and which are said to have been committed in Arroyo, Guayama and Salinas, with great danger to lives and property. As soon as they learned of the Governor's intentions in the "Free Federation" a committee composed of Messrs. Fiz, Rivera Martínez and Paz Gránela was formed and visited the Fortaleza, with the purpose of conferring with the interim Governor and telling him that it was not necessary to launch the proclamation, because the situation was not so serious, and, moreover, because the difficulties were in the process of being solved satisfactorily for both parties. The Commission first visited the Executive Secretary, who instructed it to go and see Mr. Huyke, as he had to do what he had been instructed to do in this matter. As we later learned, the Socialist Commission met with the Governor, and although the result of this conference is not known, it is certain that the aforementioned proclamation, although urgently announced, had not been given for publication by the time this newspaper went to press. A TELEGRAM The Acting Governor yesterday addressed a telegram to all the mnnií cipal Judges of the island, warning them that they (Continued on 3rd. P*g )
OPPORTUNITY For sale very cheap, the sideboards, shop windows and counters of "La Favorita'*, of Rio Piedras. "Only for a few days.
Modern apartments for families, in k stop 3 1 2. They will inform: Telephone 986 ne ; gro, Santurce. -■ ■ i-
1 1 1 NOTICE OF RELOCATION Ü J. OCHOA & HERMANO || Informs its customers and the general public that it has S £ ! moved its OFFICES and WAREHOUSES to 9 Comerco Street Numbers 29 and 31, Doctor Saldaña Building, H £ >| formerly occupied by the Union Commercial Corporation. rf í " This move is due to the commencement of the construction of a four-story building on our former premises across from Pier No. 1. -w 8
AFTER AN INTERVIEW WITH PRESIDENT HARDING, MR. ROBERTO H. TODD HAS STATED THAT GOVERNOR REILY'S RESIGNATION IS EXPECTED BY CABLE AT ANY MOMENT.
President Harding intends to name Mr. Reily's successor before March fourth.
(United Press, via All America Cable) j WASHINGTON, February 16.- Mr. Roberto H. Todd, a member of the Republican National Committee, said this afternoon, after an interview he had with President Harding, that Governor Reily's resignation is expected by cable from Puerto Rico at any moment. According to White House officials, President Harding expects to name Governor Reily's successor by March 4. WENCESLAO BORDA, ANNOUNCING EMBASSMENT OF NEW GOVERNOR Late in the afternoon of and by a prominent maria leader, a cablegram was received from Washington, signed by di señor Wenceslao Borda, in which he says, more or less, as follows: "I have suspended trip for next week, embark with NEW MAN." YESTERDAY WAS SENT BY CABLE the Governor's Resignation Late last night, we were informed that the Ledo. Feliu and the Acting Governor, had made statements that implied in a specific and concrete manner that yesterday morning the Governor's resignation had been forwarded to Washington. MEMEL TO LITHUANIA
The Governor's resignation was received on March 4, next. When the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico, Mr. Felix Cordova Davila, was asked about the above reports, he declined, for the moment, to make any political statements of any kind, limiting himself to saying only that the resignation of the Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Felix Cordova Davila, had been sent to Washington yesterday morning. In order that it may be seen how our cable dispatches are confirmed, we are pleased to reproduce, taken from the February 2nd edition of EL MUNDO, the following dispatch Due to my broken health, I am unable to carry out my duties, and I am not in a position to do so.Governor Reily said to the Editor of the English page of "El Tiempo".
WASHINGTON, February 1 - Among other statements made today by Secretary of War Weeks, he intimated that the Governor of Puerto Rico, E. Mont. Reily, will resign his high office on the fourth day of March next, returning immediately to the United States in union with his family. THE SUBSCRIPTION IN FAVOR OF THE PORTORRICAN YOUNG MAN IN JAIL IN SANTIAGO DE CUBA Subscription opened by EL MUNDO to defray the expenses of the trial of the unhappy young Puerto Rican Perfecto Correa, who is in jail in Santiago de Cuba, for having killed, in self-defense, a Cuban rural guard. Don Manuel Fernandez Juncos $10.00 Don Romualdo Real $20.00 Don Felipe Blanco $2.00 Don Luis Jimenez $5.00 Anonymous i.oo Total $38.00 FRENCH TROOPS TO BE WITHDRAWN TO MEMEL PARIS, February 16.- In accordance with the agreements of the Council of Ambassadors, the Government agreed to withdraw the French hunting battalion now at Memel. STRIKE OF GERMAN MINERS - BERLIN, February 16.-The German miners of Inkerfurt have gone on strike. In Bochum the declaration of a strike is awaited at times. I<foUTQ "Youth to Youth" (Youth to Youth) Billie Dove Cullen Landis and Noah Beery cíVI Morning, Matinee and Neche Martyr to his sin (The Grim Comedian) Jack Holt Pathé News Nos. 8 and 9. M.T.C. G.C. "PARK" TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY Superb Premiere 'PAYING THE PIPER' By DOROTHY DICKSON Tomorrow Sunday: "THE POWER WITHIN" í (The Power Within)
PARIS, February 16. - After heated discussions the Council of Ambassadors agreed to declare the city of Memel under the sovereignty of Lithuania, on the condition that the minorities be protected.
From the editorial of "The Times", corresponding to yesterday's edition, we translate the following: An hour with Governor Reily gave us a clear understanding of how ill he is. The Governor told us that with six ribs badly fractured, his nervous system deeply broken, and no digestion at all, he did not feel up to his high office. The Governor has said as much to the President, and the President has replied that he (the Governor) must decide for himself whether or not he can continue in office. We understand," says The Times, "that Governor Reily's resignation will come as a bombshell to many people in Puerto Rico. The j other day we said that it is impossible for the Governor to continue to hold his ■ office, because of his fatal physical I conditions. And there is now no indication of an early recovery, either in health or strength. j ■ > So far as we are aware we go on to say "The Times"- ■ no selection of candidates has yet been made in the event of the Governor's retirement. It is understood, however, that they have sounded mu(Continued on 6th p.) To the Importing Trade I have resigned the sale of effects from the house of Messrs. R. R. Fogel & Co. of New York and advise my customers of my approaching visit on behalf of various manufacturers of exclusive representation in the United States. Miguel J. KANDO.
STíCALMA IB I T YOUR NERVES.' 1 ■ i cure them and procure yourself a ' BR r - 88 good sleep, using of the H ' K me^or ' mas 5e< 3 uro V maí ill 0 harmless of all ■y soothing, of the ¥■ I KNOU." * II i Ift in glass tubes of 20 Z| tablets, the success of which have Ai corroborated millions of Kl cases. Effects within Zti ■ sgg í minutes of taking. In i ■ ' The cdda em P ác l ue there are ins" H i H| tractions for use. ■ . K! Every good drug store I 1 IHf dispenses Bromural Hl N 0 I I J OLIMPO THEATER 1 TODAY SATURDAY FEBRUARY 17 J The interesting dramatic production 1 THE DANGERS OF LUXURY S By " OLIVE TELL 3 . and other famous stars 3 The best drug store in 3 Caguas is for sale because it cannot be attended 5 by its owner. Good propositions. Fi Contact J. ESTEVE, Box 243 5 Advt.
Optimism reigns in the financial centers, due to the magnificent prospects offered by sugar.
In the financial centers of the city the greatest optimism reigns on account of the magnificent prospects offered by sugar, which has risen in price in the last few days, according to the news we have published on the subject. Impressions we have received in the financial centers of the city, assure us that the sugar market has been firm all this week, sales having been made at $4.3 4 from Cuba and $6.53 from Puerto Rico. According to reports, raw sugar holders are indifferent to the offers to buy, because of the rapidity with which the rise in the commodity continues. From cables received here yesterday, it has been learned that the markets of Europe are also firmer, almost all increasing the volume of their orders. The demand for refined sugar The 'Attorney Geneneraf will practice an investigation By data which we were able to obtain yesterday from the Office of the "Attorney Geneneraf. I can inform you that within a few days an inspection visit will be made by the officials of the Department of Justice to the different entities that make up said Department, both in San Juan and on the Island, in order to be able to render a report on the present state of the work carried out by said agencies. It seems that this inspection will have something to do with the upcoming changes to be carried out in the Island Government, since according to reports, the Attorney General wishes to know the true state of his Department, in order to make to the Legislature the recommendations he deems appropriate, in relation to the practical needs and the conditions of morality and competence of the personnel employed in those agencies. A NEW TRIUMPH has just been won by "The Fisjr Tire Co. Inc." in building the SUPER RUBBER 30x3 1'2 type TRUCK CORD. It is as strong as a 31x4. It is now on sale at "The Fisk Tire Store" and all its sub-agencies. i A BATTALION OF AFRICAN TROOPS IN DUSSELDORF WASHINGTON, February 16.- The German Embassy has published a communique received from Berlin according to which, a detachment of African troops passed through Dusseldorf last night, bound for Essen. The battalion is under the command of a French Colonel.
It is, likewise, important, and its volume has reached a remarkable figure, i compared to the data previously existing. ' ' In the financial centers there is a belief that prices will advance to much higher levels. ,."■■■■ - . Another reason for optimism in the financial centers is the good weather that has been observed on the island, which has allowed the sugar cane plantations to develop. The cool temperature which has prevailed during the last few months is very beneficial, because it has caused the cane to reach its full maturity, thus giving higher yields. more details Other details on raw sugar were given to us yesterday by the Lamborn * Co. office in this city, and are as follows. ! guien tes; "As refiners have postponed meeting their future requirements for raw sugars, renewed orders for refined sugar, during the week necessarily compelled them to buy raw sugars more liberally. The volume of business during 1" week was quite strong, all refineries having participated in the purchases. Practically all of the business, <*fectn have been, for shipment exr February, refiners have not yet shown any signs of having ¡ dbbited their future requirements, in advance. The increased demand for raw sugars encouraged producers to sell more conservatively, especially when, in conjunction with the increased demand from U.S. refiners, there were active orders for sugars on a f.o.b. basis, generally understood to be for the purpose of filling previous sales to Europe. It is estimated that about 100,000 tons for sugars in February - February-March were purchased for shipment abroad." LATEST CABLEGRAMS i * Our esteemed friend, Mr. Jose Ruiz Solor, was kind enough to communicate to us the contents of the following cablegrams received yesterday: New York. February 16. Average price for the first fortnight of February, is $5.7023. New York, February 16. There is little demand with free bids at $6.53 equivalence for Puerto Rico sugars. I A sale of Puerto Rico sugar for February and March shipment of $6.78 has been made to Blonda and the McCaham refinery. " 1 Market sustained. ! THE OCCUPATION CONTINUES ■ ¡ - PARIS, Feb. 16.-French troops will occupy Dortmund tomorrow.
I Victory Garden Theater I ffi TODAY SATURDAY TODAY [fi I 'The Mysteries of Paris' | THE BEST THAT HAS EVER ARRIVED IN THE COUNTRY S
4 i I I 4 i I 4 4 4 l * T** - * Underwear Agents Agents needed who can produce 75 to 200 dozen shirts, weekly. Write to Box 1467, San Juan, P. R.
30' MOTOR BOAT FOR SALE, equipped with new 12 H. P. Lathrop engine. Can be used for touring or towing. Contact Standard Grocery Co., San Juan.