THE avsj nüü
- 12 Pgt. 3 Ctvs. - Semester $4.00 One Year .... $7.50
- 12 Págs. 3 Ctvs. - Offices: Salvador Brau 81 Tel. 1222-P. O. Box 345
DAILY IN THE MORNING,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR V.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) autborired by 9e Ar} of -October 8. 1917. oa ftle at the Post Office of San Juan. Porto Rir.o, By order of the President. A. 8. Burleson, Postmaster Genere!. Entered as second class matter, February -21, 1919. at the Post Office at Haa" Juan, Porto Bieoi (United States of America) under'the Act of march 3. 1879.
SATURDAY, MAY 19, 1923- NUMBER 1319.
NUMBER 1319.
■ I. I _- ■ . - - f . a £LeadER OF THE REPUBLICAN MINORITY IN THE LOWER HOUSE LAYS THE FIRST STONE OF A POSSIBLE UNION WITH THE UNIONISTS.
The information we published i about amending the Republican Program h has been once again ratified to us "THE TIME" IS DISPROVED BY ITS OWN CORRELIGIONARIES.
; , r Vi.. '' X - ■ ■ ■ 1 ■ ■ ■ Upon learning of the pretended rec (¿fication made to us the otío day, des d" its columns the disauthorized Republican organ, referring to the information published by us relative to ; that by a group gives significant elements of indisputable worth, belonging to the Republican party, we went again to interview with the , good .friend and best corre'igfonaxio of "El Tiempo" (although he is anxious to doubt it) who supplied us then with that interesting information, and whose name we are not yet able to publish. We wanted to know his opinion about what "El Tiempo" said, in case he had read it, and when we asked him, he answered: '"Yes, I have read what our newspaper "El Tiempo" says, trying to disprove the fact that any republican (it does not have to be a "distinguished" one) has the right and even the right to publish it, for everyone has the right and even the duty to make his opinions public) has been able to tell the editor of EL MUNDO that there is a movement of opinion within the Republican party tending to amend our Constitution, and that such a movement exists, will be proved in a few days when the draft platform being prepared for submission to the Assembly is made public." -Could it be known who will endorse it?" we asked him. -I do not wish to anticipate names," he hastened to answer us, "because they will sign the said draft and that will be the best moment for them to be able to convince themselves that they are not "unionists cloaked in a republican cloak. ' ' ■ -It seems. -We told him that what most annoyed our colleague was what you told us about the Elective Governor, for in the rectifying letter they said that you, the Republicans, were not to make the "rope with which they could be saved". No. 40 Telephone 1209 INAUGURATION - On Monday, May 21, this new establishment will be open to the public. OFFICE EQUIPMENT. - HOME FURNITURE - SCHOOL FURNITURE NEW SALES PLAN The public is cordially invited to visit us. JULIAN W. BLANCO INC. San Juan, P- R. V-
Do you believe that this idea of the elective Governor has any real ' hold on the leaders of the collectivi' ty? -Our president, Mr. Tons Soto, in his recent interview in "Eli Impar.-ial," and on several occasions at ti.1 teri-or and later (in today's issue of "Puerto Rico-Ilustrado," for example) has expressed his agreement that the governor should be elective. In the interview to :il "e| I refer to of April 16, -f ijo our chief: "Finality: Statehood. Transitory regime: The current organic law eliminating the absolute veto and other restrictions. AND MAKING THE GOVERNOR ELECTIVE. - And the Constitution of the United States extending it to Puerto Ri4 With this program, Mr. Tons' Sobo stated that even a merger with the Unionist Party was feasible." ¡ (Continued <on 6a, page" aires of a coima REORGANIZATION' 1 SOPLAN ON THE NEG OF TRA-' ¡ UNDER DEjtO. RICO I HAVE NOT HAD THE NEED TO THINK OF RESIGNING THE HEAD OF THIS BUREAU-THOUGHT MR. ARROYO "The employees of the Labor Bureau are thinking of resigning." This is the news that has been circulating in the city for several days. In the corridors of the Palace, a distinguished ex-legislator, usually informed of political affairs, also gave us the news with a "mysterious man's" voice, but something made us doubt. However, something not. made us doubt the species: the activity of certain interested elements who went* from gathering to gathering, echoing > inflating the "canard" as they pleased- But it is certain that as the news continued to acquire a semblance of authenticity, we decided to visit the Secretariat of Agriculture, culture and the Bureau of re. f erence itself. (Continued on p. 12). 'Teatro Olimpo' Sunday, May 20, 1923 MATINAL AND EVENING Premiere of the extraordinary dramatic production "The Woman and the Law" by BETTY COMPSON 7 monumental acts! Colossal success! BARRILES PARAJTABACO We offer 20,000 for immediate delivery. Prices without competition Alonso, Riera Co., Inc. SAN JUAN
IN HIS SENSATIONAL DECLARATIONS, MR. GONZALEZ MENA INSINUATES THAT THE PRESIDENT OF SAID COLLECTIVITY, MR. TOUS SOTO, AND "TROS LEADERS, PARTICIPATE IN THE SAME CWTERIO
As our readers will remember, several days ago we announced that a reporter of ours had in iqente cele ¡ brar an interview ji" rigorous political act- t lidsd, with the leader of the Republican minority, "n the Lower House, "e < ñor González Mena, because by versions < qua had reached us, we knew that the popular representative, i i who is one of the most notable figures of insular republicanism, had expressed himself among his friends in a certain way, in relation to certain notes that appeared in our Thursday issue, referring to possible amendments to the republican program, which notes would have caused so much concern in the republican ranks, judging by what was said about us in "El Tiempo." Our Editor, who for days had been looking for the opportunity to interview! \ i Ledo. Gonzá'ez Mena, succeeded in his purpose yesterday, at a time when the minority leader was in his seat in the Chamber, shortly before the beginning of the session. There is no need to add that Mr. Gonzalez Mena was explained to the House. It is not necessary to add that Mr. Gonzalez Mena was explicit, vivid and substantial in answering the questions we asked him and whose answers may be the first stone to put an end to the partisan quarrels in the country, and in a surrender of arms on the part of the combatant sides, "to begin to fight tenaciously for the true, fraternity and freedom of the people. fraternity and liberty of Puerto Rico. First for Puerto Rico and then for ourselves we rejoice at these manifestations of Mr. Gonzalez Mena. They must be so helpful to the welfare of the country, which is the most important thing, that they are a lie to those who have tried to call into question our work of always informing public opinion. -¿ -* ? -We will go to the Assembly, said the Republican leader, to uphold our purpose: statehood as a solution for our future. We will go for the present as much self-government as we can get, including the appointment by popular election of the man who will govern our destinies from St. Catherine, The time has come for our governor to be elected by our votes. We do not think it is fair that the person who is to govern our island should be selected any longer by the Washington Administration without our consent. This idea is not new. In the House back in 1917, we introduced a Resolution requesting the United States Congress to amend our charter to the effect that the Governor should be elected by the votes of the residents of the island. Also some time ago, Messrs. Barbosa and Barceló agreed that a memorial should be made to the Congress.
PARQUE today - SATURDAY- ■ TODAY BEBE íDANIELS " in 'El Temple de un Alma' (She Couldn't Help It) Tomorrow: LA MANÚHA (The Blot)
 The gentleman drafted the memorial which was printed. Dr. Barbosa gave a copy of the memorial to Mr. Toug Sote for his opinion. Dr. Barbosa's attention was drawn to the fact that in the memorial the extension to Puerto Rico of the principles of the Constitution and the Constitution itself, which was invented, was affirmed. For this reason it was that H H ■ ■ I w ,. Ledo. Enrique Gonzalez Mena. ocafiion the two parties did not ask Congress to elect the governor. ? -We want our island^f orinating an integral part of the Nation, for all of life, but just as New York, Ohio or California are. o
-' C -Then, he goes on, when ' < that time comes, if the way should ever be closed to us, if Congress should ever ha- ! s certify a definite statement that we are not to be a State, we want to have in our platform a statement, also definite, that our party reserves the right of the- 1 < borax for the attainment of our full sovereignty. I < -ó- 7 ¡1 -All our perso- ¡ nal differences, he continued, ¡must disappear. De- j we must unite to defend our i rights and properly attend to all- ' i our economic questions. In that way the country would rise again and be i, i happy and prosperous. ( -¿- ? j -We understand that only two parties i ■ should exist in Puerto Rico, year of (Continued on page 6) !■
f THE FEDERAL COURT WILL INVOKE ITS JURISDICTION IN THE ASE-' SYNATUS COMMITTED 1 ON THURSDAY
I THE BUILDING WHERE THE ACT OCCURRED. THE BUILDING WHERE THE ACT TOOK PLACE WAS CEDED TO THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT BY THE DIOCESE OF P. R. IN 1908. IN THE YEAR 1908 On the occasion of certain rumors acer ca that it is possible that the Federal Court may intervene in the ase1 sinato assuato perpetrated on the person of Mr. Francisco Palacios Salazar, we have 1 been able to glean the following, from reports given us in connection ' 1 with this matter: I - Recently, when the case of policemen Victoriano de Jesus "and Eusebio Valentin, accused of killing 5 cabe Hand, of the Marine Corps, arose, this question was raised >jde dual jurisdiction which exists between -' the insular and federal courts, so-' ' i br" the de'idos committed, in míli1 ( tar or naval zone, when this zone was under the exclusive jurisdiction of the go1 bierno of the United States. It is alleged in the case of the murder of Corporal Hand that the place where the crime was committed is under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Federal Government, and therefore the Insular Government has no authority in the matter. That question, which is a very important one, has been submitted by the Hon. Justice Odlin to the Supreme Court of the United States, and that high Court will probably have its final say ! soon. But in the case of Mr. Palacios, things change on the face of it, and exclusive jurisdiction seems to be a completely settled question because of certain contracts of com-pra-sale between the Federal Government. 1* Roman Apostolic Church and the People of Puerto Rico. * According to our reports, the U.S. Lei. PreswtT Levee Act of 1909 provided for the payment to the Catholic Church in Puerto Rico of one hundred and twenty thousand dollars for the Quar tel of Santo Domingo and the land on which the same is located, as well as for the Ballajá Barracks. This assignment was made payable to the Bishop of Puerto Rito and was what was agreed to be paid by the Government of the United States, by the treaty signed in San Juan, Puerto Rico, on August 12, 1908.
August 12, 1908. By virtue of this purchase by the United States Government of what then and now has been in its possession, and by virtue of the provisions of section 5 of the law passed on February 16, 1903, authorizing the Governor of Puerto Rico to convey certain lands to the United States for naval, military, etc., purposes, and which provides that a portion of the lands to be transferred to the United States for naval, military, etc., purposes, shall be for the use of the United States Government, and in which it is provided that once acquired by the Government of the United States any land by purchase, etc., "the jurisdiction of the People of Puerto Rico over the same shall cease "ipso facto" and federal sovereignty and jurisdiction shall be exclusive." Moreover, we were told by our informant, that it is his belief that anything done by the District Courts of San Juan, first and second sections and the (Supreme Court of Puerto Bi co in the area in which the Cuar tel de Santo Domingo is now located are null and void, and that all prisoners who have Sentencia-
For sale the "Teatro Ci' ne Salinas" j Good opportunity to earn a lot of money for people enten1 didas in the business of cinema| tÓF r "f0. For information and other details about the business, please contact "CINE SALINAS", Box 24, Salinas.
OF GREAT INTEREST TO HABANO TOBACCO SMOKERS IN PUERTO RICO RIBOSCH TOBACCOES made from genuine Havana tobacco are on the market. To order, please contact > . / BOSCH BROTHERS Cayey, P. R.
The famous CAMPAMENTO SOAP by LANGE SOAP COMPANY Agents P. Gonzalez & Co. S. en C. Tel. 69 Arsenal 8
"I DON'T CARE-WE WERE TOLD YESTERDAY BY LCDO. MARTINEZ NADAL-WHETHER THE GOVERNOR OF PUERTO RICO IS TOWNER OR BARCELO".
The distinguished nepublican senator advises discretion to his co-religionists, and gives us his opinion regarding the elective governor.
As a result of information recently published in our columns, referring to the idea that a group of young Republicans is trying to crystallize to reform the Program of their party making it more liberal and requesting the Concession of the elective governor, and which information was rectified by "El Tiempo", yesterday afternoon we exchanged impressions with the distinguished senator Rafael Martinez Nadal, one of the most prominent figures of the insular republicanism. Mr. Martínez Nadal began by saying that in that information the name of the person who supplied it to us should have been published, and he alleged that no one should hide himself in order to express his feelings and his way of thinking, no matter how radical they may be, without worrying that by doing so he is standing in the way of the prevailing currents of opinion. We explained to him, then, 1 that whoever thus had to express to us, sincerely his criterion, was authorized _ to speak because of the position he occupies in the heart of the community, and that it is only for reasons of particular interest that we occupy the RUHR BASIN BECAUSE IT IS THE ONLY GUARANTEE WE COUNT ON 'i ,■ " * * ■ . .... we will leave the occupied territories. WE WILL LEAVE THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES. (GUN THE GOVERNMENT OF BERi LIN VAYA PÁGANDÓ r T PARIS, May 17. '(Cable frnacés). - . M Poincaré has declared to the members of the Finance and Foreign Re5 lations Committee of the Chamber that the military occupation of the Ruhr by the French troops is not necessary to guarantee the security of France. The occupation of the Ruhr, he says, is essential to force Germany to pay reparations. We will leave the occupied zone in proportion to the payments which the Berlin government will make, since it will consider that the left bank of the Rhine is a sufficient military guarantee for the French. Incidentally the Chief of Government spoke about the first four months of occupation, as well as the expenses and receipts during the time 1 ' mentioned. He said that military expenses. ° tares are being covered from the coal and coke obtained. 5 " i France- concluded Poincaré i -is prepared to remain in the B> Ruhr as long as Germany desires, or, in other words, as long as she pays the amount of the indemnities, in accordance with the London pact. - The two could leave by means of recourse dt Habeas Corpus, once raised k jj question in legal and procedural form. I Bolívar Pagán -LAWYER-g! Office: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz g P- O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475 Sart-Juan, P. R.
He decided that his name should not be made public. -In any case, Senator," we told him, "you know that the name is irrelevant. Don't you think that the ■ ideas contained in that information are the ideas that predominate in a large number of your most conspicuous and characteristic men of your party? -As far as I am concerned," Mr. Martínez Nadal answered, "I must tell you that as far as the fundamentals are concerned I do not consider it necessary to make any changes in the Party Program. The State has been and must continue to be our only aspiration and to its attainment we must direct and direct our efforts, if only by changing the procedures as to ■ the manner in which the Congress and the American people must be convinced of the convenience of granting us that honor. I recognize, it is true, that we are not the only people to be worthy of the honor. I recognize, it is true, that there is in the party a deep-seated tendency to liberalize our program further; but this tendency, in my judgment, should be limited to transitional forms in order to arrive at a definitive solution of our status, and in that sense I am in favor of including in the present Assembly aspirations more in harmony with the environment. Speaking to us of the forthcoming Assembly the,Mr. Jfcrtal fifi'*" manlfe-tó that he had held several , conferences eon the Chief of the Party, se f Jñor Toufi Soto, and had indicated to him the , advisability of holding some preliminary meetings par* to study the situa-., eion of party and that he trusts that during the next week they will meet two r or three times for that purpose. He also told us that they do not wish, nor do they consider it discreet and opportune to advance any opinion about what is going to be discussed at the Assembly, so that it will not be understood that they are trying to prejudice the minds of the delegates and they consider it more convenient to go to said event without prejudice or preconceptions so as to be able to give due consideration and study to whatever proposals are presented and from them approve the one that best suits the interests of the collectivity and which best satisfies (Continued on the 4th page); 'Cine Puerto Rico. page.) ; 'Cine Puerto Rico' ' -STOP 21 and . TEL- 607- Grandiose function at current prices 15 - 20 n Dos l é El Caballero del Monte' Si by LOUIS BERNNNISON in paites o Goldwyn special and e LA CRUZ DE MAYO interesting film shot in Puerto Rico by ladies and ladies of nuese tra chosen society and . Paquita Escribano e See program where the names of the Puerto Rican artists who take part in this film appear. PRICES: -- - - 15 - 20 ctvs. to MOLER-VIDRIO that "EL BOSQUE DE BOLONIA" will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA of San Juan for the ba- . ratísimo, that sells and for the sur- '- tida that is. 33 - SAN SEBASTIAN - 33
Puerto Rico Premiere "LA SUPREMA AUDACIA" (THE GREAT IMPERSONATION) ANN FORREST AND JAMES KIRKWOOD Extraordinary Program of the Bruno & Vázquez Circuit. E K