ELMINDO
- Q PAGES. 3 CTS. Semester s- "4.00 II One Year - "7.60
1 Q PAGS. 3 CTS. I Ofl. Salvador Brau 81. Ill Tel. 1222. - Box 845
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Pubh.hfld and dirtributed under penult (No SOI) auUoriied by the Aet of October S. X917, on filo at the Port Office rt f B "b n m "rv n 21 PO 19°19 at ' th/ President, ▲. B|r leeon, Poatmaater General. Entered aa aecond elaaa flutter, February 21. 1919. at the Poat Offieo at Han Juan, Porto Bi co, (United States of America) under Vie Aet of march 8. 187"
SATURDAY, JUNE 30, 1923.
YEAR V,
NUMBER 1346
The "Maria Cristina' will exhaust her liquors 3 miles before arriving.
"There is no such confiscation of ships," the Deputy Collector of Customs told us.
As our readers are already aware, the Volstead Act has entered a period of rigid enforcement, as of the 10th of the month ending today. The law against those who like to steep their elbows, has been extended since that date to American jurisdictional waters, and a strict, absolute abstention, decreed by the Government of Washington, obliges vessels entering ports of the United States and Puerto Bíco, or trafficking along their coasts, not to carry in their holds cargoes of liquors of any kind. The canteens of the ships, as it is seen, have disappeared since June 10 with the new interpretation given to the Law. That of a citizen of New York leaving the city for a few minutes, going on board the "floating bars,'' - canteens, expressly made - to satisfy his thirst, and then coming back drunken and staggering, is now in danger of disappearing, for in anticipation of this, as well as of other things, the Government is employing prohibitory measures in the territorial waters, both here and there, and has announced that it will not be permitted to carry liquor of any kind in their holds.It has announced that vessels of any flag will not be permitted to enter or traffic through American waters with cargoes of beverages on board. This has caused consequent shipping disturbances; but, true to the program of making the United States a country of incorruptible teetotalers, the Union has put the said Act in force, and any vessel caught with beverages on board, within three miles of our ports ■ I AMERICAN LEGION PORTO RICO POST No. 1. CELEBRATION OF THE 4th OF JULY All members of the American Legion and all veterans of the world war are urged to attend the grand parade on the 4th of July, The place of rendezvous will be on San Sebastian street eastward from ,1a Crttto street, at 9 A. M. o'clock. Under the auspices of the American Legion a tournament will be held between the high schools of San Juan, Rio Piedras and Bayamon at 2:30 P. M. in the halls of the Baldorioty School, San Juan, on the subject "Benefits of American Citizenship". The Hon. Governor of P. R. will be in attendance. The general public is invited. Jose S. GARCIA, Adjutant, P. R Post No. 1 Advt.
The vessel will be declared a pirate ship and the cargo will be confiscated. THE "REINA MARIA CRISTINA" In view of the above circumstances and knowing that the Spanish liner "Reina Maria Cristina" will be arriving here shortly, a reporter of ours has learned in connection with the said vessel, that she will exhaust all the cargo of beverages on board, before entering the three miles of water, which marks the territorial zone, in accordance with the practices of international law. THE DUANA'S SUB CHIEF The Deputy Chief of Customs, Mr. Siegmund, in reply to a question we put to him as to whether it was true that instructions had been given to confls- . The Deputy Chief of Customs, Mr. Siegmund, in reply to a question we put to him as to whether it was true that instructions had been given to confiscate steamships carrying drinks, stated that the version was unfounded, as they, who were in charge of implementing the alleged measure, had not received orders to that effect, nor would they possibly receive them, as the Government did not know how to do that, and that in case they have left their point of origin on a date later than the 10th of the present, as would be the case with the "Reina Maria Cristina", since it sailed from Spain on the 26th of the present, that is, 16 days after the new interpretation given to the Law came into force. Fiestas íeí 4th of July THE BIG 4th of July BALL will be held at the HOTEL CONDADO- ■ VANDERBILT on the 3rd of July at 9:00 P. M Invitations may be obtained from the executive committee of said festivities. The hotel, in celebration of this party and to further enhance the festivities, will serve a SPLENDID DINNER at 7:30 P. M. on July 3rd. Two magnificent orchestras will entertain the event. Souvenirs. Please reserve your table in advance. Advt. - TO MOLER VIDRIO that "EL BOSQUE DE BOLONIA" will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA in San Juan because it sells so well and is so south.
DON'T WE NEED ELECTRIC CARS? It is easy to say that electric cars are not necessary; that buses can accommodate all the passengers that must be transported each day. However, no other form of transportation in the United States or elsewhere has worked well except for electric trolleys. The transportation problem facing San Juan is relatively the same as that of other cities. Throughout the year we rely on electric cars as the most appropriate and safest means of transportation. San Juan HAS a transportation problem. Porto Rico Railway Light & Power Co. Manuel V. Domenech DIRECTOR LIGHT TRANSPORTATION FORCE
2nd - PRESENTATION OF THE BIG "CORONA" 1
A PALACE OF THE EX.KAISER ESCALATED BERLIN, June 29 (United Press). -One of the finest palaces owned by ex-Emperor Wilhelm on Unter der Linden avenue was scaled.
RAMSAY MAC DONALD PRE= LABOR PRESIDENT LONDON, June 29. (United Press) -The labor assembly by a large majority vote nominated Ramsay Mac Donal as its president.
TANGER CONFERENCE BEGINS LONDON, June 29 (Un.ted Press)-The preliminary Tangier conference began this morning at half past eleven o'clock.
The members of the American Legion have not resigned their positions.
WE HAVE NOT TRIED TO IN. We have not tried to interfere in matters which do not concern us, they say. Last night we received the following letter signed by Mr. Jose S. Garcia, Adjutant of the American Legion: San Juan, June 29, 1923. Mr. Director of EL MUNDO, Dear Sir:In some notes published in a recent edition of your reputable newspaper, taken from a United States newspaper, referring to the political situation in Puerto Rico and the governorship of the Hon. Horace M. Towner, it was stated that given the seriousness that government affairs had taken, 35 of the members of Post No. 1 of the American Legion in San Juan had resigned in protest. As this information is completely inaccurate, I beg you to give publicity to this letter in which I wish to disprove such falsehood. It is neither true that resignations have been received nor has this association tried to interfere in matters that do not suit it. With thanks in advance, Mr. Director, for the insertion of these lines, I remain from you, Atto. and S. S. S., José S. GARCIA, Adjutant, American Legion.
To poijjl end the discontent of the minority a change of officers will be made.
* ENTER THE COMBINA. THE COMBINATION IS MADE UP OF MESSRS. NER, SIAW AND GALLARDO? 'that the rumor is of extraordlnary importance, and even though we know that in political spheres it has acquired characters of certainty, the impenetrable reserve which is maintained, Aliga us to accept it, for the time being, only as information. M --OrCH'JI All the protest initiated by the Republican Party against the actions of Governor Towner, on the occasion of his actions and especially on the occasion of the appointments he made to Heads of Departments, and without this meaning, we are informed, that the National Administration has disapproved of Judge Towner's policy, it appears that he is preparing to rectify the situation, it seems that the latter is preparing to rectify some of his acts, in the desire to achieve unity of thought and action among the different political sides of the logging, a circumstance which is essential and necessary if we wish to obtain from the American Congress in the next elections the granting of more liberal and broad government measures, as extended to Puerto Rico. Saco of all that federal legislation which"' will benefit the improvement and progress of our country. (Continued on the 6th page)
New Styles ~ New at New Prices Suits For You Gentleman! Cashmere Pure Wool Lightweight Pure English Yarn Dril New Styles in Beautiful Colors Well-wetted and Handmade and Navy Ecru-Cream and White $20 and $22.50 $12 - $16 and $18 Genuine Palm-Beach Unlined Pira Trench Coats Elegant, Beautiful Colors Beautifully finished to receive-Well-made New Styles in Beautiful Colors $18 $20 and $22.50 $10 and $12.98 We have special orders for Custom Suits Visit us at Gonzalez Padin Co. Inc.
Spanish Transatlantic Company STEAMERS POST FOR SPAIN:- STEAMER 'LEON XIII."-Speciqp arrives at San Juan de Puerto Rico, from the Pacific and Central America, about the 8th of July next, on voyage for the Canary Islands, Cadiz and Barcelona. She admits cargo and passengers, having a magnificent and luxurious chamber which has recently undergone important alterations. FOR NEW YORK AND SPANISH PORTS OF THE MEDITERRANEAN.-VAPOR "REINA MARIA CRISTINA" - Expected in San Juan de Puerto Rico, coming from Spain, on July 11th next. She will be dispatched on her way to New York and Spanish ports of the Mediterranean. She admits cargo and passengers for Spain at the same rates as < for direct voyages from here to the Peninsu la, and has also a splendid chamber for the accommodation of the passengers. FOR SPAIN:-VAPOR "MANUEL ARNUS"-It is expected to arrive at San Juan de Puerto Rico around the eighth of August, coming from the Pacific and Central America, on voyage to the Canary Islands, Cadiz and Barcelona. It admits cargo and passengers, having an extensive chamber equipped with the greatest modern luxury and comfort. - FOR ANNOTATIONS of passengers and cargo space, as well as for any information you may require, please contact SOBRINOS DE EZQUIAGA AGENTES SAN JUAN, P. R. TEL. 12-13-85 , BOX 351.
Mayors may be removed by the governor, as provided by the Senate.
THE MUNICIPAL ASSEMBLIES WILL BE RESTRAINED THAT RIGHT Yesterday at two o'clock the Senate session began at two o'clock with the attendance of all its members except Mr. Barceló, who was finalizing the amendments to the Budget, eh the Treasury Committee" The session was presided over by the Vice-President, Mr. Juan Hernández López. Immediately after the Secretary called the roll, the proposal on the Municipal Law, which had been pending from last night's session, was brought up for discussion. Manuel Martínez Dávila, Senator for Guayama, took the floor and declared that the amendment that had been introduced so that the Governor could remove any Mayor, for just cause, was a healthy and democratic amendment. Iglesias interrupted the speaker to state that the Assembly should and had the right to dismiss. Senator Cuevas, seeing that the minority member Ledo. Martínez Nadal seconded the ideas of the socialist senator, he stated that he did not believe in the municipal autonomy of said Republican leader. Cuevas also stated that it would be very difficult for a Municipal Assembly to remove a Mayor if he had great influence (continued on page 6).
Senator Benítez opposes the sugar tax
He is in favor of the municipalities being the ones to impose this tax.
In an information we published in our previous edition, we talked about the status of the important Arbitration Law in the Legislature, which is now being considered by the Conference Committee of both branches of the Insular Parliament. In this information, we mentioned the criterion supported by some significant centralists, regarding the tax that they intend to impose on processed sugars, and to this effect, we welcomed the valuable and interesting opinions of Mr. Jaime Sifre y Taraza, administrator of one of the main sugar mills on the northern coast of the island. As we were aware that the distinguished Senator for Humacao and member of the majority in the Senate Treasury Committee, Mr. José J. Benitez, was one of the greatest opponents to the establishment of this measure, it seemed convenient and opportune to gather his impressions, to give our readers the reasons that the representatives of the Upper House had for eliminating from the aforementioned law, the tax approved by the House in that sense. We had to exchange brief words yesterday with Mr. Benitez, who in one of the corridors of the Senaco expressed himself to us in this way: - 1 It seems that there is, on the part of the public, a certain prejudice against me, perhaps due to the fact that I am, in the Senate Finance Committee, one of those who have "two peaefJá5' , to which effect I know that phrases such as this have been uttered: "up there is Don Pepe with the retranca". I can assure you, however, that I know how to behave in a liberal manner when it is necessary, and I proved it when I was in charge of the hardware store, and I need someone with experience. FERRETERIA MERINO San Juan No Brush-No Soap No Lavaza See 2nd page BARBASOL FOR RENT In Recinto Oeste No. 3, a local for family with 4 apartments door to street. High information. JOSE FERNANDEZ
I was opposed to this measure, and I was not able to accept it, but I did not want it to be effective for the whole of that biennium. I opposed this measure and proposed that they be left as they were during the first year of that economic biennium and that when the second year began, it was then when, automatically, they would be reduced, with which only the employees would be harmed during the first year." "Now then-he continued telling us-with this question of the sugar tax my personal opinion is that the imposition of that tax is unnecessary, since with the other revenue laws our Budget will be perfectly covered. I understand that since this measure is not indispensable for this reason, I do not see any justification whatsoever for taxing those plants which are materially bankrupt. (Continued on page 6) NOTICE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN, P. K, WATER SUPPLY SERVICE As of today, and until further notice, the water supply service to San Juan, Puerta de Tierra, Santurce and Río Piedras, will be provided at the following times: IN THE MORNING Río Piedras and Santurce from 6 to 8 San Juan and Puerta de Tierra 9 to 11 IN THE AFTERNOON Río Piedras and Santurce 4 to 6 San Juan and Puerta de Tierra 7 to 9 This measure has been adopted due to the low amount of water that the Bío Piedras currently has. The Administration is taking this measure so as not to deprive the public of this important service, especially at times when the consumption of water is strictly necessary. Everyone is requested to cooperate with the Administration through an economical use of water, so that the restrictions of this interruption of service, cause the least possible discomfort. The general public is hereby notified that the use of water for irrigation of gardens and for any other purpose than domestic, or for those industrial applications where water is absolutely necessary, is strictly prohibited. The police, and every citizen, has the duty to denounce any infringement of this prohibition of imperious necessity. Rafael DIEZ DE ANDINO, Commissioner of Public Service, Police and Prisons. Advt.
BARRELS FOR TOBACCO DESPALILLADO FIRST CLASS EIGHT BOWS WE OFFER ON DOCK FOR IMMEDIATE DELIVERY VENTICINCO THOUSAND BARRELS. PRICE $1.35 We accept orders for delivery during July and August. ARPILLERA (BURLAP) for packing tobacco at 8 cents per yard. For more information: ALONSO. RIERA & CO. INC. "Tobacco Palace" Telephone 527 San Juan PONCE: -Union esq. Sol PACIFIC ARGENTINE BRAZIL LINE American Steamer "Susquehanna"' DE 17,700 TONNES Expected in this port coming from BUENOS AIRES, MONTEVIDEO and RIO DE JANEIRO on July 1st and will continue voyage to CRISTOBAL CANAL Z. LOS ANGELES AND SAN FRANCISCO Calf. Admits passage and cargo for the above ports. For further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. Agents. TancalTetouan. Phone 257. Telephone Building.