THE WORLD
-12 Págs. 3 Cts.-Semester .... $4.00 One Year ... $7.50
-12 Pigs. 3 Cts.-Offices: Salvador Bran 81 Ttl. 1222 - P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY, EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR V.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) by the Act of October 6. 1917, on file at the Post Office of Ran Juan. Pnrtn Riro. By order of the President. A P Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 2!. i9I9. at tin Office at Kan Juan. Porto R) co Ftate" n* America)-jinder th#" V*t nt marM* H ixtp.
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 10, 1923.
NUMBER 1227.
THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE REQUESTS THAT SAN JOAN BE DECLARED A FREE PORT.
THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE WILL REQUEST THAT SAN JOAN BE DECLARED A FREE PORT ON THE 18TH OF THE PRESENT WAS "SCHEDULED TO BE HELD IN THE CITY OF PONCE.
Yesterday morning the Chamber of Commerce held an extraordinary session. San Juan Section, with the purpose of exchanging impressions on the matters that said Section has to submit to the general assembly of the Chamber of Commerce in plenary, which will take place in the city of Ponce on the 18th of the current. The representatives that will attend the act of Ponce were named, having been designated the following gentlemen: Alvaro Trigo, Emilio Giménez, R. Pietrantoni, F. Vail Spinoss, Maria, no Mier. Juan Pedrosa, R. W. Camejo, Antonio Pacheco, José Labrador, Eduar do Larroca. F. Schinter, Harfood Hull, Harry F Besosa, J. G. Lallande, Emilio Jiménez, Sebastián Solo and Manuel Camuñas. It was agreed to instruct said delegates to request the assembly of Ponce to appoint a commission of competent elements, with the purpose of working jointly with the Association of Lawyers, in the unification and study of all the laws that affect commerce in general. It was approved, and in due course will be sent to the Governor, the report rendered by a Committee of the Section, favorably recommending the realization in the U. S. of a campaign of announcements for the good of Puerto Rico, according to proposals made to that effect by an important American Company, and of which we gave an account in an extensive information that appeared in these same columns. It was also agreed that the delegates of the Assembly petition the War Department to extend the dredging of the port of San Juan, in order to improve the general conditions of the bay. The delegates were further instructed to bring before said Assembly the following matters: the advisability of declaring San Juan a free port; to request the Government of the United States of America to declare San Juan a free port; and to request the Government of the United States of America to declare San Juan a free port.
i | free port; to request the Government of the United States to include Puerto Rico as a free port. The Assembly also requested the delegates to raise the following matters before the Assembly: the advisability of declaring San Juan a free port; to request the Government of the United States to include Puerto Rico in the distribution of federal funds destined for the construction of highways; to request the Insular Legislature to allocate funds to carry out a land survey of the island and to make a geological map of the island; to request that the Assembly approve a geological map of the island; and to request that the Assembly approve a geological map of the island. . the geological map of the island, and, finally, that the Legislature also be asked to appoint a Commission to study and modify the Code of Commerce in force in Puerto Rico, in accordance with modern trends in the matter. The meeting, which began at 10:00 a.m., lasted until 12:30 p.m., and was one of the most interesting and laborious meetings held by said institution. The president, Mr. Morales, conducted the discussions with great skill and skill. According to our reports, the commerce of Ponce will give a great welcome to the delegates from San Juan, and it is hoped that the aforementioned assembly will result in the most beautiful reality for the commercial interests of the country. > The representative of the BEAUMONT CHAMBER OF COMMERCE has left for the island on a study visit to Mr. K. D. Schwartz, representative in Puerto Rico. Schwartz, representative in Puerto Rico, c*2 the Beaumont, Texas, Chamber of Commerce, and who, as we have said, has established his office in this city, has recently left for the island, for the purpose of studying the commercial conditions of the entire country, and to make friends with the most prominent business men in Puerto Rico, in order to further strengthen commercial relations between this island and Puerto Rico; ■ ■ ■ and the nucleus of merchants which he I 1 1 ; represents. I This first trip <le Mr. Schwartz, ; ¡ includes the cities of Arecibo, I ¡ Aguadilla, Mayagüez and Ponce. ( ! ■ Rodolfo Valentino - i and a select cast of stars in ¡ "Mother Without Soul ' (FRIVOLOUS WIVES) oM a ñ a n a : MATINEE - MATINEE - AND EVENING : "THE POWER WITHIN" : (THE POWER WITHIN) PAULINE GARON and WILLIAM H. TOOCKER ; PATHE NEWS Nos. 5 and 6 ■ M T I G. C. ; Olympus Theater j. TODAY Saturday, February 10 TODAY Two Magnificent Films! "GUILTY CONSCIENCE" By ANTONIO MORENO AND the very cute Comedy in two parts "IN SEARCH OF DUST" i SUNDAY 11 Morning and evening: Puerto Rican Premiere of the suggestive drama "ON STAGE" * By KATHERINE MACDONALD 4 P. M. Grand Children's Ball in the alia plant room. Special ticket.
■- ti*.*, " " i i - i iri tri i rrm" - :rTT, . - r ■ ■ ■ -J DUTCH STEAMER "AURORA" "* Will leave within 2 or 3 days for " ... SAN PEDRO DE MACORIS, -- SANTO DOMINGO CITY, " :: SANCHEZ, PUERTO PLA- L " TA, HAITI and SANTIAGO " :: from Cuba :: :: admitting cargo :: ü Sues, de L Villamil & Co. :; - - - - agents - '■ " Phone 1520 SAN JUAN ■id l'HI 1-H I It I 11111 11 1 1 1 H I"! 4|€IJIDARd| ■ THE NERVES I 9 ■ with all care and rohátud ; SL H . is tantamount to ensuring l He ■ good success and the greatest felb ■ w? cidade posibie.Attaquen is therefore ■/ end delay the least discomfort Ve| Wf nerve and insomnia with the Ai Df I it BROMURAL Jj vk that being entirely ¡nofensi* Zi Wt vas and by thousands of doctor; prescribed and recommended Jife H| have been credited in a thousand' | Iones of cases Effects to ; ■ | the 20 minutes of the intake. M| Oe sold in apothecaries ■ | in glass tablet tubes .....1"
THEUDFRESPOtmCOSSEABSTEN'S n COMMENT ON THE LCDO'S MANIFESTO. COIL AND CUCHI
Mr. Barceló's attitude towards the aforementioned document.
With the object of collecting in our columns the commentary that the politicians, belonging to the majority party, would have made regarding the manifesto of Mr. Coll y Cuchí, which was published in our yesterday's edition, one of our editors exchanged impressions with some of the leaders of the aforementioned party, in his desire to know their criteria in relation to the important document of the "speaker". We were guided, moreover, by the intention of also welcoming in our columns any opinion adverse to the ideas of Mr. Coil, so that it would not be understood that the fact that others gave space to his manifesto meant, in any way, that we were in solidarity with the ideas expressed in it by its author, but that we simply welcomed it as a matter of publicity of extraordinary importance at the present time. Almost everyone with whom we had to exchange impressions on the subject told us that they had read the manifesto and had nothing to say about it, because everything that was alleged in it was not in fact true.
i Last night we spoke with Mr. Bar' celó and he told us that he did not wish to say anything about Mr. Coll's manifesto, as he wished to wait for the agreement of Mr. Coll. What in this respect would be agreed upon by the Central Board and the Representatives to the House, who will meet tomorrow, Sunday at nine o'clock, to deal with all the political matters with which the Legislature will have to deal at the end of its sessions, "Mr. Coll," Mr. Barceló told us at last, "has not added anything to what is well known to all, and about which the country has already made a judgment. Ledo Lastra, whom we also asked, since he had been, it could be said, the champion among the opponents of Mr. Colljíes after the attitude assumed by the latter, told us that he did not want to advance any judgment on the document for the time being, since they were on the eve of dealing officially and amply with this issue.
The question was about to be officially dealt with in the Central Board and before the House of Representatives. Yesterday Mr. Coll y Cuchí told us yesterday afternoon that he had just returned from the Fortress, where he went to greet the Governor, denying that he had gone the day before, as he assures us was made public. Mr. Coil told us that he had found the Governor confined to bed, in a very delicate state of health. It appears, as Mr. Coll informed us, that, owing to the agitation the Governor had on his arrival and the effort he made to address the public, he has suffered a relapse which has him in a very pitiable state, having had an intense fever yesterday, and spent the day in a severe nervous breakdown. Mr. Saldaña. confirmed to us last night the deplorable state of health in ■ which the Governor is in, and noa said that to-day Dr. Ashford would go to visit him.
THE LCDO. IIZOL WILL PRESENT IN THE HOUSE A RESOLUTION TO PROTEST BEFORE CONGRESS AGAINST THE IMPOSITION OF THE PRESENT GOVERNOR, AND HE ALSO LISTS DIFFERENT LAWS OF AN ECONOMIC NATURE THAT HE INTENDS TO PRESENT "WHEN THE HOUSE OPENS ITS SESSIONS.
When questioned by us the Representative for San Juan, First District, Mr. José de J. Tizil, about his legislative intentions in the next session of the Legislative Assembly, he told us, among other things, the following: - "Before the duly constituted House does any legislative work, I will present a resolution (which I have already drafted), by which, bearing in mind that our laws of 1919 and the laws of 1933, I will present a resolution (which I have already drafted), by which, in order that the House may be able to pass the laws of the House of Representatives, the House of Representatives will be able to pass a resolution, which I have already drafted. bearing in mind that our laws of 1921, for the most part, have been deliberately left unexecuted by the Department Heads, following the policy enunciated by Governor Reily, our most vibrant protest be bravely laid before the American Congress (now in session) against the imposition upon us as legislators of dealing with a ruler who, while he should be a faithful interpreter of our laws, is a flagrant violator of them....
l And to make a roco- < ¡ ¡nmendation to the Insular Senate to disapprove the appointments made i against their will and in recess, of such Department Heads, who by I neglect to comply with our legislative mandates of 1921. have been rendered unfit to continue to hold those high offices. ' ' Ratifying the legislation of 1921, i Mr. Tizol will present a legislative plan, which includes, among others, the following laws: 1- "Excluding, as was originally done in 1902, the Banks from the SPECIAL SALE of footwear at cost prices and at least some classes. "LA CAGUEÑA" i Stop 16 1 2 Santurce
> corporations law and obligate them, insisting on the establishment of the Bin co Insular, to exclude, as was done in the first corporations law, the Banks from the prerogatives of that law and obligate them to be constituted under the National Banking Law for the better guarantee of the community. 2- Extending to Puerto Rico the Federal Income Tax Law. 3- Taxing sugar produced in Puerto Rico4- Amending the Charter of certain concessions of a public nature, so that once their value is capitalized, they may be taxed as well as other concessions for taxation purposes. 5,-Procuring that the money which is concealed from the payment of taxes, be in some way reached in the collection of credits, foreclosure of mortgages, refi loans, etc., etc. (Continued in the 3rd pa<.)
AuLoUliUu against all risks , . " " ( í on all kinds of property in the oldest and most powerful ComSius ooítwo companies in the U. S. capital " SOVEREIGN FADOCD í> CO IMP SANJUAN, P-R- SOVEREIGN $3o.0ü0.000 KUKdEK & CU., S1VC. P. o. BOX545. $21 .000.0(H) Sub- Agencies in all Island towns.
PARQUE BORINQUEN R " N *"a SUNDAY ' MATINEE ALAI 1LA A ZAZA I NIGHT ORIENTAL DANCES.-CLASSIC AND MODERN DANCES MONEo NIGHT w A ~ marte? night THE SNAKE TOMER
IMPORTANT PLEA OF MR. ABOY DEFENDING THE SITUATION OF THE TREASURY. RICO MADE A DETAILED AND COMPLETE ACCOUNT OF THE FORMAT AND PROCEDURES USED TO CONJURE UP THE BIEICULTIES OF THE TREASURY.
San Juan, P. R. 1 I February 9, 1923. Mr. Director of EL MUNDO. San Juan, P. R. Sir: Due to the fact that the information published by certain local newspapers in relation to what was discussed at the session of the Economic Commission held on February 6, 1923 is of such a nature. In view of the fact that public opinion is at the present time misguided or unduly oriented, it is my desire, and above all my duty, to express in a clear and categorical manner that in the Island Treasury there have not been the irregularities that have been denounced. To this effect, it is my intention to deal with this matter in detail and I anticipate to affirm that these data must be confirmed by the Expert Accountant and the Legal Advisor when they submit their report on the investigation carried out by the aforementioned Economic Commission. It has been intended to convey to the ' public the belief that the babncc ■ of the S9Oh.58R.89 which existed in the Island Treasury on July 1, 1922, i.e., at the beginning of the current fiscal year, had been misapplied to the payment of current fiscal year expenditures, when in fact the balance of $8,900,588.89 has been used to cover the following expenditures: Disbursements against allocations without a given fiscal year 8964,835.73 Less disbursements made against those allocations 742,313.'J2 $222,521.S6! 1 Disbursements against fiscal year 1920-21 $7,819.63 Less reimbursements made to said fiscal year appropriations 1,65 $7,817.87 Disbursements against fiscal year 1921-22.. 899,761.20 Less disbursements made to said fiscal year appropriations 9,441.36 $90,322.34 Total expended $320,662.57 ( We have, therefore, that if the 8900,538.89 were spent $320,662.57 in the disbursements already mentioned, there should have remained on December 31, 1922, a balance of only $8579,926.32, when on that date there was a balance of $8579,926.32, when on that date "La Sombra Que Vive'l (THE FACE BETWEEN) By BERT LYTELL Tomorrow Sunday: "ESPOSA POR DESPECHO,'' ("i he Spite Bride'')
' ba the Insular Treasury with a larger available balance I, or $761,817.36. The foregoing demonstrates that the balance existing on July 1, 1922, has not been used at all to cover the current fiscal year. There is also an erroneous belief that the balance of the aforementioned island funds includes, at the present time, the proceeds from the sale of the three issues of island bonds made by El Pueblo de Puerto Rica in the years 1911, 1915 and 1916, consisting of $66.5,000, $300,000 and $300,000, respectively. These three issues of island tones were guaranteed with municipal and school bonds in the amount of $1,260,500 owned by the Treasury of Puerto Rico. Since the law authorizing the three aforementioned island bond issues provides in section 4 thereof that the proceeds from the sale thereof shall be considered as part of the general funds of the Island Treasury, it is certain that in previous years the proceeds from the sale of said bonds together with the sum of $5,500.00 which resulted in excess of the municipal and school bonds, were included with the other available funds of the Island Treasury. Said funds were subsequently withdrawn from the revenue balance sheet and taken to the nnh OTWnta* nnh OTWnta* which was opened under the nomination "Securities Refunding Bonds, Trust Fund," by means of the following transfer orders: No. 36 1-2, dated February 9, 1915 $ 655,000.00 I No. 128 1-2, dated May 9, 1917 300,000.00 I No. 156, dated January 18, 1918 305,500.00 TOTAL $1,260,500.00 I As $235,000.00 of the insula' res bonds under discussion have been redeemed to date, equal amount (Continued on 3rd page).
I FOR CARNIVAL í i > The finest in shoes, bro < > cados and silver dancing shoes - I > just received them: "THE POPULAR" i J with Louis XV heel and Baby > ! Luis. ' San Justo 14 Box 849 - | SAN JUAN ' FOR OFFICE: For rent at $30.00 splendid part of a ¡ local, on the second floor of the "Tobacco Palace". Phone 411.
The neighbors of Aguadilla, San Sebastián, Lares, Isabela, Moca and Quebradillas (to whose town we will go) will be able to experience tomorrow Sunday THE MOST PLEASANT SENSATION OF THE CENTURY, flying over the "Villa del Ojo "* on the wings of the MORRO CASTLE hydro-apion.