Mk l ■ B m B
l| i paGS. 3 CtS. s.-S jsW . .1 >*■■■ ■■■ ■■■un i -- I ■ Yes* Ata u- "* Wte ' ® ® ii" 1 ■ ■ in i M
ljPA(X3£W I /| os. ativwta B" sl ■ N. usa. i- bm sm - "■ '■" ' ■ ' " ■
FYrFPTn Lns nnMiNnM
< . V. . . ■ - (MORNING MARIO.
YEAR V
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Pnbhahad "istribMM an<"r *""Ut (■". *01) MlMM* - *" i "t W MM** < IftW. " #- M "*->-*- OMan* Rm Jnan. Pena Mm, ■" "Mot -" Ua Prwtet, A. 8. **"*"L. m motM Am MMROwr,"-hrnwr* 11 1*1*. at"- Pm* <***"- -* RanMO. P>-"U B" e "q|HObKa* Rtntaá "f OOTOTtaQ* -*OT iaa 1"* R wwR Q. l*fO
SATURDAY OCTOBER 13, 1923 NUMBER 1434 , ■
Work on the new racetrack will begin next week.
Cm shares of the new Corporaóm have been purchased the land pin d ampfio racing park A few days ago we gave an account that the construction of a new and extensive racetrack on the land of Mr. Jose Rexach, in the Seboruco, at the termination of the 'Barrio Obrero, was in project. The new corporation, "Rexach Racing and Sporting Corporation", composed of well-known people of San Juan, was waiting, as we said in our previous information, for the arrival of Mr. José Rexach, to proceed with the purchase of the land where the new racing park will be installed. In the meantime, the layout of the track, which as our readers will remember, will be one of the widest and most comfortable. Mr. Fausto Arandes, one of the incorporators of the new equestrian society, informed us yesterday that Mr. José Rexach had arrived on board the steamship "Puerto Rico", from New York, and that the Rexach Racing and Sporting Corporation had immediately acquired the land necessary for the construction of the new racetrack. The total of the important transaction of the purchase of the land amounted to the sum of $50,000 and was paid to Mr. Rexach in shares of stock of the new corporation. Once the land has been acquired, and the layout has been drawn up, the construction of the various buildings of the racetrack will proceed next week, which, as Mr. Arandes informed us in the past few days, will be completed in the first days of January of this year. Ün beautiful lot of 1485 meters, 90 square centimeters "is sold or rented for long term. It has 37 meters, 57 centimeters in front of Calle Valdés, next to the docks of S. Antonio and Benítez Rexach and adjacent to the railroad and is a strategic site for storage of construction materials and placement of oil tanks or honey. Address to box 470 San Juan or telephone 1298 S. Juan. Auction - Tuesday, October 16, 1923. At 10:00 A. M. AT DOCK NQ. 5 100 bundles galvanized corrugated iron, long Isidoro DELGADO.
Several days ago we published an information dandi) account and clearly stating that the Senator for Ponce Don Rafael Martinez Nadal had told us that he was certain that the president of the Unionist Party Don Antonia B Barceló, in a conversation he had had with a prominent political personality had expressed himself in the sense that the Union of Puerto Rico would not be reluctant to accept the State formula as the definitive solution for Puerto Rico. The following day, Mr. Barceló's statements appeared in a local newspaper, in which he did not deny our information, but on the contrary, in a more ample manner, he stated that the Union would not be willing to accept the State formula as a definitive solution for Puerto Rico.
Senator Tons Soto believes that in the Unionist Party there is a strong current that favors statehood. He denies that he has spoken about this fear with Mr. Barceló and says nothing of "'interview with Governor Towner.
Mr. Barceló ratified the very high concept that he has had for some time and that he has publicly expressed on different occasions, regarding Statehood as the most dignified and decent form of government for any civilized community and that the country could gladly accept it if it were conceived without having to go through a previous form of territorial government that would annihilate our personality. Up to this point, our information was being ratified by Mr. Barceló himself; but later, in our desire to expand it, we said that the person Mr. Barceló said this to was Mr. Tons Soto, and this was denied by the president of the Republican Party himself, in a telegram sent to us by our Editor, my Ponce, and in another that was made public by "La Démocracia". As to who was the person - who made these defclaractonee to Mr. Barceló is something that should not be given greater importance, since the former head of the Unionist Party has had the frankness and sincerity to make them bravely to the country from the columns of the official organ of his party, "La Democracia". Apart from what he says regarding the matter with Mr. Barceló, the telegra (Continued in Ode. *ag.) USE GASOLINE - PYRAMIDMOTOR QUALITY - WARRANTY STANDARD OIL COMPANY of Porto Rico iWtHS Young single man needed with knowledge of the hardware and plumbing trade in. general. Address Box 1252 San Juan. - " 1 ; Tobacco Seeds, plan-. 'Xe'XS 2 Cidra, P. R. I
SUSPICIONS WELL FOUNDED TO BELIEVE THAT THE ATTORNEY GENERAL HAS BEEN RECALLED TO WASHINGTON.
The alleged upsurge of a campaign against him is the probable cause of the call.
Expanding our information of yesterday we have now to add that in addition to Dr. Lippitt's being actively working in the United States near prominent personalities a certain part of the American colony, which agreed with us here, has rebelled against the actions of Governor Towner and keeps constantly and continually informed of all that is going on here. i According to reports, the initiators of this work are already beginning to obtain their results, for it appears that Attorney General Coates has been recalled to the United States, not going, as stated, on private business. These reports have been furnished to us by thoroughly well-informed friends whose names we do not wish to disclose in any way. The campaign against this officer, it seems, is not local, but NATIONAL. It seems that this functionary has enemies at home, and it is mainly the work of the latter that has worked to get him recalled, as indeed it is insinuated. Mr. Coates the very one to whom the "Republican National Comiteeman" (Continued on pac-
DAVID LIOYD GEORGE WILL CONTINUE TO BE OUR (0LABORATOR With the article which we insert today on the third page and which is, as the'reader will judge, of singular world-wide interest, we conclude the series which the distinguished British statesman, David Lloyd George, wrote for a few of the leading newspapers of Europe and America, including THE WORLD. But not wanting this Company to renounce "the collaboration of the illustrious former head of the English Government, as this is one more demonstration of the excellent foreign services that EL MUNDO has, yesterday we have closed a contract with the "United Feature Syndicate" to buy the articles of the second series of Mr. Lloyd Georgs and which will contain the impressions of the trip that he is now making in America, as well as his political-economic views in the present time that our friends of the North are living. Only the newspapers of the first order, in the principal countries of the earth, have acquired these articles at a great price and EL MUNDO is the only newspaper in Puerto Rico that has the exclusive property to publish them in our country.
"RESTAURANT PALACE" ~~~ We wish to inform our numerous friends and the public in general, that we have leased from Mr. Agudo, owner of the Palace Hotel in this city, the Restaurant located on the first floor and with that inotive we have introduced great reductions in prices, variety in the meals and improvements in the service. Our long experience in this type of business enables us to guarantee to our customers the best Restaurant of the Island at very economical prices. Visit us and you will be highly satisfied. ¿z' - ' OTERO, ALONSO A CIA. " SEGUNDO ALONSO ANTONIO OTERO "Butler "Chef de Cuisine". MM-adtiW ■■■■- Wil l I I ----tata--- ■ ■ ■ ■ i , , , di If you don't want to bother- , J ATTgx ter8e coming to Olympus to t separate your seats ha* ga this and it will be < enough [ ¡j to; separate you season ticket for 1® ' '?áí ■ Ia £ ran zar1 zuela company "■se MIRO ORTAS s, ,O MgS¡£
Fl nñliFirítlpn <nw*ral The general puDiiciMeii, petó MI M CA. vola ■HwvdSilv vil the lotion déla public caraded problems qne affect the city.
A soIikmni is going to clean up the swampy land-notable interest in the traffic problem-still the worst scourge ofBan Joan There are many more people than can be imagined who take a keen interest in the solution of this city's public transportation problems. Numerous are "notices that come to us, inciting some to insist on the indications that we have made, so that they are not left out of hand issues as important as the issue of traffic. The traffic issue, which, after the dreadful problem of water, is the main scourge that the public has on the long-suffering coastline. These insinuations 1 of the public constituted before, nor habit of our press, which ota 1 taentado, but that then, according to paree has fallen in disuse because, perhaps, of the repetition of the subjects. - > . One of the% comin ea clones alluded to, maintains that the cafe of San Francisco should not be left without prolongation, and to this effect insinuates that one should insist with the competent authorities so that they -accede to it, since in this way it would be more comfortable and important. I Jns same Informant makes coxutar 4he swampy grounds, etc., exist" in some corners of the barrí o si de San Juan, could be corrected by means of the system of raising ti to- which, he says; sé obtained planting eucalyptus, tree whose property is to raise the ground, apart from other qualities inherent in its rapid growth and medicinal conditions. In that way, they say, they would be sanitized, and proper for the urbanization, many corners that today only serve to produce mosquitoes and stench. As for the traffic problem, it is noted that the idea of the municipality to wait for the construction of parking lots is a good one, although, of course, it requires some delay, and at this point it is no longer possible to "give time to time" as the saying goes. On this subject several of our communicants insist, prevailing among them the idea that the serious traffic congestion here is caused by the excessive parking of vehicles on the streets, either for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise, or for the purpose of parking cars. No, Mr. Pharmacist, thank you very much, . . but I want Formanal Pills and nothing else. The Formanal Pills have given me good results. I've gained several pounds, I no longer have the annoying headaches, my meals are less, my trembling is over. No, Sir; no. I don't want to waste money on irritating Wines or other inferior medicines; I want the Remaining Pills. When you have them, I'll go back to your pharmacy: goodbye! German Pills are sold in all good Pharmacies. Buy them today. Take them and you will feel better. Two after each meal 1; - Dr. S. M. Haley OSTEOPATH
"Today, Saturday, she will be selling a multitude of Superior Quality Footwear and Brand New Styles, at extremely economical Prices. Buy your socks and shoes at LA FAVORITA > We are open until nine o'clock in the evening. . JOSE LEMA A CO. ■ - San Juste 31, TeL 390.
The vice-president of the Chamber, Mr. Alfonso Lastra Charriez makes public his displeasure for the unjustified aspect that has been given to his actions in Santo Domingo.
He stated that "La Democracia" and Mr. Barceló and Mr. Guerra had not treated him with due respect and consideration.
The day before yesterday, the illustrious Vice President of the House of Representatives, Mr. Alfonso Lastra Charriez, returned from Santo Domingo and remained in the sister Antilla for a few more days on private business. Mr. Lastra, as our readers will recall, went to Santo Domingo in the official party that, accompanying Governor Towner, made the maiden voyage of the splendid Bull Insular Line steamer, the Catherine. We greeted the distinguished politician and in an exchange of impresio-
We have greeted the distinguished politician and in an exchange of impressions that we had with him, he expressed his deep displeasure as to the "aspect that here, and by the newspaper "La Democracia" had wanted to give to his actions in Santo Domingo. Mr. Lastra Charriez enjoys great and sincere sympathy in Santo Domingo, among other things, for having been the author in our House of Representatives of a Resolution requesting the cessation of the American occupation in the neighboring Republic and expressing the adherence of the People of Puerto Rico to the Dominican grief.
people of Puerto Rico to the Dominican grief in those days of bitterness. Thus, Mr. Lastra was, among all those who made up the retinue, the one who received the most spontaneous tributes from the Dominican people, as evidenced by the press there, whose editorials made special mention of Mr. Lastra, and whose portrait was published in the newspapers of the capital on the same day of the arrival of the excursionists. Speaking with us, Mr. Lastra told us that a grave injustice had been done to him, not only in Santo Domingo, but also here in Puerto Rico where erroneous information was published in La Democracia regarding his actions in Santo Domingo. "Upon our arrival in Santo Domingo -Mr. Lastra told us- and at the first party that was held in our honor, one of the Dominican speakers, benevolently, made repeated allusions to my humble person. The natural and logical thing was for me to respond, thanking him, for the undeserved and courteous homage that was paid to me; but it was not possible. The Governor, Mr. Barceló and Mr. Uuerra spoke and I was not given any opportunity. Then, and until my arrival here, I did not give importance to this fact because I was the first to remember that they held higher positions than mine and it was not right that I should be the one to assume a representation that corresponded to others with more right. But once in Puerto Rico, I have learned from a person very close to Mr. Barceló that I was not given the opportunity to speak there because there was a fear that I might compromise the situation by claiming that I am a hothead and impulsive. If this is so, I understand that this is a lack of consideration and respect for my person, and I am asking for this respect, if not for my person, for the position I hold." (Continued *on page O * "NOTICE To all automobile owners From today onwards you will not have to dirty your suits by changing tires. We provide 24 hour service during the day on the road or anywhere necessary, up to Rio Piedras, Your empty tire will be changed and your tube fixed for $1.00. New tires or tubes delivered at current prices and assembled for free. Phone 898 Santurce COCHRAN'S TIRE SERVICE STATION Stop 15 Santurce Pitia information regarding our Contract plan.
It has been constituted in this city a league of defense and propaganda of the Union of Puerto Rico The elements that integrate it are all of recognized political personality and their work will be of great benefit for the reorganization and good progress of the miionist party in this capital.
We had news that on the night of last Thursday and in the des- < pacho del Ledo. J. J. Ortíz Alibrán was going to hold an important poHtfca -par. meeting to organize a campaign of defense and reorganization in the local unionist politics of this capital. We had to announce it in our previous edition and yesterday we visited Mr. Ortíz Alibrán, who was elected President of the group and gave us the following notes for publicity: "It is true, as EL MUNDO said today, that last night a meeting of a large number of Unionists was held in my office to discuss matters related to the best way to channel the interests of the Union of Puerto Rico, in all that we can contribute. An organism was constituted that was baptized with the name of Liga de Defensa y Propaganda de la Unión de Puerto Rico, being its most fundamental principle, the basis of the organization, to defend the ideals and interests of the Union of Puerto Rico. A board of directors was appointed to be in charge of carrying out the work of the League, made up of the following members: ATTENTION! IMPORTANT! We invite retailers and quincalleros to visit the new fabric and knitwear establishment just opened at Salvador Brau caNe No. 40. G. BLANCO. Dr. S. M- Haley Has moved his offices to the new building of "Puerto Rico Ilustrado Inc." corner San Jose and Tetuan, 4th. floor. ■ ! II i ¿í'lilAllW.I 1 'i III I lí II ■■■■■tata "*"' A lady is wanted to demonstrate paintings in a stained glass window.
I am the most humble of all, and I am the most humble of all. The Board of Directors was thus constituted: Honorary President, Don Ignacio Peñagarícano; President, Ledo. J. J. Ortíz Alibrán; Vice President, Don Ramón Carbia; Treasurer, Salvador Ledesma; Secretary, Don M. Morales Rojas; Members: Don Juan C. Benítez, Don Rafael Paonesa, Don Jesús Moyano, Ledo. Carlos García de la Noceda, Ledo. José C. Silva, don Eduardo Geigel, don Francisco J. Sil vestre, don Andrés Quintana Reyes, and Ledo. Luis Toro Cabañas. Among other resolutions adopted were the following: To draft the bases or regulations by which the League is to be governed, for which a committee was appointed and is already working. To draft a manifesto to be addressed to the Unionist people of San Juan, Puerta de Tierra and Santurce, which is already being prepared. To communicate to the President of the Party about the constitution of the League and its purposes, which was also done this morning. To hold a next meeting of the League to be held on the 17th of the present at eight o'clock in the evening with (Continued on page 6) Bolívar Pagan -LAWYER- Office: Callo Alien Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan. P. R.
/m Á D APr PERMANENT SERVICE vi A Ia jAVjC garage - gasoline-lavados BRANDI
H American Colonial Bank Sucursal de Punce is pleased to inform its customers and friends that upon purchasing the National City Bank Branch, it has moved its offices from the telephone building to its former location on Calle Comercio at the corner of Mayor.