E L A® BN D O
1 1 PAGS.3CTS. I /■ - M M.M I i*
HPAGS. 3 CTS. Office ' 'Port Rite Illustrated" Bldf. Tal m> - Boa
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT ON SUNDAYS
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
PablMhwi "nd OiatribatM "ndw p "mi" (Mo. 801) ay in. am oí oe*ob" -, 0 * ÍL ' flan Jnan. Porto Rico. By order of the Preeident, A. 8. "grleaon Poetmaeter General. Bntrred to aeeond elaaa matter, fehrearr 91. 191". at the Poet O "ee at Ban Jean. Px "to - a/ America' endm- iae Aet -""" tare
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1923
YEAR V
NUMBER 1458.
What we hear from the men going to Washington on the Legislature's Committee.
H Socialist representative Mr. Alonso states that Resolution No. 2 was passed by the unanimous vote of the Legislature and this shows that this aeto involves an implicit appro-
1 I Both in the political and economic aspects," he adds, "we Socialists are confident that the Commission will be successful: -Can you Mr. Alonso/ in- 1 form us something about the work that both you and Iglesias propose to carry out in Washington as far as your party is concerned? -In the Joint Resolution of the Legislature No. 47%, there is only one point that may be the subject of discussion, and that is paragraph (a), since it relates to the definitive political status to be granted to Puerto Rico by the United States Congress. It is well known that since the establishment of the civil government on the island, a struggle which has been intensifying from year to year has divided the great political body of our country into two groups: those in favor of autonomous reforms until the island is organized into one of the many nationalities with its own sovereignty; and those in favor of Puerto Rico becoming part of the Nation as one of the many States of the Confederacy. - Within these two theories, energies have been consumed and battles have been fought, without the power that has the power to determine the definitive status of our beautiful island having said a single word. It is true that the local regime has been liberalized and that we possess administrative faculties and political liberties that many Latin-speaking peoples and republics would like to have for themselves, but what is certain is that there is a certain invisible influence and power that determines the political line that the government of the island must follow in the solution of the vital problems that affect the entire Puerto Rican community. If the Resolution had been circumscribed solely and exclusively to request a certain form of representative government, of course the cohesion and intelligence or harmony that should preside over a Cora would not have been possible for the simple reason that historical prejudices would not have permitted the rapprochement of the opposing sides. Continued on pg 6 II -"♦♦♦♦♦< I I < b""'M "l-"*"4-4-"' ¡i We need :i ' I ' I good shredders for ; ¡; suits. We pay week * ¡ ¡; óompléta for 5% days of ; > work, bolamente. Morris Sloryk ' ISABEL 5 ■eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeoeoeoeo ¿
YESTERDAY'S AGREEMENTS IN IA ECONOMIC COMMISSION
Some reports are referred to ¡ the various committees.-Bids made by the various municipalities on land for the Insane Asylum will be sent to the Interior Committee. Yesterday afternoon the Economic Committee of the Legislature met, Mr. Barcelo presiding. It was referred to the sub-committee on Public Instruction the report of the Commissioner of Ii" truction on the : distribution made by the latter of the rural and graduated schools to be built with the funds of the Em- ! prestito. | It was agreed to wait for the Commissioner of Health to submit a report on the manner and sites on which the island hospitals are to be built, and to wait for the Commissioner of Health to submit a report on the manner and sites on which the island hospitals are to be built. . The members of the Economic Commission, almost all of whom are at the same time members of the Joint Commission and of the Legislature which is preparing to go to Washington in a few days, exchanged impressions on the work to be done in the North, and also on the date of departure, which was almost definitely agreed upon. They also agreed that a meeting of all the commissioners should be held next week to discuss details of the trip and the plans on the basis of which the mission entrusted to them by the Legislature is to be carried out. BERLIN, Nov. 9 (United Press)- Reports that Hitelr had been captured have been denied, and it is certain that he escaped wounded. General Ludendorff, however, was taken prisoner. Washington, Nov. 9 (United Press) -Secretary Hughes has just sent a note to France stating that the limitations of M. Poin>- caré frustrate the purpose of the con- ; ference and make the participation of the United States in such an act impossible. Bolivar Pagan -LAWYER-- ; Office: Allen St., Esq. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. í San Juan. P. R.
BASE-BALL:-: SAN JUAN ATHLETIC PARK THREE GAMES! THREE GAMES! SATURDAY 3.30 P. M. HUMACAO vs. HABANA GIANTS SUNDAY 030 A. M. RIBOSCH vs. HAVANA GIANTS SUNDAY 3.30 P.M. HUMACAO vs.
A MEETING OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE LEGISLATURE WILL BE HELD NEXT WEEK. JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE LEGISLATURE TO LEAVE FOR WASHINGTON NEXT WEEK
Tomorrow the Republican Territorial Committee will meet to adopt important agreements.
It has been officially resolved that on one of the days of next week the Committee of the Legislature which is to go to Washington to work for the attainment of a greater amount of self-government for the island will proceed to meet. The purpose of ■ this meeting is to adopt definitely the plans to be developed in the capital of the Republic, as well as to agree upon the manner in which the various questions are to be presented to the metropolitan authorities and to the members of Congress. In speaking with some of those who have already been appointed to the Commission, we have come to the conclusion that the work which the Commissioners propose to undertake will be both brilliant and highly beneficial to the interests of the country. The prevailing belief is that even if it should not be possible to secure from Congress the reforms contained in the Resolution passed by the Legislature, the mere fact of the appearance before Congress of representatives of all the political parties of the island will be a motive for great attention to be paid to the country in Washington, and efforts will be made to solve all the problems of the island, principally those of an economic and social character which require prompt intervention by the metropolitan powers. The Commissioners have resolved to leave Puerto Rico on the 28th of the present, and it is to agree on the details of the departure and all the details of the campaign that they will undertake upon their arrival in the North that Jos Commissioners will all meet on one of the days of next week. I 1 1 1 TOMORROW THE TERRITORIAL COMMITTEE WILL MEET For tomorrow, Sunday, at ten o'clock in the morning, a meeting of the Territorial Committee of the Republican Party is scheduled, and the notice of meeting merely states that it is to discuss matters of great importance. We have tried to inquire about the details of the matters to be considered at the said meeting, but we have been unable to obtain any information because the notice of the meeting does not say that it is to deal with matters of great importance.
We have tried to inquire about the details of the matters to be considered at the meeting, but we have been unable to receive any information because the Notice of the meeting only states what we have previously noted. In speaking with one of the members of the said body, he told us that it is quite certain that, among the matters to be discussed at tomorrow's meeting, there will be the question of the Commission which is to go to the United States at the end of this month. There is a purpose among the Republican principals to determine specifically what the actions of the Republican commissioners should be and how far they should go in the demands they are to make under the terms of the Senate Joint Resolution, in order to avoid the possibility that their actions may later be characterized as being in contradiction to the principles and policy of the party. The importance of this meeting consists in the fact that some of the members of the Territorial Committee, and principally those who at first opposed the attitude of the Republican legislators, are disposed to oppose the party leadership's sanctioning the action of the Commissioners because they wish them to go in their capacity as legislators and not with the endorsement of their party. At this meeting they will proceed to nominate the Commission which will be sent to work in Washington for the attainment of the political demands contained in the Republican program. This Commission will probably be composed of Messrs. Robert H. Todd and Puventud. Mr. Todd will leave for the North within a week or two. THE DIRECTORIUM EXTREASES ITS MEASURES AGAINST THE i OFFICIALS DELIN= l ACCOUNTS | MADRID, Nov. 9 (United Press) The campaign to extirpate et caciquismo and immorality from the municipalities is continuing with great activity throughout the country. Lately the town council of Cuenca has been dismissed, after numerous abuses in the local administration have been verified. Also in the town of Grove, belonging to Vigo, two former mayors, the secretary and several councilmen were arrested and accused of having embezzled communal funds.
Yesterday morning, the request for the receivership of the Quintana Racing Park, filed by Ledo Rivera Zayas on behalf of the town of Vigo, began to be heard in the San Juan District Court, second section.
Rivera Zayas on behalf of the owners of the aforementioned racetrack, at the request of Ledo. Feliú, attorney for the defendant corporations, the hearing of said application was adjourned for next Monday or Tuesday. In the motion filed yesterday on behalf of the defendants, some of the defenses they have in the case of the main lawsuit are enunciated.
Yesterday morning the hearing of the suit against the "Porto Rico Racing Corporation ''and 'San Juan Racing & Sporting Club', filed by Mr. Rivera Zayas, Esq. on behalf of the owners of the ' ' ' Quintana Racing Park' ', for the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take charge of said racetrack until the main suit brought against the two racing corporations is resolved, was commenced in the District Court (San Juan, Second Section) yesterday morning. The Ledo. Feliú, representing the defendants, requested, by the written motion published below, that the hearing on the appointment of a trustee be postponed to any day of the next week, based on the reasons detailed below. ¡ Ledo. Rivera Zayas, counsel for the plaintiffs, objected to the granting of this extension; and Judge Rodriguez Serra, after hearing the objections of Ledo Rivera Zayas, and I Rodriguez Serra, after hearing the objections of Ledo Rivera Zayas, and I Rodriguez Serra, after hearing the objections of Ledo Rivera Zayas, and I Rodriguez Serra. Rivera Zayas, and the arguments of the attorneys for the defendants, agreed to hear the appointment of the trustee next week, assigning Monday the 12th, or in case that day is celebrated as an official holiday, it will be heard the following day, that is to say, Tuesday the 13th. Feliú, in which, besides requesting an extension of time for the hearing of the suit for the appointment of trustee, some of the defenses which the defendants have to the main suit are stated, is as follows:- IN THE COURT OF THE SECOND JUDICIAL DIS- ¡ TRICT OF SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO Deogracias Viera and Juana Sosa, Great patron saint festivities IN THE CITY OF HUMACAO During the days of November 30 to December 8 next, the patron saint festivities of the Purísima Concepción will be celebrated in the city of Humacao. The Festivities Commission will admit proposals for the sale of the sites designated for amusements until November 15. Advt. Dr. S. M. Haley OSTEOPATA
Plaintiffs, -vs- Porto Rico Racing Corporation and San Juan Racing and Sporting Club, Inc. Defendants. CIVIL NO. 121 MOTION TO POSTPONEMENT OF HEARING ON APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEE The above named defendants now appear and respectfully submit: 1 the*"application" or -motion filed in this case by the plaintiffs seeking the appointment of a receiver, was served and a copy thereof and of the order to show cause for the appointment of such receiver, issued by this Honorable Court, was delivered to these defendants on the following dates: To Nathaniel Pasarell, President of the defendant Porto Rico Racing Corporation, on November 7, 1923, there at about four o'clock in the afternoon, and to Avelino Vicente, President of the defendant San Juan Racing and Sporting Club, Inc., on the same aforementioned day, there at about 4:30 in the afternoon. 2 That immediately upon being thus notified by both defendants of said request for the appointment of a receiver and order to show cause, said Messrs. Pasarell and Vicente attempted to communicate with the attorney for the defendants, Leopoldo Feliú, Eeq., requesting him at his professional office, in the city of San Juan, Puerto Rico, (Continued on page 2)
Dear Merchants...! I . X Our buyer is at present in BOSTON, who $ is forwarding us large quanti- T dades of footwear which we have just ❖ received by steamer 4* "SAN LORENZO" ? All are selected styles t persdnally handsome and very ❖ cheap. See the sample book of 4. our traveler, write or visit X a 4. flowers Alvarez & Co. t S. at C. í Box 983 X
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC With the object of contributing to the decongestion of traffic in the city and at the same time providing our patrons with a better and faster service, we have decided to establish, as of Monday, the 12th of the present, a special service of cars for the Park, County and Mar- ' tin Peña, which will leave San Juan from the south side (in front of the Tres Banderas Cinema) of our Building in the Marina. The aforementioned trolleys will depart every day except Sundays, every 10 minutes from 12 A. M. to 12:50 P.M.; and 5 P.M. to 6 P.-M. This measure will avoid the delay that it is necessary to incur when going around the city. Porto Rico Railway Light & Power Co. Manuel V. Domenech. General Manager.
"I am glad that the mandamus petition has been filed in the Washington Supreme Court-Judge Odlin says-for if I made an erroneous ruling, there is no one more desirous of being corrected than myself."
Other matters decided yesterday in the Federal Court With regard to the cabl'gráiiras news published in the afternoon papers concerning the mandamus which has been filed in the Supreme Court in Washington we are informed by the Honorable Arthur F Odlin, whom we saw, that he is glad that such a petition for mandamus has been filed against him in the Supreme Court of Jurticif, since if he rendered an erroneous ruling against the Workmen's Compensation Commission, r.here is no one more desirous of being corrected than himself. On Friday morning the indictments©? were read in the Federal Court to Ignacio de Leon, accused of forging the signature of a money order, which was represented by Ledo. Castro who appeared on behalf of attorney Bonicio Sanchez The trial was set for December 3. I An accusation was read against Ber. nardo Martinez, for attempting to introduce. The accused was represented by Ledo. FeI lipe Jimenez Rivera, and the Court set the trial for December 6. I An indictment was read by ( Prosecutor Wells against Jose Dbmlngo Rii vera for an offense of prohibition and I Ledo. Jose N. Quiñones requested from the Court 3 days to plead his defendant's case in regard to the indictment, which were granted. | Another indictment was read against Antonio Asencio for a crime of ! prohibition and the defendant represented by Ledo. Juan B. Soto requested that the Court set the trial as soon as possible and the trial date was set for December 3, 1923. In the afternoon two indictments were "read." (Continued on page 2)
GONZALEZ PADIN CO. INC. 1 - We're Moving....! Our move is still in full force, and to lighten up a little we have resolved to Sell Very Cheaply most of the stock we have of Hats For Gentlemen All Fine Straw Hats from $2.50 - $3 - $3.50and $4 Reduced Today to $2 Cashmere Suits For Gentlemen, all sizes at $5.75 Genuine "Palm-Beach" Suits nice colors at $10.00 I t and many other Bargains J 1====== GONZALEZ PADIN CO. INC. - k*. S. ■ PERMANENT SERVICE ..." nfi.ino. Q i I I VB AVllL GARAGE - GASOLINE - WASHES new building I D D D A Ttf F> I V,LLA ~ Illustrated Inc." corner San Jose | DnAWVl 1O - P. R. MB