THE WORLD
-10 Pages. 3 Cts.- Semester .... ... $400 One Year ... .. $7.50
-10 Págs. 3 Cts.- Offices: Salvador Bran 81 Tel 1222 - P. O. Box 340
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR V.
BAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
An American company suggests to the Insular Legislature the approval of $125,000 for an advertising campaign in favor of Puerto Rico.
A factory ce [apd.-$500,00u to build houses.-To Mr. R. M. Pietrantoni the aforesaid initiative is recommended.
Several days ago we said that, through Mr. K. M., an American Company established in Baltimore, had presented to the Chamber of Commerce a project tending to initiate in the United States, an intense propaganda of advertisements in favor of Puerto Rico, by means of an allocation of $125,000, which for that purpose would be provided by the island Legislature. The aforesaid project is being carefully studied by the Chamber of Commerce, which, in due course, will recommend to the Legislature what it deems pertinent on the to The proposing Company suggests that an appropriation of $125,000 be made to promote the aforesaid propaganda for a term of one year. in accordance with the following points of view: tourism, commerce and politics. THE TOURISM The first point studied by the project of reference is that relative to I tourism, about which it says the following: "The object of this campaign would be to bring to Puerto Rico more tourists. The Island has good and comfortable hotels in San Juan, as well as in other towns of the Island. The Baños de Coamo should be presented to the American tourist as something of international interest. The road system, recognized as one of the best in the world, should be presented so that the tourist will learn the advantages of such roads for the duration of his stay in the country. This movement of tourists will bring with it improved methods of transportation between the United States and Puerto Rico, better bar'VICTORY GARDEN' TODAY -- SATURDAY -- TODAY The thrilling drama "The Vampire" Tomorrow: Premiere of the extraordinary film "Don't Forget Me" by the Bruno and Vazquez Circuit.
I eos, more frequent trips and lower fare costs. COMMERCE From the commercial point of view, Puerto Rico presents even greater opportunities. The development of Puerto Rico, commercially, has not yet begun, and the Island presents great possibilities for the interests of commerce in general. As a basis of argument for the foregoing, we wish to call attention to the fact that, according to official investigations, the agricultural interests of the Island will not be able to support the population of Puerto Rico, and that if other industries are not established, within ten years it will be necessary for part of the population to emigrate to other countries. If it is necessary for our cities to advertise their advantages in order to bring in new sales. {If it is necessary for our cities to advertise their advantages in order to bring in new sales, how much more necessary is it for Puerto Rico? POLITICS In regard to politics, the Company informs that it will need the cooperation of the Commissioner in Washington, with whom it would be in contact in regard to the above-mentioned matter. As a matter of information, the Company says that if it is chosen to carry out such a campaign, two of its members would visit the Island in a timely manner, in order to study it under all its "feasible" aspects. To Mr. Pietrantoni, who has been working in this direction for some time, the benefits of the aforementioned project will be due in the future, since it is to his spontaneous and exclusive initiative that the Federated Publishing Co. -which is the name of the Company, has not hesitated to undertake such an arduous task for the benefit of the general interests of the country. A PAPER FACTORY Mr. Pietrantoni has informed us that a Continental gentleman, a large stockholder in several paper mills in the North, has asked him for information in order to see if it is possible to establish such a factory here. On that occasion Mr. Pietrantoni has given him interesting data about that particular, it is- ( Continued on page 8a.) Monday, February 5 Carnival Night at the VANDERBILT COUNTY HOTEL Splendid DINNER followed by a Grand Ball Magnificent Orchestra-Souvenirs We beg to reserve tables in advance. I PARK TODAY - SATURDAY - SATURDAY 3 - PREMIERE The mesmerizing MAE MURRAY in the monumental drama BROADWAY 'ROSE Super-Special Tomorrow Demingo: The Night Rose The Night Rose The drawing will be held for coupons for the "Morro Castle'' Hydroplane ride.
IrELSUEÑoll B ; natural need and baseprin= ■ i cipal of Id health has in the I H ■ excited nerves its worst ene * eK B migo. To get to sleep one must first tame the nerves, which is very easily achieved by using the VI, which is completely harmless and whose success has been proven in millions of cases. Effects at BL 20 minutes of the tonsa. Many B Bl authorities have ruled in ga ■ | its favor,counting by thousands ; íg? Bt 105 m^IC05 << uc Iq r "omifndan i B BI 5t is on sale in pnnó< |Kg Bf pales pharmacies in tubes of i O *■ | " glass of 20 tablets.
I I I 1 H-l ¡lili .¡. j. GOOD OCCASION i :: STEAMERS FOR NASSAU (Bahamas) ;- " English steamer "MEGANTIC" of the White Star Line of 20,470 II ' * * tons, will leave .this port on February 6 next. -- English steamer "EMPRESS OI BRITAIN" of the Canadian Pacific II Railway of 22,200 tons, will sail from this port on February 9. - Both admit passengers for the said port of Nassau. "For further information contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. J SAN JUAN, P. R.-Tel. 257 II
II Published and distributed under permit (So. 801) authuri|ed if the Act of oetobef 6, 1917. on fila at tha Poet Of "c. of U 0 th * Prudent. A 8. Spr leepn, Postmaster General. Entered aa second class matter, I febrnary 21. 1919. at the Post Office at Ran Juan. Porto_"ieo. (United Staten of America) under the Aet of march 8. 1879 I
__H ==x=== _-- . - VA tn AiimricBi uuam iiif aci oi march oi, loir y I HAVE NO INTENTION WHATSOEVER OF QUITTING | - SAYS GOVERNOR REILY IN THE TRANS1 - - 1 ■*
He added that the reports circulated regarding his resignation are absolutely false.
(United Press, via All America Cables) - WASHINGTON, Feb. 2.-As reports circulated here this afternoon concerning the probable resignation of E. Mont. Reily as Governor of Puerto Rico, the United Press Correspondent, Mr. Alfred L. Bradford, held an interview with Governor Reily for the purpose of learning from his own lips the news concerning his resignation. Governor Reily, answering the interrogation of the representative of the United Press, said that he was preparing to leave for Puerto Rico on the vessel that was to sail for the United States.
- I am ready to leave for Puerto Rico on the Ni'eva York for San Juan tomorrow. My health continues to improve daily," said Mr. Reily, "and I have had no intention whatsoever of resigning my commission. The reports that have been circulated that I am resigning are absolutely untrue. - I have never thought about it," he added. > Gctcrnador. I WASHINGTON, Feb. 2.-The British Resident's doctor, General Sawyer, MD.
gadier General Sawyer, President Harding's physician, has stated that Governor Reily's state of health is satisfactory and that he is fit to return to Puerto Rico. THE GOVERNOR LEAVES THIS AFTERNOON FOR NEW YORK. WASHINGTON, February 'Governor Reily will go to New York this afternoon accompanied by his private secretary, Mr. Herrera, to embark for San Juan on the steamship "Puerto Rico".
Our Overseas Possessions
Don Antonio R. Barceló maintains 0'Puerto Rico can be incorporated into the American Union as a state without having to go through the form of territorial government preceding such entry.
■ (From the "Atlanta Constitution,") do (Atlanta, Georgia). <■ j The possibility of Puerto Rico becoming the 49th state of the American Union has been discussed. Such is the impression of Antonio R. Barceló, President of the Senate of Pto. Rico, who has left Washington for the island with the resolution form-1 ed to call a constitutional convention and prepare all the preliminaries for such an important step in the politics of our island possession. No doubt the said Puerto Rican legislator, who came to- the national capital to lend his aid in the campaign of the natives to obtain the removal of Governor Reily, is somewhat fêted in his as- ► pirantones and prematurely initiates the necessary activities to carry out or attempt to carry out his hopes. We cannot deny that Mr. Barce'ó relies, among other things, on a United States Supreme Court ruling considering the case of a franchise, which decision very convincingly indicates a basis for such a possibility. The referred judgment holds in effect that Puerto Rico is neither a territory nor a protectorate, and that it is entitled to full American citizenship to the full extent of the Jones Act of 1917. Jones Act of 1917. It is not the same as the territorial governments, nor can they be considered as the American Indians, for whom legislation is in the form of a "protectorate," nor does Puerto Rico bear any resemblance to the District of Columbia. During his stay in Washington, the President of the Puerto Rican Senate studied the law and the precedents and has Arkansas as one of the latter. In 1838. says Mr. Bar ' celó. Arkansas held a constitutional convention, adopted a constitution, and elected a member to the Bed.'
In 1838, Arkansas held a constitutional convention, adopted a constitution, and elected a member to the House of Representatives and two senators, who arrived in Washington, knocked at the doors of Congress, and the state came into existence in its full breadth without intermediary process from the territorial government. If Puerto Rico were admitted as a state of the confederacy with a star in Old Glory, it would naturally be able to send, in its own right, two representatives to the United States Senate and one representative to the House of Representatives, for every 230,000 inhabitants, approximately, or five delegates, instead of one delegate, as it has at present. This would mean an additional expense to the government LjdGTg TODAY - TODAY 'La Voz del Alma 9 (THE FAITH HEALER) Milton Sills and Ann Forrest Extraordinary program of the Bruno y Vázquez Circuit. Puerto Rico premiere of the interesting native magazine The Arrival of the Cruise Ship "Jeanne D' Are" Funeral of Dr. Carreras and Festivities at the University of Puerto Rico. - TOMORROW TOMORROW 'WHITE AND UNMARRIED 9 (WHITE AND UNMARRIED) Thomas Meighan Gifts to the congregation in the morning batch. M. T. I. ' G. C.
National with no apparent benefit at present. * If the United States were to divide the Philippine Islands into "states," for example, and give them representation in Congress; and were to give the Virgin Islands statehood also, besides Puerto Rico, etc., we should be obliged to have, as a matter of fact, two Speakers in the House of Representatives, one of whom would necessarily have to be of Spanish origin to get along with the foreign contingent. But that is the least of the difical' tades. The old Capitol building in Washington would have to undergo considerable changes to accommodate the new representatives, for at present there is hardly room for the present 435 deputies. These "-dangers," however, are not pressing. The House of Representatives is now unmanageable. SENATOR CAPPER CALLS ON THE GOVERNMENT TO ACT ... IMMEDIATELY . . i WASHINGTON, Feb. 2.-Sen. Capper in defending Senator Borah's resolution today on U.S. intervention in Europe said the Government must take immediate action to avert the great economic catastrophe looming over Europe. THE SENATE AND THE .... .. .. . . BORAH RESOLUTION I WASHINGTON, Feb. 2.-The Senate will continue today to discuss Senator Borah's resolution authorizing the President to convene an international economic conference. - Tomorrow California Senator Hi-'->ram Johnson of California will speak in favor of the resolution.
O INSURANCES A ' against all risks rJWggál on all kinds of property in the oldest and most powerful Comcapital companies in the U. S. capital $ 18,000,000 - $ 5,000,000 OVER £*C(Y INC SAN JUAN, P. R. OVER $ 20,000,000,000 llUlUÍEA & LU., ill V. P. O. BOX546, $ 18,000,000 Sub- Agencies in all, the towns of the Island. IH'i'-l-j-i-I-'Ji'MI I I I i I I H I1 1 ¡ I i blbi I H i ¡ H I 1 1 1 'ti 4 1 I I I I I! Ill-l-l't- i H H H ¡ I I I I I I I I 1 I I I
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 1923.
| NUMBER 1221
With the French nola at the Lausanne conference any alliance between France and England is definitively broken, says Andrew Bonar Law.
The British delegation at Lausanne will therefore leave the conference at any moment.
(.United Press, via AH America Cables) LONDON, February 2.-The Head of the Government, commenting today on the French note that the French delegation at Lausanne will enter into separate negotiations with Turkey, said that this attitude of France definitively breaks the Entente. The Cabinet will probably discuss the situation this afternoon. | Unofficially it is announced that the British delegates at Lausanne are preparing to leave for this capital. I ! - ISMET PASHA REQUESTS INS TRUCTIONS FROM HIS GO. BIERNO LAUSANNE, February 2-The chairman of the Turkish delegation to the peace conference has announced that he expects to receive instructions from ' his Government tomorrow concerning the peace treaty ! from the Allies. NATIONAL 1ST AS AND FASCISTS J SUSTAIN A TREMENDOUS FIGHT I I I I I I I POTENZA, February 2. -On the occasion of today's hoisting of the Fascist banner in the village of Bemalda, a serious clash of Fascists and Nationalists has occurred, from which an important lawsuit has been filed yesterday in the District Court, second district of this capital, an important lawsuit on the nullity of the elections of a Corporation. The lawsuit was filed by the well known attorney Rafael Rivera Zayas, representing Mr. Guillermo J. Keamey, against H. Glyde Gregory Inc. Alberto S. Menéndez and C. M. Rivera, alleging that these defendants called a meeting of stockholders to elect the board of directors and did not summon Mr. Keamey, plaintiff who days before had acquired a large number of shares of said corporation, having therefore the right to participate in the election of directors. TODAY Saturday, February 3 TODAY SPECIAL NIGHT DAVID POWELL in the thrilling 'drama in 6 acts "Fatal Lies" AND a very funny Vaudevill SUNDAY 4 A very varied program Premiere of the 'originalí| i|no drama "Despising Everyone Else" and a very cute comedy. two sensational novelties! A reward will be given to the person who finds the car stolen from Mr. Ramon Rodriguez Umpierre on Wednesday 31, which was parked in front of the Federal Building. Ford brand. Model 1923. License plate No. 4619. Engine 4723040. Black color. It had a nickel-plated bumper, and two Holyoke tires on the rear wheels. Additional bonus to the one who provides sufficient evidence for the conviction and arrest of the person who stole this car. Bouret. fian Juan Building, P. B. Telephone 1228. Advt.
| released three Nationalists killed and ctros seriously wounded. Fascists had only one killed and two wounded. BRUCE ACCEPTED THE ENCO. MIENDA MELBOUNE. February 2. Mr. Bruce accepted the commission from the Governor General to form a government. Bruce announced that today he will confer with the political leaders and that tomorrow he will go to the Palace to bring the list of the New Ministers. THE COMPENSATION COMMITTEE MEETS PARIS, February 2- ■ Under the chairmanship of M. Louis Barthou tomorrow the Compensation Committee will meet. i ■ , AN APPEAL FROM THE PAPAROMA, February 1.-On the occasion of the alarming news from . Lausanne about the imminent break-up of the peace conference, Pope Pius XI has made an appeal to the Governments represented at the conference to contribute their feelings and love of mankind to prevent the announced break-up from taking place, since it would inevitably mean the resumption of hostilities in the West with disastrous consequences for the peace of the world. > the note of His Holiness conforms . to the latest dispatches from Lausanne , has produced an excellent impression on . "1 mood of the Delegates and will probably be read tomorrow at a public selection of the conference. DR, FRANCESCHI CABALLERO An act of justice moves us today to bring to our columns the name of ' this young physician, who in a very short space of time has opened a wide field in the practice of his profe- , sion. There is not a person who has come to his office, because he is ill, who does not praise his wisdom. 1 We hear daily of his triumphs and that is why today we mention it in EL MUNDO, congratulating our friend for it. Forward. AD VT. CIRCUITO BRUNO & VAZQUEZ Announced E A previously t 1 Teatro "Alianza" , 4 by J. Cobián. , 4 by J. Cobián Rivera -4-1 Adjuntas ' A 55 Cinema "Real" , 4 by Juan Sierra -J_ J Puerta de Fierra * A 56 Theaters that have decided to exhibit to their audiences the cream of the films that are imported into Puerto Rico. ADVT. FOR OFFICE: For rent at i $30.00 et splendid part of a premises, on the second floor of the "Tobacco Palace". Telephone <11. . , AAvt. - u i 1 - W - - - i -- i .." , .