ELMONDO
HPAGS. 3 CTS.
UPAGS. 3 CTS. Ofl. Salvador Braa 81. ToL 1M>. Box 848
MORNING NEWSPAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed andar permit (Mo. 801) antkorisod b" the Aef ot ootobor 6, 1817, on Ale at the Peat Offlro at Ran Joan. Peno Miao, By order of the Preaident. A 8. Borleum, PcetMaeter General. Catered ea second elees matter, fahmary 91. ISIS, at the Poet OMeo at flan Jean. Porto Birta. (United fltatoe of America) wader too Aet of mareta B. 1878.
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 8, 1923
NUMBER 1404
YEAR V.
The former commissioner of O. P. of San Juan, Mr. Miguel Ferrer, comes out in defense of the actions of our Adm,
Mr. Bell's attitude gives rise to countless comments and colorful stories about his break with the local authorities.
The skein of the matter of 1" pipeline continues to become entangled, due to the unconsultant actions of Mr. Bell, who, not knowing why he has intervened in a matter considered by all as the exclusive competence of the municipality of San Juan, As we have been able to appreciate, the attitude of the referred gentleman has caused a disastrous impression in the city, and many and varied are the comments that are formulated about the audacity that, according to the commentators, implies the initiative adopted by the Commissioner of Commerce of Washington, in pretending to put an end to a matter that has been worked in accordance with the precepts of the Municipal Law, and without taking into account any particular interests of any kind. Many are of the opinion that Mr. Bell's action is only comparable to that which with Tuntiv" of the " San J uan Dock Com petty * performed on the Public Service Commission sono former Governor Belly, to whom, some people believe, Commissioner Bell has remarkable* - pantos- of resemblance. .tttaMfti Maeionee between the municipal authorities and Mr. Bell have been made public, the most picturesque stories have been heard on all sides as to how the break between the two parties occurred. According to reports given to us by Mr. Font, Mr. Bell visited the Mayor's office and tried to "get Mr. Bafa to rescind the contract for the Belgian pipeline. Eefior Font assures us that the tone in which Mr. Bell proposed this had all the characteristics of a "teuto-' na" order. Surprised at the "policy'' of the new Commissioner, the' Borrowing Engineer felt a deep boxer's desire, and would have tried to ' do a K. O.' ip to put an end to the ' 'encounter', but for the voices of the' "referees", - We are told, the same threats that Mr. Bell makes in his letter which saw the light of day in the local press, made to the municipal authorities during the visit of reference, which gave lu- < - X :- To the readers of "Puerto :: -: Rico Ilustrado" in Ponce i i i ' > "i <- <" Having been impossible for us ' ¡ ' ' ' to obtain, - notwithstanding the es- - - "- "- fuenos made for that purpose- j ' ' ' the relation of the subscribers - - "" of "Puerto Rico Ilustrado" ' ¡ J ' in Ponce, we advise núes- - - "> tros readers in said city ' ¡ ¡ - - ' that this Company has opened - - - ,< > at Isabel Street No. 29 a ' ' ' ' ' ¡ Office-Branch, in which - - " : copies ' ' ' ' ' of this Magazine may be purchased corresponding to Saturday, Sept. 1, ' ' ' ' - ' ' ' and to the other editions ' > to be published.  ; ; ; The Company of "PUERTO ' ' ' < - RICO ILLUSTRADO". H ' Bolivar Pagan -LAWYER- Office: Allen St. Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: "83 Telephone: 1475. San Juan. P. R.
The idea of showing him the door and others a little more serious, still, germinated in the brains of the municipal councilmen, so unaccustomed to such a nature. Mr. Font, who had the upper hand in this matter, picked up all the gloves thrown down by the mainlander, assuring him that the Administration was afraid of nothing, and that if he - Mr. Bell - would be able to go with such ae-' titudes before the Mayor of the City of Boston. Mass. for instance. Mr. Bell replied, "Certainly not! -said Mr. Font, because that official would not tolerate it, just as the Governor of Virginia flatly refused certain indications made to him by the President of the Republic on a matter of local State business. And you see (Caution on page 8a.) i
We understand that the Commissioner of Commerce Mr. Bell, who has raised a conflict on the occasion of the award made by the Municipality of San Juan in the auction of the pipeline for the Aqueduct, in the conferences he held with the leaders of the Legislature, Messrs. Barcelo and Guerra, showed a cablegram he had from the Secretary of Commerce, Mr. Hoover, in which he was urged to continue the investigation near the municipal authorities in this matter of the auction. Mr. Be'J seems to have tried to convince Messrs. Barceló and Guerra to intervene in the matter and exert their political influence to have the signed contract cancelled in favor of Mr. Vidal Sánchez who is the representative of the Belgian pipeline. In spite of all the threats of Mr. Bell, Mr. Barceló and Mr. Guerra refused to intervene in a matter that does not fall under their jurisdiction and it was thus that Mr. Bell, advised, as we have been told, by elements opposed to the present municipal administration and by persons interested in making public all those things that could discredit the island, decided to make a scandal in the press without thinking that the best way to follow in case of any irregularity is through the courts of justice. UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO BICO Río Piedras. Notice is hereby given that for the affio 1923-24 there will be an increase of fees in all Departments. The fees will be as follows: Liberal Arts $25.00 per semester. Pharmacy $50.00 per semester. Law 50.00 per semester. High School 10.00 per semester. Specials 4.00 per credit hour. John B. HUYKE. President, Board of Trustees. Advt.
Mr. Bell, according to our reports, showed a cablegram from Mr. Hoover urging him to continue to investigate.
He made threats as to the disrepute into which political leaders who propose to go to Washington might fall.
The attitude assumed by Mr. Bell has been so bad in the public opinion that by now all those who, within the Unionist Party itself, were not in agreement with the current municipal administration due to political differences, have unconditionally sided with Mr. Diez de Andino and other municipal officials because they understand that Mr. Bell's action is not only an act against the municipal interests but that it intends to set a shameful precedent for the whole country. We also understand that Mr. Bell, in order to intimidate the political leaders and achieve his purposes, told them that if they did not intervene to undo what had been done, it would be reported to Washington and they would be greatly harmed now when they went to ask for more liberties and the concession of the elective Governor. In reply to this it was made known to him that all here were well aware of their obligations and knew where they stood, and different co's were pointed out to him.
It is assured that tomorrow the Republican Territorial Committee will meet to deal with important questions.
Yesterday we were informed that the Territorial Committee of the Republican Party intended to meet tomorrow, Sunday, to discuss important questions related to the party. A few days ago in the English section of "El Tiempo" and when discussing in Mr. Sweett's editorial the question related to the demands that are going to be made before the raetropoüticas authorities in Washington by the Commissioners of the Legislature, mention was made of the disparity of criteria that existed among the leaders of the insular republicanism and indicated the convenience of calling for an Extraordinary Assembly of the party so that again it would be said which should be the true course of the party. Talking to Dr. Gómez Brioso in this regard, he told us that an Assembly was unnecessary because the hisi Continued on page 8)
á n A í* 17 PERMANENT SERVICE A.V11L GARAGE - GASOLINE - LAUNDRY BRAN DI .- p p on Í e
On behalf of Mr. Vidal Sanchez filé filed yesterday afternoon in Federal Court a libel complaint against the commissioner, Mr. P. L Bell.
The plaintiff seeks from the defendant the sum of $50,000.00 for damages which he alleges he has caused him in his interests and reputation.
Yesterday afternoon, Ledo. F. H. Dexter, ¡ on behalf of Mr. Enrique Vidal Sanchez, filed in Federal Court the following complaint against Mr. P. L. Bell, Commissioner of the United States Department of Commerce charging him with the alleged offense of libel and demanding the sum of §50,000.00 damages: IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA FOR PUERTO RICO SAN JUAN Enrique VIDAL SANCHEZ, Plaintiff. VS. P. L BELL, Defendant. ACTION FOR RELEASE PLAINTIFF The plaintiff, Enrique Vidal Sanchez, alleges that he is a citizen of the United States, domiciled in Puerto Rico, and that defendant P. ! L. Bell is a citizen of the United States, domiciled in Puerto Rico, and that defendant P.!
L. Bell is a citizen of the United States domiciled therein and upon the plaintiff's reports and belief has his present residence in the City of Washington, D. C. As a cause of action against the said defendant, the plaintiff alleges; I That as a result of the procedures followed in accordance with the Law and particularly, as a result of the solicitation made by the Municipality of San Juan for the submission of proposals for the supply of the pipeline for the new aqueduct to be constructed in this City, the plaintiff was the lowest and best bidder and by virtue thereof was awarded the contract for the supply of the pipeline for the City of San Juan. The contract amounts to the sum of 8969,300.35. Thereafter and in compliance and in accordance with the Law, the Municipality of San Juan, by its due and proper representation, awarded a contract with the plaintiff for the supply of the referred material. II i Quq on September 6, 1923 the defendant under his signature
' defendant under his signature published in the newspaper "El Tiempo", which is a newspaper published in this City of San Juan, with the exception of Sunday, and which has a general circulation throughout the Island of Puerto Rico, i an article containing libe' losa matter against the plaintiff, among which is one which copied verbatim reads as follows: "It is known that the Puerto Rican ' who is selling to the city of , San Juan the Belgian pipes has failed in his efforts to obtain a loan with which to meet the first payment he must make to the Belgian factory and that therefore the order has not yet been passed."and also: "the Municipality of San Juan can easily cancel this contract at any time before the Belgian factory receives the order by mail alleging as grounds the reasons given above, since the Puerto Rican bidder could not sue successfully because he cannot go before a Court with clean hands, convicted as he is of misrepresentation, as appears from his own manifestations. ' ' ' nor I* That the i< 8Wj8B|Hyi8Pi i W8? 1WK transcribed published statements' as aforesaid are absolutely false and libelous and constitute a malicious libel of the plaintiff. tending to expose him to public odium and deprive him of the benefit of public confidence and social relations i and further because such statements injure the plaintiff in his business and affect him greatly in his credit and reputation in the community. I IV The plaintiff alleges that the foregoing publication was made against him by the defendant maliciously and without cause, either in fact or in law. Whereupon the plaintiff PLEADS the Court to render judgment against the defendant in the amount of $50,000 and costs. San Juan, P.R., September 7, 1923. F. H. DEXTER. Counsel for plaintiff. i (Complaint is duly ju- ¡ rmed.) ¡ $3000 i Taken on first mortgage, without brokers. Reports Parada 6'/ 2 Ponce de Leon 77, Puerta de Tierra. Dr. Enrique Quintero DENTIST Returning from the United States, again offers his professional services at his office, No. 4 San Justo Street, this city. Hours: 1 to 5 o'clock in the afternoon. Advt. SUITS AT ALLEN 25 We have just received a nice assortment of suits for gentlemen and boys cheaper than na die. BAZAR SAVINGS
Mr. Mendía denies that he made proposals unworthy of being accepted by the Mayor of S. J., as Mr. Diez de Andino assures us.
Our informant speaks of how impolitic it is to buy this pipe outside, having it at home, and of the seriousness of the manifestations made by Mr. Diez de Andino.
The seriousness of the statements made by the Mayor of San Juan, when he affirmed that Mr. Manuel Mendía had made proposals in the matter of the auction, which he considered unworthy and detrimental to the rights of the most bidders who attended the auction, gave rise to the fact that yesterday a reporter of ours visited Mr. Mendía, in order to find out what he had to do with the auction, which he considered unworthy and prejudicial to the rights of the bidders who attended the auction. Mendía, in order to find out if he had ' anything to say about such a delicate par- 1 I ticular, since the same put him in ' [ question of public opinion. < ■ Mr. Mendía, dictated to a stenographer the 1 following STATEMENT: i "Mr. Diez de Andino has a very ■ bad memory in attributing to me the convenII ction that the Belgian proposition . I I I I I was the lowest, and worse intention in stating that I proposed to him at that time to submit a new proposal '! by cable in order to match it. The pri- | I ■ mero is entirely untrue: the se-1 gundown is perfectly ridiculous and ab- i I I I so lully false. -[ On the day of the award of the su- * basta of the pipeline we arranged an i interview between Mr. Savage, of the
United States Cast Iron Pipe & Foun- | dry Co., Mr. Diez de Andino, Mr. : Font and myself, and cn cl exchange of ideas ¡ with respect to this business, I remember that after having pointed out to Mr. Diez de Andino the inconveniences that the purchase of the pipe from Belgium might bring to the municipality, besides how impolitic it was to buy ¡ a lot of pipe from a foreign country when we had it in the house of ' American manufacturers among the > [ many arguments we put forward I I I 'agree with the following. "That we are not in Europe in a normal situation at present, any delay in the manufacture or delivery of this pipe would be very detrimental to the Municipality of San Juan because of the special circumstances we are going through due to the lack of water in this city, and that since in this auction as in the previous one, the Municipality had requested that the pipes be manufactured according to the specifications of the American Water Works, and that in this auction as in the previous one, the Municipality had requested that the pipes be manufactured according to the specifications of the American Water Works. The American factory had on both occasions quoted the "lowest price within these specifications", to avoid inconvenience and possible delays and inconveniences if ordered (Continued on p. 6) ffiji They are rented for Qgi $10.00 per month 37, San Justo SL, Box 456 babbers onins San Juan, P. R. ARE WE VERY BEST
> ' Bargains in Footwear X ► W L° s h°y pure all tastes - *:* ta L.A FAVORITA carries over 10,000 pairs of Fine Shoes, - . Extra Quality, at prices lower than if they were CHEAP f * class Shoes. i ► ' These Great Discounts we do on styles we discontinue- ♦♦♦♦ ► / - - we will only last this CHEAP the whole month of September. "A" ► J ... , ..., kas señeras and ladies who have SMALL feet, should not waste this LNICA occasion to buy their shoes for little money. V ► _ Economy-loving parents now have the opportunity to get shoes for their children of good quality at epoch-making prices. JL A BUY GOOD, NICE AND CHEAP AT: , J , LA FAVORITA X k . JOSE LEMA & CO . Y ► TEL. 390 SAN JUSTO 31. BOX 442. SAN JUAN, P R ♦♦♦♦♦.
"GILLETTE LEGITIMATE" SHEETS AND MACHINES Import Prices Merchandise in Stock GILLETTE SAFETY RAZOR CO. Box 456, San Juan, P. R.
Wishing to increase my coin collection, I am requesting marks, German, in bills. Defer:" STEFFENS, Christ 10
A MOLES VIDRIO that "THE FOREST OF BOLOGNA" will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA in San Juan because of the great value it sells and its southern location. Adn.
EARTHQUAKE INSURANCE J. OCHOA & HNO. San Juan, P. R.
Locked up in complete phthutism, Commissioner Bell, says he can say nothing about it.
But adds that he has not authorized anyone to speak on his behalf On the occasion of the intense expectation produced by the statements of Mr. Bell, representative of the United States Department of Commerce, which have been the subject of numerous comments and the answers given by Messrs. Diez de Andino and Barcéló, our editor visited the aforementioned gentleman yesterday with the purpose of informing our readers of the true situation and the plans of the representative of the Department of Commerce. Our editor suffered a real journalistic defeat, for he found before him a half-tomb that could hardly open its lips. Have you read Mr. Barceló's letter," we began. No, sir," replied Mr. ■ Bel! (Continued on page 8) LAST HOUR HAVE YOU BEEN CALLED MR. BELL? --- In the political centers of the city it was said last night that, as a result of several cables crossed between various elements in San Juan and the authorities in Washington, concerning the vicious participation of the Ee'l Commissioner in the pipeline affair, the above-mentioned fnnetonario had received notice to leave for the United States on the next steamer, since "his stay here lacks consistency, if we take into account that his stay here lacks consistency, if we take into account that his stay here lacks consistency, if we take into account that his stay here lacks consistency, if we take into account that his stay here lacks consistency, if we take into account that his stay here lacks consistency, if we take into account that his stay here lacks consistency. The recent actions of Mr. Bell render him incapable of reaching peaceful understandings with the Puerto Ricans. In order to confirm or disprove the species, last night we called at the Hotel where Mr. Bell is staying and were told that he had left shortly before for the island to pursue the plans which brought him to this country, and which he has so unfortunately spoiled by his meddling in matters of a different nature. Many people to whom we have informed about this particular matter have told us that the proper thing to do on the part of the authorities in Washington is to remove Mr. Bell from the island, since it is not possible for a person who has begun by acting in the manner he has done, to obtain any success in his efforts. THE RESPONSE OF MR. BARCELO Because it arrived late in our possession and because it was published in yesterday afternoon's newspapers, we are obliged not to insert in today's EL MUNDO the reply of our distinguished friend, the President of the Senate, Mr. Barcelo, to Commissioner Bell's letter. Being a document already known to all, we feel, therefore, relieved to publish it in today's issue.