ELJfflNDO
-12 Pgs. 3 Cts.- Semester . .. $4.00 One Year $7.50
-12 Págs. 3 Cts.- Offices: Salvador Brau 81 Tel. 1222 - P. O. Box 345
DAILY IN THE MORNING,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR V.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) euthvriied by the Act of October 6, 1017, on file at the Post Office of Í Ren Jn "n. Porto Rico By order of the President. A. S Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, l SATURDAY 6 DF FNFPA HF 10OO fl immrnrt . . February 21, 1919, st the Post Office at Ran Juan. Porto Rico (United States of America) under the Act of march 8, 1879 || IMtHU Ut 1923, | NUMBER 1197 ' ' ' - ' ' ' 1 I
Police funding continues to grow ever larger.
"We are only $2,438 short of & the goal," says Chief Bennett this n~.afian a. I have not yet received report* from* all the posts on the Island, but the sales and contributions so far received amount to $12,562 and we are still awaiting contributions from a large number of friends who the Puerto Rican woman and aranco metan constituted for themselves a 'reserve corps' and who have been waiting to spring into action in the last hours of the battle. Two thousand five hundred dollars is a large amount of money to raise in a couple of days and we confidently expect that it will start coming in. We have also made a special appeal for a number of signatures, from which we have not yet received a reply, but which we hope to receive by today or tomorrow. "Dr. Santiago Veve, Uuthor of the Law regulating the In* sular Police Corps organized under General Henry has forwarded his check for $50. Dr. Veve has always been a good friend and protector of the police and with his check sends us a very encouraging message. "Mr. Manuel Gonzalez, of Sali-■ ñas, remitted $200 with a testimonial of our faithfulness to duty. "The Aeromarine Airways Co. which has just established itself here, recognizes our efficiency and remits its check for $10. "Mr. George Elkins remits $10 with an affidavit of cima $afte dé ftrt income for the past two and a half years, and more. "Mr. J. Ruin Soler, Secretary of the Sugar Producers' Association, remits us a check for $100 with phrases acknowledging our - merits. "Sues, of Gamarra; Merino Rodrí- 1 guez and Bros. and the Paris Bazaar have remitted to us $50, $50 and $25. respectively, with sincere expressions of appreciation. "Major Wells. Attorney of the Federal Court, has forwarded his donation with a handsome letter which we hope to be able to publish tomorrow." AGREEMENTS ADOPTED BY THE BRITISH CABINET LONDON, Jan. 5.-The Cabinet held its announced session today, agreeing to an entirely passive attitude in regard to indemnities.
SATURDAY, JANUARY 6, 1923 KINGS EVE! Premiere of the very luxurious dramatic comedy "Paolita, she of Paris" By IN A CLAIRE. Splendid distribution of toys for the children. SUNDAY 7. A magnificent premiere! A sure hit! "Hidden Flames" Extraordinary drama in 6 acts by MAE MARSH. Completing this great program a nice comedy in two parts.
CIO
PORTLAND CEMENT 'CABALLITO'.
In five days the steamer "EIDSVAAD" will arrive, direct from Denmark, with another cargo of the Unsurpassed Cement. Low price and special concession for delivery from the Dock during unloading. ' Sues, of L. Villamil & Co.
The hearing of the election suit was adjourned to Monday at two o'clock in the afternoon.
Interesting remarks by Ledo. Feliú about the effect that the decision that the Court will give on Monday may have on the lawsuit.
At two o'clock yesterday afternoon, just as the hearing in the electoral lawsuit was about to begin, Judge Foote stated that the Court needed time to study the arguments presented by the lawyers of the parties and that, therefore, he was suspending the hearing until next Monday at two o'clock in the afternoon, when he would issue the decision on the issue currently in "isue", on whether or not to admit, in evidence, the electoral ballots and the awarding or not of the votes to the Republican candidates. The anxiety that reigns in the public, in regard to this question, is truly intense, since the generality of the persons interested in this important litigation, concede UNDECIMO CONCIERTO POR RADIO EbTACION W. K. A. Q. Program of the concert organized by the Porto Rico Radio Dealers Association, Station W. K. A. Q. of the Radio Corpoiación of P. R. -360 meters of wave -San Juan de P. R.- From 8 to 9 P. M. and from 9:30 to 10 P. M. -Sunday, January 7, 1923.- 1.- Introduction. 3- Hawaiian Guitar and Ukalele, Eres. Del Valle and Llorens. 4. - Piano selections. 5. - Recitation in Spanish. 6. - Musical selections. 7. - Description of the' island of Puerto Rico. Natural resources. Lecture by IngeefSro Mr. R. Gandía Córdova, Sub-Director of the Department of Agriculture and Labor. 8. - Hawaiian guitar and Ukalele selections by Messrs. DelxValle and Llorens. 9. - Creole songs by the troubadours Messrs. Montserrat and Vergara. Races of the Hippodrome. Base ball. 10. - Latest cable news. Note:- The concert will take place from 8 to 9 and from 9:30 to 10 o'clock Sunday night. PEACE IN IRELAND? LONDON, Jan. 5.- "The Times" this afternoon assures us, according to a dispatch received from Dublin, that the Free State delegates and the insurgents have already entered into negotiations to agree on a peace understanding. "Cine Puerto Rico" TODAY. SATURDAY. TODAY. CLARA KIMBALL YOUNG at the Yellow Passport in 5 deliveries and a comedy. In the afternoon at the matinee "EL LATIGO" film of great plot.
The company considers that it is of vital importance to the point that is now pending resolution, as they believe that this could, whatever the decision of the Court, determine the final outcome of the lawsuit. In order not to advance any comment so as not to have to bring to our columns the prevailing public criterion, since it lacks legal force, we wanted to know the thinking, which in this respect tie i:en the lawyers of the parties, and to this effect a Redactor of ours held with ei Ledo. Feliú, attorney for the Republicans a short interview, in which he asked him, if the question now pending resolution, could determine the decisive ruling of the lawsuit. "Whatever the Resolution' -Mr. Feliú told us- the lawsuit can continue. What is at issue now is what concerns a single college, and if the case is resolved in our favor, the majority we would obtain would not be sufficient and we would have to investigate the other colleges challenged, and if the decision were adverse to us as well, and then, with double motive, we would enter into the packages of the other colleges, since it could well happen that as far as these are concerned the decision would not be adverse to us. There is, however, another and .*> iMItrcto motile that whatever the result. is to be produced in the public regarding the position of one or other ¡ of the parties in contention, which might necessarily weaken the enthusiasms of the party concerned as to the continuation of the case." REQUESTS HIS REPLACEMENT AS GUAYAMA DISTRICT ATTORNEY With yesterday's date, Ledo. José N. Quiñones sent to the Acting Governor the following letter: Hon. Governor of Puerto Rico, San Juan, P. R. Sir:-
On the 3rd day of the present I received * your letter dismissing me from the office of District Attorney of the Judicial District of Guayama, P. R. Considering said dismissal to be illegal, I hereby request you to reinstate me immediately in the exercise of said office and in the enjoyment of all its prerogatives and emoluments. If on or before the 9th day of the present month I have not received an answer to this letter, I will consider it as a refusal on your part and I will go to court in defense of my rights. San Juan, P. R., January 5, 1922. Yours sincerely, José N. QUIÑONES. I BASE BALL INSULAR LEAGUE Sunday, January 7, 1923. 2 - Close Challenges - 2 'Boston Stars' (Humacao Winners) 'P. R. Sports' (1922 Champion.) There will be music and a cash prize. Materials Electrices Before making your purchases, see our prices. RIVERO CHAVES & CO. Salvador Brau 75. San Juan. Advt. FOR OFFICE: For rent at $30.00 splendid part of a local, on the second floor of the "To- ; bacco Palace". Phone 411. Advt. - i I I - . ■ -. . - -
THE INSULAR DOCK COMPANY ACTIVE DIVIDEND Having agreed upon the distribution of the active dividend of six percent on the par value of the shares of this Company, it is hereby announced that the payment thereof will take place at the offices of the Corporation (Pier No. 2) as of Monday, the 15th day of the current. San Juan, P. R., January 5, 1923. Treasurer Laureano CANTERO. Alvt A NEW LOAD OF PEI MILK HAS JUST ARRIVED For San Juan, Ponce, Arroyo and Guayama has arrived by the last steamer of the Bull Insular Line, Inc. a new shipment of the unsurpassable PET brand Evaporated Milk. Advt. M? 5 RADIO Apparatus for receiving messages by wireless. Address Segismundo Quiñones, Tetuán 6 1[2. Box 886. GUITARS Spanish guitars just received by the Music Bazaar - EUTERPE Calle de San José No. 6.
Gasoline at 30 Centavos Lna powerful Corporation abroad which produces GASOLINE of higher strength and strength, chemically analyzed, than that used here, undertakes to sell in PUERTO RICO, at THIRTY CENTS a gallon, provided it is guaranteed by contract, the monthly sale of a certain quantity. The interested parties and consumers must write me immediately indicating the quantity for which they would make the contract at said price. The amount does not matter. The sellers or retailers will have their commission or extra discount. Requests for contracts will be absolutely private or confidential. Gasoline efficiency is guaranteed. Please contact BENITO ZALDUONDO. P. O. Box 782. San Juan, P. R. YOUNG STENOGRAPHER AND ACCOUNTANT WANTED, must speak Spanish and English and have some experience. Address to P. O. Box 680 or call Tel. 605 San Juan.
We call the attention of the Department of Labor to the issue of emigration to Cuba.
A CUBAN CONGRESSMAN SAYS PORTORRI EMIGRATION IS A "CAMOUFLAGE" ! Since the Department of Agriculture and Labor is studying the sending of an emigration of native braceros to Cuba, we submit for the consideration of that body information from the press of that country, in which erroneous interpretations are given to the aforementioned project, which the Department must try to disprove, for the best success of the project. Here are the reports in question: "Genera! Betancourti - Secretary of Agriculture, was yesterday in the Governor's Office, trying to see Dr. Lancia, but he had to desist from his purpose, because his colleague had already left. Taking advantage of this circumstance, we approached him to question him about the immigration problem. -I am in favor of immigration, because I consider it convenient, necessary and patriotic," said General Betancourt, "and even if you criticize me; even if you censure me, I will authorize immigration from the West Indies, on the express condition that it only takes place in Camagiiey and the Orient. It is necessary to bring arms to Cuba where I train to obtain a large harvest. -And is there, at the present time, any special authorization to authorize the entry of more Jamaicans? -So far, no such request has been made, unless it is related to the entry of two thousand Puerto Rican workers who want to come to Cuba, to a sugar plantation in Camagiiey. General Betancourt, who remained Camagiiey's career. General Betancourt, who remained in his car, and who seemed to be in a hurry, said goodbye. A congressman of socialist tendencies, an enemy of harmful immigration, whispered in our ears this confidence. -Those two thousand Puerto Ricans are Jamaicans, disguised as West Indians. It is the "camouflage", with which they want to introduce them in the country".
El Ledo. Quiñones files a complaint against Mr. Reily and the See. Executive
The former official alleges that the said gentlemen, using threats, obtained his consent to resign his position.
Before the special prosecutor, Ledo. Samalea Iglesias, who is acting as Acting Prosecutor in the District Court of San Juan, Section La. due to illness of Ledo. Arrillaga, appeared yesterday Mr. Jose N. Quiñones, and swore the following complaint, against Governor Reily and the Executive Secretary, Mr. E. J. Saldaña: IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF SAN JUAN, 'tur' * FIRST DISTRICT THE PEOPLE OF PUERTO IU$O, vs. E. Mont. Reily and E. J. Salante, FELONY: Extortion (Felony). I, N. Quiñones, file a complaint against E. Mont Reily and E. J. Saldaña, for a felony offense, namely Extortion committed as follows: That the said defendants E. Mont Keily and E. J. Saldaña, back on August 21, 1922, in the city of San Juan, which is part of the judicial district of the same name, on occasion of E. Mont Reily holding the office of Governor of Puerto Rico ..and E. J. tivo of Puerto Rico, iíegafi voluntarily, corruptly, maliciously and criminally extorted me and obtained my consent to resign the office of District Attorney of the judicial District .I have been serving for a term of four years, with a compensation of -S3,300 per year, and which position I had not yet completed three years, three months, which term I was willing to fulfill and which was duly nominated and approved by the Senate of Puerto Rico. That my consent was there and then maliciously, illegally, criminally corruptly obtained, pretexting right thereto as such public officers and threatening to denounce and criminally prosecute me if I did not resign the office already mentioned, namely, that of District Attorney of the Judicial District of Gua yama; that the said charges, alleged by the defendants involved moral turpitude and would expose me to public hatred and contempt, and that they were at that time in the possession of the Hon. Sal vador Mestre, Attorney General of Puerto Rico, and that the defendants were waiting for them at that time to proceed against me and order my arrest and dismissal, but that if I resigned they would pay no attention to them, and that thus I would not be put in jeopardy.
and that in this way my reputation would not be questioned, otherwise they would proceed immediately against me. That these facts were false and untrue and that said threats were made by said defendants E. Mont Reily, Governor of Puerto Rico, and E. J. Saldaña, Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico, for the malicious, illegal, corrupt and criminal purpose of obtaining my resignation from the office of District Attorney or the Judicial District of Guayama, Puerto Rico. That this complainant believed in those threats made by the aforementioned defendants E. Mont Reily and E. J. Saldaña and signed said complaint, fearing that they would carry out the aforementioned threats. That these facts are contrary to the form, efficacy and purpose of the law for such case made and provided for, and against the peace and dignity of the People of Puerto Rico. José N. QUIÑONES, Complainant. Sworn before me this 5th day of January, 1923. Special Attorney General on Commission as District Attorney of the First District of San Juan. As witnesses, Mr. Quiñones indicates to be called, among "other persons: Juan B. Huyke, Acting Governor; F. H. Rogers, Secretary to the Governor; Augusto Pietri, Reporter of EL MUNDO;. The Editor of El Tiempo; Harwood Hull, Associated Press Representative; Martin Brgui, Chief Accountant, Office of the Attorney General. TO THE "ASSOCIATED PRESS" The San Juan Representative of the Associated Press, Mr. H. Hull, yesterday laid an extensive cable to the general office of that Company in NuWa York, PARK TODAY SATURDAY TODAY Sobering premiere of "THE AFFAIRS OF ANATOLIO" - by - A dozen stars of the canvas. Tomorrow Sunday:- CONVICTO (John Smith) AZADAS CHISPAS No. 2 and No. 3 ALAMBRE PUAS GALVANIZADO. - GRAMPS. Quality. - Price . - Service . ROLAN, TEJEDOR & DE HOSTOS. Box 1356. - Tel. 395-200. San Juan, P. R. -sports" Hilo Especial Try this very fine paper cigarette, sweet tasting, made from cereals and of Spanish origin. We recommend it as the nicest and finest Cigarette that can be produced.
Mr. Reily will be in P. R. in time to inaugurate the Legislature.
(United Press, via All America Cables) KANSAS CITY, Jan. 5.- Governor Reily of Puerto Rico arrived here at noon today from Washington. The Governor stated that he will be in Puerto Rico in time to inaugurate the Puerto Rican Legislature which will commence its sessions on the tenth of February next, BRADBURY RECONSIDERS HIS RESOLUTION XFARIS, Jan. 5.- Lord Bradbury while at the station to leave for England received a letter from M. Poincaré, prompting Eradbury to reconsider his resignation and T ue.vu to the Compensation Committee. FOCH'S PLAN WILL BE EXECUTED PARIS, January 5.-It is assured that Marshal Foch's military plan will be promptly executed by the government, the occupation of the Rhur being ordered. The government keeps a strict reserve on this important matter. WEEKS AT WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON, Jan. 5. - After the Cabinet meeting War sel cretary Weeks remainedI e úJjj^ d e8pyho eTcuurWMfeíW fe tensely. giving him details of the preinsert complaint made by the ex-flseul of Guayama. TO SENATOR HEFLIN The complainant, Ledo. Quiñones also cabled his close friend Senator Heflin, who is in Washington, giving him an account of the action he had just initiated with respect to the matter referred to above.
I lili NERVE"! ■ ; cure them and orocure a H jgj good sleep, using of the best, safest and most BEf harmless K SB.of all the soothing wf, of the VB I V "KNO1X" * II jV in tubes,glass 2J ik BY tablets, the success of which has been corroborated by millions of Mu cases. Effects within 2C w . minutes of taking. In ; each package, there areins* ||B| tructions for use. |K Every good pharmacy |H i dispenses Bromural - IMl a K N O LL
Tuesday January 9, 1923. At 10:00 A. M. EAST OF QUAY NO. 2 41,000 feet m ! m. CIPRES 39,000 ft. mlm. PICHIPEN. ISIDORO D. DELGADO. Almoneden" Public. Tel. 700 Box 1205 San Agustin 107.
Sensational flight of the "Morro Castle" Today in the afternoon 20,000 advertisements of the FAMOUS GENERAL CORD RUBBERS will be launched from this prodigious airplane, over San Juan and Santurce, among which there will be 50 prizes. The person who delivers one of these winning ads will receive a GENERAL CORD RUBBER. The winning ballots will bear the authentic signature of their agents®. DIEGO AGUEROS & CO. l I I ¡ l i.H'd-fdri H l l l i-bWd'il I I I I i ! 1 1 | 1