ELAfflNDO
1 n PAGES. 3 CTS. |1 " U_ H.00 I If Nfa Ale .a W
1 n PAGS. 3 CTS || Ofi. SsHsdor Br"" fil. 1 II T ' L 1MS>
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
MORNING JOURNAL,
YEAR V.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (No. 601) "uthoriied ,b" the Act ot October A, 1917, on filo at the Poat Office of Han Jnan, Porto Rico. By order of the President, A. Burleson. Postmaster General. Entered aa second class matter | febrnary 2t. 1919. at ths Poat Office at Ban Juan. Porto R> eo, (United States of America) under toe Act of march 3, 1879.
SATURDAY, AUGUST 18, 1923.
NUMBER 1387
Five thousand German asphyxiating gas guns have been detained by Customs.
These guns do not kill but instead leave a person stunned for the space of ten or fifteen minutes m * ufo Tnno rtrivtf í mi A Ti i.
It was rumored yesterday in San Juan that the Customs authorities had stopped a large shipment of German pistols destined for a merchant in this ¡plaza. It was claimed that the detention of these to the fact that they contained asphyxiating gases, being the first time that such original pistols have arrived on the island. Inquiring into the truth of the rumor, we found that the pistols in question (there were "olly two) were consigned to Mr. Manuel Navas, of the high commerce of this capital. We immediately met with Mr. Navas, who told us the following: L -First of all I must tell you that I do not know why the pistols that kill are allowed to pass, and instead the pistols that do not kill are stopped. I ordered, 1 by mail, from Germany, some sample pistols. Before ordering them, I investigated with the competent authorities whether they could pass through. At Customs I was authorized to bring them in, as they were samples; and now, I don't know why, they stop me. "I told them that I had authorization to bring them in, but they told me that someone went ahead and sent for 5,000 pistols of that kind, which had also been detained. -And is it true that they have asphyxiating gases? -Yes, I suppose they must have something like that. They are guns which when fired produce a detonation equal to or, I think, 'greater than the other guns of i tíTCTlWfcr" for 10 and 15 minutes. So that you, can shoot an enemy of yours, instead of slapping him in the face: and after the ensuing fright, let him wake up, while you quietly slink away. ¡"It has been proved that they do not kill anyone. Now, if you fire it among a group of friends, you can be sure that they will all fall; and if the wind is against you, not even the shooter will be saved. Speaking later about the new tax law, Mr. Navas, whose establishment is one of the most important in the sale of firearms and bullets, both taxable, told us that it was very complicated and that it would be very difficult to apply it. -It's a real drag, he assured us, and I don't know how the merchants are going to figure it out when they have three and four taxable sales items. I don't know how Gonzalez Padin and Mayol, whose sales are, for the most part, retail and have five or six taxable items, and of which they have to keep a daily record of sales, to deduct the percent contribution for each item sold, will figure it out. Since what is paid for is for the sale and consumption, and not for the purchase of articles, Jos. merchants must keep a book, in which the daily sales must be itemized and the percent tax deducted on each sale and each article. TEST Melachrino Herbert Tareyton Champagne Cocktail , The best cigarettes that are made from Turkish tobacco. W- l i I ! I I I -M-H-H l i n :: Guest House t ii "BETANCES" ! I ' Dr. Betances Street, (Camino '' - - Nuevo) No. 53, corner to Mu- . -; ñoz Rievera. P. O. Box 601. Tel. ;; - - - 295, green. Mayagüez, P. R. Edi i ' ' ' ' ' ' wood building. Healthy meals. ;; - - - Ventilated rooms. Exquisite service. Moderate prices- -; - - - - two. ' ' ' ■l -P-i-'i 1 f 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 ■" ' t t ■
"Moreover," he continued, "not even they themselves know how to fill out the books; and although the way to fill them out is explained in them, I went to the Treasury to ask them to explain to me better how to fill them out, and they answered me that they still did not know. "Another thing: it will be very easy to violate the new tax law, or at least not to pay large contributions. For example, a merchant on the island asked an inspector of the Rentas Linternas to explain to him how he could pay his taxes, since he wanted to comply with the law, but without having to deduct the cor- cent on the sale of each of the articles on a daily basis. In short, that he would pay them all at once, deducting the percent on the total of taxable articles in his possession. The Inspector of Internal Revenue replied that he should sell those items at a moderate profit to his own firm. I do not know whether this is legal or not, but the result is that since he sold the taxable goods to himself at a minimal profit of ten per cent, I believe he paid a very small tax. "I say, it is a tangle; and it will be very difficult to apply.'' ' Then Mr. Navas explained to us 1 how the new law of ar-' bitrios could be violated by the merchant who did not want to pay his contributions or by 'or less | he who' wanted to pay a much lower per cent. for the same or a greater number of taxable articles than those of- \j-ftfii Timrri se tea; by e! use of the ■* ' mail, as the island authorities have no jurisdiction over the postal laws; this, particularly, in í regard to the business of firearms, bullets, cartridges, etcj, and in other small articles which may be introduced by the mail and without coming consignment- j two. Finally, Mr. Navas told us that he would soon go to talk with Messrs. González Padíri and Mayol to reach an agreement on how to pay all their contributions in a less complicated and less "cumbersome" way for the retail merchant, in order to comply with the law. [new stockings} FOR LADIES We have just received a large assortment of new stocking models in pure fantasy. All fashionable colors. RED, GREEN- BLUE FLESH-GREY and many others. VERY LOW PRICES - -l-l'f 1 lili Hl-I HUI II'1'l-iIHH-Hí Salón II i II TUERTO RICO" 0 de :: : ::: m. garcia colon ; ; ; ;; has been transferred to the pia- ;;; - - - -; za. of Salvador Brau, low ■' i -- of the "Catholic Academy." i i i . ■" *"i...........
1 I II 1 I ¡ 1 r; ¡ , i | I Mil I I I .¡..¡.q. I r.ARAr.F service PERMANENTS GARAGE - GASOLINE - LAUNDRY I I I BRANDI V, 1 L O LA P P ON , CE I ■
Company Bruno & Vazquez, Inc.
PYRAMID GASOLINE -MOTOR QUALITY - WARRANTY STANDARD OIL COMPANY J. C. GARCIA, Pres. ! A MOLER VIDRIO that "EL BOSQUE DE BOLONIA" will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA in San Juan because of how well it sells and how south it is. ' "l -" -*- -...
The Ledo. Arjona Siaca ' declares that he does not dispute the election of Mr. González Mena to integrate the Commission that will go to Washington
and adds that all members of the Republican minority will endorse the name of the worthy Representative for Aguadilla * - - # ,
CHAMBER OF REPRESENTATIVES OF , PUERTO RICO I - San Juan, P. R., August 17, 1923. ! Mr. Editor of EL MUNDO, ¡ San Juan, Puerto Rico My distinguished friend: In today's edition of EL MUNDO, and in the information relating to the probable members who will compose the Legislative Commission of Puerto Rico, ¡ which, in accordance with Joint Resolution No. 2 of the Senate, is to be composed of representatives of the House of Representatives of Puerto Rico, ¡ which, in accordance with Senate Resolution No. 2, is to be composed of representatives of the House of Representatives of Puerto Rico. 2, of the Senate, is to go to Washington, prior to the convening of the next Federal Congress, to work for the securing for Puerto Rico of greater powers in the Government of the Island and greater intervention in it on the part of the Puerto Rican people, I am led to believe that I am in a position to see how the election of the members of the Puerto Rican Legislative Commission will be contested,
I am not the only one disputing the election of my good friend and political leader, Mr. Enrique Gonzalez Mena, Representative for Aguadilla, to the Commission. I do not doubt that the information of the Reporter is due to some good friend of mine who wants to consider me as qualified as Mr. Gonzalez Mena to hold the office of member of said Commission; but this kindly concept of my performance in this matter is far from the existence of a commitment of mine, in friendly dispute, with my good friend and leader. Moreover, I have always had the criterion in this matter that it should be Mr. Gonzalez Mena, for multiple reasons - which are not relevant to enumerate, but which "prestige" him to the highest degree. -(Continued on p. 11)
During an important debate in the House, Representatives Tizol and Santoni made a strong opposition to the bill to authorize a five and a half million bond issue.
At three o'clock yesterday afternoon the House met under the chairmanship of Mr. Guerra. The minutes of the previous session were taken as approved without being read, and the Clerk proceeded to read the petitions and memorials received. The Order of the Day was then entered and House Bill 3, "to authorize the issuance of bonds of the People of Puerto Rico in the amount of five million five hundred thousand dollars for the construction of public improvements; to provide funds for the payment of said bonds and for other purposes," was introduced for discussion. The Chairman of the Finance Committee Mr. Lastra then proceeded to defend the report of the Committee which was in favor of the approval of the Bill. Mr. Lastra analyzed each and every one of the improvements to be made with this bond issue and highlighted the need to build a penitentiary, a mental hospital, the Capitol, schools and roads. He said, among other things, that this legislation had already been approved by the legislators in previous Legislatures and that therefore, on this occasion, this Act should also be voted on, since in this way, all this legislation could be put into practice in the not too distant future. At the end of Mr. Lastra's speech, Mr. Tizol took a turn to defend his points of view contained in a dissenting vote that had already been filed with the Secretariat, in his capacity as member of the
The Chairman, in his capacity as a member of the Finance Committee, said that he had already filed a dissenting vote with the Secretariat. Mr. Tizol pointed out to the House the possibility of carrying out all these works without having to tax the taxpayer for twenty years and, in addition, committing the island's credit for that period of time. He said that the legislation passed by that majority in 1921 was very interesting and that he could not now, with his vote, repeal those laws. To give an idea of the views held by Mr. Tizol, it seems to us sufficient to publish the coffee™ PUEDO ASEGURAR CONTRA CICLON café en el palo, en Compañías de Seguros registradas en Puerto Rico t HENRY C. BURSIAN Representante de Asegurados P. O. Box 886 Edif. Bouret Tel. 477 San Juan, P. R.
. dissenting opinion, which he placed on the record. Here is Mr. Tizol's dissenting vote: After having carefully studied House Bill No. 3, submitted to the consideration of the Finance Committee of which I am a member and which has been favorably reported for approval, I dissent from said report: 1. - Because in the session of 1921, this same Legislature passed a law authorizing the issuance of bonds for highways, in the amount of $2,000,000. In compliance with said law last year the first million dollars was sold and at present the second million dollars is being sold, in order to use both to carry out road works, the execution of which will take at least two years from this date, for which reason I believe that it is up to the next legislature and not to the present one to provide new resources for the continuation of the road plan approved in 1916. I rest my assertion on the 'reports furnished by the Commissioner of the Interior from which it appears: That with the first million _ of dollars sold a' virtue of the borrowing of 1921 the following roads have been completed or will be completed: 1.-From Lares Adjuntas 2-Cíales to Juana Díaz. (üontínft* "d la 7a. pag.)
MAE MURRAY The Queen of Jazzínania PROLOGUE MARTA DE LA TORRE The World Violinist IN THE COURT OF JAZZMANIA
PARQUE TODAY SATURDAY TODAY Santurce Premiere NORMAN KERRY in THE LAST' THEFT (Proxies) ' Tomorrow Sunday Special KATHLYN WILLIAMS in MOTHER'S LOVE ("Trimmed in Scarlet")
*"The bill to limit the school year is a dangerous step," says Mr. Fortuno.
As we learned that the Committee on Public Instruction of the House was considering Senate Bill, number four, to limit the school year to nine months, and as we learned, moreover, that there was great opposition to the bill, our editor in the House, asked Mr. Fortuno Sellés, Chairman of the Committee on Public Instruction, for his opinion regarding the said Bill, and sent him the following note which we reproduce literally: "Friend Vargas: I must be discreet in dealing with the matter of the P. 4, since it has been submitted to the Committee on Instruction, over which I preside; but I would nevertheless like to please you by giving you the information I have been collecting from the various organizations that are familiar with this matter and can speak with recognized authority on the subject. I have received an infinity of telegrams which I list below, and those in which the teachers and Municipal Commissioners of Instruction give their opinion. { Those opposed to the Project manii fiest that it will be a calamity to i rural schools where there is do-
ROBERTS PRESSURE FILTERS They are the best. See our stock. We will please you FERRETERIA FINLAY Pupils are admitted during the regular course of the University. 28 José de Diego St., Río Piedras, P. R. Advt.
I * . r Attempts are being made to withdraw the appeal filed in the matter of the legislators' per diems.
It is believed that the "Attorney General" will be given the opportunity to issue his opinion.
The attitude adopted by the Senate of Puerto Rico in connection with the payment of additional per diem allowances to Representatives and Senators has been the subject of much comment these days. As you are aware, the Auditor of Puerto Rico refused to authorize the payment of said allowances, alleging that it was illegal, and against his decision, and with the prior authorization of the Senate, the Civil Legal Committee of said legislative body filed an appeal of the Auditor's decision before the Governor.We have come to the conclusion that most of them are opposed to the adoption of such an action, whereby the Chief Executive is placed in the serious dilemma that the children attending these schools have only two and a half hours of study, whether the group attending in the morning or the one attending in the afternoon. In addition, that the school year, after deducting the vacations of Easter, Christmas and holidays, only has 190 days amounting to nine and a half months, or what is the same, four and three quarters months for rural schools where the double enrollment only learn half a day students only learn half a day. That by reducing the school year to nine months we would have only 170 days or eight and a half or what is the same, four and a quarter months. 1<w I also have telegrams from the Parents' Associations of Caguas, Juncos and San Lorenzo, opposing the law, as well as from the Municipal Assembly of Juncos and the Administrative Council of the same town. All of this makes me think that this matter is worthy of careful study and that it should not have been given such a difficult passage in an extraordinary session where time is extremely limited and we cannot have a public hearing in which all the parties interested in the matter can present their points of view. We are orienting ourselves, friend Vargas, and in giving our opinion we will do so with our hearts in our hands, thinking of nothing but the general good of the children's socks! NEW ASSORTMENT WE HAVE J ■■ White with the cuff ready- | do whole colors with the | different cuff, white to= 5 two and whole colors. | All sizes. Pair 25c. - 3 pairs ¡65c. Í Pair 35c. - 3 pairs 99c. I At these prices they are cheap! They are worth twice as much! Gonzalez Padin Co. I l_ : !
tive of having to snub the Legislature and appear inconsistent with himself, since he did not veto that part of the Budget or overrule the Auditor who is one of the members of his Cabinet. It is so true that opinion is divided on this matter that when the protest against the Auditor's action arose in the House, the Majority Leader, Mr. Lastra Charrtez, expressed his support for the protest and the resolution of the Reporter Arjona requesting that the appeal of Sonado be endorsed is still pending before the House Legal Committee, and it is believed that if it is favorably reported, it will be defeated by the Full Committee. | As it is, many were of the opinion that the Senate would tend to reconsider the matter and withdraw the 1" appeal, thus relieving the Governor of the responsibility of having to resolve such a question, which seems to be not very favorable to the Legislature. i I Yesterday we spoke with a distinguished Senator, and he stated that it was his understanding that there would be no recon■'mering of the question, and that they had not adopted this attitude in the interest of having their per diem paid, or of setting a precedent for the Legislature in this matter. "Annoua. <9 appearance- told us per diems, e- Jo certain that mw cláflwn'a pro hfb'tiva that ex'est in different cenatltuciones estadna'ep of North America, holds us to the belief that we have power n to do what i we have done The Auditor may be correct: but as the Governor segnramento will refer to the Attorney General the ane'artón by us interposed against e! Auditor, it seems to us desirable that the Attorney Genera! issue an opinion on the matter v a.=f we will know in the future what to expect, " We understand, finally, that our Senators and Representatives intend to establish before the courts writs of mandamus'' against the Auditor to obtain the payment of the said fees, from our children, R. Fortuito SELLES." I From the data provided to us by Mr. Fortuno, it appears that forty Local Teachers' Associations are against the law and only seven are in favor of it. The latter being those of Dorado, 3<V rros. Lares. Cayey, Guayanilla, Patillas, and Manatí. Twenty-eight Municipal Commissioners of Instruction request that the referred Senate Bill No. 4 not be approved and fifteen request that it be approved, the latter being those of the following towns: Cidra. Ear- < celoneta, Sabana Grande, Adjuntas, Hu ! macao. Hatillo, Arecibo, Vega Baja, ; Aibonito, Juana Díaz, Guayanilla, ptm- : ce, Cabo Rojo, Camuy and Bayamón. Bolivar Pagan -LAWYER-- ! Office: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz. i P. O, Box: 883 Telephone: 1475, San Juan, P, R.
PACIFIC ARGENTINE BRAZIL LISE STEAM VESSEL "PRESIDENT HARRISON" of 20,000 tons Is expected in this port on the 21st of the current month. coming from San Francisco and Los Angeles, Calf, via Panama Canal and will continue voyage with destination to Rio de Janeiro, Montevideo and Buenos Aires. Take advantage of this opportunity to spend your vacations in South American countries. Passengers and cargo are admitted to the above mentioned ports. For further information please contact BEHN BROTHER INC. Agents. TELEPHONE 257 TANCA-TETUAN K San Juan ■_ . 9| - I