1.' . -L... W'".- . - - - - ... ■■■■■k VBP- Br IM ~/M ■ 'KhWwKtar Jk IK^fa8Rr*'' :
1 - 1 . - - 1 1 1 PAGS. 3 CTS. |4 = "S
UPAGS. 3 CTS. óñciaa ''Puerto Rito, Ilurtrado" Bldf. fte 11". - te" MB
EXCEPT ON SUNDAYS
MORNING DAILY,
ASO V,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
mubliahed and "MtributM andar penal* (No. *01) aitaofWed by u," ot oetobar O, 101T, en lie a* *he P "m" Ottee the San Jeaa. Porto Rieo, Br order "f the PtosMob*, A ". Iwieeon, Poaoaaatar GeneraL Matyod te aocond "laM J-ttee. tahrnarv -* 1910 at the Poet OMoe at Rea Zea*. PvTto Bl co. (United State* of Aneriea) "ador tee lot of mareh ". 1ST*
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1923
NUMBER 1464
Numerous committees presented to b Economic Com. # sas views on b apportionment of borrowings intended for house-schools.
Yesterday afternoon the Economic Commission of the Legislature met with the purpose of continuing to discuss the distribution of the works to be carried out with the loan of six million dollars - recently approved. Yesterday it was the turn of the distribution of the million dollars destined for the construction of rural and graduate schools. The proportion in which this allocation is to be distributed is two hundred thousand dollars for graduate school houses and eight hundred thousand for rural schools. Although nothing had been announced as to the holding of a public hearing, it is certain that numerous commissions composed of the most influential residents of different towns of the island, among which were some officials of said Municipalities, appeared before the Economic Commission for the purpose of presenting before the aforementioned legislative body the needs and demands of their respective municipalities. Immediately after the Economic Commission met, it was agreed by all its members to consent to listen to these commissions so that they could advise the Commission as to the manner in which they believed the distribution should be made. The spirit of the Legislature, in approving the apportionment, was that the Commission should be given the opportunity to hear from these committees as to the manner in which they thought the apportionment should be made.
and -i. .1, i, . I ÍM ÍM 41I I I I I -IH ¡ ¡ ¡ i l H-I -H-H-WH lilililí i "LA FA VORITA" - > S SAN JUST0 31 ' : : THE SCIENTIST WHO WEARS ITEMS FROM THIS STORE, IS i : ENORGULATES HIMSELF by saying that they are from the favorite ■ .v ■*-<" .... -ÍL - The secret of our preponderance lies in the Quality, correctness of Style, and Elegance of shoes, which are always chosen and selected by com- * petent people. To get today a good Xapato, of Beautiful and Elegant cut, it is not necessary to increase the " - CUPID budget. In LA FAVORITA * ' _a¿ & , , , , find the latest Models . The best shoes you've ever seen - Fashion more ; ; ; niM h Puerto Rico, for $6.00. c|os H - - '" All colors. Full and Baby Louis ' t ' We have the socks in the same color of the shoes that ; notordéne. ?í ' > We ship orders quickly by mail. í # JOSE LEMA & CO. : BOX 442, SAN JUAN, P. R. SAN JUSTO 31 TEL. 390. t Í a ,BRANCH IN RIO PIEDRAS t *a?' r - + M l > I l l l Fi ¡-l l l ! l l l4 1'H~l-!-M-H-H-lH-H-1I I | | | ■ ■ , , ,- ..-42._-■ ■ -. ■ 7 i"♦♦♦♦""♦"♦""""♦■"♦"♦"♦"■""""♦♦♦""< ii n i hhiiii <"♦'".< i 4. Preliminary Sale I NOVEMBER 16 AND 17, 1923. í > ' Sport, ball, afternoon and evening suits, silk sweaters í I - - and lañe, corsets, brassiers, and children's suits. We will grant a 10% discount on all purchases. If these amount to more than $10.00 you may select one of our beautiful embroidered thread scarves. f i ' The Vanderbilt County Shop * | r EDITH SIEGMUND, Owner. | i "THE SUN" IN ALL ITS LT APOGEO, receive a large assortment in merchandise > : 4R novelty, which we are selling at limited prices.' Take advantage now. Crepe China, all colors at $1.29 'THE SUN' 4CK€N 62 TELEf. 3-2-4 BOX 320 $ >n" i h ih i i i < <"<-+♦♦♦♦♦**" a | ROST YOU YOUNG AND LADY j ♦ selling easy sale items at Easter and New Year. 1 X 5Set¿ hÑb we are well prepared for our Agents i ♦ MONEY, for no one on the island will be able to offer the* 3 I DmM' and- Gentlemen articles of fine quality at such Cheap prices. 4 ♦ in preparation an extensive and precious sample book which . 1 Z after prior arrangement . ] *. .'MjmWhúos persons well connected in their town and knowledgeable 1 u 111 f
U "WTA CENTRAL ML UNIONIST PARTY HAD NO NEED Dt REUNIRST ENIA WnARKMWWffl
, ' rr -para, The Central Board of the Unionist Party was summoned yesterday to hold a meeting to hear the three members of the Municipal Assembly of Guaina. (Continued on page 6) I ' ' ' = i i - - - - I & w Dutch Steamer ■BAR ALT" Will Leave Monday November 19 " * "- -para - * CURAZAO ADMITTING LOAD AND PASSAGE. . Sues, of L. Villamil & Company. AGENTS. Phone 1580 - SAN JUAN.
Judge Odlin revokes an order issued by Judge Franco $oto when he was a Federal Court Judge.
On the 14th day of the present, Judge Odlin of the Federal Court issued the following opinion, reversing a default of substitute judge, Mr. Franco Soto: United States _Vs._ Dr. Eladio Izquierdo. The indictment in this case pre- i seated March 20, 1922, and charges an alleged violation of the National Prohibition Act I committed on ¡ the first day of December, 1921. Bail was posted by the defendant and nothing was done by him or by the United States District Attorney until September 4, 1923. On that day counsel for the defendant filed i in the office of the Clerk of this Cor te a motion asking that there be. On that day counsel for the defendant filed in the office of the Clerk of this Court a motion for an order dismissing the case on the ground that nearly eighteen months had elapsed since the indictment was filed and that no steps had been taken by the United States District Attorney to bring the case to trial and dispose of the matter in accordance with the provisions of the Sixth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, which provides that in all criminal proceedings the accused shall be entitled to a speedy and public trial. ! It will be observed that there is not the slightest manifestation in this motion that the defendant has ever requested a trial; nor is there any record that the defendant has ever been imprisoned. This mo- ( I (Continued on page 2)
. . a,-- -ei- - - >- - - - - * . .A' 1 Great Rebate, Take Advantage of It About to move our offices and warehouse to Dock No. 6 we are willing to give our favored customers a good rebate during the months of November and December WOODS - ZINC - CEMENT Twisted square rods. American lime and other construction materials. QUALITY - PRICE - SERVICE . ROLAN, TEJEDOR & DE HOSTOS
: I I I I Hll I 1 I I I !■ 1 III I' I ■!■ l-l-í-l I: Lehigh Portland Cement in bags. Oinís Cement Brand ■■ ! "TIGRE" in barrels. Take advantage of Special Prices. t¡ We also sell any analysis of fertilizer that [St Interese. ■: L SANTim FERTILIZER GOMPARY. i I ""■ ! I J I I LH H I I I I I I I I I ! I I I 1 M>1 Don Ramon Fernandez Mecler I HAS DIED ■ '- After receiving the Holy Sacraments v the blessing of his San| M "tidad M , His widow doña Carmen Musas, his sister doña Francisca Fernándes < Vda. de Ruis del Arbol (absent) his nephew Francisco Bolívar, doña , Rosa Fernández and don José Mareos Bayona (absent) doña Francisca I ¡' Fernández de Bolívar and her husband don Pedro Bolívar, nephews, sobri- > ■ ñas and other relatives and the Industrial Company of Santurce, have I the honor to invite his numerous friends and related for the act of! burial at ten o'clock this morning, departing from the mortuary house ' Park Street No. 27 "1 San Juan cemetery. The funeral procession will assemble at the Plaza, Columbus. itM No obituary will be distributed. Please do not send artificial wreaths. MK Funeral Director Dr. Ramon Fournier. Santurce, P. R., Nov. 17, 192b. ; '
Dr. S.M. Haley; Has moved his offices to the new building of "Puerto Rico I Ilustrado Inc." corner San Jose, j and Tetuan, 4th. floor. The building located at 36 San Francisco Street, currently occupied by the house of Gonzalez Padin, is rented. Proposals are accepted for a contract for 2 or more years. Counting from January 1, 1924 onwards. Will inform F. dél Valle, Jr. 50 Allen St.; Tel. 1482 San Juan Bolívar Pagán -LAWYER- Office: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan. P. R. _ L ■ , _ .■ * FOR RENT: Beautiful residence in King's Court, by the Park. Apply to No. 9 same street. ia-.TgK-.-.-g-- -."',i t, ' =
í DON'T MISS IT I INSURANCE contr INCeToÍoTI: great bargain to be had at the HURACAN- COSE C H A S l&SSste ROYAL EXCHANGE ASSURANCE Péetotigious English Company | - qUamM TEL. 1579. loss* P.""ds. on the, last. S ""o. $182,500.00 I Dr. S. M. Haley J. OCHM t HERIHXO.
' - < '' - General plan to be carried out by the Labor Negotiate * of the Doto. i of Agriculture.
Yesterday morning an important meeting was held at J d Department of Agriculture and Labor, which was attended by all the labor inspect- - res of the island. This meeting was for the purpose of exchanging impressions on the new plan of work which the Department, through the corresponding department, proposes to carry out throughout the island. The ceremony was opened by the Deputy of the Department, Dr. Bagué, who gave a brief and enthusiastic speech of greeting and encouragement. He was followed by Mr. Camuñas, Director of the Employment Agency, who displayed his profound knowledge of labor issues and labor legislation. ,M ! In the afternoon, the Chief of the Negocia- , do, Mr. Arroyo, his "assitant" and the first clerk, occupied the attention of the inspectors, giving them details on the various aspects of the new program, which we copy below: -WORK PLAN TO BE CARRIED OUT BY THE LABOR NEGOTIATE IN THE PRESENT YEAR. The Last Regular Legislature having appropriated ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for travel expenses, and the number of Inspectors having been increased from 10 to 15, and two Chief Inspectors, the division of industrial districts is as follows: " (Continued on page 4)
The Federal Court acquits the defendants in the vociferous conspiracy trial there.
4 Brilliant work of the defense attorneys ' Yesterday afternoon at 4130 P.M. the jury hearing the case against ! Víctor Coll y Cuchí, Ramón Valcourt ' Questell and Mariano R. Pesquera rendered - an inculpatory verdict in favor of ' said defendants, since already previously on motion of the prosecutor Wells two of the defendants, Mr. Celso Suárez ' and José de León de la casa de Villamil, had been eliminated from the indictment. For three consecutive days the prosecutor Wells was practicing his evidence, which he managed to introduce only with great difficulty and effort and with the almost continuous opposition of the lawyers of the respective defendants, Cayetano Coll, Hugh E Francis, Jaime Sifre, Jr. and Rafael Castro. The legal battle between these distinguished lawyers in defense of their respective clients was truly arduous and tenacious. It was necessary to have been present at every moment of the trial to follow the brilliant legal and doctrinal presentation given by all the defense attorneys and the prosecutors representing the Government in this important case. Both Prosecutor Wells and Prosecutor Gay fought with tenacity and energy to bring to the jury's mind the conviction that the defendants committed the crime charged in the indictment." i The prosecution's proof having been completed, the attorneys for the defendants- I I I .
From a comfortable bureaucratic chair a high public official, reviews the work being done by the municipality and gives an accurate impression of the political situation: * of the political situation l
A high-ranking public official, intelligent and industrious, whose name he wishes to remain hidden for the time being, yesterday presented a reporter of ours with the following pages, which we offer to the reader's curiosity: Everything in the political environment is in- ; dicating that the next election campaign in San Juan will be bloody, ar- ■ duous and difficult. The local fight :endri i proportions never seen before. At the present time, the parties are on the move, and are initiating various associations, tending to a prompt reorganization of their disintegrated forces. It is like an entrenchment for the final push in the decisive battle that will take place on a day in November 1924. It is commented and even taken for granted an existing pact between the parties of the minority. Republicans and Socialists are joining forces to show them the front to the Unionist majority. These in turn are preparing themselves formidably. The superb machine of the Municipal Administration is tireless. The activities are increasing astonishingly, day after day, schools are being built, beautiful parks, comfortable hospitals. San Juan Mo | derno, Melilla and other neighborhoods are being woven with the cables of the alean-! taiilado, the widening of Avenida* Pence de león is nearing completion, the sidewalks of Puerta de Tierra are advancing greatly and likewise the extension of Calle San Agustín. Work is being done assiduously on the paving and paving of the streets of Santurce. The artesian wells have already been built, as well as the provisional aqueduct of Guaynabo, and on top of this we are working hard on the gigantic project of the new San Juan aqueduct.
The Muñoz Rivera Park, Jote de Diego Park, Plaza del Condado, and the Baldonos® de Castro and Colón Squares are about to be reconstructed. Continued on pg. Í4 TODAY SATURDAY MATINEE & EVENING AT KISMET Program 1 BRUNO & VAZQUEZ
$1000.oo * ■ - THE PORTO RICAN and AMERICAN INSURANCE CO. will pay $1,000.00 to any person or persons who furnish sworn proof, substantiated by us to be valid and which will serve to prosecute and ¡njure gratuitous defamers who spread false news for the purpose of injuring its solvency and recognized reputation. THE PORTO RICAN AND AMERICAN INS. CO; ' M. V. SALDAÑA, Secretary. - * s AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE FIRE - BONDS - EARTHQUAKE PORTO RICAN AND AMERICAN INSURANSS COMPANY THE FIRST COMPANY IN PUERTO RICO Loss" paid, to date $235,964.99 J. OCHOA & HERMANO. lumber" < SUPERIOR QUALITY FROM PITCHTEN i ' ■ y Just arrived by Schooner "AMAZON", unloading at the Malecon Point: . í - . ¡j- " Take advantage of buying on the dock with the best prices at Plaza. A. H. GEIGER TEL: BOX 170 SANJUAN S , J ■ P A W A n 17 PERMANENT SERVICE I GARAGE -GASOLINE -WASHES I BRANDI io I