THE WORLD
QA FAGS. 3 CTS. g I I I 8etne "1re..- " <4.00 f ■ ■ One Year - *7.50
Inn PAGS. 3 CTS. I ¡ I I I Ofi. Salvador Brau 81. I ¡ _ I ] Tal. 1222. - Box 8*5
MORNING NEWSPAPER
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR V.
i SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
SATURDAY, JUNE 23, 1923.
| NUMBER 1340
Published aud distributed under permit (No. SOI) author: ted by th* Act of octobet 0. 1*17. on file at the Poet Office ot Sen Juan. Porto Rico. By order of the President, A 8. Burteoon. Post in an ter General. Entered eecond elaea matter. t.Hrnery 21. 1919. at the Poet Office at Ran Juan. Porto Bieo.(Unital! State* of America) under Vne Act of march 3. 1876.
Yesterday the Federal Court began the vociferous proceedings for the appointment of a new president.
Among the many appointments to be made by the new head of the Island Executive was that of Chairman of the Workers' Compensation Commission, a position now held by Leopoldo Santiago Carmona. It can be stated that no other appointment has aroused so much public attention as that of Mr. Carmona. The conditions under which the same was originally made and the political actions which followed the same, and the action which the Directors of the Union had to take in this respect, have made this appointment a matter of such importance that many considered it to be, of all appointments, the most laborious. This has indeed been proved by the facts, citing the fact that, to date, this matter has not yet been finally settled. It would be difficult for the majority of the Senate to confirm the appointment, since the candidate who holds it occupies a truly difficult position within the party, due to his political actions against the leadership of the party and the action of the Central Board declaring him out of the party. . have later tried to soften the' perish and settle difficulties, and we would even dare to say that there was a belief that this appointment could be confirmed. The desire, however, of the Unionist directors to keep their principles intact and to sustain the attitudes once adopted was an insurmountable barrier to the consummation of the facts in this form. I have made this small digression, avoiding going into details, in order to make our readers realize how difficult this situation is, which seems to be on the way to being solved, since, apparently, it is planned to give a new direction to the matter and to harmonize things in such a way that no one can feel injured in any way. The Workmen's Compensation Commission has been the subject of challenges before the Courts of Justice, and it has recently been alleged in an opinion of a Federal Judge that this Bureau is unconstitutional, since it is functioning independently of any of the Government Departments.
0 1 At Hato-Rey, stop 33, I will sell the first AAlfiirpC TWENTY Solares for cash and installments with an EZV M* w j Jusn d escuen t 0 in their prices and with only paying cash 20 per cent and the remainder in semi-annual payments. MANUEL ROJAS.-"Noa Building" Telephone 579. SAN JUAN, P. R.
Yesterday morning the trial for conspiracy against Enrique Castro Martinez, Iniis Sanquírico, Narciso Sais Jr. Rafael Seijo, Sergio Seijo, Uli ses A. Martinez, Ramon Valcourt Ques ; téU, Joaquin L. Miro, Juan Lacom- - tea, Gumersindo Colón, Leandro Guerra, Gonzalo Córdova Dávila, José de ¡león and Celso Suárez represented in this form began to be heard in Federal Court: Enrique Castro and Luis San j j quirico for Martín Travieso; Narciso Sais Jr., (for Angel R. de Jesús; Rafael Seijo and Sergio (Seijo, for Hugh R. Francis; Ulises A. Martínez for E. B. Wilcox; Ramón Valcouj-t Questell and Juan Laboraba, for Benicio F. Sánchez Castaño; Joaquín L Miró, for
The appointment of the chairman of the Indem. Comm. will cease to be a Senate confirmation appointment.
As our readers know, in the Organic Law ?■! constituting the government of the island, and determining its operation, the Executive is divided into seven Departments, the theory of the Federal Judge, even though we have not before us the opinion, (seems to be based on the fact that yes this is the division a'tablecidated by the Organic Law of the country, .a negotiated of an executive character cannot function in isolation from these departments which all constitute the executive machinery of the island. i. i. And for these reasons, we have been informed that there is an intention to move the Workmen's Compensation Commission to form a part of one of the Executive Departments, with the belief that it is most likely to be the Department of Agriculture and Labor. - If this is done, the conflict that prevails today regarding the confirmation of the appointment of the President of said Commission will disappear immediately, since this appointment will then cease to be made by the Governor with the consent of the Senate and will become the exclusive responsibility of the Head of the Department, under which the aforementioned Workers' Compensation Commission will then be located.
- Bolivar Pagan -LAWYER- Office: Allen St. Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Phone: 1475. i San Juan, P. R.
conspiracy to traffic alcohol This case involves 54 witnesses, 14 defendants and nine attorneys, including Prosecutor
Juan B. Soto; Gumersindo Colón and Leandro Guerra, for James Foster Hen ry; Gonzalo Córdova Dávila, for Jaime Sifre Jr., and Celso Suárez and José de León, for Miles M. Martin. The jury that was to hear the case began to be empaneled and most of the morning was spent on it. Eleven jurors had been summoned to complete the regular panel for the Trial comp "by standers'' (spectators, but the Ledo. Travleqp discovered by his able questions that these jurors were not acvtrdo "by-standers'' in the literal sense of the word, but had been summoned 3 days ago by the Marshal to appear as jurors, it being a coincidence that they were all Continentals, and when already -he was about to present his objection to the Cort? and asked to withdraw the other jurors to argue it, the Judge told him that it was not necessary for him to argue the point, that he should tell him the number of those who were in those "Auditions, and there were eleven, who were excluded by the Judge. JÉ After theñBtrados saw that it was not going to do much with excusing the Marsh? 1 could cite them as "by-standers'' then the Ledo. Sifre Jr. raised the point that with 17 jurors on the regular panel and the crime of conspiracy being a less serious crime, with only one other juror on the panel, the Prosecutor would be entitled to three challenges and the defense would be entitled to three more. Some time was spent discussing that point and finally the morning session was adjourned hafta afternoon. In the afternoon the question arose again and Judge Odlin stated that he could issue an order that the trial would proceed with 18 jurors only if the attorneys for all the defendants consented to it. And the Judge called the roll, all counsel having consented, and the regular juror, Louis O'Neill, having been present, the eighteen were completed, and the jury was finally impaneled. The Prosecutor then opened the case by reading the indictment and Travieso, Martin, (Sifre, Soto and Henry replied. About 54 witnesses were sworn in, including those for the prosecution and the defense. The first witness called to testify was Waldemar Hess and he was testifying all afternoon yesterday at the
A MOLER VIDRIO that "EL BOSQUE DE BOLONIA" will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA in San Juan because of how cheaply it sells and how well stocked it is. Advt. -< - - -
Attorney W. G. Marvin maintains that a tremendous number of bankruptcies are occurring in Puerto Rico.
Fifty-seven percent of the losses in insurance have come from Puerto Rico.
Attorney W. G. Marvin sent us yesterday, from New York, a copy of the following letter which he has addressed to the President of the Chamber of Commerce. New York, June 14, 1923. Mr. Miguel Morales, President of the Chamber of Commerce. San Juan, P. R. My dear sir: Mr. C. C. Walts, representative of The American Manufacturers. Walts, representative of The American Manufacturers Foreign ¡ Credit Underwriters, has sent me an issue of EL MUNDO of June 7, in which certain statements are attributed to me which have been so distorted as to change their true meaning- ( I know of no greater crime than an injustice, and it is indeed unjust to take one or two sentences said by a person in a speech, and separate them from the text of this speech when they can only be read in the light of the whole speech. As you know, I am an international lawyer. In that capacity I believe I have at least managed to gain some knowledge of the merits and virtues of peoples other than Anglo-Saxons. In fact, I am a great friend of Puerto Rico and have had the most pleasant relations with many splendid Puerto Rican gentlemen. As I am the consulting attorney to The American Manufacturers Export Association, The American Manufacturers Foreign Credit Insurance Exchange, and president of The Legal Ad visory Oomittee of the U.S. Department of Commerce, I have had a great deal of experience in foreign trade, and as an attorney for The American Manufacturers Foreign Credit Insurance Exchange, it is my duty to examine the losses incurred by this body. In that capacity, my attention has been called to the tremendous number of bankruptcies occurring in Puerto Rico, and we have definitely proved that a large number of these bankruptcies have been fraudulent. i The Aster lean Manufacturers Fo- ¡ reign Credit Insurance Exchange is composed of over 700 of the leading American exporters, such as Armour & Co, The American Tobacco Co, Wilson & Co, Corn Products, Refining Co. Procter A Gamble, Inter- [ national fiheo Co., etc. These 700 ex- Í carriers are associated for the purpose of mutually insuring their overseas shipments against insolvency or bankruptcy of the foreign purchaser. The Insurance Exchange alone has spent over $300,000 on credit information alone, and our central credit collection in New York, 110 William Street, is the largest and choicest in the world. We have about 3S5,000 foreign buyers classified and catalogued. On the credit cards covering each buyer is-first, certain data collected from the banks as to the general credit of the buyer; second, the light experience of all our members who have sold to this buyer; third, our own experience of insurance on the buyer. We are, therefore, better able than anyone else to say which of the foreign merchants are paying their obligations and which are not. - We insured, during the years 1931 and 1922 over 40,000 shipments from the United States to foreign countries, making a total of many millions of dollars- We have paid 236 loss; up to March 1 of the current affio, and more than half of our losses have been on the island of P. R. Only 5 0 0 0 of our insurance has been written on Puerto Rican risks, and yet 57 per cent of our losses have come from Puerto Rico. We have inferred the origin of these losses, and in many cases we have found that they were due to Puerto Rican risks.
In many cases we have found that they were due to bankruptcies in some of which there was an element of fraud. In many others our losses were caused by a fraudulent arrangement worked out by the Puerto Rican debtor with its American creditor. These things have not happened among the better class of merchants, but among merchants of very little moral responsibility, evidently. Therefore, when I pointed out some of these facts" to the New Orleans Chamber of Commerce, I was really doing a favor to both honest Puerto Rican merchants as well as honest American merchants. Meanwhile EL MUNDO and other newspapers object to my speech, and since the Chamber of Commerce also seems to object to it, however, they only have hearsay of what I (Continued on 1* oa. page >
Drs. González Martínez and Gutiérrez Igaravídez categorically deny the accusations that they were
It is NOT TRUE, they say, THAT WE HAVE CHARGED A SINGLE CENT FOR FACULTATIVE SERVICES, in virtue of the statements made by them in the House of Representatives.
By virtue of the statements made in the House of Representatives during the discussion of the Budget, in which it was declared that the Institute of Tropical Medicine of Puerto Rico was being used for lucrative purposes, we thought it appropriate to interview Dr. Gutiérrez Igaravídez and Dr. González Martínez, heads of said Institute. In the offices of the Department of Tropical Medicine we had the pleasure of speaking with such prestigious physicians whom we asked if they had anything to say in relation to the serious assertions that had been made. Dr. Gonzalez Martinez, to our satisfaction, dictated to his stenographer the following lines: Drs. Gutiérrez Igaravídez and
- Gonzalez Martinez report that the assertion that the Institute of Tropical Medicine charges ■ wealthy people for the analyses performed is untrue. Precisely, in a bulletin posted to the public many years ago, it is stated that in the Institution no analyses are performed nor are they carried out on persons who would have to pay for them. The announcement clearly indicates that there are three private centers in San Juan for this purpose, where interested parties may go. On the contrary, the number of analyses that are performed at the request of the doctors of San Juan and of the island, to clarify diagnoses that cannot properly be included in the purposes of the Institution, but that in order to benefit the patient, are very large.
The doctors of San Juan and the island, to clarify diagnoses that cannot properly be included in the purposes of the Institution, but which, in order to ultimately benefit the patients, are carried out without the slightest protest and without the least retribution. Dr. Gutiérrez Igaravídez, who approved of his colleague's statements, showed our Be dactor a notice which is posted in different parts of that Institute. A female employee gave our representative a copy of the notice which reads as follows: In connection with the laboratory work being done by this center, no specimen will be received for analysis that does not come from a case study of the Institute's clinic, or that is of scientific interest and is jointly studied by the physician referring the analysis and a member of the Institute. Analyses requested by the hyápítales for their insolvent cases, those of interest to the Army, the Navy or the Federal Health Service, for T-'s soldiers, as well as those of verification demanded by the Insular Government through its Departments, will be carried out as long as they do not interfere with the research work of this Institute. Under no circumstances will analyses for wealthy persons be carried out in the Institute's Laboratory, and the Institute's personnel will inform the applicants that there are private laboratories in the country for this purpose and that they are advertised in the newspapers. The statements made by Mr. Bird are completely false, both doctors told us, since our duty here is to strictly comply with our job, fulfill all obligations, attend to all persons who request the help of the Department and above all not charge absolutely nothing for the work that is done here for the benefit of the people of Puerto Ri (Continued on page 6). page) ávTsü MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN, P. B. WATER SERVICE As of today, and until further notice, water service to San Juan, Puerta de Tierra, Santurce and Río Piedras, will be verified at the following times: IN THE MORNING Rio Piedras and from 6 to 8 San Juan and Puerta de Tierra 9 to 11 IN THE AFTERNOON Rio Piedras and Santurce 4 to 6 San Juan and Puerta de Tierra 7 to 9 This measure has been adopted due to the low amount of water that the Rio Piedras currently has. The Administration is taking this measure so as not to deprive the public of this important service, especially during hours when water consumption is strictly necessary. Everyone is requested to cooperate with the Administration by economical use of water, so that the restrictions of this service interruption may cause the least possible inconvenience. The general public is hereby notified that the use of water for irrigation of gardens and for any purpose other than domestic or industrial applications where water is absolutely necessary is strictly prohibited. The police, and every citizen, has the duty to denounce any infraction of this prohibition of imperious necessity, Rafael DIEZ DE ANDINO, Commissioner of Public Service, Police and Prisons. Advt.
Republican ministries in the House and Senate intend to present an important resolution soon.
After the Republican Assembly was held, in which new directions were given to the party. i" has stirred up the idea among some very valuable elements of that collectivity, of doing something practical to carry out the plan they propose to carry out to achieve for the country the goals they have set forth in their new platform. In this respect we have been informed that the Republican minorities, in the House and Senate, propose to present for the consideration of the Parliament, a Resolution tending to the insular Legislature to request the National Congress to grant Pto. Rico statehood as the definitive formula of our governmentIn said resolution, we have been told, that it will also be added that if the Congress is not, for the time being, in a position to determine the definitive "status" of the country it should extend to the island the American Constitution and ' ' ' especially ' ' ' we grant the election of the governor. It appears that upon the introduction of this Resolution, should they decide to do so, the minorities will endeavor to do so in such a manner that it will appear to be introduced with the least amount of direct examination of Attorney Wells. At five o'clock the trial was adjourned to be continued on Monday morning at nine o'clock.
The Committee has no interest on their part, as they are trying to get the majority in both legislative bodies to accept this resolution. Someone with whom we have talked about this important matter, and i who psreems to be in possession of the sei cret and of the intentions pursued thereby by the Republican minorities in Parliament, has confessed to us that j what they propose to do with that Resolution, if they present it, is to cast a net to the Unionist Party. And this fact explains it, in the sense that ?If the Republicans raise before Parliament the question of requesting Statehood, if the majority opposes it, it will be in opposition to the ideas expressed by Governor Towner and disavowing Mr. Barceló himself, who has affirmed that he would accept for Puerto Rico the State finality if it is that with this formula the country will conserve its personality and its idiosyncrasy, and if, on the contrary, the majority agrees to formulate that petition, they believe that the Unionist party would lose a great deal before the Puerto Rican public conscience and the Republicans would then claim that they have succeeded in getting the majority to accept as their creed what has always been the Republican ideal. It is not possible for us to predict what will be the attitude of the majority party in the event that this problem is brought before the Legislature, and it would be a question of waiting some time; but what we can assure you is that whatever petition is made to Congress, the Unionist party, as the majority, will not allow the country to appear to speak through the thought and judgment of the mino(Continued on page 6) "La Filosofía" Brau 75 Come buy fresh fruit QUALITY AND PRICE
i Cuban roofing tiles, Spanish playing cards ■ Onions from - PRICES WITHOUT COMPETITION Freiría Hermanos
LADIES' DRESSES Lately received, most elegant, made of the finest silks. New styles. They are made at very reasonable prices. They are available for dancing, for the San Juan festivities, and also for street wear. Noa Building, Alien 17 and 2 altos. Call! phone 1539.
Keep it in mind Gentleman .... Our Lightweight Suits Are The Best
Look When You Buy Them Handmade Guaranteed $12 - $16 - $18
Don't be Surprised Palm Beach Frno Well Made in Beautiful Colors All Sizes Guaranteed $7.50 - $10 - $12.98
Wool Pants - New Straw Hats and Caps Gonzalez Padin Co.