THE MYND
1 A PAGES. 3 CTS. In-1 U Pa ASO 8T.68
n PAGES. 3 CTS. || Ofi. Drinker Pitch II. ■ I ToL 1831. r- Box 848.
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
ANNUAL V.
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO.
Published and distributed under permit (Me. 801) authorired by tb" Act of oetober O, 1017. on lie at the Post Offlea ef "an Jnan. Perm Biso. By order of the Preaident, A B. Burleson. Poatinaeter General. Stored aa eseoid Seaa míttJr februery SI, ISIS, nt the Poe* Office at Ben Juan. Porto Bl eo. {United State" of America) under tne Aet ef march 8.- 1879.
SATURDAY, AUGUST 11, 1923,
NUMBER 1381
"On the chess board of present-day politics, each one places his pieces, it being as yet unknown who will check the King, at this time
"The extraordinary session of the Legislature, will be intense in its work and transcendental in its resolutions"-says the Ledo. Hernandez Lopez
It was in the barbershop of Mr. Manuel ¡ (garcía Colón, where a prominent ■ Unionist politician, while being shaved by an operator, held with the latter and a reporter of ours, who was waiting for a tumo, that exchange of impressions about men and parties, which always arises when there is no better subject to discuss. Our man, half of his face lathered and the other half ready, poured before us his bitter politician's bi'is. He seemed bent on leaving in the minds of his listeners a little of the pessimistic impression that men in politics come to when their desires are not satisfied. - He began by anathematizing a few of his own co-religionists, among them the Commissioner of Health, of whom he said that after the Party had snowed him into the position he now holds, the height must have produced such an effect that he did not want to please the men of the Union by taking Mr. del Bosario to the Head of Charity, as was the wish of all. -Yes," said our editor, "but does this mean that this official believes with his predecessor that such an appointment is a mistake? .... -And who is to say," exclaimed the politician, "that another appointment that is made is not a greater mistake? The 'barber continued to pass his hand through yiWWWÓ ulano, with that"' disrespect allowed of a man who has dealt with the face of many a fellow man. -And what do you say about the political situation," we said. -I think that politics is now a chessboard and that each one is placing his pieces, not knowing, as yet, who will check the king when the time comes. -Perhaps you will be one of the winners! -Not that I want to be one at all costs. .... I simply mean that the current political situation has all the appearances of a huge watering can. - ■ THREE MONTHS ELECTRICAL SALES ON DEPOSIT - OF - Electrical Appliances Our main business is the " sale of electric current. To ensure a permanent charge, we sell durable appliances at greatly reduced prices. All of our employees, no matter what department they work in, will demonstrate the appliances and iron out the details of the sale until the buyer is satisfied. P. R. Railway Light & Power Co. v Tel. 163 San Juan Box 368 and Agendas 1- "- -- * - -
On going out to the lime e I don't know by what strange ■ conicidence, it was raining. SB. HERNANDEZ LOPEZ We then spoke with the illustrious Vice President of the Senate, Mr. Juan Hernández López. Our conversation was brief. -What do you think of the extraordinary session," we said. Don Juan, who each time seems to us more and more like the illustrious Spanish Minister of Ministers, Don José Canalejas, after extending himself in slight considerations regarding the matter, pronounced the following, emphatic words, in which we thought we saw printed the whole program that the legislators intend to develop in the important act. The extraordinary session of the Legislature of Puerto Rico," said Don Juan, "will be intense in its work and momentous in its resolutions. The proverbial reserve "n which Don Juan is always enclosed, deprived us of knowing what all the bear consisted of. Our insistence achieved nothing. It only gave rise to the Vice-President of the Senate to postpone us for when Mr. Barceló's presidential bell rings. Patience! .... A CEREMONY OF THE HISPANIC AMERICAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCES Madrid, August 10. (United Freís)-The Spanish American Academy of Sciences has opened a contest in which the soldiers of the army and navy will take part on the allegorical works for the celebration of the celebration of the feast of the race. FRANCE HELPS BELGIUM TO PREVENT THE DECLINE OF THE FRANC 1 Brussels, Aug. 10. (United Fróte.) ' -It is reported that the French bankers have agreed, with the consent of the government, to open advanced credits to the Belgian national bank for five hundred million francs, in order to prevent the Belgian currency from falling. avish "1 MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN AQUEDUCT SERVICE As of today, July 19, the distribution of water will begin at 7 A.M. and will end at 1 P. M. for all the territory served by the Aqueduct. This measure is taken in view of the prolongation of the drought, and all the neighbors are begged not to leave 1M pens open, and especially to the neighbors of Santurce to suppress the irrigation of gardens, so that the neighbors of San Juan can receive the water they need for essential uses. Rafael DIEZ DE ANDINO, Commissioner of Public Service, Police and Prisons. Advt. :: Casa de Huéspedes ■ I "BETANCES"; - - i ' Calle Dr. Betances, (Camino J ■ - Nuevo) No. 53, esquina a Mu- . '; ñoz Rievera. P. O. Box 601. Tel. * - - 295, green. Mayagüez, P. R. Edi ' ;; ficio de madera. Healthy meals. ' - - Ventilated rooms. Exquisite service. Moderate prices. ■H>H 1111 Kill I I11 H-H l-I < ■!- ■ --.-I I I lili a H IIIIUI.IIB
i" P A P A CP PERMANENT SERVICE GARAGE - GASOLINE - BRANDI WASHES -
THE "IN MEMORIAM" EXERCISES HELD YESTERDAY AT THE MUNICIPAL THEATER WERE EXTRAORDINARILY IMPRESSIVE.
The alleged danger of the municipal loans is due to unfounded alarms - declares Mr. P. de Castro As our readers know, yesterday we published an interesting informa? ción reporting that there was a serious fear that the municipal ordinances, which amount to many millions of dollars throughout the island, would be declared null and void, because, as alleged in the specific case of Yabucoa, they suffer from certain legal defects, for which circumstances we also said that the Council would have to adopt an important resolution, in order to prevent all the municipalities of the island, which have contracted loans, from going bankrupt. Our notes caused the consequent sensation, and it could not be otherwise, since the matter they reported on is of great importance for the country in general. A reporter of ours spoke yesterday with the Secretary of the Executive Council, Mr. Pefro de Castro, about our infirmation, and the referred gentleman, from telling us that there was the same in EL 1 MUNDO, nws&nformed that all that, 1 lacked the importance that was wanted to be given to it, jay. He said that it was unfounded alarms that were circulating the bonds, with the purpose of not paying these at the stimulated rates, because lately the bond market has fallen quite a lot, and for the buyers it means a considerable loss to pay them at the price they originally contracted them. Referring to the specific case of Yabucoa, which could justify the claims of those alarmed, Mr. de Castro told us that the only thing the Executive Council would have to do in that case was to order that the borrowing ordinance be amended, since it had not been approved to date. With respect to the other municipal borrowing ordinances, the legality of which is being questioned, Don Pedro says that all that is needed is for the Council to ratify its agreement to pledge the good faith of the Town of (Continued on page 6)
Of an extraordinary imposing and scMxity may tell you that it resulted in the act held in the afternoon of; yesterday in the Municipal Theater of this (capital in honor of the illustrious Warren G. Harding, President of the United States, who some 1 days ago in San Francisco of California and scpe'io of whose mortal remains was! verified in the afternoon of yesterday in his native city, Marion, Ohio. Admirably decorated the stage and stalls of the large coliseum, with purple hangings and wreaths of artificial flowers, the place presented an aspect that invited to prayer and recollection. In a preferential place, covered with the national flag and black ribbons, a tomb with the portrait of the illustrious deceased President was erected. The Hon. Governor, Horace M. Town'er; the Hon. Antonio R. Barceló, President of the Senate; the Hon. Miguel Gue rra Mondragón, Speaker of the House; the Hon. Rafael Diez de Andino, Commissioner of the Public Service of San Juan; the Hon. Juan Hernández López, Vice President of the Senate, and the Hon. Alfonso Lastra Charriez, Vice President of the House, were seated on the stage. A STARTING NOTE OF EXTREME TENDERNESS When the Municipal Band began the act, playing the ''Adagio lamentoso" from Scheikowsky's Sixth Pathetique Symphony, about one hundred girls from the Asilo de Niñas de Santurce, led by their intelligent director, Miss Santae'la, were parading two by two, perfectly uniformed, and showing, on a black band that they wore on their pajamas, a black sash that they wore on their heads. . the name of each and every one of the different towns of the island, by . before the tomb where the portrait of the late President was placed, and they left a bouquet of natural flowers each one, with the exception of the last of them, which represented San
"ENGLISH BROADCLOTH" YARN SHIRTS The fashionable shirt that has replaced the silk shirt Precious Painted in All Sizes REIS A UNION SUITS T-SHIRTS Fine knitted shirts, white mar- SOLA T™* 8 p " id °s de c , amiseta V Pantalonr,VTc! _ . , short cloth cilio, very comfortable and ca REIS with short and long sleeves fresh 50 c. 3 75 c. 3 SHIRTS BY "10.22 THIN SOCKS PRECIOUS TIES TIES TIES pure silk socks and merceriza- In wide and narrow styles, made two, in colors, there are to- VALUE d® pure silk, eneresponadas, great not two sizes. vedad 50 c - * 5 °°° 98 c. GONZALEZ PADIN CO. SANJUAN PONCE MAYAGÜEZ
Bolívar Pagan -AWARRIOÍ i ciña: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P, R,
■rnr-mn " ' ■ THE REICHSBANK CLOSED Berlin, Aug. 10. (United Press The Reichsbank has been closed as unable. to do any financial operations. The referred institution had no money to pay.
A MILLING GLASS that 4 'THE FOREST OF BOLOGNA" will continue to be the most popular in San Juan because it sells so cheaply and because of its southern location. Advt.
Gov. Towner and the highest representatives of public opinion, in heartfelt speeches, emphasized the mourning of the country before the unexpected death of the President Numerous girls from the girls' asylum, representing all the towns of the Island, deposited their children before the portrait of the illustrious deceased
Juan and who deposited a beautiful wreath also of natural flowers. The act carried out by these girls was the object of the most favorable commentary by all those who were present, i XOS SPEECHES When the band finished playing the symphony, Mr. Diez [de Andino came forward and read the following speech: Ladies and Gentlemen: It is my duty, on the occasion of the position I undeservedly occupy, to be the first to rise in this place and before such a large and distinguished audience to make use of my most humble words, to express on behalf of this beautiful and beautiful City of San Juan, the feelings it feels for the immense and irreparable misfortune, which is today ravaging our great nation. There is in the solemnity of this hour something indefinable that is born of our hearts and floats in the atmosphere* ' our spirits, takes root in the deepest part of our being, and overflows, by wide channel of the word. It is the pain, guest that comes to our table. Without any invitation, he declares himself our guest, making the wine in our cup bitter. He has gathered us here and we can well say, Here we are pain'.... Upon the earth removed by the hand of man to cherish the mortal remains of the first magistrate of the North American Republic, the Hon. Warren G. Harding. The love of the people that brought him to so high a position raises pyramids of fy>res, the artist's chisel engraves in the marble the date of his death, the great representatives of the world pass by reverently, the bells toll, the cannon resounds in mourning and the flags remain at half-mast symbolizing the pain and bitterness of a people. We pray and feel with the same pain as the people who accompanied his coffin and parade before his grave. No matter TODAY SATURDAY PARK HOi Extraordinary Sensationai Production "Sacred and Profane love" By ELSIE FERGUSON and CONRAD NAGLE Drama by author Arnold Bennett Tomorrow -" Sunday "THE PRINCESS OF NEW YORK" By DAVID POWELL and MARY GLYNNN Drama by author Cosmo Hamilton Matinee PERILS OF THE YUKON
that it is in a different language, that there are wordless sentences that flow from the heart, as crystal water flows from the heart of the mountain: that sentiment has no particular language to express itself among men. We expected from him, what perhaps no other people on earth: that he would arrive here in the course of his journey, and before the incomparable beauty of our Island and the warmth and intimacy of our men he would speak and his sentences brimming with enthusiasm and sincerity would be like flashes of lightning in the distant horizons of our politics. But it was not like that.... death stalked him at a bend in the road, and it was there on the ever-blue coast of the Pacific in the beautiful city of San Francisco, California, that he died surrounded by his loved ones and in front of the noble and beloved companion of his life. And a few hours ago the earth, a sacred urn, took him to her bosom. And nowfro", the children of this blessed land before his tomb Men we can say: - He died thinking of us. At the end of Mr. Diez de Andi no, the Hon. Governor Towner came forward to the proscenium, who, interpreted by Mr. de Castro, delivered a very eloquent speech making an admirable apology for the deceased President. The Governor's speech has not yet been translated and therefore we are unable to print it in this edition. One of the parts of his speech which attracted the most attention because of its sig-.lí (Oontinfia on p. 8) EXPRESSION OF GRATITUDE We wish to make ee'JJtsr pox by means of the present linens our deepest gratitude to all the personnel of the Sanatorium of the Spanish ociedad Española de Auxilio Mutuo y Beneficencia for their multiple care and disinterested efforts in the assistance of our father during the illness that kept him confined in said hospital for six months, making patent the testimony of our highest gratitude to the noble and kind sisters of charity, to the practitioner Sr. Enrique Fernandez, to the director of said Sanatorium, Dr. Mr. Amallo Roldan and also to the renowned doctor and very competent surgeon Dr. Mr. Velez Lopez, who once again demonstrated his profound scientific knowledge, succeeding in the difficult and complicated operations that our father had to undergo. ARBURUA-GABCIA Family. Advt.
COMPAGNIt CfNERALE TRASATlANTIQUt GOOD OPPORTUNITY TO GO TO PLYMOUTH AND HAVRE by French steamer "MACORIS" leaving Fort de France (Martinique) on August 25 next. Passengers will leave San Juan on August 18 on the steamer "SAINT RAPHAEL" and will transfer to the 'MACORIS' in Fort de France / For further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. AGENTS SAN JUAN TEL. 257 TANCA-TETUAN.
The auction of the aqueduct will take place next Wednesday.
SECOND ATTEMPT TO OBTAIN REASONABLE PROPOSALS TO SUPPLY A SUFFICIENT QUANTITY OF WATER TO THE POPULATION The new auction of the San Juan aqueduct will be opened on Wednesday and will take place at the Mayor's Office. It will be several days before the name of the beneficiary firm will be announced. This is the second time that an auction has been held to provide San Juan with a new aqueduct for which municipal bonds were sold in New York in June of this year. The proposals announced in December of last year were too high, and after several weeks of discussions, a new auction was authorized. The new aqueduct is expected to cost about $2,000,000. Although artesian wells are helping the water supply, the shortage of water is becoming more acute. THE SAN JUAN MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION IN ITS DESIRE TO CONJURE THE WATER CRISIS, DISCOVERS WATER SPRINGS IN HATO BEY BUT THESE DO NOT PROVIDE ENOUGH WATER, HAVE SAID DON RAFAEL DIEZ DE ANDINO Yesterday we were informed that in a farm owned by Don Deogracias Viera, located in Hato Rey, three ! We contacted the Mayor Rafael Diez de Andino who told us that the news was true, that three springs had been discovered and he had ordered the municipal engineers to go to the land and make the necessary investigations in relation to the important discovery. Mr. Diez de Andino continued; informing us that after several [ experiments carried out by the engineers they have rendered a report stating that the three springs cannot be used because they do not have a sufficient flow of water to meet the needs required for the water supply that must be provided to the population. Our informant also told us that the municipal authorities had already reached an agreement with the Vannina Canal to drive water tanker trains from Guay nabo to Río Piedras. We can do nothing more, our efforts are carried out with enthusiasm and with the utmost promptness," the distinguished Public Service Commissioner ended by dictating to us.