■ / ▼.wqgsmJ 1 wL aJ W w
tested 1.5," * - ( """
| A PAGS. 3 CIS. ||) asstiarj
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
- ANNUAL V - - -
11 - "i SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO [
--a - - - - - of LU. severe in this month (a appeal of the injunction against the creation of a tobacco agenda in N. Y.
The War Department, in defense of the Island Government, will contend that the law is not unconstitutional - The present term of the U.S. Supreme Court will hear the case of the appeal of Sen, as treasurer of Puerto Rico against the final decision of the United States District Court in Puerto Rico, granting a permanent injunction against the Government of the island in requiring a special bond or seal on Puerto Rican tobacco or tobacco products, pursuant to a law passed in May 13, 1921. The aforesaid law authorized the Treasurer of Puerto Rico to establish in New York City an agency, using for such purpose the services of a tobacco expert of recognized skill and expertise, for the purpose of developing an intensive advertising and propaganda campaign in the markets of the United States, in order to make widely known the seal of guarantee authorized by the law, using for such purpose film tapes, advertisements, circulars, etc.; for such purpose.(2) to watch against fraud or adulteration of Puerto Rican tobacco, and (3) to establish relations between the producers of Puerto Rican tobacco and tobacco associations with American purchasers. The Agent under the Act would receive a salary of 3*000 per annum. I obtained "£ "injtWtion" alleging that the law authorizing the guarantee stamp was null and void and contrary to the Organic Law of Puerto Rico in that it covers the two purposes of protecting Puerto Rico tobacco against suspected frauds by means of a system of inspoccidny while at the same time allying a fund of 3100.000 a year for a very different purpose, the advertisement campaign through the New York agency. The War Department, acting in defense of the Government of Puer to Rico, will contend before the said Court that the said law is not both a tobacco and tobacco products tax law and an inspection law, and is not, therefore, contrary to the Organic Act of Puerto Rico. We provide 24 hours service during the day on the highway or anywhere necessary, up to Rio Piedras. Your rubber band will be changed and your tube fixed for $1.00. New tires or tubes delivered at current prices and mounted for free. Phone 898 Santurce COCHRAN'S TIRE SERVICE .station Step 15 Santurce PMa Information regarding our Contract plan. ' ■■- ■ 1 ■■■■■ - HORSES: I wish to purchase twelve horses from five to seven years old, sets quartee and a half approximatey * ?* retrote and over-step, strong patriaCommuniqúese indicating pre- . cipoon E. J. M. o'" EL MUNDO fahrt. -ij r .
1 ■'""t! -■ . . . . - . zzzz-¿ fb£ A A W I ■ ■ ■ II |Ukl Inra Iflli I SI IMO 1E ■ ■ I AlnAvvIvliLd VL DnVnUHnl I 1 ; UrW "Kinn ACTIinBE 6 UNTIL 20 I ■ - ÚCnT SATURDAY OC UBR ■ I STOP ay 2 between the library and the capitol I I I OcotOTOT. OTf-cMculo.tr.idOT d. Coot, Htand and P.IÍOTÜ. I I I Us "*dwm "Hiw PATA ¡OTgo. d. MMIity should dlri- I I I gfrWjí OfrWbrrE sn theU Library grounds. I . ruuaiLi iDlir ' I
i ni = r ■- ¡i, xiii .i r- . i 'V I t "bra "ry SI. l "t". m tha Poa" Ortaa aé "éa taam Porta "l">, <T "itad Mete* <rf Amorto"' n4" taa AM of word" S. 1ST" | J - "t ' ' ' 1 1 1 '
Republican leader Don Oscar Guerrero was assuring us yesterday that the Republican party would never accede to the Governor's claims that they would
It is becoming increasingly evident that the attitude of the Republican commissioners who are to go to Washington will not be darting and dtfnida Yesterday afternoon we had the pleasure of talking at length with our particular friend Oscar Guerrero, a prominent leader of the Republican party who until recently held a prominent position in that party as a member of the Territorial Committee. Our first question to the leader of the Republican stronghold of Barros was whether he had any knowledge of the interview that the President of the Party, Don José Tons ficto was said to have held with Governor Towner in Los Baños de Coamo. I cannot assure you anything in that respect," said Mr. Guerrero, with a significant smile, "but what I can assure you is that Governor Towner will not get what I pretend. And what does Governor Towner want from you Republicans?" we asked him. "Well, almost nothing," he answered us on the spot, "that we should rectify the concept we have of him and endorse his administration. ' ' Senior Guerrero did not tell us in what form the Governor had expressed this desire, nor by what means he had availed himself to make the Republicans understand this desire of yours that the Republicans open wide the doors of their kingdom to him; but it is certain that these statements reminded us of the interview recently held with the Chief Executive by the Republican leader, member of the Territorial Committee, Don Boberto H. Todd, and at which he was interviewed by the Governor. Todd, and which interview has been given no little importance, and it is said that in it mutual explanations were exchanged with respect to the frictions that have occurred between the Executive and the Republican Party and there was even someone who informed us that in it they discussed the possibility of arranging an interview with Mr. Tons Soto and the Chief of the Executive. The manifestations of Mr. Guerrero, despite having made us realize that he did not know the details of the interview held between Mr. Todd and the Governor, made us remember it because it occurred to us to think that perhaps that had been the only opportunity in which the Governor had been able, being a politician of responsibility and influence in his Party as is Mr. Todd, to express his wishes for the Republicans to put aside their attitude of hostility against the present island administration. ! (Continued on page *.) "FLYOSAN" HAS ALREADY ARRIVED. There is enough in stock to kill all the flies and mosquitoes left on the island. A can of the liquid "FLYOSAN" ' with its powder for one Dollar. For sale in Pharmacies, Grocery Stores and Hardware Stores. Help to exterminate the vermin. Advt. in in 111 Dr. S. M. Haley OSTEOPATH OT. I ■■■■ ' i.
NUMBER 1428
COMPLETE DETMlfS OF 11 EXCURSION i STO. IdAIAHD" IN THE M CATIBff'
"If the Trolley Company n< supplies the neésary electric current, I assure the people of San Ji|n q. will have abundant supply of qjpia while the new <ueduct is being built" Remarks of the commissioner of Public Service, Mr. Diez de Andino at a meeting held yesterday in his office.
Yesterday, at 1 P. M., arrived in San Juan the steamer "'Catherine", of the "Bull Insular Line Inc.", in which, as our readers will know, were returning from Santo Domingo the distinguished Puerto Rican excursionists invited by the Chief of the mentioned shipping company, Mr. Miguel Such, who visited that sister Antille, where they spent hours of true solace and recreation, judging by the pleasant impressions that our comrade Augusto Pietri, who had the happiness of being one of the travelers, brings back from there. With this trip the "Catherine" inaugurates a new service of passengers, general cargo and correspondence between the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico, which, given the magnificent bonds sold in Washington on Tuesday for the value of nn tallón de.ddaiu" fifi* to build roads and bridges on the island It is expected that before next December the bonds will have been sold to cover the official borrowing of six million According to wire reports received in this city, on Tuesday bonds worth one million dollars were sold in Washington for roads and bridges authorized by the laws of 1921. At present there are pending realization the 3975,000 for Isabela irrigation and the six milliona recently approved by the last togislature. All the documentation for these two loans is already in Washington, and it is expected that before December they will have been sold. I BAGAN TAXPAYERS We understand that the Treasury Department is making great efforts to collect contributions and that the pers}ect on the success of this work is splendid. The San Juan collector's office is working day and night, and the personnel in that office has been reinforced due to overwork. Nothing else is to be expected from the Treasury Department, since the twelve million loan must be covered, which can be done as long as said agency moves actively and energetically as it has been doing. THE BOARD OF REVIEW AND EQUALIZATION IS WORKING AÓTÍVELY The Board of Review and Equalization (Continued on page 6) is also working on its water supply. The other public improvements are all coming to an end. RJ "nsanche adotonta quickly' X "a' oóttrtruccién of the new hospital "z already a he' cho. tes servicios munidyaMs vra me- ¡ jorando daily and I "poro with the , firm collaboration that mo ynrtan my compafieoM of office and 1" Junte Lot zangiouszwiaMMk sqw grama ether we take orta old forPLANCHADOR PARM MAQUINA u hosffman San Juan
The Mayor of San Juan sefior Rafael Diez de Andino, in a meeting held yesterday in his offices, gave to the public the information that the provisional aqueduct of Guaynabo, which periodically solves the conflict of the agha in our city, was finished and in conditions to work perfectly, if it has the necessary electric energy to move its machines. The distinguished official also stated that the Porto Rico Railway Light Company had reiterated its promises to provide the indispensable electric power to move the engines. "I have no intention, much less obligation, to enter into a dissension of a political or semi-political nature," Don Manuel V. Domenech told us yesterday. Domenech, when we asked him for certain statements Yesterday one of our editors visited the distinguished gentleman Mr. Manuel V. Domranochf, very competent director of the "Rorto Rico Railway, Light and Power Co." with the purpose of obtaining from him something for EL MUNDO in relation to the statements made by Mr. Valí Spinosa in a local newspaper. I do not think it necessary to make any comment, Mr. Domenech began by saying, about the interview with Mr. Valí Spinosa, published in yesterday's "La Democracia" about interviews held between representatives of the Sugar Producers Association* and "de la OdMgr* ó" Comercio. I have no obligation, far from it, to enter into a political or semi-political discussion. I have not been involved in politics for a long time. I do not allow politics to intervene in the business I am in charge of, nor in the affairs of the associations of which I am a member, either as a director or as one of the officers. Everyone who deals with me knows it. I don't need to tell you about it. However, I will be glad to give Mr. Valí Spinosa any report he may desire, and to which he is entitled as a member of the Chamber of Commerce, when he has time and wishes to stop by my office: I was approached by the Sugar Growers Association to request the Chamber of Commerce's assistance with respect to der "OTttOT m u M". m > 32 INSTRUMENTS SOLD . Not only did the Kohler I A Campbell factory sell thirty-two pianos and au- ! topones last month, but the thirty-two persons who purchased these instruments have written to Mr. T. AgnUari telling him that they were very pleased with them because of their good quality of voices, and that there are 18 instruments left for sale in October at prices o" Iptehta. - II Mee hurry and order d ray to T r Afitinr, San Juan, P. R. I" / Advt
the provisional aqueduct, and that as soon as said corporation did its part, the MunicipfU faithful to its promise, would have water eu sufficient quantity to fill the public needs, in spite of the strike in which the clouds have been declared during' the afio 1923. Mr. Diez de Andino expressed himself in highly commendable terms for the technical direction of the works of the ■ provisional aqueduct, since this work has deserved the preferential attention of the illustrious Mayor since his exaltation to the post he occupies. In relation to the water problem, the Mayor expressed himself in these terms: -"The administration that I lead has had to bear the responsibilities of the previous municipal governments, which have never defied the tremendous growth of the capital of Puerto Bico. Since the old palm groves of Santurce were opened to urbanization and modern life with its demands began to break the urban perimeter of our old walled city, thought should have been given to the construction of tributary aqueducts that would supply the poor flow of the Piedras River, or to the protection of the river by means of shade trees to prevent the evaporation of its waters in the hot season. "A gradual and methodized effort of the republican administrations of San Juan that had studied the urban development of San Juan with its densely populated neighborhoods, would have tended to always increase the proportions of the aqueduct in direct reason of said development, and " these hours one hundred thousand inhabitants would have abundance of the most indispensable liquid for life, without there ever having been the need to appeal to the extraordinary resources of borrowing to conjure up the most pressing of 1 the needs." "If the Trolley Company supplies us with the electric current necessary to move the machinery of the provisional pipeline, I assure the people of San Juan and its neighborhoods that they will have an abundant supply of water while we await the great work of the new aqueduct that will solve this eminent problem once and for all; the Commissioner of Public Works of this Municipality is already on his way to Belgium to inspect the pipes that are being manufactured in the distant Kingdom for our new aqueduct. That work is perhaps the most important of those that my administration has to undertake, and I will not rest for a moment until our capital is on a par with other major cities. Mras "nNNM "ii.r. 25 x 38-50 Superior. RESMA $5.25. REAL HNOS, S. JUAN. i'i ■ihi.i i. " HANDS >To THE POCKETS that the "Bazar ahGW\ fortress 25 has one" suits and hats (almost Igratií There Manolo the one with Xrnvi- ± b °"^ a w ui ' .-éABOGwOwOT 1 Sari' F . J ir i* íAl
DE lí "BDLLJOUR UNE INC." LAV1SITADENUESTR0SPAISAN0S WILL BE PAID FOR BY ANOTHER OF THE AUTHORITIES OF THE REPUBLIC ¡Santo Domingo, land of promise and of beauties and treasures ¡mil!-Manifestations of the Military Governor and President Vicini.
The results obtained in the maiden voyage, there is no doubt that it is the most efficient, comfortable and safest that has ever existed on the aforementioned route. The "Catherine", for its exceptional conditions of modern ship, for the good treatment of the passengers and for the exquisite education of its crew, is called to play an important role between this country and that one, since it solves, definitively, the problem of the transit in so important route, determining this way a greater movement of tourists and passengers, which has to redound necessarily in benefit of both countries, constituting, at the same time, a stamp of honor for the "Bull Insular Line Inc.", and for its MANAGER, Mr. Miguel Such, the initiators. In previous editions we have already dealt in more detail with the excellent conditions of the ship and we will begin with a detailed account of our trip to Santo Domingo, with all the details of the journey and the various entertainments and most pleasant incidents that we were subjected to in that marvelous land of promise, cradle of such illustrious and never well praised men. THE COMMITTEE About 30 people, whose names we have already given to the stamp, made up the expedition. It included politicians, government officials, colonels, photographers, journalists, etc. It was commanded by the Hon. Governor of Puerto Rico, and our good friend Miguel Such, who had the honor, for the first time in the history of Puerto Rico, of becoming another Primo de Rivera y REMY, was the SECOND (IN COMMAND). another Primo de Rivera and REMOVE i from his governmental throne the whole Executive of the island, going to give with him to distant beaches, where the feat of the warrior was very well received by thousands of hearts, and i better baptized with millions of coi pas of champagne. i Oh, the retinue has the pala- ' j bra!..... - THE DEPARTURE j: l | About six P. M. Monday 'i left the "Catherine" from pier No. ' 6. The Pilot, Don Matias Zaragozas was in charge of taking the ship out ■PARK . TODAY SATURDAY TODAY Milton Sills, Lois Wilson. Theodore Roberts, Helen Ferguson en lí PARIENTA POBK (Miss Lula Bett) . Tomorrow Sunday 1 SPECIAL * BERT LYTELL and LUCY COTTON THE SIREN IThe Misleading Ladv)
to the "boca del Morro". The operation turned out to be very happy and interesting. A few of us congregated near the helmsman. The Governor, the Presidents of both Houses, were with us. Don Matías, with his eyes fixed on the bow, was giving orders in English that the helmsman was repeating as he executed them. But how!... Wasn't it Don Matías' turn to take the wheel of the rudder? Someone asked the helmsman, but he remained mute, almost unaware that we were asking him that question, since, as we learned later, it is forbidden for them to open their mouths, except to repeat the Pilot's orders. The steamer was advancing. It had already left "La Puntilla", was taking the Canal, on a majestic route towards the first- -- i 'rás foam that breaks the sea with the line of the historic castle and the mourning island.Ú The excursionists 1 contemplated the coast, waved pa- [ ñuelos, said jokes more or less similar to the taste of the road that 1 opened and worried our feet. Mr. Towner, armed with glasses, admired the beauty of the landscape between the Morro and the Palace. The Governor told us that all along the coasts of Puerto Rico there were more places in which to form bathing resorts than anywhere in the United States. The conversation was generalized on these topics, while the "Catherine" ran out to sea; then the contours of the shore began to recede, and the night, a soft tropical night, deep, put to our ' surroundings the disquieting mystery of its shadows. ON DECK On deck, and lying long and wide on comfortable spread armchairs, the excursionists chat, laugh, sing. The sea and the sky unite them all in the same joy your(Continued on 2nd page.) NO, SM; MANY miM...;.... No, Mr. Pharmacist; thank you very much . ...but I want Oral Forma3onal Pills and nothing else. These Oral Pills have given me good results. I've gained several pounds, I no longer have the nagging headaches, my meals don't go down well, my stiffness is gone. No, Stator; no. I don't want to waste money on Irritating Wines or other inferior medicines; I want the Permanent Pills. When you have them I will come to your Pharmacy: tMM. o Farmanal Pills are sold in all good Pharmacies. Buy them today. Take them and you will feel better. Two after each meal. Advt
< lire miuemung uauy, iHC-Tn-iFTi-r ■ ■,■■■■. a- -t -iitt n.iir-r-- - Saturday :: " ' " o Habra Lonctern, I 'r* A D A r* 17 service ., ' | I kZfM\/%teE>GARACE -CASOUNlUaMvMX)" I 1IDDA1ÚTM VILLA FNBWCE I "IB K A ItI I I J I I <■ /X ra ■
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 6, 1923