ELMffiJNDO
- 14 Pgs. 3 Ctvs. - 8 "m "str" $4.00 One Aho - - _ $7.50
rl4 Pp. 3 Ctvs. - Offices: Salvador Brau Tal, 1222-P. O, Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR V,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published and distributed under permit (Mo. 801) auUori "ed bj the of oetober 0, 1817, on filo at the Post Office of Ran Jnan. Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. S. Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered m second claaa matter, february 21, 1919. at the Post Office at flan Jnan, Porto Bl co. (United States of America) under tno Aet of march 8, 1879.
SATURDAY, JUNE 9, 1923.
NUMBER 1328
The Commissioner of Public Service is very anxious to make urban improvements.
He finds that a certain portion of the public will not cooperate with him in that direction.
If water and cleanliness are desired the' Public first and foremost must do its part. After the great drought come the great downpours. In San Juan it rains at all hours In these last days have fallen al- ' gunos downpours in this city. For the island, according to reports, the rain has been inert in some parts. The streets of San Juan have become, at times, dirty streams, through which more than one small boatload of garbage has come down. Passersby have been seen walking, contracted, on the waterlogged asphalt, under the protective cover of the umbrella, like transhumant beings going somewhere, in order to ask someone for explanations about the inexplicable, the bloody paradox that these weather alternatives mean. And it is that, indeed, while the ground is covered with puddles and the gutters are flooded, the neighborhood feels (we write today, Friday) the need of the precious liquid, due to the fact that the works of the Aqueduct have not been finished, and in such conditions it is not possible to satisfy, as the Administration wishes, the needs of the Hygiene, nor less the imperative demand of many industries. Were it not that the prospect of a fresh bath, judging from what the Mayor said, is near, one would think that the situation was something like the mythological torture of Tantalus. * An Ironic Gentleman The other day, we were ascending the stairs of a building in this city. In front of us was an unknown gentleman, who seemed to us to be a stranger, and who, stopping suddenly halfway up the slope, looked down and exclaimed: -It seems that the servants of this house are not doing their duties well. POSITIVELY Our youngest customers are turning out to be those who have tried the work of others. Send your typewriter to this workshop and you will be convinced. PEDROGO TYPEWRITER SERVICE Christ 5 Tel. 1225 S. J.
And the ironic gentleman seemed to be right. Dirt, garbage, fruit peels, etc., tinged those steps, giving a poor idea of the dwellers of the referred building. Duties and Rights Everyone here shows great interest in claiming rights; but there is hardly anyone who is resigned to the fulfillment of duties, being that, it is said, the difficulty encountered by the municipal authorities, who wish to do everything in their power in favor of the community. As we have seen, the Mayor of San Juan, who is very determined to carry out urban improvement projects, finds that a certain part of the public does not cooperate with him, in spite of his constant efforts in this direction. If water, cleanliness, etc., are desired, the public must do its part and follow the Mayor's initiatives, as required by the circumstances. If "nothing is desired'', resign oneself to enjoy what there is, refraining from making accusations and complaints against alleged incapacities, because where there is no cooperation, only castles in the air can be built. For sale "Teatro Cine Salinas" Good opportunity to earn a lot of money for people in the cinema business. For information and other details about the business, please contact "CINE SALINAS", Box 24, Salinas. Smooth and corrugated iron' Cuban tiles, Spanish playing cards Onions from the Canary Islands UNBEATABLE PRICES FREIRE BROTHERHOOD" SOFT HEAT Do you want to spend the summer-as if you lived in Aibonito? Then stay at the Hotel Ritzy, Advt,
A MOLER CRISTAL 100 suits for children from 3 to 17 years old, I just received, I am liquidating at amazing prices in all colors, in Palm Beach, navy blue for graduation, raincoats and also for this summer in linen and cotton. Come and buy your suit in this house and you will be satisfied with the investment of your money. In suits for young men and gentlemen as the public knows is my specialty. My motto is: modicity in prices. In addition we show you our other novelties in shirts, ties, collars, belts, garters, socks, underwear B. V. D. underwear, caps, hats, socks for children, all of the most refined taste. Visit me at Luna 50. Prop. ANDRES ECHEVARRIA
(ompagnie Generale transantlantique French Steamer 'CARAVELLE' Expected in this port towards the 9th of the current with destination PUERTO PLATA Rep. Dom. CABO HAITIANO, PUERTO PRINCIPE and SANTIAGO DE CUBA. ADMITS cargo and passengers for the above mentioned ports. For further information please contact BB1N BROTHERS INC.-Ageifa SAN JUAN, P. R. TELEF. 257
Sensational statements before the Special Committee of the House (f. investigating the relations of Mr. Coll y Cuchí with the P. R. Photoplay Co.
AMONG OTHER THINGS, IT HAS BEEN SAID THAT MR. COll Y CUCHI ATTENDED A GENERAL MEETING OF THE CORPORATION, ON BEHALF OF A SHAREHOLDER.
The special Committee of the Chamber which investigates the matter of the letter addressed by the Auditor to Mr. Coll y Cuchí, and of the latter's statements, assuring that he has never had relations of any kind with the "Porto Rico Photoplay", as the Treasurer said in the letter he had to address to him, and of which Mr. Coll gave an account in the Chamber, accusing, in passing, Mr. Bonner for an alleged persecution of which he made him the object, has already met twice. Before the Committee appeared the representative Me Jones, author of the motion requesting the constitution of the aforementioned body, as well as Mr. Carlos J. Torres, Mr. Huyke and Mr. Santiago. The Committee was chaired by Representative Acevedo, Mr. Gonzalez Mena, a member of the Committee, requested, among other things, that the hearings to be held by said Commission be of a public nature, and that the interested party be given the opportunity to attend and defend himself. The first to testify was Mr. Huyke, who was warned by the Chairman to confine his statement to whether or not Mr. Coll was a member of the Photoplay. The witness stated that while he (Huyke) belonged to the aforesaid company, Mr. Coll was not even a shareholder, and he did not know whether he had any relations with it afterwards, as he had retired from the corporation a long time ago. Upon questions from the Chairman, he spoke of the books that as Secretary of "Photoplay" he had to deliver to Mr. Enrique Gonzalez, and it seemed to him that Don Eduardo also had relations with that company, since he owned several shares and even had a mortgage on the same. Finally, Mr. Huyke reiterated that he does not know if Coll had relations with ' ' ' Photoplay. Next, Mr. Carlos F. Figueras, a senior employee of the Income Tax Bureau, testified and gave a history of the matter related to the income tax returns of Photoplay and his futile efforts to clean up the corporation's books. He stated that the fact that Mr. Coll had received a letter from the Treasurer 48 hours after he had started his campaign against her in the House was simply a coincidence.
in the Chamber, was simply a coincidence, since the Treasury has no preventive action against Mr. Coll, for the statements he made in Parliament. Mr. Figueras stated that he could assure the Committee that in a matter concerning the liquidation and appointment of a trustee for the Municipality of SAN JU<N WATER SUPPLY SERVICE As of today, and until further notice, the water supply service to San Juan, Puerta de Tierra, ■ Santurce and Río Piedras, will be verified during the following hours: IN THE MORNING Rio Piedras and Santurce from 6 to 8 San Juan and Puerta de Tierra 9 to 11 . IN THE AFTERNOON Rio Piedras and Santurce from 4 to 6 San Juan and Puerta de Tierra 7 to 9 This measure has been adopted because of the lack of water clarity that currently affects the Rio Piedras. The Administration is taking measures so as not to deprive the public of this important service, especially at times when water consumption is strictly necessary. Everyone is requested to cooperate with the Administration by the economical use of water, so that the restrictions of this interruption of service may cause the least possible inconvenience. The general public is hereby notified that the use of water for garden irrigation and for any purpose other than domestic or industrial applications where water is absolutely necessary is strictly prohibited. The police, and every citizen, has the duty to denounce any infringement of this prohibition of imperious necessity. Rafael DIEZ DE ANDINO, Commissioner of Public Service Police and Prisons. Advt
In the case of said company, seen before Judge Rodriguez Serra, Mr. Coll Cuchi was listed as attorney for Don Enrique Gonzalez, one of the main officers and major shareholder of the "Photoplay", who at the same time was the plaintiff. Furthermore, according to the witness, Mrs. Joaquina Bchenique, wife of Mr. Gonzalez, was the owner, at that date, of twenty shares of said company, and Mr. Coll Cuchí had appeared at a general meeting of said company, representing said lady. He added the ; witness that in the Court of the Second District, where the case of I which has already been spoken of was presented, appeared Mr. Coll Cuchí as attorney for the plaintiff, sefior González, one of the i directors of the Company and also as attorney for another of the plaintiffs| d before appears sefior F. Geigel; that a Trustee was appointed by the Court, Mr. Florentino Miranda, and that the Trustee's attorney was Mr. Cruzado Silva, partner of Mr. Coll Cuchí, for all of which, the witness continued, it was logical to suppose that Mr. Coll Cuchí necessarily had some relation with the business of the "Pho toplay". The witness further supported his statement by saying that the distributors of the first film made by "Photoplay" in Puerto Rico was the firm of "Coll y Co.", of which Mr. Figueras believed that the representative Coll Cuchí was a member. The Commission, at the request of Mr. González Mena, agreed to meet every day at ten o'clock in the morning, in order to continue the investigation of this case. DON ENRIQUE BOSCH Has arrived in San Juan, coming from New York and other towns in the United States, where he was making large purchases for his elegant and very busy establishment "La ' Hormiga de Oro", the very cultured and esteemed young Don Enrique Bosch, of high commerce in this plaza, and manager of the reputable firm "Bosch Febles & Co." Mr. Bosch brings true preciousness for the coming summer season. Receive our most cordial greetings from the most esteemed gentleman.
THEATER MUNICIPALI TODAY SATURDAY, JUNE 9, AT 8:30 P.M. SIXTH FESTIVAL SALE FUNCTION The beautiful Opera in three acts by Maestro PUCCINI will be performed Starring the Eminent artist-OLGA CARRARA with the assistance of the famous artists: Com. JOSE PALET. Cav. EDOARDO FATICANTI TOMORROW SUNDAY: TWO GREAT FUNCTIONS MATiNEE at 3 and 30. BOHEMIA (Reduced Prices). In the evening at 8:30 p.m. SEVENTH FULL SESSION - CARMEN - Great success of the Company.
. ÜL™ HORA On a sightseeing trip and passing through to New York, have visited the City, the Lien well-known French artists, Mile. Sandra Milowanoff, Mr. G. Biscot, Mr? Simon-Girard (D'Artagnan) and Mi. H Herrmann, famous interpreters of the important production "El Hijo del Filibustero", which has just arrived in Puerto Rico, and will begin to be exhibited very soon in our Cinemas. Advt. TO MOLER VIDRIO that "EL BOSQUE DE BOLONIA" will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA in San Juan because of how cheaply it sells and how well stocked it is. Bolívar Pagan -LAWYER- Office: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P. R.
TOSCA
KISSE ?
PACIFIC ARCEME BRAZIL UNE VAPOR AMERICANO "PRESIDENT HAYES" DE 20,600 TONNES Is expected in this port coming from SAN FRANCISCO, Calf, on the 12th of the current and will continue voyage with destination to ' Rio de Janeiro, Buenos Aires and Montevideo, returning to : Take advantage of this opportunity to visit these cities. Cargo and passage is admitted for the above mentioned ports. For further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. Agents: SAN JUAN" P. R. TELEPHONE BUILDING Tel. 257 Tanca-Tetouan.
Secretary Mellon states fear that foreign ships will not stop atP.R.
Spanish ships will eliminate San Juan as a coaling station.
WASHINGTON, June.-A grave menace looms on the horizon of foreign commerce. The coal industry will lose large sums of money, as the United States sells immense quantities of coal to foreign-flagged ships. These evils have been seen by Secretary Mellon, immediately after the Supreme Court pronounced its decision in relation to steamships approaching American beaches with alcoholic beverages on board. The diplomatic representatives of France, England and Spain, as well as of other maritime nations, have pointed out to Mr. Mellon the injury which the decision of the Supreme Court will do to their respective countries. These countries will not only be injured in their interests, but the United States will naturally be injured as well. Mr. Mellon replied that according to his own view he believes that, frankly, the new provision constitutes a serious injury to American commerce. We must now wait for the CongreTOSCA TONIGHT The change in temperature last night made the sympathetic and notable tenor Julian Mario slightly ill. For this reason of force majeure, the Company was forced to suspend the performance of Mephistopheles. For tonight the grandiose opera "Tosca" is announced with the competition of the applauded artists Faticanti, Olga Carrara and Palet, already restored, will be the Mario Cavaradossi who left such a pleasant memory among us in the last season. The great Baritone Faticanti will be the tyrant Baron SCARPIA. Tomorrow Sunday there will be two performances, in the afternoon BOHEMIA, which was such a resounding success on Thursday night, and in the evening, the seventh performance of CARMEN with RHEA TONIOLO in the title role. Needless to say that the Municipal will be full tonight from boat to boat, since the beautiful opera by maestro Puccini is so much loved here. SALE OF A POWER PLANT The Federal Court agreed yesterday to authorize the sale of the "Puerto Real" power plant, in Vieques, for the sum of $850,000.00.
The Federal Court also agreed to legislate in favor of foreign trade. CHANGES IN ITINERARIES Not only does Mr. Mellon expect continental commerce to suffer enormous losses as a result of the law, but he also contemplates changes in itineraries between American and European ports. The Treasury of the United States does not intend to postpone the enforcement and observance of the decision which has been fixed by the Court for the 10th of the present. Mr. Mellon, in studying the situation created by this law, states that this prohibition means that the foreign ships which were in the habit of calling at the ports of Norfolk, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, to obtain the coal necessary for their voyages, will pass by without stopping there and will go to look for coal in other foreign ports. As a result, the coal companies located in those countries will lose a lot of money because they will stop selling the coal they are accustomed to. THE SITUATION IS EVEN MORE SERIOUS. SHIPS WILL AVOID TOUCHING AMERICAN PORTS. Mr. Mellon sees in these ramifications of the three-mile limit law even more serious effects than those described above. The steamers will find it impossible to approach our ports with mixed cargoes of merchandise and liquor. Shipping companies will refuse to bring cargoes to American ports if on the route they have to unload due cargoes. Shipowners are much more interested in picking up goods for other ports. Mr. Mellon believes that no ship will go to pick up cargo left by another steamer at such and such a port, so that the first one may continue its route to its destination. In addition to the strong protests made by representatives of numerous European countries, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands have also raised their complaints, on the ground that the enforcement of the law means ruin to coal sales. (From the "Journal of Commerce.")
BIG RACES TOMORROW AT THE Hippodrome of Santurce 7 IMPORTANT RACES 7 Splendid gift of a $2,200.00 "KISSEL" automobile, to the one who manages to take the Pool alone. TO THE RACES TOMORROW AT THE Hippodrome of Santurce See the Program on page 6a.
PORTLAND CEMENT "CABALLITO" has arrived directly from the factory in Denmark on the Norwegian steamship ''ERATO'*.
Big reduction in the PRICE for delivery from the Dock during the desc&rgs sues. FROM L VILLAMIL & CO. TELEPHONE 522.-MARINA, SAN JUAN.