THE BACKGROUND
1 Q PAGES. 3 CTS 10 gSMzxxftS
1 Q PAGS. 3 CTS. I jK Rivo Office ■ Illattrado" Bldg. 1 vJ 1M1 - - "<"-**
MORNING DAILY.
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
...... n.ie-n-r/s ñiÁñ Pablúhwl and di.tribuUd "ndw p "nü" (So. 801) h, th. "rf ortobw ". W17. oníH rt th.Po.l Of fie. rt SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO 8*n Juan. Porto Rieo, By order of th* Prwidwt, A. 8. Surleoon. PwtaMte Gmsrrt. BnUrtd M Meond olaM - I fahmarr 11, ill®, at tba Port OfSea at Saa Jaaa, Porto Rieo. (United Stat- of Aiaarloa) andar Vw Art rt March ". 18T®
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 1, 1923
NUMBER 1476
YEAR V
A meeting for the purpose of organizing the Puerto Rican Executive Committee of the Harding Memorial Association will be held at the fortress next Tuesday.
Governor Towner has been named honorary chairman and Hon. Emilia del Toro active chairman of said Committee.
Chief Justice gr. Emilio del Toro sends us the following notes on the "Harding Memorial Association" requesting at the same time the cooperation of the press for the campaign to be made. in Puerto Bico. Needless to say that the Executive Committee of said Association in Tuerto Rico can count on our firm cooperation, in order to help the success of that campaign in the island. San Juan, P. R-,_ , November 30, 1923. 6r. Editor, EL MUNDO, San Juan, P. K. My dear Editor:- Enclosed I send you some notes on the "Harding Memorial Association' '. I have been appointed Chairman of the Island Committee and am doing my best to make the campaign a success in Puerto Rico. I have always had faith in this kind of movement which when well and nobly conducted leaves a pleasant impression on the soul. However, to a great extent the success will depend on the cooperation of the press. I am sure that you will not deny me that of your newspaper. I remember with gratitude the facilities afforded me when I took an active part in the Red Cross campaigns. As then my purpose now is to send you daily, if possible, a few notes and ask you to publish them in the best place you can arrange for them. If in addition from time to time the paper would write something original, we would then obtain the most that can be desired. I hope to collect the Puerto Rican newspapers during the campaign in order to send them to the Central Committee in Washington who will surely agree to have them preserved in one of the monuments that will be erected. Sincerely yours, Emilio del TORO.
HARDING MEMORIAL ASSOCIATION "Immediately after the death of President Harding, President Coolidge, members of his Cabinet and other prominent citizens agreed to incorporate an association called '.'THE HARDING MEMORIAL ASSOCIATION'' whose purposes are: (A) -To erect and maintain in perpetuity, at Marion, Ohio, a mausoleum in which shall be placed the remains of the late President Harding and of Florence Kling Harding, his widow, when she shall have passed away; and to own in perpetuity, by grant, donation or purchase, such land as may be necessary to place said mausoleum and to open roads and establish squares and parks for the purpose of beautifying and improving it in a suitable manner. (B)-To acquire the home of the late Warren Gamaliel Harding, on Mt. Vernon, in the city of Marion, Ohio, and such other property as may be deemed necessary, to be converted into a temple where all personal articles, books, speeches, mementos and effects belonging to the late President of the United States may be preserved as a loving tribute to his memory, and where all people may go for inspiration; (C) To found and endow a Chair of Diplomacy and Fruitions of Government named for Warren Gamaliel Hard ing, in connection with one of the existing Universities. The Association has designated the week beginning Sunday, the ninth of December present to be observed throughout the nation as "Harding Week." Puerto Rico will take an active part in the movement. Governor Towner has been appointed Honorary Chairman and Chief Justice Emilio del Toro, President ac(Continued on p. 8.)
' KOHLER & CAMPBELL PIANOS AND AUTOPIAMOS More than 75 instruments sold between last September, October and November indicate that they are the most favored by the public of Puerto Rico, for their resistance in these climates, great sonority and good quality of their voices. Since Columbus discovered this island there has been no factory that has sold so many instruments here in three months and only the same factory KOHLER & CAMPBELL was able to sell 160 instruments in 1915, having increased its prestige in Puerto Rico from then to today. Order in time your Piano or Autopiano for next Christmas from T. Aguilar, San Juan, P. R.
HOLSTEIN BULLSHITTS from two to six months born in Puerto Rico. For sale at reasonable prices. FAJARDO SUCAR COMPANY
Cafetín and fonda can not be served at the stop and 2 , Highway No. 77.
GREAT EXCURSION TO VENEZUELA BY STEAMER "CARACAS" DEC. 21, NEXT f * ; As usual there will* be a CHRISTMAS excursion to Curaçao and Venezuelan ports. Interested persons should communicate with this Agency as soon as possible, as we have to sum up on December 7 the cabins we can arrange. L THE RED "D" LINE OF STEAMSHIPS, LEFT NEPHEWS & CO*. Agents. >c San Juan, Puerto Rico; - "
Of how our news transmitted by radio from here, is published by the newspapers of Cuba.
What the "P. R. Radio Corporation" of San Juan - Its administrator, the first amateur of which is Mr. Joaquín Agusty, cooperating as always in all the activities of the "P. R. Radio Corporation".
Cooperating as always in all the works that ennoble this land, we have seen with pleasure and satisfaction the work of the Radio Corporation of P. R. when installing more than a year ago its radiotelephonic station WKAQ in this city. This is the last word in science and it is due to their efforts that Puerto Rico is known throughout America. This radio station, the first and only one in Puerto Rico and in spite of not having had the due cooperation from the Puerto Ricans, we do not know for what reason, has gone ahead giving its regular concerts three times a week, and we have gladly supplied regularly our last minute cab es to be transmitted for the benefit of our readers on the island, j Lately the station has received hundreds of letters from Cuba and among them, one from Mr. Taboada, administrator of the newspaper "El Fénix" of Sancti-Spi-ritus, including copies of this newspaper where our cables transmitted by station WKAQ are published. Mr. José D. Taboa-¡ da must be a great Radio enthusiast like Mr. J. Agusty, Adminis- ¡ trader and announcer of the station and the first radio amateur in Puerto Pico, to whom we owe this information. For all the mail arriving on this island, the station receives hundreds of letters from everywhere from California to New York and from Canada to Mexico. Cuba holds the record among Latin American countries, and has just received by the last mail a letter from Ayrshire. Scotland, in Europe where Mr. Alexander Thom with a two bulb receiving set heard WKAQ on the morning of Sept. 7 from 1.12 to 2.28 A. M. Greenwich time, Greenwich time. M. Greenwich time, the concert broadcast by the station of this i city on Tuesday, Sept. 6 from 9 to 10.30 P. M. This establishes ; a record of more than 4000 miles and an honor for Puerto Rico to possess a modern Radio station, thanks to the International Telephone & Telegraph Corporation of New York and its affiliationOLIMPO TODAY Saturday, Die. 1 TODAY Premiere of the Super production WOMAN CARE FOR YOUR HOME ♦ -TOMORROW- HAROLD LLOYD -in LUOUITAS SIN PANTALONES 25 and 35c. Fiestas in Guayanilla Great Patron and Popular festivities in Guayanilla. From the first to the ninth of December. Sections of the public square are rented for the installation of the diverse spectacles. - Advt. Dr. S. M. Haley Has moved his offices to the new building of "Puerto Rico Ilustrado Inc." corner San José and Tetuán. 4th. floor.
The Radio Corporation of Puerto Rico. Already our citizens see all that can be seen from those beautiful towers that rise above and beside the telephone building, and we should not take for granted Agusty's efforts to make "the Island of Enchantment" known throughout the world. Our intellectuals have by means of this station the means to reach their works to infinity, and there is no more effective medium today that can supplant the Radio in the matter of information. All the letters which we have seen at the station and of which there is an arI chivo of thousands of them say in con- ! junto that the Puerto Rico station is heard clear and perfect even many veI ces above all annoyances and inclement weather. The station's equipment is the same as that of its sister radio station in Havana and with only 500 watts of power it has carried the voice and music of Puerto Rico thousands of miles to Vancouver, Prince Edward Islands, Mexico, Cuba, Scotland and God knows where else. I EL MUNDO is pleased to publish these lines and give unto Caesar what is Caesar's.. We will continue to supply breaking news wires not only for the benefit of our readers in Puerto Rico, but for all Puerto Rican listeners in America, In Puerto Rico we have looked upon the Radio as a simple toy and it is not so. It is no longer so, in fact, it never was. The day we have a radio receiver in every home, we will have advanced 20 years in instruction in all aspects of life, we will have our own opinion and conscience of our actions. If we have a station which we can use for our own beneContinued on page 8) * , I The Insular Dock Company General Meeting of Shareholders. At two o'clock in the afternoon of Monday, the 31st day of the current month, and at the registered office of the Company, located on the first floor of Pier No. 2, the General Meeting of Shareholders of "The Insular Dock Company" will be held, in compliance with the provisions of Article I of the Bylaws of said Corporation. Which is hereby made public by means of this announcement for the knowledge of those interested.San Juan, P. R., December 1, 1923. For the Board of Directors, FEDERICO VALL-SPINOSA Secretary accid. Advt. FOR SALE at reasonable prices. Holstein Calves Born in Pto. Rico two or six months old. FAJARDO SUGAR COMPANY Today Saturday the "Bazar Ahorro", Fortaleza 25 has a bargain that no one can match: suits, hats and shirts at rock-bottom prices, Tel. 1579. i tub "■■■■iiii mi n im*
C 1 ADAPT PERMANENT SERVICE kl AVXIL GARAGE - GASOLINE - LAUNDRY BRANDI V, , L ¿ A .- p p°" r ce
WITH IODO RESPECT....
In connection with the order of the Judge of the District Court, Second Section, directing the Hon. Prosecutor to conduct an investigation on the occasion of the article published yesterday in EL MUNDO censuring the game of "pool" at the racetracks, we wish to state the following: In said article, as can clearly be seen, we did not refer, nor was that our intention, to the Hon. District Court which has under its administration the Quintana Racing Park where the races were held on Thursday that gave rise to our article of yesterday. In saying that at said racetrack "acts are being committed which result in the public losing their money through the bad faith of those in charge of making it a decent sport and not a cry of speculation and business" we meant by this those who continually make the most outrageous combinations in order that the result of the races may be favorable to one or two determined persons.Long before the Hato Bey Hippodrome was placed in the hands of a trustee, we began our campaign against the growing vice of "pooling" and against the immoralities to which this game lends itself to defraud the majority of the public who play their money in the best good faith. We understand that in the outcome of the races the trustee appointed by the Hon. District Court does not intervene at all, but the jockeys, horse owners and persons who play combinations in the pool, and therefore we did not hesitate to censure in our article of yesterday the scandals that the intervention of these persons caused in Thursday's races, as on so many other occasions continuously denounced by us since we began our campaign, which has been received with applause by the public. We are confident that we are right in this case, and that this will be established when the occasion arises. GENERAL PRIMO DE RL VERA WILL BE GIVEN IN BARCELONA THE SWORD THAT GENERAL PAVIA RECEIVED IN 1874 BARCELONA, Nov. 30 (United Press)-On his arrival in this city, and as a tribute of admiration and affection, General Primo de Rivera will be presented, at a grand reception to be held in the City Hall of this city, with the sword of General Pavia. i 1 ' Said sword was given to General Pavia in commemoration of the celebrated coup d'etat of 1874. PARK TODAY SATURDAY TODAY SPECIAL ' SPECIAL CLAIRE ADAMS in LOS OUE GASTAN - (The Spenders) Tomorrow Sunday BARBARA LAPLANTE in MALA SUERTE Comedy in 6 acts Billiards and accessories D ELMENDORF* TETUAN9 p San Juan, P.R. Bolívar Pagán -LAWYER- Office: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P. R. F. Soto Gras ;; " Participates "U return from " -- United States. " . < - - - - - - - - ♦ -S--O.
The National Committee to discern the American Peace Prize entrusts "El Mundo" with a pa- I triotic task I
I t is the duty of Puerto Ricans to express freely their opinion concerning the victorious plan, by means of a coupon to be published in this newspaper.
The following is a letter from the American Peace Award entrusting us with the national plebiscite to be held next January to ascertain public opinion regarding the plan selected by the Jury that will act in the national contest for the presentation of a plan by which the United States can cooperate with the other nations of the world in avoiding future wars. The importance of such a task can be judged by the mere fact that the American Peace Award Committee has selected the most important newspapers in the United States, including the World, the Tribune and the New York Times, to publicize the winning plan and to make public the ballot on which each citizen of the United States, including Puerto Rico, will express his or her individual opinion regarding the winning plan. As our readers are aware, the prize offered to the best candidate for the goodwill of the people of the United States, I will receive a $100,000 award from Mr. Edward W. Bok. The American Peace Award Committee, which gives us the charge of the plebiscite in Puerto Rico, is composed as follows; John W. Davis, Learned Hand; William H. Johnson; Esther Everett Lape; Nathan L. Miller; Mrs. Gifford Pinchot; Mrs. Ogdei Reid; Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt; Hen ry L. Stimson; Melville Stone; Mrs. Frank A. Vanderlip; and Cornelius N. Bliss Jr., Treasurer. The Qualifying Jury is composed as follows: James Guthrie Harboard; Edward M. House; Ellen F. Pendleton; Roscoe Pound; Elihu Boot; William Allen White; and Brand Whitlock. New York, Nov. 16, 1923. Dear Mr. Editor: Our committee wishes to commend to THE WORLD the national plebiscite to be held next January on what is to be the plan selected Dr. S. M. Haley OSTEOPATA
- Jí'JS by the Jury of the American Peace Prize, created by Edward W. Bok and offering $100,000 for the "best feasible plan by which the United States can cooperate with other nations toward the prevention of wars." We believe that you will have time, not only in the month of January but also between now and January, to draw the attention of your readers to the opportunity which this plebiscite offers to all citizens of this country to express their opinion as to what the relations of the United States should be with the rest of the world. The contest, as you know, closed last November 15. We understand that the Jury will have selected the best entries by January 1. Immediately after that date, the winning plan will be submitted to the widest possible public for study and voting .on .the .publication date a large number of the nation's leading newspapers, including the "New York Times," the "New York Tribune" and the "New York World," will publish alongside the text of the winning plan a ballot containing space for the signer's name and address, a statement ' as to whether he or she is nu vo(Continued on p. Buenahora Bros. & Company WHOLESALE DEALERS AND IMPORTERS P.O. Box 823 Ponce, P. R. Immediate need for salesman skilled in dry goods and novelties to go out to the Island. Good opportunity for young man with aspirations. Write or come personally.
ANNIVERSARY . "i -ofEl Mundo Elegante This great establishment celebrates its first anniversary of its founding with great discounts and gifts from December 1 to January 6. STYLISH CLOTHES. 1924 just received Fortaleza corner San Justo. . The Clothing house of 'distinction. f - ■ ; . ' -, -r - - - ,■ . ", Smoke Good and Cheap ; Melachrino Cigarettes 10 x 20c. ■ Johnnie Walker 20 x 25c. ■ " Heibert Tareyton 20 x 20c. ■ Champagne Cocktail 20 x 15c. :