ELMtNDO
- 12 Pg. 3 Civs. - Semester $4.00 One Year .... $7.50
~~ 12 Paga. 3 Ctvs. - Offices: Salvador Brau 81 Tel. 1222-P. O. Box 345
DAILY IN THE MORNING,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR V.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published end dutributed under permit (Mo. 801) >n thoriisM[ the Art of October 8. 1917. on file st the Poet Offlce of Men Jnen. Porto Rico. By order of the Prooident. A 8 b5" s . Poetmaeter General. Entered m second daaa matter. febmarr 21. 191", at the Poet Office at Han Juan, Porto United Htatae of America) under the Act of march S. 1879
SATURDAY, APRIL 14, 1923.
NUMBER 1280.
Telephone company authorized to make a bond issue.
Yesterday the Public Service Commission met in closed session, for the purpose of considering an application made by the "Porto Rico Telephone' Co.*', in the sense that it be authorized to make a bond issue at par in the amount of $600,000.00, On behalf of the petitioner appeared Ledo. Hartzell, who alleged that the Company has an authorized capital of $1,200,000,000.00, of which only half has been used, or $600,000.00 as a result of its incorporation, the other half being in the possession of the Company, but without having been used in any way. Mr. Hartzell further alleged that the Company has repeatedly tried to obtain a market for the sale of said bonds, in order to obtain a market for them. He further alleged that the Company had repeatedly tried to obtain a market for the sale of said bonds, for the purpose of paying its obligations and introducing reforms in its business; but that, owing to the requirements of the Act, that said bonds would not be issued or surrendered under other than par conditions, at least, the petitioner had retained them in its possession, until the most advantageous issue and sale of the same could be obtained, which (Continued on page 6) What occurred at Pier No. 2 MANIFESTATIONS OF SURPRISE AND ADMIRATION . Last tartíu ai passing by the pier No. 2 we observed that a crowd was crowded in front of this pier, and curious that nomos, we made our way through the crowd and there we found the friend Panzandi, the true representative of motoring in Porto Rico, directing the operations of unpacking, je and preparation of four precious cars ESSEX. When each box was opened, exposing to the viewers a different model, there was an explosion of admiration, in a harmonious murmur. In unison, everyone said, how beautiful, how elegant and fine it is! I will make, said one enthusiast, any sacrifice to buy Chago one of those cars. Another said; I prefer a closed one, like that one, to protect me from dust and rain; and finally a clever one made his voice resound, and said I want an elegant car for its simplicity, comfortable and well reputed, like the Hudson or the Essex, I don't like many adorers or lanterns. We, after contemplating such beautiful cars, turned our eyes to Panzardi, attracted by his skillful manipulations in the preparation of the cars, and, frankly, it is not necessary to speak of the mastery with which Ohago directed the operations and with the meticulousness with which he took care of every detail that was necessary. We approached him to ask him to tell us why he cared about such insignificant details, and with his usual kindness he said: "My friend, on these apparently insignificant details depends greatly the duration and efficient operation of the car, and they are details that if the car is observed when it is taken out of the box can be forgotten. Then he entered into other considerations that came to conform us to the very just reputation that friend Panzardi enjoys, for his vast knowledge of the automobile industry. It was almost eight o'clock when we left the dock, pleased and satisfied to see our friend Panzardi at work again. AD.V.T.
"TEATRO OLIMPO" SATURDAY 14th AND SUNDAY 15th APRIL 1923 Two last and great farewell performances of the gentle Spanish tonadillera PAQUITA ESCRIBANO with two splendid couplet programs and the extraordinary films - Saturday: "EL PRINCIPE Y EL MENDIGO" by TIBI LUBIN Sunday: "LAS URRACAS" by JUSTINE JOHNSTONE. PRICE: 50 CTVS. BUTCHER. -
PARK TODAY SATURDAY TODAY BIG PREMIERE Milton Sills, Cleo Ridgely and Jack Mulhall in "THE FORGOTTEN LAW" Sunday: "THE IMMORTAL WOMAN" (Always the Woman) ■: ■■ -".. - . - ..e -
ENGLAND ALSO INTENDS TO PROTEST AGAINST THE AGREEMENT LONDON, April 18- It is officially reported that the Government will raise a protest to the nationalist government of Angora, if the concessions" to the Chester almiivnte comprise the Mosul oilfields, It is possible that the president of the British lv relegation, at the Lausanne conference, will join the French protest. . > j ... -
Claire Windsor in the portentous drama extraordinaire 'Two Wives of Wit, (TToo Wise Wives) > Bruno & Vazquez Circuit. 'M.T.C. G.C.
Briefing wrapped up yesterday in the contempt case being heard in federal court.
Judge Odlin reserved ruling until 2 p.m. Tuesday.
The halls and corridors of the Federal Court were very crowded yesterday. There was interest in listening to the defense attorneys and the Prosecutor, in their respective reports. The first to speak was the Prosecutor of the Court, Mr. Ira K. Wells. Wells, who limited himself to sustaining the allegations contained in the indictment, in accordance with the evidence presented and to refuting the testimony given by the witnesses for the defense. The first turn, in the defense of the defendants, was taken by the noted attorney, Ledo. Francis Dexter, defender of the brothers Cayetano and Víctor Coll y Cuchí. Mr. Dexter spoke for about an hour and a half, and it was a unanimous opinion among the other lawyers and the public in general congregated there, that rarely had been heard such a brilliant and detailed report as that of Mr. Dexter. He analyzed with great skill all the evidence presented by the Prosecutor, as well as the testimonies of the witnesses for the prosecution, in order to convince the Court that the evidence was insufficient to find his defendants guilty. Among the points of law raised by Mr. Dexter in his luminous defense, we consider the most interesting the one in which, with citation and collection of jurisprudence, he established the theory that a defendant, once a Grand Jury renders its final verdict and has been arrested and bailed, is free to use the means at his disposal to prepare his defense, since as long as he is not found guilty, he enjoys in his favor the presumption that he is innocent. In the last part of his speech, and when referring to his other defendant, the Ledo. Cayetano Coll y Cuchí, he spoke of the sound and justified intention of his defendant, in bringing to the Prosecutor a statement that he was able to reserve in his possession in order to bring it as evidence on the day of his brother's trial, and thus surprise the Prosecutor of that Court with an unexpected counter-evidence. He gave emphasis to the fact that Lic. Coll y Cuchí had been an upright officer of that Court, during the time he had postulated in it, and recalled the statement of Prosecutor Gay, in which the latter stated that Ledo. Ooll y Cuchí had not asked him to file his brother's case, but had indicated that, if there was no evidence against him, the case should be filed and dismissed. At the end, Mr. Dexter was congratulated by his colleagues. Messrs. Loret and Sweet consumed the first turns in the afternoon session, in defense of Colonel Bennett. Mr. Sweet at the end of his speech, and even though, he said, he was only charged with the defense of Mr. Bennett, made an appeal to the Cor. te in favor of his colleague the Ledo. Cayetano Coll y Cuchí, having laughed that he once had him as an opponent in the electoral lawsuit of Guayama, which lasted three months and where he was able to appreciate the talent and sagacity of Mr. Coll, as well as his great intelligence and courage in the performance of his profession. Mr. Martin spoke in defense of the Chief of the Detective, Mr. Harding, alleging that the order he gave, facilitating the detectives, was a routine order; that he was at that time in a position to leave the office and was in a position to do so.
Martin said that he was in a position to leave the office and that was why he ordered his immediate subordinate to take charge of the matter, advising him to consult first with Colonel El Ledo. Martin finally said that Colonel Bennett and Chief Harding could not be responsible at the same time, and that if Bennett was guilty, Harding was innocent, or vice versa. The Ledo. Francis made a brief speech to lay before the Court the following proposition: ''That at the residence of Dr. Coll y Cuchi, on the seventh day of December, and during the conversation which the latter had with Felix Torres, there was no intimidation, influence, or coercion of the said witness, and that, if this essential fact had not been proved, the crime of contempt could not exist.''* Mr. Francis defended Chief Harding, and Chief Harding, and Chief Harding, as well as Chief Harding, and Mr. Francis, as well as Chief Harding, as well as Chief Harding. Francis defended Chief Harding, and in making this allegation maintained the view that, if there was no such offense on the seventh, whatever occurred prior to that date could not be considered criminal either. (Continued on page 2) Resignations of Department Heads not accepted" The latest impression gathered by our reporters in the official centers, regarding the resignations of the Department Heads, is that the Hon. Governor Towner has not yet accepted them. This news has been fully confirmed yesterday afternoon, on learning that the said resignees met in the Public Service Commission, and acted in the prosecution of an important matter, of which we reported elsewhere in this paper, comd such officials of the Island Government. CHANCELLOR CUNO PRO. NUN TO DELIVER A SPEECH ON MONDAY BERLIN, April 13.-It is announced that Chancellor Cuno is preparing to make a speech on Monday concerning the situation in the Ruhr, and the manner in which Germany would submit to the Allies propositions concerning indemnities. GENERAL HENRYS IN PARIS PARIS, April 13.-General Henrys arrived here this afternoon from Essen.
In the company of the Presidents of both Houses, the Governor visited the prison and the asylum.
As for order, discipline and cleanliness, the impression was excellent.
Yesterday, at three o'clock in the afternoon, the Hon. Governor Towner paid a visit of inspection to the Presidio and the Insane Asylum of this city. The impression made on both establishments by Mr. Towner and his companions, who were the President of the Senate, Mr. Barcelo, the "Speaker" of the Senate, Mr. Barcelo, the "Speaker" of the Senate, Mr. Barcelo, the "President of the Senate," and the "Speaker" of the Senate. Barceló, "Speaker" Guerra, Private Secretary Van Deusen, Attorney General Coats, Mayor Travieso and Mr. Martín Ergui, Chief of the Bureau of Prisons, was, as we were informed last night, excellent as to the order, discipline and cleanliness existing in them IN THE PRESIDIO Accompanied by the Chiefs of the Prison, the visitors made a tour of the prison galleys, and the workshops of the various industries in which the convicts work. They also visited the infirmary, where they were struck by the state of cleanliness that reigns everywhere, and the willingness shown by the heads of the prison to ensure that the establishment is up to the standards required by the circumstances. The French Government is preparing to protest at the Lausanne conference against the agreement signed between Admiral Chester and the Nationalist Government of Angora concerning the intervention of a trust of American capitalists in the construction of iron roads, harbors and other public works in Angora. The French Government considers that the Chester agreement constitutes an open violation of the 1914 treaty. MARSHAL FOCH AND NUMEROUS GENERALS IN CRACOW BERLIN, April 13-- A dispatch from Greiwitz says that Marshal Foch and numerous French Generals arrived in Cracow last night. THE HOUSE OF COMMONWEALTH DECLARES A RECESS UNTIL MONDAY LONDON, April 13.-The House of Commons passed on third reading the bill to reorganize the army and air forces of the country. The House was declared in recess until next Monday.
During the visit, the Governor and his friends, according to our reports, exchanged impressions on the main problem that exists in this institution, which is that the number of inmates is growing somewhat, as there seems to be a fear that as time goes on there will be no capacity to house so many people. Mr. Ergui, the current Chief of Prisons, gave ample details to the visitors about the general conditions of the Presidio. A LAW We understand also that the Legislature, in anticipation of the aforesaid establishment becoming too small for the present needs of the country, voted a Law ordering it to be sold to the highest bidder, and the proceeds of the sale to be used for the construction of new buildings, to be used for the same purpose. This Act-as we were told yesterday by several legislators-was one of the many that were not carried into effect during Mr. Reilly's Administration, so that this apparent deficiency is still unresolved, as was the wish of our legislators. ' t As soon as the automobile carrying Governor Towner and Messrs. Barceló, Félix Córdova Dávila, Miguel Guerra Mondragón and Mr. Van Deusen left in the direction of the Penitenciaría, one of our editors went to the Manicomio, with the purpose of waiting there for the distinguished visitors. At five o'clock Dr. Lippitt arrived and a few minutes later Mr. Towner and his companions, with the exception of the Resident Commissioner, who had to leave at four o'clock for Arecibo. Mr. Lippitt, after introducing the Governor to the Director and other high officials of the Manicomio, led the party to the general offices, showing the Governor a map of the present Manicomio and another of the proposed building. Dr. Goenaga, to whom he translated that the Asylum building and grounds could be sold for a million dollars. Governor Towner replied that if the National Government would buy that land it would be a great thing, since that money could be used for the construction of the new Asylum. Dr. Lippitt, as he showed the spacious apartments to Mr. Towner, praised the hard work done there by Dr. Goenaga, of whom he said that he was a magnificent and proficient official. After this brief dialogue, the Commission passed into the neatly cleaned operating room, and Dr. Goenaga informed Mr. Towner that Dr. Lippitt had there performed a difficult operation with happy success. Ledo. Miguel Guerra Mondragon told one of our Editors that they did not visit that place to reach definite conclusions, but that they would nevertheless study ways of improving these establishments. These two Institutions have lagged behind in the brilliant path of our culture and do not respond to the (Continued on 2nd. page.) SOLD lots in the County in front of the Sea. EARL K. BURTON, INC. Telephone Building. San Juan, P. R. Advt.
Gentlemen's English Pure Yarn Suits Cut and hand made by expert and competent Tailors New fabrics imported directly from England Dampened for more than 48 hours. Special Price *12 and *16 GOZNALEZ PADIN CO., INC. SAN JUAN. PONCE. MAYAGÜEZ.
Puerto Ritg could be converted into a base for the Panama Canal.
So did the airmen who made the reconnoitered San AntonioHAMPTON, ' Ja., April 3.-Six airplanes of the military aeronautics ajjpice lifted off this morning at Langley airfield completing the last leg of their journey from San Antonio to Washington via Puerto Rico. The airmen left San Antonio a year ago and, on different flights, have stopped in three foreign countries: Cuba, Haiti and San Domingo. Captain Lanphier who is in command of the squadron 0onferene ¡ando - with the peri/bdifettes who came out to interview him stressed the importance of the flight, assuring that, from the military point of view, it is of inestimable value, since it has been palpably demonstrated that Puerto Rico* can be chosen as a base for the air forces operating in combination with the American fleet for the defense of the Panama Canal. The airmen will continue their route to Washington without landing, thus fulfilling the plan they had set themselves. A telegram received late yesterday afternoon announces the arrival of the aviators at Bolling Field, where they were greeted by the Minister of War and other high-ranking representatives of the American Army and Navy. THE FLIGHT In boldness, the military aviation service (sets exemplary precedents. In the summer of 1921 General Mitchell, deputy chief of the air service, sent his Martin bombardment planes a hundred miles out to sea from Langley airfield to sink the old German battleship "Ostfriesland". When the ship sank to the bottom of the ocean 21 and a half minutes after the attack began, General Williams, Chief of Staff, exclaimed, "A b&mba has been fired today that will be heard around the world." Thus it was demonstrated that if an enemy squadron were seen approaching the coast, the army aviators would join their navy comrades in an attack from the air. The army aviation service undertook another daring adventure when six planes left Kelly Airfield, San Antonio, on March 3 to fly to San Juan, Puerto Rico, by way of Cuba and Haiti, having to cross three sea lanes. There was another no small risk in the cruise between Port-au-Prince and the city of Santo Domingo, a distance of 190 miles, having to cross so (Continued on 3rd page)
Yesterday, the petition for certiorari against the municipality of San Juan was filed.
Confirming our information of several days ago that a lawsuit against the municipality of San Juan would be filed at any moment, we can say today that on Thursday afternoon a petition for certiorari was filed in the District Court, Ira, by attorneys J. H. Brown and Mestre & Loret, a petition for writ of certiorari, on behalf of the United States Cast Iron Pipe & Foundry Co. and against the Board of Directors of this city, the Aqueduct Pipe Auction Board, the Municipal Secretary, Mr. Bayoyonet, and the Municipality of San Juan, with the purpose that said Court issue a writ of certiorari, to review the acts of the aforementioned entities, relative to the award made to Mr. Eduardo Georgetti of the auction of the pipe for the Aqueduct, the Municipal Secretary, Mr. Bayoyonet, and the Municipality of San Juan, with the purpose that said Court issue a writ of certiorari, to review the acts of the aforementioned entities, relative to the award made to Mr. Eduardo Georgetti of the auction of the pipe for the Aqueduct for the Municipality of San Juan. Eduardo Georgetti of the auction of the pipeline for the San Juan Aqueduct, in order to correct and adjust the same to the Law( especially, mind the resolutions adopted by said Auction Board dated December 23, 1922, December 30, 1922, January 19, 1923* and February 10, 1923. ALLEGATIONS Among the allegations made by (Continued on the 6th page)
Yesterday Don José J. Usera passed away. ' Aygr, in the early hours of the nnchw, 7W'rtwunicaftn'^w~%ehfon l o, from Ponce, the unfortunate news of the death in that city, in the late afternoon, of the illustrious gentleman, Don José J. Usera, one of the men who some years ago came to acquire extraordinary prominence and legitimate popularity, for his vast intelligence, his great civic virtues and the affabilidf(i of his character. Meritorious by all concepts, the illustrious Puerto Rican deceased formed a very significant part in the group of leading men of the country, in the most bitter times of the history of Puerto Rico and in occasions in which the rudeness of the struggle and the combat *demanded of our leaders a character to all test and a steel temper, to be able to overcome the obstacles and to save the difficulties in the request of greater rights and wider liberties. He was Delegate to the House, in different occasions and in his passage by the Insular Parliament he left there a valuable contribution, daughter of his enlightened talent and of his indisputable experience. An exemplary, studious and hardworking gentleman, he was a prominent figure among the Puerto Rican intelligentsia, (Continued on page 2).) SANTURCE AWAITS WITH ENTHUSIASM THE DEBUT OF "PERDITA" AND "YOETA" The news that from next Monday night the renowned artists "Perlita" and "Yoeta" will perform at the "Puerto Rico" cinema, has produced in Saaturce the effect of a cannon shot, because everyone, ladies and gentlemen alike, is preparing to invade the "Puerto Rico?to admire and applaud these two stars, who have given great crowds to an important cinema in San Juan. Many seats have already been requested for the night of the canvas, which will be a night of glory for the "Puerto Rico", because it will be full from boat to boat. Nobody wants to miss the night of the "debut", which will be splendid, as none of the season, which will be the best done so far, not only in San Juan, but in the whole country, Santurce will fill the cinema of Lloverás, who has obtained a great triumph for having managed to hire these two admirable artists. Advt,
Solares y Casa s S, 11 *"* * Piedras. Calle José de Diego 26 will inform or Telephone 36, Río Piedras*.