ELM1NDO
12 Pgs. 3 Ctvs. - Semester $4.00 One Year .... $7.50
- 12 Págs. 3 Ctv". - Offices: Salvador Brau 81 Tsl. 1222-P. O. Box 345
DAILY IN THE MORNING,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
aín 1 *pS^' fi c r ?? Ute u und J er P®™** < No - 801) authorized by th, Ac; of October 6. 191?. on file rt the Port Office of /.hrnílv 91 P 1 o 1 0 R Pr *ident, A. 8. Bur leson, Portmaater General. Entered aa second cías" matter, e rnarv 21. 1919, at th, Pont Office at San Juan, Porto yi co, (United States of America) under the Aet of march 8, 1879.
ANN V.
SATURDAY, APRIL 28, 1923. NUMBER 1302.
After several weeks of 'expedadon the governor's cabinet begins to be formed by elements that have the sanction of the country.
"In spite of everything, political observers believe to discover a certain uneasiness among the collectivities that until recently enjoyed great predicament in the government."
At the üora in which we write this" line" (1 A. M) the politicalaministrative situation, according to 1M latest news that have reached our corccimiento, seems to definitely enter a very interesting period. The Executive, after having been considering candidates' for more than three weeks; after holding countless conferences with all the politicians and legislative officials; after, finally, having heard and weighed what has been said by the parties concerned, has decided to form his Cabinet, it is for him to those elements which, in his judgment, can best perform their" respective offices. The latest news is that Mr. Towner sent *1 Senate the name of Mr. Chardon for Secretary of Agriculture, The public opinion, in view of the names of the remaining possible commissioners, is expectant, waiting for the ministerial question to be cleared up once and for all. The people with whom we have talked about this matter are very optimistic with regard to the, rotivity adopted by the Executive. a Cabinet which by all accounts deserves the general applause of the country. A politician of high stature, a former senator who has done copious work in the Upper House, an impartial political observer, these are the persons who in succession have spoken to us in the belief that, finally, the Governor will appoint a Cabinet which will include elements of the highest significance and worth, which will have the general endorsement of Puerto Rico. As it is seen, our informants have triumphed in their predilections feet as our readers already know. Efteves obtained the unanimous sanction of! country through the Insular Senate, and Chardón, for his relevant conditions of intelligence and industriousness, "A WEEK OF LOVE'' AT THE "PUERTO RICO'' CINEMA'' Since all the most notable films, barely disembarked in San Juan, are exhibited at the "Puerto Rico'' cinema, the splendid photo-drama that has caused a great artistic revolution in the United States, "A Week of Love", will be exhibited tomorrow, Sunday, in that popular cinema of Santurce, where the most numerous and most select elements of such an important neighborhood gather. "A week of love" will leave an indelible memory, not only among the ladies, but also among the gentlemen of Santurce, because it is an affair full of intrigues and emotions, with a denouement that will produce an intense and powerful impression on everyone. The "Puerto Rico" cinema will have one of its monumental exhibitions with this marvelous photo drama, which all the families of Santurce are anxious to see. Advt
ei is expected to be the object of the same honor. While these events are taking place, in the political centers it is said that there exists in the bosom of the re-pi'.blico-socialists, certain agitation of displeasure and consequently there is talk in secret of friction between elements of the same strain, believing some that not much time will pass without public attacks being formulated, related to supposed disloyalties that bax. And it is believed that these fights between certain elements of above have to rpasionar to their respective sympathizers, that eager to externalize if: adhesion towards his friend, will not hide sv-s feelings, nor dissimulate their apparent contrariedades. From the clash of these passions, say political observers, can arise dissidences and detachments that endanger the unity of the Party. It is also true that many repu-bL'co-socialists, whom we have heard speak, fail to understand the motive that can stimulate such contentment and restlessness among members of collectivities that until a few days ago enjoyed such a predicament in the Government. This, in part, is what intrigues and worries the people who are wondering what is going to happen. IN THE HOUSE Yesterday afternoon the House approved Concurrent Resolution No. 3, by Mr. Velilla, to request Congress to include coffee in the new treaty to be concluded with Spain, since it will greatly benefit the interests of the island. Likewise, the draft of deficiencies for six thousand dollars to pay for the expenses incurred in the Executive Mansion, for the purpose of properly fitting out the Governor's quarters, was also approved. Representative Velilla requested and it was approved, the appointment of a committee from the House to attend the agricultural-school exposition to be held in Vega Alta today and tomorrow. Mr. Velilla, Mr. Bahr, Mr. Hernandez, Mr. Fiz and Mr. Fiz were appointed. Bahr, Hernandez, Fiz and Garcia were appointed. The session was adjourned until Monday at eight o'clock in the evening. ITALY TO ISSUE A TAX ROME, April 27 (United Press). The Government proposes to issue a tax to cover public services. There is in project for the construction of several roads and buildings. WASHINGTON, April 27. (United Press). -Mr. Albert D. Lasker, I chairman of the Shipping Board has pre I seated today the resignation to President j Harding to take effect the first ■ of July.
Auction On Iones April 30, 1923 at 2 P. M. at Dock No. 6, 850 sa= eos of cement, 190 sacks of cattle and poultry feed. Reinaldo Vizcarrondo ♦ Almoneden) Public. SE SOLD lots in Condado in front of the Sea. EARL K. BURTON, INC. Telephone Building. í San Juan, P. R.
Bolívar Pagan -LAWYER- Office: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz. P O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P. R. laüñíoñ BARBERIA Moved from Alien 19 to number 13 alien, j'junto a la Escuela "Lincoln" Department iz quierda of the elegant "Ojeda" Building, Allen 13.
Governor Towned yesterday sent to the Senate the appointment of Donj Carlos É. Chardón to the post of Com. of Agriculture and Labor.
Interesting letters addressed by the Governor to Messrs. Feliu and Aboy accepting their respective resignations - The Deputy Commissioner of Agriculture, Mr. Guerrero has already prepared his resignation.
At half past one o'clock yesterday afternoon, the name of Don Carlos E. Chardon was sent to the Senate by Governor Towner, to fill the important position of Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor. Mr. Chardon is the youngest person that has ever been indicated to fill a position in any governor's cabinet. He is a recognized expert in agricultural matters, having graduated with a Master of Agricultural Sciences degree from Cornell University, and is currently an expert in sugarcane diseases at the Río Piedras Experiment Station. At the time he was being indicated for the post of Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, Mr. Chardon was made an admirable proposition to go to occupy a magnificent position in the Central Cambalache. To give an idea of his ability and competence, suffice it to say that when Governor Towner had an interview with him to discuss his appointment and acceptance of the position, the Governor told him that the only objection he had to make to him was that he feared that he would decline to accept the position. It seems that the Governor, in so expressing himself, had in mind that Mr. Chardón's knowledge and capacity offered him a better field of action and future outside the Government.
As for his political affiliation, Mr. Chardon is a Unionist, and his appointment has been generally applauded by the whole community. THE ATTITUDE OF FELIU * . I When we learned that Mr. Chardón's name had been sent for Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, we went to visit the Ledo. Don Leopoldo Feliu, who holds that office at present, and found him arranging his desk and prepared to hand over his office, as soon as his successor so desires ... . After greeting us, Mr. Feliu made the following statements: "As of today, April 27, the Governor has accepted the resignation of the position of Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor that I presented to him upon his arrival on the island. As soon as my successor is appointed and takes office, I will return to my office to attend to my professional affairs and devote myself exclusively to the practice of law and notary public. - I carry with me the fondest memories of the staff who have served the people with me and in a loyal manner since I took charge of this office on June 19 of last year, and to all the employees who have behaved with me in this way I have the most sincere and sincere gratitude.
. behaved with me I have the most sincere gratitude. ' ' He then extended to us, complacently, the letter addressed to him by Governor Tow ner, accepting his resignation, and the terms of which are truly commendatory to the said official. Here is the letter: San Juan, P. R. April 27, 1923. I Hon. Leopoldo Feliú, Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, San Juan, P. E. My dear Mr. Feliú: Your resignation as Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor was duly received. At my request. You have continued to serve in your position until I can consider the appointment of your successor. I am now ready to make that nomination and therefore accept your resignation. Allow me to thank you for the significant services you have rendered while in office. There is no greater service that can be rendered to the people of the island than that of the promotion and development of the conditions of the working masses. To these great interests you have rendered such intelligent service and interest, that you deserve great credit for your work. (Continued on 3rd page)
"LA PARISIEN" We are pleased to inform our friends and the public in general, that having already completed the important alterations that we have introduced to the premises that were prepared for our modern establishment of SHOES AND FOOTWEAR and other effects of HIGH NOVELTIES, "LA PARISIEN", which we have provided with a colossal assortment of fine shoes and fancy stockings, all of rigorous actuality and at prices without possible competition, definitely, next SATURDAY, MAY 5, will be inaugurated this new house. "LA PARISIEN" will be the ideal store, especially for Ladies of good taste and gentlemen who distinguish themselves in good dress, because to the unsurpassed elegance and superior quality of the shoes and stockings of "LA PARISIEN", ' unites the well significant fact of being obtained for much less money than similar articles of other houses, being moreover all authentic, irreproachable < and entirely < NEW! 4 A VISIT TO "LA PARISIEN" WILL BE A DEFINITE CORROBORATION V THE FIRM ' GUARANTEE THAT HERE YOU WILL GET SHOES AND STOCKINGS OF QUALITY AND ' ELEGANCE AT YOUR MINIMUM COST SPECIAL ATTENTION TO THE ORDERS OF THE ISLAND LAKE, WHEAT & CO. S. en C. TELEPHONE 986 - BOX 456 - SALVADOR BRAU 41 - SAN JUAN, P. R. -
SMOKE 'CAROLINA ROYAL
An important judicial combination is under careful consideration to fill the vacant prosecutor's office in this capital city.
Probably next Monday this matter will be definitely settled, the most certain candidates being, Messrs. D. Massari, R. Gomez and B. Guerra-Mondragon
For several days there has existed, among the members of the judiciary, of this capital and of the island, extraordinary uncertainty as to who would be the surest candidate to occupy the office of District Court prosecutor, prii mcr district, of this city, vacant by the resignation of Ledo. ArriUaga, who held it at present. Many were the candidates who were exerting their influences, in order to enter into that combination, and the Courts of the island were making efforts to obtain more promotions, coming to occupy one of the two prosecutor's offices of San Juan. SENSATIONAL DETAILS ABOUT THE NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN GENERAL CASTRO GIRONA AND THE MOROS OF ALHUCEMAS Madrid, April 27 (United Press). The details of the breakdown of negotiations with Ab- ! del Krim are beginning to be known. The Beniurragueles Chiefs met with General Castro Girona, I in a boat, because the Moors refused to hold the interview on land. The Atfcéel Krtor*i5reteiMier¿h arranged an intelligence between the Sul- . tán, Ab del Krim and Spain, it being understood that this nation would protect Al Hoceima as an independent State. General Castro Girona exposed the precise conditions to reach an agreement, being these, the absolute subjugation of the Moors, surrendering the cannons. This was refused by the Beniu1 Traguels and Mocoyas. Among the conditions that Abdel Krim set forth to continue negotiating with Spain was that of not admitting any Spanish officers in his dominions and that the Mehallas be paid for by Spain.
Nothing was certain about this important matter, until yesterday afternoon, when, with great probability of certainty, we were able to gather, in official circles, the news that the following combination was under careful consideration by the Government and Senators: For prosecutor of the District Court of the first district of this city, the Ledo. Domingo Massari, present prosecuting attorney of the Court of the second district. For district court prosecutor, second district of this city, i Ledo. Ricardo Gómez, current prosecutor of the District Court of Humacao. For prosecutor of Humacao, the Ledo. Benjamín Guerra Mondragón. And for Municipal Judge of Cabo Rojo, Ledo. Montalvo Guenard. There are other candidates who aspire, as we said before, to be part of this combination, among them, prosecutors Romani and Acosta and former prosecutor Quiñones. Of course, this combination has not yet been officially accepted as definitive, nor has it been sent to the Senate; but we can be sure that up to now it had every chance of being carried out. U.S. GOVERNMENT REQUESTS HELP FROM ENGLAND Washington, April 27. (United Press)-It has been officially learned that the United States government has again requested diplomatic aid from England to put a stop to the frequent smuggling of alcohol entering American shores. LATEST NEWS Owing to the large number of applications. on Monday, April 30, a new course in BOOKKEEPING will be opened at the highly accredited ROYAL GREGG SCHOOL. Day and evening classes. Course of 6 months. Diploma at the end of the course. Medical prices. A new course in TYPOGRAPHY AND MECHANOGRAPHY will also be opened. For further information, please contact Mrs. MaF.IA T. CAMACHO DE ROBLES. ALLEN 80, SAN JUAN, P. R., TeL 534 green. Advt Opportunity! For Rent the high of the house that occupies "LA MERCEDITA" Own for a clothing workshop or Hotel. They can also be made independent for two families. They have thirteen rooms and a wide corridor. - Ask for more information at "LA MERCEDITA" 79 Ave. Ponce de Leon. Stop. 15. Tel. 353 Santurce. wu" 'in iiuummuSaKi FOR SALE on Calle "Dufot* stop 19 a lot of 9-1-2 by 25 deep. For more information RAMON R. INFANZON Soda Fountain Stop 19
FOUR INSURRECTS EXECUTED Dublin, April 27. (United Press.) -Four Irish insurrectionists were executed early this morning at Mount Joy. LAST TIME THE SUGAR MARKET IS DECLINING IN NEW YORK (Cablegram received last night by "Lamborn and Co.')' "Friday, April 27-Market less strong owing to Mr. F. Olecht having given an estimate of the European crop at 18 0 0 more than last year. Sales: 12,000 bags from Cuba to "Arbuckle Bros.'' at 6 5 8 (8.41 P. R.); 36,000 bags from the Philippines for shipment afloat at 8.50 to the. "Natíonal Refining Co.", of New York and 15,000 more bags from Cuba to "Cold Chaux and Co." of New Orleans, for shipment in June at 6 5Í8 (8.41 P. R.). At the close of the market there were small offers from Cuba at 6 and from Puerto Rico, for shipment in May at 8.41. Plumbing See our prices before you buy. Rolan Tejedor & de Mostos 1
Calzado Calzado assortment!!! In addition to our regular manufacturing, we have received a colossal assortment of footwear because of the large purchases made by our don Manuel, which will satisfy the most demanding taste. Quality. Economy. Taste. Visit us at Alien 35 and San Justo 10, San Juan, P. R. CUETARA HERMANOS