O
I n PAGES. 3 CTS. I O
1 p PAGES. 3 CTS. | Office - 'orchard Riso I | | | Durtrado'' Bldg. | ■■ Val- isa". - Be" M0
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (So. MI) s "¿hori*ed by tb" Aet oí oetober 0, 101T. on tía a* the Poet Office at Ban Joan. Porto Bteo, By order of tha PraaMos*, A. 8. Bar lasan. Poatmaatar tonaraL\ Bntarad m aaoond elees matter, fabraary "1, 1010. a* tha Poet Offiee a* Ban Juan. PvTio Meo, (rinitod Statee of An<lea) andar taa Aat ef march "■ 18T0
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 1923
NUMBER 1470
YEAR V
Tomorrow the primary elections of the Republican Party will be held in this Capital.
Judging by the reports we have the one who will occupy the presidency of the new Committee will be Dr. Fernández Náter Tomorrow, Sunday, and in accordance with the recent call published to x effect, the primary elections of the Republican Party will take place in this city for the designation of the men who are to form the new Local Committee and those who are to be delegates to the Party Assemblies. The circumstance that, prior to the celebration of these primaries, the leaders of local Republicanism met in order to agree on the candidacy that would be presented in the primaries so that there would be no fight in the primaries, these elections will not have, indisputably, greater importance and will be held with the sole purpose of fulfilling this indispen sable requirement to legally constitute the new Local Committee. It seems unnecessary to us to publish again the candidates who were selected by the Committee out of the fifteen to be voted in the primaries, since they are known to our readers, but we can advance that judging by the reports given to us by elements who are well "acquainted with Republican affairs, the one who will occupy the Presidency ' of the new Committee will be Dr. Fernandez Náter. The current President of the Local Committee, Mr. Gatell, a person who enjoys much sympathy, is not in a position to accept the responsibilities of this position due to his many occupations and has only accepted the position of member of the new Committee. As Mr. Gatell accepted the position of President only on an interim basis, when selecting the new candidates it was necessary to think of a person of enthusiasm, prestige and capacity who deserved absolute confidence in the performance of the position of President, and it was for this reason that IV-Fernández Náter was thought of as the ideal candidate from the very beginning. The primaries to be held tomorrow are, therefore, of no more importance (Continued on page 6).
Fiestas in Guayani7/a Great Patron and Popular festivities in Guayanilla. From the first to the ninth of December. Sections of the public square are rented for the installation of the diverse spectacles.
Our political informant replies the manifestations of the Ledo. Eugenio Font Suarez
The tyrant of the Vanguards and the liberator of Mayaguez - The romanticism of Poincaré and the protest of Streseman - Interesting considerations about the meaning of sentimentalism in politics.
In response to certain declarations made to us by the person who has been informing our readers of the political situation in the representative districts of San Juan, Puerta de Tierra and Santurce, the Ledo, Don Eugenio Font Suárez, published some statements refuting certain concepts of our friend. Our friend, on this occasion, wanted to make today, a stop in his political information to answer Mr. Font Suarez and sent us the following statements: I have read Font Suárez's article, in which this young man refers to my manifestations published in EL MUNDO on the 19th of this month, on certain particulars in relation to the representative district number 2. From the aforementioned article it is clear, quite clearly, the accuracy of everything I said, as well as that the author has disliked, more than any other of my statements, this one in which I describe one of its political aspects: "The love for the land has in it a lot of lyricism and too much romanticism. He loves it like Romeo loves Juliet, and sentimentalism in politics is the outpost of failure. To weep before the image of the homeland is poetic, nothing more than poetic; it is not patriotic." I say that this has displeased him more than the other, because it is the point on which he rests with most desire to apologize. "I love-dice-, it is true, with infinite sentimenta'ism the adored terroir where so many bad Puerto Ricans have been born. I may have shed some tears for it, in the impotence of not being able to shed them for it FOR RENT A second floor of house numbers 13 and 15 San Justo Street. Seven fresh and clean rooms. * Will inform ARTURO CARRERAS Telephone 291 Santurce, from one to three and from seven to nine. i Dr. S. M. Haley I OSTEOPATA
all my blood. My pen and my voice will have let out, perhaps, some painful lamentation at the horrible misfortune of this soil. But no one, no one has been or will be more ready than I to do everything "and to give everything, i happiness, estate, life, to make my country free and happy." The lyricism and romanticism of Font Suarez, stand out in such a way in that paragraph, that it is not possible to hide neither the great amount of ridicule that they transude, nor the impression that in that infinite love there is a very important factor that makes it detract a lot: verbalism. To love sincerely "with infinite sentimentality" it is necessary that what is loved be a spiritual thing. Thus, we have that for Font Suárez the homeland is an immaterial thing. Hence, when he has felt the desire to shed his blood for it, he has not been able to satisfy his desire, because the homeland does not appear anywhere. If the homeland were for Font Suarez what it is for us: this land, these women, these men, this language, this organic charter, this American citizenship, etc., nothing would prevent him from shedding his blood and the sacrifice would be consummated. Fortunately, the homeland is for him something else, and for that reason we enjoy the happiness of seeing him among us. The "horrible misfortune of this soil", of which Pont Suarez speaks to us, I think it is none other than to have some fontsuarezcos worshipers, whose pen and whose voice let "escape, perhaps, some painful lamentation, when, for example, McKlure in full sun and in public place, tramples the monostellated flag. Then someone should appear ' ' ready to give everything, happiness, property, life." But no one shows up. The salon liberators hardly learn of the insult done to the symbol of their ideal, and Me Klure leaves the country with full ribs, without a tooth less and laughing even at the judges belonging to the group of the LIBERTATORS. That the people are governed by feelings rather than by calculations is something that is no longer disputed. And it is that "-1"-nt.imíAntn "a in life.
"That people are governed by feelings rather than by calculations is no longer disputed. And it is that sentiment prevails in life, because sentiment is love and in the world there is nothing, nothing, stronger than fear." (Continued on p. 15)
THEATER OLIMPO VICTORY GARDEN Today Saturday 2 Tandas " Today Saturday 2 Tandas VIOLA,DANA BARBARA THE SEA in ;- in THE RUN AWAY OF THE BRIDE | BLACK ORCHIDS - TOMORROW-LON CHANEY - - First Day in -' ¿e THE EARTHQUAKE :: THE GAP OF HELL 1 I l l.|..|. ¡ I i i I I I I -I-I -L-I I 1 Ui-H-M ■I-I-I-I-H H !■ I I I llbH 1 f* Á D A C* 17 PERMANENT SERVICE Vi GARAGE - GASOLINE - BRANDI LAUNDRIES p p p°~ r ce
Ledo. Alfonso Lastra Charriez, vice speaker of the House [of Representatives, responds to statements made yesterday in a San Juan newspaper by Judge Odlin.
These men--he says--should remember that the place where one eats and where one sleeps is worthy of more respects and considerations
The Ledo. Lastra Charriez, Vice Speaker of the House of Representatives, whom we visited in his office yesterday afternoon in order to know his opinion about the political statements made by Judge Odlin in yesterday's press, answered our questions and replied as follows: Well sencidly the same opinion of mine is the same as yours and that of all sensible men who have read what Judge Odlin said. This gentleman is either mentally retarded in his ideology about public things or a person who has little enthusiasm for reading works of political philosophy. He lives in a time before this time. He thinks and if his thought could be embodied he would surely rule at the level of the heads of state before the French Revolution and before the founding of the democracies in America. According to the manifestations of Judge Odlin, in today's world, the Legislature of Puerto Rico, in spite of the times and the law of our country, should be an instrument of the Governor of the Island or, in other words, the Parliament, which is the representative of a whole community, should be subordinated to the executive, which in our country may, as now, have the endorsement of our people.
but that his nomination is derived from the will of the President of the United States. As I have told you, this was the authentic thinking of every head of state until the end of the eighteenth century. The political philosophy of the Enidopedists and the dynamic action of the French and American revolutionaries broke this archaic mold, smelling of privilege, and since then the sovereignty of public opinion in all democratic countries is and must be above the opinion of a citizen, whoever he may be and whatever interests he may represent. Notwithstanding the distance between the death of Feuda'ism and our days, there are people who have ignored this movement and continue to live in a dream of full Feudalism. Worse for them, those who think like this are a drop of water in the ocean. We should not therefore be concerned about these opinions and this - men Our right is there. Let us keep it. To recognize it amply we must expect nothing from anyone but ourselves and the noble spirit of the American people. The occupation of a territory formerly gave the right of sovereignty, because the lands were either uninhabited, or contained only an uncivil and uneducated population which had to be civilized. In modern international law the occupation of a territory with a strong population, with a strong personality, does not determine any right of sovereignty, unless the inhabitants of the occupied land voluntarily and spontaneously agree to accept that sovereignty. Hence the Americanist sentiment of our country is not the product of the fact of the "intervention and occupation by the United States of our land by virtue of the treaty with Spain, but the effect of the love of democratic institutions and of the liberal principles which inform and integrate the Republic of the United States. If the American people have succeeded by their virtues in winning our spirit, it is indubitable that their consciousness of justice will determine the full recognition of our right to govern our internal affairs, in spite of the retarded opinion of some citizens of the continent and of the Island. Now, it seems to me that it is plausible for everyone to think as they please and to express their thoughts frankly. But it is not superfluous to remember that old aphorism that says: 'The courteous does not take away the brave'. The Judge (Continued on p. 6)
Rialto TOMORROW SUNDAY Three Shows Three Extraordinary Matinees The Stupendous Drama DEAD BY LAW by Milton Sills and the modern dancers DAY MONSERRAT AND SEVEN GIFTS ;Matinee for Children! Premiere of the Great Series THE GENIUS OF THE DARK Sweets for all. In the Evening: Puerto Rico Premiere THOMAS MEIGHAM in Single with Kids and A Kinegram with the sensational race of ZEV vs. PAPYRUS and World Series Base Ball Final YANKEES vs.
™U A n A P0S SENSATIONAL CHALLENGES OF HÜKft NO" A Cayey! PONCE VS. RIBOSCH :: LOS LEONES AL DESVANQUET ::
FUEGO EN XL BAZAR AHORRO] FORTALEZA 25 | At fire prices a large assortment of suits, sonv) breros and other articles for caba- ¡ lleros and children is being sold. ¡ .Fortaleza 25 Tel. 1579' / M. RIVERA 1
|Dr. S. M. Haley 1 Has moved his offices to the new building of "Puerto Rico i Ilustrado Inc." corner of San José 1 and Tetuán. 4th. floor.
BALSEIRO'S LATEST COMPOSITION It is for sale at the Bazaar de Mü- , sica "Euterpe" of Laza y Co_, the , í whimsical tune "Lejos de mi PaI tria" by composer Rafael Ealseiro.
In the Department of War important manifestations have been made about the reforms that the parties of the Island propose to request.
To confirm the rumor that the trip of the Legislature's commissioners had been postponed, we went yesterday afternoon to meet with a member of the Legislature and he informed us that, indeed, an agreement had been adopted to postpone the departure of the Joint Commission of the Legislature until December 26. The main reason for this postponement was that since the Congress is meeting on December 3, it is not possible for the commissioners to do any effective work during the next month, when the Congress will be in full organizational work, appointing the different Committees and outlining the general legislative plan in accordance with the recommendations of the President's message. The members who are to compose the said Commission have come to the conclusion that their presence in Washington before the month of January will have no practical result, and that is why they prefer to arrive there after the Christmas recess, which will be when Congress will be in a better condition to give due attention to the affairs of the country. We understand that at the end of this month the Commission appointed to discuss with the authorities of Columbia University the conditions under which the medical school of that University should be established on the island will leave for the North. As to the date of departure of the political Commission, the postponement has been advantageous since, as our readers know, the President of the Republican Party announced that he could not leave the country before December and in this way the Commission will be able to leave at once, with the exception of those of its members who will have to bring forward the trip to discuss the matter related to Columbia University. THE DENTAL ASSOCIATION OF PUERTO RICO wishing to cooperate in the success of the EDUCATIONAL WEEK, has inserted an interesting article on Dental Hygiene on the 3rd and 4th pages of this newspaper. i DO NOT STOP READING IT! ! THE WORLD Saturday 24. Advt.
"The work which the Joint Commission may accomplish," says Senator Iglesias, "will be very limited before Congress if those who compose it are separated by mere political declar* cations and have no primary interest in economic solutions which may unite us all" . - Upon his arrival in Washington, returning from his excursion through the Western United States, during which he made an intense and thorough investigation of the general conditions of all the transit populations, as well as of the systems of government and legislation applied in all of them and which are unlikely to be successfully applied in Puerto Rico, a representative of EL MUNDO had an interesting interview with the labor leader, who was glad to present his views. -General Me Intire," began Mr. Iglesias, saying, "was visited by us, and his views concerning Puerto Rico are very optimistic, and offer no marked change to the ideas he has held about the country for many years. His report, which has just been printed, says briefly as follows (Continued on p. 9). ' i DON MAURICIO F. ARIAS 1 ¡ - ' The well-known American house of Barclay ; and Co, of New York, manufacturers ' of products so famous with Reuter's Soap ■ j, Barry's Trichophyte, Barry's Pearl Cream 1 , and Au1 . ter's Pills, have decided to start a strong campaign in this island to make their products better known, and for this purpose have sent to Puerto Rico, the 1 active and intelligent young Don Mauri- ■ cío F. Arias, who has just arrived from > i New York, and who will occupy a 1 season of 30 or more days in recoI rrring the island advertising the products r of the said house. Mr. Arias has had the courtesy to ■ pay us a visit 1 ' - FOR RENT The building located at 36 San Francisco Street, presently occupied by the house of Gonzalez Padin. Proposals are accepted for a contract for 2 or more years. Counting from January 1, 1924 onwards; F. del Valle, Jr; , 50 Allen St; Tel. 1482 i San Juan Bolivar Pagan -LAWYER- Office: Allen St. Esq. Cruz. P- O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475 . > San Juan. P. R.
Pacific Argentine Brazil Line STEAMER PRESIDENT HAYES Expected in this port on the 28th of the present from Buenos Aires, Montevideo and Rio de Janeiro, and will continue voyage to Cristobal C. Z. Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Seattle. Passage and cargo are admitted for the last mentioned Pacific ports. For further information contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. Agents Tel. 257 San Juan Tanca-Tetuan i
Smoke Good and Cheap < Melachrino Cigarettes 10 x 20c. " Johnnie Walker 20 x 25c. " Herbert Tareyton 20 x 20c. " Champagne Cocktail 20 x 15c.
- PARK TODAY SATURDAY TODAY MARION DAVIES in THE BRIDE'S PLAY Tomorrow: Bert Lytell and Virginia Valli in TH.
To Messieurs Apothecaries The house "Virol Lmtd:", of London, manufacturer of the famous "Virol", (children's food) puts on all labels the name of its agents, "Alonso Riera & Co." All bottles bearing such mark, may be considered as not legitimate; VIROL LMTD; London, (England).
The Banquet of the House of Spain i Notice is hereby given to the members of the House of Spain and to those persons wishing to attend the banquet in honor of Don Manuel Gonzalez, Don Jose Perez Losada and Don Dionisio Trigo, that the cards-inF-vitation to attend said act, which will be held on Sunday, December 2 "Y, at one o'clock in the afternoon, at the Palace Hotel, may be picked up, by those interested, at the Spanish Casino of San Juan, until the 27th day of the present. " < , The price of the cards is $5.00. < - THE ORGANIZING COMMISSION. < 0. seeeeasaaaae.