ELMUNDO
"12 Págs. 3Ctvs. - Semester $4.00 One Year _ .Z $7.50
- 12 Págs. 3 Ctvs. - Offices: Salvador Brau 81 T< 1222-P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR V.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
The presence of the Republican leaders at La Fortaleza is not an indication that the campaign against the Governor has ceased Mr. R. H. Todd visited the Palace yesterday and conferred with the Chief Executive.-Possible agreements to be adopted at the announced assembly of the Party.
As we opportunely reported, in giving an account of the meetings held by the Republicans, to agree-it is a powerful, almost uncontainable force, which dominates that collectivity-the official rupture of the Party with Governor Towner, it is a certain fact already that the extraordinary assembly of that grouping will commence on Saturday, June 9, at 9 o'clock in the morning, at the place cpe opportunely to be fixed*The impression that reigns, The impression prevailing in regard to this event is that it will be truly sensational, for, according to the opinion of commentators, scourging speeches will be made, catapultic, with a great deal of aggressiveness against the Executive, in which the speakers will present all their arguments against the Governor, censuring with marked acrimony his administrative policy, considering it detrimental to their party interests, thus breaking all ties, Mr. Towner, and ratifying, in the same way, all the arguments against the Governor, and ratifying, in the same way, all the arguments against the Governor's administration. Towner, and ratifying, once again, that the collectivity is completely detached from the Government. .However, under these circumstances, which the Unionists regard as the burial of the Republican Party, even though it has made efforts to appear undaunted, many of its most prominent co-religionists have become extreme in their suits, some of them, as a family, expressing their marked displeasure at the initiative taken, On the occasion of this situation and wishing to know the opinion of the leading elements of the Party, we exchanged impressions yesterday with them, in order to give our readers an exact vision of the true state of the said collectivity, IN SEARCH OF THEM AND faithful to our motto of informers, we went out yesterday morning in search of them. Our purpose was to see the leaders of the Republican minorities in the Legislature, Messrs. Tous Boto and Gonzalez Mena. -. But we did not find them. At the stroke of 10 o'clock we entered the Chamber, looking for Don Enrique. He was not there. A small number of representatives were reading, making a few awakenings and putting their feet up on the seats, but Mr. González Mena (Mr. Enrique Boto and Mr. González Mena) was not there.
1 sález Mena (Don Enrique). We inquired about his whereabouts. He is staying in Santurce s We desisted, necessarily. Before leaving, we took a last look at the 'alón k Nothing! Rather enough, because among the legislators present there is Mr. Baigés Gómez, a Unionist, with a square, solid silhouette, with its edges cut off at the back of the room, precisely within the quadrant formed by the walls, where the portraits of the Presidents of the Chamber hang: "the beautiful, intelligent head of the President of the House: "the beautiful, intelligent head of the President of the House, the beautiful, intelligent head of the President of the House: "the beautiful, intelligent head of Mr. Baigés Gómez. Chamber: "the beautiful, intelligent and bold head of José de Diego; the face -j (Continued on page 5).
The Governor has no statement to make Yesterday at two o'clock, a reporter of ours went to La Fortaleza for the purpose of requesting from Governor Mr. Towner an interview or statement about the attacks he is being subjected to by the Republicans on the occasion of the recent appointments of Department Heads. The Governor was unable to speak to our Editor as he was extremely busy, but was instead received by his distinguished private secretary, Mr. Van Dussen, with whom we spoke for a few moments. -Mr. Van Dussen, what does the Governor think of the attacks of the Republican newspaper? -The Governor has no opinion as yet. .... -Mr. Towner has no sta■temert to make? -None. Only that the appointments he has made are superb; the people who are filling them are excellent. We have seen in the columns of THE WORLD that Mr. Towner has been warmly congratulated on his choice of qualified people to fill the positions. The country is satisfied. As soon as the Governor has any "statement'* to make, I will call upon you, Mr. Repor ter, concluded Mr. Van. Dussen/ Page automobile for sale due to owner's absence before May 15, 7-passenger with only three months use in magnificent condition and six nearly new tires with full equipment. It can be seen at 2 Comercio Street, Miramar. Advt. i -
NOTICE The Special Commission in charge of the study and consideration of the P. of <J. 15, "To repeal Laws No- 105 of March 13, 1913; No. 42 of April 13, 1916; No. 52 of April 12, 1917; to create an Insular Riding Commission and to regulate the operation of German bancas, POOLS or the system known by PARI MUTUEL and the formation of betting books, and for other purposes," makes it known that it will hold a public hearing on Thursday, the 17th of the present, at ten o'clock in the morning, in one of the rooms of the House of Representatives. ENRIQUE BIRD, Chairman. Advt. $
I PLACEMENT wvcwwnwivii must study. Courses in Bookkeeping and Accounting, exclusively by Correspondence. Ask for prospectus and Pri mera Lesson absolutely free. INSTITUTO Department 4, Apartado 1376, San Juan, P.R.
A MOLER VIDRIO that "EL BOSQUE DE BOLONIA" will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA in San Juan because of how ba. ratísimo it sells and how sur. I tida that it is. 33 - SAN SEBASTIAN - 33
H H l l l IHWWH-HII H-H1J lili i 1 I lililililí I NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC | " The Bull Insular Line Inc. advises that its service from Santo I; Domingo and Virgin Islands by the steamship MARINA will be temporarily suspen- - - - " dido upon the return of said vessel from Santo Do. -- mingo on THURSDAY, MAY 17, due to the fact that said steamship ;; is due to leave for New York on the 19th of the current for purposes of - - ; inspection. II ■! ■M "H I i M-H-H-H 1 1 1 1 1 11 HI I II11 HiHII i 11 H-H'lil 11 H -| Hl | f
* n '£ 0 't? ed , by th ® Ac > of **>!>" ®. 1"17. on fila at the Port Offieo of febmarv 21 1919 at th/ A. Pur leson, Postmaster General. Entered aa second class matter, fehmarv 21. 1919. at the Post Ofdea at San Juan, PortjfcRico, (United States of America) under the Act of inarch 3.
SATURDAY, MAY 12, 1923-
Governor Towner has proceeded as if in a general election the Union Party of Puerto Rico had carried him triumphantly at the polls by the will of a majority of the people, declared Ledo last night. Tous Soto
Mr. Iglesias fights the nomination of Don Ramón Siaca Pacheco, alleging that he is an unconditional servant of the Unionist Party - - - - ■ -
At twenty minutes past four o'clock yesterday afternoon, the legislative session of the Señalo began, under the presidency of Mr. Barceló. The minutes of the previous session were approved without being read. The Secretary proceeded to read by titles, different petitions presented, as well as several bills. He gave the Senate an account of several communications received and Senator Hernández López requested the unanimous consent of the Senate to consider as presented, by just presenting their titles, as many bills as the Senators wished to submit, during the course of the Session, since the term for their presentation expired, according to the law, at twelve o'clock last night. There being no objection, the motion was approved. As there was no business to discuss, the legislative session was adjourned and a recess was declared until five o'clock in the afternoon, at which time the statutory forty-eight hours to report the appointments sent expired. Since the beginning of the legislative session, the public gallery and the halls and corridors of the Senate were materially filled with numerous people eager to witness the debates on the appointments. At five o'clock the Senate was constituted in executive session and the Secretary gave the report of the majority of the Nominating Committee recommending favorabemenjbs the confirmation of Messrs. Manuel Náter Girona and Eduardo Urrutia for 1 Marshal's of the two District Courts of this city and Messrs. Dr. Pedro N. Ortíz and Don Ramón Siaca Pacheco, for Health Commission and (Superintendent of Elections, res- j pectively. The Chairman of the Nominating Committee, Mr. Benitez, took the floor to request the approval of the report.
Pursuant to the ninth paragraph of Rule 34 of the Senate Rules of Procedure, which states that the Senate shall be informed of a report of the Nominating Committee, at the request of a [Senator to remain pending until the next adjournment of the next session, for one -sixth time,'' Senator Martinez Nadal requested that the nomination remain with the Committee. The chair so agreed and the meeting was adjourned. NIGHT SESSION At half past ten o'clock the legislative session was declared open. The Secretary The new Superintendent of Elections awaits his appointment to take office - Yesterday, a reporter of ours met with the new Superintendent of Elections, Mr. R. Siaca Pacheco, whose nomination for the said position, has been sent to the Insular Senate by the Hon. Governor Towncr. We asked Mr. Siaca if he had already taken office. Siaca if he had already taken possession of his office and he answered us in the negative, expressing that until the Upper House confirmed his appointment, he could not take possession of the office for which he was designated by Mr. Towncr, since what the latter had done was simply to send the proposal of his nomination to the Senate, which did not acquire a definitive character until said Body considered it. For these reasons, Mr. Siaca told us, I cannot tell you what I have in mind to do in this negotiation.
read several bills presented, among them one by Mr. García Ducós and Mr. Ramírez, to establish a Boxing Law in Puerto Rico. Mr. García Ducós requested that his name be withdrawn from the bill because he was not a co-author of the same and that he was not a supporter of boxing and was a supporter of cockfighting. There being no other business, the meeting was adjourned until twelve o'clock at night. At the request of Mr. Hernández López, the Senate was constituted in executive session to discuss the appointments. Mr. Tous Soto filed his dissenting vote, which is transcribed below. DISSENTING VOTE The undersigned Senator, representing the Republican minority, dissents from the majority opinion and states his opposition to confirming the nominations made by Governor Towner cTTdon Pedro N. Or tiz, as Commissioner of Health, of Don Ramón. Siaca Pacheco for Superintendent of Elections and Don Eduardo Urrutia for Marshal of the District Court of San Juan, See. First, for the following reasons: NOMINATION OF DON PEDRO N. ORTIZ We have nothing to oppose the suitability and honorability of Dr. Ortíz. We do not have the honor of knowing him. We object to the confirmation of the nomination of this gentleman by the Governor because this is the last of five appointments of Je- i fes of important departments of the Government which the Organic Law places in the hands of the Governor of Puerto Rico, ¡ and in all of them the Executive has deliberately and systematically ignored the Puerto Rican Republican Party. The Governor has appointed to these five Departments Mr. Eduardo Saldaña, a Unionist (appointed on the 4th page).
Gentlemen ....! For these heats there is nothing like a Palm-Beach -m $15.75] 2 .m Beautiful Colors, Good Workmanship and Our Guarantee. Gonzalez Padin Co. San Juan Ponce Mayagüez - -cG "sTc "go_u s. o/reet ■■■■MKiB&asQnBaDBMB THE GENUIMS CLOTH ♦ va./x-tevfXf) CO.
PARK TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY ANITA STEWART in 'MIND OF THE PAINT GIRL' Tomorrow: "THE PROPHET'S PARADISE" (The Prophet's Paradise) By EUGENE O'BRIEN
Bolívar Pagán -LAWYER- Office: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P. R. ' - I
Olimpo' Theater today - SATURDAY- TODAY "La Huerfanita de París" Second Day,
FOR SALE lots for sale in Condado on the oceanfront. EARL K. BURTON, INC. Telephone Building. San Juan, P. R,
NUMBER 1314.
The Governor has acted as if there were no competent men in the Republican Party to hold office-Dr. Juan B. Soto I believe-anade-that the Union being the party that won the last election, it is logical that the Governor should appoint two Unionists to his Cabinet.
At his notarial office on Fortaleza Street yesterday we visited the distinguished jurisconsult and eminent leader of the Ledo Republican party. Juan B. Soto, from whom we requested the following important decorations related to the present situation of his party: I do not attribute the existing displeasure among the Republicans on the occasion of the Governor's actions to the fact that he did not appoint a Republican to serve in his Cabinet. This, of course, may have helped, but it would not have been enough for the Governor's sake.
Mr. Bennett's appointment to be sent to the Senate Yesterday we were informed that .at any moment Governor Towner will send to the Senate, for its signature, the appointment of Colonel Bennett as Chief of Police. The general impression gathered by our reporter from the lips of numerous Senators is that as soon as the Governor sends the appointment of Mr. Bennett it will be confirmed by the Senate. Moreover, we understand that Mr. Towner's relations with Mr. Bennett have been cordial and the performances of this official have been very satisfactory. LONDON, May 11. (French cable)-Lord Stanley Baldwin has reported in the House of Commons that Great Britain has no intention of exchanging impressions with the Washington Government in connection with the last note which Chancellor Cuno addressed to the Allies in regard to indemnities.
NOTICE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN WATER SUPPLY SERVICE As of May 10, and until further notice, the water supply service to San Juan, Puerta de Tierra, Bar. tur ce and Río Piedras, will be verified at the following times: IN THE MORNING From 6 to 9 NOON From 12 to 2 IN THE AFTERNOON From 5 " 10 P. M. This measure has been adopted because of the small amount of water that the Piedras River has at present. The Administration is taking measures so as not to deprive the public of this important service, especially at hours when water consumption is strictly necessary. All are requested to cooperate with the Administration by economical use of water, so that the restrictions of this interruption of service may cause the least possible inconvenience. The general public is hereby notified that the use of water for irrigation of gardens and for any other purpose than domestic, or for those industrial applications where water is absolutely necessary, is strictly prohibited. Martin TRAVIESO, Commissioner of Public Service, Police and Prisons, Advt.
The fact is that we Republicans care little for one appointment more or one appointment less. What seems to have sown the greatest dissatisfaction is the fact that after the Governor announced his intention to surround himself with the best and ablest men, without regard to their political affiliation, he completely ignored the Republican party men, choosing them all, with the exception of Mr. Bonner, who does not belong to any local party, from the Union of Puerto Rico. But it seems to me that he should also have appointed a RepubHican. And in not doing so, after having announced that he would appoint the best men, no matter which party they belonged to, he has acted as if there were no men of the highest competence in the Republican party to fill any office in the Government of Puerto Rico. I _¿ ? I believe that this attitude of the Governor c is not fair. In our party there are men of unquestionable ability and of revealing merit, as much for their intellectual clones as for their character and honesty. -It is to be regretted that the Governor did not take this into account, giving rise to > ■ displeasure, which is always unpleasant. -¿ ? I dare not assert that the Governor acted maliciously. It is probable that he did so unintentionally (Continued on 6th page).
. [ PREMIERE IN PUERTO RICO [ MARY MAC LAREN NORMAN KERRY AND HOLMES HERBERT "THE WILD GOOSE" BRUNO & VAZQUEZ CIRCUIT Extraordinary film M. T. C. j -i Lone Star S. S. Co. The steamer "SOUTH SEAS" will call here on the 15th of ma. yo from the Gulf ports and New Orleans. ITINERARY Steamer South Lauds t ¡ Galveston on May 26 >, Houston on May 28 I Peamont on May 31 i New Orleans on Jun. 3 We beg to be favored , with your orders of embark- ! that by said vessel. San Juan Mercantile Corp. General Agents: Malecon Office Section A. Tel. 840. : OLIMPO THEATRE Sunday, May 13, 1923 ' Matinee and EveningRICHARD TALMADGE in the sensational dramatic production 'Going Out with Soya' ' Extraordinary Success.