E. L MONDO
n PAGES. 3 CTS. í| B*a<xnrc__ - ts.ee II O" Afta "r.M
1 n PAGS. 3 CTS. I Office * 'Port Rite Illustrated" Bldg. I V **1 - >w
MORNING PAPER, 1 EXCEPT SUNDAYS *
YEAR V
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
PubliabM and duuibutM aua.r p "mi* (Ao. MX) -*.tiori "od ta. 0* octobar e, 4"1T, on .Al. a* the Poet Offlee el San Juan. Porto Bieo, By order ot the PreeMUnt, A. 8. Beriwuon, Poatmaater General. Batero* ae aoeond elaaa matter, febrnary SI, l "10, et the Port Qfñoo at Aen Juen, P.rto Bice, (United Stetae oí America) under tac Áet oí march >. 18TS
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 8, 1923
NUMBER 1481
Statements of a mainland teacher, who practiced in the island schools, on her arrival in the United States.
THE AMERICANS RESIDING IN PUERTO RICO HAVE BEEN IGNORED BOTH BY GOVERNOR TOWNER AND BY THE UNIONIST PARTY WHOSE ONLY ASPIRATION IS TO SECEDE FROM THE U.S.-THE PROHIBITION IS A MYTH.
Prohibition is a myth - A high-ranking government employee preferred suicide to serving a federal sentence - For the first time in many years, what Americans thought would never happen has happened: a Puerto Rican is Commissioner of Instruction.
(From the Boston Transcript). Per ELIZABETH ELLAM There is something "rotten" in Puerto Kico. Unquestionably; during the last few months the cable dispatches have given us an idea that all was not entirely harmonious on the island which is one of Uncle Sam's most disputed possessions; but they have not been able to give us a clear picture of the social or political situation of the island. Mrs. Elizabeth Joslin, of Connecticut, who has just returned to the mainland after a five-year stay there, gives us a vivid picture of Puerto Rico, of which most Americans are completely unaware. This is a Puerto Rico where Americans are politically powerless, ignored as much by "Governor Towner, the island's new chief executive, as by the party in power; a Puerto Rico where the prohibition law is a myth. and where a high official committed suicide before serving the federal sentence awaiting him because he had been caught in the act of smuggling liquor; a Puerto Rico which is in the hands of the Unionists, whose only belief is that Puerto Rico is for the Puerto Ricans and that the island must become entirely independent of the United States, The lady from Bridgeport has gained knowledge of the situation in Puerto Rico through intimate contact, and continued study. When she left for the island five years ago, she was the wife of Professor Cedric Joslin, professor of civil engineering at the University of Puerto Rico. She has returned, widowed, with two adorable, blond babies by her side. During the early months of her marriage Mrs. Joslin taught in the schools of Puerto Rico, and since the death of her husband, a year ago. she has been' teaching in the high school at Mayaguez. AMERICANS ARE IGNCRAHADOS IN INSULAR POLITICS ... "Americans have no powers in FREE Toys for Easter and Epiphany At the OCTAGON SOAP Prize Department, Isabel Segunda No. 12, Marina, San Juan, you will find a complete assortment of toys to exchange for OCTAGON coupons. Save the Octagon coupons; save money. Buy: OCTAGON SOAP OCTAGON SOAP POWDER OCTAGON CLEANER OCTAGON Order at all grocery stores. General Agents in Puerto Rico. B. FERNANDEZ & HNOS. Sues, Marina, San Juan, P. R. " Dr. S. M. Haley OSTEOPATA
j the politics of the island," we have been told by : Mrs. Joslin, a day or two after I had returned to the mainland. "The new Governor has com- ■ pletely ignored the Americans. After our experience with Governor Reily, we await with great anxiety the proceedings of the new Governor. When he categorically ignored all Americans and openly granted his favors to the Unionists, whom Governor Reily had deeply hated, it was believed at first to be a ruse. At his first extraordinary reception, Governor Towner excluded on his , guest lists the Americans, i with the exception of one or two, greatly offending i many of them. Since ■ that date he has not altered his manner of proceeding. "It is true that he has not deñ' nitively challenged the Americans, and that ! he is very friendly to the Portoijicans. And for the first time in many, many years, what the Americans thought would never happen has happened: there is a Puerto Rican as Commissioner of Instruction. I don't want you to think that I have anything to say against Mr. Huyke," Mrs. Joslin quickly corrected, "when I make this clarification. He has proved himself to be a proper gentleman, and the Commissioner's assistant is Mrs. Ligget, an American lady. But Mr. Huyke does what he naturally has to do: he employs Puerto Rican teachers wherever there is an opportunity, and in many cases the Puerto Ricans teach English as a subject and many of the students who come to high school have never had a mainland teacher ' Every day there are fewer American teachers on the island. The need now calls for more American teachers in Puerto Rico," Mrs. Joslin added emphatically. "Although English is supposed to be the (Continued on page 2) ROY SATURDAY 8 Matinee and Evening "fl. APPLAUSE OF THE WORLD'' (The World's Applause" by William De Mil'.e with Babe Daniels, Lewis Stone, Kathlyn Williams, Adolphe Monjou. PRICES i Matinee: PLATEA Seniors 25c. children 15e. BALCONY Seniors 15c. Children 10c. Night: 35 and 25cts. 25 and 15c, j FOR SALE at reasonable prices. Holstein Calves Born in Pto. Rico two or six months old. FAJARDO SUGAR COMPANY
P A P A rr PERMANENT SERVICE VI GARAGE - GASOLINE - WASHING I BRANDI VI £ A : P P ON R CE I ' 1
i Don Emilio del Toro, president of the Pto. I Rico Executive Committee of the "Harding Memorial i Association" requests the spontaneous cooperation of the press i in support of the "proHarding" week which will begin next Monday.
THE IMPORTANT MEETING : HELD YESTERDAY WAS ATTENDED BY THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SAN JUAN NEWSPAPERS.
At the invitation of the Hon. Judge Emilio! del Toro, President of the Puerto Rico Executive Committee of the Harding! Memorial Association", we attended yesterday an important meeting which was held at eleven o'clock in the morning in the office of Hon. del Toro. The following journalists attended the meeting: Aldea Haza rio for "La Correspondencia"; Sacarello for "El Tiempo"; Agostini Bonelli for "El Imparcial"; Becerril for "La Voz del Obrero"; Paz Gránela for "Justi- . cía"; and López Batista for EL MUN1 DO. I | Don Emilio del Toro, once all the press had returned, went on to explain the reason for the meeting, which was none other than to explain, first, the organization of the campaign, and then to solicit from the San Juan Press its original, spontaneous cooperation in support of Harding's week. j i Of course, and it is unnecessary to say. : l lo. this cooperation requested by Don EmTio del Toro and the Executive Committee ■ ¡ will at all times have it frank and ¡decided 4 . The coming week, which will be known as "Harding Week," and which will begin on Monday, the 10th, will be devoted to the campaign for Puerto Rico's contribution to the Harding Memorial Association. (During this week the various committees and sub-committees appointed for this purpose.
, ' " ' ' --" ~ < -jjj-u- uiM-iiU-Mis 11 iHimiiii"- 1 -i num ni mi mi-■Mmims-n BKMa-mm mm-i-miMim-■ un ■" im.iiiwiB±-mi_irn ■-¡r ■-i. mienii■ ti" TíimmwwTmTirii-rTini - ~tt mri tti "mmn ] n i TODAY SATURDAY is the last day in these old premises at 1 P. M. we close them definiti- J v v amente, take advantage to buy today everything you need- CHEAP. Our sale "AL BARRER" , continues in full force until tonight, APROVECHE! 1 Monday at 10 A. M. we will open in our new building in front of the square ' DON'T MISS! GONZALEZ PADIN COMPANY 11 (■MiMMaMM "m "mBmmBm "BAmm "m "m "m "m "mB"""m "i""mmB""Bmmmi "mm""B "m "m "mnmB "B "m "m "m "m "m "mmmmJ
"THE ELEGANT WORLD" ios latest styles : / for young people 1924. : ' fiW / // / / / / / Vf ; /1' á*. gí q o 1" We have also re- : / cibited the "tíhs - '.JkOTjOO® O t"■ i7¡' WwT 1 W / /#\ I ■ The establishment of : £ ¿ . J p - CORTES & ' ' .* ■ ™ tfh iGh '"" v SEGURA ■ - T?x lír ¡ i L" AuJ* a y iflj WIj Lu uien s san msio, ¡;
* - . I ■ I I I I A SCANDAL At BAZAR AHORRO, Fortaleza I 25 there was a loud scandal a I i consequence of the very low prices I it has on suits, hats, cami| sas and everything for gentlemen and children. TEL. 1579 ¡
HOLSTEIN BULLSHITTS from two to six months born in Puerto Rico. For sale at reasonable prices. ¿ FAJARDO SUCAR COMPANY
jUsed typewriters and ; a mimiograph at prices that- 1 < mazón. Pedrogo Typewriter Service 4 Christ 4 Tel. 1225 I
There is no shortage of people offering to present the case against the Hippodrome affair to the Federal Court if tomorrow something unpleasant happens.
IF TOMORROW ANYTHING UNPLEASANT HAPPENS AT THE "QUINTANA", THE CORRESPONDING COMPLAINT WILL BE FILED. DIENTE. - THE PURPOSE OF AMENDMENT, OR ACT- ■ RA IN FORM. 5 Yesterday, when we went for the answers to the questionnaire which we had left the day before in the hands of Attorney Wells, of the Federal Court, about the affairs of the Hippodrome, the said official told us that he had learned the contents of our questions, and as the only answer to them, he could tell us what he had already told us on another occasion, that he had already informed us on another occasion, and that he would not be able to answer our questions. He had already informed us on another occasion, that is, that he was willing to act in the matter, provided there was someone to file the complaint, since he did not wish to take the initiative in this matter. i ! There being, as there is, irre| futable proof of horseracing immoralities, several persons to whom we have spoken of this last interview with Prosecutor Wells, have made representations to us to the effect that they are willing to carry out the wishes of the late official, provided that during the races to be held tomorrow new grounds for complaint ¡ and protest against the Hippodrome should arise. In this situation the equestrian "affair", it can be said, practically, that the sporting life of the ''Quintana'' is on the verge of a new scandal. 1 Will there be one tomorrow? God willing it " will happen, since the "no abstinen-' eta", on this occasion could give rise! . to; what would remain in the daytime.
Resident Commissioner in Washington, Hon. Felix Cor* dova Davila, advocates the establishment of Pto. Rico as an unincorporated state of the American Union.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 7- (United Press) - The establishment of Puerto Rico as an unincorporated state of the United States of America was advocated by the Hon. Felix Cordova Davila, Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico, in an interview with a United Press correspondent, as a solution to the political status of the island. A special Puerto Rican commission is on its way to Washington to ask the U.S. government to express its intentions regarding the island's future. Differing opinions prevail among the island's political parties regarding Puerto Rico's status. The Republican Party advocates statehood. Unionist Party leaders, taking into consideration the island's economic situation, will call for a less drastic solution. Mr. Córdova Dá" vila's point of view is in agreement with the Unionist position. The proposition for the establishment of Puerto Rico as an unincorporated state, though of a very original character, is in harmony with the present relations existing between the island and the federal government, is the belief of Mr. Córdova Dávila. By a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States, it has been held that Puerto Rico, while a fully organized territory, is not an incorporated territory of the United States. The establishment of a nc-incvflfporate state would be the logical next step. The establishment of such a state is" (Continued on page 6)
Tragic event occurred on a beach in Santo Domingo, in which an esteemed young Puerto Rican lost his life.
Mr. José V. Venegas, nephew of the well-known banker Mr. Luis Venegas Castro, dies drowned one day after celebrating his birthday -He-roism of Mr. Welles, who threw himself into the water with all his clothes in order to save him -Detailed details of the lamentable event.
From "El Listín Diario", of the neighboring republic of Santo Domingo, December 3, we reproduce the following: ''Yesterday at three o'clock in the afternoon took place in the picturesque beach of Andrés, near Boca Chica, a pathetic tragedy, one of those that leave in the memory imperishable traces. Venegas, who had celebrated his betrothal the day before with Miss Eloísa Ferez Ravelo, a member of the capital city's búena society, was in said town in the company of his fiancée and her relatives, spending the day at the home of his brother Mr. Emilio Venegas, a high employee of the Boca Chica sugar mill. Young José E. Venegas decided to take a bath. He was an intrepid swimmer. He jumped into the water and swam to the Andres channel, near the buoys that indicate the way to the sailboats and tugboats. It seems that he was suddenly attacked by cramps or congestion and called for help. His cries were heard by his brother Emilio, who jumped into the water, stripping off his clothes and shouting to the victim: "Hold on, I'm coming over there". Hon. Sumner Welles, ' Ledo. Francisco J. Peynado. Manuel de J. Pellerano, Tujio M. Cestero, Dr. Moi sés García-Mella, Wínel Guerra Parra; Ledo. Jacinto B Peynado. Mr. Ra- , fael Brache; Mr. Felder, Arturo Pellerano Sardá, who were spending a picnic at the initiative of Mr. Gómez, at the house of the Administrator of the Boca Chica Sugar Mill. Mr. Guinsburg heard the screams of several ladies asking for help for a man who was drowning. Everyone rushed to the scene and realized that in front of the Ingenio employees' residence at the entrance of the ANDRES port, at a depth of 10 feet, where shallow-draft vessels enter, about 100 meters from land, a person was struggling to keep from going to the bottom, which rose to the water level and disappeared from sight several times. Mr. Welies, with astonishing speed, without taking off the clothes he was wearing, was only able to remove his overcoat on the way from the house to the sea, suffering a fall, he jumped into the water. Although the clothes bothered her greatly, a pair of white cloth pants, suede shoes, rubber soles and a cream-colored silk shirt, she swam resolutely and courageously towards the place where the young man was swimming.
The victim's brother had arrived and was swimming with him to the place where the young Venegas was swimming. The victim's brother had arrived and shouted: "Here he is, send a boat, I don't have the strength to take him in..." Mr. Welles approached and was able to grab the drowning young man by the head, who bit him on the finger, causing him to gush blood. No matter how hard they tried, it was not possible to float the victim, for his rescuers were exhausted by the effort. The American sailor John NorriSj - Mr. Russell's chauffeur, who was already in a boat when they asked for one, on arriving at the scene, jumped into the water, and with a deep plunge was able to pull out the already lifeless body of the victim, after having told him the place where his brother, who spoke both English and Spanish, had disappeared. The drowned man was placed inside the boat, which was joined by Mr. Welles, who was struggling to stay afloat, trying to remove the clothes that were bothering him ■ so much. Mr. Emilio Venegas, who if it were not for the help given him in time would have perished as well, ¡ for he lacked strength, was helped to get into the boat. Mr. Wedes, already in the boat, was on his legs, face down, holding his tongue with his left hand so that young Venegas would not get caught with it, and between him and the sailor they began to move their arms, as is done in similar cases. When they reached land, young Venegas was pouring a lot of water through his mouth and nose. Mr. Welies told those who were present, that in the boat when they brought the drowned man, they could feel his pulse; but it seems that they were the last heartbeats, because when they were on land, they could barely feel a weak pulse. Once on land, they took charge of the unfortunate young man, especially Messrs. Manuel ! de J. Gomez, Tullo Cestero and others whose names we do not know. He was given two injections of camphorated oil and an hour later, when Dr. Gautier came, who certified death, he gave him an injection of adrei naline in the heart; but all to no avail. The Municipal Commissioner, Colonel Gil Fumará, who was there when the mishap occurred and was one of the first to jump into the water, his (Continued on page 9).
We are interested in interviewing persons We wish to interview persons of some economic responsibility, who may be interested in acting as our sub-agents to sell PACKARD, HUDSON and ESSEX Automobiles, in the districts of Mayagüez and Arecibo. SANTIAGO A- PANZARDI LIMITED.
Dr. S. NLHaley Has moved his offices to the new building of "Puerto Rico i Illustrated Inc." corner San Jose i and Tetuan. 4th. floor.
Bolivar Pagan --ABOGADO--■ " a Office: Allen St. Esq. Cruz. . P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. | I San Juan, P. R.
DETALLISTS AND RETAILERS ::: 1; " Large lots of merchandise are coming in at Alien 87. Pay a visit, and you will come away pleased. Mosquito Nets, T-shirts and Military Underpants new- í ¡ ¡ ¡I vos at prices that admit of no competition. German T-shirts and stockings. Before buying see my prices. S. VISCASILLAS. :: ALLEN 87 Box 1344. I! ' - -