THE BOTTOM
[16
i PAGES. 3 CTS. 4.00 | SenMtra _ $4.00 | One Year $7.60
fí6
PAGES. 3 CTS. Ofl. Salvador Brau 81. Tel. 1222. - Box 845
_.Z DAILY MORNING PAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR V.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) autnoriiedBy the Ac; of October 6, 1917, on file at the Post Offlea ot San Juan Porto Rieo. By order of the Preeídent, A. S. *BurIasoa Post,master General. Entered aa second elan matter. febmarv 21, 1919, at the Poet Office at San Jnan, Porto Bi co {United State* of America) nnder tne Act of march 8. 1870
SATURDAY, JUNE 16, 1923. NUMBER 1334
"The demonstrations against independence made by Governor Town-.
Barceló told us, are far from being the same as those made by Reily" "In those of the former," he adds, "we can see the sincerity of a man who loves us well and who expresses his ideas without animosity or prejudice against anybody".
After yesterday's session in the Senate ended, two of our editors met with the leader of the Unionist party, Don Antonio B. Barceló, with the purpose of expressing his ideas without animosity or prejudice against anyone. Barceló, in order to know his opinion regarding the Republican Assembly to be held today. Extremely busy, in different matters of a political and legislative character, and having to attend last night a Soiree which in honor of himself and other prominent* Unionists was being held in Cataño, Mr. Barceló could only spare us brief minutes, during which he expressed himself in this manner: "As to the Republican Assembly, I must tell you, that we must not say anything for the present. We must wait for this crisis to pass, between them, so that we can then judge the situation. ' ' - "And regarding the Governor's message to the Legislature, what does he have to tell us, we asked." "It seems to me a very valuable document, mainly from the legislative point of view. It demonstrates that the Governor has been able to perfectly sympathize with all our problems and needs, all of which, in his various recommendations, he has treated with extraordinary thoroughness of detail, which not only shows a perfect knowledge of our internal affairs, but also a great interest in achieving the greatest amount of progress and happiness for the country. I understand that the whole country must be pleased with the good wishes of which the Governor is animated, and we legislators present to his recommendations due attention, and what is more still our full cooperation and our assistance." "I must say without mental reservation, and in honor of Mr. Towner," added Mr. Barceló, "that even more than his message to the Legislature, it should be a mark of pride for him the work he has done in the preparation of the Budget Bill which has been submitted to the House. Particularly the budgets that refer to the Departments of Health and Agriculture and Labor deserve every commendation. Together with the intelligent and active young Commissioners Pedro N. Ortiz and El Ledo. ABTUBO O'NEIL communicates to the merchants of San Juan and the Island, and to the public in general that he has constituted, under his professional direction, a Collection Agency, to diligently pursue the collection of accounts, by judicial and extrajudicial means. P. O, Box 883, TeL 1475, Alien No. 23 (altos) San Juan, P. B. ' Advt. 'HIERRO ACANALADO Y LISO' Tejas cubanas, naipes españoles Cebollas de Canarias PRICES WITHOUT COMPETITION Freiría Hermanos CIVIL ENGINEER: One needed for assistant in sugar corporation. Young graduate with two or three years practice preferred.
i- and Carlos E. Chardon, the governor i- has drawn up two budgets pa- - to carry out the respective plans - of those departments, by virtue of which - such - highly beneficial work will be done for the country that - i this will be his masterpiece. ' ' ' I -- "You tell us nothing about the political part of the message?" we asked. i I "This is a question which it is not for us Unionists to comment on. > In these days it has not been us ? ■ who have been raising political questions of this nature. If any circumstance could have moved the > Governor to express his per- ■ j sonal opinion about the "status" of the country, - í it would be exclusively the fact that the public officials, with their political statements of these days, and in which our current governor was alluded to several times, made it necessary for him to be compelled to express his opinion about the "status" of the country, The Governor has been accused of > being devoted to the independentistas and who knows if this may have induced him to give a resounding lie to his accusers by expressing, sincerely and frankly, his opinion regarding the solutions of the future." ",His manifestations against independence- he went on to tell us-- ■ | are far from being comparable to those made by Eeily. Those of Governor ; Towner, have no other significance . i than manifestations full of sin- . I cerity of a man who, wanting r ; very much our country, believes that our happiness lies in Puerto Bico being a State of the Union. There is in his sentences, neither prejudice nor animosity against anyone. In Beily's, on the contrary, there was a preconceived purpose to impose, by degree or by force, his ideas without any consideration or respect for the sentiments of our people. We should not fear that Puerto Bico may one day be a State, if under that form of government we are to preserve our personality and idiosyncrasy, and I must assure you that in that part in which he referred to a transitory regime of government with an absolute extension of our Organic Law placing in our power the responsibility of our entire government, it coincides perfectly with what is and has always been the thought of our invista collective." Thus ended Mr. Barceló, having- - pleased us too much. I - - - BELGRADE, June 15. (United Press) - The last dispatches received assure that Stamboulisky has been killed by Zankoff's troops. of Chocolate We have just received Nice boxes of our own for re > Gallic, at limited prices. Come and see them ' SANTURCE PROVISION CO. Phone 114 and 555 Stop 17 Bolivar Pagan -LAWYER-1 Office: Allen St. Esq. Cruz. P. O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. > San Juan, P. R.
Address to "F" do EL MUNDO
TO THE "RADIO FANS" OF PUERTO RICO Due to the courtesy of INTERNATIONAL GENERAL ELECTRIC and Messrs. BRUNO & VAZQUEZ, I attended the private showing of the movie "LOS MISTERIOS DEL INALAMBRICO" (The Wizadry of Wireless) which will be shown next Monday 18 and Tuesday 19 at the TEATRO RtALTOMI am pleased to recommend to the members of the PORTO RICO RADIO CLUB and to all those interested in this marvel of the century, do not fail to attend the showings of this great movie that will teach you much about the construction and development of this scienceJoaquín A gusty Pres. P. R. RADIO CLUB INC.
"I am determined not to say anything until the Assembly has passed.
He said, however, that in his capacity as president, his attitude at the meeting would be that of a judge2 .
For days we had been waiting for the arrival in this capital of the prestigious politician and head of the Republican party, Don Jose Tous Soto, because more than moved by our informative interest, knowing the prevailing public anxiety (to know how the distinguished public man thought, not only in terms of the Assembly today, but in terms of the message recently delivered by Governor Towt/st, Khn soon we learned that Mr. Tous Soto was in this city, we went to visit him at his residence at the Palace Hotel. With exquisite kindness, so characteristic of the illustrious leader, he received us and was glad to answer our questions. -Forgive us for coming to bother you, but we would like to know, since there are only a few hours left before the celebration of your Assembly, if you could say something about your criteria regarding it and the purposes that you bring to it. -I am very sorry," he replied, "that you have taken the trouble to come to see me; but I am determined not to say "not a dry coconut" until the Assembly is over.
i- Then, it is mtry Nocible, that I com - pense you with creée" jjlta refusal of aho-' " -But is ¿tyfiílisted is one "of the '> signatories -le. -■ of the Draft Platform *qqe (we published and would like you to comment on it 1 in advance of your discussion. -There is no fiacesidiad of it. fariña Silver project comments on its own. Moreover, I do not wish to influence in any way the minds of any of the delegates to the Assembly, so much so that I only decided to sign that draft, when after I was convinced that I was in agreement with the ideas that I have been holding and preaching for a long time; however, I can tell you that I did not even take part in it. I did not even take any part in the drafting of! the mieaÍQ, nor did I direct anyone to endorse it, nor have I worked for it, although I am in agreement with all the ideas it contains. I am the Presid "f¡9 Ó! Tefido and her ,1o s therefore I will have'to preside over the Assembly, and I understand'the inejcr attitude to adopt ( on my part dJbeissr that dq a judge, * serene e and any maní.1 <Ccr. r.a 9) | |
| YAUCO NO | ICafé pulverized. One of the proofs that YAUCONO coffee is the best coffee available in Puerto Rico is that almost all those who try to get into this business say when they present their article: " nNEXT THAN "EL YAUCONO"! ffi BETTER THAN "EL YAUCONO!"S It is easy to disguise oneself under reputable names like ours, and it is even easy to offer ONE or TWICE a year a regular class coffee. S What no one can offer in Puerto Rico or in any part of the world is to offer a coffee as exquisite in aroma and flavor, uniform all year round as the 31 "YAUCONO" S Our coffee comes from the best farms of the Island, contracted ex- ¡j elusively for us. *What others cannot do, because their production capacity does not allow it. YAUCONO is the oldest LA house on the Island and our coffee was the first coffee that deserved the absolute trust of the public and the one that freed from the hassle of roasting in cauldrons because until "Yaucono" did not appear on the market, the pulverized coffee was distrusted. YAUCONO has many moral and material interests to defend and as it knows that the fame of TWELVE years is lost in a day, it will always hold supremacy over all others with its incomparable article. We will defend the deserved fame of Yauco coffee against all those S S who try to deceive the public with inferior coffees by equating it desirably with YAUCONO. - kf, ffi Ask for our coffee in all establishments, and if your shopkeeper does not have it, please contact us at the main office. Jfi Tel. 406 Santurce or at our branches in Río Piedras and San Juan.
TEATRO MUNICIPAL SATURDAY, June 16 at 8:30 P. M. TENTH AND LAST SUBSCRIPTION PERFORMANCE. The grandiose Opera and Dance in 4 acts of the Master MASSENET THAIS will be performed. Starring the famous artist OLGA CARRARA -EDOARDO FATICANTI-JULIAN MARIO. NAÑANA SUNDAY June 17. FAREWELL. MATINEE AT REDUCED PRICES THE GRAND OPERA TOSCA WILL BE PERFORMED IN THE EVENING at 8:30 P. M. GRANDIOSE EXTRAORDINARY PERFORMANCE OUT OF SUBSCRIPTION FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FAMOUS ARTIST TINA PAGGI WITH THE BEAUTIFUL OPERA AND DANCE IN 4ACTOS T R A V I A T SEE PROGRAM.
The traffic problem is in the process of taking on alarming proportions in San Juan.
The traffic problem is taking on alarming proportions in San Juan. WILL THE DAY COME WHEN HIGH FLOORS WILL HAVE TO BE INSTALLED ON SOME STREETS IN THIS CITY? The recent statements made by Mr. Diez de Andino, Mayor of San Juan, on the subject of traffic in this city, have lent themselves to diverse comments and observations on the part of a large number of people, lovers of the progress of our capital and of the island in general. The prevailing belief among these elements is that the traffic in San Juan is already difficult to control and will become worse and worse, due to the fact that the number is increasing in a considerable manner. I People, as we said before, interested in the prosperity of the country and the needs of its population, assure that within a few years the number of motor vehicles will be so great, that the traffic problem will become something dreadful, Dantesque. How and where will the vehicles run? Will their continuous increase, it is said, cause them to be taxed? Traffic, they say, will be perhaps the greatest obstacle facing every automobile owner, since the present traffic conditions are already making their effects felt to the detriment of the interested parties and the public in general, since, it is assured, such a state of affairs will not fail to influence all other aspects of life, de| (Continued on page 8.)
Sensational statements by Mr. Gordils, one of the founders of the Republican Party.
The message of the Cclfira¿cr--¿ke--¿ke--crfa--crfa--crfa to the prepio Governor an untenable situation with the Unionist party, within the most elementary principles of logic.
For some time now the well-known publicist and brilliant writer, Mr. Gordils, has stopped writing editorials for our newspaper and when we knocked on his door yesterday, as he is one of the founders of the Republican Party, he received us with true affection, authorizing us to ask him whatever we wished in relation to the present political situation and to the assembly to be held tomorrow by the Republican Party. You who know the initial thought which informed the first platform of the Republican Party, will you kindly tell us what, in your opinion, will be the result of the Assembly of the Republican Party and what scope you give to the Governor's Message in connection with that assembly. -I wish to express to you, condensing the ideas that in the political life of Puerto Rico, I have never been able to observe a situation more singular and worthy of study than the one before us on the eve of the assembly of the Republican Party. In the first place, I believe that the ideal of the State is irreplaceable and unalterable within the program of the Republican Party. The reforming currents do not refer to any modification in that basic ashlar that is the foundation of the party I do not know what, in the end, the Assembly will agree; but it is evident that there will be allowed without hindrance, nor subterfuge, the serene and free emission of ideas, without any man, nor group of men, believing themselves authorized to put into practice stratagems and abilities to impede the expression of thought. Now, a Governor obliged by the mandates of democratic principles to work for the political happiness of Puerto Rico, united with the majority of the country, represented by the Unionist Party, has established, as a basis for this work, the stupendous declaration that he sustains a political ideal, different from that of the majority with which he believed he was identified. Precisely, that is the Governor's theory, that there must be unity of thought and action to obtain a victorious result and the Governor who holds such a judicious opinion, is the one who expresses and defends a political ideal fundamentally opposed to the political ideal of the Unionist Party. Situations should not be hiddenWithout Brush-Without SoapWithout Wash See 2<h page BARBASOLl
- i No matter how much skill one may wish to show in distorting the Governor's message, there are obvious and unquestionable facts. And these facts are the following: That the Governor of Puerto Rico has expressed in an official document, in a categorical and categorical manner, which leaves no room for different interpretations, that the political ideal which Puerto Rico should pursue is that of a Confederate State of the Union to form an integral part of the American Nation. - That the political ideal with which the Governor of Puerto Rico is identified, is precisely the same political ideal that the Puerto Rican Republican Party held and holds in accordance with its primitive platform which I had the honor to discuss, accept and sign. That the Governor of Puerto Rico understands and maintains that in order for the petition for such ideal of a Confederate State to be successful, it is necessary that the political parties that are to formulate said petition be united. 4. That at present there exists the Union Party of Puerto Rico, which expresses the will of the majority of the country and which is the party that dominates in the spheres of the Insular Government ■ r qw aétwaftiwtfc Téh SUS magnos the springs of public life. J 5.-That such party has adopted > as a solution for the Status of Puerto Rico, a formula which it has called Commonwealth, and such formula it has set forth in its program and has accepted and proclaimed it as the best for the political purpose of Puerto Rico. i 6.-That the Confederate State is a political concept entirely different from that of the Free Associated State, without this admitting of the least discussion, the former being the classic formula for bringing Puerto Rico into an integral part of the United States, and the latter being the most important and most important of all the political concepts. -Sunday: *' REPUTACION VTTUPEBADA" (Whispers) Coney Island every day. A MOLER VIDRIO that "THE FOREST OF BOLONIA'' will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA in San Juan because of how well it sells and how south it is.
KISSEL
The automobile for people of Gusto. VILLAMIL IN THE MARINA.
Arturo O'Neill LAWYER-NOTARY -Criminal and Civil Matters- Specialty:-MARKET LAW Alien No. 23 (high) San Juan, P. R.