THE AfflND
Pg. 3 Ctvs. - 8 "m "atr" $4.00 One Year $7.50
- 12 Págs. 3 Ctví. - Offices: Salvador Brau 81' T "L 1222-P. O. Box 345
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
MORNING JOURNAL
ARO V,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
District Court Grand Jury renders an important report
Calls the attention of the Legislature to the deplorable state of several public institutions of Puerto RicoYesterday afternoon at five o'clock, the Grand Jury of the District Court appeared before Judge Foote and placed in his hands the following very interesting report on various matters of great importance to the country: In the District Court of the First Judicial District of San Juan, P. A. The Grand Jury of the District Court of the First Judicial District of San Juan, was constituted on May 7, 1923, formed by Jurors Manuel Anzalota and Francisco Silva, from Corozal; Ramón Nevares, from Dorado; Aurelio Ortiz, from Naranjito; Vicente Alcaraz, Rafael Arcelay, Alberto E. Lee, Antonio Puigdollers, Antonio Puigdollers and Rafael Arcelay. Lee, Antonio Puigdollers and Juan Sotomayor, of San Juan; Ramón Cruz, Plácido Fonseca and Juan R. Molina, of Toa Alta; José Arrieta and Alfredo López, of Toa Baja and Antonio Jimenez, of Vega Baja, .the Hon. Court having appointed Juror Alberto E. Lee as President, who by instructions of said Grand Jury, has the honor to present the following Report of its proceedings to date: Sessions were held on the 7th, 8th, 9th. 10, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21, 22, 23, 24, and 25 May, having investigated seventy-four cases of alleged crimes committed in the district, of which he presented on May 18 to the Hon. Court: 36 founded indictments and 9 unfounded indictments, and on this date presents 24 founded indictments and pending further investigation by the Hon. Prosecutor 6 of the cases brought before the Grand Jury. There are a considerable number of cases being studied by the Prosecutor's Office for preparation, but the Grand Jury is unable to continue the investigations for lack of witnesses and preparation of indictments. The conditions in which the Hon, Court is working are deplorable, since it occupies a part of a building which is not the property of the People of Puerto Rico and which it shares only by tolerance with the District Court of the Seventh District of Puerto Rico, and which is not the property of the People of Puerto Rico. For information and other business details please contact "CINE SALINAS", Box 24, Salinas. Bolívar Pagan -ABOCADO-7 Office: Calle Allen Esq. Cruz. P- O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P. R.
::
bhhhhhhhhh Georges Tchitcherine, Soviet Foreign Minister, who presided at Vorowski's funeral SERIOUS ACCIDENT ABOARD A DANES CRUISER COPENHAGEN, May 25 (United I Press). During a lecture aboard l Danish cruiser "Geyser," a bomb exploded injuring 47 members of : the crew. - - ■ ■ ■- 1 ■ - 1 ■' -- i BRILLIANT EXHIBITION OF THE ( ¡ ¡"NATIONAL BISCUIT COMPANY". In the Plaza Provision Co" Cruz 13, ( today began the attractive and su- ; estive demonstration of its products by the NATIONAL BISCUIT COMPANY, which is one of the most prestigious and renowned firms in the world, and which enjoys all the predilection of Puerto Rico for its excellent products. Of that important firm, the very distinguished gentleman Don Lum 1 N. Jimenez is the exclusive representative in Puerto Rico. i The curiosity that detains the public before the precious exhibition, turns into admiration and enthusiasm for the enormous variety and intimpara- ' Lie of the mentioned products, which are consumed more and more in Puerto Rican homes, ! The National Biscuit Company's demonstration of its incomparable jToductos, which it exports to all the peoples of the earth, is more of a demonstration than an exhibition, since a young lady has been commissioned to give them to be tasted free of charge to as many people as request it. In the demonstration there were several new and exquisite varieties, such as "Boyal Fruit Sprays", "Royal Sprays", "Bouquet Sandwich", "Coconut Sandwich", "Coconut Sandwich", "Coconut Sandwich" and "Coconut Sandwich". "Coconut Sandwich", "Chocolate Filigree Sandwich", "Gaiety Sandwicn". "Do | :1s Sandwich", "Social Tea Sandwich" and other fine classes besides such generally known ones as "Export Soda National", "Uneeda Biscuit", "Sorbetto Sandwich", "Marie Biscuit", "Premium Soda", "Saitina", "Combination Biscuit", etc., which are never lacking in any of our ho gares. The National's demonstration proves once again, in a way that is pleasing to the eye and to the palate, that the products of the renowned company are unrivalled and that they are increasingly popular because of their fine quality and the fact that they have become a staple. Advt.
-------- - - - l The Peerless Exerciser Co. | NEW YORK Presents *; The famous exerciser and creator of -- PEERLESS muscle (patented). Ma- '- - ravellous combination of FIVE devices in one: CHEST EXTENDER, " WALL EXERCITATOR, RODING --( MACHINE, and COMBINATION HANDLES FOR DEVELOPING THE Wrist and Forearm, also used as MASSAGE ROLLS. " It is on the island and can be served inme- " ; di afamen te by C. O. D. <- ' Special price for dealers. 'I ; Serious agents solicited in some " ¡ island towns- " ' Ask for reports to: ' ' i JAIME CATALA :: Box 201, Yauco, P. R. - I Distributor for Puerto Rico of this and ' other gymnastic apparatus. "
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authonxed by the Act of October ". 1917. on fllo at the Port OfSeo of Ran Juan. Porto Bieo. By ordar of the Preeident, A. 9. Barle. on , Po.tma.tor Gener.l. Entered aa second elus matter, Febmary 21. 191®. at th. Port Offle. at Ran Jnan. Porto Bieo, (Uni tod State, of America) under the Act of march 3, 187®.
Suggested need to increase salaries to judges.
The Ledo. Molina St. Remy came out against the College of Law of the University of Puerto Rico With great enthusiasm and regularity, the Legal Committee of the House of Representatives continues to study the bill on judicial reorganization. .. At the HEARING held on Thursday on the subject, interesting data were contributed and judicious observations were made, for the better preparation of the new judicial plan, by Messrs. Texidor, (Don Jacinto), "President of the P. R. Bar Association"; Rodriguez Serra, Judge of the District Court; Molina St. Remy, President of the "Federal Bar Association" and Ledo. Juan B. So te, Professor of the University of Puerto Rico. Mr. Texidor stated to Ta~Comi fion that the project of reference was indisputably good, mosrtft,ndos< supporter that the salaries of the judges were increased, in accordance with the provisions thereof, puos as! He expressed his doubts as to whether such an increase and the creation of new judgeships for the Supreme Court was in conflict with our Organic Charter; to questions put to him he showed himself in favor of the Courts of three judges of which he speaks (*1 project), adding that he could not assure whether or not such Courts were the best that the Legislature could do in the present case; referring to the intermediate Court of Appeals, contained in the project, he said he was not in favor of it, preferring the creation of Courts with three judges, which he preferred to the creation of Courts with three judges, and he said he was not in favor of it: Of Courts with three judges, which seemed to him much better. JUDGE RODRIGUEZ SERRA d Judge Rodriguez Serra then spoke, who lamented the heavy workload of the San June District Courts, and reported in a clear and precise manner, the difficulties that the judges of said Courts have to deal with in order to create a three-judge Court of Appeals, which he felt was much better.
tchitcherine
SATURDAY, MAY 26, 1923.
Emmo Iglesias indicted for murder by the Grand Jury of the District Court.
THE DEFENDANT WAS ARRESTED AND BRINGED INTO THE PRESENCE OF JUDGE ODLIN h - Yesterday morning the Grand Jury of the Federal Court met, and at the conclusion of its deliberations appeared before Judge Odlin delivering to him an unsubstantiated indictment against Mr. Enmo Iglesias, who is charged with the murder of Mr. Francisco Palacios. Afterwards, the prosecutor Ira K. Wells appeared. Wells, and by motion, stated that he had no further business to submit to the consideration of the Grand Jud-' -ado and requested that the said Grand Jud-' -ado be dissolved. It was so ordered in open court by the Judge. Said Grand Jury was composed of Jose Marrero, T. J. Quinn, W. L. Cope, Sol A. Davidson, H. R. Whitng, Henry Axtmayer. R. Rosario Martinez, Francisco Gonzalez, A. C. Both, ' Tuan Sierra Jr, Ralph Swfggett, Hecj "or Cestero, B. F. Murphy, Diego Ro-, mero Jr, Paul Hagen, Frank Lopez.* Lister Haydon, J. G. Lawdon, E. j E. Zwiggard, F. N. Reed, F. Porrata Doria and Guillermo Chabert. In the afternoon, after the Tran Jury was discharged, a warrant was issued for the arrest of Juan G. Igle'ias, which was executed by bringing the defendant before Judge Odlin shortly after five o'clock, and Judge Odlin asked the defendant who his attorney was, and he stated that he was Ledo. Rafael Martinez. Nadal, being left in that ¡by Secretariat is notified to said counsel <ue must appear before the Court today, at two o'clock in the afternoon paja, inform you, probably, of! if it makes Til acted. IN XA DISTRICT COURT OF SAN JUAN At five o'clock in the afternoon appeared : the Grand Jury before Judge Foote, of the District Corle of San Juan, and en- ¡ tred several pleadings, one of them con- ■ having an indictment founded in conj tra of Enmo Iglesias, for an alleged i crime of generic murder, committed I the person of Francisco Palacios i Salazar. Judge Foote learned of the contents of those pleadings and then, addressing the President of the Grand Jury, ¡r Alberto Lee, as well as the others (Continued on p. 12.).
WE ARE IN THE RUHR TO ENFORCE THE TREATY OF VERSAILLES--SAYS RAYMOND POINCARE - - - - - _ - _ -
PARIS, May 25. (French Cable.) The Chamber met this afternoon to continue the discussions relative to the occupation of the Ruhr. M. Auriol, speaking on behalf of the Socialist party, criticized M. Poincaré for not having received M. Bergmann, who visited this capital with the object ■ to present propositions to the go- ' bernment, during the meeting of the heads of government held in JanuaryThe German shepherd deputies stood up and indignantly protested when deputy Auriol said that the only The report of the Finance Committee filé prepared in Treasury ASI OPINIONS THE LCDO. CAY COLL CUCHI, EX-PRESIDEN- ! A few days ago the House Finance Committee made a report in connection with a request made by Representative Coll y Cuchi for an investigation of the Treasury regarding the imposition and collection of income taxes. We were puzzled by the silence which, in regard to that iAfonne Mr. Coll, until yesterday no# made the following statement: - "I am making a study of the in- ; forme of the Finance Committee of the ! House on the question of con- : tnbutions, the report of which I shall analyze at one of the next sessions." ! - "Are you not satisfied with the result of the investigation made?" í - "In spite of the agreement of the Chamber," he told us, "the Committee has made no investigation; and the so-called 'report' has been prepared in the Treasury." - "To state that is serious," we told him, "can you prove it? Ledo.?" (Continued on page 6)
Gentlemen ....! THE HEAT KEEPS GETTING HOTTER EVERY DAY DRESS COOL. COMFORTABLE AND ELEGANT "PALM-BBACH FINO" DRIL DB HILO INGLES Bien Hecho - Botuto. Colors Well Wet - -- - Handmade $5.75 - $10 - and $12.98 $12 - $16 - and $18 ■ ' Absolutely Special Sizes $2 extra VISIT OUR DEPARTMENTS GONZALEZ PADIN CO.
RECONSTRUCTED Typewriters of the best brands, we have some that we liquidate at Very Low Prices $10 - $15 and $25 Remington Department 'Gonzalez Padin Co.
GREAT OFFER OF TOBACCO!! i I have in the Barrio de La Iiata, jurisdiction of Aibonito, a famesa part'da of Tobacco in Rama, coaechado in special lands of the banks of the Plata. This consignment consists of 800 to 1,000 quintals, more or less. For more information, please contact the Borinquen Hotel or directly to the undersigned, owner of the article. Liborio Gutiérrez RODRÍGJEZ. Aibonito, P. B-. May 1923. Advt.
Sale farm 150 cuerdas, 4 kilometers from Bayamón, adjacent to the road to Comerío, suitable for dairy or planting cane. -Abundant running water. -Good flat land. -Facilities are given for payment. Address to JOSE L. PESQUERA, Bouret Building, San Juan.
i OLIMPO THEATRE j -- TOMORROW SUNDAY 27 J 0 A RACE t IN KENTUCKY j .. a8 World's Most Famous Horse Racing with REGINALD DENNY |
PARK TODAY SATURDAY TODAY BETTY COMPSON in "THE LAW AND THE WOMAN" r Sunday: :| THE WORLD'S A STAGE *1 The World's A Stage)
NUMBER 1316
Poincaré and tachin are given a standing ovation at I 's 'T" - the Chamber.
- way to solve the problem of the ■ indemnities was to conciliate the En- - tente with Germany, Germany, said M. Oberkirch, depu11 tate of the Rhine, is spending a thousand mi11 million gold marks to organize passive resistance. I must remind the House, said M. Poincaré, replying to M. Auriol, that we are in the Ruhr basin to enforce the clauses of the Versailles treaty and to show that it is not a "piece of paper" as the Teutons believe. The matter of the "San Juan Racing and Sporting Club" was brought before the House of Representatives yesterday morning by Mr. Bird < ' At ten o'clock yesterday morning, the House of Representatives was called into session and the minutes of the previous session were considered approved without being read. Representative Mr. Bird, as we had to announce in our previous edition, presented to the House a motion tending to be studied by any committee of the House, whether or not to initiate a process against the Corporation called "San Juan Racing & Sporting' , Club", which refused to provide certain reports that were requested by the Chairman of the special Committee appointed to study House Bill 15. Mr. Bird alleged that the attitude assumed by the referred Corporation ¡ Cine "Puerto Rico" STOP 21 SANTUBCE TODAY SATURDAY TODAY A BURLON SPIRIT The most extraordinary of Bruno y' Vázquez, and tomorrow Sunday Premiere in Puerto Rico of the Super special drama /El. IGNORED PATH'' By the famous dramatic star: Pauline Frederick accompanied by a comedla. All at current prices 15 and 20 cents A MOLER VIDRIO that "EL BOSQUE DE BOLONIA" will continue to be the most popular QUINCALLA in San Juan because of the great sales and for the south it is. 33 - SAN SEBASTIAN - 33
Radiotelephonic Amateurs !!!!! THE MANUFACTURERS' AGENCY CO. Edificio Ramirez de Arellano -Terraplen offers Radio sets with a range of 25 miles - 200 miles - 2,000 Miles - at reduced prices. Apparatus used by the American Navy. Telephone No. 1390 San Juan, or write to P.O. Box 485, San Juan. We also sell all kinds of radiotelephone parts* for those who wish to make their own. These parts are sold at the lowest prices on the market.
When the head of the government entered the Chamber, all the deputies, with the exception of the Communists, stood up and gave a standing ovation to Mr. Poincaré PARIS, May 25 (United Press) - When the Senate met to discuss the dissension over the Ruhr, Premier Poincaré entered the Chamber to a standing ovation by all the deputies except the Communists, who immediately resigned their posts. Then deputy Cachin made his entrance, who was cheered by his* colleagues, who shouted, "Down with the Senate." ■ ? had been detrimental to the dignity the prestige of the House, since it had been a disrespectful and mocking attitude, since they had not only refused to provide the reports, but had offered them on several occasions and then did not fulfill their offers. With the purpose," said Mr. Bird, "of obviating difficulties for the Corporation, if the reason they had for not giving those reports was due to overwork, the Board that I preside over requested the help of an accountant from Auditing, which he placed at the disposal of the Corporation, and even so it was not possible to obtain the reports." 5 It was then discussed, among Messrs. Arjona, Bird and Santon i, the powers of the House to prosecute for contempt, and Mr. Santonl said that this e/a matter of such transcendence that due caution should be acted upon and asked Mr. Bird if those reports were absolutely necessary inforI nar the Project placed under his conI sideration and study. To this Mr. Bird contended that yes, and that is why the reports were requested. Mr. Lastra, presiding, proposed that a motion be made to the effect that the Civil Law Committee join the Special Committee chaired by Mr. Bird to study the matter and report the result to the House. This motion was seconded by Ledo. Arjona, who added to it, that the Civil Law Commission was to report back twenty-four hours later. (Continued on p. 8) Today and tomorrow, great news ' in the second batch of the and in the evening GONZELL WHITE and his ' JAZZERS ! and the beautiful drama "Paramount" "THE GANZADAS" (DUCKS AND DRAKES) BEBE DANIELS