ELMÜNDO
- 12 Pgs. 3 Ctvs. - Semester $4.00 One Year $7.50
■- 12 Págs. 3 Ctvs. - Offices: Salvador Brau 8T Tal. 1222-P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
Published end distributed under permit (No. 801> authouiied by the Ac} of oetober 6, 1917. on fllo at the Post Offlco of th * p J*W "nt. A. 8. Burleson. Postmaster Oeneral. Entered *■ eecond el&M matter, febrnary 21. 1919. at th" Pont Office at Ran Joan. Porto Rico, (United State* of America) under the Act of inarch 3. 1879.
SATURDAY, APRIL 21, 1923.
ANNUAL V.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
NUMBER 1296.
Love and jealousy wrote another bloody page in Cataño yesterday.
Joan Carmona seriously wounded his wife and then committed suicide - The tragedy took place in the middle of a public street and caused general consternation.
The neighboring town of Cataño was the scene yesterday afternoon of one of those dramas in which love and jealousy always play the main role. The young spouses Juan Carmona and Juanita Bruno, belonging T>O "A CARMEN EOMAÑACH DE FRANCO SOTO Yesterday a cablegram was received in this city from New York, informing of the sad news of the death in Saranack Lake, the distinguished and cultured lady Carmen Romafiach de Franco Soto, wife of Mr. Carlos Soto, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. < The painful news of the death of such a distinguished lady, who enjoyed great affection in our society for her always noble and altruistic behavior, has produced deep sorrow because the deceased was related to prestigious families of our most distinguished social network. The lady who has just died was residing for some time in the United States, by prescription, but the disease, which rnjpaba "u body has finally brought this sad result. The body will be brought to Puerto Rico, where it will receive a Christian burial. EL MUNDO, in recording in these lines such a sensitive death, sends to her relatives, her husband Ledo. Carlos Franco Soto, to her mother dofia Catalina Boss Vda. de Romafiach, germans, dofia Clara R. Vda. de Guillermety, do fia Julia R. de Bozzo, Miss Dolores Romafiach, Salvador Romafiach, Ledo. Francisco llel Valle and to his niece, our colleague Mrs. Laura Bozzo de Ramos, the expression of our heartfelt condolences for the irreparable loss they suffer. PARQUE HOY Saturday, April 21 TODAY SOBERBIO ESTRENO Super Special. Betty COMPSON on "Hay Que Vivir" (t ADIES MUST LIVE) Mafiana-'¿QUE ES LO QUE QUIEREN LOS HOMBRES? (What Do Men Want) Do you feel discomfort in your eyes? Visit SIXTO PACHECO Alien 47. Consultations are free.
i both to two humble families, lived i for a long time separated by marital dis- ■ tastes, without until the fe- , cha nobody could suspect that al- ■ i redor of those beings were bai tending the tragedy its tremendous wings. DIFFERENT OPINIONS Regarding the motives for these disturbances, there are different versions that our Editor was able to gather at the site of the events. Some were of the opinion that it was because Carmona was sick in the chest and his wife did not want to live in his company; others told us that the main reason was that she was forced to work in the factories to attend to her most urgent needs, and others were of the opinion that the opposition of a sister of Juanita to her marriage with Carmona sowed discord in the young home of the unfortunate spouses. (Continued on page 8a.) Senators Abril and Tons Soto favor women's suffrage Yesterday was presented in the Secretariat of the Senate, a printed project of Senators Abril and Tons Soto, asking for women's suffrage. This bill, which will be known by the P. of S. 53, establishes that a woman citizen of the United States, who has attained the age of ten years, and who has attained the age of fifteen years, shall have the right to vote. This bill, to be known as P. S. 53, provides that a woman citizen of the United States, who has attained the age of nineteen years on election day, shall have the right to vote. In accordance with said law, separate precincts for women and men shall be established at all polling places. If the majority of registered female voters -says the law- request it, they will be able to intervene in the tables of said precincts. | If this bill becomes law, every qualified woman is entitled to be eligible for any public office. The vote of women shall be voluntary. When this bill comes up for discussion in the Senate, very , interesting debates will be aroused, as a large number of senators will defend it. FOR SALE in Dufot Street, stop 19, a lot of 9-1-2 by 25 in depth. For information RAMON R. INFANZON Soda Fountain Stop 19 AdVt.
"THEATRE OLIMPO" TODAY SATURDAY, APRIL 21, 1923 -, TODAY The very pretty Zarzuela SAN JUAN DE LUZ, THE LAST CHAPTER and .great multicolored act, by the applauded Company of PACO MARTINEZ TOMORROW SUNDAY 22: MATINAL AND EVENING ■ Premiere of the extraordinary and monumental dramatic production in 8 acts: "A WEEK OF LOVE" Brilliant success by Elena Kammerstein and Conway Tearly. In the afternoon 4 P. M. Splendid matinée by the.' Company of Paco Martinez. - Solares and Casa s Piedras. Calle Jose de Diego 26 will inform or Telephone 36, Rio Piedras.
For Rent in West Precinct No. 5, a Local for family with 4 apartments door of street. High information. JOSE FERNANDEZ
JUDGE TOOTE, OF THE DISTRICT COURT, DECLARED THE LAWSUIT AGAINST MR.
SANTIAGO IGLESIAS, IN THE CASE OF ANCIENT SABALIER It has been ordered the restitution to Sabatier of the tinea "Melilla" and the defendants are ordered to pay the costs.
Late yesterday afternoon we learned that the case followed against Santiago Iglesias, in the matter of the elderly Sabalier, had been ruled against the aforementioned labor leader. The following is the opinion and sentence: IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF SAN JUAN. FIRST DISTRICT Bernabé Sabalier Sabalier, Plaintiff. VS. Santiago Iglesias and Bank of San Juan. Defendants. . Civil No. 45. Nullity and non-existence of contract. OPINION On November 6, 1922, this case was called for oral trial and both parties, represented by their respective attorneys, appeared and began the taking of evidence, which continued to be presented in the sessions of November 7, 8, 9, 13, 14 and 16 of the same month. On November 16, 1922, the taking of evidence ended and both parties by stipulation submitted the case by written pleadings, and the Court reserved its decision. The Court finds the following facts proven: That the defendant was 90 years of age in the year 1916. That Iglesias was an advocate and Leaded Obrero and organizer of the American Federation of Labor in Puerto Bico. That Abraham Peña was a lawyer and notary public and represented the workers. That Prudencio Rivera Martínez, Ra fael Alonso and Juan Dominicci were labor leaders. That the property that is the object of this litigation has the following description: (size and boundaries). "Land property located in the Santurce neighborhood of this City, bordering to the North in 290 meters with Don Ar/irés Crosas today Succession of Wenceslao Bosch and with lands of the Andrades Succession: to the South also in 290 meters with the Martín Peña pipe; to the East in 338 meters with the Succession of Juan Potracio del Carmen; and to the West also in 338 meters with Don Avelino Vicente. Giving these measures a total area of ninety-eight thousand and twenty square meters. That Iglesias cultivated the friendship of the plaintiff, gained his confidence and made him join the A. F. of L. and the United States Workers' International, and he and Dominicci intimated to him the advisability of granting Iglesias a general power of attorney to administer and take care of his property to prevent others from stealing from him. That this power of attorney was granted on October 16, 1916 before Notary Benedicto Peña, accompanying Sabalier to the act of granting. The original deed was written by Peña. That on the following day, October 17, 1916, Sabalier signed a will before Notary Benedicto, written in Peña's handwriting at Iglesias' house, in which he instituted as heirs of half of all his assets to Iglesias' surviving children "OPPORTUNITY'" Two "Trucks" of 2 and 2H tons are for sale. At half of their prices. Address to P. O. Box 782 San Justo No. 15, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
at his death. Witnesses to the instrument were Priiiencio Rivera Mar- ¡ tínez and Rafael Alonso and present at the act Abraham Peña. That the plaintiff by private instructions forbade his agent Iglesias to make use of the power to sell the property he owned without his express consent. That the plaintiff consciously never gave private instructions to the agent Iglesias authorizing him to sell real estate. That in 1916, when Saba Her was 90 years old, he was a very deaf man and due to his advanced age his mental and physical faculties were weakened. Iglesias is not a businessman; he had never acted as a trustee for anyone before and did not understand the administration of estates of the size of Sabalier's. During the time that he acted as marVatario he gave very little attention to the administration of the estate and in making it' produce the rent that it owed. That on May 12, 1919, Mr. Peña, together with other persons, organized "El Banco He San San Giorgetti is ready to resign from the estate. We have been informed that Mr. Eduardo Giorgetti, in favor of whom and as representative of an important Belgian company, he was awarded the auction of the Pipeline for the Aqueduct of this city, has decided, in a truly plausible gesture, and with the intention of avoiding difficulties and avoiding hindrances to the Municipal Administration, to renounce his rights acquired by virtue of the referred contract. As is known to all, the investigation carried out by the Municipal Assembly cleared the actions of the Auction Board in favor of Mr. Giorgetti; but this was not an obstacle for the judicial action to be established, which even though it could also be favorable to the Municipal Corporation. (Continued on page 8.) - JUDGE ODLIN TO SPEAK ON THE KU-KLUX-KLAN Tomorrow at eight o'clock in the evening Judge Odlin will take the podium of the Vnion Club to speak on the interesting and highly topical subject of the KU-KLUX-KLAN. We appreciate the invitation extended to us to attend this event. Zinc ribbed and smooth. (LOWEST PRICE/Quality - Price - Service Rolan, Weaver & of Hosfos Advt. SOLAR PLOTS FOR SALE in the County facing the Sea. EARL K. BURTON, INC. Telephone Building. San Juan, P. R.
■ Juan," the purpose of which was to stimulate aho- - rro among the workers, to make loans of not less than five dollars to tra ¡ bajadores and loans to workers for the purpose of building their homes. 1 That the organizers of the Bank of ' San Juan were Peña, his wife, Inés R. de Peña, Peña's brother-in-law, Norberto Escabi, Attorney Jo1 sé Soto Rivera and another Attorney, PaI ¡ blo Andino, being the capital subscribed ■ thousand dollars in the proportion of "ioscientos dollars each and selling shares, for a nominal value of five dollars. That on December 31, 1919, the Bank had placed six thousand nine hundred and eighty dollars in shares. That in the month of May of 1920 the I I I Bank bought in Partnership with the ' ' ' Com pafiía Editora de Justicia' ', of whose Company was president Iglesias and se' cretario Peña, the half of the price thirteen thousand dollars each one, the house No. 18 of the street of Alien of San Juan. The Bank paid two thousand dollars in cash, leaving eleven thousand dollars deferred for a term of three years. That on November 30, 1920, the Bank had placed in shares seventeen thousand four hundred and fifteen dollars. That Peña was appointed attorney-at-law to represent Sabalier and Iglesias in all legal matters involving the administration of Sabalier's assets, and as president of the Bank of San Juan he was commissioned by Iglesias as agent to find a buyer for the plaintiff's estate. That Peña proposed to the directors of the Bank of San Juan the sale of the estate and they made the following offer, which was accepted by Iglesias' agent. | That the sale is verified for the sum of TWENTY SIX THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED AND SIX HUNDRED AND SIXTY SEVEN DOLLARS, which the acquiring Bank pays as follows: FOUR THOUSAND DOLLARS which it leaves in its power to pay to the Banco Po- - pular de Economias y Préstamos de es1. ta Ciudad, for the two mortgages which -j has on the estate. FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS which is given to him in a certificate for one hundred shares of Banco de San Juan, and for the same value. And TWENTY TWO THOUSAND THIRTY SEVEN HUNDRED SEVENTY SEVEN DOLLARS in this form: TWO THO THOUSAND TWENTY DOLLARS in cash, in this same act and in a check payable to the Banco Comercial de Puerto Rico, issued in favor of Mr. Iglesias. THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS for the entire month of January of the year one thousand nine hundred and twenty-one. THIRTEEN THOUSAND DOLLARS for the whole month of June of the same year one thousand nine hundred and twenty-one. THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS for the whole month of June in the year nineteen hundred and twenty-two. THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS for the whole month of June in the year nineteen hundred and twenty-three. (Continued on the 3rd. page.) Be Cautious. - Do not neglect your eyesight. Visit SIXTO PACHECO Alien 47. FREE CONSULTATIONS.
/^RC A'
Bulgaria resumes negotiations with Turkey for a military alliance.
Everything suggests that Germany's economic catastrophe will not be long in coming.~Has the Spanish Government entered into negotiations with Ab-Del-Krim?
LONDON, April 20-(United Press). -According to news received by the "Exchange News," the governments of Turkey and Bulgaria have resumed negotiations for the conclusion of an agreement of a military nature against Greece. As is known, negotiations for such an understanding were suspended when the peace conference began at Lausanne and remained relatively quiet until last March, when Bulgaria requested that the discussions be resumed. If such a treaty is signed, the Hellenic army is insignificant to contain the Turkish-Bulgarian troops, which will immediately invade Greek territory at various points on the frontier. In the political circles of this ca-' I i such they judge that the news of that Turkish-Bulgarian alliance has nothing far-fetched, signifying, by the way the' imminence of an armed conflict. The British newspapers refresh the memory of their readers, publishing the first appointments sent by Governor Towner to the Senate Governor Towner yesterday afternoon sent to the Senate the names of Mr. Tomas Jordan for marshal of the District Court of Arecibo; of Mr. Arturo Lluveras for a new term as member of the Board of Revision and Equalization; of Dr. Modesto Bird and Dr. Casadulduc, for members of the Examining Board of Dentists and of Dr. Belaval, for member of the Board of Medical Examiners. These appointments have been received in the Secretariat of the Senate and have not yet been officially reported to the high legislative body. We are also assured that the name of Mr. Guillermo Esteves, for Commissioner of the Interior, was sent. Although we believe this news to be true, we have not yet been able to confirm it. Today at ten o'clock, the Senate will be informed of the above appointments. MONSIGNOR TESTA IN BERLIN BERLIN, April 20 (United Press). Monsignor Testa has arrived here this afternoon, coming from
statements made in Lausanne by the head of the Bulgarian government StambouUski last year, when he said that a rapprochement between Bulgaria and Turkey was possible. .... It seems that Stambouliski's statements have regained their relevance. PARIS, April 20 (United Press). - The news that Germany's economic catastrophe is inevitable fills the columns of all the newspapers. It is stated that the amount of the German mark paper has been doubled between the first of March and the thirty-first of the same month from thirty to seventy trillion. In view of Germany's economic conditions and the financial study carried out in the Ruhr, Minister Delasteyre declared this morning that the feared financial collapse of Germany will occur at any moment and that, parallel with this catastrophe, the capitulation of Germany will follow. M. DELASTEYRE SAYS THAT THE ECONOMIC CATASTROPHE OF GERMANY IS INEVITABLE PARIS, April 20 (French Cable) - Minister De Lasteyre, who returned yesterday from the Ruhr area, has told journalists that the economic catastrophe of Germany is imminent, M. De Laateyre added! "No country can withstand for longer a financial and economic policy such as that which the Government of Herr Cuno has been withstanding.'' April 20. (United Press).-* Jtfes and army officers lately arrived from Morocco, report that the government has entered into peace negotiations with Ab-Del-Krim. This news has produced deep displeasure among the military. We are pleased to inform the drugstores and wholesale dealers that we have been appointed exclusive representatives in Puerto Rico of the famous * SALVA VIDA SOAP. P. O. Box 94. Tel. 18. San Juan, P.R.
Great Excursion Spain by steamship "BARCELONA"" of 10.000 tons of cargo. With calls at CORUÑA, GIJON, SANTANDER, CADIZ and BARCELONA DEPARTURE FROM SAN JUAN, towards the end of May next - , Line Pinillos-Izquierdo & Cía. ■ SOBRINOS DE IZQUIERDO & CO. GENERAL AGENTS. San Juan, Puerto Rico.
| E sIntorce n -- "La Huerfanita de París".
Bolivar Pagan Attorney at Law. Office; Allen Street Esq. San Juan, P. R.