ELMWNDO
0)
PAGS. 3 CTS. Lleo Durtrado" Bldg. 1828. - Box 3*8-
120
PAGS. 3 (TS Bekiertr" - - - - lA 'M" Ud AAn - - - - --> 8'
MORNING
MORNING
YEAR VI
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO (
Published and distributed under permit (Mo. 801) eutbmtfed by the Act of October ", WIT, on lie st the Port Office of Ben Juan, Porto Bleu, By order of the President, A. 8. Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 91, 1919, at the Post Office at Ban Juan, Porto Blco, (United States of America) under the Act of march 8, 1879.
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 20, 1924
NUMBER 1821 .
TEXT OF THE RESIGNATION OF MR. R. H. TODD.
Reasons which have led Mr. Todd to adopt a resolution of this nature.
Chauffeurs and bus conductors will leave the service.
We know for a fact that the seven Republican members of the Municipal Assembly stand as one man and as one will, beside Don Roberto H Todd.
todayalaslOa.m. it was impossible to reach an understanding at yesterday's meeting.-EI new offer made by the Mediation and Conciliation Commission to the shipping companies Yesterday, at four o'clock in the afternoon, the Mediation and Conciliation Commission met again, to understand once more in the matter of the strike. In the first place, the question of the dock strike was briefly discussed, and the following letter was read, in which the Commission makes a new offer to the shipping companies to solve the strike problem: December 19, 1924. Sir: The Commission of Mediation and Conciliation which I have the honor to preside understands that it is your duty, in circumstances such as those created by the strike of dock workers in San Juan, to continue to intervene, in the public interest, and to offer solutions for the consideration and resolution of the parties to the conflict. The Commission believes that it should invoke, as it does, the good spirit of both parties and foresee the consequences for commerce and for the public of this kind of conflict, reminding the parties concerned and appealing to their good sense and desire for harmony for the benefit of all. Guided by these motives, this Commission now deems it advisable to propose, or suggest, the following rates for the work of ship loaders and unloaders: Hours per day, salary 30 ctvs. (Continued on page 9)
The superb Sunday Edition published tomorrow by "El Mun-do''-The famous "jockey" Paco Mesa will tell the seven horses that are going to win Truly sensational informationEducing Pa-pa.-Foreign collaborationShadow of the Orient.-Great interviews Truly extraordinary is the Sunday edition of "El Mun-do''-The famous "jockey" Paco Mesa will tell the seven horses that are going to win Truly sensational informationEducating Pa-pa.-Foreign collaborationShadow of the Orient.Great interviews Truly extraordinary is the Sunday edition published by EL MUNDO. The Sunday magazine, which has become so popular, and which has caused a true revolution in Puerto Rican journalism, constitutes tomorrow a true display of local and foreign information. Our readers will judge by the following review. j First of all, we will say that the local information we are publishing tomorrow is sensational. The political note, gets special attention, and there is some very interesting information in connection with the possible election fight in this capital. The sports page, this week is better than ever. The great jockey Paco Mesa, will tell our readers, which are in his opinion, the seven winning horses in tomorrow's races. If you are an equestrian, be sure to read his work, as it will give you a more accurate idea of the possible outcome of the races. For the first time a jockey gives, hours before the race, his opinion publicly on the possible outcome of the races. EL MUNDO is pleased to introduce this innovation to bene- - Continued on page 9.
Yesterday we reported, with every possibility of truth, the news that Don Roberto H. Todd, coalitionist leader, had resigned as Mayor-elect of this capital. Our information caused the consequent sensation, not only in San Juan, but throughout the island, where Don Roberto's popularity is indisputable. - Some newspapers tried to deny our information, denying that Mr. Todd had resigned. However, 'today, "EL MUNDO" assures, in an official manner, that Mr. Roberto H. Todd has resigned from the office to which he was elected, by the express will of the electorate of this capital, who see in him the man prepared to perform conscientiously and to the satisfaction of all the difficult position of Mayor of a city like San Juan. And to give a touch of grace to those who may still doubt, we will publish the text of the resignation sent by Mr. Todd to each of the seven pure republican members of the Municipal Assembly. ... The seven pure Republican members of the Municipal Assembly elected on November 4, are the following gentlemen: 3 FLAGS TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY Opening of the great play The Mistress of the World with the Norwegian actress MIA MAY Lunettes 20 Stands 10 TOMORROW great Matinee at 3:30 with the applauded duet HUERTANICA-CARDOSO and comics by CHAPLIN - Rebaja <$e Precios - -
t Dr. Martínez Roselló, Dr. Jorge del Toro Cuevas, Dr. Rafael López Sicardó, don Jorge Bird Jr., don Santiago Diago, don Ramón Cabrera, don Pedro Juan Barbosa. Each of these gentlemen has received the following letter, which is none other than the text of Mr. Todd's resignation: San Juan, P. R., December 19, 1924. Mr. San Juan, P. R. Dear friend and co-religionist: Due to a difference of opinion with the Territorial Committee in matters of procedure to be followed with the Socialists in the new Municipal Administration, I have been obliged to announce my firm intention to present my resignation from the office of Mayor, to which I was elected together with you on the 4th day of November next. In fulfillment of this purpose, I am writing this letter to you, having written an equal one to each of the members of the Municipal Assembly, so that said body may have time between now and January 12 next, to find a person to replace me in the aforementioned elective office. I subscribe to you, most affectionate friend, (S.D.) ROBERTO H. TODD. . REASONS THAT LEAD MR. TODD TO ADOPT THAT RESOLUTION We have spoken with different coalition leaders, we have gathered impressions here and there, in order to have an exact knowledge of the causes that have led Mr. Roberto H. Todd to adopt a resolution of this nature. We have it on good authority, that an attempt was made to impose certain candidates, and that the Socialists demanded that Mr. Todd appoint certain elements for Director of the Treasury and (Continued on p. 2) "We wish to purchase in installments a National style 900 mahogany colored cash register in good condition ' ' '. If you have one write to Reglero & Castrillo, Mayagüez. P. R. Advt. L. Good Opportunity We need Director Expert in costume making and all kind of hand work. Must speak English. Apply personally to MORRIS E. STORYK Isabel 2nd No. 5, Marina San Juan.
"The Association of Chauffeurs and Bus Drivers has commissioned us to bring before the interested parties a list of conditions representing the petitions of all those who are employed as chauffeurs and drivers on the buses, because it is understood that our situation is untenable with the sum we are receiving as salary, consisting of twenty percent of the settlements, and that we are receiving only twenty percent of the salaries we receive: in twenty percent of the liquidations ¿lirias of the income, and requesting that the salary be increased to thirty percent of the income as compensation for the chauffeurs," says Hipólito Resto, Car- 1 meló Rostido, and Tomás Martí Campo- ' m-ntes of a Commission which, according to what we have been informed, is not authorized!- 1 zuda by two-thirds of the employees in the various fast service lines. ' "THE ASSOCIATION OF CHAUFFEURS AND DRIVERS IS NOT A LEGAL ENTITY: EXECUTIVE SECRETARY Since all the chauffeurs we have consulted, currently working on the various bus lines have told us that they were not present at the meeting, thus disavowing the agreements of the meeting inasmuch as they did not belong to such an entity, we have sought legal information in the offices of the Executive Secretary, and in the corporate registration department, and have been informed that they were not present at the meeting, we have sought a source of legal information in the offices of the Executive Secretary, and in the corporate registration department.
SOLARES SPECIAL PRICES during Easter and New Year. Henry W. Dooley 9 Tapia St. Tel. 1295 Santurce
"The Governor of Puerto Rico has not expressed his desire to resign his position as Executive of the island," says officially the Secretary of the Department of the Treasury.
"THE ASSOCIATION OF CHAUFFEURS AND BUS DRIVERS IS NOT LEGALLY RECOGNIZED BY THE GOVERNMENT, THE ASSOCIATION OF BUS OWNERS "Lí DEFENSA INC." IS RECOGNIZED BY THE EXECUTIVE SECRETARY "We do not recognize the state of strike that a few chauffeurs and collectors without work have proposed, that in order to enter they want to remove the others", said the bus owners.
We have been told the following: ' ' ' The Association of Chauffeurs and Bus Conductors is not legally recognized by the Government, but is recognized by the Association of Bus Owners! "Le Defensa Inc. "WE DO NOT RECOGNIZE THE STATE OF STRIKE" "We do not recognize the 'state of strike that a few chauffeurs and collectors without work have proposed to get in, they want to get the others out, said last night at the meeting held in the halls of the Municipal Assembly of the Municipality of San Juan the owners of buses. At eight o'clock in the evening, the meeting of the Association of Bus Owners "La Defensa Inc." was declared open, under the presidency of the distinguished Mr. Arturo B. Echevarría. Echevarría, and acting as Secretary Carlos A. Varona. The Assembly was constituted with one third of the bus owners present, in direct representation of more than half of the buses currently working on the line. "WE CAN PAY 25% TO A MECHANIC-CHAUFFEUR". . After a general change of opinion, the Guaguas owners were pleased to say that "We will be able to pay 25 percent to a mechanicochauffeur". Dec. 17 between 3 to 5 P. M. -I will reward $25.00 to anyone who indicates whereabouts. I Tel. No. 610 Blue, Santurce or Antonio Urrutia, 5th Floor, Telephone Building, San Juan.
carving of the non. H. M. Towner "The Governor is preparing for his next trip to Washington," adds The press yesterday afternoon, inserted a cablegram, reporting that the Hon. Horace Mann Towner, Governor of our island, wished to resign his office for health reasons. At the same time, it was stated that President Coolidge intended to make efforts so that Governor Towner would continue in Puerto Rico, for the good of the island administration. OFFICIAL NOTICE SUPPLIED IN FORTALEZA Precisely, the cablegram received coincides with Governor Towner's next trip to Washington, where he will cooperate with the joint commission for the approval of the bill granting our people the right to elect their own governor.by the American Congress. as expected by all the Puerto Rican people, it is evident that it would still require the appointment of a new Governor for a new term, as the bill would not take effect until ... (Continued on page 9).
[Q]
Compare the Lucky Strike cigarette to any other cigarette Quality speaks. "i ■■■■ II ■■■■■I Saddle lili ■BSa -S.
LA VILLA DE MADRID - DE - J. VILLAMIL & Co. wishes all its friends and favorers "HAPPY EASTER AND PROSPEROUS NEW YEAR" and is pleased to offer its new and colossal assortment. tel. 166 San Juan. P. R. Box 764
3i.(iüiií-ii & O, NEW MODELS RECEIVED THIS WEEK
SUITS Truly original and very tasteful are those we have just received for the last steamer. Fashionable colors. Very convenient prices. F PARIS BAZAAR
' HATS Our models that we receive every week are sold immediately for their always new es= ) tilos and for the reduced price that we mark them. ¿ THE NOVELTIES
H'ÁDENSA What will it be? < - i. i 11¡ i
1 GARAGE I BRANDI I VILLA ST. - PONCE |
FINE OLIVE OILS HIJ05 of YBARRA SEVILLE SPAIN □ I5TR I B LH DOB E S S V AGENTS CA5AHDVA5&C0.5UC5 MAYAGÜEZ P. R.
GANGA < Two (2) "CADILLAC" Limousines, " 7 passengers. Magnificent condition. Cost $8,000. Offered for í $2,600 108 two. Make your offer. Tel. S J, 259 Advt.