ELMUNDO
A RAGS. 3 CTS. ■ ■ Semester 14.00 II One A£o 97.50
, 1 n I Et ua Offices: ''Puerto Bico 1 R J! B Illustrated" Bldg. I A Tol. 1222. - Boi 845.
MORNING PAPER, EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
Published end distributed under permit (No. 801) ty the Act of October 6, 1917, on file at the Post Office of / San Juan, Porto Bico, By order of the President, A. S. Bnr.esaa, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter,/ February 21, 1919, at the Post Office at San Juan. Porto Rico. > States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1879/.
YEAR VI SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
SATURDAY, JANUARY 26, 1924 NUMBER 1522
THE ASSOCIATION OF SUGAR PRODUCERS AFFIRMS THAT IT HAS NEVER OPPOSED THE DECLARATION OF PUERTO RICO AS A STATE OR INCORPORATED TERRITORY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
THE UNIONAMERICANA the only questions dealt with by the Association, says Don Ramon Aboy Benitez, are purely economic and not political Yesterday we received the following letter from the President of the Sugar Producers Association: Mr. Director of "EL MUNDO'' San Juan, P. A, Dear Sir: - In view of the comments that the press has been making these days on the occasion of the cable that by agreement of the General Assembly of Sugar Producers was transmitted to the Committee of the Legislative Assembly in Washington, which cable reads as follows: "PUERTO RICO COMMITTEE WASHINGTON, D. C. - "The Sugar Producers Association of San Juan, P. R., is in favor of the sugar industry. C- "The Puerto Rico Sugar Producers Association, meeting today in General Assembly respectfully addresses that Honorable Committee to state that the economic interests of Puerto Rico would be greatly harmed by the declaration of this Island as an Incorporated Territory or Federal State, due to the fact that we would lose more than Ten Million Dollars from the present tax sources of the Insular Government and we do not find other sources that could be used by the Puerto Rico Sugar Producers Association, to make the following clarifications: That the Sugar Producers Association has never opposed Puerto Rico being declared a State or Incorporated Territory of the American Union: That the only thing it has done at the present time, has been to call the attention of the Committee of the Legislature now in Washington as to the revenues which as a consequence of such a measure the Government of the Island would cease to receive, in order that they may study this question and see from what other sources such revenues could be obtained, should such incorporation take effect: That the only questions dealt with in the Association are purely economic matters, without ever mixing in political questions, since they integrate said organism elements, some foreigners, others Unionists, others Republicans, and others indifferent Sincerely, R. ABOY BENITEZ President LONDERS, January 25. (French Cable) A dispatch from Rome arrived in this city announces the dissolution of the Parliament by a royal decree signed yesterday. The elections, says the same decree, will be held on April 6 next, í,
i, SEVERAL CHECKS HAVE ALREADY ARRIVED IN SAN JUAN FOR THE YOUNG PEOPLE WHO ATTENDED ! A n important information from Washington Our esteemed friend Mr. J. A. Crespo, a senior employee of the Department of the Treasury, has furnished us with all the information relating to the payment of additional compensation at the rate of $100 per month to members who attended the training camps during the war, in accordance with the provisions of the Wartime Wartime Compensation Act, which was enacted by the United States Department of the Treasury, in accordance with the provisions of the Wartime Wartime Compensation Act.} The war, as adopted by the authorities in Washington, D.C., was a wartime event. i All those who took part in the first and second camps are entitled, as indicated below, to the additional compensation approved; and as far as we have been informed, many of those who attended said camps, including Mr. Cies-I 1 po, have already received their respective checks for the corresponding sum. i i i The information to which we have referred, supplied by the Washington authorities, reads as follows: > "ADDITIONAL $100 PAY : "In accordance with the act of June 15 ' -, 1917, men enlisted to } boot camps for > officers who received a salary of less than $100 per month during their training, are entitled (subject to the conditions set forth in I the following paragraphs), to the differen- i i i ■ cia between $100 per month and the amount j . ■ received by them during the ¡ II period of training. . "SHALL NOT BE PAYABLE FOR , TRAININGS SUBSEQUENT TO JUNE 30, 1918, OR PRIOR TO JUNE 30, 1918, OR PRIOR TO JUNE 15, 1917. RES TO JUNE 15, 1917: s i I I "The law does not authorize the payment of the ' i additional compensation at the rate of i $100 subsequent to the existence of the can 5 ' j tity voted, June 30, 1918; and the dis 5 position is not retroactive in its effec-: ts, and, therefore, does not entitle the (Continued on p. 7) WHY DO THOSE WHO TAKE RICO ¡ RECOMMEND IT WITH SUCH ENTHUSIASM? Women admire and help the one who fights. Torres has gone from house to house with her RICO coffee and has proven that it is the > best. He has struggled remarkably. It is true that RICO is good. That is why the enthusiasm. Advt,
Compagnie Generale Transatlantiquc French steamer "CARAIBf" Expected at this port from Cuba, Haiti, and Santo Domingo about the 28th of the present and will continue her voyage to Le Havre. For further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. for further information. Agents. TELEPHONE 257 SAN JUAN TANCA-TETUAN
"Our insular political problem does not admit, in its solution, of middle terms: either statehood or independence"-says Rep. Arjona Siaca in a censure of the ac-
The current division of the island into muni- ¡ cipios- -he says- is arbitrary and capricious1 sa.-It is not by copying the laws of L II. ! nor by sending commissions there-he adds-that the complex problems of our social organization are solved The illustrious engineer and man of science Mr. R. Gandía Córdova, editor of the "Revista Geográfica de P. R."In it, Mr. Gandía Córdova, among others, has made the following statements: "In studying a municipal law for Puerto Rico, he says, it is necessary to take into account the needs of the rural and urban population, and the means available to satisfy them, in order to organize not a government, but an admi- ! nistration whose sole object is to obtain the satisfaction of those needs in the most efficient way; bearing in mind that municipalities are not small states, they are not public bodies with their own constitution and laws. A glance at the map of Puerto Rico, he adds, shows that the division of the Island into municipalities is today arbitrary and capricious; obeying to past conveniences, but not to a plan well studied in the present with the sole aim of the general interest; taking into account the present density of population, and all the data of our social geography. It is not by copying the laws of the United States; it is not by sending committees to study the municipal laws of different States with a view to applying them to Puerto Rico, that the complex problems of our social, economic and political organization, involved in the problem, will be solved. 11) ■PARQUE 1 TODAY SATURDAY GLORIA SWANSON in "La Jaula de Oro" Maiiana Domingo "THE POVERTY OF MONEY" BOLIVAR PAGAN ATTORNEY AND NOTARY I j Insular and Federal Courts ; Office: Alien Street, in front of González Padín. ¡ P. O. Box 883. Telephone: 1475 i SAN JUAN, P. R. |
Dr. L. L. L. LOPEZ DE LA ROSA SURGEON Residence: Taft Ave. No. 12, Santurce Phone 1421 CONSULTATIONS:-9 to 12 A. M. San Francisco 32, altos de la Porto Rico Drug Co. HOURS: 3 to 5 P. M. i- P A O A P I? I kj rlA zAxjIL garage - gasoline - washes I BRANDI v, w A ,- p P of t CE |
OLIMPO" Theater - Hoy Hoy I
In a recent work published by the distinguished representative to the House of Representatives, Mr. Rafael Arjona Siaca, regarding the attitude of the members of the Association of Sugar Producers, and after harshly censuring the content of the cablegram sent by them, he makes interesting political statements that we think it is appropriate to make known to our readers. Here are some of the most salient paragraphs of Mr. Arjona's interesting work. i "It is, in truth, that attitude. Jose de Diego, the fulgurant ver. 1 bo that from his seat as a legislator, whether in the exercise of his professional ministry, or in the teaching tribune of the University and the! Ateneo, already in the tribune of combat, in the midst of the crowds snatched by his lyricism, as a lawyer, as a statesman, as a poet, defended and proclaimed the ideal of Independence for Puerto Rico, everywhere, and at all times, recognized that there were only two decent solutions to the political problem of Puerto Rico and the only "bles- don frti'WbY of a cultured and civilized people: the State or Independence. ' i Antonio R. Barceló, President of the Senate of Puerto Rico and President of the Unionist Party of Puerto Rico, not now, when his party, under the pressure of strong external circumstances, eliminated from its program the Independence solution, and approached the State solution, but before, in 1919, when in his party the secessionist verb predominated and it was on the basis of his oratory Independence that he triumphed in previous electoral campaigns, he recognized, in full Committee on Insular Affairs (Continued on page 2) ! AL BARRER For having to be absent, I sell a Complete Cowshed and I yield in lease a farm of 300 ropes, fincada de Caña and malojillo to 5 minutes do ( San Juan Reports: Carretera Nueva, Calle Africa, telephone 673 green, Santurce. Luis de la Cruz. Advt. ¡í FOR SALE | i ::: 4. j j j A "Na- " ÍTIONAL" one-drawer cash register, " with very little use, for mod- " ¡í díco price. " For information, please contact " T box 456, Mayagüez, --
The Ledo. Rafael Guillermety in an interview he gave us last night says that 'incorporation' means the death of the country.
"There would come a crisis so great, so enormous, that loi das wealth and institutions -more firm and powerful- would disappear.-The Joint Resolution -he adds- determines in my understanding, a new era of the highest transcendence in our politics One of our Editors visited I last night the Ledo. Rafael Guillermety, a distinguished lawyer of San Juan and a prestigious figure of the Unionist party, j -What do you think of the present political moment," we told him, "The present political moment has, undoubtedly, a culminating and decisive interest. Joint Resolution No. 2, approved by the Legislature of Puerto Rico, determines, in my opinion, a new era of the highest transcendence in our politics, and the fully collective feeling of a country, which is reborn concentrated in cohesion in- , ! tima and alive with all its latent forces. ■ . The collective ideal had always been in Puerto Rico a vague reverie, a strange chimera, and in the present political moment, miraculously and providentially, it is a new value that emerges, luminous as a sun and glorious as a gospel of peace and love. The diplomatic la- i , bcr that develops the Co- ¡ } mission before the Capitol in Washington . The diplomatic mission before Capitol Hill must be encouraged, sustained and defended with the conscious and virile effort of all Puerto Rico. Never, at any other stage of its history, has Puerto Rico been able to unite in a closer bond.} - Rico unite in closer bond its j I I high metropolitan powers greater su- j , ma of self-government; which is this in ¡ i reality indeed, what is asked of the Nation, for the Congress of Washington cannot and should not determine per ! multiple and most powerful reasons, the I definitive political status of the Puerto Rican People i i i ■ -Why do you believe that the American Congress can not determine the final political status of the Puerto Rican People? J - First, because Puerto Rico, at this moment, is a young people that is beginning to study the ins- ■ ■ titutions of the freest and most powerful people in the ! ¡ powerful of the Universe; four s'lglos of 1 past civilization could be but were not enough to invigorate the body and soul of the country; the gymnasium and ia school, fundamental bases of the ■ i physical and spiritual vigor of a people were only attributes of the public classes of Puerto Rico; the people, the' I true people, the one from below, the one that I suffered and suffers the privations and the mi- ; I serious; the one that represented and represents . i in the most beautiful images the struggle, painful and bloody, for the political and social welfare; the one that synthesized and still synthesizes, scattered in the high summits and in the green meadows of our fields, the primitive and divine prototype of the peasant, that one and no other, . who represents in the majesty of his ■ modesty the immense nucleus of the ha- j hitantes of Puerto Rico, declared hu mana and wisely citizens of the United States of America by virtue of the precepts of Bill Jones, that dis- - i graced, who could not enter a tem , *! pious to know God, who could not . II attend a school to learn, i > j who lived and lives in solitude in en| deble bohío, submerged in ignorance > 1 and subject to the inclemencies of the po- ! 1 tentes forces of nature, is "| is that the citizen of the Uni * I I two States Who is going to ask the Capitol of Wash * * ington to define and determine the sta- *} tus political of the Puerto Rican People? It will be one, two and perhaps three generations before the inhabitants of Puerto Rico will be perfectly prepared to ask the U.S. Congress to define and determine the political status of the Puerto Rican people, and to determine the political status of the Puerto Rican people.
Violent collision occurred in the early hours of yesterday morning near Guabajibo between mail train number 3 and a truck. Ten people were injured, among them two of intense gravity In the early hours of yesterday morning, a violent collision occurred in Mayagüez between one of the trains that pass through that city at 4 o'clock in the morning, and a truck, property of Mr. Agustín Roselló, resulting in numerous injuries, all of them of gravity. We immediately contacted the Mayagüez Police headquarters, where they provided us with all the details of the terrible accident that endangered the lives of numerous people. I THE ACCIDENT | The fact occurred, coño we say anI tes, at 4:15 in the morning of yesterday, ¡ near Guanajibo. highway number ; 2, and in the level crossing what- there is in that ! site, kilometer 190, ¡ ~*At that hour, and in p.sitio indicated, ' the mail train number 3* 'that leaves from . San Juan at nneup o'clock in the nocjfie'gon |Aestiqp to Po-jfe. HP 60, guiaflo pof he chauffeur Ríyfael i Valentín, a native of Mayagüez, and 40 years of age. The collision was so violent, that the (Continued on page 2) ¡ ¡ $3,000,000 TAX EXEMPT BONDS OF PORTO RICO Bids will be opened at the Bureau of Insular Affairs, War Department, - Room 3042, Munitions Building, Wash- ■ ington, D. C. at 2 o'clock P. M, Fe- , bruary 5th..., 1924, for Public Improve1 meat Bonds of Porto Rico, to the face value of $3,000,000. Bonds are dated July 1st., 1923 bear interest at 5-0 0 per annum, pavable semi-annual, ly on January 1 and July 1, and are ! in coupon form in denomination of $1,000 only. Bonds are payable an' nually in series of $500,000 each on July 1, 1944 to July 1, 1949 and are i redeemable on July 1, 1943 or on any i subsequent interest payment date, i Principal and interest will be payable at United States Treasury, Washingi ton, D. c. The Attorney General of ' the United States has passed upon the legality of ths issue. Bonds are ac- - ceptable at par as security for deposits Í of public moneys or postal savings funds of United States; also for de1 posits of Porto Rican funds and as I security required by law of Porto Rico to be deposit with Treasurer of Porto Rico. Bids should be enclosed in envelopes marked "Subscriptions for Porto Rico 5-OiO Gold Loan of 1923 (1943-1955) Public Improvemet" and ' addressed to "Chief Bureau of Insular } Affairs, Room 3042, Munitions buildi ing, Washington, D. C. Bids must be accompanied by Bank draft or certified check for 2 0 0 of par value of bonds bid for, payable to Chief Bureau of Insular Affairs, In New York City funds. Accepted subscriptions will be payable February 19, 1924 at a bank in New York City to be designated later, which will make delivery i of the bonds or bearer Interim certificates exchangeable for the definitive bonds. The right is reserved to reject any or all bids. For further particulars address the .BUREAU OF INSULAR AFFAIRS,.; I Washington, D, C. Advt.
I The federal Grand Jury declared in open court that there was no cause of action against the deputy chief of Prohibition, who was indicted for violating an article of the U.S. Criminal Code by U.S. Attorney Wells.
I The alleged violation of Law had its , origin in the now famous smuggling discovered at Mona, and in which , the Agent had to intervene, conjun- ' 1 Lamente with other companions who then indicted him In the District Court of the United States in and paia the District of | Puerto Rico, on Nov- i bro A. 1", 1923. THE GRAND JURY of the United States, empaneled, sworn and instructed . ! at the aforesaid term of the said Court, under oath taken by them, do find that Jesus Pales i Diaz, on the 1st day of December, 1923, in said district and within the jurisdiction of this court, to wit, i in Mayagüez, Puerto Rico, the expreI sado Jesús Palés Díaz, there and then being an officer of the ■ Government of the United States, to wit, a 1 Federal Prohibition Agent acting under the Federal Director of Frohi- , , , ! , bition of Puerto Rico, and being a } ■ j official of the Department of Teso- } ■ ry of the United States, and there and | i then acting in his oil- j ¡ cial capacity as Federal Agent of the ProhlI bition of the United States, came j ' i into his power as such Federal Prohi- : - Lition Agent, and under his control in the discharge of his office, and under color of ¡ 1 authority as such Federal Agent of i : Prohibition of the United States, ' ' , certain intoxicating beverages and certain ! 1 drugs and perfumery, which had been ' ocMpajias^j>federal authorities ■ ■"é -1 a íírÓM'ífrlífoft eíf Puerto RW and the 1 1 1 island police of Puerto Rico as ' contraband on Mona Island, in i Puerto Rico, and that the said Jesus Palés Díaz, there and then and on said I i occasion, namely, at Mayagüez, Puerto j Rico, there for the first day of dii cember, 1923, unlawfully, willfully, im- ; I own and criminally converted to his own use a briefcase full of intoxicating drinks and perfumery and other bottles containing liquor and perfumery, being a part of the contraband occupied on the Island of La Mona, and which were there and then in the possession of the late Jesus Pales Diaz as an officer of the United States Government, namely, a Federal Prohibition Agent, and were possessed by him under color of authority as such Federal Prohibition Agent. The exact kind, quality and quantity of liquor and perfumery so illegally converted to his own use by the said Jesus Pales Diaz, being unknown to this Grand Jury and therefore unable to describe the same with any degree of certainty, the exact manner of such conversion to his own use or disposition by the said Jesus Pales Diaz of said liquor and perfumery, ' thus unlawfully, improperly and criminally I converted to his own use, while I the same were in his custody ' as an officer of the United States being unknown to this Grand Jury, and therefore cannot be made to appear with a greater degree of certainty. ■ All of which is contrary to the law pa- ■ i ra such a case made and provided for and against j I the peace and dignity of the Uni- . i two States. [ (f) Ira K. WELLS, United States Attorney. i! I SECOND CHARGE ' i ■ And the Grand Jury upon its oath already expressed, further submits as a separate and distinct charge that Jesus , Pales Diaz, there for the 1st day of Decem- ■ bre, 1923, in said district and within ' the jurisdiction of this Court, to sa- . ber, at Mayagüez, Puerto Rico, the said Jesús Palés Díaz being there- and then an officer of the ■ Government of the United States, to wit, a Federal Prohibition Agent ac- ; tuing under the Federal Director of Prohibition "Je Puerto Rico, and being (Continued on p. 11)