EL.WNDO
I A PAGES. 3 CTS. | 1% *QÍ¿raur "hen" fiñ ■ | | Destrato" Bldg. | <> "L 12aa - - SM.
in PAGS. 3 CTS. I The Sametere gAM 1U r M
- MORNING DAILY, .
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO Vt
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Pvbllahad and "atribulad nadar "aradt t "o. Ate nf Oteabar S, 1R1T, M 1U rite Paa" OfSea oí San Iwn, Poete "Mo, Sy order of tta PraáldaSK. Fntenertw Oosaral. Esterad aa aoooad elate natter, ft>hmdr" 81. l¥jf,a* tea Fate Ottao te. éte Jte(ÚMted "atea af A "ariea> "adar tea Ate af aatak S, 1S7S
SATURDAY, MAY 10, 1924.
NUMBER 1610
Socialist Me will favor passage of election amendment to allow voting for candidates on more than one ticket
One of the most important questions to be resolved by the directors of the "Alianza Puertorriqueña'', recently formed in the Assemblies of Mayagüez and San Germán, is to find the way in which the candidacies belonging to this understanding between Republicans and Unionists will be taken to the electoral ticket. It seems that this matter, when it was discussed in the conferences held in Ponce between the representatives of both historical parties, was left in suspense with the purpose of resolving it after the projected "Alliance" that is today a reality, according to the will of the sovereign Assemblies of both collectivities, was agreed upon in due form and principles. The idea that has been suggested so far to carry out the Alliance without having to dissolve the parties or form a third party, was to amend the Electoral Law in the sense that the same candidate could appear at the same time in two or more candidacies.The Legislature is in a position to do this perfectly well, because the parties, in minority, have recently been clamoring for this amendment to be made and appeared before the Congress so that it would include this right, which made the republican-socialist coalition feasible, in the Organic Act. As we were told, yesterday afternoon, that Senator Iglesias, in the interview he had with the Governor, had spoken to him about the advisability of calling the Legislature into extraordinary session to amend the Electoral Law in the sense we have indicated above, we called Mr. Iglesias and to questions we asked him he replied that he had not requested "So of the Governor and that now those who might ask him to do so (Continued on page 2) The races on Sunday 11 will be among those that will be epoch-making in the horse-racing season. Advt. ATTENTION "El Figaro" barbershop guarantees modern haircuts for girls. Pedro Trujillo GUILL. rQfí-w "it's TOASTED Conípare the LQtky Strike cigarette with any, other cigarette. Quality speaks. WRITING MACHINES A . (JuMtttaMno* nuMtro work. -M. 'tVPEWRlTER REPAIRDW SHOP. ABte lí, Tri. M*. Bol 1*48
The dialogue that Mr. Barceló's and Mr. Barceló's, a newspaper of the afternoon, puts in the mouth, exists only in the imagination of the reporter of that newspaper'', says the head of the Socialists, Mr. Santiago Iglesias "I have no interest in the amendment of the electoral law, but I do care about the approval of a new electoral law. Yesterday afternoon we were talking on the phone with the supreme leader of the Socialist Party on the island, Mr. Santiago Iglesias, who made the following statements about an information given by an afternoon newspaper: "The dialogue that one of the afternoon newspapers puts in my mouth and that of Mr. Barceló does not exist more than in the imagination of the reporter of that newspaper. Everything published is completely inaccurate, all lies. The only truth that exists in the matter is what you have published. Other than that, everything that is said is false. This newspaper is untruthful when it says that I asked Mr. Barceló about the extraordinary session of the legislature. The one who asked that question was one of its editors. I have no special interest in amending the current Electoral Law in one way or another, simply because it is all bad. What matters to me is that when the Legislature meets, if it meets, since Tous Soto and Barceló are determined that it should, in order to amend the Electoral Law so that the Holy Turkish Alliance becomes possible, what matters to me, I repeat, is that a new law is passed that is not as despotic and tyrannical as the one we now suffer and that offers more guarantees to the people. That does matter to me, and very much so. We are suffering from a quasi-military directory, and that is what I want to see end. If the blessed allies, who preach so many ideas of liberty and democracy, do not put them into practice, then where do we stand? The reporter of this newspaper goes so far as to pretend to make public the conference I recently held with Governor Towner. Everything he says in that connection is untrue. Nothing of the kind was discussed in my conference with Mr. Towner. He does not know one iota of what happened there and will continue to ignore it. "The dictatorship that has been implanted in the country will bear its punishment.
The great speed race has awakened an enthusiasm among the horsemen, which promises to be a sensational show on Sunday at the "Las Casas" racetrack. Advt. Villar & Co. Inc. Apartado 201. Tel. 1450 San Juan, P. R. They sell the best wheat flour brands "LUNA DE 9R0" "CRUZ DE QUALIDAD" Price without competition. Proof makes faith. Dr. f. B. RONS Painless Extractions $1.00 Edificio Padfn. Fifth Floor.
"GOD CANNOT SAVE THOSE WHO DON'T WANT TO BE SAVED'-WE ARE LIFTED BY A LEADER REFERRING TO THE D' COLL AND CUCHI® ACION.
We have been told that the Aflpa did all it could with the ex-speaker to make his position in the Party decorous-'fl believed-we have been told-that he had been a victim of injustice should have raised his dirflent question and proved his innocence to the Asfla."
The attitude assumed by Mr. OoU y Cuchí, upon his return from the Assembly, writing an article harshly censuring the actions of Mr. Barceló in not bringing the case of Mr. Coll to the consideration of the Assembly, has been the object of numerous comments in this capital. One of the main leaders of the majority party and one of those who attended the Unionist Assembly of Ban German, commenting on the attitude of Mr. Coll, has told us, sincerely sorry, because he feels true affection for Mr. Coll, that God cannot save those who do not want to save themselves. He explained to us that Mr. Coll, given the situation in which he found himself with respect to the leadership of the party and the House of Representatives, which bodies had withdrawn their confidence in him, should not expect anything else from the Assembly but that it would treat him with consideration that would be disavowing to the governing bodies that condemned his past actions. "The fact, we were told, that a question of confidence was involved in the matter of Mr. Coll meant that the Assembly had no jurisdiction in the matter, since it is impossible for an Assembly to compel the Central Board to have confidence in one who is not a member of the Board, and the voice of the ballot box in November will be most eloquent. It is not possible to preach ideas of "love, harmony and fraternity" and do the opposite. When deeds do not correspond to words, the latter are useless. Tomorrow the Executive Committee of my party will meet and we will draw up our plans in such a way that we will be able to avoid with the greatest ease the situations that the dictators want to create for us. "Let it be noted once again that what was published by this afternoon's newspaper is completely false, and that the only thing true is what you published."
But the atmosphere of - 1 the was hostile to Mr. -jcoll. of the ex-speaker, r ¡ those who understand the errors i res by. and his last ac- . "tnations combating - ¡ the Collectivity Chiefs, feel j towards him affections, were 1 willing "&$car a skillful means pa 3 ra that a .éí fBflé would make it easy to be left from 3 'the bosom of the party, l without' swBm compromising either the . position of3Ekderes and without feeling a Y a such for the futuI ro in the caK|b that would be repeated ca- ■ sos lós occurred with Mr. Coll'PVsb. Referring to the attitude of Mr. k Barceló. nesügjUnifesto that had been , very qúe made the se- , ñor Coll yjótqhf was called on the list and place in the box esL cénico. ( "BarceRUjilq could arouse the quesL tion of the other . roso that a situation was tfat a situation in which it was necessary to discuss cues- ( ' tions of such a nature that Mr. i Coll would have resulted in worse posiL I I ción. And if Mr. Coll is innocent and if he knew that an injustice had been done to him, then he should have raised his question directly and not through the Central Board, nor should he have waited for Mr. Barceló to bring it up. ' "The call made to him, the 1 applause given him by the Assembly 1 at that moment must have been enough for him to consider that while the Assam .blea did not wish to rehabilitate him completely, it was interested in giving him ' one more chance paña that he might remain in the collectivity acting in such a way that he might one day fully acquire the rnnflan" ft that he has lost." We can be sure, judging from what our interlocu- ' tor reported to us, that the most important question expected by all at the San Germán Assembly was the matter of Mr. Coll, and in spite of this, no delegate was able to give him the opportunity to remain in the community by acting in such a way that he would one day fully acquire the rnnflan" ft he has lost.
The announcement of the 'affair' of an emigration to Hawaii has been the pretext for Fortaleza to confer on other things with Mr. Iglesias ASI CRK EL LÍDER" OBRERO, DON P. RIVERA MARTINEZ We have already had reports on the object of the interview held by the maximum leader of the Socialists and the Governor. Among the data that we have collected is first of all the official note of the conference given yesterday to the press at the Fortaleza itself and which reads as follows: ''Senator Santiago Iglesias visited the Governor on a proposition for the emigration of workers from this island to Hawaii." The above was ''one of the topics" discussed in the referred conference, but it was not "the topic" that originated the same, judging from what ■ labor leader, Don Prudencio Rivera Martinez, told us yesterday. Mr. Rivera Martinez told us that the issue of emigration to Hawaii is an old one and has been used in this case as a pretext to be able to talk about "osaa," which was discussed in the interview between the Executive Committee and Mr. Iglesias. I Although the details of the points on which the aforementioned conference was held are not yet known, it is certain that it also dealt with political current affairs and the "affair" of the resignation of Mr. Antonio Arroyo, Chief of the Labor Bureau. WITH MR. ARROYO 1 On our way to the Fortress yesterday morning, we met the Chief of the Labor Department, Mr. Arroyo. Upon our questions, he told us that he was already on leave and that, like his Chief, Mr. Char- ¡ dón, he did not wish to comment on his situation in the Department. That he believed that this action, even to those who are still personally sympathetic to Mr. Coll, it did not occur to him to ask that this important question be brought to the consideration of the Assembly.
WHY ARE YOU BUYING A CAR WITHOUT FIRST SEEING THE NEW OLDSMOBILE-SIX ¿ Touring, SporbTouring, Roadster, Sedan, etc. types? CASH AND INSTALLMENT SALES 1 GENERAL AGENTS PIETRANTONI & SOJO SAN JUAN, P. R. TELEPHONES:-1275 AND 1276.
This afternoon the Executive Committee of the Socialist Party will meet to exchange impressions on the present political moment and probably go into details about the pact with Martinez Nadal's Puros.
WHAT EXPLODES! Don José G. Torres, the calm and patient figure of Unionist politics, whom we met yesterday in these streets, had the following dialogue with one of our reporters: Don Pepe:-Are you one of the "cigars"? Reporter: No, of the others. Don Pepe:-Ah, because if you were one of the "cigars" you would run the risk of someone smoking it. Reporter: Don't worry, Don Pepe, there won't be anyone who even tries it for fear of exploding. Don't you think so too? Don Pepe:-Yes, that it will explode! "If what you want is to resign, if you present it, we are on the other side.Our policy is not drcunscribe to defend a job or a public position", says the head of the Labor Bureau, Mr. <( Despite the fact that I have all the rights, I will not establish legal claim * any", agrégd 9 As we previously informed our readers, the Head of the Labor Bureau, Don Antonio Arroyo, has been granted an accumulated leave of two months at the end of which he is asked to submit his resignation. It is not known if at the last minute the Commissioner of Agriculture will make any other decision, but for now we can be sure that Mr. Arroyo has been asked to resign. We have been talking briefly with Mr. Arroyo, who made the following statements:- "If what is desired of me is that I should tender my resignation, if I tender it, we are on the other side and the matter is over. Our policy is not limited to defending a job or a public office. Our ideals (Continued on page 6) his decision was the best that could be adopted at this time in order to let things be settled in complete freedom and without annoying complications of any kind.
The visit that the maximum Her of the Party, Iglesias, has paid to the fortress lately has made the rea-nion much more interesting - An "ear" that needs to be checked Yesterday we went to the headquarters of the Socialist Party in Fortaleza Street, and we went inside the Free Federation, ending up at the desk of the Secretary General of the party, the amiable Alfonso Torres, whom we found in friendly conversation with a "kamarada". We had news that today the Executive Committee of the Socialist Party was to meet and we wanted to learn about the issues to be discussed. Torres began by telling us that the convocation was private, that is, only for the members of the Committee, and that since he did not like mysteries he would tell us something. So we can tell our readers that the members of the Executive Committee of the FartK%Jbeialista, are proposing to give a thorough discussion of the current political situation. After 1* Ajanan. CaiOhlteto and have taken such Abrís quo tosí* directive of the Socialist Party has believed that a change of impressions is imposed, to draw the guideline to be followed by the party. So tomorrow we will officially know what to expect as to the future plans that our friend Iglesias, a fervent devotee and admirer of the "Holy Alliance", intends to develop. But as we are now in a period of pacts,* coalitions, mergers, and leagues, the pact with the pure Republicans led by Martinez Nadal could not be absent from the program of matters to be dealt with. The dominant impression in the high circuits is that the pact or understanding with the pure ones etf something* inevttXMe and asunte to which it is necessary to give preference and prompt attention. And given the circumstances, it is almost certain that this afternoon we will go into detail# about the poet, stipulating in passing the way in which the "kamaradM" of Iglesias, with the "cigars" of Mate tinez Nadal, will be united. ' Lends extraordinary Importance - the meeting to be held lot socialists this afternoon the fact that ed (Ckmtlnfia in péglna X).
There is a great demand for seats for the sensational races on Sunday 11 at the "Las Casas" Hippodrome. Advt. Saturday, May 10, 1924. Premiere in Santurce. ENID BENNETT in "Un Amigo amo hay muchos" Tomorrow. DOROTHY DALTON in "KISS 0 DIE" WHITE CAPACETS - KAKI $4.00 by C. O. D. CABRER STORE-Ponce.
It is said that in the race of the "EL IMPARCIAL" Cup, "Ruban" will leave "loe Muchachos" small. Watch this sensational race. Advt. WE BUY MUIAS THAT ARE CRUZADAS AND DOMADAS, suitable for field work. Address offers to: t Apartado 1290 San Juan; P. R. FOR SALE the furniture of a house. For information: Avenida Miramar No. 3, Parada 11, Telephone 44, Santurce.
P AD APC permanent service AuIL GARAGE - GASOLINE - BRAND WASHES! .- TF