■■F*W JTwWBraNWM ■■■
lliS
ID PACS.3CTS. I V
JOURNAL OF
MANNA,
V. AMI VI
SAINT MAN, THEFT NOS
ruaesnea TT "g?* * me m sao.iries tie gaaoTtl M demtaTSm £ Mttf mSk BM&I
SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1924.
NUMBER 1697.
bos attacks-we are told by the Chief of the Pro$idfaMne have given us laughter because I imagine the authors are intoxicated with the praises of'which their writings speak.
A Nata fe la tama y fe tejrotibióés, se fiase hay ¡tarta pe le sacas diaero a las cMbtafistas. la siraldiBMft As asa raran dacaaarta UBOMi K M Ulgv KofRI Ut tanroóM ¡asaatate de los péfa?es
On the occasion of some articles that have appeared in the English section of the morning paper and because they deal in some detail with the liquor question and the introduction of liquor in P. R., we thought it would be a good idea to go to the head of Prohibition, John T. Barrett, and talk to him about it. John T. Barrett and talk to him about the matter. To this end we entered the office of the distinguished official with friend Falda Dias, greeted him and proceeded to ask: Have you seen the articles that appeared in a morning paper stating that my liquor is now sold in Puerto Bico and cheaper than in Peoquerp?-81-. What do you have to say about the matter? -Puso I say scneUteman-' bo'oo all osos infundios have been inaptrtdoe and are the work do enemies apparently; pe4 AfMeito pe comeo and I know that >nft tata" make me given some poeqnp tofig - ÍMMPL Ujestigjo before you have totegi* 4 '. " y' > P '-'T '1 * Can ductile oon all franqueen that euamié W'W first article and dsopudael. Mguado, aso caneó much, rich. gáfate really I thought that the <dft had written osos artízalos was fdobablemeubt BORRACHO cm ti lUter of which they speak enta "Mass. * I s-dWVtf. they speak of the intredneeidn éh Puerto Bico of great | etattpfa* of Mdoroo? The stone that. RMiatafe throw to my attentive departa-1;-W MiÉb oobro another dopartamfirtfi tefts" I have to mmnlMiar pefeqdO' ti ton. of the arisate, is my friend * pfatal./'Á-f U-M".vU$k tided to believe, agreed Mr. MfaMt!* M tell it a Jta XfiÉM, Nfa - less than all the PonenaaMlidMr by the lafiroduooldn do drink* fifi Vierto Bico falls oobro my dsgataasidjtaP 7 hMBtoM - " l i ee^g"..a|ti '<>" irony. They are others. M fWMtitodto who have to watch j Mr that e#-íta'ships arriving loo PM0M W* introduce liquor. 'TtoaúdtajjjirhñMa in bears fig. tojo price that has "Jcsnsodó'wt'Eeor now at present. "Htototo 0 m bought from the gWtoqtaMÁfitahc, with bflletes fal- ■ sos, which has not cost nato rto'ltotoda ensota, so I can Mata butiyito*. T °all is in that te rafidM< ; dfi|;.btaá. ton many loe ssrtoaaáta ftjl pe have given, incluon.dfafafajfe an * toctos to h i " mita". -" --- 1 iitoótoii 1 1 1 ai-' ■ £ - ' I . -■* ■WO I, ' W, " ©ondMfiU V- ■ s ' -t-Á- v --
fl trinfe fe Mitro ronpitrieta Ledo. fosé CoH y Cacti ta tos pegas flanks Ncta tes fe Saeta Deaingo - I
fipns (aa iraiMes la Reto-; bfa brama cmi d tod> f*h* fiada y d Anabisto de to®dta diocese ns tai certain of the (rimrfas dd Two cablegraphic dispatches signed by such notable figures of the sister republic of Santo Domingo, as the 1 distinguished poet Fiallo and the Anobispo de 1 aqutila Diócesis, give us an account, with warm phrases where the most sincere admiration palpitates, of the notable triumphs conquered in the National Flora- ¡ l Games celebrated with unusual enthusiasm in La Vega, by our distinguished compatriot, the eminent tribune Ledo Portorriquefio. José Ooll y Cuchí. i | The triumphs of the illustrious friend, and the enthusiastic words that the noble and admired Panto Domingo bloc pays tribute to him and to his country through the mouths of two distinguished sons, fill us with deep and healthy pride. Below we are pleased to . publish the text of the cablegrams cited, extending our cordial faith- : bidding aF dear coaepetriota and igra ( fisirfsnán laf ajpgiti that for , you, Jdjo de Puerto, Bico* and. for our ( - . * . rt - "í q Ld toga, B. D. August 15. ¡ Sargia Bomanaece, BL MUNDO, San Juan. At parties National Floral Games held here with unusual splendor and Intellectual concurrence all the Republic, pronounced José Coll y Cu- ; |chí, in conference requested, speech ¡ grandilotuente interrupted by atrona- . dores applause; and receiving at the end . a moving ovation, proclaasaanído high West Indian ideals of the great tribune and apostle portorriquefio. FaUo FIALLO. La Vega, August 15. EL MUNDO, San Juan. I have come expressly to hear José Coll y Cuchi deliver a speech on a special evening of the National Floral Games. God bless his tataito and eloquence for the glory of his homeland and his country! I Adolfo NOEL > Anolnspo of 8to. The steamship "Maracaibo" will no longer leave on September 3, from the city of Mayagiies to Curacao and Venezuela, as previously announced, but on the 5th of the same month. \ Sire to this do notice to the persons who have separate passage on said I ship to embark for Mayagiies. SATURDAY - TODAY ~ SATURDAY PREMIERE IN . PUERTO RICO DOUGLAS MACLEAN and MARJORIE DAWgn: I.| g-- . AvIotu ?|KI No dsjq de vto tote drama bto . U''-- . a' mocito* - >TU.? 1 ' ■" i'- n 1 .' 11'II"|.1 r' Su* =.
Horrifying bloodshed in the Naroqo ite Fajanlo.-fi ex-soldier, d¿ertor dd army, and the killer of an Indian policeman, losé Ramos Peña, is pierced cmm afiado madiete by his own roñado
to NIMBO K IMANA tt NIKINA HNWI DOMNKAL
Aadsmtatole sfinsnii ñuto untos Hfins úprtras; hs(mues tatas fc gnu tirita e ■tatsarissas ntos. pifas esept■adoatatt satenal ritosm |p maiana The mafiana issue of our Sunday Edition, for its extensive informative text, comic pages, sports sections, and articles of great world news, will be one of the most complete or tnterecsntoe offered to date to our readers, In its first pages, In its first pages, in addition to a wide range of local information on the most important events that took place during the last days of the week in San Juan and on the island, we published a special article transmitted by the United Press studying on positive numbers the probabilities of victory of the three candidates for the U.S. presidency; and, in addition, numerous cablegrams reporting the latest world events. .. We also offer, in nnghtrp issue of "mafiana two-page autmnovilisme, 'sports', illustrated; Jas cua(teq Pages in colors eon "Las Avon ywT "J|t 1 Trtaa"; "La RÍOS M L¿>", and "Tinterillo y Fooeooto";*.y nn Chinto "c "c mo episode of "Bducam do a Papá." In the pages of literary actualMados, we offer a most interesting article in which the trial against General Berenguer is studied in detail; to the daily editorial accoetumhrado of Dr. FraflB Grane; an important article of world interest by our exclusive collaborator Frank H. Simonds who discussed at length the present situation of Europe and the participation of America in the solution of European problems; another by BL O. Wells, an insigo collaborator of ours, studying with great tact and judgment the probabilities of a socialist revival Otí the whole world; besides* another "fiarte do Espafia", by González Blanco, who has so many readers in the Hit; the continuation of the exciting novel "El Crimen do OreetmerO** and finally two illustrated pages, entitled "Mártires do la Patria a Punte do Cuchillo" and "Los Lancee da Amor del OpulMto Duque do Weetminster". In the first one is told the reeurgiqiientó that on the occasion of the approval by the Otogreeo do loo Botados ' United of the law do exotarión, has had in Japan the ancient and horrifying custom of the "baitakiri", the ' suicide by means of the deoonteafianriento; and the other in where so MMten with k luxury of detaOoc, loe nmnertoes lances ' gallantes dd oputanto neldo English, (Continued in te 6a. pg.)
NEW INSURANCE COMPANY ; The Unittd State" Caxadiy Co. S* oomplM* MÍ ammetar "1 BÚ*U** <- PuMte Uto lwbi*ad> oon 1H r*'fee*Ho* "ex uy1r¡oo.ik "w* ""*T?!''T r "EÍÍ : ■ i Airroaovus, ouawas, mohnhs, mro""ums mhucá, énpekmbnADes, sobos, yriMEBos Krc. .. . - . íimtóM (awnings. ¡¡¿¿ rjKB vraicuViitfW^WwMUrv.qM,.qp.lq v "we ( g'ta* w totoa v AfBfftM - fUpralGQr r raraJBWBnTO "4' - j. HtMiv. 'i''-" ' c ■ |R .-■■ ■ ■ ■ . -- - -/x-' ? -- ; ¡ ■-^A 5 --X- v -■/? - .á- ''-¿4 -S .:■>' ■ í ;? >'- -O
The victim fired two shots at Ramos' horse, but was unable to injure him, and the quarrel began because of damage to one of Ramos' horses.
The bloody chronicle cannot be missed. The echo of the crime reverberates even in the most secluded and quiet corners of our island. Passion, hatred, grudges, reign everywhere, and the spilling of blood is the child of such a state of mind. The green fields of Fajardo, have been the scene of the horrendous crime that we will now narrate to our readers, in all its details. BACKGROUND OF THE VICTIM Before we begin to relate the tragedy, we want to take a look at the past, to the testing days of the war, when our jíbaros left their huts to enlist under the star-spangled flag of Uncle Sam. José Romos Pefia, son of Fajardo, fell in the obligatory military service, and was brought to Camp "Las Ca-I eas". But he did not want to be reckoned with rifles and forced marches, and a few days later he escaped, and went into the Fajardo Mountains. I Once there, he believed he was out of the QM of the previous miiitarea, he became a fugitive from justice. t i Poro things could not stay like that, and complete detachments of the insular police, went out in search of him, dlspuest-s to capture him. But it was not so easy to find a son of the woods, who was in his element, and who was willing to sell his life dearly, but never to give himself up. Little by little, a legend was woven around the fugitive soldier, the efforts of the police were in vain, and then the National Guard entered the scene and also went after the deserter.... * Finally, he was captured, but not without a terrible fight with him, in which he was killed by an accurate gunshot.
He was finally captured, but not without a terrible fight with him, in which he was killed by an accurate shot by Juan Rodriguez. The due proqeso was formed to him, faé condemned, but ee the case, that * to the present time, he lived calmly in the neighborhood Naranjos do Fajardo, where he had formed a bogar. vrqp -- THE TRAGEDY - " On Wednesday of you present week, day twelve, as to tes eight in the morning, they were cutting with sharp machetes bears that are used in our fields, in a farm dq} neighborhood Naranjqs, the individuals José Oico and Anselmo Eantana. The first, José Sico, was the owner of the farm and the brother-in-law of José Ramos Pefia, the victim. | A horse, property of Ramos Féfia, had gotten loose, and had caused great damage, on the property of Sito, his cufiado Bn les campee, when he catches a horse on a farm, he acojs* tumbra to hold him until he comes for you, and then he goes to Ja Iria de rigor. Azi pnce, Sloe "mawá'ql ¡"aballo next toi.cerqqfie detíde "Stake felling with a peon. v sfflq of the pantalós, and mtoifietsude that he was coming to take his eabaBe. Bn mfieda told him that it would not be rin he paid him 1m dafios that' he had done it, and then the quarrel arose. Ramos pefia, who had a vlAlentb character, hiao use dél revolver he carried, and the Meo two shots at his cufiado fiieo, poro without succeeding in wounding him. Then, Sito, seeing that his life was in danger, rushed at his opponent, and nasuda qj sharp machete as if it were a sword, t¿ ró him a tremendous eétedfida quo paoó the chest from one side to the other, traspasán. dole the heart. Ramee Poda, fell to the ground, bathed in his own blood, and after the revolver rolled down the slope, the thrust had killed him instantly.
E8PECTACUL0S PRESENTED BY THE FIRM BRUNO & VAZQUEZ INC.
Today, Saturday, August 16, 1924. RIALTO (Seventh Anniversary Day) Matinee and Evening. Premiere in San Juan. "THE VALLEY OF SILENCE" by Alma Rubens and Lew Cody. Matinee 25-1S-15-10. Night 85-26-25-15-15. TRES BANDERAS (NOCHK) Port Rieo premiere. "THE DEVIL'S STEP" nor Edmund Cobb. SUCCESS! SUCCESS! LOS PERROS COMEDIANTES by Professor Tenoff f VER PARA CREER Precios"- Platea 75, Niños 50 Balcón .60 Nifios A5 POPULAR <Matineé y Noche) "VICTIMA DEL ODIO" by Carmen Otero. Prices:- Afternoon 10-5 Evening 15-10 THE HOMES <N0CHE) THE FOUR KEYS by Ben Wlleofi. ■ Ptodoo;- 15- 10-t5 WALTOzRegtoMATneEF" i*NM6AI"-(cmM rSrtSESta'rffw/ .tSev - <<. * vtojqflEgHM
Tomorrow, Sunday, August 17, 1924. RIALTO (Last Anniversary Day) Morning and Evening. Puerto Rico Premiere. "WHITE HANDS" by Hobart BoswOftb, Elinor Fair and Robert Me Kite. Prices :- Morning: 20-15-15-10 Evening: 35-2Su-g5-15 THREE B ANUIRAS (NOCTíj The Beautiful Druid eh 9 acts "THE MAN WHO SAW MARAÑA" by Thomas MeiffMuí, Leatriee Joy, Theodore Roboro r Eva Novak. And the perri "o6med by& Prices:- j , M.Iím4; ftt-W ," tS "HIS PRfiwOHrtDANO* by ■■ by Eva NovaiL jMhrt Wadduum NOTE the Mtee THREE ha>eú EA ft-.
Yesterday enyet to be seen before the jtógWf of the TriM SqraN, the rean <|Bmk áterytoto to D. Roberto II. WÉMtotó Executive Seaetario, alegaiidb h -Mpieiialitol of the electoral legislaciéi "IMftambta.
H Ledo. CayetMo Coll yúcti MdeKomW* * " dia.-lss ptticMHms presestiroa hty ■ degato pe $erícMtatib dlaespof las.
Yesterday, at two o'clock in the afternoon, began to be heard before Judge Wolf of the Supreme Court, the writ of mandamus filed by Don Roberto H. Todd, against the Executive Secretary, Mr. Saldafia. As our readers know, said mandamus tends to get declared unconstitutional, the last electoral legislation passed, which obliges the constitutionalists of Martines Nadal, to present as many affidavits as the god percent of the doctorate in order to register, and which forbids them to call themselves Republicans. First K an amendment was filed by the Ledo. Cruzado Silva,, counsel for the petitioners, that | where it said in the mandamus, Pure Republican Party, it should read Historic Constitutional Party. After an intense debate between the two sides, the court agreed to the petitioners' amendment. It was commented on the fact, that the' Lodo. Cayetano Coll y Cuchí came to the court as counsel for the petitioners, to Meet do- ooMr adn íMKMie* starthis. - | ABtfUMENTAOIONS OF BOTH PASTES I Rateando in the matter, argued extMMUnente the Assistant Attorney, Ledo. Mullos, representing the respondent, who argued that there was nothing to justify that the law was unconstitutional, citing numerous case law. He then argued Ledo. Ooll y Cuhi who made a brilliant argument to prove the unconstitutionality of the law, gave numerous case law, and tsmhWhs my conpaftoro ol Ledo. Cruzado Silva, | At the conclusion of the argument both parties, the judge expressed the idea that ais harbored certain doubts, and therefore, requested that both parties prosoAtann written pleadings, alleging the respective rasemos.... Both parties agreed that today at four o'clock in the afternoon the petitioners will file a written pleading, explaining what the aaticonstitutionaUty of the law consists of, and the respondent will file his pleading at four o'clock in the afternoon, answering the arguments of the plaintiffs. **The Jmb will decide whether or not to proceed with the interpponent's ont dódteóndamns.
BActot A Briese, dela Tdfia.Hr*, "teftp "de atoi "t arftototo a ateto * -ai
lt pt ns áh AMágrii Mr rewsi on e t Examidandó* dK*S the JMto petition certifications that are sworn P 07 lo " 1* registration of the Furo party, we noticed that he had included Dr. rtioso, author of the I secciÓA. * * * * r as a candidate po£"i c "co of ago it was said eq this city 'toralflMBtoo would be Don Eoberta. 11 * * rt * now he is now riing petitions oiL cíales d ctonMr Commissioner Besidente?A'FrecglqB party re-pubMcán-K jytob to0. Martines Nadal nop mMyyrigJIMMtalrnnos days that many of the t.... had protestiMo Roberto was nominated. after the ConvenUóti Party te" bis detanado jHjmMnisionado jHjmMnisionado ResV dmStarT * " w "al to .4 X ólf i '' ' -' the Dlrecdel Pirltof and most tireless intofeores djgdicÁ nascent collectivity,sida* fístatotee general sympathy Wr the men who make up said yrtido; Mp ¡pe M said by peopoáen defot cone óandidata,' so that when sfi candidate of the AHanx¿9tirar known sfi the doctor %Mmet Brio so and portujfc"! Don Roberto. Another of the reasons given to justify the fact that Don Roberto continues to appear as a candidate for Washington, is that if the Mandamus is not resolved, he could not withdraw his candidacy because then the lawsuit would have no reason to exist and would become an academic question. - When we met yesterday with the esteemed Dr. Brioso, we asked him * ri he was determined to leave his candidacy until the end and he cratect us: "Do I have it peaso face of Mayor?" Sofior Gomez Briooo added to us that the Mayor for the Pure Republican Party and the Socialist Party would be sailor Todll; but that for now he would remain the candidate. As for the position of Resident Commissioner, he told us that to date no candidate has been announced to replace Don Roberto. 1 If the Socialist Republican coalition were to triumph, Dr. Mane Briooo would surely be the Director of Health and Municipal Welfare in Don Roberto's administration,
days that