ELmNDO
10 PAGS - 3 CTS - ■ - ''dseiñ&s: "Puerco Rico ■ /> Hu "tr*do" BMf. Ill Í "L 1222. - Box 346.
Il Q PAGS. 3 (TS i I I Seacstr" - - - - H-W J I A Afeo - - - - f |
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR VI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Publiihed aád diWrftuud trader pcrmi? (Ho. 801) "utkorU "d by the Act of October 8, 1917, on file at the Post Office of Sen Juan. Porto Bleu, By order of the President, A S. Burleson. Postpiaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919 at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Bleu, (United States of America') under the Act of March A 1879.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 1924,
NUMBER 1793.
Our Resident Commissioner in Washington vigorously replies to the statements made by Iglesias in the U.S.A.
"There is not the remotest possibility that Congress will intervene in the elections held in Puerto Rico," says the Hon. Córdova Dávila.
Several days ago, the maximum leader of the Socialists, Senator Iglesias, marched to the United States to attend the Annual Convention of the American Federation of Labor, which is being held in El Paso, Texas, and announcing at the same time, that at the end of the referred Convention, he would go to Washington, where he would confer with the National authorities, and request that the recently held elections, in which the "Puerto Rican Alliance" obtained a resounding victory, be declared null and void. But Senator Iglesias, before going to the city of El Paso, in the state of Texas, had to disembark in New York, staying a few hours in the great American metropolis. Naturally, he was questioned by some journalists, among others, by a reporter of our colleague "La Prensa", who interviewed him about the results of the elections in our island. Iglesias, of course, told the said reporter what he had told us before leaving, stating that the elections held had been completely illegal, and that everything had been reduced to a farce to justiflVeúiti&nco, infaHes combinations.-A firm line.-Discovery of an expert.
We live from surprise to surprise. The men* of science and the predestined have turned us into innocent babies*, the one with their dazzling discoveries and the other with their marvelous faculties. There was universal astonishment when a man of science announced a few years ago that signs could be transmitted from one point of the globe to another without the need for cables or wires. Thus through the air as if by magic. "Hardly had we recovered from that astonishment when Madam Curie appeared with the discovery of Radium and from here the news of the cure for cancer. And so on we have gone from the twelve year old boy who beat a hundred famous chess players, to the cure of tuberculosis, to the young Edda, an Aleftan who accompanies herself on the piano with one hand, sings in German and writes with the other hand in English while solving problems on a blackboard holding a chalk with her teeth, and Von Hans displays six different activities before an audience - at the same time. A few days ago a newspaper announced that a Japanese or a German could turn mercury into gold. To all these things some call phenomena, others speak of occult powers, some believe and others doubt, peContinue on page 8Whoever proves to us that there is another butter in packet BETTER or more PURE than the CLEAR BROOK brand, < of Wilson & Co. Packets ¡ of 4|4, 2¡2 and 1 Ib. at 48 cts. ( Try it and you will be satis- < fied. < Sole Distributors ¡ SANTURCE PROVISION L COMPANY . Colmado Llompart ; STOP 17 ;
DENTISTS Pr Rafael F. TORRECROSA - Dr. Enrique TORREGROSA Spacious-Modern Dental Clinic - Appointments by fixed hour. Night work from 8 to 10 P. M. Office Hours:- 8 to 12 A. M. Main Plaza. to 6 P. M. - Tel. 1074
The information was published in large type. The information was published in large type, in "La Prensa'', and was read by our Resident Commissioner in Washington, who immediately made the following statements, which were transmitted to us by cable yesterday: EL MUNDO, San Juan, P. B. XWashington, Nov. 21, (United Press, Via All America Cables). The Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, Hon. Felix Cordova Davila, has vigorously replied to the statements made by the Socialist leader Iglesias lately, in the newspaper "La Prensa'', of New York. Here are the energetic statements made by the Commissioner: LEGAL AND HONEST ELECTIONS - "The general elections recently held in Puerto Rico have been absolutely legal, honest and impartial. It is untrue to say that fraud and abuses were committed, (Continued on 'la pag.
today - SATURDAY - TODAY For the First Time in Puerto Rico Pat O'MALLEY, Mary ASTOR, Raymond HATTON, Warner OLAND - in the drama-comedy in 7 Acts (The Fighting Adventurer) PRICES: Afternoon: 25 and 15, Balcony 15 and 10 Night: 35 and 25, Balcony 25 and 15 TOMORROW SUNDAY First Time in San Juan 'Norman KERRY, Claire WINDSOR, Richard TRAVERS, Barba' ra BEDFORD, -in the powerful Super-Jewel drama Verdict of Inculpability ' (The Acquittal) PRICES: ,] Morning: 25 and 15 Balcony 15 and 10 ■ Evening: 35 and 25 Balcony 25 and 15 English TAQUIGRAPHY! Miss desired who knows English ta- [ quigraphy.-Direct to: - MARYLAND CASUALTY CO. '¡ Tanca No. 3 San Juan SOLARES <¡ 5 of all sizes in San- 5 ¡i 8 turce. a > ? CHEAP PRICES <; i Henry W. Dooley I <¡ | 9 Tapia St. 3 Tel. 1295 Santurce ;
"It is natural that I will accept my new nomination, in case the President of the E. II. so give-
The Insular Board of Elections will make public today its report on the final result of the elections in this capital Don U. M has won by a majority of 194 votes. The coalition wins the Assembly by 102 votes At last, the general scrutiny of the elections in this capital is over, and we can consider the boring work of writing down numbers and more numbers to determine to whom the triumph corresponds in the end. The examination carried out by the Insular Board of Elections has confirmed the triumph awarded to the coalition by the Local Board of Elections, with the only difference that now the numbers have changed, and the coalitionists have obtained a relatively large increase in votes, which they did not have before the general scrutiny was carried out, and the report will be made public today. The Insular Board of Elections is working ceaselessly, and is preparing as soon as possible the official report of the result of the elections in San Juan. We can ase (Corftinúa on page 7) MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN PUERTO RICO "'OFFICE OF THE MAYOR i ] - CONVOCATION To the neighbors of the Barrio de Miramar, Santurce, interested in the construction of the new slaughterhouse of this "iudad, you are summoned to the HEARING, that on this important work, will be held in the offices of the Mayor of San Juan, on Tuesday, Nov. 25, 1924, at 10:00 A. M. Rafael Diez de ANDINOZ de ANDINOZ de San Juan, on Tuesday, Nov. 25, 1924, at 10:00 A. M. Rafael Diez de ANDINO. i Mayor of San Juan, Advt.
sée," says Juan B. liuyke "If I were offered the office of Comi/io. ado. general of ií sTuccón, I would accept it," assures González Ginorio i The election of Calviri Coolidge to !the magistracy of the great American nation, places under his direct government, that of this island, with its million and a half inhabitants, all of whom are almost completely educated, and as efficient as any in what concerns perfect citizenship, well demonstrated patriotism, singular bravery, and the general superiority which is the cause of the foundation and nature of the Latin race. The President of the United States chooses from among his best men, those best qualified Continued on p. 5. MY ■ ¡ YESTERDAY AFTERNOON, A FURIOUS SHARK inflicted such wounds on a CONTINENTAL PARK-BASED man that he died a few hours later The victim was a professor of Chemistry at the University of Puerto Rico. -Efforts will be made at the PresFiterwno Hospital. Last night, we learned of a tragedy, which cannot but bring to the minds of those who read this information, a shudder of horror. A continental gentleman, Mr. J. Winslow, was bathing yesterday evening, about six o'clock, with a group of friends, in the excellent sea baths, qne there are in the Park of SanturceWhen no one expected that death would stalk one of those who composed the i cheerful group, appeared on the scene, an unexpected and dismal visitor, a furious shark, which attacked Mr. Winalow dismissively. When the friends were able to wrest the unhappy victim from the dreadful jaws of the fearsome fish, they found that Mr. Winslow was materially
The great Sunday Edition published tomorrow by "El Mundo".
EDUCAN'DO A PAPA ARRIVED ALREADY. --A SENSATIONAL ARTICLE DF POINCARE.-MAGISTRAL COLLABORATION OF LLOYD GEORGE AND SIMMONDS Our Sunday edition of this week is beyond all doubt, one of the best we have yet published, both for the local and foreign information it brings, and for its graphic pages, and its sporting and literary section. We can announce to our numerous children's readers, that after two weeks of intense waiting, the sparkling series "Educating Dad" has arrived again, and that this week we will publish a section capable of delighting the most boring person. Our illustrious contributors, Lloyd George and Simmonds, publish two masterful pieces in this issue. Did you know that the Liberal Party has allowed its eternal rival, the Conservative Party, to win in order to take revenge on the Labour Party? Lloyd George addresses that question masterfully this week. E( illustrious French politician, Poincaré, (Continued on p. 2) shattered. The shark had torn off his right hand, and had inflicted dreadful wounds in all parts of his body, causing horrible hemorrhage. The inanimate body of the victim was immediately removed to the Presbyterian Hospital and there-. All efforts were made to save Mr. Winslow, the able physicians at the hospital gave him three infusions of blood, but all to no avail, and within a few hours he had ceased to exist. The body is still in the Piesbiterian Hospital, as the victim has no relatives on our island. Mr. Winslow was a professor at the University of Puerto Bico, where he taught chemistry, and was well liked by all his disciples, and by his fellow faculty members, for his great and indisputable merits.
P. GIUSTI & CO. Allen 27 San Francisco 45 We are showing in our Fashion department the most beautiful and complete collection of LADIES' SUITS AND HATS IN THE LATEST MODELS CREATED BY FASHION trails /Mb* M.m\ S0Mm0S from $9.75 W® from $4.00 in 1 onwards ~r onwards --1 p ELEGANCE M lOPl ü ( ' ORIGINALITY - - -.
The Municipal Auditor will refund certain amounts which, by way of arbitrios, have been collected by the French press, Paris, since
The French press, from Paris, praises the material and Polish progress of our country "We cannot but ask from here, in the name of Justice and of the historical mission of this small town, that it may succeed in what its political parties propose" From the magazine "Revue de L'Amerique Latine" published in Paris, we extract the following paragraphs from an article entitled "The Economic Development of Puerto Rico" which appeared in one of the last issues: "The Island of Puerto Rico, the most beautiful flower of the Spanish Colonial Empire in the new world, has not ceased to be part of Latin America in spite of the change in its political regime, and it is fair to recognize that under the tutelage of the United States this country has reached a grandiose economic development. Its population, which in 1899 was 953,242 inhabitants, has reached 1,299,809 in 1920. Its budget (Continued on p. 6) GREAT SUCCESS OF THE COMPANY :-:SOLER VELA:-: REPRESENTATION of the sublime operetta in 3 acts ¿a Rosa de Stambul A DOLLAR BUTACA Morning -Matinée and Evening VIUDA ALEGRE AND DANCING DOLLESS "I Comrre a "cajetilla today. IF you are not satisfied Gilles A Wood-* ward will refund your money. Lsssssssssaaü ja Automobile Salesman needed with experience and who can give good references. Please write to: P. A. P. ■ Box 1518 San Juan, P, R. NOTICE TO FARMERS I have for sale F. C. 306 cane seed of the best productive quality. Recognized by the Experimental Station of Rio Piedras. Inform: Santo Buxó. Box 65 San Loj renzo, P. R. Advt. , BOLÍVAR PAGAN ATTORNEY AND NOTARY Insular and Federal Courts Office: Alien Street, in front - González P&dín. I P. O. Box 888. Telephone: 1475 1 SAN JUAN, P. R.
overpayments to the public
236,000 ordinance was approved At the recent session of the San Juan Municipal Assembly, the $236,000 borrowing ordinance was approved, which we inserted, in its entirety, in one of our past issues. The Assembly also discussed another ordinance authorizing the reimbursement of certain amounts paid in excess for the tax on certifications of the ClviL Registry. By virtue of said ordinance, the Municipal Auditor of (Continued on page 6) njío I need an agent in each town of the island. It must be a reputable house that organizes its district for the sale of a manufactured product needed by wholesalers, retailers, ranches, municipalities, professionals etc. Write: ESABROMY. P.O. Box 989. San Juan, P. B. Advt. ■ ■ ■ " "U-TT
To gladden the soul: THE NBA For good music, of course : the phonograph, w We have them portable, table, cabinet and console: cash and installment. It is the preferred brand for art lovers. RECORDS The latest hits. Cuban and Mexican songs at 75 cts. s ALSO 1 we have REGAL records at: J 65 cents, special introductory price. López Nussa & Co., Inc. Tanca 3 t Phone 1231 Apartado 1300 San Juan | GARAGE BRANDI | VILLA ST.-PONCE |