THE WORLD
llQ PAGES. 3 CTS. I S "Mrtr" - 8400 I i 1 A Aflo 87.50
1Q PAGS. ad's? 1 jC OScíum: "Puerto. Bies ■ Hurtado*' Bldg. ■ ■! ti 1222. - box eaa.
MORNING' DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO VI
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
Pabllsted and Oirtribnted und "r permit (Bo. SOI) oy táa Art of October 6, 1017, at ále at the Port OfSce ef San Juan, Porto B""o, By order of the Prooldont, A. S. aBeoon, Portmaotor General. Bntorod ao second cines sartor, february 81. ISIS,. at too Poo" Office at Ban Jean, Porto Jp>. (United Btotoo of Aatoclea) under the Art of rtareb S, 1878
SATURDAY, APRIL 26, 1924.
NUMBER 1598.
"We are not counting at all on the results of the Unionist assembly in San
Germán, for we know that the pact with the Republicans will be imposed, and that the protest of the least will be stifled," says Licúo. Martínez Nadal, vice president
of the Republican Pdo. "Tons Soto is so defeated-he adds-q. his triumph has as much chance as a piece of sky falling" Yesterday afternoon we were depar j tiendo with Ledo. Martinez Nadal, Vice-President of the Republican Party, and leader of the opposition to the public-Unionist pact, who made the following very interesting statements: "I am of the opinion that absolutely nothing will happen in the Union camp. We do not count at all on what happens at the Unionist Assembly to be held soon in San Germán. The policy of Don Antonio Baroeló will triumph. Who imposed the surrender of the independence ideals to conserve the positions in the power, now imposes also the dictatorship agreed in Ponce to conserve almost all that power and almost all its positions. The seflor Barceló has no other purpose than to kill the republican-socia-ÜBta coalition < dethrone the UBlón from power and from the legislature 1 found an auxiliary sufiiso in Mfior Tons Soto to carry out that work. - "UndB few Unionists, the fewer, those who feel scruples *of conscience as lovers of liberty, in the face of the dictatorship project, will fight it. But the most, when they calculate that they will have with eight members united in the control of the Board of Directors, and see that by sacrificing a few crumbs for the Republicans they conserve the best of the slice and do not expose themselves to losing it, as would happen with a re pubUco-aodalist triumph, they will endorse Mr. Barceló and will approve with their votes the bases of the "Alliance" in Ponce. "Bn regard to the Resolution lately published in the press by (Continued on page 6) WCinety-ltóSwy TODAY . SATURDAY TODAY Borrascoso Dawn With WARREN KERRIGAN and ANA NILSSON TOMORROW -TRILBY" $85000 - ■ MSsti You are willing to pay ; i?., this sum for a 10-piece dining room set? ? come see it in our window. ■ LOPEZNUSSA & CO. Tanca 3. 1231. San Juan
1 socialists harass Messrs. Barcelo and Toas Soto to accept the compromise of permanent sovereignty ¿e f. U. for P. H, in return for the Adm. They insist that the union of the historical parties leaves out the orga- ¡ nizacior.Mr. Iglesias gave us the following notes for publication; i "Washington, It appears that the proper government in Puerto Rico is to be run by a single class to the exclusion of the working class, according to the impressions of persons familiar with the mysterious negotiations which have been brewing around the Bureau of Internal Affairs and Secretary Weeks since the hearings held before the House and Senate committees on the bill granting the Puerto Ricans the right to vote in the House of Representatives. The bill granting Puerto Ricans the right & to have an elected governor. A coalition of the island's Unionist and Republican parties tends to leave out the workers, organized in trade unions and in the Socialist Party. After Governor Towner and the other political leaders finished their reports to the House and Senate committees last month, new hearings were held to draft language to the effect that American sovereignty would never be discussed in Puerto Rico. And, this is because the Unionist Party, which represents the group of reactionary elements on the island, favors independence for Puerto Rico. Be fears that Senator Barceló, ■Chief of that group, will become a dictator in Puerto Rico. I II Barcelo is reported to have accepted j the compromise of permanent Ameri|can sovereignty on the is'a, with the con1 dition that Weeks and the AdmiBlstra- ¡ ¡ don provide guarantees against uh fu' ture radical regime. Governor i Towner proposed an amendment to the pro- , yect of elective governor, consisting i te that such governor will remain su1 on page tl> ' KWS - MATINEE AND NIGHT Farewell to :: PAQUITA ESCRIBAN tz* - j--.*w.raaaii 111 - me-1 Buy a packet today. If you are not satisfied Gilles & Woodward will refund your money. I I i i L HlhJ IIL w
A D A P17 PERMANENT SERVICE AArM* GARAGE - GASOLINE - BRANDI WASHES W .'
Prestigious elements of the Unionist party propose to present a most important resolution at the San German assembly .
It hints at the dissolution of both Historic Parties; to seek from the Congress of the United States a larger sum of self-government for Puerto Rico in order to demonstrate in the application of such government that the country is prepared for the enjoyment of its complete sovereignty within the American Federation or outside of it.
Distinguished Unionist elements propose to present to the assembly at San Germán, the following resolution: WHEREAS, it would be highly beneficial to Puerto Rico if the "Union of Puerto Rico" and the "Puerto Rican Republican" political parties were to reach an understanding for the purpose of securing from the Congress of the United States a larger sum of government for the island; WHEREAS, if the names and programs of the aforesaid parties were retained, it might happen that ■ the work they now seek to accomplish might be hindered by the memory of past struggles; i WHEREAS, the Union of Puerto Rico, in Assembly assembled, resolves: ■ 1. -To dissolve the "Union of Puerto Rico" Party, on condition that the "Puerto Rican Republican" Party is also dissolved. 2. To found a patriotic grouping to be known as the "Alianza Fuerj- torriquefia. The purposes of the Puerto Rican Alliance shall be: (a) To seek from the Congress of the United States a greater amount of self-government for Puerto Rico; (b) To demonstrate in the application of such self-government that the country is ready for the enjoyment of its full sovereignty within the American Federation or outside of it; and (c) To demonstrate in the application of such self-government that the country is ready for the enjoyment of its full sovereignty within the American Federation or outside of it. 1 4. -The Assembly appoints the se- < res, (here the names of three leaders;! unionist) who in union with three 1 persons to be appointed by the re- 1 publican Assembly, shall call for pri- i m elections in all the municipalities of the j island. n
In the aforementioned primary elections, all voters registered in the registry books of the Local Boards of the "Puerto Rico Union" and "Puerto Rican Republican" parties acting on this date shall take part. In the aforesaid primary elections, the local bodies of the "Puerto Rican Alliance" shall be elected, and these local bodies shall consist of five members in the municipalities with less than fifteen thousand inhabitants, seven in those with fifteen to twenty-five thousand inhabitants and nine in the remaining municipalities. 7. - The local boards of the "Alianza Puertorriqueña" shall each appoint two representatives, who, in union with the six persons referred to in paragraph 4, and on the date designated by said six persons, shall meet in a constituent Assembly in charge of drafting the program and approving the Bylaws of the "Alianza Puertorriqueña". í u ' DISTURBANCE MAY OCCUR IN IRELAND BELFAST, ahjri: 25 (United Press)-It is ctee that spanslón of the conferences tor nato tomarle "a London (ntre les Irish commissioners and the British government have for the present no immediate consequences, although there are serious fears that "n the future serious disturbances may occur, especially if the Head of the government, MacDonald, decides to withdraw the imperial troops from Ulster, which have hitherto helped greatly, to restore order and public peace in that region, which is the most unruly in all Ireland.
WHY YOU BUY A CAR WITHOUT FIRST SEEING THE NEW OLDSMOBILE-SIX Types Touring, Sport-Touring, Roadster, Sedan, etc. CASH AND DEPOSIT SALES GENERAL AGENTS PIETRANTONI & SOJO SANJUAN, P.R. - -i TELEPHONES:- 1275 & 1276.
TaqÍta - H °y Saturday, April 26, 1924 ' ICalXU nlliniLipdl AT 9 P. M. ONLY DAY ============================= OF THIS TIME REAPPEARANCE OF THE MARINA UGHETTI COMPANY with the premiere of 1a precious operetta in 3 acts v : LA CORSETERA DE MONTMARTRE : ■ of different plot than the Countess TOMORROW SUNDAY-2 colossal performances 2- MATINEE AT 3:30 P. M. AT HALF PRICE and for GO NIGHT AT. 8áO; exact time. SEE PROGRAMS
"None of us Republican representatives to the House are subjects of our own to be
"manipulated", neither by our adversaries nor by our own co-religionists", says the well-known Republican leader Ledo. Arjona Siaca,
CARLOS AROCIIO EVOCATES THE TRAGIC FIGURE OF THE VERDUGO V SIEN' TE HONDOSJ "AVORES The prisoner has had fevers and when the priest goes to see him, he receives him prostrating on his knees! The tragedy of the Rio Piedras nifla was a drama in which three souls were shipwrecked, dragged by the vortex of a black destiny, which seems to have all the fatalism of the Ananké of the Greeks. As the reader will remember, nothing of such deep emotionality, of such sincere positive and real pain, had ever been heard under the dusty roofs of the old courtrooms of the Santo Domingo Barracks. i, An audience crowding in to open their eyes in amazement at the pain of others; a judge analyzing one by one the circumstances of the inconceivable fact; two men occupying the dock, and an old man, the father himself, the father of the three men, who was the only one who had ever heard the story of the three men. An old man, the victim's own father, who was making the accusation against the two men in the dock, and an old man, the victim's own father, who was making the accusation, "We are not going to talk about what Carlos Arocho and Jacinto Clemente did, that is the name of those who sat in the dock, because the public already knows too much about it, and we have no interest in falling into annoying repetitions. [Today we will only record a few reports that have been echoed by the curious public concerning the life of the two prisoners in the prison, in response to the 'The Times' replying to the 'The Times', which was published on page 6.
'replying to "The Times"
If the American people should refuse to ¿give us our sovereignty within
MY TIMES 09 JOSE TOUS SOTO INFORMED US LAST NIGHT THAT HIS IMPRESSION IS ESPIEN-1 OIDA AND THAT HE IS WILLING TO ACCEPT-' TAR ANY BET GUARANTEING i HIS TRIUMPH FN THE SAMBIFA i Fl Senator Iglesias predicts ana defeat ¡ for Tons Soto by two-thirds i of his Party. i After having made a visit to numerous towns in the center and north of the island, the President of the Republican Party, Den José Tous Soto, returned to this capital last night and informed us that he was "there is no doubt about that," he told us when we asked him if he expected to triumph in the Assembly. I am willing to accept any bet you want to make me in that ■ sense, depositing the money in any bank." I Senator Iglesias, who was also in the towns of the island, pressing the opinion of his party, told us on his return to this capital that his party was as one and ready to sweep away those who had been trampling on the rights of the people up to now. | Tons Boto," he told us, "is defeated by two-thirds of his party. If he were a leader of dignity and not a cacique in the style of those in the South American republics, he would have retired to his home and resigned his position of honor in the party. They have more respect and consideration for Barceló because he leads a party that is in power and where it has been customary to support caciquismo; but they have already lost all consideration and respect for Tous I Soto". I Mr. Iglesias emphatically denied the rumor that was circulating in Ponce that he had agreed with Martinez Nadal to dissolve the Socialist Party and vote under Aguila. I "If we make the coalition-he told us | -we will form a third party and there ! I (Continued "n U page 6) Villar & Co. Inc. Apartado 201. Tel. 1450 San Juan, P. R. They sell the best wheat flour brands "LUNA DE ORO" "CRUZ DE CALIDAD" Price without competition. Taste makes faith. SATURDAY" TODAY' : VICIOUS WIVES: (Gambling Wives) The photodrama that all LADIES should HURRY -to SEE.
i of national sovereignty, nothing more just q. we aspire '¡ to conquer it outside the federation," adds I ¡ Ponce, April 18, 1924. ' To Mr. Editorialist. "The Times," (El Tiempo) San Juan. My dear sir: - The pressure of many peri eni tory matters which during the last few days have been preferentially claiming my attention, caused me to overlook your corresponding issue of "The Times ' ' of the 3rd of last month. My attention was called, however, a few days ago to a paragraph in my editorial which I consider, having read it, to be entirely incorrect and wholly unbecoming of the culture and elvation of thought which your editorials have generally reported. This paragraph reads as follows: "Undoubtedly, the best plan conceived and executed by the absolute leader of the Unionists, was "his manipulation ' ' of the Republicans and the Sideliners in the last session of the Legislature, making them support his "plot" for independence". There is not a single fact, you cannot find a single fact that occurred during the last sessions of the present Legislature, ordinary and extraordinary, nor in any of the sessions of the present Legislature of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico, that sustains you in your unjustified or unjustifiable assertion that the Republican members of the House and Senate were "manipulated" by any person for the support of any "plot", to use your own words. | I speak for myself. as a member of our insular House of Representatives, and in the name of my other co(Continued on page 6) HELIOGRAPH CINEMA TOMORROW SUNDAY TOMORROW : VICIOUS WIVES: The photodrama all ladies should hurry to see. Lene Star Steamship Company Steamer "SOUTHLANDS" Advertised to leave Galves ton, after loading at Orange and Beaumont, May 10. We beg the Trade to recommend her shipments from the Gulf ports by said vessels. SAN JUAN MERCANTILE CORP General Agents. Box 542. Phone 840. FOR SALE A piano-pianola - a baking machine and other furniture. Will inform J. Nadal tel. 901 Santurce. Q
SHOTS At the "BAZAR AHORRO" Fortaleza 25 GABARDINA suits model SPORT from $22.00 to $15.50, Pure Silk Shirts $4.50 and $4.98, HATS bargain, great bargain in clothing and for work do not buy without first coming here that I limit myself. Tel. 1579 Box 1246