ELWNDO
Q FACS. 3 CIS. JL OfclnaF: -'Puerto -leo Huetrado" Bldg. J Pel. 1222, - Box 34B.
II Q PAGS. 3 CTS I Semaetra - - - - - |4.uv III A Afio - - - - 9' - -"
MORNING JOURNAL
ASO VI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published ud distributed under permit (Ko. 801) authorized by the Act' of October ". 1917, on file st the Post Office ef I San Juan, Porto Bieo, By order of the President, A 8. Burleson. Postmaster General. Entered as secend class matter, February 91, 1919, at the Post Office at San Juan. Porto Bico, (United State* of America) under the Act of march S, 1*79 |
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 13, 1924,
i NUMBER 1814.
Trucks working on the docks have promised the Arbitration Committee that they will go on strike Monday if the shipping companies do not accede to the seamen's demands.
Workers in other trades have also promised the seafarers that they will support the strike movement.
The American Federation of Labor is sympathetic to the movement and will lend its support to the strikers if they are in solidarity with the strike.
The strike is getting more and more complicated, and we see less and less chance of an understanding unless something truly extraordinary happens, something that will introduce radical changes in the way of thinking of both sides. i THE TRUCKS PROMISE TO STRIKE, I Yesterday, we received again in our editorial office a visit from the Committee of Arbitration appointed by the strikers to deal with this matter. The gentlemen who make up this committee told us that the trucks that load and take on cargo at the docks of this capital had solemnly promised them that if the shipping companies did not accede to the demands of the seamen, increasing their wages, they would also go on strike next Monday. Of course, this would greatly complicate the situation, since these trucks are the ones that bring the supplies to the commerce, as well as to the towns of the district. ALSO OTHER TRADES ) Pe$o ""o Nog ma-' i nifested also, that the unions of ; several other trades, had given them , formal promise, that if the shipping companies did not relent and grant what is asked of them, then they too would second the movement, pa- 1 . xa strike in this capital would be ■ general. This is the news, not very flattering by the way, that we have received from the lips of the seamen themselves, which indicates that this strike has no signs of ending in a good space of time. . ' ' I THE FEDERATION SYMPATHIZES WITH THE MOVEMENT It is common knowledge that these seamen who have gone on strike are not 1 uiionadcs. However, we have been talking with Mr. Prudencio Bivera Martines, Acting President of the American Federation of Labor. In the absence of Iglesias, who told us that the Federation had every sympathy for the movement initiated by the dock workers, and that if they asked for help, they would have no objection at all. - Cashmere and thread suits for gentlemen and boys_, as well as fine footwear for ladies, and also the very creditable and showy "London" shoe for gentlemen. La Cagueña Stpp 16V 2 Santurce | GARAGE I BRANDI I |i VILLA ST. - PONCE |
to lend it to them, even if they were not united. THE CASE OF THE BALTIMORE AND RED D. LINE Our readers will recall that the day after the strike began, the workers told us that the Baltimore and Red D. Line were paying the wages they demanded, and that they saw no reason why the other shipping companies should not pay the same wages. But it is now the case that all three companies are refusing to grant the wage increase to the seamen, and the Baltimore and Red D. Line have stated emphatically that they were not paying the wages demanded by the seamen at the time of the strike. THE ROLAN, TEJEDOR CA3O The trading house of this capitol, Rolan, Tejedor and de Hostos, acceded to the seamen's demands, and is paying them the wages they are asking for. We have asked some people what is the reason for this attitude, and they have told us that it is due to the fact that the house in question is made of wood, and that for the unloading and installation of the wood, expert, practical workers are needed, that is to say that the seamen cannot be easily replaced without the interests of the firm suffering and being harmed. A AGENCY IN AGUADILLA Persons who have lately arrived from Aguadilla have told us that an agency has been established in that city, where new workers are recruited and sent to the docks of this capital to render services. But it is not only Aguadilla. The exodus from the island has already begun, and ; nao of our editors could see, as yesterday, a large group arrived from Vega Baja, who did not hide from our presenter that they were coming to work at the docks. Great Exhibition of Brilliant Hcy Saturday from 7 to 11 o'clock in the evening we will make -"'% exhibition of fine platinum jewelry and precious stones, in our showcases in Calle de San Justo. Take this opportunity to see the latest creations of the art in Jewelry J. P. BOUBET INC. Successors of Tinaud. The house you can trust. Advt. FOR SALE a magnificent villa located in the best residential district of Santurce. For more information, please call Phone 1240 or Apartado 748, San Juan. WESLEY BARRY -EN- El Rubicundo i Febo ("The Printer's Devil") Sunday, December 14 Monday, December 15
In District Court the question of whether or not those accused of adulterating milk are entitled to be tried by a petit jury is raised.
Yesterday several supporters of baptizing milk were sentenced.-Many others were read the indictment Before Hon. Judge Foote several cases of milk adulteration were heard yesterday, the subjects Jose Rodriguez, Laureano Soto, Aniceto Montañez and Mrs. Encarnacion Roldan having been convicted, all of whom were found guilty of being supporters of baptizing milk, the first three being sentenced to 25 days in jail and the last to 5 days. For the same crime the indictment was read to the subjects Delfín Sotomayor, Enrique Martínez, Nemensio Ríos, Justo Moreno, Roque González, Timoteo Conde, Anttero Rivera and Jesús García. The trial was scheduled for the 17th of this month. The attorney for the defendants Delfín Sotomayor and Enrique Martínez, Ledo. Ignacio Carballeira Cañellas, raised before Judge Foote an interesting question of law in requesting a trial by jury for his defendants, on the grounds that the law of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico, providing what was necessary to punish the adulteration of milk, to offer it or have it for sale, etc., approved on March 10, 1910, Section 2 of said law gives jurisdiction to hear these cases and impose penalties to the District Courts, and in accordance with Art. 178 of the Code of Procedure, the District Courts have jurisdiction to hear these cases and impose penalties. 178 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended by the law of June 22, 1919, in cases of misdemeanor whenever the indictment was originally filed in the District Court and were also within the jurisdiction of the Municipal Courts, they shall be tried by the jury, when the defendant or defendants or any of the parties so request. Prosecutor Massari objected on the grounds that the amendment to Article 178 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is only applicable to those cases in which the Municipal Courts have concurrent jurisdiction with the District Courts. Judge Foote denied the motion for trial by jury and defense counsel took exception, as he intends to take this matter to the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico for consideration. NOTICE We hereby inform our relations and friends in general that Mr. Antonio Molinelli has resigned his employment with this firm, and is therefore disengaged from our business. We beg all interested parties to submit any account made by Mr. Molinelli for our account prior to January 1, 1925. JAMES THOMAS & COMPANY. Ochoa Building. San Juan. Advt. Olimno Theatre -tHOY - SATURDAY - TODAY:- Unprecedented success of the great. ILLUSIONIST MAIERONI -SOLARS TODAY-SOLARS í ' SPECIAL PRICES > ? during Easter and New Year ' i ■. I| Henry W. Dooley I j": r 9 Tapia St. ¿ - '* Tel. 1295 Santurce |
ARE THE MINORITIES WITHDRAWING FROM THE MUNICIPAL ASSEMBLIES AND THE LEGISLATURE?
A resolution has been submitted for consideration by the Executive Committee of the fepublic-socialist coalition requesting that minorities recuse themselves from their seats in both the Municipal Assemblies and the Insular legislature.
- Only a joint convention could adopt a final resolution on this matter. A large number of socialist sections will second Loiza's attitude and the convention will prevail.
The Socialist Section of Loiza, has approved a very important Resolution, requesting from the Executive Committee of the Republican-Socialist coalition, that so many minorities in the Municipal Assemblies, as well as in the Insuly Legislature, refuse to occupy their seats, considering as not valid the nomination that they won in the elections on November 4. We have carried out a complete investigation into what we consider to be of transcendental importance, so that we can provide our readers with detailed information. But first, copy us the Resolution to which we refer: RESOLUTION Requesting the withdrawal of Socialist minorities from the Municipal Assemblies and the TJcgúddlura Tnsular as a demonstration of protest against the abuses and illegalities perpetrated on November 4 by the so-called Puerto Rican Alliance. Whereas: The procedure used by the Puerto Rican Alliance and its leaders to win the elections of November 4 is a curse repudiated by all citizens who love ortkn and are jealous of the prestige and civilization of the country; Whereas; A wave of protest has inflamed the public conscience to the extent that some aliancistás of. honor repudiate its triumph preceded by assault, persecution, crinjen, bribery, fraud and using all the most ruffian and savage means that can be resorted to in dishonor of a people to impose on the multitudes the abortion of Messrs. Barceló-Tous against the genuine will of the people; i'or how much: It is our duty to strengthen the protest that spontaneously stirs in the proletarian and altruistic hearts, persuading of the justice that animates our complaints to the organisms of 'significance in our conglomerate; * , Buy a packet today. If you are not satisfied Gilles & Wood- ' ward will refund your money. Office for Rent If you want a cool, comfortable office with all the comfort you need and for little money, be sure to visit us at the EL MUNDO Building. One office only.
RESOLVED: (a) That the socialist minority in our Municipal Assembly integrated by comrades Juan R. Fuentes and Blás Sanjurjo, be authorized so that in demonstration of ¡ protest against the outrages and violations of law carried out by corrupt agents ¡ ' defenders of the so-called Alliance against our citizens' rights, they withdraw from that body as soon as this resolution is approved; (b) That this resolution be published in the press of the country, and upon learning of it by this means the Sections which make up our party, adhere to our agreement by withdrawing their representatives from the Municipal Assemblies in the towns where they exist; (c) That the Sections all, after studying the question with serenity and good judgment if they think it opportune to make a suggestion, request as we do! The Committee, after having studied the question with good judgment if they thought it advisable to make such a suggestion, requests, as we do! The Executive of the Coalition. to order the elected Senators and Representatives to abstain from occupying their seats in the Insular Parliament until such time as reparation is made for the treacherous political assassination perpetrated by the so-called "Puerto Rican Alliance" on the 4th of November, 1924. I certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the resolution presented by comrade Juan R. Fuentes, delegate to the Municipal Assembly and approved by our general assembly of members of the Socialist Party held on December 2, 1924, and to be forwarded to the Executive Committee of the Republican Socialist Coalition, as well as to the sister organizations through the press of the country and for general knowledge, I sign the present at Loíza, P. R. on December 1, 1924. BLAS SANJURJO Sec. Local Socialist Committee. A CONVENTION Up to here the Resolution approved by the Socialist Section of Loiza, and endorsed to the Executive Committee of the Republican-Socialist coalition. Yesterday, one of our editors was conversing in this regard, with the Secretary General of the Socialist Party. don Alfonso Torres, who made us very interesting manifestations in relation to the possible' withdrawal of the minorities, both from the Municipal Assemblies, as well as from the Insular J Legislature. "Indeed, we have BOLIVAR PAGAN ATTORNEY AND NOTARY Insular and Federal Courts Office: Alien Street, in front of ' Gonzalez Padin. P O. Box 883. Telephone: 1475 SAN JUAN, P. R. TOMORROW SUNDAY Morning (10y 2 ) only ANTONIO MORENO, COLLEEN MOORE e in the drama in 6 acts MARTIRES DELA BELLEZA i (Look Your Best) -:NIGHT ONLY:- PRISCILLA DEAN -IN-REDEMPTION OF A , disenchanted i (The Storm Daughter)
received a copy of the Resolution passed'**, Mr. Torres told us. "However, the first step has already been taken, Loíza has taken the initiative, and if the other sections now follow the idea, we will have a ¡magna Convention, which would be the one called to deal with a question of such importance. ♦ THE CONVENTION SF. IMPONDRA We have taken steps to obtain information from other sources, and we have it on good authority that many other socialist sections are ready to second Loíza's attitude, and that they will ask for a Convention to be held to deal with the question. It is certain that the Convention will be imposed, since among the coalitionists for some weeks, and now, during the last few days, it has taken on even greater momentum. Will the minorities withdraw from the Municipal Assemblies and the Legislature? Everything seems to indicate that there is a strong likelihood that they will. PARIS POLICE FORCED TO APPEAL TO FORCE TO DISPERSE COMMUNISTS PARIS, Dec. 12-(United p ress ) - In spite of strict orders from the government, and the efforts of the police, numerous trains arrived driving hundreds of Communists. The thousands of workers organized a great demonstration and invaded squares and streets, the three thousand policemen on duty being unable to dissolve them by force. The demonstrators interrupted traffic and burst into thunderous shouts, demanding shorter working hours and higher wages. The police, faced with the seriousness of the situation, were forced to use force, and the rioters were 93 - 93 - 93.
"El Mundo" publishes tomorrow one of its best Sunday editions.-The heroic feat of an intrepid aviator, in a close fight with a shark on the beach of the Park.-An "ensational interview with Judge Odlin.-Poincaré rejects the responsibility of the war.
Revista Universal.-Sombra de Oriente.tducando a Papá -la historia de los aviadores americanos que dieron la vuelta al mundo en aeroplano.-lnfor-madon local y cablegráfica The Sunday edition of EL MUNI DO, which has had so much acceptance I throughout the island, and which with so much an1 siedad is awaited every week, , will come out tomorrow full of interest. We will publish, with appropriate illustrations, one of the most interesting pieces of information. It tells of the heroic deed of the intrepid aviator Harradine, who fought a fierce and bitter fight on the beach of the Park, pulling one of his friends, Professor Winslow, from the horrible jaws of a shark. Harradine faced the wrath of the ferocious sea beast and exposed his life to no avail, for his friend died shortly afterwards at the Presbyterian Hospital. He has the intimate satisfaction, however, that he did everything within the reach of his material strength. When he was still alive, he used his own arms as a tourniquet. Then, exhausted with fatigue, he gave his arms as a tourniquet. Then, exhausted with fatigue, he gave his blood generously in a last effort to try to save the life of the dying Winslow. Be sure to read this thrilling account. One of our editors did a sensational interview this week with Judge Odiin, of the Federal Court. The Judge's statements are truly sensational and should be known to all. The great French statesman. Poinca ré, in a masterly article, emphatically rejects the guilt that some try to place on him in connection with the horrible world war which cost mankind so many lives, and which is still imposing so many sacrifices and privations. This week's issue of "Universal Review" is very interesting and full of pleasant and select reading, which will cause no little delight to (Continued on page 6) those in different directions, taking away from them the power and drive which they had collectively.
go ® IH
FINE OILS ! DE OLIVA HIJ05 de YBARRA ! SEVILLE SPAIN g OISTRIRUlOCRtS V AGENTS CASANOVAS &C0.5UC5. | MAYAGÜEZ P. "
OLIVE ] g| | \o I J MAOC \h/ jh* s jm)n VT r-i I. HVCSJt 1 nk/w " n *■■"- kZ¿< r¿¿'| ¿i j i" Xit-Jí SEVILLA E5P.ÍIA * X T