THE WORLD
1 n PAGES. 3 CTS. I Semester "4-00 I If **-**
1 p PAGES. 3 CTS. I Oficinal: "inert I I I ■ Dnitrado" Bldg. ■ If TeL 1222. - Box 843.
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO VI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (Ko. SOI) sntMorigd by the Act of October 6, 1917, on tie at the Post Office of San Juan, Porto Hico, By order of the President, A 8. Barifsoa, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, february 21, J.919, at the Post Office at Ban Juan, Porto Bico, (United States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1879 I
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 2, 1924
NUMER01528 (
Mr. Roberto H. Todd gives us a broad "'statement" about the work done by him in Washington and the efforts of the Legislative Commission
"My personal opinion," he says, "is that the Congress will not authorize the election
Our distinguished friend Mr. Roberto H. Todd yesterday gave us the following statement: "On my return from the United States last Wednesday, I was approached by many journalists asking for my personal and political impressions and especially with regard to the work of the Legislative Commission which is at present in Washington. ! To all I replied, as was natural, thanking them for their attentions and promising to say something for the public after I had had an opportunity of speaking to my friends.* j My trip to the United States, was principally to attend the meetings of the Republican National Committee on the 11th and 12th of December last, at which the Committee decided to hold the National Convention in Cleveland, Ohio, on Tuesday, June 10th of this year, as well as other matters of importance. I brought with me the official papers for personal delivery to the Secretary of the Territorial Committee for the purpose of holding a Convention of the Party at which two delegates and their alternates are to be elected to attend the National Convention. Although my efforts had nothing to do <¿>with those of U Commission Le- " mié friends Toas Soto, Gonzalez Mena, Iglesias Alonso, staying in the same hotel as them, and thus was able to closely see the attentions of the members of the Subcommittee that was in charge of the important mission near Columbia University, in New York. I returned to Washington with Messrs. Tons Soto and Gonzalez Mena, and visited them daily at the Hamilton Hotel, where all the members of the Subcom- ( Continued on page 11) ■ MR. A. A. A. SICHEL There is in*San Juan the prominent gentleman and business man Mr. A. A. A. Sichel, manager of the export department of the powerful "American Tobacco Company," of New York. Such a reputable businessman, belonging to a firm that enjoys universal renown, was introduced to us by the worthy and excellent gentleman Mr. Manuel Costas, manager of the reputable firm "Gillies and Woodward". We send to Mr. A. A. Sichel, who has come accompanied by his beautiful and distinguished wife and is staying at the "Condado Vanderbil" hotel, our respectful greetings of welcome. TODAY SATURDAY TODAY HOPE HAMPTON and LON CHANEY -f in El Cáliz Salvador (The Light in the Dark) Tomorrow x Sunday DESPIERTA, MUJER (Woman, Wake Up). with FLORENCE VIDOR
The San Juan Municipal Assembly approves the contracting of a loan in the amount of $300,000 and the Republican minority votes against it, alleging that public funds will be squandered.The San Juan Municipal Assembly approved by majority vote an ordinance for the contracting of a new loan in the amount of $300,000, for the purpose of raising another slaughterhouse in San Juan, constructing various public works and paying various debts of the municipality contracted in previous years. The ordinance was approved by the House with the Republican majority voting against it, which said it was unwilling to give its approval to the project because it was not willing to sanction the San Juan municipality's continued squandering of public funds. i The minority leader, in the absence of Mr. Pietrantoni, Ledo. Martinez pávila, reiterated yesterday to a reporter of ours said manifestations, which he had to pronounce in the Asam-, blea at the instant of i vo , t^ci^ n >4 this paper was to give us some statements of his on the referred matter, which, he said, is not looked upon well even by some Unionists, from among whom the Republican leader cited the name of a financier of this city. Judging by the terms of the ordinance, of the $300,000 of the loan, $50,000 will be invested in the construction of the slaughterhouse, and the rest in other improvements and the payment of the aforementioned debts. Another of the Assembly's agreements was to accept the plan of conditions set by the Law for the construction of Muñoz Rivera Park, committing the municipality to contribute $100,000, provided that the Insular Government contributes the same amount. By the unanimous vote of the Assembly, the delegate, Mr. Vicente M. Alcaraz, was named Vice President of the Assembly. ENGLAND RECOGNIZED THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT YESTERDAY LONDON, February 1. (United Press)-The Government of Great Britain today gave its official recognition of the Soviet Republic of Russia. I used ''West Indian Goiter'' and found it the best alcoholate I have ever used. Distributors: R. Juliá A Co. Advt.
TULIP 4 and 5 oz. sanitary cups. Special Premises. Write to Sucesores de Suau, Marina Station, Mayagüez, P. R.
f* A Ó A C* l? PERMANENT SERVICE Vl AJV AVlJu GARAGE - GASOLINE - BRANDI LAUNDRIES
i ■ The failure of the Unionist commissioners to deny, in the memorial delivered to President Coolidge, the finger and effective hedw that Puerto Ricans are American citizens, evidences a failure of orientation.
The vice-president of the Senate, Mr. Hernandez Lopez, confessed to us yesterday that he has not received news of the work of the Commissioners He is uneasy about the possibility of a pact between the Republicans and Socialists and declared to us that there is no good faith in politics Yesterday we were called by the illustrious orator and politician, acting president of the Insular Senate, Don Juan Hernandez Lopez. Don Juan wished to know what was true about the "hearings" we reported yesterday in our cable information and we informed him in detail about the dispatches we had received. He stated that he had received no news regarding the work of the commissioners in the North, and told us that from his reports it appeared that Governor Towner intended to return on the steamer leaving New York to-day. THE WORK OF THE SENATE
Yesterday we asked the distinguished Republican leader Don Manuel F. Rossy some questions in relation to the work being done in Washington by the Joint Committee of the Legislature of Puerto Rico, knowing how the opinion of the preeminent and authoritative leader weighs in the political circles of the island. The Ledo. Rossy, responding to our request, provided us with the following interview: 1- What do you think will be the outcome of the work being done by the Commission? ANSWER It is difficult to foresee it, much less from here. That depends in large part on the time Congress has available to devote to the legislation that Puerto Ricans are now asking for as an extension of their charter. Some believe that the affairs of Puerto Rico are small, and for that reason should not preferably occupy the attention of Congress. He believes that in this there is a great mistake. The definitive political and governmental organization of Puerto Rico has a national aspect, and another international aspect. The national aspect is to give entry to a country separated by the sea from the American Continent, in the federation of the States of the Union. This is a new aspect for the North American policy, which is further aggravated by the fact that it is not only Puerto Rico, but also the Hawaiian Islands, perhaps the Philippines, perhaps in the distance Cuba, and possibly other territories that for now it is not possible to foresee or predict. Of course, this problem must be solved, definitely, because not even Puerto Rico can put a bicycle agency and it will give you great results / Use Titan bulbs for your car, they are the best. Brakes for Ford, Johns Manville are second to none. Milwaukee Timers comply with the failure of your Ford. Vitalic tires are preferred by bike renters. Shaler Vulcanizers and Usaco Compressors are replacing old machines and garages. We are the agents on this Island for all these products and we wholesale at special prices everything your car needs. A. BETANCES ft CO. - San Juan, P, R. Advt.
i Regarding the work to be done by the Senate in its executive session these days, Mr. Hernandez Lopez, my 4ij9 that he did not yet know what would be dealt with, other than the confirmation of the appointments that had been made during the recess and those that were still pending. Asked which one he thought would be the new Treasurer, he informed us that he knew nothing about it and that surely that was the reason for the Governor's early return. "You know," he told us, "that in this matter of appointments the initiative corresponds to the Governor and that we only have to "advise and consent". Up to now the senators have not met to exchange impressions and I cannot say for sure what the policy will be in this matter. We were told that "1 Acting President of the Party, Mr. Torres had received a letter from the Commissioners in Ja which spoke to him in general terms. HIS FEARS ABOUT THE PACT 1 Don Juan, as far as the republican-socialist pact is concerned, does not have it all his own way. He spoke to us about the fact that one and the other are getting confused in the same tribune and he will point out the fact that Iglesias and Tons Soto seemed to be together before the President. He was not convinced by our remarks to him that 1 Iglesias did not seem to favor the pact, * and he replied that if the voters wanted it they would override the opinion of the Chiefs. "Besides-he told us- * I am not - satisfied with the manifestations of Igle- ' sias because in Politics there is no good ■ faith." I In pronouncing these last palaI I I bras, Don Juan made us think of Se11 púlveda, whose famous phrase sa has he- ' cho unforgettable. r - _ . _ l SENATE DISCUSSES RESOLUTION CALLING FOR THE RESIGNATION OF SECRETARY DENBY i WASHINGTON, Feb. 1 (United Press). -The Senate has opened the de- . bate on the resolution introduced by Secretary Robinson calling for the immediate resignation of Secretary of the Navy Denby. It is understood that the discussion will continue for several days.
FOR SALE i "EL RUBI" Magnificent opportunity pa- ; for a person who can ■ attend to it personally; For information: PEDRO ORPI, Arecibo "EL RUBI" Box 1481 San Juan !
Manuel F. Rossy Gmi regarding the work of the Legislative Commission in Washington tells us that everything depends on the time available to Congress, although he is confident that a big step towards statehood will be taken.
He says that neither Rico, nor any other territory can continue indefinitely as a possession of the United States, since this is not in accordance with the policy of the Americans, nor can it be made a colony for long, because they are averse to that system which made them unhappy in the beginning, and for which they insurrected against England, They have already made progress in this field, since the platform of the Democrats, who have a more progressive tendency than the Republicans, have given entry to this regime concerning Puerto Rico with the United States, by recognizing its citizenship to the Puerto Ricans. And it has not yet occurred to anyone that the citizens of a country can be governed in different ways, most of them in a good way, and the least of them in a bad way. The Republicans are also forced to go down this road, and they have so far marveled that, in spite of the fact that Puerto Ricans are citizens of the States, they do not have the effective benefit of the law, with the Constitution, giving the ridiculous fiction that the Constitution is considered valid for everyone in the Puerto Rican territory, and that the native is asked to take an oath by it in order to carry out some assignment or perform some official mission. The greatest obstacle for now consists of the little extension that the English language has among us. The Unionists who have always fought for Puerto Rico to be a political unit separated from the United States, have been successfully fighting their mistaken language problem, aimed exclusively at the fact that English is not widely spoken in the country. To be more specific to the question, I believe that a great step towards statehood can be taken, recognizing now the Congress, which here governs the Constitution, and granting some more advances in the territorial regime which is what we now have, because outside the State there is no other political regime, but the United States, which is the one we now have. Permanent work. Address to Infanta Luisa 4-6, Marina.
STETSON SHOES - $1000 - SWIGGETT BROS.
THEATER J ¿ssáfeass IZLT/MA5 'fÜÑCÍÓÑÉS DE A COMPAÑIA DIAZ.
W W W B H0Y SATURDAY TODAY < C cTVÍ mañana Sunday Matinée * NIGHT OLIMPOI JUAN JOSE i LA DAMA DE LAS CAMELIAS | AMORES Y AMORIOS s - ■ ■ ' - ' ■ - .... - . ■ ' . .
'I'M WILLING TO MARCH FORMER PRESIDENT WILSON TO HIS PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIAN'.
According to the latest medical bulletins, the death of the distinguished ailing man is only a few hours away - In Washington it has caused a deep sense of grief to be felt because of the seriousness of Wilson's illness.
j '-$ , records ñebre(*f>e?o however, he is still 'very 'weak. i patient logNTsleep quietly ' for alonas hours will regain i part of'his lost strength. In spite of all Dr. Grayson indicated 1 (Continued cu page 11) r $3,000,000 TAX EXEMPT BONDS OF PORTO RICO Eids will be opened at the Bureau of Insular Affairs, War Department, : Boom 3042, Munitions Building, Wash- ■ ington, D. C. at 2 o'clock P. M, February 5th..., 1924, for Public Improvement Bonds of Porto Rico, to the face value of $3,000,000. Bonds are dated July 1st., 1923 bear interest at , 5-0 0 per annum, payable semi-annual. ly on January 1 and July 1, and are in coupon form in denomination of $1,000 only. Bonds are payable annually in series of $500,000 each on j July 1, 1944 to July 1, 1949 and are redeemable on July 1, 1943 or on any 1 subsequent interest payment date. Principal and interest will be payable ■ at United States Treasury, Washlngi ton, D. C. The Attorney General of > the United States has passed upon the legality of the issue. Bonds are ac. > ceptable at par as security for deposits - of public moneys or postal savings : funds of United States; also for de- * posits of Porto Rican funds and aa security required by law of Porto Rico to be deposit with Treasurer of Porto Rico. Bids should be enclosed in envelopes marked "Subscriptions for Porto Rico 5-0 0 Gold Loan of 1923 > (1943-1955) Public Improvemet*' and r addressed to ' ' ' Chief Bureau of Insular e Affairs, Boom 3042, Munitions buildix Ing, Washington, D. O. Bids must be * accompanied by Bank draft or certified check for 2 0 0 of par value of bonds - bid for, payable to Chief Bureau of - Insular Affairs, in New York City funds. Accepted subscriptions win -■ be payable February 19, 1924 at a I .bank in New York City to be desig3 ' nated later, which will make delivery II of the bonds or bearer interim certificates exchangeable for the definitive " bonds. The right is reserved to re' ject any or all blds. For further particulars address the ".■"""" ■■win." e BUREAU OF INSULAR AFFAIRS,. e Washington, D. C. Advt.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 1, (United. Press^*- Dr. Grayson, physician of ¡ . 'ex-pr es i h?*h "ftb erf 'Iff tardé He noy some ' remarks to the press in 1 which he describes a truly painful scene which took place at the side I the bed in which the distinguished man r public is prostrate | of gravity. Dr. Grayson says that Mr. Wilson, placing his hand sorrowfully on the arm of the former, said to him: "I am already like a broken and disarmed machine. You however have been very good to me, I doing all you can to res- ¡ table me." Dr. Grayson has declared, almost in tears, that at a moment's notice the death of his distinguished patient will come. "It may be delayed for some days," said Dr. Grayson, "but it is inevitable." There is little hope of his improvement," Dr. Ruffin and Dr. Fowler, on leaving Mr. Wilson's residence, informed the press that during their visit to the distinguished patient they had not been able to see the slightest favorable change in him. At a late hour it was reported that the sick man has been able to get some sleep. His breathing is normal, he is not WASHINGTON TODAY - Admiral Grayson has issued a discouraging report on the health of ex-President Woodrow Wilson. Said states that the condition of the illustrious statesman is very serious. -The last hour says that the death of ex-President Wilson is expected at any moment. -President Coolidge, members of his Cabinet, members of the Diplomatic Corps, etc., visited the residence of the distinguished politician to learn of his condition. -The extreme gravity of the ex-pre-president has produced deep sense of grief. -The French Ambassador, M. Jaaserand, visited the Secretary of Ertádo, conferring extensively with Mr. Hughes.