ELM'JNDO
AA PAGES. 3 CTS. >11 ' uítonae: "Paerto Um > I I I Dwtrado" BM*. O 11M - - - *"> MS-
Í)A PAGS. 3 CTS. /II B "MtN r- S€W ¿É V
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
DB EX A.M. DAILY,
ARO VI
BAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published aod diatrtoutod*"ondst psorñd* ÓÓ1)Mrthoxi""d to th* Ao* to OatoMr < t X "17,"■ 11""t Ul" >ms Ofl"" to San Juan, Porto Blto, By order of toe Prutotout, A ". BanAon, Postaustor "murto. Batotud m soooad elaos aattor, fsbrusry "1, 1"1", M the Pee) Oftee -" San' Jua, Pórte "Mr (UnltM "totea of tourtMV "ad" toe to *areh I, in
SATURDAY, JUNE 28, 1924
NUMBER 1652 4
Yesterday the Puerto ico Farmers' Association was constituted-over one hundred delegates representing the various towns of the island attended the great assembly.
The association, although it is not partisan, will work with all its strength so that the agricultural interests are represented in the Insular Government as well as in the Municipal Government, and if the circumstances force it to do so, it will become a political party.
If circumstances force it to do so, it will become a political and combat party at any time.
II northern neighborhood of "La Perla", in this city, constitutes a serious problem of public safety for our authorities I - ; The continuous scandals occurring in the secluded northern neighborhood ''La Perla", of this city, bring alarm to our authorities, to the point that the District Attorney, Ludo. D. Massari, has addressed to the Police, expressing to him the necessity to endow that zone with a more effective surveillance, in order to avoid the numerous scandals that occur there. The topographical situation of this neighborhood, separated from the rest of the city by the old Spanish walls and the constant noise of the mat , makes this place a truly strategic location for the ¡nipunidau (Continued on page 5) I
As we informed our readers in one of our previous editions the farmers of the island have conceived the idea of uniting in a compact and strong association to defend the agricultural interests of the country. Well, yesterday was held in this city, and in the halls of the Carnegie Library, the constituent assembly of said association, which was extremely interesting, given the importance of the matters that were there discussed. j CONSTITUTION OF THE ASSEMBLY At ten o'clock in the morning, there were already assembled in the assembly hall of the Library about one hundred delegates, who attended in representation of all the towns of the island. The most valuable and prestigious farmers of our island were gathered there, responding to the summons previously published in the press. Mr. H. Scoville, My ISjLCKr®/ The quality of this cigarette has not been changed nor will it be changed. The quality alone has made this cigarette the most popular in the world. The racing draw is over v the riders are set to play the nool with more enthusiasm. For this reason, it is expected that next Sunday's pool will amount to at least 115,000.00.
The act was opened with brief words, and immediately proceeded to appoint: a President and Secretary to act in the aforementioned act, and these appointments were made by Mateo Fajardo, a wealthy center- ; list of Mayagüez, and Agustín Femández, a wealthy tobacco grower of Cayey. The table was thus constituted, Don Enrique Landrón took the floor, who explained to the delegates the purpose of the assembly, which was to constitute an ¡ Association of Farmers of Puerto ¡ Paco, with the purpose of looking after the agricultural interests of the country, at all times and in all senses. A motion was made by Ledo. Víi cente Rodríguez, to proceed to appoint a committee to study all the projects that had been presented to the assembly, and to report on those that should be put to decision. The motion is argued pro and er against, Sen. Zeno, Scoville, Davis and Aponte intervening in the debates. Scoville, Davis and Aponte. j The motion was put to a vote and carried, and then the Speaker of the Assembly, Mr. Fajardo, proceeded to name Messrs. Zeno, Aponte, Da. n ~ WMRJtlJ iBRTWiJPJ The race of the cockerel. That's what the equestrians call the Sunoco, Clicquot Club, Shell, Flat Tone. Rubamy Velour. Don't miss it this Sunday. FOR RENT A magnificent local for family, with four apartments, kitchen, and sanitary service in Recinto Oeste No. 5. Doña Lola in Los Altos will inform. BOLÍVAR PAGAÍV LAWYER AND NOTARY , Insular and Federal Courts Office: Alien Street, in front of . González Padín. P. O. Box 883. Telephone: 1475 SAN JUAN, P, R.
Villar & Co. Inc. Apartado 201. Tel. 1450 San Juan, P. R. They sell the best wheat flour brands "LUNA DE ORO" "CRUZ DE QUALIDAD" Price without competition. Taste it.
Barber Shop 1 (Ochoa Building, 3rd. floor) Has been opened to the Public The most elegant and the best barber shop in San Juan.
Caguas Trading Co. Inc. Box 173 Caguas, P. R. Sole distributors for Puerto Rico of the famous KELLY SPRINGFIELD gum. We want to get in touch with active and responsible sellers. Write us.
IMPORTANT NOTICE TO THE RADIO FANS OF PUERTO RICO The Rialto Theater Press has obtained that the P. R. RADIO CORP, transmits to all the owners of Radio sets of San Juan and the Island, the Concert that will take effect tomorrow Sunday 29 at 9% P. DIOS Y DEL DIABLO (maja) 2. LETREROS (Couplet picaresque) 3. JÜVIENS (Valts sung in French) 4. (Apache song) ■' : ' '-jcALOME (fashionable foxtrot)
"As soon as a civil government has been established in Puerto Rico, and I hope it will come at the next session of Congress, the advancement of the people will be more rapid."-Says Samuel Gom-.
< Gonzalez Cpadin Co" Inc. in the coRAZon of the city.
For the coffee Hacienda called Frontón de Ciales a buyer, lessee or administrator is needed. To discuss one of these pro- j positions any which may suit the applicant, you may! address Forteza Hermanos & Co, Sucesores, of Vega Baja, 1 Pto. Rico Advt. | SHOEMAKERS i At factory prices, we make - a large assortment of leathers, soles and to- * da class of materials for the branch. . Exclusive sales through C. O. D. LEATHER CASH SALES ; Box 134, Aguadilla, Pto. Advt.
4-H-H-H- I I I I I I l ! H 1 1-1 Hll | LEASING | T T is offered for lease. T t at a very reasonable price, a T T magnificent farm, next to the town + ■ 4. of Bayamon, which is devoted X ■r presently to dairy. It has -> ¡ T good dwelling house and all . I the necessary establishments . .. T There are cattle and -- í business fixtures to be purchased. The farm ... + is crossed by a track of -- Y the Central "Juanita" and has a " X good detour. This is a ... T tunity to be taken advantage of. " i Understand with - t José L. Pesquera T EL MUNDO Building, San ' X Juan, P. R.
OFFICES ■ FOR LEASE Fresh, Hygienic, Ventilated, ' with all modern conveniences. -EXPRESS LIFT--and other important services. Gonzalez Padin Building. THE NATIONAL CITY BANK OF NEW YORK has for rent from July 1st. the entire second floor of its building, San Justo* Street No. 2. HONAL CITY BANK OF NEW wbx. .
l IF YOU WISH. I A young man 17 years of age and a freshman in high school and desiring to acquire a placement no matter what the salary only during the vacations. laf, A Ojod", OM. 365. Advt.
Always Prepared..., ?-***'■'-**■ y&rfl 1 * * * * ***■ Latest Seasonal Novelties Just Received New Hats in truly whimsical styles. Elegant Suits, new street styles for Ladies. Fine Silk and Knitted Underwear - Washable Children's Apparel. Fine and Beautiful Stockings in all fashionable colors. Novelty Handbags and Purses. - Bracelets - Combs - Screens. Silks and Fine Fancy Fabrics for Ladies Suits and many other Novelties of the Season. PRICES ALWAYS ECONOMICAL. COME TODAY TO THE FASHION STORE, IN FRONT OF THE MAIN SQUARE.
Don Roberto H. Todd announces that in today's Republican Assembly he will strongly attack Governor Towner In the pure political circles there is a profusion of comments about the Pure Republican Assembly to be held today at the San Juan Municipal Theater. The importance of this event is indisputable for the puros because it signifies, it can be said, the legal constitution of that new collectivity, which was formed in fact, as our readers will remember, after the Mayagüez Assembly, in which the policy of Mr. Tous Soto triumphed and those opposed to it had [to embrace the tendency sustained by Messrs. Martínez Naj da] and Todd, in order to be able to continue defending certain ideals. ("in order to know something about this political event, a reporter of ours asked Mr. Todd yesterday if he wished to give us some details on the matter, since we knew that the matter (Continued on page M
- Bruno & Vazquez Company, , IMffig - - - - SATURDAY, JUNE 28. Second presentation of LA LUSITANA with a completely new program ONE SINGLE TANDA AT 8 P. M. Tomorrow Sunday 29 Tomorrow. Third presentation of : LA LUSITANA : i Complete change of program. Tonight TWO COMPLEX TANDAS AT 7:30 and 9:30.
FOR SALE 1923 Buick Roaster; 5000 miles traveled. Will report: F. Echevarria, phone 1177, Villamil 12, Santurce. FOR RENT two houses for housing, recently built, with electricity and water. At $25.00 per month. Villa "Las Palmas", Cataño. Will inform: Prudencio González, Cataño. i " 1 " " -
ANDINO AUTO SUPPLIES CARRETERA NUEVA CERRA NO 33 For steam Puerto Rico I have received a large assortment of Rubber and Tubes of all sizes and variety of parts for all makes of automobiles. Prices, no need to talk about Carretera Nueva. Lock No. 33.
Judge Odlin, in a letter addressed to him, wants the Ledo, lastra (harrier do not forget his name Tomorrow we will insert the reply of the vice-President of the House to the curious missive dd Federal Judge On a piece of paper with the letterhead of the "UNION CLUB", as if to indicate that it is of a personal nature, Judge Odlin of the Federal Court has addressed to the vice-president of the House of Representatives, Ledo. Alfonso Lastra Charriez a curious letter which we transcribe below and which has been sent by Judge Odlin on the occasion of the manifestations that the distinguished representative made recently in the Insular Parliament and which we publish in these columns: UNION CLUB SAN JUAN, PTO. RICO. June 25, 1924 Hon. Alfonso Lastra Charriez, San Juan. Dear Sir:-I have read with much interest the remarks you made on June 23, or by that date, as they were published in EL MUNDO, regarding the Federal Court Judge in j (Continued on page H. >
. / / /; SAVE I' j, YOUR CAR / / //7 IN THIS GARAGE THERE IS ALWAYS PLACE H M Service Guarantee F Í Í They say Spinball comes ready to recapture his laurels in Sunday's races. But what about Jorge G., Little Dear and Vice Regal? GRAPES PEARS CHERRIES AND PLUMS WILL ARRIVE ON MONDAY FRANK S. SOLER. Tetouan 35 CHOSEN COWS Up to 80 cows for sale, picked in any number. All are young and selected cattle. The business must be liquidated and so they are sold. Contact Eugenio Toral. Comerío Street No. 137, Bayamón. INTERESTING INSULAR HEALTH RECOMMENDATIONS ABOUT TUBERCULOSIS: Do not live in dark or poorly ventilated houses, and we add that this is an advertisement for the Ritzy Hotel which occupies the most ventilated place in San Juan. Don't live in rooms that get gallery air, take care of yourself and spend the same money. All our rooms face the street. Discounted rates. HOTEL RITZY Tanca No. 2. Box 640.
pers in letter to Senator Iglesias
In one of the paragraphs Mr. Gompers declares that Iglesias represents the workers of P. R. only as president of the free labor federation On the occasion of the letter that the president of the American Federation of Labor, Mr. Samuel Gompers, addressed a few days ago to the leaders of the Alliance, Messrs. Barceló and Tous Soto, Senator Iglesias and labor leader Rafael Alonso wrote to him, thanking him for his attitude and informing him of the impression that his letter had produced among the labor element of the island. In reply to these letters from Alonso and Iglesias Mr. Gompers has answered with the following letters in which some truly interesting statements are made:
American Federation of Labor. Washington, D C., June 18, 1924. (Continued on page 4) TO THE WATER CONSUMERS OF THE SAN JUAN AQUEDUCTO: June 23, 1424.  This work will begin to be carried out in the district of Santurce by the persons in charge of the same. At the same time that these facilities are being provided, an auxiliary collector of the duly authorized Municipal Treasury Department will proceed to collect from the interested parties the signed request that accredits them as subscribers of the Aqueduct, as well as the amount of the bond, established in Section 6a. of the aforementioned ordinance, amounting to $5.00 (five) dollars, issuing the corresponding receipt to that effect. I call attention to what is also provided in said Section 6a. as to the fact that noncompliance with the above precept shall determine the suspension of the water supply to the building or property whose owner fails to comply with this provision. Rafael DIEZ DE ANDINO, Commissioner of Public Service, Police and Prisons. Advt. WHO IS MARTA B? They say she is a phenomenon and that she will dump Molinera, but what is well known is that most of the Hipjeos play her in their combinations.
POST OFFICE NUMBER 1. On the second floor of our establishment, a post office has been installed, to offer the public the convenience of not having to go to the post office. stamps - money orders - envelopesCe rtif i cacfps - postcardsPacket insurance and others for sale. Gonzalez Padin Co.
Dr. Eduardo Lamoutte OPTOMETER SPECIALIST IN REFRACTION. EYE EXAMINATION. Consultorio Union St. Ponce, P. R.
10 trial of Sf. Remotti's trial, held in Gieynabo, confirmed our opinion on the actions of the Mtedive.
1 Yesterday, the hearing of the complaint formulated by members of the Detective against Mr. José Remotti took place before the Gujfcmabo Peace Court, as a highlight of the events that we have been relating in our last editions. As our readers are aware, Mr. Remotti has been the victim of a targeted persecution by the Detective, and in none of the different cases in which his right to the free exercise of his freedom of movement has been violated, has the body of the offender been discovered. I It is the case that Mr. Remotti has been detained several times, and not having found the coveted liquor, a complaint was made against him for carrying prohibited weapons, while he was traveling in his car on the road between Baya- [ món and Santurce, according to the Detective in jurisdiction <iq lu municipality of ¡ I Guaynabo. # i Mr. Remotti appeared before the , | Court accompanied by the Ledo. Mestre I ' and Ledo. Ramirez. Nadal, and the trial ! (Continued on page 5) i