ELMUNDO
in PAGES. 3 CIS. 'ÓícinM: ' Aleo orchard I ■ Illustrated'* Bldg. ,-Ji ■ Tel. 1222. - Box 8*5. Hr -
BPAGS. 3 CTS. Semartrt 8*.'JO A Afio - - - - - "7 6"
MORNING JOURNAL
ASO VI
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
PuDjUhidlSd dlsirlbuted under 4>ermñ~ (Mo. 801) zintíwritifcby the Act - of October 8, 3 817, on file at the Port Office of San -Tnan Porto BÍco, By order of the President, A. S. M "son, Postmaster General. Entered as second claw matter, February '21, 1®1B, at the Port Office at Ban Juan. Porto ypc, (United States of America-) under the Act of march 3, 187" - ±===: -■ - * - "" ■ jaa x 1 ■ l=sr^=dfe^|^^=^ ===if L-ur 1 ; sssasasa.
After the last outbreak of bubonic plague occurred in Puerto Rico there have been for two occasions new indications of the terrible malady, judging from the suspicious appearance of dead rats recorded
b the Department of Health is continually doing to prevent the country from a new pestiferous invasion WHAT IS A PLAGUE? During the last epidemic of the Bubonic Plague, which visited the island, thirty-three persons were counted attacked and 20 died; the government spent half a million dollars in the suppression of the plague; a severe depression in business was recorded, and the quarantine interrupted for more than a year the development of commerce. The results of the first plague epidemic in 1012 were much worse. >The results of the first plague epidemic in 1012 were much worse. A PLAGUE PREVENTION BUBEAO HAS BEEN CREATED. It was evident that the Department of Health had to do everything possible to prevent another outbreak of this sinister plague in Puerto Rico. A new Bureau for the prevention of the plague was created last year. Plans were drawn up for a magnificent and comfortable building to house the Bureau's offices and laboratories for the examination of rats. The building commenced construction- p M last May and is already completed ■ de. It is to be expected that the nascent -Ai*A á-* 1 -Ml-tf-tr mIIm! IT1I ™ di cmK "U "VV IH V jwTIL" c ' 1 te. BELL VS. GOWNS. One of the main phases of the work against the Plague is the trapping and examination of rats. Plague is primarily a disease of rats. It is transmitted to man by an intermediary agent: the flea. However, in a place where rats are not abundant, plague will not be able to thrive. During the year ending June 30 last year, 112,004 rats were caught by the new health agency. In San Juan, which is the par (Continued on p. 2) UNDERWEAR AGENTS ARE Sought in all the towns of the Island. Those who have experience in the rafiio and can produce quantities may apply giving references and guarantees. Reply to Underwear, Hotel Condado San Juan, P. R. Select One Now An almost infinite variety of delicacies prepared by the housewife herself -even without having to change out of her going out dresses. * A simple and artistic-looking electric appliance - inexpensive in the extreme - useful at any time of the day or night. You can buy it for $6.50, paying cash or in dishes. Call 163 or visit us. PORTO RICO RAILWAY LIGHT AND POWER CO. San tón Pto. Rico i ■: *0 .. - I q I
The Insular Riding Commission considers impertinent a letter from the Jockey Club in which the latter recorded its strong protest against an agreement of the Jury of the bipodium The Jockey Club, for its part, publicly declares that it does not believe in the justice of the Commission and says it will appeal to public opinion San Juan, P. R. October 7, 1924. Jockey Club of Puerto Rico, San Juan, P. R. Gentlemen: i Pursuant to instructions from....I am pleased to acknowledge receipt of your communication dated the 6th of the present, informing you that it is the desire of the Commission to ignore the impertinence of your aforementioned letter in all that refers to the gentlemen who form the present jury of Las Casas Racing Park and with reference to the matter of the mare, MOLINERA, as well as that of Sevilla, both are under consideration and es- ; The Commission will decide these cases, taking into account the interests of the equestrian sport in our Island, without any other considerations. Sincerely, J. Peña REYES, Secretary-Auditor. INSULAR HORSE RACING COMMISSION. Here is the reply from the Jockey Club: San Juan, P. R. October 8, 1924. Insular Riding Commission, San Juan, P. R. Gentlemen: The Jockey Club of Puerto Rico met this afternoon to consider your letter dated the seventh of this month, reply to the nu'.i tfa dated the sixth of the same in which we protested the actions of the Jury that served in the races of September 28th, and after giving due consideration to this matter, unanimously agreed to p? r ti cipate to you that it sees with extrafiera that you understand that the criticizing the actions of a Jury quo a (Continued on page 5)
""T'S . TOASTED íhl Buy a pack today. If you are not satisfied, Gilles & Woodward will refund your money. " l *
* - .. ■ - 1 1 I < ■ Wi niias i !■ HMM j ■ ..aWlií A * TOM MOORE, NAOM. CHILDERS, MABEL BALLIN, ALEX B. FRANCIS IN " - OF HIGH SOCIETY - SUNDAY AND MONDAY" THE LOST HUMANITY J BY ROBERT EDISON AND HEDDA HOPPER ujfe-''' - '
Ml M
What. hw is true, according to the Executive Secretary, in the "affair" of the Nationalist candidate for the representative district of Caguas and Aguas Buenas * On the occasion of certain manifestations accusing the Executive Secretary of manifest partiality in the handling of the Ti-latiya petitions for the nationalist candidacy for the representative district of Caguas and Aguas Buenas * On the occasion of certain manifestations accusing the Executive Secretary of manifest partiality in the handling of the Ti-latiya petitions for the nationalist candidacy for the representative district of Caguas and Aguas Buenas.In order to know if the aforementioned official had anything to say on the matter, a reporter of ours visited Mr. Saldaña yesterday afternoon to find out if the aforementioned official had anything to say on the matter. * We asked Mr. Saldaña if he had read the information that motivated our visit, to which he replied: ii 7 I -Yes, I have read the accusations * that Mr. Silva makes to me; but all of them are totally unfounded. This office does not need to make great efforts to maintain the rectitude and impartiality it has always enjoyed. -<And what is the truth of the matter? -What there is of truth, is that the I "Nationalist" Party needed to re1 mitigate to this office, in accordance with i the law, at least 839 valid petitions I, so that it could be registered mind we received 916 petitions; but of these we had to discount 95, for reasons of duplicity, among themselves, 'and with respect to the petitions of the Historical Constitutional Party, and for other fundamental reasons. After deducting the 95 petitions, we were left with a balance of 821 valid petitions, that is, 18 less than the minimum fixed by law. -Was it true that you deducted certain ballots? -Yes, we discounted 14 petitions, in which the name of the local judge of Caguas, Mr. Tulio Rodriguez, appeared printed on the cer1 ¡tified cer1ficate, and those " which, however, were signed by Judge Aybar. This, as you " will understand, is a serious error; 1 since a different person appears certifying 1 than the one stated in the certificate. But, even counting the > candidate those 14 petitions, he would still not have enough number to cover the minimum 1 required by law, and in any case, said candidate would have remained unregistered. According to reports, Mr. Saldaña was preparing a letter for "El Imparcial", clarifying the concepts expressed by Mr. Silva, since, judging by the above data, the Nationalist candidate seems to have been incorrect in his assessments.
+-H-1HH i ¡ l -i - l-H-11111 I I I 1 !■+* i $25,000 í : Taken in mortgage for 5 years ;; ■ ■ on house and 14,000 meters ra- ....  WITHOUT CORRE- .:: : I DORES. * ; Reports:- ■ Box 1174, San Juan. 1 *h41-l I I 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 I l 1 1-1
■y-^ 1 . * -- . ■ . " ■■■■ ■ .1 4 SATURDAY, OCTOBER 11, 1924 szssssszr- ■ 1 . ■: , j' - r.-_s=
In tomorrow's minerof "El Mundo" will appear treg sensational political interviews in which í tacen very interesting declarations ci regarding the future of the island.
One of the interviews is with the private secretary of La Foliete, candidate for the presidency of the United States for the Progressive Party, who is in Puerto Rico resting from his intense work. The other two are with the illustrious Puerto Rican politicians Don José Tous Soto 1 and Mr. Waller Mck. Jones
The issue of our Sunday edition, which will be published tomorrow, is undoubtedly one of those which the public will justifiably call "interesting", not only because of its varied and entertaining reading, but also because of its exceptional local and foreign information. The extraordinary thing about this issue of EL MUNDO is the three sensational interviews that we publish in the front page and with the importance that both the interviewees and their statements deserve. One of the edJtreviBtas, is with the Secretarlo particu|4 r de La Folíete, the prog|pteista candidate to the Presidency of the EstadoserUnidos, who is seasonally in Puerti Rico, resting di *his intense work to the YESTERDAY SE JbRARGN SOLEMK NES MISAS R0R EL DESCAN Su ETERNO DE A ALMA DE LA NOBLE Y VIRTUOSA DAMA DOÑA ANA MA|1& HERNANDEZ tí REAL * ■■ w "*"* rnanana aef uta de ayeír, In most of the parishes of this capital and its neighborhoods, solemn masses were held for the eternal suffrage of the soul of the noble and virtuous lady, Doña Ana María Hernández de Real, who in life was a noble and virtuous lady. The spiritual exercises celebrated in the different parishes were very well attended by the phalanx of friends that the loving parents of the deceased lady, Hon. José Conrado Hernández and Mrs. Angelita Usera de Hernández, her siblings, as well as her troubled widower, our dear companion, Mr. Romualdo Real, have in this community. All the friends were there present, in that solemn hour of spiritual recollection, hearing with sacred unction, the solemn masses, for the eternal rest of the soul of that one, who in her life was a model of virtues. The sorrowful relatives of the noble lady, Mrs. Ana María Hernández de Real, will keep in their souls, eternal recognition towards those persons, who accompanied them yesterday, in the fulfillment of the greatest precept of the Holy Church. lillllllll-1 I 1 I I M-I-4-i OF INTEREST TO SUGAR PLANT I ¡j We have for sale 18 Cen- ; - - - - 30" trifuges in perfect es- - * '; tado, complete with their corres- ; í ! mixer slopes, etc. . -- Request details of ; ■ - DELGA IX) HERMANOS ; ■ : ' Box 204, Yauco, P. R. . ; I 1 I I I I I I I I I M I H-l 1 <■ 1I--I U-I-'
side of the well-known chief radical. 1 Mr. Curry, has made us manifest 1 nes truly sensational, not only in relation to the politics of the mainland but also on the political future of Puerto Rico in relation to the United States. Another of the interviews is with the distinguished leader of the Alliance, Don José Tous Soto, and in it the illustrious politician explains to the country clearly and categorically what is the meaning of the disputed phrase "the sovereignty of Puerto Rico within the sovereignty of the United States''. And the third interview, as sensational as the two previous ones, is with the distinguished mainlander and Puerto Rican legislator Mr. Walter Me K. Jones, who also makes interesting statements in relation to our political situation. ARTICLES OF COLLABORATION. I In tomorrow's issue there will also appear numerous and selected articles of collaboration, among which the following stand out as the most important: "M. Edouard Herriot on Intimacy'*, by a noted French" writer; a Chronicle of notable article by our Insignificant exclusive contributor' Frank H. Simonds; an editorial by Dr. Frank Crane; a page of adventures in the interior of India; an article by M. Poincaré; etc., etc., etc. In addition, there will be the usual motoring pages, and . "spprts'', in which appear the entertaining chronicles of Gerrish Jr. and the ' very readable Orot's Equestrian Chronicle. Nor, naturally, must the five comic pages, which have made such a large and assiduous readership, be missing. THE UNIVERSAL MAGAZINE. This interesting edition of the Sunday edition of EL MUNDO is completed by the Revista Universal, in whose pages our numerous readers will find literary curiosities and articles of great novelty. For example: one of the most interesting details in our Weekly Supplement, in tomorrow's issue, is the interview with the popular film star Mary Miles Minter, who frankly and decisively assures us that "she is disgusted with the cinema"; and finally the sensational revelation of how a German archimist has finally succeeded in transmuting mercury into gold. :: -TODAY SATURDAY TODAY-- :: Life in Hilly Wood Come to the RIALTO to LAUGH, to PA " SAR and to HAVE a very; J - DELICIOUS RIDE
I i THEATER TRES BANDERAS *- 8 * Saturday 11 ALICE BRADY and NITA NALDI in g La Novela de si Mismo PAQUITA SICILIA Sunday 12, LEONORE ULRIC in | LA TIGRESA (Tiger Rose) PAQUITA SICILIA PRICES:- 35 and 25 - 25 and 15 BOLIVAR PAGAN ABOGADO Y NOTARIO || GARAGE | Cortea Insulares y Federal 8 UD A í Office: Calle Alien, across from g JLxJL P. O. Box 883. Phone: 1475 i | VILLA ST. - PONCE í 1 ' SAN JUAN, P. R. Thm-n-i-mn ,..."!,, _ __ * " 1 ? * ■* ■ Si' ' ' ' " ■
1 ■ II ■ I I I I I I I I I I I I "I IH "I I I I NUMBER 1752. -[-.i. ■ "' - ■ ->
The socialist leader, Ledo. Bolívar Pagán has been reduced to prison again in Fajardo for refusing to surrender the keys
of that municipality The mayor, Mr. Robles, pushed the door of the town hall and penetrated with the entire Assembly yesterday at one o'clock in the afternoon taking possession immediately Apparently, the political turmoil in Fajardo has no traces of ending, despite the efforts that have been made to achieve it. The socialists are not willing to hand over the municipality, and the situation is becoming more and more complicated. At the last minute, we have learned that the socialist leader, Ledo. Bolívar Pagán, who has been the lawyer for the socialists in the Fajardo lawsuit, has been reduced again to prison, yesterday at eleven thirty in the morning. Eager to obtain complete information, we telephoned Fajardo, obtaining all the details ! of the new political episode, which already' threatens to degenerate into a serial movie. WHERE ARE THE KEYS? i Our readers know that the District Court of Humacao, recently resolved that the legitimate Mayor of Fajardo, is Mr. Juan Robles Jr. and therefore ordered that he be replaced in his post, which was being occupied, by Mr. Enrique Matta. Yesterday, Mr. Robles Jr. decided I to take possession of the Town Hall, £enMUfMmA;de su" asamblmsto S| .y dirigido al conserje," en solicitud de las llaves. But he told him that the keys were in the possession of the Mayor, Mr. Matta, and Mr. Robles went there. But the story was to continue, because the Mayor told him that the keys were in the possession of Ledo. Bolivar Pagan. And Mr. Robles went there. When he found Pagán, he told him to give him the keys if he had them, and then, we are informed that the latter told him that he did have the keys, but that he was not willing to hand them over. i the arrest An argument arose, the authorities intervened, and Ledo. Bolivar Pagan was immediately arrested. The prosecutor Guerra Mondragón intervened, made a thorough investigation, and he was arrested as a "pharmacy employee I " ¡ Expert in dispensing prescriptions, [ with some knowledge of English, NEEDED. Accompany references with application. FARMACIA GARCIA ' Humacao, P. R. 1 ■ SWIFT & CO. , participate to their clientele having moved to 1 Comercio St. (Ochoa Building), 5th floor.
Unionist from the first moment of life of that organis-mo-says Ledo. Benitez-he adds-never did my enthusiasm waver, nor my energies in its defense run out.
Here-he adds-we all know each other and I will not try to defend myself from those who wield ignoble and impolitic weapons Mr. Benitez Flores sent us yesterday the following article: EGOTISMO A FORTIORI y It is extremely painful that in this tiny country, in which we all know each other, and at this point, there are fools and petulants, lacking all personality and less intellectual and political authority, who are acting as charlatans and charlatans of the political and social class, and who, in the same way, are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the most important. The fact that we all know each other, and at this point in time, there are fools and petulants, lacking in all personality and less intellectual and political authority, who, acting as corner, coffee-shop and drugstore charlatans, - and with their backs turned, - as befits any good bard, - try, ratonilmente, to gnaw away prestige and well-established reputations, since these are based, exclusively, on a constant work of firmness, honesty and homeliness, - as befits any good bard. (Continued on page 4) -' only of infraction, to article 137 of the [Penal Code, fixing him bail to obtain his provisional liberty, which was given shortly thereafter. is. * At one o'clock in the afternoon, Mr. Robles went again with the assemblymen to the municipality, and the door, because Bolivar never delivered the keys, entered the premises, and took possession of his office, entering in functions immediately. This is the new episode of politics in Fajardo, which as we said before, is degenerating into a serial movie. COLUMBUS DAY SUNDAY 12th On Monday 13th the Barber Shop "EL FIGARO" will close at 12:00 noon. Pedro TRUJILLO TEATRÓOLIMPÓ , Today -Saturday October 11- Today Premiere of the 5th day of. *-5 "PARISETTE" and third performance of the picture ; SANCHEZ-PERAL-CHAVEZ , Tomorrow: two performances, Matinee and evening.
. USA "E SPAIN IN PUERTO RICO í CENTRAL BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONVOCATION In compliance with what was agreed upon by this Board of Directors iy Central I CALL FOR AN EXTRAORDINARY GENERAL MEETING to be held in the Salons of the Spanish Casino of this Capital, at nine o'clock in the morning of the NINTH DAY OF NO- '" VIEMBER next coming. g The matters to be discussed are the following: S 1-The Board of Directors will give an account of all that has been done to date to reach the construction of our § social building. 2-The same Board of Directors will submit to the resolution of the Extraordinary General Meeting an agreement modifying the proposal relative to a loan up to the sum of *$500,000.00, made by Don Enrique Zorrilla, with amendments from the Delegates Don José Berrocal, Don Justo Juan, Don Nadal Reinés, Don César Rodríguez, Don Enrique Leiguarda, Don Emilio Jiménez and Don R. Baragaño, and approved by the Extraordinary Meeting of October 23rd, 1923. This Extraordinary General Meeting may only be attended by the Delegates of the Locals, provided they meet the conditions required by Article 24 of our Regulations. San Juan, P. R. October 9, 1924 JOSE PEREZ LOSADA ENRIQUE ZORRILLA , Secretary Accidental President , Mb/ ' --->■ 1 - .1 r- J * . i . . . "ir