THE WORLD
in PAGES. 3 CTS. I Otela*". Paetco Bim L i | UuttrMt" B14* 1 *** - "<" f
|in PAGS. 3 CTS. II V
DIARY OF
THE MARAÑA,
YEAR VI j
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Fnbl'jUiMI aud AiwlBaiM uatu patm" *0i>"t <_ i* 17. sa ax* a " u< mao" "f "*n Ju." Fort" >y "tOr "f tk" Fr "rtd*ut, A. -- FoMauMw "MarW M mmM "tMa aMMz, "*bm*ry ", Itlt, at Pm1 Offtro a" lu Jun. Fwto te"- ai "u(v tk" io af aarak a, tan
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 20, 1924.
NUMBER J731
FIFTEEN DOCTORS OF THIS CAPITAL HAVE BEEN ARRESTED, CHARGED WITH OUTRAGEOUS AND ILLEGAL ADMINISTRATION OF DRUGS, ESPECIALLY OPIUM.
The doctors have been summoned to testify before the United States Commissioner, Mr. Adams, for the purpose of prosecution, * í It is persistently rumored that drugs prescribed for patients are being supplied to horses at the racetrack, and that contraband opium is being smuggled into Puerto Rico - the doctors in question are accused of expressly violating the law, as they had not registered their licenses with the treasury, and therefore were not authorized to prescribe drugs for their patients.
An insistent rumor reached us about a certain investigation that was being carried out in connection with the sale and administration of drugs. Once on the trail, the reporter also began his investigations, and, tying up loose ends, learned all about it, and finally, ready to obtain official confirmation, he went to the offices in the Federal Building of the Commissioner of the United States. Mr. Adams, to whom he stated that he was aware of everything, and that he wished to know the details of the matter. Mr. Adams obligingly furnished us with all the information, which we in turn make known to our readers. FIFTEEN DOCTORS ABRESTED The United States Commissioner, Mr. Adama, entertained serious suspicions that several doctors in this capital were not only openly violating the drug law, but that their powers to administer such drugs to their patients were scandalous and illegal. Finally, he obtained the conven-i ction of it, and obtained carta franca' to ebrar in the matter. " His actions were not long in coming. The day before yesterday, no less than fifteen doctors, of this capital, were arrested, and taken to the offices ~ ,
The doctors were arrested the day before yesterday, and taken to the offices of Mr. Adams, where their statements were taken for the purpose of the legal proceedings, which will be instituted against them immediately. Among the doctors arrested, and who have been released on bail, are distinguished personalities of this city, whose names are kept a complete mystery, so as not to spoil the investigation, which continues to be transmitted to you. THE ACCUSATION! The accusation against the aforementioned doctors is limited to the fact that they were violating the law of abicrtamertc drugs, because they had not registered their names in the Treasury, paying the de' rechc of rigor, and therefore were not authorized to prescribe opium, or any other drug to their patients. Indeed, and in accordance with the law, any doctor who wishes to prescribe drugs must go to the Treasury, register his name, and then fcn tiMfiers, for example, will have to stamp it on all prescriptions, and also record the name of the patient. Tatnpoi co can prescribe more than a certain amount prescribed by law. and if he does otherwise, he is committing a crime punishable by law. And the authorities. suspected all these things, and hence has come the arrest, which has (Continued on p. 7) NOTICE i , . and I participate to my valued clientele, friends and relations to have moved temporarily in front of my old establishment or No. 19 Commerce Street (Marina) where I am at your service and where I will remain until the completion of the new modern building I am constructing in the premises I formerly occupied. THE FISK TIRE STORE ADRIAN NELSON DISTRIBUTOR 19 Comercio Street - San Juan, P R
-J ILJOSBESSsmmmmm Buy a pack today. If you are not satisfied Gilles A Woodward will refund your money.
49 " full chest 33 ' ' ' waist I- 24 12 " thighs 17 " legs : - f |'9 " ankles Weight. 217 lbs. Height, 84 inches. Age 32 years. El Toro Bravo de las Pampas. i Luis Angel Firpo of Buenos Aires, ■ Argentina. Height: 6 feet 2 1)2 inches. Neck: 17 inches. Biceps; 16 inches. Forearm: 13 12 inches. Wrist: 8 inches. Normal chest: 41 inches. Full chest: 44 inches. Waist: 36 12 inches. Thighs: 23 3 4 inches. i Legs: 15 inches. Ankles: 9 12 inches. Weight: 224 12 pounds. Reach. 79 j inches. Age: 28 years. i The fight i Both fighters stepped onto the platform and were given a standing ovation by the huge crowd which was
Firpo receives more cheers and applause. He arrived first at the platform, as ) at 9:50. Wills arrived 5 minutes later. Wills is somewhat nervous, while Firpo, with his usual serious face, seems to dislike the distinction that the public gives him. He starts boxing in the air. Wills stomps his feet in his corner. The Referee gives the usual instructions to the contestants and the public shouts madly at the boxers. The fateful bell rings: ler. ROUND. Firpo flies over the black and both of them throw right hands to the head, they get in a clinch, and then they get back to sorting each other and grabbing each other. Wills gave a strong punch in Firpo's body, and immediately a right to the jaw that disconcerted Firpo. Firpo answered this in identical fashion. Firpo made no target with his left ¡ (Continued on p. 10)
luis ANGEL EIRPO Y HACEN INTERESANTES : "EL MUNDO" I
I'm very disappointed with the result of my fight with Wills," says Firpo, "He didn't want to fight openly.firpo is a long way from being ¡ boxer" Our New York correspondent ■ visits both boxers immediately- ¡ mind after the conclusion of the fight EOYIE'S THIRTY ACRES. JERSEY CUY- SEPT. 11. 1924 AT ,í 7 P. M. i - (From our New York Correspondent) 1 The capacity making the sran pla- ¡ za where the fight will be held is da > 60,000 people, but at this hour there are already . that number inside and about 40,000 ! The "fftlfcrb*erf treffifcdoe M vi' y'W Se police, cars, cars, cars and the crowd, it seems that it is a compact mass qre moving to impulse of cold wind circulating. Everyone is impatient. nervous. The anxiousness to see the result of the fight is visible and every time the crowd spots a "character" of the aristocracy or politician, it breaks into applause. Preliminary fights that have no importance for the audience, with the exception of the Bate-Casanova match, which is of interest to the 300 or 500 Puerto Ricans who have attended the bout. Casanova, the Puerto Rican, was defeated, but he fought a giant who could only have beaten him by batting. Now comes the moment of silence and for a few moments the public stops the noise when it is announced that the fight of the Toro Bra- > vo de las Pampas with the Black Panther will begin. The Black Panther is announced. Name: Harry Wills, of New Or. leans, La., 6 feet 2 inches tall. 17 in. neck. 16 " - biceps 14 ' ' ' forearm 8 ' ' ' wrist 44 " normal chest -.
HARRY WILIS, AFTER THE FIGHT EXCLUSIVE FOR
Although the Health Commissioner is optimistic about the Ponce epidemic, he is clear that there are currently 65 cases of the disease.
Although the germ of the disease has not been found in the water, all opinions affirm that this is where the epidemic is coming from -A doro plant to purify the precious liquid.
The Commissioner of Health returned from Ponce. Dr. P. N. Ortiz, after ' having remained a few days in that city studying personally, the causes and situation of the typhoid fever epidemic that afflicts that city, advising at the same time to combat it, the most determined and efficient campaign in cooperation with the local health authorities and the public in general. Dr. Ortiz is very optimistic and believes that since the Sanidád has begun to work actively there, there is no doubt that the disease will soon be eradicated. Many initiatives have been implemented in Ponce, among the most important of which is the upcoming installation of a chlorine plant to purify the water that is consumed. Thanks to this, the neighbors ' will drink the pure liquid and the danger I of the epidemic will diminish in a 9? percent, since it is believed that the water is the main tiredness Je ¡a epidemic that reigns. Someone believed that it would have been advisable not to use the water from the Aqueduct, but the idea was not put forward, since such an extreme measure would have progressed if there had been no means of getting the water sterilized, as is planned to be done by the installation of the Plant in question. In anticipation that there may be s^ bilitan bocales in Pohcv with capacity for many patients. At the present time, according to Dr. Ortiz, there are 65 confirmed cases of typhitic patients, and several deaths have been recorded. - Dr. Ortiz, in his brief conversation with us; spoke very well of the measures that have been adopted in Ponce to combat the epidemic, and gave us the impression that the Health Department regretted, deeply, that private physicians did not report the existence of any disease of that species as soon as they were called to attend the first case. This is of vital importance, because the Department could then act at the beginning of an epidemic and not when it was in the process of increasing. The Sanitation advises the public to use some disinfectant with the water when washing the floors Monday morning, September 22nd, we need Dishwashers. Work by the cake.-MORRIS E. STORYK, Isabel 2a. No. 5, MARINA San Juan, P. R.
in quantity necessary to kill " all kinds of microbes. Although the greatest reserve seems to be kept on the subject, we have learned that all the possibilities of the origin of the disease, such as legumes, vegetables, etc., have been analyzed, and although it has been realized that these products can be good conductors of the disease, they should not, however, be accepted as the main causes of it. In the unofficial versto r i nes circulating on the true origin of the epidemic, water is pointed out as the most probable cause, adding that it should be purified as soon as possible. It has been scientifically proven that Ebert's bacillus exists in water even though it could not be dis- (Continued on page 7.) i "uill HORA The Sacred Heart School Closed in Ponce. -Dr. Lopez Nussa applauds EL MUNDO Campaign - Two more dead yesterday. Ponce, Sept. 19, 1924. Mr. Editor of EL MUNDO, ' 'San Juan, Eminent Dr. Lopez. Nussa apiaupara ¡onear Ponfft'j 1 in San Lucas to offer Hospit*i lizacíón tíficos. Sacred Heart College Closed today. Deaths today up to noon nine, among them, two assisted typhists Dr. Pietri. Today died of typhus Maria Emilii Torres Busquet, niece of Francisco Alvarado, President Casino de Ponce, and Francisco Rivera. RAMIREZ. BRAU. AUCTION ON MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 22, 1924 AT 2:00 P. M. AT THE MALECON QUAY, NAVE "D" I will sell at Public Auction, for the account of whomever it may concern, by order and in the presence of THE AMERICAN COLONIA!/BAÑE. 6,000 sacks dt Belgian Cement The sale will be made in ONE OR SEVERAL WTES, as ordered, to the highest bidder, payment by cash at the act of award. Reinaldo Vizcarrondo Almonedero Publico
TEATRO TRES BANDERAS COMPANY BRUNO & VAZQUEZ INC. TODAY SATURDAY 20 AT 8:15 P. M. TODAY Reappearance of Professor Tenof's LOS PERROS COMEDIANTES and the wonderful film :: MUJER, CUIDE SU HOGAR :: Popular Prices: Platea:- seniors 40, children 25. . seniors 25, children 15. ; -r * "ft l ■ - * ■ -- Tomorrow Sunday Regio Matinée at 3:15 P. M. with "LOS PERROS COMEDIANTES" and the film "CHOZA O PALACIO'' Prices:- 25-15-10 * For the "LOS PERROS COMEDIANTES" and the premiere in Puerto Rico of the interesting film: "COSAS DEL OESTE'' Prices:- Stalls: seniors 50, children 35. Balcony: seniors 35, children 25.
f- q If your car has high oil, spends a lot of just vour gasoline, takes a long time to start or fails a lot of times, put it on a W "MOTOR MASTERS" I For sale by: zw* / CARIBEIMP0RT co - Apartado 1107 San Juan
SE OFRECEDINERO On mortgage of concrete house in San Juan, Pta, de Tierra or Santurce, from one thousand to five thousand dollars mortgage. Inquire: Box 1105 San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Are you a FATHER*... WOULD YOU SELL YOUR DAUGHTER'S BEAUTY?
Great Patronal festivities in Yabucoa during the days of October 2, 3, 4, 5, 1924. Requests for the lease of sites for the installation of pikes, "carrousels" and other amusements. "carrousels and other amusements will be received until Sept. 27, by the COMISION DE FESTEJOS. Box 58, Y abucoa, Puerto Rico. NOTE: All the inhabitants of Puerto Rico, and especially those of the neighboring towns, are cordially invited to these festivities.
Use Alcoholado 'Gateli EL MEJOR DEL MUNDO (The Best in the World)
THEATER TRES BANDERAS --THURSDAY SATURDAY 20 AT 8:15 P. M. TODAY:- Reappearance of : Los Perros Comediantes : of Professor Tenof and the exhibition of a colossal tape. POPULAR PRICES Platea:- Mayorres ...40 Niños....25 Balcón:- Mayors ...25 Niñoó 15
GARAGE I BRANDI | VILLA ST. - PONCE | HARINA GOLD MEDAL
FLOUR GOLD MEDAL WHEAT OLD WHEAT Constant stock B. Fernández & tinos. Suas. MARINA, SAN JUAN P. R.
SATURDAY SEPT. 20 MIRIAM Ov s' COOPER jjk KENNETH HARLAN M,SS DU PONT * s' WALTER LONG RICHARD TUCKER SUNDAY:- THE RUNNING DELIGHT
$4,200.00 I receive offer for a few days, giving payment facilities, on house ® valued at $6,000.00. Of modern and solid construction, with sanitary installation, electric light, basement, cistern and artesian well. Nestled in 1-1)2 rope of land planted with yerba Elefante. Distant 3 minutes from Bayamón, Toa-Baja highway. Ricardo Vela e hijos, Balamón, or José L. Pesquera, Edificio EL MUNDO, San Juan.