ipi MHunn IL Lr L* Vr
yhAfiS. 3 CIS. / I Ofttinsa: "Puarta Btoo g Illustrated" Bldg, ToL 1222, - Box M&
í>" yÍ PAGS. 3 CTS. Semester 94.00 / p ° Afio 97.50.
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR Vi
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
PubUahM aud under permit (Me. , SOI) eotSartáed j>y Bar Art o""a to U tM Boet Ottce at T San Jowi. Porto *"ee. By order of the President, A. 3- Bsrtpaon. Poatawstor General. Entered m aooond clew matter, I febmary 81, 191", et the feet ottee at Im Jssa, Poete Vnft0Bta "ez of Amorirei under the Act of march a, [
SATURDAY, APRIL 19, 1924. i .
NUMBER 1592.
"If we (fescart the pompous name we have given to the Rio Piedras mstihidon, it will be seen that there is no such University; that everything is reduced to a joke on a grand scale; that we are playing that we have a University, when it is true that we have only a wasteful and absurd institution, with no organization or discipline.
organization and discipline:" Rafael Cuevas Zequeira, r~ I .
From the illustrious Senator for Humacao, Mr. Rafael Cuevas Zequeira, we received the following letter yesterday: Mr. Don Sergio Romanare e, 1" Director of EL MUNDO, ¡ i Son Juan, P. R. j < Dear friend: i A few days ago I read in the newspaper which you so rightly and dignam-' te dirljd, a newspaper in which, bonda-! 1 desámente, you launched into publicity the idea of offering the presidency of "that" which they call here "University of Puerto Rico", to my brother, Dr. Sergio Cuevas Zequeira, currently Professor of Philosophical Sciences at the National University of Havana. Thank you, friend Bomanacce, on behalf of myself and my bar ■taño; and allow me to express, by condeció sqyo, some points of view in i relation to the debated matter of our titled. university. < . In the first place - J to avoid tDrdMaa^tnOrippettac&nes -I wish to say 1 Oda "Oda frankness that to my brother i rife sa would in no case offer the pre ' aidence of the university of Puerto Rioo; but if such a thing were done, my brother* would have to decline the honor, because the ties that bind him to Cuba are so very close, that, notwithstanding his love for the land of his birth, he could not, without incurring a crime of lèse gratitude, abandon his chair of professor in the historic and famous university, to which he has devoted more than twenty-five years of intense mental labor, nobly compensated with the respect, affection and admiration of a free people, which generously offered him the glorious asylum of its highest center of learning, in the fateful days when a mob of slaves, in his homeland, condemned him to exile. On the other hand, my dear director; if we discard the pompous name that we have given to the institution of Rio Piedras, it will be clearly seen that there is no such university; q. everything is reduced to a joke on a large scale; that we are Villar & Co. Inc. Apartado 201. Tel. 1450 San Juan, P. R. They sell the best wheat flour brands "LUNA DE ORO" "CRUZ DE CALIDAD" Price without competition. Proof makes faith. i
playing that we have a university, when it is true that we only have a wasteful and abysmal institution, lacking organization and discipline; without teachers, that is to say, without true representatives of the di dactic science, since some honorable exception, proves, precisely, the lack of men of high intellectual preparation to boast, without irony, the title of professors. And it has to be as it painfully is; because an institution of teaching character, the most important in any civilized community, does not and should not be governed and directed by a group of gentlemen who, with very few exceptions, know as much about the university and cultural movement of America and the world, as the sly Sancho Panza knew about the noble and ideal things that troubled the spirit of his master Don Quixote. The group of gentlemen who, under the name of the Board of Trustees, has governed our paradoxical university, has gathered in its bosom people belonging to very dissimilar branches of human activity: doctors, lawyers, fruit growers, businessmen, engineers and moneylenders; all magnificent elements for the management and operation of the most risky stock market enterprise: but, for the most part, so far removed from the problems of public culture, that I have often thought that rather than the careful selection of well-meaning rulers, the Boards of such doctors seemed purposely formed for university failure; with no other reasonable explanation for their existence than the mental poverty of the power of the legislature, and so by the ministry of the law, the people, although in the minority, were the only ones who were able to make a decision. The people, although in a minority, have been worthily represented in the boards of trustees, in the prestigious persons of the presidents of the legislative bodies. | You are not going to believe, Mr. Director, that the Board of Trustees is solely responsible in Puerto Rico for the university's disastrous situation. The Commissioner of Education, a decorative figure, without energy and authority, a supporter of the comfortable "laissez faire" theory, is largely to blame. And, if we must be sincere, those of us who, rightly or wrongly, call ourselves the representatives of opinion, are also to blame for allowing, without protest, the unjust preterition of a man of the immense intellectual baggage of Rafael LóI pez Landrón, the highest exponent of the university, to be unjustly banned.
i 1 : V*/ /'i'.. x FRENCH STEAMER "FIGUIG" ! ON HER NEXT MAY 5 JOURNEY FROM SAN í ! JUAN DIRECT FOR LA CORUÑA AND THE HAVRE. ! . She admits passage and cargo for the above ports. J !' Note your tickets without loss of time. For further information please contact ! BEHN BROTHERS INC. agents. i Telephone I 257. Tanca--Tetuan, San Juan. 8 I IM ift A I?"' PERMANENT SERVICE I ■ MMRMvAvjuL garage - GASOLINE-WASHING 1 BfiLDANfYI VILLA - PONCE r I QJl/SlvVVl io P. R. ||
Applications for houses or lots in the Barrio Obrero will not be considered unless the applicants reside in San Juan I was resolved by the [om. de Hogares Seguros at its last meeting on the grounds that there is an excess of people in this city The Commission of Hogares Seguros met on Wednesday, April 16, 1924, to discuss important matters. The Sub-Commission on Safe Homes made a report on various petitions for lots and house transfers and requested certain rules on certain petitions which, according to law, required specific rules from the Commission. Upon this report, the following resolutions were adopted: To fix a* rule, in the Contract of note for grant of lots and casfa, which are granted* to per- . gAnap, qtfé engaged in itinerant industries, that such real estate may not be devoted to such industries, but for dwelling purposes exclusively. Industrialists wishing to establish industries in the Barrio Obrero, must make their requests directly to the Commissioner of the Interior, who may grant lots for such purposes, subject to the provisions of the Executive Council of Puerto Rico. Regarding a request from a person who is not a resident of the City of San Juan, the Commission resolved that the City has enough pe- ¡ tidonaries to cover the quota of lots, and it is not possible to attend to requests coming from outside the City of San Juan. The President of the Safe Homes Commission was authorized to draw up the preliminary plans and presuf- lict for the construction of a public park in the Barrio Obrero. There is a separate property for such purpose, which must be beautified, to provide pleasure and delight to the inhabitants of the neighborhood. i Likewise, the administrator of the Barrio Obrero was ordered to make an investigation on the following points: 1:-People who have concessions of houses and lots, who currently do not occupy them and have rented them to other people. 2. 2.-Families that have tenants, determining the conditions of such families in order to comply with the rental fees. 1 The purposes of the investigation are aimed at avoiding: ; The overcrowding of persons, in such proportions, that may produce an epidemic, which would entail upon the People of Puerto Rico, the investment of fonda* necessary for other attentions, and likewise, to create the moral principle, of good public education, of healthy and comfortable bogar, which tends to develop a strong and vigorous type of citizen. To kill all speculation and exploitation. 1 In view of the fact that the Auditor of Fuer . to to Rico in communication dated April 14, 1924, states that the Safe Homes Commission can con* fruir a Building for the administrator of the neighborhood, which must pay the corresponding lease canOfi do, it was ordered to the President of the 0o(Oontinfla on page 6) I BUY RABBITS How many do you have and how do you see them" !de7 ; - : V ' > . Contact us today: | J. V. . ■ r- ■ *M15O" San Juan, P. R.
ULTim ■
Eo hr neighborhood of Utuado and at the time he was about to be arrested a "fugitive attacked a policeman with machetes, seriously wounded. Without injuring him with a bullet, the policeman reduced him to impotence and managed to apprehend his assailant -- , Thursday morning we received from our correspondent in Utuado the following telegraphic dispatch: ¡EL MUNDO, Terrible encounter today between policeman Villanueva and Cecilio Perez in the Guaonico neighborhood, seriously wounded. Police ' says Perez is a fugitive from Juana Diaz. Angel C. MARTINEZ Correspondent As soon as we received the above report, we contacted the Chief of Police of that district, to inquire about the details of this saceao ■ and Mr. Izquierdo was happy to give us the following information about what happened. ! Cecilio Perez was a fujitivo of the ; justice who had been accused of robbing uu quincallero in the jurisdiction of Juana Diaz. A warrant for his arrest had been issued by the Municipal Judge of Tr.ana Diaz and the District Chief of .Utuado had received instructions from General Headquarters ; to proceed to the arrest of Perez, who was said to be loitering in that jurisdiction. - i At <£ez o'clock in the.morning of last Thursday ■, the jpoliceman, "sé A. Villanueva, ■ of the arrest warrant - against Cecilio ' Perez to carry it out. Upon the arrival of the said policeman at the ex1 presado barrio, he met Cecilio at a neighborhood ca1 mino and approached ■ him notifying him to follow him and that ■ he was ' arrested in accordance with the warrant he showed him. Perez protested the arrest saying that he had committed no crime and when the policeman ■ set out to comply with the order anyway. Perez, armed with a machete, struck the policeman with two terrible machete blows, wounding him in the back ■ 5 inches long and another in the shoulder, 4 inches long. [Despite having been assaulted in this way, the policeman did not fire at his assailant, limiting himself to hit him with the revolver, with the corporal of the ■ j which wounded him in the head, reducing him to impotence and taking him to the town. - j Policeman Villanueva was admitted to the Hospital where he has been cured of the serious wounds received. ■ I The investigation of the facts has sil do practiced by the Municipal Judge 1 of that city, who has filed 1 complaint against Perez for a crime - 1 against public justice. 1 ■ According to the reports received in Utuado, great praise has been given to the bravery and conduct of policeman Villanueva, who, even when wounded by the accused, did not fire at him and, wounded as he was, arrested him, thus fulfilling the mission entrusted to him. I Cut this Card and Place it < on your Desk. ¡ Rate which will govern deede this facha. < You can Umpi "r my times sn mi- h quina and so it will last longer. < Xumpiez? Underload rio. 5 .. .. 92.03 * rio. 3 ... . 3.00 ( Bemington . . . . . . .. 2.00 < " corro grande. 3 00 , - ' Boyal rio. 10 2.00 ( large corro. 3.oo ( >- Oliver rio. - 2.00 '- rio. 10 ~, r ."... .2.00 large car. 3.00 - L. C. Saütt * Bree ' No. 8 ... < 9.00 L. C. Bmtlh A Bros * large car ... ".. 3.00 < '- Woodstock eunlqnier "es- 1 linden 2.00 < " Corona, Remington and 1 Undervood portables 2.00 ( Cleaning Cash Register ... 5.00 ( ' eualQúler manufacturer . . . 5.00 , ' Spare Pinas Us extra charge a / catilogn price. ; . . J I can do this because I do not pay i eaaa, I do not pay employees and due - i atfr large ridigwWiteutSz in mecá-i - > nica I can prodnclr male work al' <> SU- . ■ ■■-&- w . - < rio must Marañóte SI < < <MBDA MILLOXállO eon otraa casaa i al riBWO OXBBA MILLO- S
£/ Socialist leader, Mr. Iglesias, makes a comparative study of the registration years from 1906 to 1924 in order to show that the electoral frauds of this year are of exceptional importance.
v In 1920--he says--the number of electors was 268,643, and in this year, if the lisias that have been made prevail, there are more than 344,060 supposed citizens entitled to vote.
Mr. Iglesias gave us to publish the following article: i "TO ALL THE WORKERS AND SOCLA j LISTS --THE FRAUDS IN THE REGISTRATIONS As a starting point and as an incontrovertible fact to demonstrate very clearly the corruption of the ¡ agents of the government party, we must analyze the extent of the enormous amount of frauds carried out in ¡ the electoral registrations. The official data of the registrations carried out annually, tell us the truth; then the population census, and later on it will be verified by means of the judicial expositions that we expect to receive from each locality. 1 The republican form of government is founded on democracy, and on the right of citizens to intervene by vote in the government and administration of the country. When the citizen is not assured of the value of his vote, and there is corruption and fraud, the legality of suffrage is a myth, and the republican form of government is a ridiculous farce. When political irruption destroys legality, then the citizens have no other means of saving themselves from tyranny and remedying oppression and public iniquities than slow action and revolution. This has been the case for more than three quarters of a century in almost all the so-called republics of South and Central America, including Mexico, until a violent revolution destroyed the tyranny of the Porfirio Diaz. The Lili and other I tyrants have kept the peoples ¡ oppressed, ridiculously assuming that ■ they were elected by the free vote of the citizens. The frauds committed in this year 1924 in Puerto Rico, are of such a nature that they will bring the country into disgrace and ludibrium attached to American institutions. The electoral majorities will be a lie, a farce and the elections will be disgraced total "Santo Tomás"-he said seeing is believing-. Use the Bay Rum of this name and you will be convinced that it is the best. Distributors: R. JULIA A. CO. i TYPING MACHINES We guarantee our work. P. R. Typewriter Repairing Shop P.O. Box 1445. Tel. 288, Allen 11, San Juan.
472; eu 1914, 273,116; in 1917, 244,530; in 1920, 268,643; and in this year of 1924, IF THE ELECTORAL REGISTRATION LISTS PRE VALIDATE AS THEY HAVE, THERE WILL BE MORE THAN 340,000 BU ¡ ¡ POPULAR CITIZENS REGISTERED WITH THE RIGHT TO VOTE. See now the corruption in the light of truth, without exaggeration. i The difference between those registered for the year 1906' and 1909, i.e., those registered* as "isctoros sama sn 19M frri <" 18,862. * The difference between the year 1909 and 1910, i.e., those enrolled as new doctors in 1910, was 15,791. The difference between the year 1910 and 1912, counting those registered as new voters, there was a notable decrease in the total number of registered voters, which reached 17,344 in 1912. It was found that in this year, in spite of some new registrations, thousands of supposedly fraudulent voters were left off the lists. The difference between the year 1912 and 1914, counting the number of those registered as new voters in 1914, was 08,644, a year that was abnormal in frauds. Numerous fictitious names of voters were again introduced and the electoral lists were dirtied. A comparison between the years 1914 and 1914, the year in which the new Electoral Law was put into effect and photographs and other documents were used, showed that those registered as new electors returned to the electoral rolls in 1914. I Hn
The Resident Commissioner, Mr. Felix Cordova Davila, delivers a heartfelt speech in the House of Representatives in honor of Mr. Humphreys, "a just and generous man who did not hesitate to join us in the most critical moments of our history".
I SPEECH DELIVERED BY MR. CORDOVA DA VILA AT THE FUNERAL SE- ¡ SION HELD IN HONOR OF BENJAMIN GRUBB HUMPHREYS ON APRIL 6, 1924 Mr. Speaker: If I were asked ' If I were asked to establish by means of a comparison the affection that every American feels for the illustrious Pitt, I would say that we could not offer a more accurate comparison than the "1 love! that the people of Puerto Rico feel for ( Congressman Mr. TWwWWWx' * he | The same virile cntstos, tf same hatred of arbitrariness which prompted the celebrated English statesman to champion in a conservative Parliament j the cause of the American colonies, , inspired also Congressman Ben- , jamín Grubb Humphreys do Mississippi [ to raise his voice on the floor of this . I House requesting that the people of I I I Puerto Rico be relieved from the ad- 1 j' ministration of an Executive intole- ¡ j j ' rabie. j * Very few men have I known .'who possessed as Humphreys, almost , to perfection so many and such admirable x virtues, and I could hardly ex- ! I could hardly express my admiration for him in more sincere terms than those which flowed from my pen at the time of his death, when I communicated the fatal news to the President of our Senate, Mr. Antonio R. Barceló. In a letter which I addressed to this caVÓBéro ón that 1 date I said thus: ¡ j "By cable I communicated to him the 1 death of Mr. Humphreys. I assure you that when I heard of his death I was deeply grieved. Humphreys was one , * of the noblest souls who have ,' crossed through life. An uncompromising and austere conscientious citizen, he commanded respect by the strength of his character and engendered deep affection by his nobility and generosity. Modest without affectation, energetic without jactiy, of pleasant manner and ex5 quisite expression, he harmonized rectitude with gentleness, and made insensibly felt the suggestive influence of his personal attraction. He was a cultivated, healthy, prudent, discreet spirit, who never acted on sudden impulses but with moderation and equanimity. His actions were always guided by reflection: Humphreys was a disinterested advocate of all just cansaa and devoted himself to them with the faith of a convinced man and the self-sacrifice of a -". His actituA "n the aauntof Belly is a gesture of civility 'that Mtté<yodretadhMvMar. It was ¡ difficult to find, both in the Democratic camp orin the Republican camp, a resolute man who would break a lania for us- " others. All the Representatives ¡ sympathize with our Island, but I ' Cüonúiifiálttla' jKg. 12) ¡ "Three Flags Theater" TODAY TODAY'S SATURDAY L, . v $O|l BEATRIZ" See the great miracle <ld the Virgin.
Gran Feria Industrial Agrícola en Arecibo, P. R. LOS DIAS 26 DE APRIL AL 2 DE MAYO - Extraordinary exhibition of all agricultural and industrial products efe the Island GRAND PRIZES .'. V DON'T MISS THE TRAIN FARE REDUCTIONS ¿