elmbndo
Inn RAGS. 3 CTS. .■ M"""": "tww Atoa |> > Dátente" BMg. NMM im. -teite '
CTS. ZZ
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ANNUAL V!
BAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
rsKteteS tu aiMcutMM aaMc >T "n <■*. "-*"*"*?* Ate te Otesete ". 1"1T. n Ate te ¿a n- n"- < f tea Jasa. tote Btea, By arte""t tea totetent, B. Z. BJnu<jt jyeteteaa te" Oaa "aL tetera" ae asean* atea atetar, fobraary SI, lili, te tea Pwt OOm teto Jaaa, 8*>ete a* Anwte) toe" A AS < aam S, im
SATURDAY, MAY 31, 1924
NUMBER 1628.
"The tare of the Alliance slides smoothly down of patriotism, taking aboard all those Puerto Ricans who put the sacred interests of the homeland before personal quarrels," says d ¡lustrious head of the Union don Antonio Barceló.
"Yesterday, moments before leaving for Fajardo, we were talking with the illustrious head of the Union of Puerto Rico, Don Antonio R. Barceló, who has managed to achieve the ideal of so many old patricians, to unite the historical parties of our island in a fraternal embrace to work together for the interests of the country. Don Antonio, kindly made the following statements about the historical moment that the political parties in Puerto Rico are going through. The Alliance, the golden dream of so many old patricians, is already a beautiful reality, whose results are already beginning to be seen. The idea of uniting the entire Puerto Rican family in a fraternal embrace has imposed itself by its own greatness before public opinion. Great and noble ideas are making their way in spite of the obstacles that may be placed in their way by the usual jet laggards. '* 'fcasi t'odW the local committees of the Alliance in the different towns of the island and the few that are lacking are being constituted tapidamente. In my recent visit to the island, I have been filled with satisfaction to see how the preaching of cordiality and fraternity that we have exposed to the public conscience is growing and growing. The boat of the Alliance glides smoothly through the sea of patriotism, taking on board all those Puerto Ricans who put the sacred interests of the homeland before personal quarrels. A CERTAIN NEWSPAPER'S CAMPAIGN IS RISIBLE - As we asked you about the KltBtlnLA "a la p. H) ' Compare the Lucky Strike cigarette with any other cigarette. Quality speaks. -ncAjiiC'Winc-JCa |"Y< SATURDAY - TODAY LON CHANEY r." * in "SHADOWS" Tomorrow: 'CHAINS OF LOVE'.
Our readers will surely be aware of the editorial campaign against the indepen dence solution for Puerto Rico waged by one of the local dailies. In its latest article the editorialists, made mention of the name dw43MhM>P*t'"t-* i ~MMyar one arguments. Yesterday we were discussing the matter with Mr. VOlar & Co. Inc. Apartado 201. Tel. 1450 San Juan, P. R. They sell the best wheat flour brands "LUNA DE ORO" "CRUZ DE QUALIDAD" Price without competition. Proof makes faith. "LA LUNA", REFORMED We have expanded to benefit the public. ALL RENOVATED. ALL NEW SUITS. FOOTWEAR. GENTLEMEN'S ITEMS Come visit "LA LUNA" Cruz 23. San Juan. Clean your typewriter for $2.00. Add up and cash register for $5.00. BRUJO OJEDA MILLIONAIRE Phone 365 San Jose 37. RENT An Apartment for offices. Information: COMBATE TOBACCO CORP. Tetuán 14 (In front of the Royal Bank of Canada) CABALLOJDE SILLA Due to the absence of its owner is sold batato a saddle horse, rocio canelo de paso fino, young, healthy and of good height. It can be seen in the crib of La Colectiva, in Miramar.
"In Cuba there is nothing but sympathy for the Puerto Ricans and it is sad and painful that in spite of being brothers in blood, Cuba has to be brought up at every moment to interfere in local political matters", said the Consul of Cuba in this city "We have spilled our blood to conquer our independence, we have overcome very difficult situations and practically demonstrated that we are completely prepared to govern ourselves without the intervention of anyone", he added.
Consul of Cuba in this city, who made the following statements: A PAINFUL IMPRESSION "I have been following step by step the campaign against the ideal of independence "ftMyto/gipo. by one of the local newspapers from its editorial columns. And yesterday, with great surprise on my part, I see that the name of my homeland is used to support one of the arguments of the article writer. The impression I received was regrettable. I see no reason why in order to fight for a political solution for Puerto Rico it is necessary to resort to my country. In Cuba there is nothing but sympathy for Puerto Ricans and it is "sad and painful that in spite of being brothers in blood, Cuba has to be brought up at every moment to interfere in local political issues. THIS IS NOT THE FIRST TIME THIS HAS HAPPENED "This is already the second or third time this has happened. The whole country knows that a short time ago, Mr. Domínguez had to make certain clarifications precisely because of something similar to this. The political problem of Puerto Rico, in order to be solved, does not need to be compared to that of Cuba. I love Puerto Rico as a second homeland, but I am saddened by these things, which lead to no practical end. CUBA IS PROSPEROUS AND HAPPY "The editorialist of that paper has suffered a mistake in pretending to prove that Cuba is an ar-
w. B. RONS Extrtfitiones sin Dolor $1.00 EdWio Padín. Fifth Floor.
BOLIVAR PAGAN ATTORNEY AND NOTARY. Insular and Federal Courts Office: Alien Street, across from Gonzalez Padin. P. O. Box 888. Telephone: 1475 SAN JUAN, P. R.
Prestigious elements of the Unionist Party in the town of Aibonito formally protest before the Board of Directors that elements of true value within the Party have been disregarded in the formation of the new local Committee, in order to appoint elements that are not members of the Unionist Party.
The sudden drop in the price of sugar was due to the great increase in the production of sugar in the United States, the competition being much stronger than usual í The production of beet in Europe has also increased, damaging the demand for our sugar For several reasons the outlook is improving, and it is expected that the demand for our sugar will increase, and consequently, the prices. But because we are always waiting for something better, many of our sugar growers have turned down such a good opportunity, and a conflict has arisen. The *cablogransA have brought us the discouraging news of a rather sharp drop in* the price of the prey lens Je "'tyKe reached a record low of $5.02, the lowest of this year's crop to date. Naturally, in a country like ours, where the main industry is sugar, and where three quarters of the population derives its livelihood from it, news of this nature should discourage us all and cause panic in the financial circuits. By stating that there are sugar mills on our island that have not sold a single pound of sugar from this harvest, hoping for better prices, our readers will have an idea of the effect that such a large drop will have on the sugar industry. Naturally, the small producer, who is not aware of the causes of the decline, cannot explain it, and is left in a state of great uncertainty. There are many reasons that have motivated such a break, but among the most important we have to point out two of them. Cuba is the nation that produces the most sugar in the world, and the one that competes the most with us in the American market. Cuba's production has increased considerably during this harvest and is expected to continue increasing. To date, there has been an increase of 262,000 tons over the estimate made by the experts, and that increase alone is more than half of the sugar produced by our country.
Prestigious people from Aibonito sent us the following letter: OUR PROTEST TO THE DIRECTORATE OF THE PUERTORRIQUEÑA ALLIANCE . SAN JUAN, P. R. In the town of Aibonito, P. R., on the twenty-sixth day of the month of May, nineteen hundred and twenty-four, at seven o'clock in the evening, and in the premises of the Ortiz Hermanos firm of this municipality, the undersigned gentlemen belonging to the Union Party of Puerto Rico, who have accepted the Puerto Rican Alliance in accordance with the manifesto and bases established by our Illustrious leaders Messrs. BarceiÓ and Tous Soto, and the following: By- "rutjpto : -Having - met piePuert .4 I 19 of the current to designate the three candidates who were to form part of the Committee of the Puerto Rican Alliance in the locality; ( Inasmuch as: -In a previous meeting of said Unionist Committee held on the night of Sunday, the previous 18th at the Hotel Aibonito, integrated by " ¡ valuable Unionists of the locality, to exchange impressions on the ' election of said candidates, no agreement of a 'positive character was ' reached; | I Forasmuch as: - Although no definite agreements were made, it was not possible to reach a positive agreement on the election of the candidates.Although no definite agreements were made, it was agreed by the said Unionist Committee to call for an Assembly of the Party to be held in the Municipal Building on the evening of Monday, the 19th, where the candidates would be selected: - Upon requesting at said ¡ previous meeting of the Committee if the candidates there proposed by the cir- - cunstants would be taken into account by said body when making the election at the Casa Alcaldía on the following night and answered no, letting it be seen consequently, that in spite of that previous meeting, the Committee already had selected the candidates it believed it should impose above all will and good criAutomobile Peerless < Due to the absence of its owner a "Peerless* late model 7 passenger automobile is sold cheap which has only 4 months of use and has traveled 2,000 miles. It is like new. It can be seen at Calle Comercio No. 2, Miramar. Opportunity Vapdo very cheap house Calle Cerra No. '15 gives wood, amenities for payment, Mfiiimnzft A. Lopez de Haro. Phone 908, Santurce, P. o. Box 857, Santuxce. Advt. Maqoinarias Je Escribir We have several of use in good condition, from $15.00 and up. Pedrogo Typewriter Service Cristo No. 4. Tel. 1225
This is not the first time that we have been rejected and disappointed by this system of compadrazgos and odious absolutisms and we are not willing to continue to suffer more outrages," they say.
The Unionist Public Assembly; Whereas:-At the Assembly of Monday evening, May 19, on . motion interposed by one of those present, it was agreed that the Assembly should be given voice and power to nominate candidates for the election which would then be made by the Committee; i Whereas:-This right was by degrees restricted until the Assembly could realize that it would do nothing to nominate candidates if they were not to be taken into account at all by the Committee in making the election, as it was so demonstrated by those who contested on behalf of the said body assembled there; * 1 Whereas:-This right was by degrees restricted until the Assembly could realize that it would do nothing to nominate candidates if they were not to be taken into account at all by the Committee in making the election, as was demonstrated by those who contested on behalf of the said body assembled there; * 1 Whereas:-The Unionis- ; ta Committee in appointing members to the I Alliance Committee obeyed its , obsolute 'whim and by a majority of ' of its members, chose innos who are not of Tá sfinjfátla Unionist constituency of this locality, among them, the present Commissioner of Public Instruction who dis- . The current Commissioner of Public Instruction, among them, the current Commissioner of Public Instruction, who, under the auspices of this Administration, has been given a refi- - buted public office, and thus has been given preference over others who, with the merits to perform the same mission, would not have had the hindrance of a public employment that would prevent them from accepting and acting to satisfy the general interest of the Collective and the public: -We have seen with sadness that the candidates for the Alliance Committee have not been elected in good faith, much less with (Ocntinu* an 1A page 11) l - NOT 50N WORDS BUT Eloquent FACTS WHICH THE WHOLE WORLD AFFIRMS ¡ The "Crest Motors, Inc.", of New I I York, has received the following letter: "I assure you that the "Flint" is a real marvel. The more I use it, the better it is. "It is a magnificent looking carriage; and, when ascending lag. mountains, that is when it shows its admirable capacity in "high gear." "I shall be glad to demonstrate, to as many persons as may desire it, the extraordinary merits of the "Flint Six." A. ROSENBLATT" (New York). Responsible persons, with excellent references, are wanted to take charge of the Ijla Agencies. ALONStf riera & co. exclusive agents. San Juan. BIG BARGAIN FORTALEZA 25 Baratillo of suits of Thread, Gabardine, Navy Blue and other colors at bargain prices: Hats, shirts and Caps all good and cheap. Don't forget that MANOLO is LIMITED. Tel. 1579. Box 1246.
- - ■ 1 . - V Important...! Gentlemen's $ Silk Jersey Shirts at ¡ESPECIAL! 498 ¡ESPECIAL! ür* Variety-All Sizes. Visit us today I Gonzalez rpadin Co, Ina I IN FRONT OF PtlOClFAL PLAZA r - . ' ' - ' - - ■ I ... - . ■ ¿i. ' ■ ■ CARCHO A Carbonated Chocolate, Beverage.
A D A E* PERMANENT SERVICE AH GARAGE - GASOLINE - BRANDI A'á* WASHES .'
A ¡ateresante wbád Mr. Luis Nial?, <k .lia, in the (lie is predicted, le of data, the onapieKImcaso of important' negwk in Fuerte Rico, a tired of lartey of Arfónos vitrente.
Mr. Nicole, ¿nucía |as pérdidas (pe ecasieoa al coerdo 1a entry of w* posts "drivos "4ejieraiicíK The true leader of the jpinoría in the Municipal Assembly' has received the following letter: i '-May '30, 1924. 'JE* Mr. Don R. FWtra'tiloni, San Juan. r , ' Dear Sir:-* " I read with migues, the manifestations of you ace<-a de Actual Ley de Arbitrios, published by "EL MUNDO" in JL Álieién* of today. In the same, |pan "iona .iona you, in passing the negocíb-Ma - jewelry, which is precisely, the <gie most suffers from .such state of .dp Things.In the watchmaking industry, for example, it is easy to see that, since the entry into force of this law, the newspapers have been filled with advertisements from northern houses, which offer watches at prices impossible to compete with, paying ¡ insular patents and in addition to the 11% tax on the receipt of the merchandise. All these sales by mail, represent increased sums, which are exported without leaving our stocks, which we cannot keep without movement and pay, on top of them, the heavy taxes in force. ! In addition to this, Mnemns queMtodb ' I the world 'éstfi 1 'Wú<md twenty persons who dedicate themselves to I impotate small consignments of watches, those who visit the evenhial buyers, telling them: "...I can sell to you much cheaper than "such" jewelry, because you pay patents and also very expensive duties, while I bring them "DE CHIVO".... The consequences of this state of things, for this house, for example, are that I have to liquidate, buying only what is strictly necessary, to reduce the stock, deprived of its normal movement, being so, that, for the next fiscal year, my Merchandise item will be reduced by about $15,000 - for the time being. The impressions I have lately exchanged with my competitors in this matter, Messrs. Bouret and Dinet & Pacheco, have confirmed my opinion on this matter. And don't tell us: "Jewelers don't want to pay anything, they want to earn everything! Nothing of the sort, the 10% tax on jewelry is not harmful to us, on the contrary, as long as it can be applied, as it was, after the (Continued on page 6.) practical argument against the independence of a small and weak island. Cuba at present is: a prosperous and happy nation. The greatest tranquillity and order reign : in all parts of the Republic. The (Continued on page 4.)