THE WORLD
|p PAGES. 3Cj[ I II amMte" ss.oo I II Va Ate r .50
i n in
MORNING DAILY, EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ANN VI l SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Pnblimd and dijCribnud nndw pénate (No. 801) wrttort*** by the Act of October S. 1017, oa 11" ti U" Po "t Ofoea"/I San Juan, Porto Blco, By ordor of the Proaidont, A. 8. Burleson, Postmaator General. Entered as second class matter. I February 81, 1919, at the Post Ofdeo at San Juan. Porto Blco, (United States ef undec the Act of march 8, 1879 I
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 1924, NUMBER 1540.
. ú W|i I ,1 ■■■■■! ■! ■ i I I ■ "It is necessary that the workers of P. R. act and raise the state of strike as it develops in their respective localities'-writes from Wash.d leaderSantiago Iglesias.
The leader of the Socialist Party invokes the constitutional principles of the American Federation of Labor, in view of the strike problem in the country.
The following letter from the Socialist leader, now in Washington, Mr. Iglesias, was recently received here: February 7, 1924. Mr. Francisco Paz Gránela, Acting Secretary of the Free Federation, San Juan, P. R. Dear comrade and friend: I have before me your letter dated January 30, 1924, in which you inform us of all the matters processed and steps taken in connection with the work being done by the Commission of Conciliation and Mediation in the settlement of the agricultural strikes. The cablegrams regarding Villqreal, inviting me to go to Veracruz to hold a conference regarding important matters and the other regarding the strike petitions made to the American Federation of Labor by the agricultural organizations of Vieques, Arecibo, Fajardo, etc., were to express what Article XIII of the Constitution of the American Federation of Labor, which refers to the defense fund for the Local and Federated Unions, states in its Article 2, the following! "In the event of a disagreement between a Local Union and an employer which, in the opinion of the Local Union, may result in a strike, such Union shall notify the President of the American Federation of Labor, who shall investigate, or cause an investigation of the disagreement to be made, and endeavor to settle the difficulty. | Should such efforts prove futile, Bruno & Vazquez, Inc. : . ■ - ¡ SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 17 AT 10:30 A. M. Premiere of the luxe comedy aVAWERO ERRANTE (The Rambling Kid) i with the well-known actor í HQOt GIBSON $ BEAUTIFUL GIFTS 3 Jpor lañóle at 7% and at 9 P.M. Premiere atY. R. of the powerful drama ÜnlionibrecofldosMadres ' (A* Mari 'With Two Mothers) ? starring MÁRY ALDEN CULLEN LANDIS . SYLVIA BREAMER
tiles, shall take such action as may appear to you necessary to notify the Executive Council, and if a majority of said Council shall decide that a strike is necessary such Union shall be authorized to order a strike or stoppage of work which shall be deemed lawful, and no money shall be expended from the defense fund in that respect, unless the strike or stoppage shall have been first authorized and approved by the President and the Executive Council." According to this article, in order for the Executive Council of the American Federation of Labor to approve a strike, it must have before it, the following facts: 1. - Evident proof that the employers have refused all forms of intelligence and settlement of the matter with the workers or their Unions/ 2. -That in view of the circumstances, the Unions have met and by an absolute majority of their members, after considering the situation, declare that the only means of being able to settle the question is the immediate declaration of a strike, " by Coughing" cables, that the Commission of Conciliation and Mediation is still trying to conciliate the question. There is no definite statement, in order to bring the question before the Executive Council of the American Federation of Labor that the organizations have completed all fair and legal steps to conciliate, and that in that connection, no agreement having been reached, ' they claim from the Executive Council of ' the Federation approval of the de- . claration of the strike. i The procedures followed by the ' bodies affiliated with the Federation I here, on the Continent, are as follows : 1. -Meet the bodies to consider the petitions to be made to the employers, for such and such reasons. 2. -Presentation of the pleadings to the employers, fixing the scales of wages and conditions of work, determining at the same time the necessity of holding a joint conference, to conciliate the questions submitted, and giving a time limit for such discussion. (Continued on page 10) THE MIRACLE OF ATASCO! THE EVANGELICAL LEAGUE OF SAN ! JUAN has visited all the editorial offices of the newspapers, with the object of presenting the supposed paralytic of ■ Añasco, Young Amador R. Fietri, accompanying an affidavit signed by i Ja mother of young Pietri, proving that the miracle of Añasco is a mere invention and a crude lie, and that it has only been an attempt to surprise the good faith of the people. EVANGELICAL LEAGUE OF SAN JUAN
t--****■- ■*■ 1 V í HEAR THE EMINENT Dr. JACK (HAROLD LLOYD). JACK (HAROLD LLOYD) ; ■ "Infallible cure-all" sue ailments" MONDAY 18 DfJfTA TUESDAY 19 JfiBoha) líl/iLl V (Afternoon and Evening) ¿SSíBSSS-- I /* Á PERMANENT SERVICE I GARAGE - GASOLINE - LAUNDRY I |WK r ÁlinV VILLA PONCE I I I 1O * P. R. R.
The great Titta Ruffo triumphed last night in an unsurpassed manner.
The audience, which filled the theater, rose from their seats to give you a formidable ovadón.- H insigne ba* ritono emodonado. Pina Garavei revealed herself as an exceptional soprano. As I write these lines, the echoes of the ovations that the San Juan audience gave last night to the immense singer are still resounding in our ears. Our great public, as we had presumed all of us who know him well, corresponded to the fame of the distinguished artist, because the theater could not have presented a more dazzling appearance. There was there all that is most valuable and significant in the population, represented by many charming ladies, and numerous distinguished gentlemen. In the boxes and in the seats, from the first moments, the enthusiasm boiled, which overflowed as soon as the first of the world's baritones appeared on the stage. The great Titta is at the height of his astonishing powers. Imagine," one of the most reputable authorities on artistic matters told us, "the great Zacconi, if he possessed the most beautiful baritone voice ever bestowed on a human being, and you will have the vision of what he is and of the prodigy performed in "Hamlet" by the never well praised Titta, who maddened last night, immensely more than all the titans of lyric art who have visited us, our public. Needless to say that there were moments of intense emosion; truly astonishing moments, suspended on the highest pedestal of glory. In the duet "Nega se puoi la luce", sung with Pina Garavelli, who is a very meritorious soprano; in the famous toast, which has made him famous in the world, "O vin, discaccia la tristezza"; in the monologue of the third act and in the "Come il romito flor"; he truly lifted the audience from their seats, who no longer had hands to applaud him. Titta Ruffo must have heard thousands of ovations in his brilliant artistic career, but the ones he received last night must have surprised him more than many of the ones he won, as emotion seemed to overwhelm him on many occasions. Pina Garavelli, who played the role of "Ofelia", conquered the audience with her exquisite art and her delightful voice. She received an enthusiastic ovation throughout the work, especially in the first act duet I with Titta Ruffo and in the romanza ; of madness. Maria Salori, who played the role of Queen Gertrude, proves to be a soprano of beautiful vocal organ, and was frequently applauded. Our friend the excellent bass Bettoni, already very much applauded in the previous season by the public of San Juan, was also very much applauded, especially in the prayer. It is not possible to characterize more conscientiously the role of King Claudio. We must not conclude without also paying enthusiastic tribute to the great maestro Soriente, who was one of the heroes of the evening. The orchestra contributed, with its illustrious leader, to the thunderous success conquered by the "Bracale Opera Company"; success PARQUE Exclusively in Ranturce DOROTHY PHILLIPS ' in / "THE PIRATE'S DAUGHTER" Complete every night TOMORROW. SUNDAY HOUSE PETERS AND > IRENE RICH IN "THE INVISIBLE RODER" ¡ RENTALS ían apartment, proper for fu níllM, in the "Tobacco Palace", hvfefmarín in the same building.
A GREAT ARTIST
" W - The Cortis who will make his presentation tonight in opera Tosea. Today will another Hearing by the<om¡sio.iados Crowd of tequias to Cordova -Torres Mazmu represents w no one r- - Washington,4ÍB'<b. 14.-For today at ten o'clock' the next "hearing" of the Puerto Rican Delegation has been scheduled to discuss the issues of the island, g ' In some that eTtfij. In some that Mr. Ccrdova Dáyila has made *1 Representative Press" in Washington,'* Ma áicho that he has received a multitude of theorems from numeroYork, who protest that Torres Masorana is holding the representation of the Colony to discredit the Puerto Rican delegates and to oppose the granting of greater freedoms and rights to Puerto Rico. CONGRESSMAN COOPER SUPPORTS INDEPENDENCE FOR THE PHILIPPINES The House Insular Affairs Committee received three bills granting independence to the Philippine Islands. Congressman Cooper, of Illinois, was heard by the Committee. Cooper (stated that he was in favor of granting independence to the Philippine archipelago, arguing that continued occupation would be unwarranted. <He argued that continued occupation would be unjustified, and in contradiction to American ideals of democracy and freedom. He strongly favored the United States relinquishing absolutely all responsibility for the future of the Philippine islands, once independence is granted; although he indicated that it would be necessary and prudent to ensure in advance some international guarantee to defend the integrity of the future Philippine republic against possible aggression. The audience that gathered last night at the theater was so large that it ensures consecutive full houses, as it is very difficult to miss any of them. Tonight and Sunday will be two great events: the presentation of the famous tenor Cortis, in "Tosca", and the reappearance of the colossal Titta Ruffo, in "The Barber of Seville". The great Mariani -second Mussolini- must be very proud. The full house, as expected, was overflowing. The Lucky Strike cigarette is the most popular among all the others, this is due only to its excellent QUALITY mWWw i W W W WK wElWwwB , *.
The pseudor rqMiNKaN Ido. Rafael Martinez Nadal, consigned yesterday in writing, sa opposition to the appointments of Judge hmteyM Inez de Paz de Fajardo.
Yesterday, new appointments were confirmed In yesterday's session of the Senate, the following appointments were duly confirmed by the Appointments Committee of the Senate: Mr. Eduardo Pérez Casaldnc, for Clerk of the First District Court of the First District. Mr. Luis Vergne Ortiz, for "ocre, tarlo of the District Court of San Juan, Second District. Don Manuel Náter Girona, for mar shal of the District Court of the First District. Don Eduardo Urrutia, for marshal of the District Court of San Juan, Second District. SUSPENSION OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE At the request of a Senator, it was stated. The Rules of Procedure were suspended so that the Senate may give its conI sideration to any appointments as they are sent by the Governor. 1 by the Governor. i SENATOR MARTINEZ NADAL The Republican Senator, Don Rafael Martínez Nadal, requested the reconsideration of the vote on the appointment of the Justice of the Peace of Fajardo which was in the previous one, and after "n heated debate, it was ■ te recantíderaalín and the se-. ñor Mart&IR Xadal vetoed the motion, making constaür*'poi' -e**!* wt' wt" disi- 1 "dente, which ee cagtrnje A clones.' As to the appointment of Judge Foote, before whom the San Juan elec toral suit and the matter of 'Sabalier v. Iglesias were brought, the Republican Senator also recorded his dissi denting vote. A SENATORIAL INVESTIGATION AGAINST THE U.S. BREAD TRUST WASHINGTON, Feb. 15 (United Press)-"Progressive" leaders in the Senate have promised to introduce a resolution calling for a thorough investigation of the charges against the U.S. bread trust, which is alleged to be looting American consumers to the tune of half a million pesos annually. The said investigation will probably be made by a Senate Committee appointed for the purpose, or by the Federal Trade Commission. DON RAFAEL FABIAN On Thursday last returned to Ban Juan i via New York after spending a i season of some months in the Spanish Peninsula, our distinguished friend the distinguished gentleman Don Ra- i fael Fabian, one of the elements of j the Hispanic colony of most prestige, and ! who enjoys besides just esteem and credit in the financie, ros circles of the country. A large group of friends, from the many cafes that the highly esteemed traveler has had in San Juan, came to the dock to welcome Fabian. We send to Mr. Fabian a cordial' greeting of welcome. j Sales manager for édüestTonal' article in Spanish. Must tho- ¡ roughly understand English and. Spanish. Also be able to obtain train and handle salesman fori this article. References Snd bond required* Apply in own handwhiting to: M. W. PURVIS, Box 1316, San Juan, P. R. .... ,-t . ~ ; "St. Thomas"-said vor' to Use the Bay Mum of , this name and you will be convinced that it is the best. Distributee": aR, JULIA ACÓ,
In the Mayor's office yesterday, a lively brawl took place in which one of the protagonists was left with contusions on his face.
A complaint brought there was the one that turned the Aqueduct building into an improvised "ring" - what the main actors in the "affair" had to say about it.
Yesterday morning various and moving comments were spread around the city, as word of mouth spread that a personal meeting had taken place in the Mayor's Office between some employees of the municipality and Mr. Luis Barrera, from Santurce, due to an incident that arose from a heated dispute between Mr. Barrera and the person in charge of the Aqueduct Office, Mr. Alfredo Vera. The news, whose origin we found out later, as it was transmitted from one person to another, acquired, as always happens with this kind of reports, exaggerated proportions that increased ■ the popular conversations, constituting the main topic in the streets, in the cafes, etc., to the point that it startled some, placing others in an apparent situation of astonishment and expectation. Faced with the insistent comments that we heard, one of our reporters visited the Al caldía, with "1 object to make clear what tatMeoo do disrto about the impression that the commentators had communicated to him of the possible boxing event. I Bq te JJcaMte we learned that the asungarnwnte, although, to tell the truth, we learned that "something" happened that resulted in the aforementioned Mr. Barrera leaving the Municipality with a black eye and with the breast of the shirt reddened by the blood that dripped from his nose. I HE PRESENTED HIMSELF IN A BAD WAY i In the Municipality, he showed the reporter ■ he exchanged impressions with Mr. Alfredo Vera, in charge of the Aqueduct service, and the latter stated that what happened was simply that Mr. Luis Barrera presented himself there in a discomposed and polite way, demanding uncouth explanations about a certain fault in the Aqueduct in front of his house, which prevents the water from coming up to his residence. In explaining the manner in which Barrera sat down there, Mr. Vera told us that the visitor, violently removing his hat, threw on a table a folder he was carrying under his arm and started to attack him.
He then started a tirade against the employees of that office, whom he saw as negligent, negligent and other such things, all of which Mr. Vera told us, since the Municipality has had plumbers on duty for several days to repair the damage that prevented the water from reaching Mr. Barrera's house in Bate tur ce, The only "ROUND" Barrera's sour phrases repeated in turn by other energetic phrases of Mr. Vera, were the fuse that ignited the powder of the tempers, and as in boxing events, the first "round" immediately arose, and the person in charge of the Negociado and Mr. Barrero came to blows, who exchanged a series of "jaba" blows, divorced in no way from the rules established by the famous Marquis of Queensbery. - 1 Faced with the unexpected occurrence, sa>> taron al "ring" the employee Jete Otero and another surnamed Gouteles, for fl "rodo entnl tete "Btatoz some trate* peace, could notice te*. Sorrir* jHNte taba the contusions in the rooteo i* we have spoken to the prinoipio do eten w formation., WHAT THE 8R TELLS US. BARRERA Explaining the incident to us, Mr. Barrera, who was in our Newsroom yesterday shortly after the incident, told us that on Monday he had gone to the Municipality, Department of the Aqueduct, with the purpose of requesting that they repair "n pipe of the water supply to a house he owns in Santuroo, This was on Monday," said Mr. Barrera, and on Monday nothing had been resolved. Yesterday he returned, and insisted that the fountain be repaired, explaining that there had been no water in his house for four days. A little annoyed by the obvious apathy of the fimeio (Continued on page 7a.)
tapsBiimtew TOURNEE OF THE GREATEST ARTIST OF THE CENTURY 1 COMENDADOR TITTA RUFFO * 1 Directed by Maestro Cav. Adolfo Brwcale. 1 MUNICIPAL THEATER Today Saturday, February 16, 1924 At eight forty-five o'clock will be performed the Opera of Maestro Puccini "TOSCA" by the eminent artists Antonio Cortis, Olga Carrara, Enrico Roggio, and Antonio NicdichJ X4DB PRICES OF TODAY'S FUNCTION Boxes without tickets 18.00 Lunettes with tickets .... Í12.00 Balcony .... a 8.00 General Admission i 6.00 Gallery _ | 8,50 ' Sunday, February 17 At 8:45 the Opera of fUesini "BARBER OF SEVILLE" will be performed by the pivo Com. TITTA RUFFO. ' PRICES Boxes without tickets ; ..*125.00 Lunettes with tickets - ** ,20.00 ¿ Balcony * * - 1154)0 t General Admission - - --110.00 -- "6.W ¿ ■: NOTE:-Seats are on sale all si áte at the te* * * ' quilla of the TEATRO MUNICIPAL. * - ¿ . ■aamamaa-B-■■■■MMteHBmmauMuil .