ELMUNDO
IQ PAGES. 3 CTS. I Semester 14.00 111 Bu Afio *7.50
10 HAGS - 3 CTS I JL Ótciñí": Ble" I Ilnrtrido'' Bldg. 1 B J J T * L 1222 ~~ *" ,<a '
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO VI
-AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Publlahed and dlatrlbatdd andar pariMli (Mo adi) authorlaA by tha Act oí vetauar O, 1W1<, on lia M tba Fort Offica af San Juan, Porto B<"0, By order of the Praaidaat, A. 8. Bafleaon, Poatmartar GoneraL Entorod aa second class mattar. fabrnary 21 1S1". st the Pest Office at Ian Juan, Porto W*. (United Btataa of Amarlcaq under tha Act of march 3, l "7t
SATURDAY, APRIL 12, 1924
NUMBER 1587.
The arrest of an alleged persecutor of underage girls in Cayey causes a phenomenal outcry.
Cayey provokes a phenomenal scandal that could have had dire consequences, but for the equanimous attitude of the Police ■ Exalted elements-we are told-climbed up to the balcony of the barracks in order to snatch the prisoner from the authorities.-Chief Lopez de Azua threw them off and had the front of the building cleared.-A demonstration, a rally and a brawl.
A couple of days ago we published■ a news item reporting that in the city of Cayey there was a subject who apparently harbored "nos santos'' purposes 'regarding several girls, minors, whom he was dedicated to chase around the school surroundings, ora making them malicious signs, The attitude of this subject disturbed the society of Cayey, perhaps because of the fear that something regrettable could happen, since the recent experience in such cases could not have been more disastrous, as the reader will have observed from the information published by the press. i Extending the note to which we mentioned at the beginning, from reports supplied to us by persons who had arrived in P***"o" d * cir ' we" O : state of excitement to which the girls who were said to be persecuted had reached, the Principal of the School of Ca- 1 yey called the chief López de Azúa and told him what was happening, requesting him to investigate the events denounced by the minors. Mr. Lopez de Azua invited all the girls-about 8 or 10-to accompany him to the place where they said the alleged persecutor was, and as the passers-by went by, the Chief of Police asked them to point out the subject in question, if they wanted to have their complexion free of spots, freckles, pimples and blackheads, then use the "Cutiperfec1 to" Cream. Distributors. R. JULIA & CO. e BOLIVAR PAGAN LAWYER AND NOTARY. Insular and Federal Courts Office: Alien Street, in front of Gonzalez Padin. P. O. Box 883. Telephone: 1475 SAN JUAN, P. R.
to see them pass by. So did the poor, somewhat nervous and restless creatures, until a group of several individuals, who turned out to be tobacco growers, happened to pass by, and the girls, pointing to one of them, exclaimed in chorus that he was the one. The alluded to, according to what our informants tell us, turned pale and denied that he had anything to do with the matter, but the testimony of the ten accusers was more powerful than his denial, so the chief Ló- ■ pez de Azúa decided to take him to the barracks to investigate the case. At the barracks it was found that the suspect accused by the ten girls was one Justo Reyes, a tobacconist, the same one who, according to the girls, had been persecuting them since last Monday. I Judge Rodriguez Rivera appeared i at the barracks having heard from i lips of the minors that the detainee ■ was the same one who had been following them i for some days. Reyes denied that he had sometimes followed the girls, but that this was due to the fact that the hours when he left the workshop where he worked coincided with those of the school where the girls were, and that he had never harbored the malicious intention of harming them, as they claimed. While the matter was being clarified, Rei yes was detained at the barracks, which later led to the Chief being told that the prisoner had been tricked by the Chief, causing the consequent excitement among certain elements of the people, who gave political color to the matter and in a large group gathered in front of the barracks, some of them trying to get the prisoner to go upstairs. Some tried to climb up to the balcony to free the prisoner, which, we are told, they did not succeed because they were thrown from there by the police, who immediately proceeded to clear the front of the building, in order to restore order. The attempt failed, it seems, and then a demonstration was organized, followed by a rally to protest the arrest of Reyes. However, we are told, there was a speaker who exhorted them to withdraw their attitude for the sake of the peace.
FOR NORTH SPAIN STEAMER "FIGUIG" She is expected in this port about May 3 and 4 bound for LA CORUÑA and EL HAVRE Take advantage of this opportunity as she is the only steamer this season. Separate your passage in advance. Passenger and cargo are admitted for the above mentioned ports. For more information contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. Agents Telephone 257. San Juan, P. R. TODAY SATURDAY TODAY NORKA ROUSKAYA . IN THE CLASSICAL DANCE "SALOME'. i Numbered Lunettes *1.00. Amphitheater without No. SO.75 ■ II" .!!! , * f A D A CE PERMANENT SERVICE AklIL GARAGE - GASOLINE - BRANDI VI WASHES , L O LA .
It is considered imminent that a new conflict will arise at the University as a result of an order issued by the Chancellor of the University.
The University is to be suspended from its schools and one of its students expelled as a result of the riot which took place on Friday, the 28th of last month.
Yesterday afternoon we received from Rio Piedras, reports concerning an order that has been issued by the Rector of the University, Mr. J. St. John, imposing a corrective on the students who appear to be guilty of the riot that took place there on the 28th of last month, of which we gave a timely account to our readers. 1 This riot had to oc;i. i'mar.-e , -: due to the athletic games celo-' ■ j bi aded in Ponce, and due to the de- - I cision given by the Athletic Commission, 1 which understood that the University > had not obtained the victory. Icgal- > over Central High. School >, of this capital. * . Excited as were the animi- -; mos among the student body : ■ l of the University, when Rector St. John announced to them that the athletic Coi mission had given them an ( i adverse decision, they rose in j i , protest and there ensued the phenomenal ¡ 1 1 scandal of which the whole press of this city was then i occupied. Mr. St. John, from that time, emi ■ ned to practice a thorough in- , investigation of the facts, and yesterday i was published, in all the visible sites< ' of the University a list containing all the names !'of l®r r estWiiatih's'- quisled san of having participated in the mo- , tin and of having been responsible ; for this act of indiscipline, with the ( [ notification that in punishment of their < fault they will be suspended-; temporarily- 1 1 1 minded from their classes. | A young man of the University, Mr. de Jesus, representing e-t" ' newspaper, was changing impre| considered it premature in those ins i tants, and suggested to the crowd not to do anything until the final result of the "affair" was known, which, according to the speaker, was going to be in this or that way, thus allowing himself to opii I narrate on a matter which was "sub judice' '. Given the action taken by the authorities and the police, calm was finally restored. The only thing that had to be regretted, hours later, was a disturbance of order caused by two exalted people who ■ were quarreling. ■ A complaint for disturbing the peace ' i was filed against Reyes, of j who is said to be a man of no bad record. The Judge has se- j fialed him bail in the sum of $300, Ledo having ' taken charge of the defense. ' Fernandez Garcia. 1
1 sessions with Mr. St. John, quiej) him ' made the following statements in connection with loar 1 punishments to be .imposed: \ "For those students who on Vicr- ; nes 28 did not attend classes and who ' have not presented any reasonable excuse, they have been suspended for one week. For those in whom there is good evidence that they promoted the riot or that by their speeches and acts they induced other students to take part in the riot, the punishment of three weeks' suspension is reserved. I There is one case of expulsion. In relation to the number of students who will have to be absent from their classes because of these, Mr. St. John himself is of the opinion that more than two hundred students are absent for some days from their classes. # 1 Naja we have been able to ascertain I (Continued* on page 6) o. ' "f - ■ 1 The president! Mae and the taba* ws of frite, , April 2, 1924. , Dear Mr. Barrett: - I am very grateful for your kindness in sending me the excellent Puerto RicG cigars which I have enjoyed with great plücer. as I have enjoyed those others you have sent me in the past. You have been very kind to remember me in this way. The adie onal remembrance of the For- 1 terican Company has come in well, and is a further proof of the excellence of the produce of that island. Yours sincerely (f) Calvin COOLIDGE. ( Hon. John T Barrett, Prohibition Director, San Juan, P p. I ZZ. i I I MUSSOLINI TRIUMPHANTLY ACCLAIMED THROUGHOUT ITALY I . ROME, April 11 (French Cable). The head of the government, Mussolini, who has arrived in this capital from his residence in Milan, has been triumphantly acclaimed by all! I03 towns and cities through which he has had to cross. The journey of the Italian dictator has been a triumphant march amid cheers of enthusiasm, musi- í cas, c illuminations. I
was our surprise when we learned that the Commission of Public Sert had solved the "Affaire" of the telephone without giving us time to expose it to the public.
The telephone issue without giving us time to present our points of view-we were told yesterday by Mr. Vall-Spinosa, a member of the Chamber of Commerce Committee which brought before that body in 1922, John T. Adams, Chairman of the Committee on the Telephone, and the President of the Chamber of Commerce, John T. Adams, Chairman of the Committee on the Telephone, in 1922.
John T. Adams, Chairman of the Executive Committee of the National Republican Party, reviewing a floor plan of the session hall of the building in which the next Republican convention is to be held in Cleveland. The first joint meeting of local Republican and Socialist bodies is reportedly being held in Loiza. Uni ' mind, the famous pact, and some "compliments" to the heads of the bourgeois parties As our readers know. under the plan of the soealute Republican pact. there are provisions authorizing the local committees of both parties to hold joint meetings and agree on certain details of the coalition. in order that the general work may be more easily accomplished and the collective action of the two political groups throughout the island, as the final campaign draws nearer. According to what Secretary Torres of the Socialist Party told us yesterday, it seems that Loíza has been the first town on the island where the first joint meeting of the Republican and Socialist committees has been held, having unanimously approved an extensive resolution in which both local parties agree to go to the polls united in the next elections, in order to put an end to the "Unionist seed'' there. In the resolution, the two parties agreed to go to the polls together in the next election in order to put an end to the "unionist seed'' there.
If the Telephone Company- it says- needs money to do certain works it is logical that it suspends its dividends and employs that money . in the improvements that it is going to make
l i) our reputei visited Mr. F. Vail Spinosa yesterday with the purpose of exchanging impressions with this well-known man of neg>>cius on the ''telephone affair''. Mr. Spinosa, we told him. < report that you were a member of the Commission appointed by the < amara j of Commerce in the year lt'22 to oppose the Telephone Tariff. Could you supply us with any information on this matter? The report of our Ais,gado, Mr. Soto Gras, he replied, gives -uticien- } tious details of the efforts made by the Commission in the year 1P_>>2 by the then chairman. Mr. Waldemsr Lee, to oppose the increases requested by the Company d<-l Te-| léfono. I.a Commission was composed j Messrs. Pedro Bolivar, Rafael ' M. Pietrantoni, Enrique Abarca and j a servant. We attended "uatro © five sesione", being pemlieriL' *l techniques of the Public Service Commission for then us to present our proof; which mainly consisted <;i demonstrate to the Commission, with lo- own; u to, month of the Company, when a Corporation declares a divid< ndo of! ¡ 8'. and accumulates money to retire its nonos, it is not only not bankrupt, but is in m, prosperous state, as o n,ar:ñe-ta " 11* itself in -its artial report to >tis stockholders, and po,- therefore, no increase of ta>'if:is was appropriate. If the Telephone Company really needs money to undertake new works, it would be logical to suspend dividends and use the money for improvements to be made to the company. Has monogrammed L B cover outside. Will be splendidly rewarded to anyone who returns it to Wilson 18, Santurce, or advise phone 962. Santurce. I
establish. Of course the increase granted to the Company represents an immediate gain to the stockholders of 100G in the value of the stock. In short, i if the Company has issued $500,000 i in stock, as I understand, i the Public Service Commission has made a gift of an additional $500,000 to the holders of the stock, at the expense of the taxpayers of ¡ Puerto Rico. This increase in the value of the stock is due to the fact that the value of all commercial paper is fixed according to the dividends it may earn, and in this case the increase allows the Company to double the dividends. Our surprise was enormous," he continued, "when we learned that the Public Service Commission had ruled without having given us the opportunity to present our points of view, and we were not even notified of the resolution of the increase so that we could exercise the right of appeal granted to us by the law. Yesterday afternoon. April 10, was that the -'omission notified - the Chamber of Commerce that the increases had been granted, after we had (1T) ululated the protest against the Committee's decisions, and when ■ the Company had already begun to collect the increases. All this obliges us to act violently to defend ourselves, instead of having been given the time required for a defense that would allow us to proceed calmly. (Continued on page 6) i ANOTHER EVENT I At the "BAZAR AHORRO". For- ! taleza 25. has just received a large assortment ríe gabardine suits, Sport model, and sells them at $15.50 i (others sell them at $22.00). Great bargain of suits and other articles of clothing at any price. Manolo limits himself; visit him. i Advt.
INAUGURATION SUNDAY 13 | HIPODROMO 'REXACH'.
Yerba Elefante For seed and livestock, contact Arturo Carreras, P. O. Box 782, San Juan, P. R. Gray hair dulls the face and gives an appearance of premature old age, all of which can be avoided by using the incomparable "OMENTAL DYE" which dyes hair instantly.
The Lucky Strike cigarette is smoked all over the world, only because of its excellent quality. M3®
THE INDEMNIFICATIONS COMMISSION ACCEPTS EXPERTS' REPORT NEW YORK, April 11. (United Press)-From Paris it is reported that the Reparations Commission which is presided over by Mr. Bartheu, has decided to accept the report presented by the experts, and to recommend at the same time to the Allies to accept the said report if Germany in turn accepts it. TYPING MACHINES General repairing of typewriters, calculating machines, phonographs, etc. P. R. TYPEWRITER REPAIRING SHOP, TEL. 288, ALLEN 11, BOX 1445. San Juan, P. R,
SATURDAY 12 AND SUNDAY 13 TWO FAREWELL FL'XCIOXES of the E.-pignola Star AMALIA MOLINA Messenger of the Spanish and Spanish-American Soul. DOS TAXDAS CADA XOCHE A POPULARES PRICES 35 v 50 ESTREXOS DE PELICULAS ESTUPENDO DECORADO.
THE SERVICE I GIVE SPEAKS INSURANCE OF ALL "ASES HENRY C. BURSIAN IMfltlO BOUKl 3rd FLOOR III. 477. P. 0. BOX 886. SAN JUAN, PIO. RUO