ELMBNDO
p PAGES. 3 CTS. Otele"": '-Puerto Rico ? Illustrated" Bldg. If Tel 1222. - Box 346.
1 1 n PAGS. 3 CTS Semester 94.00 III A AUo 87 fie
A.M. DAILY 1 1 *"
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of October 8, 1917, am file at the Poet Office of San Juan, Porto Blco, By order of the President, A 8. Burleson, Postmaster General. Entend second claes matter, February 21, 191'9, at the Post Office at San Juan. Porto Blco. (United States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1879.
*-■ ii ■ ssseaes: 1 . -jujSABADO NOVEMBER 8, 1924,
NUMBER 1779.
YEAR VI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC COALITION WINS PUERTO RICO.
ARTURO
Don Roberto H. Todd obtains over Don Rafael Diez de Andino, for Mayor, a majority of 125 votes, the coalitionists win the Assembly by a majority of 50 votes over the aliancistas.
At last it is known who has won in this capital, it is known that the municipality has been won by the republican-socialist coalition, in an official manner. Yesterday, at five o'clock in the afternoon, the agitation was immense. Thousands of people were situated in front of the Senate, in whose building the offices of the Insular Board of Elections are located. Numerous policemen, armed with carbines, were stationed at the entrance of the building, to avoid any disorder that might occur. At six o'clock in the afternoon, the Marshall of the Municipal Court, Mr. Ramón Zeno, made his entrance in the office of the Superintendent, Mr. Keith, bringing the official report of the Local Board, on the First Precinct, which was the one called to decide the fight. Mr. Zeno came guarded by two policemen one on each side, and Corporal Emanuelli bringing up the rear. The official report was delivered to Mr. Keith, and a short time later, the press had it that the Republican-Associationist coalition triumphed. You will see, our readers, that Mr. Robert H. Todd, counting between the first and second precincts, has triumphed as Mayor. But here are the numbers. In the second precinct, Don Roberto obtained a majority of 504 votes, and in the first precinct, Mr. Diez de Andino obtained a majority of 379 votes. Mr. Todd thus has a majority over his opponent of 125 votes. As for the Municipal Assembly, in the second precinct, the coalition obtained a majority of 458 votes and in the first precinct, the Alliance obtained a majority of 408 votes. Thus, the coalitionists won the Assembly by an official majority of 50 votes. At that hour the coalitionist enthusiasm in this capital was immense, indesdriptble. They organized a great demonstration, which went through the main streets, proclaiming the triumph. Here is the official report submitted: LOCAL BOARD OF ELECTIONS PRIMER PRECINCT OF SAN JUAN PUERTO RICO November 7, 1924. Mr. Superintendent General Superintendent of Elections, San Juan, P. R. V w Sir: In compliance with your communication, requesting that in view of the collation sheets you practice a recount to obtain the summary of the votes acquired by the mu-
- nicipal candidates in the elections held on November 4, 1924 - this Local Board of Elections, in different sessions, proceeded to formalize the requested recount with the following result: Rafael Diez de Andino, as candidate for the Partido Unión de Puer- - to Rico, 4,276. Jacinto Texidor, as candidate for the Puerto Rico Union Party, 4,282. Jacinto Texidor, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Republican Party, 358. Manuel Ginorio, as candidate for the Puerto Rico Union Party, 4,275. Julián W. Blanco, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Union Party, 4,284. Julián W. Blanco, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Republican Party, 357. Enrique Aquino, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Republican Party, 354. Juan Marchán Sicardó, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Union Party, 4,269. Juan Marchzn Sicardó, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Republican Party, 356. Total-4,625 Eugenio Delgado, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Union Party, 4,274. Eugenio Delgado, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Republican Party, 359. Total-4,633. Leandro López de la Rosa, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Union Party, 4,277. Leandro López de la Rosa, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Republican Party, 359. Román Díaz Collazo, as candidate for the Puerto Rico Union Party, 4,277. Román Díaz Collazo, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Republican Party, 359. Arturo Díaz Cintrón, as candidate for the Puerto Rico Union Party, 4277. Arturo Díaz Cintrón, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Republican Party, 356. Ramón Lloverás Soler, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Union Party, 4,284. Ramón Lloverás Soler, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Republican Party, 356, Total-4,641. Eduardo López Tizol, as candidate for the Puerto Rico Union Party, 4,270. Eduardo López Tizol, as candidate for the Puerto Rican Republican Party, 356, Total-4,626. Roberto H. Todd, as candidate for the Socialist Party, 1,236. Roberto H. Todd, as candidate for the Constitutional Party, 3,015. Manuel Martínez Reselló, as candidate for the Socialist Party, 1,227. Manuel Martínez Roselló, as candidate for the Constitutional Party, 3,007. j Jorge del Toro Cuevas, as candidate for the Socialist Party, 1,218. Jorge del Toro Cuevas, as candidate for the Constitutional Party, 3,009. Total-4,227. j Jorge Bird Jr, as candidate for the Socialist Party, 1,217. Jorge Bird Jr., as candidate for the Constitutional Party, 3009. Rafael López Sicardó, as candidate for the Socialist Party, 1,232.' Total-4,226. Rafael López Sicardó, as candidate for (Continued on page 17)
THE JAPANESE REPRESENTATIVE TO THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS
t ■'fB| oil ' '4 41 1 2&| k >- : <7 h W> F a WrW~ Minister Adachi, who represents Japan at the present conference of the League of Nations in Switzerland. Don Jorge Bird Arias, prominent landowner of Fajardo, bicha by tearing his son, forje Bird Jr, from the bosom of the "public-socialist huests altoJOJíeaWl hiH ñor and will not He will have to come to Fajardo with Santiago Iglesias, q exploiter and worst enemy that Puerto Rico has We have received a copy of the following loose leaf, which subscribed by the prominent landowner of Fajardo, Don Jorge Bird Arias, has circulated in that city, lately: TO THE PEOPLE OF FAJARDO A loose leaf addressed to the "Socialist People of Fajardo" and signed by Dr. E. Matta, Bolívar Ochart and Gabino Soto, announcing a meeting and citing Jorge Bird Jr. among the persons who are to take part in it, was circulated today. The signers of that sheet were not authorized to use the name of Jorge Bird Jr., who was not even planning to come to Fajardo and much less to take part in the meeting. It is therefore just an abuse and a deception of the unscrupulous signers of that sheet. Jorge Bird Jr. has a high concept of honor and would not come to Fajardo, with Santiago Iglesias, the exploiter and worst enemy that the working class has in Puerto Rico, much less dare to climb a tribune stained and dishonored by continuous preaching of hatred, niality and deceit. Jorge BIRD ARIAS. * OFFICE TRANSFER The Ledo. Gonzalo Ardín has moved his office to the third floor of the Bouret Building, San Justo 12, San Juan, where he is at the service of his clients and the general public. Advt.
MEDICINES THAT DEFEND TUBERCULOSES The weakened organism can be helped with the invigorating action of medicines that increase its resistance, awakening vitality in the languishing cells, in a word, reconstructing in the organism those principles that the disease ruined, and this is achieved with the use of NEOBIOS, which brings to the terrain where the microbe fights its battle chemical elements that counteract its acometivity. Based on these same principles the Roman Institute of anti-tuberculosis therapeutics, established in Rome to combat this disease, has circulated profusely throughout the world, with the sanction of its most eminent medical capacities, this injectable product Ñ eobios. WE SUGGEST YOU TRY IT. please contact SOJO PHARMACY, Inc. Exclusive Representatives. STOP 15 - Phones 491-816 - SANTURCE
The "public socialist" leaders prepare to go to Washington to challenge the Resident Commissioner in the Lower House for believing that there were
If this is true, the fears that the "pure" president, Mr. Martinez Nadal, has been harboring for a long time in this respect are confirmed -And the other thing he said they will also do?
Friday, eleven o'clock in the morning. Around, next to the stairs, under the bureaucratic arcades of the old Municipal Building, a tingle of republican-socialists, with some other neighborhood leader, gesticulates nervously, looks at the high floors guarding the stairs that lead to the office of the officials who will govern the municipality until next January. In groups of children, while new news of the march of the San Juan's elections arrive, the last political events are commented, they talk about supposed conscience sales, about the unskillful organization of the alliance's campaign in San Juan, the oral one snatched the triumph of that party here, giving in this way an easy victory to the coalition in the city. While they speak to us, others, with more expertise, and exibiting their net alabarderismo, sn robertista unconditionality of twenty years d" faithful and interrupted adherence to don Roberto, "make numbers" against Iqs walls, hoping ■■ * ■** * AMERICAN WOMAN TO GOVERN THE ARMENIAN DISTRICT OF SAAR 8. i i i 1 I 1 1 1 I 1 I < * I - Miss Sarah Wambaugh, of 1 Washington, D. C., who has been appointed by the League of < Nations to replace the Spanish Go- i bernator of the Armenian District i of Soar. Miss " Wambaugh is a doctor of i law and philosophy, being reputed the foremost authority 1 on international plebiscites. <
the "chance'' to be offered to you, in due course. Among a jumble of notebooks and papers, an austere, Buddhist aspirant emerged, who apparently constituted the distributing referee, since he brandished a long list of aspirants to the municipal budget. The others paid attention to the reading, and looked at the presumed referee, submissive, with a gesture of doing his will. "Suddenly, one of them, they say that the Changa, wielding a rocky language, with a voice of a bass, came; -Li ceases march and nobody will stop it. Everything is already combined. Each one <of us will have his post. That aho>a. "Later", when "the other" comes, there will be more things. (Of "the other" we will deal with later- So the reader will know what it is about, as the reporter knew it, without meaning to say that it is true or false. It is a matter of information, and nothing more). -Will there be "the other thing"?" asked one i 3 " ce I c . an 9^- aja wearnta changa.- Do you think you will 'fall' "it"?.... v Faced with this strange political dissertation in code, the reporter turned to one of the most characterized, who appeared to be in the "secret", and.... "ELECTIONS WILL BE CONTESTED Our informant confirmed the news given the following day in *'E1 Globo" by the pure President, Mr. Martinez Nadal, in the sense that the Republican-Soclallist leaders will soon embark for the North, in order to present before the Lower House and contest the nomination of the Resident Commissioner, Mr. Córdova Dávila, for understanding that alleged irregularities have been committed in the elections. In connection with this "affair", our informant assured us that the coalition leaders Mr. Todd, Mr. Geigel and Mr. Iglesias would be boarding the ship in due course. Geigel and Iglesias. The latter will go as the first outpost of the delegation accompanied by Mr. Bolívar Pagán, the hero of Fajardo, who is going as an assistant, in case they run into a closed door on their way to the Capitol. Although it is not known what kind of documentation is available in this case, it is said that whatever it is, the success of the initiative is assured, since, according to the supporters of the "affair", thanks to the influence that Mr. Pagán and Mr. Iglesias have there, it is very possible that the American Congress will order new elections, or at least, that the Congress will order a new election, or at least, that the Congress will order the elections to be held in the Capitol.
the American Congress is very likely to order new elections, or at least, to give them the triumph of Tuesday's elections. Having written the above lines, we have received a copy of a manifesto adopted in a joint session by the managing bodies of the two parties of the Republican-Socialist coalition, which appointed a committee composed of the following members: Rafee 1 Martinez Nadal, President of the Protest Committee, Bolivar Pagan, Secretary of the Committee of Protest. Bolívar Pagán, Secretary of the same. Cayetano Coll y Cuchí. Member. Prudencio Rivera Martínez, id. Pedro Juan Barbosa, id. Santiago Iglesias, Roberto H. Todd, ¡ and Ferrando J. Géigel, hono1 1 arios members. Dr. José Gómez Brioso, Manuel F. Rossy, Alfonso Torres, Rafael Alonso, " L. Llorona Torres? Committee members. In the manifesto, which is extensive, it ' is stated, among other things, that the delegation says, it is going to the U.S.A. "coa ' the purpose of establishing, between the T .y . a J RStÜobf mssenergICa pruterta against the outrages, coations, violence, frauds, corruptions, injustices and immoralities of all elates, which with impunity, and in the most unprecedented and scandalous manner, were carried out during the past electoral contest of November 4, 1924 " That is "the other" of which we spoke before. UNCONFIRMED. The version that the pure President, Mr. Martinez Nadal, had stated in some gatherings, before the elections, that they were going to Wash mgton also to formulate alleged charges against the judges of the Supreme Court, could not be confirmed by our reporter, in spite of his inquiries in that sense and the certainty with which a friend of ours told us, who claims to have heard it from the lips of the interested party. f The alleged statement, if true, is believed to have originated in the decision that the Hon. Court issued regarding the Ponce lawsuit. But, as at the present time the result of the election there has given that case an academic character, it is believed that the alleged protest is itself considered academic. MCDONALD ABANDÓÜÁÁHÁTI MONDAY HIS OFFICIAL RESIDENCE IN DOWNING ST. LONDON, Nov. 7 (United Press) Macdonald is expected to leave his official residence in Downing Street next Monday so that Baldwin can make his move as soon as possible. It is believed that Macdonald will go to live in a hotel for the time being, and will not take a private home for two or three months.
MERCHANDISERS OF GOODS We receive the most varied and extensive assortment of GOODS, ALL PREMIUM, WELL SELECTED IN COLORS AND CLASSES which we wish to realize at real bargain prices. If you want to make money don't buy a yard of fabric without seeing our SAMPLE - Our salesmen will be visiting you very soon. M. RODRIGUEZ & CIA. Manufacturers of the "Paris" Shirt ALLEN 79 SAN JUAN P. R.
DEFEATED IN POLITICAL LIFE BY A WOMAN w ■ i®. ' ■Mi l&Hn ■HH&. George C. Butte, professor of the University of Texas College of Law, who was defeated in the last election as Republican candidate for Governor of the State of Texas, by Mrs. Miriam A. The reasons proclaimed by Mr. Pedro Hzaburu for not voting the Alliance candidate for mayor in San h a i, according to Mr. Marchind Sicardó Says the latter that the former stated that he would vote mixed because it was intended to su* bir contributions Mr. Juan Marchand Sicardó, candidate to the San Juan Municipal Assembly for the Alianza Portorriqueña, while commenting in a political gathering on the results of the last elections in San Juan, said, among other things, that this was due to the attitude observed by many people who did not vote for the Party's candidacy in its entirety. - Among these people, Mr. Marchand cited Don Pedro de Elzaburu, a high ranking employee of the Department of (Continued on page 6) FOR SALE Concrete house. Union 27 Miramar. -Informarán:- Tel. 41 Blue Santurce rd/J/ *> T 's . T0ASTE0 Compare Lucky Strike cigarette with any other cigarette Quality speaks.
CHANGE OF OFFICES The Santini Fertilizer Company and Costa & Santfhi Sues. Inc. have moved their offices to the Ochoa Building, Fourth Floor, Numbers 411 and 412, where they are at the disposal of their extensive clientele. General Telephone: 1281 P. O. Box 914 San Juan, San Juan.
BEWARE OF TYPHUS DRINK EVIAN WATER The best table water. Everyone who travels should be careful about the water they drink. Demand it in hotels so you don't run the risk of drinking contaminated water.
GARAGE BRANDI VILLA ST. - PONCE
BOLIVAR PAGAN ATTORNEY AND NOTARY Insular and Federal Courts Office: Alien Street, in front - González Padín. P. O. Box 883. Telephone: 1475 SAN JUAN, P. R.