ELM&NDO
1 n PAGES. 3 CTS. I h - Pumo Mio ■ ■I DoMrMe" BM<. ■ II im - m.
1 O PAGS. 3 CTS, I II ftuw
MORNING
MORNING,
BMe By aríSt ef *ka FtaaMeat, A. A Po "*"aa "er OeaaraL m aaoau aUaa aattat, í "ira" th/ P""" <**-- -" "*" "*" . *"*-***? * Amartaay "Mae U" Al et -ral a.
YEAR VI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 6, 1924.
NUMBER 1717.
In several letters crossed between ex-Governor Reily and the late Pte. Harding, a little less than two years ago, the latter makes sensational statements regarding the political situation of the island at that time
"If Judge Towner-said Harding-takes advantage of the splendid work done, by you (Reily) and does not take a single step backward he will be able to maintain a satisfactory state of order and ar- ■ mony on the island" And he further adds, "If Senator Barrelo had any serious grudge against you he did not venture to give expression to that enmity in his interview with the Secretary of War and myself."
We translate from "Mission State Topics:" One of the most powerful political factors in Republican politics in the State of Missouri is Gober- ; nator E. Mont. Reily, of Kansas ( City. Governor Reily is descended from one of the oldest and most pro- < minant families in the South, is a < truly brilliant business man and was Governor of Puerto j UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO RICO 1 Rio Piedras, P. R. j September 4, 1924. PREPARATORY COURSE IN LAW To enter this course it will be required to be a graduate of a * - secondary school ( high school ) and to be * admitted to the College of Law will 1 require the study of two years in the preparatory course. Candidates for this course will be enrolled in the College of Liberal Arts. ( COLLEGE OF PHARMACY < . ' , ' ' i The two i year cufso in this college has been abolished. From the encolar year beginning September / 15, 1924, the course will be of three years, at the end of which the student will obtain the diploma of PHARMACEUTICAL CHEMIST. V ' ' ' ' tí-fr REGISTRATION Registration will take effect on the following dates: COLLEGE OF LAW.-Thursday, September 11 from 3 k 5 P. M. and Friday, September 12 from 9 a. m. to 12 a. m., in the classrooms of the College of Liberal Arts. M., in the halls of the College of Law building on Jose de Diego St. i ■ LIBERAL ARTS, PREPARATORY COURSE (PREMEDICAL i AND PRELEGAL) and PHARMACY. -Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, September from the 10th to the 12th (both incltlsive). NORMAL SCHOOL. First year (all three grades)-Tuesday, September 9. Second, third and fourth years.-Thursday and Friday, September 11 and 12. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, September 8 to 10 (both inclusive). SECONDARY SCHOOL (High School). In the "Muñoz Rivera" building. Fourth year.-Monday, Sept. 8; Third year, Tuesday, Sept. 9; Second year, Wednesday, Sept. 10; First year, Thursday, Sept. U- ■ x STUDENTS ENTERING UNDER CONDITION. Saturday, September 13, 8 a.m. to 12 noon. M. Candidates for the above courses, except those of the College of Law and High School (Hiffh School}; will enroll eg the assembly hall of the Román Baldorioty de Castro Building, Río Piedras. Students should come prepared to pay the corresponding fees and deposits at the time of enrollment, in Room No. 5 of the "Baldorioty" building. Those who wish to enter the University and have not yet applied for admission, should send their documents and credentials to the University office. Advt
Rico during President Harding's administration. A Kansa's City newspaper, an enemy of Governor Reily, saw fit to attack Governor Reily's administration in Puerto Rico, resulting in the publication of certain cross correspondence between President Harding and Governor Reily, filed in a suit for damages on the occasion when Governor Reily was badly damaged by a "taxi cab" in Kansas City. The letters, bey of more value because of President Harding's death, read as follows: "White House, Washington. March 15, 1923. Hon. E. Ment RaHy, Governor of Puerto Rico, San Juan, P. R. My dear Governor Reily: Your letter of February 14. has been received. I was so busy'' on that date that an opportunity did not present itself for me to acknowledge your receipt properly. ! I am really sorry to observe the discouragement you show in your endeavor to regain your health. On the whole, I believe it is entirely in your own interest that you should decide to abandon the cares and concerns of your office in order to reach a full recovery. In the last days of the present (Ocntinu* on page 11> TO THE TRADE IN GENERAL Stop, Look Listen, Stand, Look, Listen. Your business is a mine, I am an expert in business mines. Fourteen ; years of experience, I know the island and its people and I am a selling agent, English and Spanish correspondent and accountant. I wish to relate to a responsible and serious house that wishes to inject a double dose of activity and profit to its business. BUSINESS GETTER, Box 323, San Juan, P.R. Advt. Seeds of Onions From Canary Islands and just received and of the yellow kind, sell. to MENDEZ, MARTINEZ & CO. Marina, San Juan. Use Alcoholado'Gatell' The best in the world.
SABAPO "El Espectro ¿ e su p asa d 0 " WITH | Miriam Cooper, Kenneth Harlan and Zazo Pitts SUNDAY and MONDAY Nita Naldi, Alice Brady, David Powell IN "The Novel of Itself".
Cipriano Castro the famous ex-president of Venezuela, summoned to appear for contempt before the San Juan Municipal Court.
"El Cabito", under the pretext of illness, did not appear before said Court, in spite of being summoned on two occasions last July and, in Santurce, a quarrel occurred between Mr. Cipriano Castro and a fellow countryman of his, named Miguel Guerrero Itúrbide. Castro came out of the fight with a strong contusion on his left cheek and Guerrero with an incised wound in one hand, produced by a stiletto. "El Cabito'' affirms that Guerrero shot him with a revolver that he set on fire and, then, with the corporal, he gave him that contusion, leaving a hint that the attack is due to a criminal plan of his political enemies, to deprive him of his life. Guerrero for his part maintains that there are no such rams; that he hit Castro with his fists, as anyone would have done who had heat in his face, in virtue of a serious, immediate offense, which he received in" person qjampda, while flPúr was coming "¡obre the rent' of a house. But the interesting thing about the case now is that, the helios having been denounced, a proceeding was instituted against Guerrero for the alleged crime of assault and battery, and when the Castro was summoned for trial, he did not appear in court. A second summons was issued for the day before yesterday and Mr. Castro also failed to appear in court. The Second Section of the Municipal Court of this capital, in view of Castro's disobedience to his lawful order, summons him to appear to show cause why he should not be punished for contempt. The (Continued on the 6th. page)
MATINAL SUNDAY 7 NIGHT MAY MC AVOY WITH Pat MOORE and Walter MC GRAIL ON "THE TOPS OF NEW YORK" (The Tops of New York) ONION SEEDS I just received from Ganarlas, completely fresh, which I sell at >2.00 a pound. MIGUEL MARROIG Box 134. Aguadilla. P. B. TWO COFFEE DRYERS FOR SALE For inquiries: CASANOVAS & CO, Sues. Inc. Mayagüez, Pt. Rico
fl candidate for Mayor, Mr. Diez de Andüwv is assured that he is both repudiated and 'repudiated
by some of the new members of the Municipal Assembly The new Alianza municipal candidate has been a true revelation for many rather than a surprise.
At last, the Puerto Rican Alliance of San Juan, in whose bosom there were so many fights for the designation of the municipal candidacy, has decided on the nomination for the office of Mayor of a net Union, assuring that Mr. Diez de Andino will be nominated. The case of the tie between the latter and Mr. Miguel Morales, from the bosom of the local Committee of the Alliance passed to the directing body for its final decision. The tjntinuist aspiration that so many unionists supported because they believed it would save the cohesion of the Party, will come out in the end ttiuhfante, giving a blow to other aspirations within the same collectivity. - Mr. Diez Andino was never daunted.4 A tenacious man, extraordinarily constant, he never gave up; his friends went so far as to declare that he would fight even with them! if necessary, rather than hand over the stupendous political machinery of San Juan to anyone else. Don Rafa, it was said, that in accepting the postulation for his new term he would do it on condition that he would have a Municipal Assembly that was to his liking, because he was not willing to deal with people who were not of his entire confidence. i We do not know, in fact, whether or not the elected assembly members are to the liking of Mr. Diez de Andino is something that *hasth na* salamosf , *pJrfc, J "W "W what we are assured is that among the referred candidates there are some who do not look with 'good eyes at the current Mayor of San Juan. Although 'to date the Central Committee of the Alliance has not resolved the mayoral tie, in all the political ter- - tubas it is assured that Mr. Diez de Andino is the man, adding that the local leaders have accepted everything, provided that the Board of Directors would know Mr. Diez de Andino for a new term as Mayor of San Juan. "The surprise caused by the nominations for the Municipal Assembly has been profound, for with the exception of a couple of names expected (Continued on p. 5.)
Margarita Colón y Alvarez and the child Dolores Martínez Pereira, when the latter was a few years younger than today's seven.
According to a letter we inserted from the U.S. Consul in Havana, Cuba, inquiring about the whereabouts of the relatives of Margarita Colón Alvarez, a Puerto Rican who is insane in an insane asylum in that city and who arrived there from the United States, yesterday we were visited by Mr. José Ortiz Martínez, janitor of the Municipal Theater, who said he knew the unfortunate woman.
I said he knew the unfortunate young woman, who, according to him, is a native of Ponce and who about 15 years ago, he recalls, embarked for abroad, without having heard of her until now. Margarita, according to Crtiz, is the daughter of a certain Juan Melero and Bonifacia Colón de oficio Comadrona, who resided in Ponce during the time referred to in our informant's account. The history of this case of madness is reported in the Cuban press as follows:
(Continued on page 14)
NOTICE ! REVOCATION OF POWER OF ATTORNEY For general knowledge I hereby make known that on this date and by deed granted in this city before Notary Pedro Amado Rivera, I have revoked the Power of Attorney that I had conferred on Jaime Colón Pons by deed granted in Jayuya before Notary Rosendo Cordero on May 28, 1916, leaving said Mr. Colón in the enjoyment of his good name. Gerónima Colón OLIVER. San Juan, September 3, 1024. Advt.
Last Hour! INSURANCE ON GUAGUAS Bail and policy for PERSONAL ACCIDENTS and DAMAGE to PROPERTY OF OWNERS, pedestrians and passengers: , . I Limits up to $250.00 8S=" } P J respectively Limits up to $300.00 ""■=' P J ' respectively LOOK AT THE LIMITS (This question is very important because in case of an accident if the judgment of a Court is higher than the limit of the policy, the owner of the bus will have to respond for the difference with his property). THE BEST RATES AND CONDITIONS AND PAYMENT FACILITIES. The Porto Rican & American Ins. (The first and only Puerto Rican company) J. OCHOA Y HERMANO General Agents. SAN JUAN, PORTO RICO
S. Lema X Co. FOOTWEAR WE HAVE ALREADY BEGUN RECEIVING NEW PURCHASES. SMALL AND LARGE LOTS VERY CONVENIENT. SCHOOL SANDALS AND OTHER STYLES San Juan S. Brau 85, - Box 1309 -Store-"LA POPULAR" PUERTA DE TIERRA.
-4-i-H-H-H--l"|.! I- l - l - l '!-l "l "l "bI-fr W-++ 1 H 1 1 I I I Ü H -H-H EH I I I 4 111!", TEATRO TRES BANDERAS EMPRESA BRUNO & VAZQUEZ, INC. Last two performances TODAY _ SATURDAY SEPT. 6. - TODAY EMILIA BENITO:-: TOMORROW SUNDAY, in matinee and evening: EMILIA BENITO with the colossal film in premiere entitled: LOS PARIENTES HEREDADOS.
The steamer "Ponce", which arrived yesterday at our port, had to run a furious gale that surprised her on the high seas; for thirty hours the ship was the toy of the raging waves.
The reports we have obtained to date on the unfortunate Puerto Rican madwoman in Havana lead us to believe that her family resides in Ponce.
The tragic story of a life. Margarita, in full mental crisis, exhibits her nakedness of autumnal beauty under the relentless rain.
The Captain takes the helm, faced with the gravity of the situation, and manages to avoid the danger - The alarm among the passengers is truly terrible - The beaches of Puerto Rico - The "Cornelia" is also hit by the storm.
We are in the midst of a stormy season, and very often, ships going from our island to the United States and vice-versa, are lashed by strong gales. Nevertheless, some are spared from the downpour, as for example, the "San Lorenzo", which made its last trip with all happiness. It's all a matter of luck. The sea, like beautiful women, and even many who are not, is extremely capricious. And now, it was the turn of the steamer "Ponce'*', who had to run a furious gale, THE ODYSSEY OF THE "PONCE" The "Ponce" anchored in our port yesterday at six o'clock in the morning. One of the passengers, a particular friend of ours. who came from New York, has told us in all its details the odyssey, of which he was the obliged protagonist (■! "Ponee." The ship left New York harbor on Saturday, August 30, with 120 passengers and cargo*)>for the commerce of this square. Everything was going very well, a bor(Continued on page 5) MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT OF HUMACAO, PTO. RICO NOTICE It is hereby made generally public, (fye ja'su'iasta announced for two thirty o'clock in the afternoon (2:30 P. M.) of September 8, 1924, for the sale of a bond issue for $83,000.00 has been suspended. Notice of the new date for the auction will be published in due course. August 29, 1924. M. LOPEZ DEL VALLE, Mayor. Advt.
Compare Lucky Strike cigarette with any other cigarette. - Quality speaks. r?V iW-, .