ELMUNDO
Tomorrow, the first issue of EL MUND's Sunday edition
| A PAGES. 3 CTS. I oáclnaa: Toarlo Mleo Ilutrado" BI4g. I T< 1 "M. - B*X U"
li p pags. 3 as. || liautri 84.00 I 11 vn Ai" - - - - rr.M
EX MANANA DIARY, "- ♦
EXCEPT SUNDAYS"
aa "XT 1 - ■ ' _"i -f i es ARO VI
I SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
PnhlfhH nn<i "r "rali (Mo. 801) ortbotf- fcy th" Act of October i. 1"17, pa SI" at iórt Otiot "FT a Jnín Porto Bloo, By erdor of tho Proaldont, A. S. Buriwon. PootmMtor e "ar*L Bntartd M ooooaa olaaa matter, tebrnary Ml, H10, at the Poti Of£ee at Baa Juan. Porto Bico, fOnltod tete" of A""rtoa> wa "r the Act of march a t "7t |
NUMBER 1657
SATURDAY, JULY 5, 1924
On Thursday night the La Perla neighborhood of this city was the scene of a tragedy in which an unhappy woman was killed by her husband.
The unhappy woman lost her life murdered by her husband, the aggressor, jealous, fired a series of shots at the unhappy victim and turning the gun on himself, wounded himself severely. The unexpected occurrence of this incident caused enormous panic in the neighborhood, which ran in panic fearing that it was a dangerous madman.
At seven o'clock on Thursday night, in the upper part of the city, towards Boulevar del Valle, in the neighborhood of La Perla and in the place known as "San Miguel "*, a frightening tragedy took place that produced enormous panic in that neighborhood. Luciano Landol (a) Colile, is a black man, about 35 years old, who was dedicated to the sale of pork rinds and roast suckling pig, being reputed as an element of bellicose character and who on several occasions, mainly at election time has had encounters with his adversaries and now, lately, when the electoral registrations were held we understand that he used a revolver to attack an enemy of his, having been avoided the encounter by the timely and prompt intervention of some passers-by and the police. Colile inhabited one of the small houses of humble people that there are in the expressed district. And he lived there in the company of a woman named Dolores Durán, about 40 years old, dark-haired. The irifelts companion of Colile, it can be said that it was already a physical ruin, not only for the advanced of his age, but because in her they had left proVENDO Buick Roaster 1923; 5000 miles traveled. Will report: F, Echevarría, telephone 1177, Villamil 12, Santurce. INTERESTING INSULAR HEALTH RECOMMENDATIONS ABOUT TUBERCULOSIS: Do not live in dark or poorly ventilated houses, and we add that this is an advertisement for the Ritzy Hotel which occupies the most ventilated site in San Juan. Do not live in rooms that receive air from galleries, take care of yourself and spend the same money. All our rooms face the street. Discounted rates. HOTEL RITZY Tanca No. 2. Box 640.
The tragic event, according to the hotel's staff, was the result of a series of tragic events. The tragic event, according to reports we have obtained, was caused by a scene of jealousy between the two lovers. It seems that Colile had in his house, besides Dolores, another mistress, who was forced to leave the house, apparently because she could not live near Colile's other woman. When he arrived back home on Thursday night, Colile had a serious disagreement with his wife. Some people say it was because of his jealousy and his belief that his wife was unfaithful. Others say it was because he flew into a rage when he learned that Dolores' intolerance forced his other mistress to leave the neighborhood. Whatever the true version is, it is certain that Colile was blinded of anger and making use of his revolver he undertook it with shots against his wife, wounding her in an arm and in the right side. Faced with her lover's aggressive attitude, the unhappy woman ran out of her little house and fell mortally wounded a few steps from the door of her house. Colile chased her into the street and seeing her collapse on the pavement, returned to her bedroom, closed the door, and fired two shots at himself, seriously wounding himself. THE ALARM WAS TREMENDOUS When the shots were heard and when the neighborhood realized that a woman had been wounded and that the killer continued firing incessantly his revolver, assuming that it was the work of a madman, began to run terrified towards the city calling for help. The shouting and running of men, women and children, and the (Continued on page 61
CENTRALISTS: We are interested in buying old 6", and 1%" and 2" corner pieces. Communicate price and quantity to P. R. cjo EL MUNDO-
GRAPES PEARS CHERRIES AND / PLUMS WILL ARRIVE MONDAY FRANK 8. SOLER. Tetuan 35
GOOD PLACEMENT A competent bookkeeper needed .with good references for important house. Good salary. Address application stipulating compensation required to P.O. Box No. 1436.
Caguas Trading Co. Inc. Box 173 P. R. Sole distributors for Puerto Rico of the famous KELLY SPRINGFIELD rubber. We would like to get in touch with active and responsible sellers Write to us.
The story of Aladdin is performed New Plates by Old Plates AT THE Porto Rico Railway Light & Power Co.
Luciano Landol (a) Colile, the killer of his common-law wife Duran, who is seriously wounded in the Municipal Hospital. Bases on which will rest the -already famous coalition of the Pure Rejiiblicans and the Socialists Assembled today, June 26, 1924, the members of the committee appointed by the General Committee of the Pure Republican Party, Messrs. Rafael Martinez Nadal, Roberto H. Todd, Jorge Gonzalez, Fernando J. Géigel, Miguel Tniyol and Ettienne Totti, to discuss with the Commission appointed by the Socialist Party, composed of Messrs. Santiago Iglesias, Pru ¡ dencio Rivera Martínez, Bolívar Pagan, Blas Oliveras and Alfonso Torres, on the terms to be established in order to reach " a pact or xo*alition between the Socialist and Pure Republican Parties in the present electoral campaign, and after being informed of the existence of quorum to adopt agreement on said coalition or pact, they state that the terms thereof are pending * ratification, adopting the following agreements unanimously: ■> FIRST:- Pending the ratification of the bodies corresponding to both Parties, the rrpre- sentants of the same in this joint agree that the coalition be keyed between the pure Republicans and Socialists. SECOND: - It is completely rejected any partial coalition and by district it is agreed that said coalition has a general character that covers the whole sla. THIRD:- The candidate for resident commissioner in Washington shall be nominated by agreement of both parties to the satisfaction of both parties, and the Socialist Party agrees that the candidate shall be a pure Republican. FOURTH:- The coalition will be finalized at the earliest possible date, me (Continued on page 61 TODAY'S PARQUARE - TODAY Saturday, July 5, 1924. COMPLETE CAST OF STARS in - JACQUELINE Mantona - "Tailcoat Thieves".
PIME
MEMORABLE DATE Just as the Americans fought for the Independence of their country, they also fought to produce the best automobile in the world.
"The Packard".
On the stretch of road between La Colectiva and the San Antonio bridge, the
the bridge of San Antonio the bus "Klim" overturned yesterday, with the consequent shouting of the passengers who believed that their last hour had arrived. The chauffeur is seriously injured, and a fatal outcome is expected from one moment to the next.
Not a day goes by that we do not have to record in our columns some automobile accident. For something has come to be called the daily cliché. And yesterday, to celebrate the glorious date of the independence of the United States, yftser day of celebration, one of the buses that make the transport service between Martin Peña and San Juan, wanted to get out of the routine of the ¿shoques and bargains and overturned in the middle of the road, while driving a group of passengers. A SOBER SKID The "Klim" bus was on its way to Santurce yesterday, at about half past eight in the morning, carrying a group of passengers. As our readers know, yesterday morning the clouds gave us ten or twelve showers, and the road was hellishly slippery. But it seems that the chauffeur of the vehicle does not count this, and upon arriving at the stretch of road between "La Colectividad'' and the bridge of "Sign Aútonio", in one of the curves, he gave a tremendous skid and went against Tftí fftfrraftco. And then came the debacle, because, as is natural, the bus, falling sideways, and with the violent jolt, pulled the passengers out of their seats, and piled them one on top of the other. It is useless to say the shouting that would ensue, for each one believed that his last hour was at hand, as he hit the hard road. The chauffeur, Francis Uolon, as he was the most exposed, received several serious injuries, to the point that it is feared for his life. He was immediately taken to the Puerta de Tierra Emergency Room, located at San Agustin 70, where he is being cared for by the active and reputable doctor of this neighborhood, Dr. Melendez. The other passengers, fortunately, and by a miracle of Providence, were not injured, although slight contusions and scratches could not be avoided. 1 THE TRAGIC AND RISIBLE SPECTACLE, One of our editors, who happened to be passing by the site of the incident, was able to appreciate the tragic and comic spectacle offered at the same time by the "KLIM" bus, which in a comical somersault, went sideways, falling with its wheels in the air. On the other hand, the chauffeur Colon, who was pulled out from under the vehicle all bloody, victim of the tragedy, and the passengers who, without being wounded, hurried to get up, anxiously touching their ribs, to see if they were healthy, offered a scene that was both sad and laughable at the same time. And all because a chauffeur, forgetting that the road was slippery and that a skid could cause him to overturn, seriously endangering his own life and that of his passengers.
Mr. Soto and Mr. Valdes continue to explain with an extraordinary wealth of detail, who have been recognized in Cleveland.
The two men go on to explain in extraordinarily rich detail who has been recognized in Cleveland, whether it is the Pure (a) Dissident Republicans, represented by Todd, or the real Republicans represented by them, Soto and Valdes. |
To the enmity between former Congressman Roedemberg and Senator Me. Kinley owes Mr. Todd his seat on the National Committee.
Mr. Soto and Mr. Valdes go on to explain what happened at the Cleveland Convention as follows: "The statements made public by Mr. Todd seem to imply, and this is what the press of his followers maintains, that the Dissident (a) Pure Republican Party has been recognized in the United States as the true Republican Party of Puerto Rico, and not the Puerto Rican Republican Party. That statement is absolutely false, and as it is a matter of informing a public interested in the knowledge of the truth, we will state the facts as they have occurred, in order that the country may judge who have been recognized in Cleveland, whether the RepuDucado" dfcraeiKes repreraitados by Mr. Todd, or whether the 'true Republicans, represented by us. At the outset, let us lay down the following propositions: First:-Mr. Todd owes the fact that, as a mere courtesy, he was allowed to be seated among the Puerto Rican delegates to the enmity between Senator Mc-Kinley and ex-Congressman Roedemberg, and not to any acknowledgment made by Mr. Todd, or to the fact that he was allowed to be seated among the Puerto Rican delegates.
not to any recognition made by the National Republican Party in favor of the Pure (a) Disi- . dent Republican Party. Second:-To the aforesaid enmity i between Senator McKinley and ex-Congressman Roedemberg, owes Mr. ,<Todd equally his seat in the National Cogmittee. p The foregoing are deduced from the following facts: Senator McKinley, Chairman of the Committee on the Record, at the close of the vote on whether Todd and Reily or Valdes and Soto should be recognized as the true repre(Continued on U page 21
I NEED A COMPETENT SHORTHAND WRITER IN SPANISH AND ENGLISH. Address details of experience to P.O. Box 134, San Juan.
■1
Compare Lucky Strike cigarette with any other cigarette. Quality speaks for itself.
THE GREAT XIRGU COMPANY IN PONCE Great artistic season at the BROADWAY THEATER Company: BRUNO & VAZQUEZ INC. Debut: Wednesday, July 16 with :: L' AIGRETTE :: The subscription to the only six performances of the season is in charge of this company. BRUNO & VAZQUEZ INC. Ponce, P. R.
NEWS IS ALREADY OPERATING IN SAN JUAN AND THE ISLAND THE BUSINESS AND GENERAL INFORMATION AGENCY. Where any business is solved more quickly. Sol No. 37. Telephone 1724. San Juan, P. R.
LAS CASAS RACING PARK SENSATIONAL RACES FOR TOMORROW SUNDAY, JULY 6 DON'T MISS IT - DON'T MISS IT
I have done everything possible to maintain harmony between the different elements of the Administration," he said.
Jos different elements of the Administration, and I can do no more; when I break down in the middle of the street it is because I already feel I have my sword against the wall," says Ponce Mayor Parra Capó. --- " On the occasion of the information we gave from our columns, about the elimination of the socialist leader, Mr. Blas Oliveras, when the new board of directors was constituted in Ponce, the mayor of that city, Ledo. Parra ■ Capó, made the following Manifestations: -¿ ■ "Indeed, early last night, I received the written resignation of the two members of the Spcia'is- ' & ¿ ¿te had destined jlli-rf part of the executive branch of the Administration. In their letters these two friends clearly express to me that they do not accept why Mr. Blas Oliveras has not been appointed Municipal Treasurer; and they indicate to me that to proceed in this way would be to go AGAINST THE AGREEMENTS OF THEIR PARTY. So, if I do not appoint Blas Oliveras to an executive position in the Administration, I will not find a (Continued on 6th page) UNIVERISIDAD DE PUERTO RICO Río Piedras, P. R. REGISTRATION 1924-1925. Persons who are going to enroll for the first time in the departments of the University of Puerto Rico located at Rio Piedras, for the 1924-1925 course must comply with the following warnings: COURSE FOR BUBA- . The following are the only students who have passed with good grades (G. or better) in the tenth grade of the regular or scientific course of the High School. It will be useless to apply for admission without these requirements. > The application should be sent immediately, accompanied by official certificates of all credits earned after the eighth grade, and the OFFICIAL birth certificate. i UNIVERSITY and HIGH SCHOOL COURSE.- During the second week of August, applications should be submitted with OFFICIAL CERTIFICATES of all credits earned in high school. Any information will be given promptly when so- ( licited. The enrollment period, during which all students must be present to make payment of fees and bonds, will run from September 16 to 20. Classes will begin on September 28. Semester fees are as follows: For High School do 811.60 to 814.00. Normal and Rural, $1.50 (except in the Domestic Science course which fluctuates between $2.75 and $11.00). Liberal Arts, $26.00 to $37.50. Law, $51.50. Pharmacy, $59.00 to $73.00. C. W. ST. JOHN, ~ Rector. Advt.