ELMNDO
10 PAGS " 3 c TS I "Mola"": "Puerto Ble" ■ ■ M norteado" Bldg. ■ < 1 1888. - Box f".
llQ PAGS. 3 CTS. I Semartr* 84.00 11 A Afio 17 60.
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
4*0 VI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
PubUahed and "irtrtbutod nadar p "rml" (Ma. 801) aothotlMd by tha Act of October ", 1917, ea Ale at tha Part Otica af Rea Juan, Porto Btco, By ardar of tía PreeMant, A. 1. Burlesca, Poatmaitor General Enterad aa second elaea matter W "rnarr 81 leí", at the Post Oftae st tan Jwaa, Parte Blco. (Vnitod Statos of America 1 under tit Act of march 3, 187"
SATURDAY, MAY 3, 1924.
NUMBER 1604.
Don'Antonio R. Barcelo, scored another triumph in the district assembly held yesterday in this city.-The assembly accepts the alliance between voices of love and cordiality.
"The truce of God was imposed as the only means for obtaining greater liberties", says the illustrious leader of the Union.
Yesterday, the district assembly of the Unionist Party was held in this city, attended by delegates from the entire district of San Juan, and the old Municipal Theater was overflowing with Unionists, who were anxious to hear the reasons that the illustrious leader of the party had had for going to an alliance with the Republican Party. At a quarter to eleven o'clock in the morning", Don Antonio R. Barceló entered the room, and half an hour later the assembly was constituted under the presidency of the Senator and President of the Local Committee, Don Celestino Triarte Jr. Next to the presidential table, Don Rafael Diez de Andino, Don Juan Hernández López, Dr. Octavio Jordán, Ledo, José de Jesús Tízol and others took their seats. José de Jesús Tízol and others. "EL MUNDO" AND THE ASSEMBLIES TODAY AND TOMORROW In order to give a detailed and ample information of the transcendental assemblies that will take place today and tomorrow in the towns of Maya-1 giles and San Germán, EL MUNDO will have two of its Editors, Messrs. I Vargas, and Batista in those towns. ! Mr. Vargas, in the Mayagüez Assembly, and Mr. Batista in that of San Germán. Both will send us by telegraph or telephone the most sensational reports" of the course of the assemblies as the events unfold; hoping in this way to keep our numerous readers informed of the slightest thing that happens in the two very important political events. Villar & Co. Inc. Apartado 201. Tel. 1450, San Juan, P. R. They sell the best wheat flour brands "LUNA DE ORO" I "CRUZ DE CALIDAD" ¡ Price without competition. i Proof makes faith. The quality of this cigarette has never been changed nor will it be changed. The quality alone has made this cigarette the most popular in the world. Saturday, May 3, 1924. Premiere in Santurce. THOS. MEIGHAN and LEATRICE JO.Y in "HOMICIDE" Sunday, May 4, 1924. "THE MTLDITE ISLAND" LILA LEE and JAMES KIRKWOOD
The chairman declared the session open with a bang of the gavel, and Mr. Barcelo took the floor, declaring that they were assembled for the purpose of fraternally exchanging impressions and explaining to the assembly, the reasons the party leadership had had for going into an alliance with the Republicans. "We are not here to debate, he said-but to talk fraternally, among co-religionists, exchanging impressions on the present political moment." Thereupon, several questions were put to Mr. Barceló about the pact. The head of the Union promised to answer all questions at the afternoon session, and made a motion that the meeting be adjourned until three o'clock, as there were some delegates from the district who would probably be here at that time. The motion was approved, and the meeting was adjourned until the afternoon. At three o'clock in the afternoon the assembly was resumed with a greater attendance of delegates than in the morning. The president declared the session open and Mr. Antonio R. Barceló took the floor first. Mr. Antonio's speech was highly patriotic. According to Mr. Barceló, the questions that had been put to him (Continued on page 6) GOVERNMENT OF PUERTO RICO WORKERS' COMPENSATION COMMISSION SAN JUAN, P. B. NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS IN THE VILLAGES OF BAYA MON, HUMACAO, GUAYAMA ARE CIBO. MAYAGÜEZ, PONCE AND SAN JUAN.
Pursuant to Section 10 of the Workmen's Compensation Law, the Commission shall, prior to June 1, classify and group the occupations of workmen according to the probable risks or exposure to injury or occupational disease within the existing conditions and shall fix the rates of dues to be paid by the workmen's pa- ¡ trons in these groups for the fiscal year 1924-1925, "The Commission, in order to hear the employers and persons interested in any way in the work of fixing assessments, has decided to hold public hearings on the dates hereinafter set forth in the towns of the towns and cities of the United States, and to hold public hearings on the dates hereinafter set forth.} The Board has decided to hold public hearings on the dates indicated below in the towns of Bayamón. Humacao, Guyaama, Arecibo, Mayagüez, Ponce and San Juan. The hearing for the District of Bayamon will be held in the hall of the I Municipal Assembly of BayamOm at 10 o'clock in the morning, on May 8, ■ 1924, and may be attended by all the pa- ■ thrones of the following towns: Bayamon, Guaynabo, Cataño, Toa. Bala, j Toa Alta, Corozal, Naranjito, Comerío, Dorado, Vega Baja, Vega Alta, Barros and Barranquitas. The hearing for the District of Huma-' cao will be held in the hall of the Humacao Municipal Assam blea, at 10 o'clock in the morning, on May 13, 1924, and may be attended by all the patrons of the following towns; Humacao Juncos. Gurabo, San Loren ! zo, Yabucoa, Maunabo, Vieques, Ceiba, Naguabo and Las Piedras. The hearing for the District of Guaya-1 ma will be held in the hall of the Municipal Assembly of Guayama, at 10:00 a.m., on May 15, 1924, and all the thrones of the following towns may attend: Gua y ama, Patillas, Arroyo, Aguirre, Salí -i ñas, Oayey, Aibonito. I The hearing for the District of Areci bo will be held at the sa'ón de la Asam-.
A i p A re PERMANENT SERVICE UfllB Akllu GARAGE - GASOLINE - BRANDI LAUNDRIES
In New York, a spectacular robbery takes place in which a Puerto Rican from Ponce, Puerto Rico, is the protagonist.
The Arecibo Municipal Assembly will be held at 10:00 a.m. on May 20, 1924,1 and all patrons of the following towns will be able to attend; Arecibo, Ca ■ very, Hatillo, Manati, Barceloneta, Ola- 1 les, Morovis, Utuado, Isabela, Lares, 1 San Sebastián, and Quebradillas, - ■ The vísta for the District of Mayagüez, will be held in the hall of the Municipal Assembly of Mayagüez at' 10 a.m., on May 21 da 19£4 and may 'concur all patrono' of the following towns: Maya giie", San Germán, Lajas, Sábana Gran de, Oabo Rojo, Hormigueros, Maricao, Lm M*rias, Añasco, Rincón, Aguada, 3
Moca and Aguadilla. i The hearing for the District of Ponce will be held in the hall of the Municipal Assembly of Ponce at 10:00 a.m. on May 23, 1924 and all the patrons of the following towns may attend: Ponce, Juana Díaz, Coamo, Villalba, Jayuya, Adjunta", Peñuelas, Guayanilla, Yauco, Santa Isa bel and GUánica. The hearing for the District of San Juan will be held at the offices of the Commission at 10 a.m. on M ay 26, 1923, and may be attended by all" the patrons of the following towns: Piedrw, Oagtwr/Afua" Bue
WHY ARE YOU BUYING A CAR WITHOUT FIRST SEEING THE NEW OLDSMOBILE-SIX Types Touring, Sport Touring, Roadster, Sedan, etc. CASH AND INSTALLMENT SALES GENERAL AGENTS PIETRANTONI & SOJO SAN JUAN, P. R. - TELEFONOS:-1275 V 1276. 4 *fe
The Unionist Assembly THE MEMBERS WHO MAKE IT UP VOICE AND VOTE: Representatives to the House 2 Senators 15 Delegate and alternate members of the *Central Board 28 l ! Unionist Members of the Public Service Commission Two Representatives for each Local Board 15GI ti consul of Espada, D. Ernesto Freyre, makes interesting statements regarding information given by a newspaper in yesterday's edition A local newspaper in yesterday's edition, goes ahead to give information announcing that according to the new Immigration Bill being considered by the American Congress, Spanish immigration to Puerto Rico will be practically annulled, due to the meager quota to be assigned to Spain, the new bill is based on the 1890 census, according to which, Spain will only be able to send to the United States. 224 citizens. Considering that if such a thing were to happen, Spanish interests would suffer great inconvenience, and wishing to know if the Consulate of Spain, in this city, would have any news of the (Gentlntl* in u pagua" 6>
When all the employees of the Sunset Lightning Fixture were at work, young Felix Munet with a revolver forced them to raise their hands and seized $3,000, leaving the building immediately, protected by his revolver! The New York newspapers published a few days ago the audacious robbery that a young Puerto Rican carried out in the house where he had been working and where for seven years he had held a very important position. A young woman from the information department of the robbed house was questioned by a representative of "La Prensa" about the case and has refused to give any details whatsoever and has only declared that up to date the thief has not been caught. Although we are told that nothing is known of the result of the investigations being made, it is rumored that the individual is being tracked and that an arrest is expected soon. i The robbery appears to have occurred on March 29th last at the Sunset Lighting Fixture, located at: No. 532 West 22nd Street, 22nd Street, Suite 532. 532 west of 22nd street and where i of had been working for seven years the well-known Puerto Rican, Felix Munet, son of Spanish parents who live in Puerto Rico and who are in good financial position. i I I It is not known what motives prompted him to rob the young man who for so long did his duty; but I j j dictated the robbery to him.L but j diced and when almost all the employees were at work, at the point of i revolver he forced them to raise their hands and seized S3,000, leaving the building immediately, protected by his revolver. his revolver As soon as this operation was finished and he was owner of such a respectable sum he went to a house where it seems he had an open account and paid his recent and overdue debts, providing himself at the same time with new suits and other (Continued on 6th page) REMATE' ¡ On Saturday, May 3 do May 1924 at 2 P. M. at Pier No. 6, I will sell at Public Auction 300 BLES. CEMENT REINALDO VIZCARRONDO ' Almonedero Publico ECONOMICE MONEY "EL ENCANTO" SAN FRANCISCO 36. It has opened its doors with a great bargain in suits, shoes, shirts, hats, and J other articles for gentlemen! and young people. Do not buy without seeing our; prices. Ask for C. 0. D. Rodriguez Blanco & Co. Box 1503. - Tel. 1448. San Juan, P. R. ¡ledo. E. Ramos Antoniiíi ATTORNEY-NOTARY ¡ Ponce, Puerto Rico. Dr. Apellaniz ■ He is pleased to inform his clients that he is again in front of his office (Cruz 17). Hours: 2 to 5 P. M. TYPING MACHINES We guarantee our work. P. R, TYPEWRITER REPAIRING SHOP. Alien 11, Tel. 288. Box 1445
I ñas, Cidra, Trujiilo Alto, Carolina, Loi- !! za, Grande, Luquillo. Pajajdb and San Juan. ■! All patrons residing in the above-mentioned towns have the right to attend these hearings on the dates and at the places indicated above, either by themselves or through their duly authorized representatives, or in writing if they deem it convenient. J>ado "n San Juafi, P.,£. on May 1, 1924. " ' R. CINTRON LASTRA * - v BRBSUAsNTB "* Advt.
the Republican Assembly ' THE MEMBERS WHO COMPOSE IT: i I I VOICE AND VOTE: Proprietary Delegates 17? Territorial Committee 29 Total < VOICE: Alternate delegates- 172 Territorial Councilors 5 Total 373 i WITHOUT VOICE OR VOTE: Average for representatives' tes of the Local Committees to 2 for each Municipality 122 Total 50Ü ti Tesoro Insular meets its financial obligations and has never failed to meet its commitments i . . . . - The newspaper "La Correspondencia de ¡Puerto Rico , which calls itself "an absolutely impartial newspaper", in its columns, in its edition of! first of this month, an article of collaboration in which serious accusations are made against the credit of Puerto Rico and such erroneous and absurd ideas are expressed as to compel us to take up our pen to demonstrate that the "Teso:-" Insular denouncer is either ignorant ¡ in financial matters or seems to have the purpose of defaming the country. I n a Treasury which has paid its ordinary debts and continues to pa- ■ gate them and which accumulates a sacred fund to meet in the precise fe1 cha of their maturities the obligations contracted in consequence of the contracted borrowings; a Treasury which cannot be accused of any act of insolvency, does not delie ■ be declared before public opinion in a "state of bankruptcy," by any writer who can appreciate what is meant by financial honorability (Continued on page 4) ! BOLIVAR PAGAN ATTORNEY AND NOTARY PUBLIC ATTORNEY Cortes Insulares y Federal 1 Office: Alien Street, in front of Gonzalez Padln. P. O. Box 883. Telephone: 1475 ! SAN JUAN, P. R, GO SEE IT j the great baratillo at the Bazar Ahorro, Fortaleza 25, , great assortment of gabardii na suits different models from $22.00 ¡a $14.98. White shirts with double collar and cuffs from $2.50 to $1.50. Fine silk shirts at $4.98. Hats at any price. Don't forget that Manolo limits himself. Tel. 1579. i ' ! Of Great Interest Diabetics will welcome with joy the news that we have a very varied supply of foods suitable for them, among these, fruits and preserves. Ask for details at: "Capella Pharmacy" of BELENDEZ & GARCIA, INC. Box 1400. Phone 1237. Dr. F. B. RONS Painless Extractions $1.00 Edificio Padín. Fifth Floor.
In a drama of blood and mud, worthy of the tragic inspiration of Euripides, a young ex-sereno of a San Juan hotel shakes his figure that preferred the walls of the Presidio to being a vile toy of alien degeneration.
of alien degeneracy The victim had threatened him with death if he did not accept his absurd plans ti- - wwIBImW - -< I , - - I I 'v " NI I r 'J i tiW'áI W' ?-■ RAMON QUILES. j As the truth draws back the veils of the apparent mystery surrounding the tragic death of José Weber - "Manca Mano"- in the San Juan cár-I cel, the spirit is surprised by unpublished details, by unsuspected circumstances, which corroborate the theory that life sometimes presents heavy complications. When Weber fell under the knife gQlm of his cellmate Ramon 'Quiles, one night last December, the reporter had for the intervener that gesture of impulsive pity that always tears us from the apparent existence of a victim... But now, with the recent visit we have made to the alleged killer da "Manca Hand," the figure of the dead (Continued on p. 8)!
Senator Willis, Acting Chairman of the Senate Committee on Territories and Insular Possessions, "for a favorable opportunity to bring up for discussion as soon as possible the bill granting elective governmental approval! (United Press. Special to) EL MUNDO) WASHINGTON, March 2.-The Senate passed, without a record vote, the bill authorizing the construction or construction of customs houses in Puerto Rico. |for that purpose. the following amounts were appropriated: ■Arecibo, t'einta mS dollars: Aguadilla. twenty-five mir dollars; Arroyo, thirty thousand; Fajardá^' c.iarenta thousand; Guánica,thirty thousand; 1Por.ce, eight thousand; Humacao, four thousand f Mayagliez, eight thousand. Senator Willis, Acting Chairman of the Senate Committee on TWitorios and Insular Possessions, has stated that there is only one favorable position to be discussed as soon as possible in the Senate. | Once the bill is passed, Senator ■Willis has said that the bill will be approved by the legislative body. * The Commissioner in Washington, sir, has made every effort to have the House of Representatives begin to discuss next Monday before that body all the legislation for Puerto Rico which has already been favorably reported. It is believed to be almost certain, unless some unexpected obstacle arises, that Puerto Rican affairs will begin to be discussed on Monday as the Resident Commissioner has requested. .