ELWNDO
1 n PAGS. 3 CTS ■ mw Vuvuim; ' ruvtM | ■ ■ ■ Illustrated" Bldg. I If TeL 1222. - Box 845.
1 n PAGS. 3 CTS. Tj Semestr# 84.00 I 1 1 One Year0 * 7 ' 69
DAILY DAILY OF 7
THE MORNING
YEAR VI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) of October 6, 3917, on filo at the Post Office of San Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919, at the Post Office at San Juan, United States of America') under the Act of march 3, 1879.
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 27, 1924
NUMBER 1738.
"All the good that can be done for the country, will be done by the republican-socialist coalition; the poor and the Tico will be
benefitted and no one will be harmed in law, in justice, equity and reason", says the Ledo, femando J.Géigel,
If a lawsuit that will soon be filed before the courts succeeds, the municipality of San Juan runs the great risk of having its current budget annulled. It is alleged that said budget was prepared in flagrant violation of the law. The reason for said proceeding is to attack the legality of the current ordinary budget of the Municipality. 1 It is alleged that the current budget for the fiscal year 1924-1925 is made in open violation of the precepts indicated for the case by the Municipal Law in force, and all this, they say, is to the detriment of the taxpayers of San Juan and of all the creditors of the Municipality and of the public interests in general. f There are many who claim to be creditors of the municipality and who, according to reports, complain that in the ordinary budget their debts have not been included, as required by the Municipal Law in force. The ordinance of diAK jjméiWWWtoy" aga*Mm, 4m "* 1 no legal value for having been made in violation of the provisions of the law. The Ledo. Bolivar Pagan, is the lawyer who will take this important matter to the Courts. The origin of this appeal, they say, is the letter sent several days ago by Mr. Roberto H. Todd, candidate for Mayor for the Pure Republicans and the Socialists, to the Auditor of Puerto Rico denouncing alleged irregularities in the mu-| Continued on page 6).
candidate for Resident Commissioner
"More economy in the budgets, absolute suppression of useless items, elimination of unnecessary offices and businesses that represent a burden for the taxpaying people; all this will be part of our policy," adds Ledo.
£1 Ledo. Fernando J. Géigel, designated by the Republican-Socialist coalition as candidate for Resident Commissioner in Washington, has made the following very interesting statements to one of our editors: Hn side designated by the Republican-Socialist coalition for Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in the United States, which is the highest representative post of the country. I never believed that I would be granted such a high representation, given the conditions required for a candidate to this high position, that I could represent with complete satisfaction a bourgeois party in its majority, such as the Historical Constitutional Republican to which I belong, and the Socialist Party, genuinely working class. For me it was a great honor to receive the unanimous endorsement of my party, which, without class and personality dictincton, nominated me for such an important office. Rn pamb'o I experienced great satisfaction in receiving the unanimous endorsement of the most Puerto Rican party of our island, the Socialist Party, suffering and working Puerto Rico. j I wish it was not about me, to ' clr * all winds, the great political tras-, cendencb of this act carried out in Puerto Rico. History will not overlook the certain fact that at the same time as in France, England, Breda. Germany, Russia, and in almost all of old Europe as a result and natural consequence of the Great War, the government of nations has been placed in the hands of men of the people, or who feel, think and act with the people and for the good of the people, here in America, this blessed island, key of the two 'Amérjcas', "opens its doors also to this great spirit of democracy and equality, so that this part of the world, where the freest and most sovereign peoples of the earth are found, may find a wider way to climb the rungs of true democracy, true liberty and true equality.
- true freedom and true human equality. I am Republican, since my age, allowed me to enter the political struggles of my country, and I was Republican and I am Historical Constitutional, because they picked up the creed and the flag, from the hands of those who trampled the latter by abandoning their faith. Republican of conviction, I have to be a socialist also, because my party has always sustained in its platform and defended in all occasions, almost all, if not all, the so-' lutions of justice, equality, order, morality, reason, law, humanity, in short, to which the socialists of Puerto Rico aspire. In the political part, the socialists like Us republican constitutionalists historíeos. we walk by the same path, illuminated by the same light, xa star 49, that will occupy very soon its place, already separated, in the blue sky of the great national flag, as one of the sovereign states of the greatest, I the freest and most democratic nation of the Universe. - . . .- .gJjQófi&ó- 4. Áa.M.- Mr. Badil'o, who surprises me with his interview, is that the republican coalition is strong, powerful, stable, true, and more than true, without mask, because black and white, rich and poor, owners and workers, we all commune before the same altar, and we embrace the same creed of humanity, justice and equality and support the same political faith. There is no need to fear the modernism that imposes itself on the customs, life and government of peoples and individuals. There is no reason to believe that the great France, the powerful and thriving England, would come to the aid of the representative men of the liberal parties, and that they would be wrong to do so. Lloyd George in England and Clemenceau in France, both liberals, were the most decisive factors in the triumph of the Allies in the Great War. And so it was that these two nations, the oldest and most powerful in Europe, which have remained for centuries at the head of European civilization, have seen clearly that there as in Puerto Rico, we must put an end to the exclusivism of men and castes, with those politicians conceited by power, which there as here lead the country to ruin in their mistakes, bad government, and the misunderstanding of those men. In Puerto Rico we must put an end to this economic and administrative disorder, which will soon lead the country to the most disastrous economic ruin. Agriculture, industry, commerce, all the branches that constitute the life of a people, are on the road to disaster, because the Aliaqcist politicians only seek personal welfare, saving the interests of a few, for their own personal gain, to the detriment of the interests of the immense majority of the people of Puerto Rico.
NOTICE Due to last minute unforeseen circumstances, we are postponing the opening of our new establishment for Monday 29th. Flores Alvarez & Co.
"0Í/K4R PAGAJV ATTORNEY AND NOTARY. P. O. Box 883. Telephone: 1475 SAN JUAN, P. R.
SATURDAY KENNETH 27 BY HARLAN ESTELLE TAYLOR ED,TH roberts EVELYN SELBY SUNDAY: "While Satan Sleeps" with JACK HOLT By Famous Author: PETER B. KYNE.
I "The MiriUo" will publish ' tomorrow or of its most interesting issues of its Sunday Edition.
Sensational information, interesting articles, cablegrams of great actuality and numerous comic pages form its ameiiq and select text Fot the bijevos reviews that in advance hOJmos.dado of the most sensational articles that will appear in our numero'-fie tomorrow, can ¡ -I realize, ññwtros numerous lee-' tores of the U$íh0ancia really ex-| ' traordinary of the special number of the ' ' ¡ ¡ ¡edición dominim-of "EL MUNDO" correspondióntee to this Sunday. As always, we give preference in our tomorrow's issue to local information, which this time is of great interest because it deals with matters of real merit. It stands out, among our most fearful local information, the interesting interview held with one of our editors, the great Puerto Rican pugilist Juan i&sanovas, upon his arrival in Puerta Rico on his return from the United States after his celebrated fight with Bill Tato, the giant of the American "ring "*. We also published numerous select articles from the pens of the most notable Puerto Rican and foreign intellectuals. H. G. Wells, the famous English novelist, the most widely read of modern authors, will delight the readers of the bominical edition of El Mundo with one of the best literary and philosophical articles ever written by him; Frank H. Simons, the ligneous historian, will be the author of the first edition of El Mundo. Simons a¡ Leñoso historian of Ja War Mufiñ ÍL .estudií the, leticia rests .pet'cion of the German nació- 1 nalists that it be investigated ' officially who £was the culpbale of £ the Great War; Crane has forwarded us 1 for this Sunday* one of his mojor Editorials. These are our exclusive co- < laborers. In addition we publish an article by M. Poincare c on the London Conference; otio, |< by Dr. Roses Artau on scientific cnestln- ( nes of the highest interest; a t courageous chronicle by Ribera Chcvre- j mont on the "puppets in litera-
■ INJ'JIVV
INAUGURATION
e will definitely open to the public our new and modern premises on Monday, September 29 17 1, at Cruz 13, Cruz
on Cruz 13, where "La Plaza Provision Co." used to be. _ .... .AiáKI r -
Our establishment
will be, in its branch, the largest, the most comfortable and modern in San Juan. There will be two large departments, one for luxury footwear and the other for lots, at popular prices. An infinite variety of new styles of footwear, - the latest novelty - forms never seen before.
The latest novelty - shapes never seen before in San Juan, originated exclusively for us, will be exhibited in our ample showcases and will be sold at prices that will cause a real revolution in the footwear industry.
FLOWERS ALVAREZ & CO. Phone 67 P.O. Box 983 SAN JUAN, PTO. RICO
"We wanted to know who was the candidate proposed by the Republicans for Resident Commissioner in Wash.
ington, since someone belonging to that group had said: 'The nomination corresponds to us and being a Republican, even if it is Anamú,'" says socialist leader Prudencio Rivera Martínez, "We wanted to know who was the candidate proposed by the Republicans for Resident Commissioner in Wash- ington.
The Attorney General's office reports the truth of what happened in the case of Elias Antonio.
From the investigation it appears that there was no such robbery and assault, but a disturbance of the public order - The chief of the police of Fonce reports that Elias Antonio was intoxicated when he quarreled with Joaquin Lomba.
Mr. Rivera Martinez made the following statements yesterday: The reasons I had for writing to President Iglesias the letter I wrote on the 23rd of the present are set forth in said letter. My purpose was to precipitate a meeting of the Territorial Committee of our Party to call official attention to the general political state prevailing in San Juan and throughout the Island on the occasion of certain candidacies publicly discussed without our Party having intervened in any way. At the date my letter was written, nothing had been resolved by the Pure Republican Committee, and officially our Committee had no knowledge of what had been done and that the Pure Republican Committee should be forced to resolve it definitively. The meeting of the Territorial Executive Committee of our Party was held yesterday afternoon and the situation was discussed at length. All the vi-ce-presidents agreed that the attitude adopted by nú was quite justified. Our acti(Continued on page 5) NEW MAYOR IN PONCE The Governor has just solved the conflict that arose in Ponce by ordering Liado to offer his large assortment of Alliance, Unionist, Republican and Socialist buttons, at-$2.50 a hundred, and 1000 for $20.00. All C. O. D. B. LLADO P. O. Box 1021, San Justo 9,
In connection with the case of Mr. Elias Antonio and certain representations made surrounding this matter, the Attorney General's office makes the following statements: Mr. Elias Antonio, claiming to be a priest of the Greek Orthodox Church, appeared at the offices of the Attorney General on September eleventh and complained that on the road from Adjuntas to Ponce he had been assaulted by a chauffeur; that he had been robbed, without knowing by whom, of four hundred dollars and that the Judge of Ponce had arrested him. The complainant Antonio gave a deposition under oath, in which he studies the probable results of the next election. In the 'sports' pages, which are so widely read by the many sports fans, we offer especially for them juicy chronicles of current affairs by Gerrish Jr., notes and articles on motor racing, and a wise horse racing chronicle by Orot where our distinguished sportsman, who was in front of the Special Prosecutor.)
i ment before the Special Prosecutor. Reports were requested from the Municipal Judge of Ponce, from whom on the 15th a letter was received informing that he had conducted an extensive investigation of the facts, with Joaquín Lomba, Juan Arroyo, Maximino Meléndez, Luis Ortiz Saldaña, Emiliano GonzáI and María Rivera testifying; that upon being called to testify Elias Antonio stated that he was not testifying under oath; that from the investigation it appears that there was no such robbery and assault, but rather a disturbance of the public peace, with Elias Antonio and Joaquín Lomba fighting, that the police filed a complaint against them, and bail was set. against them, bail being set; that Elias Antonio pleaded guilty to alteliarr fine of three dollars *which hfeft effective; that on the day of his investigation Elias Antonio looked as if he had been under the influence of liquor, and spoke in terms injurious to Puerto Ricans. The Chief of the Insular Police District in Ponce informed the Chief of the Force, who investigated the facts; that Elias Antonio, in a state of intoxication, quarreled with Joaquin Lomba; that Elias Antonio pleaded guilty to disturbing the peace, and was fined; that the witnesses who witnessed the facts deny the loss or theft of the four hundred dollars and Elias Antonio himself could not inform him how he had such sum of money; and that he conducted himself improperly before the police and the Judge, demonstrating the alcoholic excitement in which he was. The case of Mr. Elias Antonio was duly investigated by the judicial and police authorities of Ponce, and attended to by this office.
San Juan
Tomorrow BASE-BALL at Ocho. "Arecibo Park" VS. "S. I. Athletics" Morning 10 A. M. Afternoon 3:30 P.M. WATCH PROGRAMS
Compare Lucky Strike cigarette with any other cigarette. Quality speaks for itself.
GOLD MEDAL WHEAT OLD WHEAT FLOUR Constant stock B. Fernandez Sitaos. Suers. MARINA, SAN JUAN P. R.
GARAGE BRANDI VILLA ST. - PONCE
"SOCIEDAD PROTECTORA DEL TRAFICO RAPIDO" CONVOCATION All the owners of guaguas, whether members or not of this Association, are hereby invited to an Extraordinary General Assembly, which will take place on Monday, the 29th of the current month, in the halls of the City Hall of San Juan, in which matters of great importance will be discussed, among them the resignation of the President, Mr. Alcaraz. A. B. ECHEVARRIA Acting President
"We have no objections to offer to the candidate Mr. Géigel.The socialist party by its position, could take advantages and " impose conditions, but did not do so," adds