ELMÚNDO
1 A PAGES. 3 CTS, I 94.00 II ■ A Afio 87.S0
1 n PAGS. 3 CTS. I OficinM: "Puerto kÍM ■ ■ ■ ■ Unatrado" Bldg. ■ ToL 1222. - Box 843.
MORNING DAILY, EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
aa.TiT r'"-"-.-, j■ - ■■ 1 -- ANO VI SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
PuuliBhed and distributed under permit (Ko. 801) suthorteed by the Act of October 6, 1917, on file at the Post Office of San Joan, Porto R*'o, By order of ths President, A. S. PosUnaster General. Entered aa second claaa matter, febrnary 21, 1919, at the Poet Office at Sin Juan, Porto R*'o, (united States of America> under the Act of march 3, 1879.
SATURDAY, MARCH 1, 1924 ' NUMBER 1551 I
Never has the case of P. R. been better presented for the consideration of the American Congress or aroused more interest I ¡ as on this occasion, has de-
I The President of the Senate, Mr. Barceló Barceló I The President of the Insular Senate is confident of the success of the efforts made by the Portorriqueña in Wash-I ington, and believes that the Congress will grant us the Governor-elect WASHINGTON, February 20- Mr. Antonio Barceló, President of the Senate of Puerto Rico, and other members of the Senate of Puerto Rico, and Mr. Barceló, President of the Senate of Puerto Rico, and Mr. Barceló, President of the Senate of Puerto Rico, and other members of the Senate, have expressed their confidence in the success of the efforts made by the Portorriqueña in Wash-I ington, and other members of the special committee presently on the island, are hopeful that the United States Congress will adopt the bill providing for the election by the people of Puerto Bico of their own governor, as well as the other measures advocated by the committee. Senator Barcelo, in discussing the situation hcy with the correspondent of La Prensa, expressed great faith in the success of the Puerto Bico legislative program. Both the Senate and the House have listened with respectful and intense interest to what the members of the delegation had to say concerning the reasons justifying the granting to the people of Puerto Rico of a greater degree of self-government. In the various hearings before the two committees during the last ten days, the members of the committees, who have attended the sessions in the majority, have paid strict attention to all the statements made, and have also cross-examined many questions to the various members who appeared before them. Never, in Mr. Barceló's opinion, has the case of Puerto Rico been better presented, nor has it aroused more interest in the legislators of the United States. | Although no definite prediction can be made as to the congressional decision on the bills now pending before the House committees, Mr. Barceló said that he would not be able to make a definite decision on the bills before the House committees.
♦♦♦♦I U I !■< U 1 1 1 1 < I i 1 i I I I ♦♦♦ I < LA SINGER | -' -Announces that it has moved its Office and Store to f J Calle de San Justo No. 18, to the building formerly ocu- ?! " pó eá Remington Department of Gonzalez Padin. 1 " It is the only store in San Juan and Santurce that sells Singer sewing machines and needles of the latest Singer manufacture. 4 " We invite the public to visit our Store to see I *' the beautiful embroidery and sewing work done by the f - " Professor and her pupils on Singer machines. 4 To anyone who buys a Singer machine we X *' teach free of charge how to do these works. x Come and see the Electric Machines at work. í í í I Denied the famous Ceregumil > W Complete vejetarian food based on the most nutritious ■ w cereals, devoid of fats and alcohol, reco- W ■ mendable to all ages and especially for children, w a Bulk testimonials of 1 ■ its wonderful results 1 w For sale in all drugstores, and in the store of the ■ - Messrs. GONZALEZ PADIN CO..., INC. > > DISTRIBUTING AGENTS B *f DIEGO AGUEROS & Co. 1 ■4- TeL 67S 60 Allen St., San Juan, P? R. w
Cm Mr. Torres Mazzorana's appearance before the House Insular Affairs Committee ended what might be called the "peaceful lase" of the hearings on Puerto Rico.
DETAILS OF THE UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT THAT COMPLETELY DISRUPTED THE GOOD HARMONY OF THE HEARINGS. The Committee and the Puerto Rican Delegates assailed Mr. Torres Mazzorana, who told the Committee that he represented about eight thousand Puerto Ricans living in New York, with questions. WASHINGTON, Feb. The series of hearings which the house insular affairs committee of the house of representatives has been devoting to the committee of the Puerto Bico legislature which is in i the P. B. legislature which is in i tos of law, prescribing, among other co ' Washington in defense of various proyec j sas, the election of governor by ios portorriqueños themselves, had a sensation today...! phase entirely unexpected by the members of the i house committee. From New York came to testify young Bafael Torres Mazzo- | rana and in his statement, which fell like a bombshell at the end of the hearings, which were conducted in complete harmony, he strongly opposed almost everything approved, supported and proposed by Governor Towner and the delegates from Puerto Bico. MAZZOBANA APPEARS to finish his report, interrupting the end of yesterday's session, other speakers, Senator Toas Soto, Republican, Socialist leader Senator Iglesias and Unionist Senator, Dr. Cuevas Zequeira. reiterated the recommendations made the day before in pro (Continued on p. 15). -: TYPING MACHINES Owing to having to extend our business in repairs of typewriters, calculating machines, phonographs, etc., we have moved to Allen St. No., 11, next door to Sobrinos de Ezquiaga. j P. B. Typewriter Beparing Shop. Telephone 288. Box 1445. San Juan, Advt.
It appears that the efforts made by the Commission for Mediation and Conciliation in the striking capareas have begun.
I I I What did Mr. I Tons Soto reply? I I I I In one of the hearings held before the Committee on Insular Affairs on Puerto Rico, and ¡ after having spoken ¡ for an hour and a half, a little more ¡ or less, during which time the President of the Insular Republican Party, Mr. José Tous Soto, read a very brilliant plea in favor of statehood for the island, received a letter from the President of the Insular Republican Party, Mr. José Tous Soto, José Tous Soto, received, and with him his party and the country, a humiliating reply from a Continental Representative, who, alluding to the bill presented before the Committee granting a more liberal form of government to Puerto Rico, expressed himself in these terms:' "If, after all, you compel me to vote for this bill, and I do vote for it, it must be understood to mean per- 'I am not a member of the Committee, but a member of the Committee.If, after all, you compel me to vote for this bill, and I vote for it, it must be understood perfectly well that under no circumstances will I vote for any measure of government whose ultimate end is statehood for Puerto Rico. I ¡ for I would not give Puerto Ricans the privilege of intervening in our national prob'ems, much less when they are not qualified to do so." | We do not know what Mr. Tous Soto would reply to these words, humiliating by all accounts for the country, and particularly for the Island Republican Party. The Commissioner of the Public Service of this Capital, Mr. M fael Diez de Andino, is satisfied that the opponents of the Administration have decided to resort to the courts of Justice "They are perfectly within their rights to do so," said the Mayor, "and we will accept the decision of the Court, whatever it may be. We are confident that we have acted well; but if we have made a mistake, we want the courts to say so, and we will be ready to rectify it". In the afternoon of yesterday, we were in the office of the Commissioner of Public Service of this city, Don Bafael I Diez de Andino, We carried the prop-, * sito of knowing his opinion respec-! We were in the office of the Commissioner of Public Service of this city, Mr. Bafael I Diez de Andino, in order to know your opinion regarding the writ of Certiorari that was filed before the District Court of this city, requesting that the following be re (Continued on page 13) AUTOMOTORES DE VIA AMERICAN RAILROAD COMPANY OF PORTO RICO CHANGE OF ITINERARY Effective as of 6:00 A. M. on the 1st day of the month of October. M. on March 1, 1924! In order to give greater facilities to the public who patronize our special Motor Car service, we will change the departure times of TRIPS 29 B. and 30 B. as follows: ' Trip 29 B. leaving San Juan 10:15 A. M. will now depart . 11:40 A. M. Trip 29B. arriving at AreciI bo 12:25 A. M. will now arrive I 2:00 P. M. I I Trip 30B. departing AreciI bo 1:00 P. M. will now depart 4:50 - PM. I Trip 30 B. arriving in San ' Juan 3:10 P. M. will now arrive i 7:15 P. M. ADDRESS. > FOR RENT i an apartment, proper for fa' mile, in the "Tobacco Palace'*. [They will report in the same building.
If this is to continue, it will be necessary to declare the inutility of the said organization, whose decisions appear to be respected by no one, for the purpose of conferring with the officers of the Bureau of Labor and the Free Federation, Mr. Jose Cordero Bosario, Secretary of the Labor Committee of Barceloneta, visited San Juan on Thursday, and spoke to us on the subject. Barceloneta, who spoke to us about the ¡ state of the workers of the auzcarerfis comarcas of Vega Baja, ga Alta and Barceloneta, on the occasion of I the situation the relaStonfiB of the workers and pa- . I thrones of there-- by intervening in their' 1 aid the Comilón de Mediación y ' Conciliación. I Mr. Cordero told us that on Sunday the workers of Barceleñeta had met with the purpose of protesting that the agreement between them, the thrones and the Commission was not followed. According to our informant, the alleged violations of the aforementioned agreement, they are paid only $.70, when the minimum agreed upon was $.75. 2- That the cutting and collection workers, who were paid from $1 to $1.30, have been reduced five cents. 3- That the agreement stipulates an au- 1 ment of 20 per cent as the price of sugar rises, and this has not been complied with in spite of esI Note Well i; It is not possible that anyone in San Juan nor on the whole island can offer you for S $1.48 a shirt of such good quality nor so well <[ made as the one we have , it is worth much more, we can offer you a large S collection of painted ones to choose from in all sizes; come and see them. We also have for ? you collars, ties, socks, underwear, belts and everything else you need. <[ Come today and visit our effects department in front of the main square <[ GONZALEZ PADIN CO. Inc. in front of the main square i OPPORTUNITY At FELIX LOPEZ Jewelry ■ you received a great assortment of elegant Wall Clocks, suitable for Offices, Dining Rooms, etc. í Very cheap ( S. Brau San Juan
In view of the abracadabrante spectacle presented by the latest events recorded by criminality in P. R, the Opto, of Justice has brought into play all its resources, in order to q.
The Central Board of the Union of Puerto Rico, in its meeting yesterday, agreed to withdraw the confidence of the Party to significant elements of the municipality of Guaynabo Having fomented a dissidence and having made common cause with the minorities to conquer power has been the reason for this drastic action of the Party For some time we have been reporting in these columns that in the town of Guaynabo a coup d'état had been carried out, by virtue of which three members of the Unionist majority in combination with the minority of that body had taken over the Municipal Administration. Immediately after this act was carried out, the local administration was changed and the fact was reported to the Central Board of the Party for its resolution. On different occasions, different commissions of that town and significant elements of the party tried to settle the differences and consolidate their attitude to save there the position of the collectivity. (OdUtinUa on page 6) i t was quoted at $7.28 and $7.53. 4 -That track and construction workers are only paid $.65 and $70 for nine and ten hours of work. After discussing the above, according to reports, and being approved by the assembly members, it was agreed to pass a letter to the Mediation and Conciliation Commission, giving an account of what had happened, which, judging by what can be seen, signifies a great failure for that body, since everyone believed that the strike movement in those districts had been definitively resolved. The assembly workers agreed, according to Cordero, to declare a two-week waiting period from the day of the assembly, in order to give time for the matter to be settled, or else go on strike. If similar to the above have been the arrangements made by the Commission in other regions of the island, we can already declare that said body is out of order, or at least, that it does not instill the due respect so that its decisions are in turn respected. A magnificent local for rent for family with three apartments, kitchen and service in Salvador Brau esq. Recinto Oeste No. 3. It will inform in the high JOSE FERNANDEZ I used the '"Rocío Antillano" and it was the best alcoholic drink that in my life I have used. Distributors: E. Juliá A Co. Advt.
DEFEND YOUR HEALTH AND YOUR MONEY Order the prescriptions and medicines you need at FARMACIA BLANCO and you will get, GUARANTEE, QUALITY AND PRICE i we import directly We are not resellers. SAN FRANCISCO 56 . TELEPHONE 35. A D A C 17 PERMANENT SERVICE Vi AM AkJlL GARAGE - GASOLINE - LAVADOS BRANDI v To LA .- p r o t CE
The people, represented in the Administration of Justice by the Jury agencies, must also cooperate in the work undertaken by the judicial authorities.
THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION AUTHORIZES THE TELEPHONE COMPANY TO MAKE AN AU- ! A Committee of said agency so recommends, for reasons expressed in an ample report rendered to that effect. Messrs. Cabrera and Esteves, members of the Public Service Commission, who were appointed by said agency to study and report on a request made by a company of the PTBdGsáM* torizaeion to make a conditional increase in the price of its fare, rendered a comprehensive report on the matter, stating the following points in favor of the requested conditional increase: ' 1-That the valuation of the company's properties as far as ta- ■ - rifas is concerned, as determined by the special committee referred to above and given in the report submitted on January 15, 1923, is correct and should be adopted by the Commission. 1 í 2-That the telephone rates suggested by said committee in its report * be approved, excluding the rates 1 , for local service which your committee I recommend be substituted for the ■ ' (Continued on p. 15). 1 '
Incidentally, we met yesterday with the Assistant Attorney General of P. R., Hon. Miguel A. Mu' ue', the Hon, Hon. Miguel A. Mu' ñoz, with whom we had to chat about indifferent things, first, and then our conversation fell '' on the latest bloodshed that crime has registered in Puor- [ to Rico. (Lightly, the distinguished official made wise comments on such an important matter, that we, as informers of public opinion, cannot pass without leaving consigned in our columns, since it is good for the country to know that the crime has been committed in Puor- [ to Rico, and that it is good for the country to know about it. The case recently occurred in Río Piedras, said the young and already illufi tious lawyer, in which two men without conscience committed one of the most horrendous crimes in the judicial history of our country, and another one of the most serious crimes in the history of our country, and another one of the most serious crimes in the history of our country, and another one of the most horrendous crimes in the history of our country, and another one of the most horrendous crimes in the history of our country. Applications, stating experience, salary, etc., may be sent to: 1569, San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., San Juan, Puerto Rico.
OLIMPO THEATER ,ioy a ™ y ' Debut of "La Princesita del couplet". LA MARAVILLITA" WITH THE LATEST CREATIONS IN COUPLETS j The precious tape in seven acts I -: EXPIATION :- -I -I - 5 PRICES: Boxes with 6 chairs, $4.50 -Upper floor lunettes unnumbered 50 cts. Lunettes Ground Floor numbered 75c. :: WILL THE GREAT SALE OF FURNITURE LAST UNT UNTIL SATURDAY :: WILL THE GREAT SALE OF FURNITURE LAST ? :: AT SENSATIONAL PRICES :: BUY NOW! TODAY! t Refrigerators $10.75; Food Storage $8.25; Dressers t ;* $17.25; Wardrobes $27.50; Iron Cases, $5.00; Al- T ;; Congoleum Shades $6.75; Living Room Sets $44.50: Complete 7-piece bedroom sets $144.50; luxurious ; ' wicker sets with cushions $104.00 and lots of other X good stuff very cheap. 5 -- and ALL NEW, JUST RECEIVED í l RAFAEL MARGARIDA & Co. | -: S. BRAU STREET 44 AND 89 J WE MANUFACTURE AND SELL THE BEST FURNITURE ¿ <> 5