ELMUNDO
1A PAGES. 3CTS. I h ~~SFofaM: -dh.eru 'lHe DtlWíl" BMg. I II ItM - Bez ta*.
1 C TAGS. 3 CTS. I tf A- 9TM
THE MORNING,
DAILY OF
ARO VI
-AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Pubi-siiaa MUÍ awritewd ana" <1í".soi> *
SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1924
NUMBER 1678
0 Mr. Fraudo Paz Gránela, in presenting his resignation as ¡nsnector of labor, formulates specific charges against the Comi-
He accuses him of introducing into his Department the "malevolent policy of his party" and of violating the regulations of the Civil Service Commission for the benefit of his co-religionists.
Several dismissals inspired by partisan motives, according to the opinion of Mr. Paz Granela.Mr. Paz Granela, Vice-President of the Free Federation, has delivered to us for publication the following letter, which he addressed to Mr. Chardón, Co-Missionary of Agriculture, July 21, 1924. "* Mr. Carlos E. Cbardón, Commissioner, Department of Agriculture and Labor,-San Juan, P. B. < í Sir:- * As you may well have read ' in the Special Bulletin of the History of the Labor Bureau of Puerto Rico, published October 31, 1923, "the creation of a Government office to study and intervene in the problems affecting the life of the workers and at the same time to protect them legally, was the first formal request made to the authorities of the country and of Washing- j ton by the labor unions of Puerto Ri- - co". I > From 1899 until April 14, 1912, the IfJftseatWft of the Puerto Mico Labor Federation, assisted by the American 1 ; j Federation of Labor, did not rest for an instant in its efforts for the creation in Puerto Rico of a Department in charge of promoting and protecting industrial and agricultural labor, until, through the efforts of the organized labor movement and the good wishes and sentiments of insular and Federal authorities, the right of labor to be represented and protected by the Government was recognized, and for that purpose the ¡ Negociado del Trabajo was created in Puerto Rico, by a law approved by our Legislature on March 14, 1912. Thus, it is to the efforts of the Libre Federation and the American Federation of Labor that we owe the impetus and interest in the creation of this office, and that industrial and agricultural workers may be represented and protected by a Department of Agriculture and Labor. - After all these developed efforts organized labor never had genuine representation in the Bureau of Labor, because of the (Continued on page 4)
Last night on Colomer Street, in Santurce, Mr. Cipriano Castro was the victim of a criminal attempt on his life.
In the impossibility of wounding him with four unsuccessful shots. The assailant chooses to hit him with the end of his revolver. The general responded to the aggression by using a rapier he was carrying. Late last night we were informed by telephone that General Cipriano Castro, former President of Venezuela, who has been living in Puerto Rico for many years, had been the victim of a criminal attack that seriously endangered his life. IN THE HOUSE OF THE GENERAL. Immediately, one of our reporters went to General Castro's residence, located at 12 Colomer Street, Santurce, where he had an interview with General Castro himself, who received him lying on his bed. The General's shirt was all bloody and he had a slight wound over his left eye. THE 'AGENT The attack on the aggression of which the General was the victim, as is logical, has several aspects, two of which we know from the mouths of the protagonists of the event. The first, by General Castro, who told us what happened as follows: "I went out to the side here, at number 22, where Don Pepe Bri tapa ja lives, and as usual we began to talk; he and his wife from the balcony, and I on the sidewalk, on the outside of the balcony. While we were talking, we saw a man and a woman pass by, whom neither don Pepe, his wife nor I knew. After a short time they passed by again, upstairs, and arrived, presumably, as far as the house, after which they went back, j Then they approached us and the man, addressing me, asked me if he could not find a house there that they wanted to rent him. I replied that maybe in a fortnight I could rent him a house of my own. At that moment he pulled out a revolver and fired three or four shots, but as the revolver failed him he then hit me with the gun. Al (Continued on 2nd page.)
Very interesting summary of tomorrow's issue of "El Mundo" Its text and graphic pages form a whole of great amenity and interest for our numerous readers One of the issues of our Sunday edition that will respond with greater ver- , dence to our determination to make our Sunday issue every week more and more interesting, is undoubtedly that of tomorrow. Its textb, containing articles by the most notable foreign writers, important cablegrams, and information of the latest news, together with the numerous graphic pages it offers, form a whole of great amenity and interest for our readers. Among the illustrated pages of aven ] tures, we publish two that will attract the attention of all - the highly topical subjects they deal with. One is entitled ''Bombs of asphyxiating gases to combat crime''; and the other ''Wives have the right to cut their hair'', in which the various opinions of the most authoritative American judges are set out in relation to the new short hair mo- da. In addition, there will be interesting articles by our indispensable and distinguished foreign collaborators Frank H. Simmonds. H. G. Wells, Lloyd George, Frank Crane, etc., dealing with current issues with the mastery and authority that such writers possess. Inaugurates his collaboration in our Sunday edition the brilliant Puerto Rican writer Mr. Pedro J. Rosa, resident in Europe, with some impressions of England. Mr. Rosa is a notable Puerto Rican writer who has been living for many years in Paris, where he recently published a book, "The Crimes of Imperialism", which has been a resounding success. We have also published another important article on the sensational inven tion of the Englishman Mathews, the famous "Bayos de la Muerte" (Bayos of Death). Needless to say that local information and cable information
" . COMPANY BRUNO & VAZQUEZ, Inc. TODAY- SATURDAY JULY 26th - TODAY THE NOISY SUCCESSES OF THE EXCELLENT ARTIST AMPARITO GUILLOT CONTINUE, with a completely new program will be exhibited the powerful drama entitled: AMOR DE TEMPESTAD i ("On High Seas") by the stars: DOROTHY DALTON - JACK HOLT TOMORROW SUNDAY JULY 27th AMPARITO GUILLOT with a new program. Also showing the Puerto Rican premiere film EL MUNDO Y SUS MUJERES , (The World and its Women) PRICES:-50 & 35-35 & 25
11/ & MILLA Vice Regal, Clicquot Club, Little Dear, Velour. Tomorrow's sensation at LAS CASAS RACING PARK DON'T MISS :■
GRAPES PEARS CHERRIES AND PLUMS WILL ARRIVE MONDAY FRANK S. SOLER. Tetuan 35 r-im gBEggggsaa Compare Lucky Strike cigarette to any other cigarette. Quality speaks for itself.
till TIME
'Horrifying blood sai eso 1 in Santurce.-! l man kills another by a, ¡értero revolver shot.-# tragedy unfolded in a move of moírte The killer was attested and placed at the disposal di the authorities . Last night, around 7:30 p.m., a serious incident occurred in Santurce.® The daily newspaper was not to be missed. At ".stop 20, behind the mosaic factory, a group of people^avidas entertainment, formed a play of ' mount. I In that play hgtaban present, . Ignacio Alvarez, the victim, and Gregorio Osorio, e] matador. It seems that ■ a heated dispute arose between the two as a result of which they came to blows. Then, Gregorib . Osorio, making use of a revolver' which he carried, fired several shots at his con- . trincant, who fell to the ground bathed in blood, dying a few minutes later. i' ' The authorities immediately went to the scene of the tragedy, where they proceeded to arrest the killer, who, without resisting any resistance, entered the scene of the tragedy, where they proceeded to arrest the killer, who, without resisting, entered the scene of the tragedy. The unhappy victim lived "in Santurce, and the killer also lived in the said barrip, but is a native of Ca| nóvana-í. The Romani Prosecutor took charge of the investigation of the case, if : ¡ : that at the time of writing these lines had set bail for the assailant, Eitt rteeso di 'Wíl , gre caused great consternation among the neighbors, for most of them did not even know that he was playing in that place. As you will see ! our readers, it is no longer only the "cañita" that causes so many tragedies that we have to lament daily, but also the ghost of gambling plays a major role. The graphic pages occupy a preferential place in our morning issue because of the very important issues they include, as well as the motoring, sports, etc. pages, and the four comic pages in color, which have been so well received and have become a real success. This week, having arrived in a timely manner, we are publishing the chistoi sa page of the series "Educating Dad", so that our readers will not miss tomorrow the funny characters of the series. --As a complement to such a varied and entertaining format, now comes the Universal Magazine, carefully presented and with a series of articles and extraordinary curiosities. On the front page of the magazine is an article, illustrated with a color photograph of the young anar (Continued on page 6).
Yesterday the general conventions of the Puerto Rican Unionist and Republican Parties met in this capital.
Yeses Barceló and Tous Soto were the object of enthusiastic ovations.-Up to seven o'clock last night the House Representatives and District Senators had been elected.
Yesterday morning at the Municipal Theater of this city, the delegates belonging to the Unionist and Republican parties which form the Puerto Rican Alliance met. At the beginning, they all met in an informal convention, presided over by the Resident Commissioner, Mr. Corto ¡ va Dávila. At the beginning of the act, Mr. Barceló pronounced heartfelt tributes in honor of the distinguished compa- I triota Don José E. Benedicto, who died yesterday morning in this city and who was one of the most prominent figures of the party. Mr. Barceló requested that the ■ Assembly, standing, dedicate five minutes as a tribute of sympathy to the deceased compatriot and asked that a wreath be dedicated to him on behalf of the Alliance. Mr. Córdova Dávila opened the event with an eloquent speech of high patriotic tones, in which he reaffirmed his advice that the best men should be chosen for all posts, taking into account mainly their qualities of honesty and ability. We must bring honest men to our Legislature, because the Alliance has been formed," he said, "to clean up the environment and fight for the happiness of Puerto Rico." He said that even though the bill had the endorsement of the Administration and the backing of Congressional leaders, its approval in December depended on how Puerto Ricans would develop their administration on the island. At the end of Mr. Córdova Dá- ! vila's interesting speech, most of whose paragraphs were greeted with loud cheers, Mr. Hernández López presented the following resolution: RESOLUTION TO THE ASSEMBLY WHEREAS: Messrs. Antonio R. Barceló and José Tous Soto, Respective Presidents of the Unionist and Republican Parties presented before the Steering Committee of the Puerto Rican Alliance their resolution not to accept nominations to appear on the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rican Alliance. WHEREAS: The Steering Committee of the Alliance resolved to request and invite said political Presidents to desist from such resolution because it is contrary to the life of the Alliance, to the achievement of its patriotic purposes and to the unanimous sentiment of both political collectivities.
THEREFORE: I, the undersigned, request the Assemblies of both political Parties assembled today, to confirm the resolution approved by the Directive Committee of the Alliance and with its sovereign and imperative authority, also require and invite said Messrs. Barceló and Tous Soto to accept to appear on the electoral ticket of their respective parties in the very high and irreplaceable position that corresponds to them. Given in the Convention Hall on the twenty-fifth day of the month of July of the year one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four. Juan Hernandez LOPEZ. To sustain it the illustrious vice-pre-president began to take the floor extolling the exceptional conditions possessed by the two can- ! dillos of the Alliance; but Mr. Pe . drosa requested an interruption and asked the Assembly that before Mr. Hernandez Lopez finished his argument and without prejudice that he would then continue his interrupted course, he proposed to the Assembly that the Assembly, standing, acclaim Mr. Barcelo and Mr. Tons Soto and thus consider the resolution approved. It lasted about a quarter of an hour. Mr. Tous and Mr. Barceló were cheered and the applause became more intense and cheers to the Alliance and to the two Presidents were heard from all parts of the Theater. Mr. Barceló then made a speech stating how determined he and Tous were to remain in the attitude of not desiring any representative office in order to give a resounding lie to those who were saying, and propagating the species that they were dictators and that they wished to have control of the public thing. He spoke of the times in which he had adopted a similar attitude and the support and confidence of his people had reanimated him to continue in the struggles with more faith and decision. Mr. Tous Soto also spoke in the same terms to the Convention and after making history of how the Alliance was formed and saying that in his Direction there are no dictatorships or impositions but that they obeyed what was the will of the majority in all cases, he said that if the Assembly imperatively imposed on them the acceptance of a position of lord they would accept the honor but for one of many and not to occupy the highest positions. Mr. Hernán dez López then continued his speech, which was one of the most brilliant we have heard from the distinguished speaker. At the end Mr. Hernandez Ló JOSE N. QUIÑONES -LAWYER- San Justo Street Office No. 10 high, Cuétara Hermanos, Telephone 768. San Juan. P. B.
Tomás Lamela made a motion that the Assembly approve the Resolution of not admitting Mr. Barceló and Mr. Tous Soto to be left off the electoral ticket. Then, Mr. Batéelo intervened and stated that they were gathered there in an informal convention and that when the particular Conventions of each party met, the adoption of the resolutions would proceed. Mr. Córdova Dávila declared the functions of the Directive Committee terminated and handed over the presidency to Mr. Barceló who called the official Convention of the Unionist Party to order. Mr. Barceló was appointed as President and Mr. Amadeo and Mr. Henriquez as Secretaries. A Minutes Committee was appointed, composed of Mr. Genaro Cautiñ°. Mr. Jesús Benitez and Mr. Arturo González Prado; and a recess was declared until two o'clock in the afternoon. When the Convention was resumed, the Chairman of the Minutes Committee, Mr. Can tiño, rendered a report stating that the Unionist delegates were admitted without protest. There was no objection and the Convention was declared legally constituted. A recess was declared for the selection of candidates for the representative districts and for the districts that were not representative, and the delegates of both parties, who were selecting the candidates of each one. Mr. Córdova Dávila appointed a Commission to attend the ' fnerals of the distinguished compatriot Mr. José E. Benedicto, composed of Mr. Hernández López, Mr. JeI sús Benitez, Mr. Arturo González Prado and Mr. Enrique González Mena. At the time of closing this information we have not been able to obtain the complete list of candidates for the representative districts because discussions were still going on in the Guayama district where they were trying to bring a Republican candidate to the Senate, against the Unionists' criteria. The following candidates were signed by the senatorial districts: 1 San Juan, Celestino Triarte, and Sanchez. Celestino Triarte and Sánchez Morales; Arecibo. Jordán and Aponte; Aguadilla. García Ducós and González Mena; Mayagüez. Arsenio Martines and Perea; Ponce, McJones and José Víctor Figueroa. Zeno and Godreau were tied. And Humacao, Cuevas Zequeira and González Fagundo. DEATH OF A DEPUTY - FRENCH PARIS, July 25 (French Cable)- M. Ignace, who was at present a deputy, and who was Under-Secretary of State during the government of M. Clemenceau, has died in this capitol.
+ P. ' HAS DIED Don José Aniceto Sierra His children, Damián, María, Esteban, Antonio and Trinidad, on informing you of such a mournful event, request your attendance at the burial' of the corpse, which will take place today at 4:00 p. m., from Obrero street, 333 Obrero street. M. from 33 Obrero St. to the cemetery of Santurce. . . . . In anticipation of his recognition. Do not send artificial wreaths. No obituaries will be distributed.
- ■ PARK - - thomas AT THE PRODIGA ME1GHAN Jr_| VENGANZA FRIDAY & SATURDAY
PURELY REGIONAL ALCOHOLATED CEREIPINA is a product without rival and" in Puerto,Rico the first, this is not that I want it that everyone thinks so. Amen.
TAKE ADVANTAGE. By the steamer Reina Maria Cristina arrived today we receive Spanish potatoes. Place your order soon. Call telephone 284 1 Tetuan 50
PITMAN SHORTHAND WRITERS. Notice is hereby given to all members of the Pitman Stenographers' Association, that on Sunday, the 27th of the current month, the Board of Directors of this Association will meet at 9:30 a. m., at the Pitman College, Luna 58, to discuss the "'Confederation of Associations" - All members who wish to intervene in the resolution of this question, may attend on the day aforesaid. San Juan, P. R., July 26, 1924. Pedro C. Timothée, Oscar A. Gandía# Secretary President