THE WORLD
ip PAGES. 3CTS. ■"MateM: **Paem 'HHT |l| DasMdo** BMg. 1 w **- ltar -
in PAGS.3CTS, |1 v
MORNING
MORNING,
SAN JUAN, PUSRTO RKU
ASO V|
FuarsSM that <iari>m< uaét wrmn <"o. Mi) emhsrtyáyP "to 0 QeisSfc q. isi?. L. ai, L TL I' leo Jasa, hrt" BMo, By señar yes *- FtMMmS, *<*""*" 4 "mL M es "M""m a "M fMmary ti. ISIS, M tks Vee OMo" a" Boa Pssb, MM> of AamtesjeM* too BMe? mn* KMVB.
SAT. AUGUST 2. 1924
NUMBER 1684 I
In the month of February, a superb exhibition will be held in the capital, which will be attended by industry, commerce and agriculture.
American manufacturers will also exhibit their products.
It is expected that more than two hundred thousand pennas will dress San Juan - Two mini pesos will circulate in the month of February Governor Towner has asked the Secretary of the Colon Development Committee, Mr. M. Guerra Mondragon, to call a meeting for the purpose of submitting to the consideration of the members, a bill by which it is considered easy to raise the money necessary for the construction of the Colon Park on the banks of the Culebrinas. The gentleman has submitted to the Governor a memorandum *'oi¡ tentive of the project he has to hold an exhibition in San Juan dedicated to the promotion of industry, agriculture and commerce, the month of 1 February next year, for which purpose he has already managed the preliminaries. The exhibition, according to the project, will be held on the land owned by Mr. José Rexach annexed to the Hipódro-i me Las Casas, and for this purpose the plans are already being prepared and the way to smooth out the difficulties that exist in terms of the irregularity of' ■na part of the land has been studied. The site is considered to be a delightful one, a well [ titeada extension that allows the construction of j cudPtos building" are deemed necessary i with pl aliciente of the Hippodrome, which with ¡ loe land have been put at the disposal of the initiators of the idea. . In the pacte "North of the property is en-| cuffjjjgala Ijagmut of Sin Mvtidñ until nnes.J Mhfefc installing ap its interior i exihilMéWh the most cofnplete posi- ¡ blo of the MUqUias that are preservedI in Spain and Santo Domingo of the des-' entoldo r, This exhibition probable-! This exhibition will probably be placed under the auspices ( df the Spanish Colony or the Catholic Church, and it is considered that it will be an attractive fund-raiser for the projected Park on the site of an datambarco. The exhibition pion industry.I loe covers a very wide radius. The United States Department of Commerce is interested, and it is expected that the cooperation of the Federal Government through the Secretary of War and other official agencies will be of great interest. Among the objects to be exhibited will be national relics consisting of the trophies of the last world war and collections of animals and plants of great value to the development of agriculture and industry on the island. Mr. James, Special Commissioner of the United States Department of Commerce, who is in Puerto Rico when he learned of the plan, stated in principle that he would follow it entirely and that he would inform the Department for the purpose of bringing the news to the attention of the American manufacturers so that they could be informed of it.
Tomorrow will be held ei Ponce and Guayama the conventions of disrüto to resolve within the Alliance, the situation eirá created on the occasion of the senatorial representation Mr. forcejó was yesterday in aguate trying to settle the differences arisen in that poWadóo For manada Sunday have been con vocadas in Ponce and in Guayama, The conventions of the Unionist Party and the Republican Party have been convened in Ponce and Guayama, with the purpose of sanctioning the arrangement that was recently made in Ponce, by virtue of which it was accepted that the Republicans would have two senators for Ponce and two for Guayama. In addition, the conventions of the representative districts of Juadg Díaz and Villalba and of Guayama and Balinas have been called, where it is believed that Walter Melones and Guillermo Gpdreau will be designated for the House of Representatives, and who were being candidates for the Senate in the aforementioned districts. It seems that the. prevailing idea is that* all will be satisfied- ■ and the Alliance which many Ib have augured on the occasion of these Combinations 'agreed upon; but it is certain that many of their most conspicuous leaders do not seem to be satisfied with this mode of settling the conflict and are disposed to protest of such an understanding if it should be sanctioned uor the conventions of tomorrow. These leaders, belonging to the Unionist Party, do not accept the equality in the senatorial representation because they allege that the merger has not yet been made and fear that at a given moment the majority party could become a minority party in the Upper House. Other reasons for opposing this move are that if equal representation in the Senate were to be accepted, this would result in the Republicans and Unionists, in all the towns of the island, aspiring to the same representation, The leaders who remain somewhat displeased with this arrangement are waiting for the question to be carried to the Board or to be finally sanctioned by the conventions and hope to exchange impressions with the leaders of the Alliance so as not to appear to be adopting a rebellious attitude without giving opportunities for the true al(Continued on page 6. page)
DAD TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY * XX Ivy/ <J i EXTRAORDINARY GERALDINE FARRAR in the grandiose drama in 7 acts "Eli mundo y sus mujeres" Ün girón de Rusia en. hervidero de su azarosa política. SUNDAY AND MONDAY TOM' MOORE and MARY MILES MINTER in "THE ALIEN ENCLOSURE" Drama PARAMOUNT Full nightly. LAS CASAS RACING PARK EXTRAORDINARY RACES FOR SUNDAY, AUGUST 3 1208 METERS My BmwtM. Vice Refd, Shd and Hat Tone.
A fearsome gang of thugs carries out audacious robberies and thefts, some of them displaying badges identical to those worn by the polkü.
The study is very terrible jraviM the thieves, by pretending to be policemen, were trying to be suspected of some connivance with the police institution.
About a year ago, about a little more or less, members of the Detective in conjunction with the Police were instructed to investigate and bring to light a spate of audacious robberies and terrible robberies, which, like an epidemic, as is happening again now, were plaguing this city, mainly in its suburbs. 1 After days of hard and tiring investigations, not only by law enforcement officers but also by one of our reporters, it became known that a gang composed of many individuals, with the most picturesque aliases of the underworld, including some youngsters in the process of initiation in the art of Caco, was swarming around these neighborhoods, making everyone happy with their misdeeds. Another reporter, in his research, came to know that the members of the terrible gang met in different places in the slums, where they planned the audacious robberies that were carried out, many of them in the middle of the day, as follows: The members of the gang watched the arrival of trains and steamers, and when they were convinced that any passenger was a stranger, a stranger, they would wait for a propitious moment to form a brawl on him, and then under pretext that some one of them was politic *they would arrest him, releasing him again ' then by cughurier esti'se involved in alleged prosecutions. The public voice said that those arrested were lottery ticket or drink sellers, who jumped to the ground in the past, and were stripped of large sums of money they had on them as the proceeds of their work.... And it goes without saying that the robbery remained in the most absolute impunity, because the interested parties were not going to expose themselves to greater risks, since their conscience was not very clean that we say. | These facts have been proven ad nauseam, if one remembers the robbery of which an officer of a Cuban ship was the victim while he was going ashore near the docks of the Federal Government. On that occasion the sailor was robbed and, if we remember correctly, was the victim of the corresponding aggression by a presumed policeman who was part of the robbery gang. Now, as it seems, the terrible gang has returned to work and we are told that there are not a few robberies that have been occurring, and which do not tend to happen because the most important ones are carried out against liquor or lottery ticket dealers at times when they are in operation. | The Trucks have not been robbed, and their PRECIOUS CARGO stolen by the dreaded gang. -The fact that the details of this matter are truly serious, revealing something that we are reluctant to believe, is that the same plates have been seen among these criminals.
ahMa-sKs-e" quality of octe eigarriF.jBo nwnca has never been eambiat 4tia nor is eambiavi. The eaf .Ea solaceful age has made 1Rrá cigarette the most po* I SlMar of the. monde.
The Chief Executive of the island has addressed an official d d ios members of his
The Chief Executive has addressed an official letter to the members of his Cabinet urging them to introduce all kinds of economies in their respective departments - If there are employees needed - and no small number of them can perform the work required, those employees should be dismissed categorically, Mr. Towner says that no account should be taken of any infliMCias of any kind on the part of those employees, if their removal, he will say, is justified.
In reply, we publish a letter from the Governor to the heads of the executive departments during the year, the amount of which is reported to have been in excess of £200,000. The Governor urges that every effort be made [to economize during the present year. " , [ Here is inserted copy of letter i forwarded to < (A><< of department heads!; 1 "San Juan, P. R..... - July 30, 1924. Dear Sir: - I have been very much pleased that during the pasA)'* fi-cal year you have been able, n<5 silo to keep within your budget appropriation, sijjjue tartjbue you have also been able to enter into the" a substantial amount which you have economized due to the and economic ad-' It will not be necessary urjjjjir that during the present fiscal year you' will make every jíbsible effort to economize in the regime of your department. I suggest that you have a conference with each of the chief negotiating officers, and. that you examine with them carefully the existing conditions and the possibility of making still greater reductions in expenditures during the coming year, I trust that all of them may come to understand that it is the policy of the ad- ! ■ I 1 - tics to those used by the Police. This is of supreme importance and should be investigated with great earnestness, for it is unjustifiable that this fortuitous circumstance, there is no doubt, should be exploited by these vulgar jumpers in the sense that they should be supposed to have the slightest connivance with any member of the meritorious institution, for it works the demerit of the latter, which has given so much evidence of loyalty and honesty at all times of its existence. It is to be hoped that the Chief of Detective McManus will already carry out gertibnes tending to surprise such subjects, since we understand that these reports have reached him through different persons. It is regrettable that the Police should be taken for such misdeeds, and it is even more regrettable that those in charge of defending it and safeguarding its prestige should not act in the manner that the circumstances require. For our part, we will be ready to defend it, and to pay homage to justice and truth, whatever they may be.
| We will be ready to defend it, and to pay obeisance to justice and truth whatever these may be. . If savings can be made in any way, prompt action should be taken to effect them. If there are employees who are not needed, and fewer of them can perform the required duties, those who are unnecessary should be laid off. I In dismissing those who are no longer needed, no personal or political influence should be considered. Those whose services are least efficient and whose classification as an employee is the lowest should be laid off, if reductions are justified, no matter to what party they belong or by whom they have been recommended. The business of government is the bad big business of the Island, and we must turn it, if possible, into m<>- I dolo of economy and efficiency and not j into an object of reproach. The President j DISTINGUISHED TRAVELERS ->4bb "a* a ■ - I On the steamer "Manuel Arnús" will embark today for Spain, the respectable and highly esteemed lady doña Rita Martínez Vda. de Rivera and her charming daughters, very valuable elements i of the Puerto Rican high society, who intend to spend a long season away, visiting the most beautiful regions of the Peninsula. In the company of such highly cultured travelers also embarks the very worthy Mrs. Dolores Rivera de Gómez, wife of our dear friend and companion Mr. Luis Gómez, and a lady who, because of her outstanding personal qualities, enjoys well-deserved sympathy in our high social circles. | The loving companion of our good friend and companion Don Luis Gómez. The loving companion of ! our good friend will also be absent for some months, attending to the [ recovery of her health. [We wish the dearest of our dear friends a trip full of pleasant impressions. j TEATRO 3 BANDERAS Company Bruno & Vázquez, Inc. Today Saturday, August 2, 1924 Second performance of AMPARITO GUILLOT and the colossal tape PAPA1TO by JACKIE COOGAN (seniors 40 cts. Prices: Platea( (child; 25 cts. (seniors 25 cts. Balcony ( (children 15 cts. Tomorrow Sunday grandiose MATINEE at 3:00 P. M. AMPARITO GUILLOT and the super tape "It's My Man" by Rodolph Valentino and Dorothy Dalton. Prices 25 and 15 cts. SUNDAY EVENING | at 8:00 P. M. MAPARITO GUILLOT and the "The Mermaid of Brohdway" by Dorothy Revier. i (seniors 40 cts. Price¿< Platea( ) (children 25 cts. v (seniors 25 cts. (children 15 cts.
The United States is leading the United States to the highest degree of economic management of public affairs. We must do so that Puerto Rico will follow step by step the progress of the nation of which it is a part. As we have greater needs to fill in order to place ourselves on an equal footing with other parts of the Nation, we must make even greater efforts to see that every dollar has a beneficial result in our progress and development. I know that you share this purpose, and that you will do all in your power to make your record during the coming year surpass the admirable and creditable record which you have had during the past year. With the highest appreciation and consideration, I remain with you, Sincerely yours). H. M. TOWNER, Governor.'' ZANNI ARRIVES IN BADGAD LONDONj'-.glUrte ' Press). -The latest news received in this capital indicates that Zanni, the Argentine aviator who is flying around the world in an airplane, has unexpectedly arrived in Badgad, where he has been cordially received. 1 ON A RECREATIONAL TRIP On his way to Spain and other countries in Europe, the very worthy gentleman and prominent businessman Mr. Vicente Usera, accompanied by his * very distinguished wife, his son, the very cultured young Julio, and his kind and beautiful daughters Dolores and María ! Usera Santiago, who, by their high social merits, have conquered a place of honor and sympathy in the aristocratic society of Ponce. We wish the esteemed travelers the most fortunate impressions in their recreational excursion. APPOINTMENT By agreement of the Board of Directors of the SOCIEDAD ESPAÑOLA DE AUXILIO MUTUO y BENEFICENCIA DE PUERTO RICO, Dr. José Vicente, whose professional competence is a solid guarantee for the members of said patriotic and meritorious Society, was appointed Dental Surgeon of this Institution. The medical attention, for the Members, will be from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. on working days in the private clinic of Dr. Vicente, located at Calle de San Justo No. 33, altos de "El Louvre". In case of emergency, members will be attended at any time. Advt,
YOU WANT... read our ad on the 5th page SEARCH Gonzalez Padia Go. Inc. TAKE ADVANTAGE By the steamer Reina Ma- ; ría Cristina arrived today re- [ cibimos Spanish potatoes. Order soon. Call teMfeno 284 CASA9NOVA8 A CO.
a E£ tomorrow
Lis ais nteresartes nipus of alanuáón, deputes, silks, grafios and orataras of grai actuality aapaiea so varied and enao .text "■ One of the most interesting issues of our Sunday edition, undoubtedly tomorrow's, TTna choice selection of articles by the most notable foreign writers, of comic pages, and extraordinary adventures, fashion and sport sections, and sensational stories illustrated with i colored engravings, make up its vaIriadísjno and suggestive text. ! Naturally, its first few pages are occupied by the most interesting and interesting text. The first pages are naturally filled with the most complete information on the latest local events. It then offers our many readers very interesting articles by our distinguished contributors. Frank Crane, whose daily editorials have been so well received; and Sinunonds, who studies in detail the situation in Europe and the possible results of the London Conference. Also published is a sensational interview with the great American Hispanic writer J. M. Vargas Vila, who, in his declarations, mercilessly attacks Gomez Carrillo and Santos Chocano; an interesting study on the Presidents of the United States who took part in the Civil War; another on the par- sows HdM of Davis, Democratic candidate for President. * For boxing lovers we offer the most authoritative commentaries on the Firpo-Wilft fight; - and various and well-nourished pages on sports, automobile racing, etc. "Educando a Papá", and the four color comic pages continue to complete the very entertaining text of tomorrow's EL MUNDO, which is beautifully rounded off by the interesting Revista. The Revista Universal contains, on its front page, a beautiful portrait of a great New York beauty, in full color; a sports page; a sensational account of the adventure of a famous Austrian painter in New York; an interesting story of the discovery of famous masterpieces by Velázquez in the tropical forests of Honduras; the continuation of the beautiful story of "The Avenging Girl of Paris", and finally a page of humorous drawings in color, due to the brilliant pen of the great caricature of the great cartoonist, "La Muchacha Vengadora de París", and finally, a page of humorous drawings in color, due to the brilliant pen of the great caricaturist, "La Muchacha Vengadora de París".The great American caricaturist Margarita slhloemann's brilliant pen. , --T-. i PARIS, August, 1. (French Cable). In view of the importance of the amnesty bill recently passed by the House, the Senate has made a thorough study of it, and has agreed, after intense discussion, that the said bill shall not come into force until January 1, 1925. PURELY REGIONAL ALCOHOLATE CEREIPINA is a product without rival and in Puerto Rico the first one, this is not that I want it that all the world thinks so. Amen. Advt.
--■■■■xv COMPANY BREXO & VAgQÜEZ, INC. IjQ TODAY SATURDAY, AUGUST 2 TODAY ■ P. GELABERT PRESENTS e! superb drama, entitled:- - - - - TEMPTATION (TEMPTATION) , with the stars: EVA NOVAK ¥ BRYANT WASHBURN PRICES: 36 and 25 25 and 15 MATINAL SUNDAY, AUGUST 3(>NIGHTB " The powerful drama, entitled:- * THE GREEN TEMPTATION (THE GREEN TEMPTATION) t will be shown with' stars BETTY COMPSON and THEODORfe KOSLOFP Prices:- 25 and 15 - ■ 15 and 10.