EL.HUNNDO
1A PAGES. 3 CTS. I óiclnu: "Port Llco III Hurtrado" B14j. g M. 1888. - Box 346.
|l n PAGS. 3 CTS. | * * ■' Semester - .- - - "♦ -JO I I I A Afio - - - - I7.M !
MORNING JOURNAL
ARO VI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
BabUafcad and AlxtríbvUd under pwal" (No. Ml) satberisefc *7 tie Art of October S, 1817, in tie a* the Poet of Son Juan, Porto Bieo, By order of the President, A. S. Burioeon, Poetmaster General. Entered - as second elaea matter, febraary 81, 181", at the Poet Office at San Juan, Parto Mico, (United States of America') andar the Act of march 3, 1ST"
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 6, 1924. I
NUMBER 1807.
The Bureau of Insular Affairs refuses to intervene in the elections lately held on our island.
The Chairman of the Insular Affairs Committee in Congress, fairfield, refuses to receive the protesting committee, which intended to present evidence before said Committee, that the elections should be annulled
Senator Iglesias was called upon to receive the refusal.-What will be the attitude of the coalitionists? The country closely follows the movements of both political factions in our island; on one side, the Alliance, on the other, the Coalition, and both holding diametrically opposed ideas, and employing completely different procedures. The Alliance relies on its own triumph to justify the triumph of its ideals, and to request the American Congress to extend to our people the right to elect their own governor. On the other hand, the Coalition is relying on the results of the elections to ask that they be annulled as illegal, and to that effect, a protest commission left for the North to present its case before the American Congress. Also the day before yesterday, the advance of another commission went out, which is going to ask for the elective governor. A cablegram that we received yesterday, brings the news, that the first ones have failed in their efforts, to ask for the impugnation of the elections held in our island. Here is the faithful text of the sensational dispatch that we received yesterday in this editorial office: THE 'IGLESIAS' DEALS FAIL WASHINGTON, Die. 5. (United Press). Special dispatch to " Eb MUNDO." -Senator Santiago Iglesias, Socialist leader and member of the protest committee, appeared before Congressman Fairfield, Chairman of the Committee on Insular Affairs of the U.S. Congress, requesting permission to appear before that Committee and present evidence to prove that the elections lately held in Puerto Rico were not legal and that all sorts of irregularities were committed. Congressman Fairfield, who is one of the most influential figures in national politics, after hearing Senator Iglesias, told him flatly that in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee on Insular Affairs, it was impossible for him to accede to his wishes to grant him a hearing and that he would not be able to give his committee members, Mr. Coll i and Mr. Dones Padró, the opportunity to present evidence to prove that the elections recently held in Puerto Rico were not legal and that all sorts of irregularities were committed. -Fairfield, at the same time, expressed his doubts that the committee of which he is chairman, had such powers in regard to Puerto Rico, recommending at the same time that Senator Iglesias appear before the courts of justice of the island, and present the evidence in his possession, since it is the Puerto Rican courts that are called upon to hear the matter. WHAT WILL BE THE ACTITUDE ADOPTED BY THE COALITIONISTS? So much for the text of the cablegram we received yesterday, which will undoubtedly cause a great impression on our island, where the public closely follows political events. What will be the attitude of the coalitionists now? Will they decide to appear before our courts of justice, as Mr. Fairfield advised them? We will know in due course.
To the trade and our Related Parties We inform you that for any matter related to our business we have provisionally established our office in the high fie "La Villa de Madrid**, Salvador Eran 51, P.O. Box 1411, Telephone 166. PORTO RICO PAPER A SUPPLY COMPANY, INC. Advt. . ,, --- / GARAGE I i BRANDI ; VILLA ST. - PONCE |
rOtiL-w " ,T 'S . I TOASTED
The quality of this cigarette has never been changed nor will it be changed. Bolamente quality has made **♦**■ cirarrillo the most popular in the world.
1,000 DIFFERENT GIFTS ' One For Every Dollar You Invest. \ - Come Today for Yours - PHARMACY c a pella -(Salvador Brau 46:- . <■■■ ■ ■ ■■ , amoiiramDmw It is hereby made public that the Insular Riding Commission, will hold a public hearing on Sunday, December 7, 1924, at 9 o'clock in the morning at the French Hotel, Ponce, to discuss the charts or classification of horses proposed by the Manager of the Ponce Racetrack Inc. All horse owners and persons interested in the sport should attend this event to inform and exchange views on this important matter. San Juan, Puerto Rico, December 4, 1924. J. PERA REYES ' Secretary-Auditor
The Insular Government sends a study commission to Santo Domingo which leaves next Monday Puerto Rico is preparing to conquer the Dominican Rep.
A study commission will leave on Monday from this city for Santo Domingo with the purpose of carrying out various scientific and social activities in that country, and then dedicate the results of its investigations to the general interest of the island. According to what we learned yesterday, among those who will embark is the Deputy Chief of the Labor Bureau, Mr. Ramon Lebron, who is going to the Dominican Republic in order to officially deal with the President of the Republic on the matter of a Puerto Rican emigration to that Antille. Mr. Lebron is going on behalf of the Department of Agriculture and Labor, that is to say, in representation of our Government, to see if it is possible to reach an understanding on -1 announced exodus, or "colonization", as he has called it. Mr. W. P. Kramer, Chief of the Forestry Division of Puerto Rico, is another of the subjects that embarks, with the purpose of making a study on the Dominican forests, with the purpose of bringing new species to our flora. Mr. Francisco Sein Jr., from the Experimental Station, also accompanies the previous ones. The purpose of his trip is to make a complete study on the insects of that country and to bring back a complete collection ; uBo "fle the above mentioned Organization. Don Mario Brau Zuzuarregui, the Director of the Museum of Puerto Rico, is also part of the expedition. Don Mario is going to deal with the Dominican birds and reptiles, in order to form a good collection of these aminals to increase the specimens already in the Museum... Don Mario píen-
Don Mario will need to be armed with spear and shield in case his presence should cause any trouble with the above-mentioned irrationalists. The aforementioned travelers will be joined by another small expedition of "amateurs" headed by Dr. A. Martinez Alvarez, who is going to Santo Domingo with the purpose of exploring the highest peaks of the island. The Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, Hon. Carlos E. Chardon, intended to join the travelers, but, of late, has i desisted from his intentions on the ground that he wishes to be present at the general meeting of the farmers, which will soon take place in San Juan, and at which, according to reports, sensational matters will be discussed in connection with the ■ agricultural legislation which those intend to present in the next LegisI lature. For these . reasons, it will not be possible for Mr. Chardon to embark on Monday in company with the ex1 peditioners. PRESIDENT COOLIDGE MAKES DEMONSTRATIONS CHICAGO, Die. (United Press.)-President Ooolldge, attending a luncheon given by the Commercial Club of this city, delivered a masterly speech, stating that cooperation was essential to the welfare and progress of civilized mankind. He added that certain impulses should be avoided, tending to give aid to those who ask for it, because only those who help themselves deserve to be helped. He concluded by saying that when the nations of the world decided to cooperate with one another, the prosperity and peace of the universe would be assured.
The superb Sunday Edition published tomorrow in "El Mundo".
Sensational political information -A masterly work by Lloyd George. -The sovereignty of Cuba and the Platt Amendment, a brilliant stadium by Ledo González Lamas. González Lamas - A literary article by Sergio Cuevas Zequeira The Sunday edition published tomorrow by EL MUNDO is destined to eclipse the previous editions, for the superb local and foreign information, for the brilliant articles of collaboration with which its pages are honored, for the magnificent comic section, and for many other works that we will announce to our readers in this review. The front page is full of local information of the most current news, and we give more color to the political note, which is the topic of the day, the talk of squares and corridors. Our news tomorrow is truly sensational. The former head of the British government, our illustrious collaborator, Hon. David Lloyd George, this week makes a brilliant study of the situation in Egypt, proving ad nauseam that Great Britain, for numerous reasons, cannot withdraw its troops from! Do you know that Wteo*'tkMsIhlhjfe eh "fiK i val of Pompeii has been discovered, and that it was hidden from the eyes of mankind for centuries and centuries, being preserved in perfect condition? Our page of adventures that we publish tomorrow, deals with this matter, of so much interest for the lovers of the new, of the last word in discoveries; The castizo Spanish writer, don El-| pidió de Mier, publishes this week a very interesting work, which he titles: * .'Continued on page 2)
W Novelties... r We have just received an infinity of pretty, fine and ■ appropriate objects for the little presents of ; Christmas and New Year : All our departments are replete with articles , wenMafa. nUeV0S com P ra d° s expressly for this season. -Many different to choose from: -/ i Precious leather and beaded Lady Purses and Bags. J Very nice Vanities - Fine Handkerchief Boxes. Fine stockings in the latest fashionable colors. Beads and Pearls Necklaces - We have real Preciosities. Fans - Screens - Umbrellas - Bracelets - Combs : Fine Perfumes - Silks for Suits - New Hats. - and Many Other Novelties - DO YOUR SHOPPING IN TIME - EVERYTHING NEW, BEAUTIFUL AND CHEAP | i'...: - # I'iQonzalez Cpadin Co, Inc --X IN FRONT OF PRIUCIPAL PLAZA.
For different towns on the Island " we need respons- g Skill agents skilled in the con- faction of costumes and all kinds**? of hand work. If you are inexperienced do not so- 5 bid. Morris E Storyk ¡ Isabel 2nd No. 5 -- Marina, g San Juan, P. R:
Victory Garden TOMORROW SUNDAY El Rubicundo Febo -BY-WESLEY BARRY (the freckled one).
SOLARES SPECIAL PRICES during Easter and New Year. Henry W. Dooley 9 Tapia St. Tel. 1295 Santurco 1
BREAKING NEWS
Dock workers walked off the job at 7 o'clock last night, starting a protest movement, because the companies presently holding steamers in port, refuse to pay them the wages they are demanding
An anonymous call, led us last night to the docks of this capital. The EL MUNDO sympathizer who telephoned us to give us the news indicated that the workers at Pier No. 1 had given up work. Immediately, one of our editors went to the docks, and was able to verify that the movement was even more serious than we had been told at the beginning. It was not the workers on pier No. 1 alone, but practically all the workers on the docks, who had left work at seven o'clock last night. | The workers were gathered around the Federal Building, in front of Pier No. 1, in lively groups, discussing the attitude they had just adopted. WHAT THE WORKERS TELL US. * We heard everything from the lips of the workers, who hurried to tell us what had happened. -You see," said one who expressed himself in very correct terms, "we have initiated this protest movement, because we have received the most complete and varied assortment of silk and cotton fabrics. - Cashmere suits and yarn suits for men and children, as well as fine footwear for women, and also the very reputable and colorful "London" shoe for men. La Cagueña ¡ Stop 16% Santurce '
We went to the companies to demand that we be paid our old salaries, given the high cost of living, and our request was not granted, as we were told that the current salaries we enjoyed were reasonable, and that the increase we were asking for was impossible. At present we are being paid 25 cents an hour during the day and 37 cents an hour at night. "We cannot live on that, all necessaries have gone up, and we wish to be paid our old wages, as stipulated, that is, 35 cents during the day hours, 52 1|2 cents during the night hours, and after o'clock, at $1.12, which we were earning before. 1 "Besides, there are at present three companies, the Bed D. Line. The Bal. timore Line, and the Villar, which pa- ■ earn us those wages, whenever their .ships come in to unload at the port. I "But on the other hand, the New York A Porto Rico (Steamshin Co., the Bull In- * salar* nir* nir* gan to pay us that price. And since we believe that an injustice is being done, we got up from work, today, at seven o'clock at night, all of us, as one pump, and (Continued on page 6*) -:TOMORROW. 6*) -:TOMORROW SUNDAY:- Morning Only CLAIRE WINDSOR, HOBART BOSWORTH, ELEANOR BOARDMAN, STUART HOLMES and ten more stars in The Strangers' Banquet Evening Only Mary PHILBIN, Pat O'MALLEY -IN- The Path of Innocence