B'-> Pü B VI B flHtiv rKémF A " A
|ñS~ÍAffi.3 CTS. ftg V" ===- JA/ STS'rrrftS i**" - - - -
nn PAGS.3CTS. // MM -1SM--
OIÁItlO DE LA M>cto, y VKjí ■ ' V
SUNDAYS
ASO VI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
t -" >Mt orno, "t | S** Jf. **.*!X ""- ai Lcrí? , f" ■"*"< " " second class naMsc, I tsteemy M, mo, es m, Pm Ortss rt T> red, U. det st mrch 0, 1070 |
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 23, 1924
NUMBER 1545
hr confidences that have been gathered in various sugar districts of the island, the ground seems to be prepared for a general strike when an order is given for the milling of the sugar cane.
ww this, hidden milling takes shape <■ " J the workers are sotidarizan, the zafra can suy* \ /nr serious quebrantos.
. / You have reached us news, "not do aor derlas consider them of some gráTOdZd, about that existon domantes scattered throughout the sugar districts of the island, which have instrpeeionós of maintaining the dninos of Jos workers in good dlspoaMta gm" "ns repuesta huelga' quo so looming, and which will make effective, according to the version, as soon as it is considered opportune potqzienes cocespande. According to reports, the authorities com potentes have had confidences in that sense, ¿..hasta so les ¿a informed where are the most advanced nuclei of the alleged general movement. So assures that the arrangements made THE GAMES OF YESTERDAY ALLENTOWN VS. <S. J. ATHLETICS , Two close fights were fought yesterday on our athletic field between the formidable "Allentown" and "Athletics" nines. The morning game was suspended in the ninth inning when the score was 5-5. Huntley pitched for the Rubios; De Graff and. De Graff and Gámfe pitched for the -tifias. Knessel and Hernandez pitched for Hogar. The afternoon game was even more AUaUrwn:-. Papsin and St. John 'Hernandez and GáiSeoroz A. M. I 020 201 000-5 000 003 200-5 B P. M. O i B Allentown r 100 130 000 2-7 ||t Athletics 100 200 200 1-6 ON Monday we will publish detailed;5>'mind both games, r; t EDDIE COLLINS. I rent "¿from <!- first of April my Waejdonolii on the road from San ÍJozn to Guaynabo. 1 > Will inform: C. Coll Cuchí, # Alien 82, San Juan. Bsealquila own for fa¡¡í "a, in the "Tobacco Palace". in the same building. W-íg 1 - oBaízoncillos-camisetas M new Military mosquito nets limo ¡os. A i&rand lots of Merchandise. TOA PRICE 1W * BW V1SCASILL AS A 87 Box 1344 ílB Sw" Juan, P. R.
The strike outbreaks registered up to the present between employers and workers will become a dead letter when the agreed time comes, unless circumstances dictate otherwise. All the outbreaks of strikes recorded in the country have apparently been settled, but, according to our in- * Takers, the truth is that they are only awaiting the propitious moment to go on strike . T.he possibility or not of a general strike, we are told, is intimately connected with the political problem which today arises in Washington, depending on the advantages or disadvantages which this situation may bring to a certain element, whether or not a strike movement is declared throughout the country. - In order to keep latent in the minds of the workers the true spirit of what is intended, assemblies are frequently held, and in the ENTRELINEAS of those officially charged with this propaganda a special intention of PROPHECY which is about to be fulfilled. In case these lines that we have taken from the bosom of reality, in the same sugar regions, could be useful for something, in good time they are written, since if the plan we have denounced is true, the damages that our sugar industry will suffer will be serious. n.USTBADO'' OF THIS WEEK On the occasion of yesterday being a holiday, the popular magazine "Puerto Rico Ilustrado'' will see "public light today; and as always it is full of amenity and interest. In its graphic part appear: the gracious San Juan Carnival Queen, Miss Marquez; arrival of tourists to the port of San Juan; posthumous honors to Woodrow Wilson; graphic actualities of the week; etc. In the literary part works in pro sa and verse by the well-known literati Pinochet, Nicolás Rivas, Enrique La. febre, Primitivo Herrera, J. M. Toro Nazario, J. Rodríguez Pastor, José 8. Alegría, Valdejully Rodríguez, A., Ramírez Silva, González García, José Juan Tablada, A.' González Blanco and José Yumet Méndez.
ALPUBUCO NOTICE We hereby have special pleasure in informing the public that we have obtained the exclusive rights to exMbiddn in Santuree of the famous and extraordinary movie filmed by Harold XdbH entitled: "EL DOOTOB JACK*' In the interest of all we also inform that "El Doctor Jack" is the most famous of this eren actorcóodco for whose exclusive exhibition in his theaters of Santurce Olimpo, Vio tory Garden, Dnpodal and Puerto Rico. .Ja CompaSía theatrical has paid the fabulous sum of MM. Advt
BKte a A ~ SERVICE PFRMANFMTF I PaaAKAV*E.OARAOE - OASOUNA -LAVADOS I VILLA - PONCE I Bp ~ >■ ■ ■■■■/ i "PARA BAILÉ" > r m f i . EMIM K Callll MnBllSUMI I "■ 'üV . - o " □ <fc*7 end* 0 BtíL- -- ' í- - '1M
DETAILS OF THE KPANTOSOUS CRIME COMMITTED IN THE BARRIADA CEPEROEpE RIO PIEDRAS LAST WEDNESDAY.
(Juanita, twelve to thirteen years old, is kidnapped and taken to the cane field where, after the infamous purposes of the kidnappers were carried out, she was kidnapped by Carlos Arocho, co-author and conpllcs in the horrific crime. A brutal and shocking crime to the inconceivable has deeply moved the neighborhood of Rio Piedras, j provoking the civilized people before the atrocious spectacle of the savage act. The event occurred in Barrio Capero, on the road to Rio Piedras, Trujillo Alto. \ Immediately after learning of the dreadful crime, one of our reporters went to the Oepeto neighborhood, where the incident occurred, and managed to meet with the father and relatives of the victim. The parents of the girl, sacrificed in the name of a brutal instinct, are Claudina Morales, and RaSE MEETING ON MONDAY The President of the Executive Committee, Mr. Domenech, has summoned for an important meeting the other members, Mr. Morales, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran, Mr. Domenech, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran, Mr. Moran and Mr. Moran. Morales, O. Moran, B. O. Clark, M. B. Lee, A 8, Monendez, H. P. Besosa, B. 8. Jimenez and JL P. Holmes at the Chamber of Commerce rooms, next Monday at 9 p. m. sharp on the occasion of the arrival in San Juan of 5 ships of the squadron, according to letter from Admiral Coontz to Sefior Domenech. We understand that the mayors of Ponce and Mayagliez and the presidents of the Chambers of Commerce of both towns are also organizing festivities on the same occasion. Ponce will be visited by 5 ships and three in Mayagliez. ESCMBB MACHINES :- Due to having to extend our business in repairs of typewriters, calculating machines, phonographs, etc. we have moved to Alien 8t. No. 11, next door do Sobrinos do Bzqnierdo. Advt. VIL LA MIL In the Marina sells the famous "FEDERAL" rubbers. They are the best and the cheapest" PrudbeMs and not wart others.
fael RoiriguHMtiHyz, ía Caguas. They have long ! resided in the da iixo Pie- ' dras, and are economic position, properties in El Sr. It is not for Ce: rihir the show ■"■ 1 Automobiles NOTICE TO OWNERS Owners of automobiles and' other motor vehicles are hereby warned of the duty imposed by law to report to the offices of the Island Collectors of Internal Revenue and the San Juan Assessors, "Intendencia" building, to declare their respective vehicles for 1924-25 tax purposes on or after January 15, within a period not to exceed March 15 next. Those who voluntarily fail to do so after publication of this notice shall be denounced for "misdemeanor" and shall incur the maximum fine of one hundred (1100.00) dollars as prescribed in Section 299 of the Political Code. \ The transfer in sale of such automobiles and other motor vehicles, carried out after January 15, does not release the current owner thereof on that date, from the payment of the tax that corresponds to them for the entire fiscal year, nor does it relieve him/her of the duty to declare it if he/she had done so before. * The Department has requested and obtained the cooperation of the Island Police Department so that this appraisal work may be carried out in a brief and efficient manner, so that all automobiles may be declared and appraised at the end of the aforementioned term. San Juan, Puerto Rico, February 19, 1924. JUAN G. GALLARDO, Acting Treasurer of Puerto Rica Approved: > - I Acting Treasurer.
The heart-rending home offered by the Rodriguez family, stricken by the most horrible of misfortunes. MISSING . . . attack, gave us the first reports of the event, the details of which clouded everyone's feelings of magnanimity for the guilty and the unanimous feeling that the hanging should be the just payment for the criminals. On Wednesday at noon, as usual, the nifia Guillermina Rodriguez, 12 or 13 years old, arrived home from her school, where she was attending the
DANCE at the Parque Convalescencia in Río Piedras TODAY SATURDAY night KERMESSE on Sunday from 10 A. M. FOR SALE: Sideboards and glass cabinets and 1 Recorder "EL RUBI" Pedro Orpi. If you are bitten by the fly use the "Sanagono" Definitive Injection. With only one bottle you will be on the other side. Distributors: R. JULIA & Co. Advt. BOÍÍÍVAR PAGAN . ATTORNEY AND NOTARY Short Insular and Federal Office: Alien Street, in front of Gonzalez Padin. P. O. Box 883. Telephone: 1475 SAN JUAN, P. R.
®2 _ /- 1 A -- U*J a J -2-- cal AnMMnrana Kinrarana --- xz".a raauva ivcuiu anzui aiaua "wÁQinKir , Tí\hP> marks OCp w WAotiiYGiIwV The most Bha% Fus and Resistant that nport ■ - tito cír\ - ; - .- - - $AS.<Jv ' i - -== Saco Ha Tftn lihfam en BflhREH n ue rabeen.
The n.fia Morales, 12 to 13 years old, sacrificed for the sake of a brutal and savage instinct.
She was in the fifth grade. After lunch, she left again for her dazas. The road she had to travel daily, if not long in fact, constituted in certain places a serious danger for a girl of her age, exposing her to the effective, horrendous ZMMMMoolMtirtwMWM. At four o'clock in the afternoon, the time when the nifia was supposed to be on her way home, she did not arrive. Some time passed, and the uneasiness began to leave in- : trever in the nifia's home a possible misfortune. The father, Mr. Rodriguez Martinez, went to school with the idea that his daughter was punished, and was surprised to hear from the teacher's lips that Guillermina had not attended class in the afternoon, where, as we have said, she had left after lunch. From that moment on there was no peace in the house of the missing girl, fearing that something horrible had happened to her. Her whereabouts were carefully investigated. The father accompanied by the neighbors Julián Serrano and Segundo Ramos, touring the nearby mountains; the siblings were also accompanied by the father and his wife, and the father was accompanied by the father. Special prices for the hi¡ncai>ros. MIER & CO. Alien 59 San Juan, P. R. THE STEAMER "REINA MARIA CRISTINA" The comfortable and luxurious ship "Boina Maria Cristina", of the Spanish Transatlantic Company, will leave Cadiz on March 28th next, bound for New York, and from that port will come to San Juan on its return trip to the Peninsula. It will leave on April 19, and not on April 19, as erroneously appeared in an advertisement published in our edition of the
published in our edition of the 20th, will be dispatched for Spain, admitting cargo and passengers.
Jacinto Clemente, black, aged 24; and Caries Arocho, dark, aged 17 have been arrested as alleged perpetrators of the horrific murder ■ - Jacinto Clemente, one of the alleged perpetrators of the gruesome murder of the Cepero family.
The girl's body was found in a small area along the outside cane fields that bordered the road. Mr. Rodriguez, faced with the possibility that the girl had gone to Oaguas, where his relatives live, went immediately to that town, and every possible effort was made; all the resources that a father can use when faced with the disappearance of a daughter were put into practice. But during that afternoon and night, everything was useless. IN THE MORNING At dawn of the following day, the girl's brother, José Esterás, continued the investigations. In a wire fence at the edge of the Cepero road, he found a trail of blood; by intuition, more than anything else, he imagined a horrible bloodletting, and went into "1 (Continued on page 3a.) ::PARK::: today SATURDAY MARION DAVIES -in-"THE DREAM DB DIANA" Tomorrow - - - ■ Tkwningn FLORENCE VIDOR -in-'THE CONQUEST OF JUDITH* TOASTED' iSr The reason why the Ame- - rican Tobacco Co. sells 40,000,000 Lucky Strike daily, is due solely to its excellent quality.
DEFEND YOUR HEALTH AND YOUR MONEY Order the prescriptions and medicines you need at the ' ! BUNCO PHARMACY and you will get, GUARANTEE, QUALITY AND PRICE " . ' we import directly ■ ; We are not resellers. SAN FRANCISCO 56 PHONE 35.