THE WORLD
in PAGES. 3 CTS. I OScln*i; -Piucto AST 111 Dartraée" BMg. I O "et im - b*s tea.
|l n PAGS. 3 CTS. [I Qjygsssfta
MORNING NEWSPAPER, MORNING
MORNING,
PntoEaM ana "wnnwH "Mes permM (Be. Mi) e* 1 *" 1 vweMt a, lar,,, m aw m um Mom ef ■aa Jtaa, Berta MMe, By eréet ef the BraaHaM, AS. Poataaaatac "asnal. BaMaeé aa eeeeaé alase aattat, febmary ti, itlt. -" the Pees Oftee e" Bm Maa. Porte age. (Ttertet Matea of Murían) "Mtar the Aet ef "reh t, 1ST"
YEAR VI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 13, 1924
NUMBER 1724 I
Till when, Mr. Governor, is the country going to be witnessing spectacles
Tomorrow's "El Mando" Full of the most interesting local information and cablegraphies, of amusing chronicles, essays and articles, and of the most humorous caricatures will appear in our Sunday edition this week. The local information that we offer in our Sunday issue corresponding to this week, all on matters of rigorous actuality, and topics of the throbbing environment, is of the most complete and interesting that can be found in the ample informative and literary text of our tomorrow's issue. Also, we offer several pages where we have collected in great detail the most remarkable events of the whole world occurred in the last three days of the week. Among the literary text, very carefully chosen and selected, "imrecen juicy articles of the most notable foreign writers, including our exclusive contributors H. G. Wells and Frank Crane, the greatest writers of the century in the English-speaking peoples. Among these articles there is a clear chronicle on the Theater in Spain, by Don Jose Castellon; an editorial by Dr. Crane; another literary essay on the return to the practice of his profession of law of former President Millerand; a wise dissertation by Wells on the antagonism between the sexes, and the growing feminist tendencies; and finally, a beautifully illustrated page dedicated to mothers, where the advisability of holding annual beauty contests among the mothers of America, and the luminous results of this practice, are discussed by an American scholar. WEit Irfs dedfrtWfaV ft we published numerous articles on motoring, an interesting and well thought out Equestrian chronicle by Orot, and another one on bal basis by Gerrish Jr. We also published a pleasant interview of our Editor Augusto Pietri with Carmelita Martinez Acosta. Needless to say that one of our central pages is dedicated to one of the most humorous episodes of the transcendental and eventful life of Ramona and Pancho in the series "Educando a Papú'' : and that in four more pages, in full color, appear the antics of Tomás Sawyer and Hugo Finn ; and the humorous adventures of "hi familia Del Lío". Orejotas. and Tinterillo and Pocoseso. To complete this magnificent text, now comes the very interesting Revista Universal, a supplement to our Sunday edition. On its cover is a humorous drawing by the notable artist Herb-Roth on the delights of an American beach in these hot days. I.e signe an extensive and sentimental article entitled "Ix>s poor rich beg for love"; another, of great historical value by Ernest Brennecke, in which, under the title "Science Finds Curious Proofs of having been located in Prussia the Earthly Paradise'', are exposed the
The "Science of the Law," under the title, "Has the rule of law passed away?
There are certain issues that the pen of the prudent journalist is reluctant to write about, because politics-despite all its problems-can be carried out with greatness and develop, even in the most difficult and exalted stages of its development, with relative, decent judgment.... But, the force of the environment forces, and thus the partisan rampage does not stop before any consideration to carry out reprehensible acts, at odds with every principle of true democracy, it is logical to suppose that we do not support any longer the existence of a horrible state of things that should not last, and that we believe it is our duty to point out in these columns, so that the Insular Government will stop its eyes, in contemplation of the same, and give a definitive cut to the situation to end in one way or another with such an unedifying spectacle that we are witnessing in the country. In drawing these lines, we will abstracciótn of all sectarian ideas and party conveniences, subjecting ourselves to isolate facts, that if they continue to occur will work our discredit and print greater consistency to the idea propagated by the enemies Island so that we are not recognized spectra capacity for the pious government. The real things are happening in Ponce, Fajar- ' do and Aguirre. Fajar- ' do and AguadUla are of a shade of excessive gfbvity .... As they are already entering into anarchic manifestations, due to the relaxation of the principle of authority, bringing with it the lamentable scandals of which we have given a detailed account in recent days. The situation, therefore, could not be more disastrous. There have been officials removed from office by force of law. This one has gone to the corresponding authority in search j of supposed amparo, and when it does not support him in his pretensions, he ignores the validity of this attitude, and insists on remaining in his position, provoking strong uproar with his substitute, as if he had had some possessory file on the position in dispute. In Ponce and Fajardo the scenes have been "even more pathetic", as our readers will recall. What has been referred to, then, is enough for us to realize the reigning chaotic state of the island. We do not want, nor should we try to find out whose side is right in these cases. It is of little interest from the point of view of the administrative conveniences of the municipalities affected by the anarchy impe-.
T" Sgag "T MARJORIE DAW and FORREST STANLEY IN EL ORGULLO DE PALOMAR (The Pride of Palomar)
WELLS (Arecibo) Loe interested in ARTESIAN WELLS, juris* diction of Arecibo may avail themselves for a reasonable price, of the use of a machine that is> tating WELLS for the Municipality of Arecibo Address to:- L. ANTON " ANTI, PONCE, P. R.
The important thing is that the only victim of the attack was the mayor of Arecibo. The important thing is that the only and true victim of all these fecho1 rias to which the rampant politicking is given is, as usual, the society, the peaceful and one-armed people. The taxpayers of these municipalities, who have too much with the difficult situation that the businesses tvonunua in the pagui" a, Tribute postumous to doña Ana María Hernández de Real The unexpected and painful death of doña Ana María Hernández de Real, the deep feeling of sorrow that caused in our society her eternal disappearance, the inconsolable pain that leaves in the heart of her husband, parents and brothers; all the immense feeling of sorrow that her death has produced in San Juan, took vivid expression in the beautiful posthumous tribute offered to her memory on the day of the burial of her mortal remains. Countless wreaths and bouquets of natural flowers covered the coffin of the unfortunate lady, and numerous ''BstíK colons? and bouquets* all with heartfelt and sincere dedications, were the offering of affection and sorrow of all those who enjoyed the love and friendship of that generous, good and charitable heart. Next we publish the list of the beautiful wreaths and bouquets of natural flowers, with their dedications; I that affectionately and painfully covered the coffin of the noble lady, expressing the immense sorrow that her death has left among her loved ones: Wreaths: To my idolized Ana Maria. Your companion. Romualdo. Your parents will die with your memory in their hearts. You will never be forgotten by your siblings Pepe and Maria, We will eternally mourn your absence. Angelita, Mario and children. Impossible to forget your siblings Pedro and Raquel. Goodbye dear sister, Carmencita and Alberto. You will not be forgotten by your siblings Vicen te and Onida. Rest in peace, dear sister. I Lolita. María Asunción and Conchita. i RAMO: Teresa F. de Conde (Continued on page 4).
The enemies of the candidacy of Don Rafael Diez de Andino, are discussing with the Nationalists the advisability of pos* hilar the candidacy of Don Miguel Morales and that of some unio-.
The representative to the House, Mr. Velilla, emphatically states that he has not held any conference with Mr. Córdova Dávila and that he only held an incidental conversation with said gentleman in the office of the Attorney General of the Department of Justice, who had to send a special judge to Toa Alta to facilitate the registration of the federal party.A stone that endangers Mr. Velilla's life Late last night, we received a phone call from our particular friend, the representative to the House, Mr. Velilla, who made some statements emphatically denying certain information echoed by a Ja tarde newspaper yesterday. Here are Mr. Velilla's statements: DESMINTIENDO UNA NOTICIA "I would like you to state in your newspaper that the news that has been reported in an afternoon newspaper, to the effect that I have held a political conference with Mr. Córdova Dávila, is absolutely untrue. The truth of the facts is that I came to the office of the (Ocntlnúa "n te page 11) Treasury Department NEGOTIATION OF ARBITRATION ARBITRATION LAW Those persons interested in acquiring copies of the current Tax Law, with all the amendments introduced to date, in Spanish and English, may acquire them at any Internal Revenue Collector's Office upon payment of 25 cents for each copy. San Juan, P. R., September 13, 1924. F. FANO. Acting Treasurer of Puerto Rico " ,T 's toasted' St The quality of this cigarette has never been changed nor will it be changed. The quality alone has made this cigarette the most popular cigarette in the world. BOÁ/VAf? PAGAiV ATTORNEY AND NOTARY ! Cortes Insular and Federal Courts Office: Alien Street, in front of Gonzalez Padin. P. O. Box 883. Telephone: 1475 SAN JUAN, P. R.
SATURDAY JACKIE COOGAN in "Chiquillo Travieso" and BUSTER KEATON in "CRIMINAL PELIGROSO" SUNDAY:-- MAY I AVOY IN "Las Bohardillas de Nueva York".
Yesterday in the United States the "National Defense Day" was celebrated with great enthusiasm, with all the military organizations of the country taking part in the program.
We do not know why Puerto Rico did not celebrate this day, as all the military institutions of the United States were called upon to do so. A few days ago, we gave in one of our Sunday editions, the news that September 12, had been designated by the national authorities as "Defense Day". But perhaps some of our readers do not remember the main purpose of this holiday. For them, we must say that the national authorities, in instituting this holiday, had in mind the idea of mobilizing all the military forces of the nation, in order to know with what precision in a moment of danger, invasion, or any other cause, these forces could act. All the military organizations of the nation were to take part. ! and not only that, but also the citizens who voluntarily wished to do so, could enlist in any military corps, and serve on that day. CELEBRATION OF THE DAY OF THE DEFENSE AND the effeeto. yesterday, 12 setieni(Continued on page 15). i MR. FRANCISCO CERDEIRA, SENT A CABLEGRAMA TO PRIMO DE RIVERA, PROTESTING AGAINST THE MILITARY GOVERNMENT WHICH CURRENTLY RULES SPAIN President's Military Directory, Madrid. The noble and noble Spanish nation, witnesses today with a blushing face, the anniversary of the most shameful military position. If our ancestors, those unconquerable men who discovered, colonized and civilized half the world, were to raise their heads from their tombs and see what you have made of Spain, they would do with you what Christ did with the merchants in the temple. Francisco CERDEIRA (Spanish.) enjoy the predilection of the most prestigious sporting elements in the island. The first series of the "PierceArrow" has been almost completely sold out before arriving in the country. To the congratulations received by Mr. Pietrartcni, we add ours, which are no less enthusiastic.
GOLD MEDAL FLOUR TRICO VIEJO Constant stock B. Fernandez & tinos. Suas. MARINA, SAN JUAN P. R.
Protestant nistas
Once the candidacy of Don Rafael Diez de Andino for Mayor of the city was proclaimed by the parties in the Alliance, numerous protests began to be made by elements who did not want this candidacy and who have been fighting it for so long. The elements behind this protest movement, on the night this matter was resolved, were deeply indignant because they alleged that they had not been given any opportunity to present their views on the issue. A CONVERSATION WITH CORDOVA. They alleged that Mr. Barceló had made them vacate the meeting room where the Board of Directors was meeting, and when they expected to be called for an opportunity, they found that the matter had been resolved in favor of Diez de Andino. Speaking with Mr. Córdova Dávila, one of the most significant members of the Protestant group told him that that night they did not wish that they be allowed to speak, but that Mr. Francisco de Paula Acuña and Mr. Ednrado Giorgetti be allowed to speak in their behalf. They also told him that, in that sense, he understood that the tie was to be decided in favor of Mr. Diez de Andino, they would have accepted that decision. In that same conversation, the referred Protestant elements let Córdova Dávi'.a know that they had the intention of getting the Nationalist Party to include in its candidacy Mr. Miguel Morales as candidate for Mayor, a Unionist majority in the Municipal Assembly and Mr. José de J. Tizol for Representative to the House of Representatives. In order to do this, it would be necessary to substitute those Nationalist candidates that appear in the petitions that have been filed. Many of the parties that have registered by petition intend to make changes in their candidacies; but we understand that there is an intention to file an important appeal to prevent such a thing from being done, because according to the criteria of some, parties by petition cannot make these substitutions. 1 ' ' . Any substitution will have to be made before the twentieth day of this mos, and therefore if they were to decide to establish such a remedy they would have to do so as soon as one of those parties attempted to make a substitution. CIVIL ENGINEERS Two needed, for surveying, railroad, drainage and construction at Central Azucarera. Write to P.O. Box No. 1569, San Juan, P.R. giving detailed experience and references. Degree preferred but not necessary. Salary $125.00 and lodging expenses. Advt.
The distribution which has been made for the Repneotantes at-large de "Alianza.
It is assured that the three candidates will be victorious. Yesterday it was decided to make the distribution of the towns and districts in which the three candidates for House Representative for the Puerto Rican Alliance have voted. The division was made after great effort, since it is very difficult to predict the exact number of votes counted by the parties since these coalitions were made at the last minute without time to register the electorate. The following is the distribution that has been made: DON SOTO will be voted for by the districts of Ponce and Mayagüez and the representative districts of Sálinas and Aibonito, Barranquitas and Comerío. ! ALFONSO LASTRA CHARRIEZ, shall be voted for in all the towns of the districts of Humacao and Guayama, with the exception of the representative districts of Salinas and Guayama, and Aibonito, Barranquitas and Comerío, and shall also be voted for in the representative districts of San Juan, Piedras, Carolina and Trujilló Álto. DON MIGUEL GUERRA MON- i DRAGON, will be voted for in all the ■ towns of the districts of Aguadilla I and Arecibo and in the representative districts of Bayamón and Guaynabo I and Corozal, Naranjito, Toa Alta and i Toa Baja. As for 1A apportionment for senators, n^ - íe has not yet announced anything, definitively. ROSARIES FOR LASRA'S SOUL SUFFRAGE. HERNANDEZ DE RE-Afa. - ■ / -- . I From today, at five o'clock in the afternoon, will be prayed in the Franciscan Chapel, loi ( rosaries for the eternal suffrage of the soul of the one who in life was, the distinguished Mrs. Ana Maria Hernandez de Reai. Her parents, Hon. Don José Conrado Hernández and Doña Angelita Usera, her siblings and other relatives; as well as, her beleaguered husband, our companion, Don Roumualdo Real, beg her numerous friends to attend these pious acts, which will be celebrated during the nine days marked by the ritual. THE ' PIERCE- ARROW" CAUSE A TRUE REVOLUTION The excellent gentleman and very reputable businessman, Don Rafael M. Pietrantoni, head of one of the atas acrcaitanas firms of this square, is receiving many congratulations, with motive of the arrival of the magnificent automobiles ' ' Pierce-Arrow", that great discoveries made lately by the German scholar Von Wendriu. and then various notes on fashions and body exercises.
- THEATER TRES BANDERAS - COMPANY BRUNO & VAZQUEZ, INC TODAY SATURDAY 13 AT 8:15 P. M. -- TODAY and Tomorrow Sunday MATINEE and EVENING BONORIS SAA VEDRA with new numbers, Prices for the Matinée:- ~ w " PLATEA: Seniors-25 Children-15. BALCONY: Seniors...15 Children. ....10
THE PIERCE- ARROW SERIE 80 HAS ARRIVED DO NOT BUY ANOTHER CAR WITHOUT SEEING THIS ONE FIRST R. M. PIETRANTONI J. M. SOJO Tetuán 73 Stop 15 SAN JUAN . Santurce