THE WORLD
1 n PA¿5.3 crs7 I g Semester $4.00 ■ g One Year 17.50
n PAGS. 3 CTS. g Offices: "Puerto Blco g Illustrated' '- Bldg. [ _ Tel. 122Z. - Box "4".
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
IPubliahad and "atribatad anta permit (Ma. *01) -mftortete "" Am ux omomt ", a "lT, ea fila M tea Fon Fon Office el Ban Xncn* Porte Bico. By order ef the PrecMeat, A. 1. jHgMeon, Poetmaeter General. Bntered "a ceeond class matter, IMO, at the Peet Office at Baa Jim. Furto Meo. (United fitatee of America) wader tae det of march ". Ifitfi
SATURDAY, JANUARY 12, 1924
NUMBER 1510
YEAR VI
El Ledo. Benítez Flores, delegate of the University of Puerto Rico to the National Convention of Universities of the United States, explains the synthesis of his work.
Questions of administration, government and university pedagogy extensively treated and their application to our university wisely analyzed and discussed - Yesterday we visited in his office of 1% Salvador Brau Street in this city the illustrious Professor of Law of the University of Puerto Rico, Ledo. Benitez Flores, who in the company of the Secretary and Treasurer of the University, Mr. Griffith, attended as representative and delegate of the "unta de 'Sin dicos" to the Convention of the Boards of Control of the universities and colleges of the United States. Ledo, in spite of being ro. dea do of work, agglomerated during Bu absence in the North, received us with the kindness and courtesy proverbial in him, and extended in interesting manifestations about his work ' done at the Convention of the Boards of Governors as well as at the National Con-1 vention of Universities of j the United States. -We wanted to know, Ledo, about the outcome of your mission, we told him. "Realistically," he told us, "this question could not be condensed into such a brief infor- i nation as I could furnish you i at this" moments, that is to be, pre . cisely the report I am prepa. rating for the. Board of Trustees of the University of Puerto Rico. The matters discussed at both meetings were of such breadth and scope in the educational order that neither the time now available to you and me, nor the space which your paper surely has at its disposal, will permit me to give you in detail how much relates to your request. However, I can tell you in brief, that at the aforementioned conventions such important matters as the following were discussed: At the Board of Controllers' Convention the main purpose was to finance the economic problem of the universities. The second major question was "What universities and colleges should do in the fields of Agriculture, Religion, Journalism * and Commerce. The first of these questions, Agri culture, was admirably treated (Continued on page 9.) Today Saturday Today The company of zarzuelas BONORIS SAAVEDRA in the applauded works Picaros Celos LAS BRIBONAS Tomorrow: Matineé with the "CORSARIAS" In the Evening: MOLINOS DE VIENTO (Windmills)
In the evening:
THE INSULAR DOCK COMPANY Having agreed upon the distribution of an active dividend of six percent on the par value of each, share of stock of this Company, notice is hereby given to the stockholders that payment thereof shall be made at their offices on the first floor of Pier No. 2, as of the 20th day of the current do 9 v 11 a.m. and from 3 to 5 p.m. San Juan, P. R., January 7, 1924. Et Secretary, A; DIAZ MOR: a." """"." < I Ar ii nmiiiitl --r ■ - .T r-y -th ->; f AD A fü PERMANENT SERVICE UfMK AkJlLL GARAGE - GASOLINE - BRANDI .- E WASHES.
Complete program of the festivities to be held in honor of the illustrious visitor Mrs. Carrie Chapman Catt upon her arrival in Puerto Rico F She will be declared, in a solemnity to be held in the Municipality, an honored guest of the city of San luán THE PAN AMERICAN WOMEN'S ASSOCIATION OF PUERTO RICO invites the people of San Juan, and especially its women, to welcome the illustrious traveler Mrs. Carrie Chapman Catt. TENTATIVE PROGRAM. She will be received at the dock by the Co missionary of the Public Service, the President of the Municipal Assembly and representatives of the different local associations. From there she will go to the Municipality, where she will be declared honored guest of the city and Mr. Ramirez Santibanez will address her on behalf of the San Javan Municipal Assembly. There will be a reception at the Municipal Theater where Mon Señor Caruana will give the invocation to begin the conferences, the Hon. Emilio del Toro will greet her on behalf of Puerto Rico. She will be introduced to the public by the President of the Pan American Association. Puerto Rico Branch. Mrs. Rickchoff will let us hear the aria from Travista and a choir of girls from the Charity asylum will sing "Welcome". RIALTO CINEMA- ASSOCIATIONS DAY.-In order that Mrs. Chap man Catt may be acquainted with the activities of i Puerto Rican women in social I work all the mn-' jeres' organizations have been invited to read a cor- i to report on their work, and they have already responded by accepting many associations. The University of Puer-: to Rico will give a reception, where she, will speak. The Suffragette Social League has: asked for an evening to regale the i distinguished lady. The Feminist League. Educational League will give her reception at the Ateneo Portorriqueño; the Fraternidad Escolar at High School ; the Club Ci- ' vico de Damas will give her a luncheon at the I Hotel Condado Vanderbilt; the (Ja sino de Puerto Rico has offered its halls for a lecture and will give a re. ception-dance in her honor. A tree will be planted in the Capitol gardens, on which a bronze plaque commemorating the visit will be affixed. This plaque will be presented by Mrs. J. de Iturrondo to the President of the Association. Each re- 1 presenter of association will throw a shovelful of earth to the tree as a sign of friendship between the associations. The trowel is for Mr.! Reus. The handle will be of native cedar and will bear the inscription: ''Asociación Pan-Ameri-cana de Mujeres de Puerto Rico''. This paddle will be presented to the Museum of with the condition that it be loaned to the women's associations. BOLIVAR PAGAN ATTORNEY & NOTARY Insular Courts and Federal Court Office: Alien Street, in front of Gonzalez Padin. I P. O. Box 888. Telephone: 1475 > SAN JUAN, P. R.
Some 23 appeals from the island's courts are awaiting trial in the Boston Circuit Court.
Among them are 16 rulings of Judge Odün and 1 from the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico The Calendar of the "United States Circuit Court for the First Circuit," of which Bingham, Johnson and Morton are judges, has been received, and from that calendar it appears that there are now on appeal before said Court 16 cases decided by the Federal Court of Puerto Rico and 7 decided by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico ■ The cases indicated which are on appeal from the Federal Court are the following: 1532 Benito Zalduondo vs. Elisa Clivillé. - 1496 Osvaldo Goico et al vs. Russell and Co. S. in C. 1542 Osvaldo Goico et al vs. Russell and Co., S. in C. 1571 José E Benedicto, Treasurer vs. The New York and Porto Rico SS. Company . 1630 Porto Rico Railway Light and Power Company vs. Eugenio Cognet et al. j 1633 Mariano R. Pesquera vs. United States of America. 1654 Northern Assurance Company Limited vs. Francisco del Moral. 1659 Arturo Garcia vs. United States of America. i 1660 Albert E. Lee, Receiver vs. ' Hoppel Industrial Car and Equipment Company w ! 1661 R. V. Perez Marchand, Petitioner, in the matter of A. Lahongrais, in bankruptcy. . _ " . 1668 Edwin Lavergne v. United States of America . 1675 American Railroad Company of Porto Rico vs. Carlos M. Ramirez Lopez. 1689 Víctor Coll y Cuchí vs. United States of America. 1692 Francisco I. Gatell vs. Antonia Arzuaga Millian-. 1694 Sucesores de Bianchi et al vs. Julian B. Shope. 1696 José Jacinto Nicholas Polanco vs. August Goffinet. Those of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico are the following: 1557 Miguel Martorell y Torrens et al vs. J. Ochoa y Hermanos et al., 1573 Hermanos Sellés y Sobrino et al vs. Juan Pagán et al. 1582 Marcial Suárez y Suárez et al vs. 1609 Central Victoria Limited vs. Juan Pérez Cami. 1617 Sucesores of C. and J. Fantauzzi vs. Municipal Assembly of Arroyo, Porto Rico. I 1643 José Bello y Feo vs. Registrar of Property of Arecibo. 1658 Plazuela Sugar Company vs. Euiogia Colón Alvarez. It will be delivered to Mr. Mario Brau at the same act. She traveled to the interior of the Island through the Central Highway, stopping in Caguas, Cayey, Aibonito and Baños de Coamo to receive the commissions of the local Committees. - In Yauco she will be received at the elegant home of Don Arturo Lluberas, who, together with his wife and the local committee of the Pan-American Association will do the honors. In San Gprmán, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, (Continued on page 6) CONVOCATION "To the Shareholders of the Compañía Poblar de Transporte", GENTLEMEN:- ' (fulfilling the precepted in -1 article third of the regulation of this company, we have the pleasure to invite you for the annual meeting of the General Meeting, of accidnistas, that will be celebrated on the 20th of the current day in Cataño at 9:00 A. M in the local "le the station of the Línea' Férrea del Oeste. Sincerely, RAMON OORDOVA, President, MANUEL JORDAN, ' * Secretary. 5 Cataño, P. B_, January 9, 1924. AdVt."
The Grand Jury of the Federal Court conducted a thorough investigation at the Presidio of San Juan.
Yesterday morning the President of the Grand Jury of the Federal Court submitted to the Court the report sent to him by the Committee composed of Harrison Johnson, Manuel Berrios, Manuel Sanchez Morales, Enrique Carbia and Cayetano Casals, which was appointed by the Grand Jury to make an investigation at the San Juan Prison and examine the food served to the federal prisoners. The report of the sub-committee of the Grand Jury states that a careful investigation was made of all the departments of the prison, and that the food was tested by all the members of the committee and found to be sufficient and good. Several prisoners were questioned about the treatment and food and no cause for complaint is found. Except for one prisoner named Mena who considers the interval between the afternoon meal from 4:30 p.m. to 5:30 a.m. the following morning to be too long. The Sub-Committee suggests that arrangements be made so that when a federal prisoner wants to work, he can work because there is now no way by which a federal prisoner can be put to work even though he wants to work. The Sub-Committee notes that it received a letter from the personnel in charge of the jail and prison and that they were shown all the files, papers and all the documents they wished to observe or see in relation to the mission entrusted to them. PARIS, January 11 (French Cable) - The Bank of France has raised the tax on bills of exchange from five to five and a half. In financial circles they attribute this increase to the large number of bills and drafts to be cashed during the last days of last year. $3,000,000,000 TAX EXEMPT BONDS OF PORTO RICO Bids will be opened.at the Bureau of Insular Affairs, War Department, Room 3042, Munitions Building, Washington, D. C. at 2 o'clock P. MJ February 5th , 1924, for Public Improvement Bonds of Porto Rico, to the face value of $3,000,000. Bonds are dated July 1st , 1923 bear interest at 5-0 0 per annum; payable semi-annual-ly on January 1 and July 1, and are in coupon form in denomination of $1,000 only. Bonds are payable annually in series of $500,000 each on July 1, 1944 to July 1, 1949 and are redeemable on July 1, 1943 or on any subsequent interest payment date. Principal and interest will be payable at United States Treasury, Washington, D\. C. The Attorney General of the United States has passed upon the legality of the issne. Bonds are acceptable at par as security for deposits of public moneys or postal savings funds of United States; also for deposits, of Porto Rican funds and as security required by law of Porto Rico to be deposited with Treasurer of Porto Rico. Bids should be enclosed in envelopes marked "Subscriptions for Porto Rico 5-OjO Gold Loan of 1922 (1943-1955) Public Improvemet" and addressed to "Chief Bureau of Insular Affairs, Room 3042, Munitions building, Washington, D-~C. Bids must be accompanied by Bank draft or certified check for 2'0j0 of par value of bonds bid for, payable to Bureau of insular* Affairs, in New York Citv funds. Accepted subscriptions will be payable February 19, 1924 at a bank in New York City to be designated later, which will make delivery of the bonds or bearer Interim certificates exchangeable for the definitive bonds. The right is reserved to ject any or all bids. F s or further particulars address the .BUREAU OF INSULAR AFFAIRS,. Washington, D. C.W Adn.
fn the next voyage of the steamer San Lorenzo will return to the Island the Republican Commissioner Don Roberto H. Todd.
Mr. Todd returns, judging by deltas -manifestations, completely disappointed in the result of his work Someone who has just arrived from the United States where he had the opportunity of becoming acquainted with the result of the steps taken in the capital of the Republic by the delegate of the Republican Party of the island and member of the National Republican Committee, Don Roberto H. Todd, has expressed to us his opinion ' terminally that Mr. Mr. Todd has "failed in his political management and that he is preparing to return to Puerto Rico on the next trip to the island by the steamer San Lorenzo, that is to say, in two weeks. i The question that has had the greatest effect on Mr. Todd's mind, according to the statements of this friend of ours, was that of the confirmation of Attorney General Coats, in whose non-confirmation the Republicans of the island were very much interested. Mr. Todd's failure is due to the fact that in Washington, Governor Towner enjoys unlimited prestige and consideration, and the Administration, in view of the fact that he has succeeded in normalizing the situation on the island, will do only what he says and will not accept any reason against his administration. The situation has reached such an extreme, according to our reports, that it is assumed that if the majority party were to make efforts in this direction, Mr. Todd would have nothing to fear if he were removed from office. When we were told about this, we were told that the situation of the majority party with respect to the administration in Washington is identical to that which existed on an occasion when Don Luis Muñoz Rivera achieved the reform of the regime and in which, in order to leave out Don Martin Travieso, the Congress accepted the suppression of the Executive Secretariat. The return of Don Roberto is also attributed to the fact that with the Commissioners of the Legislature, including the President of the Republican Party and the leader of the Republican minority in the House of Representatives, his presence there is unnecessary and that his not being part of the Commission could be interpreted as him wanting to act on his own and independently of the Commission of the Legislature. The person with whom we have exchanged impressions regarding the situation of Don Roberto told us that he had not been able to exchange impressions with him personally; but he told us that everything he had told us about the failure of the Republican delegate he had learned from many elements of recognized importance in the capital of the Republic. NEW TELEPHONES OF EL MUNDO AND PUERTO RICO ILLUSTRADO j We call the attention of our readers, advertisers and sponsors, as well as the general public, that since yesterday the new direct line telephones that we have established in our offices have begun to operate. i To avoid confusion and since the numbers have been changed, we will publish them below so that when calling our offices you will know exactly the telephone number corresponding to the different departments. TELEPHONES OF "EL MUNDO'* Director 1650 ' EDITING 1745 Administration 1222 Workshops 1595 1 TELEPHONES OF PUERTO RICO ILLUSTRADODirector 1630 ADMINISTRATION 540 Workshop, Photoengraving and photography 1699
fl Ledo. Carlos J. Torres addresses the 4th Insular Police Commission because of a recent police attack of which he claims to have been a victim - - - The complainant alleges that he was a victim of a recent police attack.
The complainant alleges that he was in the
Painful tragedy occurred in New York in which a young Puerto Rican couple perished On New Year's Day, Antonio Pomoles and his companion were asphyxiated by gas in their apartment on Seventh Street. We translate from the "New York World" of January 2nd the following important information: "On the eve of New Year's Day, Antonio Pomales, a young Puerto Rican, was married at the Municipal Palace to his childhood sweetheart whom he sent for four months ago. Elias Paredes, Pomales's longtime friend, and witness or' best man at the ceremony, a co' mida in honor of the newlyweds, I after which the Pomales couple went to their home at 211 Eeast 7th Street. To congratulate the happy couple, Eladio Rivera, also a Puerto Rican, who lives in the next room, 1 knocked on the door of the apartment of Po- 1 males the following day, New Year's Day in the afternoon without any answer to his lia-! mada. Upon smelling the odor of fluid gas. Rive-I r(V went to Policeman Shiffer, of the East 35th Street Es- 1 tation, who forced entry to the premises. Pomales was found dead in the chamber and next to him, the bride was breathing faintly. A gas pipe connected with a small heater on the floor was open and the deadly fluid was escaping through it. 1 Dr. Lawson of Bellevue Hospital was able to revive the young woman with a pulse motor; she was taken to the hospital, where it was reported hours later that there was little hope of avoiding a fatal outcome. Pomales came to the United States about a year ago and was working as a servant at the Exchange Restaurant, Madison Avenue and 295th Street. He recently wrote to his girlfriend that he had saved money for their wedding and then she came from Puerto Rico. I FRANCE MUST RESTORE ITS RELATIONS WITH RUSSIA, M. HERRIOT HAS DECLARED PARIS, Jan. 11 (United Press) - Deputy Herriot has declared that it becomes imperatively necessary for France to resume its economic relations with Russia; but at the same time he adds that he fears that it is already too late. It is urgent that the old relations with the United States should also be resumed, declared M. Herriot, without forgetting the ideal of America, which must be applied again on this occasion. He said that the only thing he had to say against the United States was that they had become disinterested in Europe and its situation too soon; but that if they were approached for help, he was convinced that they would help as they had hitherto done.
In connection with the incident which arose between the Ledo. Carlos J. Torres and Corporal Emanuelli, of the Insular Police, when the latter attempted to raid the establishment of a client of the former, we may add that yesterday the aforementioned judicial counselor addressed a petition to the Commission of the Insular Police, aimed at obtaining an investigation of the incident that occurred and demanded the appropriate respon. sibilities from whomever it may concern. In his complaint, according to our information, Mr. Ledo Torres states that on December 4, he, as a lawyer, had to go to Tetuán Street in this city at the request of his client Mr. Cándido Aguayo, where he met Victor Emanuelli, of the Insular Police; that when Mr. Torjes was informed of the illegal pretensions of the said Mr. Emanuelli, he was informed of his client's illegal actions.The said Victor Emanuelli's illegal pretensions in the sense of searching the commercial establishment of Mr. Aguayo, without being authorized to do so in any way whatsoever. ! rizado para ello en forma alguna forma, el i querellante en su capacidad de aboga. The complainant, in his capacity as Mr. Aguayo's attorney, informed J I advised the latter what, in the opinion of the attorney, was the proper thing to do according to the law; . " that. apparently, the attitude taken by Mr. Aguayo as a result of his. $nida .Aguaba as a result of the petitioner's advice, annoyed Corporal Victor Emanuelli, who expressed himself in a manner improper or unbecoming of any citizen and especially improper and unbecoming of a member of the Police; I that not satisfied with the conduct assumed, Emant elli took it upon himself to formu- , lar before the Municipal Ccrte of Sari , Juan, First Section, a complaint against Mr. Torres for an alleged offense of disturbing the public peace; that by virtue of a petition of the ario to the Municipal Court of San Juan, First Section, said Tri.  A FAMILY APARTMENT For rent at the Tobacco Palace in this city. For information: Alonso Riera Tel. 527, San Juan. Advt.
. WOODS q. Coming from Tampa, Florida, the American schooner ''Horace M. Bickford" has arrived in port with a cargo of special quality X. pichipén wood (far superior to all the stock in this market) if you want to build with quality material and at limited prices, before making your purchases, please contact the í COMPAÑIA INDUSTRIAL DE SANTURCE T PEDRO BOLIVAR, S. EN C. J TEL. 425 , - SAN JUAN, P. R. BOX 25ÓI | FOR RENT t Department for store in the Victory f - Garden building, stop 15. Will inform Telephone 1292, San Juan,