jr 7 : i o É É L Milkin o
1 PAGS. 3 CTS. g I Ofidnai: * 'Port Rice Illustrated' * Bldg. Tal. 1222. - Box 84S.
MPáGS. 3 CTS. Semester - - - - $4.00 A Allo - - - - >7.50
DAILY MORNING PAPER, EXCEPT SUNDAYS
Published and distributed under permit (Ho. 801) San Juan, Porto Bico, By order of the President, February 21, 1919, at the Post Office at San Jas*.
'leson, Portmarter General' Entered as second class matter, "o, (Unitfd States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1879
YEAR VI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
SATURDAY, JANUARY 19, 1924 NUMBER 1516
A LARGE PART OF PUBLIC OPINION LOOKS UPON THE UNDER-TREASURER, MR. GALLARDO, AS THE NATURAL AND UNDISPUTED SUCCESSOR OF
SORDELJUEZ BONNER
This nomination would serve as a symbol and applause for Mr. Gallardo.
This nomination would serve as a tribute and applause to a life of hard work, nobly oriented in the practices of a branch of the Government Interesting manifestations of the aforementioned insular fanatic The young Deputy Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Juan G. Gallardo, is, what is said in the language of reporters, an accessible personality, here, where .most of the time, our officials and politicians tend to cultivate the "pose" of a supposed hermeticism; and ca. if always, before matters of interest to the country, they shut themselves up in that dumbness, keeping their opinions out of greed or cowardice, instead of dispensing them in a frank and sincere desire to guide the people whom they must serve in any case. Hence, let us say that going to interview Mr. Gallardo does not suppose great efforts for any diligent reporter. A man of his own judgment, formed in the heat of study and work, and knowledgeable of the problems and needs of our regional life, he is ready at any time to express his ideas on any subject, and especially, of course, on those that are most familiar to him; because there is no doubt that the young sub-Treasurer considers that, as such an official, he belongs to the public and should not hide his thoughts on a matter that interests him so much. That is why when we visited him yesterday afternoon for the purpose of interviewing him, we were successful. And thanks i to this our readers will be able to know I the opinion of the present Deputy Treasurer of - Treasury, regarding the insistent, and for us logically founded j version, that Mr. Gallardo is the ■ Indisputable candidate to replace Judge Bonner, since his performance la. We are convinced that Mr. Gallardo is the undisputed candidate to replace Judge Bonner, since his performance in the Department is worthy of encouragement and deserving of applause. Mr. Gallardo, we say it with pride, has made his way to the high position he occupies today, by his tenacious effort and unquestionable performance, after having held the important positions of Assistant Chief of the Accounting and Payment Department of the Treasury Department and that of Municipal Commissioner of the Treasury of the municipality of San Juan, to which he was appointed in 1919. Subsequently, he held the position of Auditor in the San Juan branch of the Porto Rico Drug Company, one of the most important firms in Puerto Rico. On September 1, 1922 he was appointed Deputy Treasurer of Puerto Rico, a position he currently holds to the satisfaction of the Administration. Mr. Gallardo has vast knowledge and experience in finance and administrative accounting, and owes his success to his integrity of character and enthusiasm for his work. At the present time, due to the tragic event that has deprived the Treasury Department of its exemplary Chief, Mr. Gallardo is performing the functions of Treasurer Into(Continued on page 6)
The principal sugar mills of the north coast of the island held a meeting in this capital and agreed to pay their workers a salary of more (than one dollar a day).
The Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor is aware of this agreement and believes that this action of the centralists will avoid a strike in this region. The threat of a general strike in all the sugar factories of the island has caused all the official or ganisms to agitate in order to find a favorable solution to avoid the conflict. In most of the sugar mills the employers have submitted to their workers, for their acceptance, the wage scales to be applied during the present harvest, and in some places the workers are even considering the proposed bases, while in others they have gone on strike and are holding demonstrations and rallies in protest against the reduced wages and the terrible conditions to which they are being subjected. In talking with the Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, Mr. Chardon, we learned that a large number of the northern coast of the island had held an important meeting in this capital to discuss the situation and had adopted an agreement to pay their workers a day's wages of one dollar a day. * ' . .y Among the centralists who have adopted this action are Mr. and Mr. Andres Oliver of Arecibo, believing that this measure will prevent a strike from breaking out on that coast. This year the outlook for the sugar mills is undoubtedly very good, since there is hope that the price will remain good, and it is only fair that the compensation to the workers be fair and reasonable. There are those who believe that even if the employers approve a reasonable and fair price reduction, the workers will go on strike, because according to the opinion of many, this year's strike also has its political purposes because it is on the eve of elections. In the official spheres, and mainly in the regions of the North and East of the island, a great optimism reigns and it is hoped that the centralists' cooperative attitude will prevent the strike from being declared or, if it is declared, that it could prosper, since it would be considered a completely unjustified movement.
GINBlRA, January 18 (United Press). -The old communist dictator of Hungary, M. Belakue, has bought the beautiful Villa Lausanne in the vicinity of this Capital, for a whopping one hundred and fifty thousand francs, fixing his residence there. ::PARK::: TODAY SATURDAY TODAY Milton Sills and Anna Q. Nilsson in 'Shipwreck of Souls' (Ths Isle of Lost Ships) Tomorrow Sunday TEA WITH A KICK (Tea with a Kick) With ¿7 special stars IMPORTANT Use VITALITY feed if you want higher milk yield. VILLAR & CO. INC. H O. Box 201 Tel: 1450 . San Juan, P. R.
To whom it may concern I must advise my clients and friends that my brother Don Francisco Santaella has ceased to be my employee, and that I will not recognize any commitment made by him concerning my business and interests. * Ricardo Santaella
D A PERMANENT SERVICE Alx AklC GARAGE ~ GASOLINE - LAVADOS BRANDI r *'
Messrs. JBarceló and GuegHa sulegadaJWashington, make inlHintes statements about the prow result 1 of Omission's efforts.
. Barceló stated that the undesirable affaire
President Coolidge thanks the country for the generosity with which it has responded to the collection of funds for the Harding monument Secretary of War Mr. Weeks also expresses the gratitude of the American government The Governor has received the following communication from the Secretary of War on the occasion of the campaign carried out in Puerto Rico for the Harding Monument: "Washington, January 3, 1924. Honorable Horace M. Towner, Governor of Puerto Rico, San Juan, P. P. / ! My dear Governor: ' I acknowledge receipt of your cablegram ¡ of the 21- of last signed by you as Honorary President and by Mr. Emilio del. Toro as President of the Harding Monument Commission, and in which you give an account of the estimated amount of funds to be raised for that purpose. i In reply, I am pleased to inform you that the President, to whom your message was transmitted, is pleased with the munificence with which Pto. i Rico has contributed to the purpose initiated and has requested that I transmit to you and through you to the Pto. i Rico, and through you to the People of Puerto Rico, its thanks for the generosity with which you have responded and for the activity displayed by the various organizations, departments and individuals during the week devoted to the Harding Monument campaign. Copy of the President's letter
rfe ReqMuerá a readable leo ction demonstrating what a gob&Edor from iMdngton (United Special to INMUNDO) - WASHINGTON, Jan. 18.- To his capital, the Hon. Antonio fijBarceló, president of the Senate" yrtorriqueño, has been by one of the representaflH* of the "United Press" his impressions respesto of the managements q. carried out in the of the Republic the comisid|p|g of the Insular Legislature. ftH Jrcj ■ -i GOOD P1WECTIVE. ONE. CRITERIA Mr. expressed himself in terms nMBMóres of a frank optimisiúígft as to the success that is to OSRar as a result of the gestfipLthat they propose to make near JB&s authorities of the and committees of the announced to the press quejMqffieno of the Collision existed®! .positive and sinoe-.
(Continued on page 2) encloses herewith. Yours most affectionately, (fmdo.) JOHN W. WEEKS. Secretary of War." The President's letter reads as follows: "Washington, Die. 29, 1923. My dear Secretary: I have in my possession your communication with the cablegram from Goberna. dor Towner, referring to the very generous manner in which the People of Pto. Rico have responded to the appeal made to them in connection with the week devoted to the work for the Harding Monument. As soon as the opportunity presents itself, I hope that you will express to the Governor, so that he may convey to the generous donors, my sincere thanks for the assistance they have given to the above campaign. Most affectionately yours, (fmdo.) Calvin COOLIDGE."
Memo-
$3,000,000 TAX EXEMPT BONDS OF PORTO RICO Bids will be opened at the Bureau of Insular Affairs, War Department, Room 3042, Munitions Building, Washington, D. C. at 2 o'clock P. M, February 5th, 1924, for Public Improve, ment Bonds of Porto Rico, to the face vain" of $3,000,000. Bonds are dated July 1st., 1923 bear interest at 5-010 per annum, payable semi-annual-ly on January 1 and July 1, and are the coupon form in denomination of $1,000 only. Bonds are payable annually in series of $500,000 each on July 1,* 1944 to July 1, 1949 and are redeemable on July 1, 1943 or on any subsequent interest payment date. Principal and interest will be payable at United States Treasury, Washington, D. O. The Attorney General of the United States has passed upon the legality of the issue. Bonds are acceptable at par as security for deposits of public moneys or postal savings funds of United States; also for deposits of Porto Rican funds and as security required by law of Porto Rico to be deposit with Treasurer of Porto Rico. Bids should be enclosed in envelopes marked "Subscriptions for Porto' Rico 5-0|0 Gold Loan of 1923 (1943-1955) Public Improvemet" and addressed to "Chief Bureau of Insular Affairs, Room 3042, Munitions build, tag, Washington, D. 0. Bids must be accompanied by Bank draft or certified Check for 2 0|0 of par value of bonds bid for, payable to Chief Bureau of Insular Affairs, in New York City funds. Accepted subscriptions will be payable February 19, 1924 at a bank in New York City to bo designated later, wftich win make delivery of the bonds or bearer interim certificates exdhafigeablo for fha definitive bonds. The right is reserved to reject any or all bids, For further particulars address the BUREAU OF INSULAR AFFAIRS,. Washington, D. XL Z r Advt.
An important newspaper in the United States, the "Newarkj Evening News," records the fear that the Irish problem in America may very easily arise' in regard to the P.R. case.
In a personal encounter which occurred in Yauco between the well-known elements there, ledo, Don Carlos del Toro Fernandez and Don Andres Negroni, the latter resulted with a gunshot wound.
Mr. Negroni shot Mr. del Toro with a shotgun Last Thursday night, between half past six and seven in the evening, a personal encounter occurred in Yauco between the well-known elements of that society, Don Carlos del Toro Fernandez and Don Andres Negroni, resulting in Mr. Negroni with a bullet wound in the belly. According to reports supplied to us last night by the Chief of Police there, Cándido López, the incident was motivated by the personal enmity that had existed for a long time between Mr. del Toro and Mr. Negroni, due to lawsuits and questions of interest. The resentments were so deep that we are informed that Mr. Negroni had gone to live in Guayanilla and came to Yauco periodically. Mr. del Toro's residence is very close to Mr. Negroni's. fafiWA - Tínslu And there were two versions: Mr. del Toro alleges that when leaving his residence and crossing in front of his enemy Mr. Negroni's, Mr. Negroni fired a shotgun shot at him and that he then used his revolver to shoot him.
Mr. Negroni fired a shotgun shot at him and that he then used his revolver and fired at his assailant. Mr. Negro ni says that he was sitting on the sidewalk of his house waiting for his car to be prepared to leave for Guayanilla and Mr. del Toro passed by, and when he crossed by him, he said these or similar words: "I want to hit this one in the face, and if you want to fight, throw yourself in the street". Mr. Negroni says that he then told him not to provoke him, that everything between them had already been paid and when Mr. Negroni stood up, he says that Mr. del Tofo shot him. Then Mr. Negroni went up to his house and shot him with a shotgun. We were also informed that Mr. del Toro, rushed into the house of Mr. Ramón Román which is (Continued on page 2)
glj. MUNDO-EL?®NDO M . ... y y El Diario of the largest circulation in Puerto Rico intends to beat its own records, offering a year's subscription . O FREE to each of its readers, by means of an extraordinary offer to be announced next week.
A timely cartoon from the same paper which is being much talked about in Washington political circles.A beard that 1 have grown long ■ <' ■ ■ ■'O 7 1'i-Ofill i ;ú<mh6)otKm9 a v.V ' HetqTheBurder, - '<>-■ / In the cartoon appears Puerto Rico, with a beard and an enormous head of hair, the product of twenty-five years of American domination, symbolizing the question of our ultimate status. Pulling Uncle Sam's coattails, Puerto Rico turns to him and asks: "Uncle, when are you going to take me to the barbershop?
Congress can easily bring about in America a situation similar to the Irish problem unless it pays due attention to the demands of our island dependencies for a greater measure of self-government. The Puerto Ricans have joined the Filipinos and Hawaiians in their endeavor to reach the gates of the Capitol to demand what they consider their rights in the same spirit demonstrated by the members of the Boston City Council nearly a century and a half ago. | Puerto Rico asks for self-government, the right to elect its own governor, the privilege of legislating on internal affairs without restriction, and of appointing for itself the officers whose appointments are now made by the President of the United States, and a proportional share in the benefits of whatever the United States Government may undertake for the good of education, agriculture, and other resources of welfare and wealth. i The first and most urgent of their demands is to know what is to be their final political status. Puerto Ricans take it for granted that the United States does not intend to leave them as they are forever. Will the island become a territory, a state or what? The Puerto Rican Legislature has authorized the Commission now on its way to Washington to inquire of Congress and the President what their intentions are in this regard. The Commission represents all three political parties on the island, whose aspirations range from outright independence, or statehood, to the most modest changes in the current Charter. Like Ireland, Puerto Rico is in such a situation that complete independence is considered out of the question for the time being. The demands outlined by* the Legislature tend more toward statehood or, perhaps better, a system of government similar to the political status of the territories. Although the commissioners have not reached agreement on all of the changes to be made, they are all united in their demands.
Although the commissioners have not agreed on all the changes they will seek, they are all united in their efforts to obtain a greater amount of self-government. Puerto Ricans are citizens of the United States. They would not be imbued with the true spirit of American citizenship if they did not insist upon the fullest freedom to manage their own interests. Their desire to free themselves from the chief encumbrances of Congress elicits the sympathies of all. No people worthy of the name would consent to live all their lives under the domination of political officials appointed by another government, whether worthy Republicans or Democrats accrediting such appointments. The United States has had more than twenty years to figure out what it intends to do with Puerto Rico in the end. It may not be an easy question to answer; but it is not easy for Puerto Rico to remain in suspense, without having a set (Continued on page 2)
TODAY Saturday, January 19 TODAY Matinee and Evening BRUNO & VAZQUEZ, INC. Presents: The Monumental Twin Work of "Don't Forget Me" "The Voice of the Soul" (MIGHTY LAK' A ÜÜÜSE) JAM&S RENNIE and DOROTHY MACKAILL Special Musical Adaptation by LEOPOLDO GUADALUPE Conductor of the Rialto Orchestra 1j -Minueto .... Paderewski 2.-Ave Maria Gounod Piano Solos by CECILIA CASANOVA Sj -¡Roses of Picardy Saxophone Solo by RAFAEL SANCHEZ 4. MIGHTY LAK' A ROSE 5. -Sobbing Blues " r Violin Solo by LEOPOLDO GUADALUPE