ELXUNDO
AA PAGES. 3 CTS. >11 üáctak"': "Puerto RÍm /II DutrU"" BMg. If TM im. - Bex
nn PAGS. 3 CTS. I # I I I I Bctoertr" - S4.08 I/ II vn áte - - - S7.M
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAY
-AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
PubUahad and dlatrtoutod under parait (Bo. 801) -atáactaaáfby tha Act of Oatobor 8, 1817, ea Ila at tha frwt Ofloa Saa Juan, Porte Blae, By order of the Praaldeat, A. ■- Burteoon, Poataaeter OeaaraL Bntored at aaoaat olaae Matter, faornary 81, 1818. at tha Poet Ofloa at San Juan, Porte IVMtod Stotoe of Atoartca> under too dot of toara* 8, 1878.
ARO VI
SATURDAY, JUNE 21, 1924
NUMBER 1646
A PROJECT TO REORGANIZE THE COURTS D' JUSTICE
MANI FISCAl IS APPOINTED TO FILL THE NEWLY CREATED POSITION
For several months now, all the press of this capital has been dealing with the reorganization of the District Courts in San Juan. Prominent jurists have given their opinion on the matter, and it has been one of the? most debated issues during the last few days, and one of the most commented in squares and corridors. Such a boom came to turn the idea, and so palpable became the necessity of reorganizing said courts, that the Hon. Governor of Puerto Rico. Mr. Towner, made recommendations in that sense to the insular Legislature, which is now assembled in extraordinary session. This, as is natural, made the question more interesting, and at the same time gave it more importance, the importance and transcendence that it really should have. THE PROJECT HAS BEEN PRESENTED AND APPROVED And a project in that sense was presented before the Legislature, project that from the beginning had the sympathies of both legislative bodies. Finally, today we can report that the bill was approved yesterday on second reading, and that it will soon become law, in the fullest sense of the word. So that the district courts of San Juan will soon be reorganized, completely reformed, responding to a need that was imperiously felt. It is well known that in this capital city there are currently two district courts, the first and second sections, completely independent of each other. Well, according to the new project. INTERESTING RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE INSULAR HEALTH CARE ABOUT TUBERCULOSIS: do not live in dark or poorly ventilated houses, and we add that it is an advertisement for the Ritzy hotel which occupies the most ventilated place in San Juan. Do not live in rooms that receive air from galleries, take care of yourself and spend the same money. All our rooms face the street. Discounted rates. HOTEL RITZY Tanca No. 2. Box 640. SHOEMAKERS At factory prices, we make a wide range of leathers, soles and all kinds of materials for the industry. Exclusive sales by C. O. D. LEATHER CASH SALES Box 134, Aguadilla, Pto. Rico.
The new law, which will soon be law, will merge the two courts into one, which will completely change the judicial system in San Juan. And it is something that is obvious, and for which the bill also provides, that a judge will be appointed, who will have to carry on his shoulders all the responsibility for the work that is currently being done by two judges. In addition, all the personnel of both courts will have to be changed, so that the new court will be completely reorganized and will be able to respond to the purposes for which it was created. This does not in any way mean that all the employees will be changed, but it does mean that some will occupy positions other than those they now occupy, etc. But there is one position with which public opinion is especially concerned, and of which we shall speak first. A PROSECUTOR WOULD BE THE IDEAL CANDIDATE And the people, public opinion, which is never wrong, points to a prosecutor as the ideal and indisputable candidate for the high post of judge of the new court. Our readers will understand that for this a specially prepared person is needed, since he will bear on his shoulders the responsibility now carried by two judges. A prosecutor, argues the opinion, by the civil and criminal experience he possesses, by the many skills he has to bring to bear in the performance of his difficult Jjfa Tlónj* to bring all the cases that fall under his jurisdiction intelligently and by the talent he must necessarily possess to succeed in his not easy work, make him the undisputed and irreplaceable candidate to occupy such a high position in the insular magisíratura. Besides, a prosecutor must be an honest person, and his integrity and morality, the high qualities that must adorn him, make him a marvelous candidate to bear such a great responsibility. AND the public opinion, that as of (Continued on page 5) Piza Hnos. S en C. They participate to their friends and clients to have transferred their office and store to the street Comercio. No. 17-19. Villar & Co. Inc. Apartado 201. Tel. 1450 San Juan, P. R. They sell the best wheat flour brands "LUNA DE ORO" "CRUZ DE CALIDAD" Price without competition. Proof makes faith. I IttGMO MY MILLIONS !!!! To whoever in P. R. can rebuild your typewriter, adding and cash register, cheaper and better than me. Avoid spending on a new one, Brujo Ojeda millionaire, Tele. San José No. 37. San Juan, P. R. TENGO MAQUINAS DE- VENTA THE NATIONAL CITY BANK OF NEW YORK has for rent from July 1st. the entire second ?oor of its building, San Justo Street No. 2.
30,000 Mortgage $30,000 offered in whole or in part on mortgages on city property. Contact Enrique Bird. Tel. 896 Santurce. Box 842. FOR RENT! A magnificent establishment premises with -Aparadores ' and counters in Calle de San Agustín No.> 125, Parada 7, Puerta de Tierra and an interior room for housing. Idformafí Julián Pérez Sevillano, Cross 28 Altos. Advt.
DISAuthorizing Mrs. BENET DE MEWTON Angela Negron de Vivas speaking i Yesterday we talked extensively with Mrs. Angela Negron de Vivas, President of the "Asocia- ¡ ción Feminista de Puerto Rico", and one of the most distinguished leaders of the suffragette movement in our island. We had the purpose of asking her opinion on the incident that arose lately between a commission of suffragette ladies and Mr. Bare<4ó, an incident that has been the talk of the day in all the circles of this city. I Mrs. Negrón de Vivas kindly lent herself to our wishes j and made the following manifesta- - cations: DOÑA MILAGROS IS NOT AUTHORIZED TO SPEAK ON BEHALF OF THE FAITH MIN1STA í "I must state, in answer to your question, that I am President 1 of the 'Feminist Association of Puerto Rico", and that Mrs. Bennet de Mewton has never belonged to our society. We are the most serious and the strongest movement in Puerto Rico in favor of woman suffrage, our society has countless members and its ranks are swelling, and as a director of that movement, I can tell you that Mrs. Bennet de Mewton has never belonged to our society.
Supreme Court declares certiorari appeal filed against Judge Foote for his decision in the case of the aqueduct pipeline a few days ago, Judge Foote, of the District Court, rendered a judgment declaring null and void the contract signed by the Municipality of this city with Don Enrique Viidal Sanchez for the transportation of the new aqueduct pipeline to the site of the new aqueduct. A writ of certiorari to review the judgment of the lower court was filed by Mr. Enrique Viidal Sanchez, and yesterday afternoon, the Supreme Court decided the case as follows: IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PUERCO RICO I Enrique Vida! hez, Petitioner. I 7 ! The Dimito Court of the First Judicial District of San Juan. Hoift - liarles E. Foote, JUEZ.* Respondent."■153. y tiorari. i ' ' \! RESOflt" ION San Juan, P. R.j June L-\ 1924 ■ Not being eftwainci' da ja Court of is involved in 1 <-.-te "aso question' any question' of jurisdiction or procedtfnii uto and the petitioners having úñ adequate remedy in the urinary course of law, the Cm te, in <1 é>jíf< i.do of its discretion, resolves noTjuG-r place to the writ.
Spanish schooner 'Guiniguada' Just brought in a cargo of onions, seed. Cadiemo Hnos, Sucrs.
Who will be the next Resident of Pto. Rico in.
HABIA LICENCIADO IOSE S. ALKRIA NATIONALISTS AND "PUROS" WILL VOTE UNDER THE "JACHO".
As our readers may know, several nationalist leaders have lately taken an active part in the rallies held by the Socialists and Puros. Yesterday, on the occasion of the protest rally of the minority parties against the amendments that the Legislature has introduced to the Electoral Law, one of the evening papers, directly addresses the Ledo. Alegria, Nationalist leader of this city, and we thought it advisable to see him. El Ledo. Alegría responding to our questions made the following statements: THE MANIFESTATION HAD NO REASON TO BE ''I did not attend the protest demonstration on Thursday, just as no Nationalist did. "Signed the amendments-; introduced to the Electoral Law, having already the same stamped the Governor's strip, the protest did not have to be requested. It was agreed by the Court and signed by the Presiding Judge; I certify. Emilio del TORO. Presiding Judge. Joaquín LOPEZ, Secretary - Reporter.
reason for being and should be left to the ballot box. "Everything Towner's servile paper says is a ridiculous falsehood as far as I am concerned. He knowingly lies to earn his new stripes. "Democracy" in this period of drooling chochez cares very . little to tell the truth. THEY WILL PROBABLY UNITE i SOCIALISTS, PUROS AND NATIONALISTS "The amendments introduced to the Electoral Law, make practically impossible the registration of new parties. And given the circumstances, it is not certain, but it is very probable that nationalists and purists will vote under the "jacho" to be able to include our candidacies. And in that ca- ¡ so we will vote mixed cantidatura, since somehow we have qut J to choose our men. After all, the winner will be the Socialist Party, which will increase its votes in a considerable way. ¡ j..Y I.A LAW ON THE. CAFE'.'' i Many people are surprised that in spite of the recommendation <1(1 Governor in his Message, the Agepci Act has not yet been passed,. -tW'cwfe- the Rs- -| tado< United States. That would be one of the most beneficial laws to the country, since it comes to protect and propagate the credit of a Puerto Rican product that requires the greatest public protection. In spite of the oblivion so far of this law, we believe it will be brought to the attention of the Legislative Assembly and will be approved so that it may begin to be enforced on July 1, 2010. OPPORTUNITY FOR AN AMBITIOUS YOUNG MAN < We need aggressive salesman with experience in the rice, flour and general grocery business. i Salary commensurate with your ability. Send references to P.O. Box 271, San Juan. |
cX V I S S O All our Electrical Appliances ARE GUARANTEED A repair shop* and* a body of experts uphold our guarantee, keeping our customers satisfied. This is one hundred percent service. Buy conscientiously. Porto Rico Railway Light & Power Co.
.4. -A. .A. .A. .A. .A. .A. .A. .A. *
The Goddess of Mystery j Colossal Magician of Disti- j no World Fame '■ * ' * Egyptian TEACHER of occult sciences, Hypnotism, Magnetism and Suggestion. It is in j vigil. Possesses secrets of " HOLY LAND. 1 * Consultations at San Juan Cove No. 2 from 9 a. m. to 9 p. m. Also by correspondence. j .♦..A. A. A A .A .A. A. A. A A A A A A A A
Commissioner Washington?
Barbershop (Ochoa Building, 3rd. floor) Has been opened to the Public The most elegant and best barbershop in San Juan FOR SALE 1923 Buick Roaster; 5000 miles traveled. Will inform: F. Echevarría, phone 1177, Villamil 12, Santurce. IN BARRANQUITAS Furnished apartment for rent in newly built and well located house with living room, dining room, 4 bedrooms with seven beds, maid's room, kitchen and bathroom, from the end of this month of June to the end of October. Will inform: P. O. Box 515, San Juan.
Dr. Eduardo Lamoutte OPTOMETER SPECIALIST IN REFRACTION. SIGHT EXAMINATION Consultorio Union St. Ponce, P. R. Caguas Trading Co. Inc. Box 173 Caguas, P. R. Sole distributors for Puerto Rico of the famous KELLY SPRINGFIELD gum. We wish to get in touch with active and responsible sellers. Write to us.
The doors are wide open to Puerto Ricans who have titles We received the following letter from New York yesterday: June 13, 1921. Mr. Editor of EL MUNDO, San Juan, Puerto Rico. Dear Sir: We think that the idea of the compatriots of New York who, in these days of councils and alliances there in the beloved island, have approached us to request our small help in the foundation here of a group of "intellectuals"-despite our friend Iglesias-which they would call "PORTO RICO'S DEFENCE COMMITTEE" in the English language, or "Committee for the Defense of Puerto Rico" before the people of the continent, more and more poorly informed about our island life in its multiple manifestations and orders, seems to us to be very wise. And, we consider the idea of the organization of the Puerto Rican Committee luminous simply because, not being native political clubs or societies in whose bosom the greater number of partial, fractious and, so to speak. heterogeneous elements, led to inevitable failure. the good success of this group will be assured by its personal circumscription to those who are able and willing to carry out an intense written propaganda on behalf of our island in the languages of fihalcespeare-, . Recognizing, then, that the projec(Continued on p. 8.) "i 1.1 "e-■- Compare the Lucky Strike cigarette with any other cigarette. * Quality speaks for itself. I w FOR RENT in the street of COMMERCIO, of this City, Nos. 17 and 19 a large store premises. Information: LA PLATA TOBACCO COMPANY, Bank of Nova Scotia Building, 3rd. floor. "BY TELEGRAPH FROM MAYAGÜEZ" The reputable Hotel "Colón" installed on the second and third floors of the sumptuous building of Don Patricio Martínez was not hit by the last fire as erroneously circulated the news, José Jiménez FONT, Owner.