ELM1NDO
i n BAGS. 3 fTS. I; H - - - - H.Ih f g no bb" - - - - r"
IP PAGS 3 (IS I Uuwr'e IL* ' Í. L.j<u "4o' * I " 9 **
DAILY MORNING
I N A.M.,
YEAR VI
-AN JUAN. PUERTO RIC"
r wrt nnd.T '("e. 801) eaiheriMB 4 "w áet oí Oetebei ". 1"17, ce lia at U. Feat Ollc "ürfl Ban Juan, Porto *>-", By order ot ta. Praeldeut, A B. '*"**"**'** M "taaa f.hrnary 11, lili, a*"fia Po" Oflaa at Ban Jaan. Porta *■ co* (United Btataa af America-"pit* th* Aat of isarck I IV"
SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1924
NUMBER 1671
Important steps taken by the Secretary of the Dept. of Instruction on his recent trip to the U.S.A. requested by the Secretary of the Dept. of Instruction on his recent trip to the United States.
I am asking for Federal aid for THE SCULPTIONS OF PUERTO RICO Back from the U.S.A., he has again taken charge of his office. Fe has again taken charge of his office e.i the Department of Instruction, our good friend, the noted pedagogue, Ledo. Francisco Vlzcarron-' do. Societario General of that impor- ■ tanta branch of government. Mr. Vizcarrondo remained for several weeks in the North, making arrangements of great interest to our educational system. A reporter of ours visited yesterday to! Friior Viicarror.do, in order to give us his impressions of his trip. Our friend told us that he had attended in company with Dr. Fermos the convention in Toronto Canada, held during the 23rd to the 29th of June. He then went on to the National Education Association's main assembly held in Washington around the same time. At the convention in Toronto, Canada, Mr. Vizcarrondo tells us that about G thousand delegates met, having discussed various matters of general interest for that country, the United States and Puerto Rico. Delegates from all the States of the Union were present, as well as from the provinces of Canada. The Assembly of the National Education Association was attended by some 15,000 U.S. representatives. Matters of transcendental importance to public instruction in general were discussed, and the highest officials of the Nation intervened in the discussion, among them President Coolidge himself, who addressed the meeting in an eloquent speech, expressing his unconditional personal support for the organization of a federal Department of Education. In spite of the great support of the people of the United States for educational and social welfare work, the authorities who took an active part in the convention appealed in a heroic manner to the local and federal governments for further cooperation for the benefit of this important movement. As representatives for this country at the convention, Mr. Vizcarrondo presented a resolution requesting federal aid for Puerto Rico. A copy of the resolution was sent to the executive authorities in Washington, D.C., concerned with the affairs of the island so that the corresponding action could be taken when Congress meets. Mr. Vizcarrondo paid a visit to Empresa Bruno & Vázquez. Inc TODAY SATURDAY, July 19 TODAY second showing of the powerful drama entitled La Descastada (The Impossible Mrs. Bel lew) with Gloria Swanson and Conrad Nagel Tomorrow Sunday, July 20 premiere of the production entitled Ladrones de frac (Missing Millions) by David Powell and Alice Brady Prices: 25 and 15-15 and 10 FOR RENT A magnificent local for family, with four apartments, kitchen, and toilet or sanitary in Recinto West No. 5. |See our advertisement on Page 7. NEW YORK & PORTO RICO COTTON GOODS CORP. 84 Allen St. S. J.
Who will be the candidate for the Alliance for Senator for the Aguadilla district?
The agricultural bloc in front and in the arena - Enthusiasm is immense - Numerous letters are received daily I On the 25th of the present, the Convention of the Alliance is to be held in this capital to name candidates who will fight the battle at the polls next November. Nominations' < < are pouring in, everyone thinks he has the right to throw his name into 103 j four v.entos, hoping that a happy little house will place in his hands the coveted nomination. And the bosses remain like sphinxes, unable to show their sympathies for this or that person ahead of time, because the others would show resentment and would not cease to be dangerous. THE DIFTRICT OF AGUADILLA But there are some districts that break the record, in candidacies, since the Alliance has come to double the number of candidates at the sacrifice of sitting on the desks of our legislature. And among these is the A guadilia constituency. There are at least six or seven candidates there, and all of them are willing to defend their candidacy to the last moment. But since a coi lective nomination is impossible, several will be disappointed and even jaded with life after July 25. * The Puerto Rico Farmers' Association was recently formed for the sole purpose of defending agricultural interests in all areas. And since politics plays a major role here, and is the most fertile ground, the farmers cannot avoid fighting the political battle. As is natural, there are lawyers, merchants, etc. that Jes offer a paradise, but the farmers, as b'.te nos sons of the terroir, remain fira the Pan-American Union, being able to 1 notice, says the great current of sympathy that exists between the peoples of America and the United States, as a result of the intense work that comes i performing that institution and which will be every day taking greater partici- ¡ ción Puerto Rico by its special topographic situa' ción and the possession that has ; of both languages. Mr. Vizcarrondo has the purpose of rendering an extensive report on his efforts there, in the hope that this work will benefit our educational system and other government activities. - Use "Motor Masfers" on your car. | It won't raise your oil, it will be quieter and it will extend the life of your engine. Ask for information at I - Motor Master Agency ApaHailo 1107 San Juan, I'. R. PURELY REGIONAL ALCOHOLATED CEREIPINA 5 is a product without rival and in Puerto Rico the first, this is not that I want it " that everybody thinks so. Amen! JOSEN QUIÑONES -LAWYER- San Justo Street Office No. 10 high, Cuétara Hermanos, Phone 708. > San Juan, P. R.
The way in which the candidates will be nominated at the Alliance's Joint Convention has been the subject of several comments.
Many candidates are working exclusively with the compromisarias of their party -the Board of Directors has not yet determined the way in which the voting will be carried out- -fear that some aspirants harbor.
On Friday of this week, as our readers know, the Joint Convention of the Puerto Rican Alliance will be held to elect the candidates to be on the ballot next November. I bre. According to the reports that we have been able to gather and judging from the published notices, upon the meeting of the delegates, 1; Convention of the Unionist Party and the Convention of the Puerto Rican Republican Party will be called to order by their respective presidents. Both bodies will make their agreements separately, although they will work together since they will develop the same policy and elect the same candidates. On this occasion we have heard many candidates express the opinion that they consider it unnecessary to work the compromisarios belonging to the other political grouping, because, they say, the election should be done separately and each party within the Alliance should elect the candidates that correspond to it. Of course, this does not seem the most appropriate since if they are to be candidates to be voted for by the two parties in the month in their thirteen, and they say no to everyone. They already have their candidate, a farmer, Don José Ruiz Soler. They claim that he is the only candidate who will defend them from the senatorial desk, and that they are not willing to defend with their votes any other candidate, but they are willing to give the battle, burning every last cartridge for the doctor's candidacy. The farmers, who until now had been peaceful and willing to go through anything, have suddenly become rebellious and do not want to give up their representation in the senate, and are not willing to give up their representation in the senate. They have come to form an association and, naturally, the union makes them feel strong and ready to do battle. The agricultural bloc is therefore firm as a rock, has thrown itself into the arena of combat, and surely, its influence must be felt in the convention of the 25th, because they are ready to be given the representation they are entitled to. Letters are daily received at the office of the Association from the various committees of the is.'a, who are enthusiastic, and more and more pleased at the happy idea of having formed "a strong and powerful society to defend their interests. A further factor jumps into the political arena. A great force that had been asleep for years and years, unconscious of its power, and that suddenly realizes its power and is willing to be given preferential attention. And no one can deny that this complicates the situation and makes it more interesting. Kl 'O", I , Buy a pack I today. If you are not satisfied, Gilles & Woodward will refund your money. 1 ,7-
i Alliance must respond to the confidence not of Unionists or Republicans ■ but of both. This is the criterion that we have heard expressed by many of the most significant elements of this political evolution, I Referring to this same matter, we have heard others who have reason fiara be perfectly aware of the matter, qije the fact that 1 the Conventions of*, both parties are 1 held separately does not imply that they will act independently 1 since one thing is the legal personality of both coActivities and Another cesa is the Program that by mandate gives their two sovereign Assemblies : they propose to develop. The fear that some candidates have, in the event that both parties intervene in the election of the candidates of the other party, is that in this circumstance they may be defeated not by the delegates of their party but by those of the other party. The Board of Directors, even though it has not yet finalized the H ícrma er in which the voting at the Convention is to take place, is certain to draw up the guidelines for the free expression of the will, not only of the other party, but also of the will of the Alliance. As this would be equally dangerous to both parties, we have been told that the Unionists, since it is a Republican office, will favor the candidate recommended by the Republican and vice versa compromisers, since it is a Unionist office. Only in the event that for any reason the delegates cannot agree on the choice of a candidate, it is believed that the intervention of the Board of Directors will be necessary to decide the question, without this meaning that the members of that body should not cast their votes on all ballots. The person with whom we were exchanging impressions told us categorically that if any difficulty were to arise in this Convention, it would be of exactly the same nature and kind as that which might arise in the convention of one of the parties alone; but that harmony will never be broken by partisan prejudices and passions, since all are already convinced that this step of harmony and harmony is necessary in order to be able to better defend the general interests of the country. PEKIN, July 18. (United Press) M les of soldiers are constantly employed in repairing the dykes, for they have broken and Peking is in danger of a flood which will sweep over the city. Still the city is threatened, but the rains are expected to abate, the danger being removed. WIN! j An automobile i "Sti'tz" is sold cheap or exchanged for a pe > i queño. JOSE M. GATELL, Apartado 67. San Juan PARK Sunday, July 20, 1924 "HEROES OF THE STREET'' With WESLEY BARRY. MARIE PREVOST & JACK MULHALL. Complete every night. Sunday, July 30, 1924 GLORIA SWANSON, CONRAD NAGEL & GERTRUDE ASTOR -sn- - "LA DESCASTADA" Paramount drama in 8 acts. Matinee 3:30 P. M. "AMONG THE BRAVE". I
Tomorrow's issue of the Sunday edition of "El Mundo".
For its local and cable inform aeon, its co mic pages and the interesting articles it publishes, "Tomorrow's Mtndo r will be a real event < 'tiniplivnilo with what we have set ourselves <le to make the Sunday issue of THE MI'.X'DO every week more interesting. surpassing this Sunday the previous Sunday's issue, we have taken pains to offer our numerous readers tomorrow one of the most interesting and eomjdi*tas editions of the Sunday issue. In addition to the pages of local and cablegraphic information, we publish this week two pages of adventurous novelties entitled "l'im Gather in exile who longs to make his adored ■ son nn child king", (interview of a ' celebrated Hungarian ]x-rio<lista ion the ex- I Empress of Anstria-Hungrfa 1 and' -■Has female suffrage been a success?", where a matter of ' throbbing interest is discussed. * | On the international page are published very interesting articles by our distinguished foreign contributors: "The Crisis of Fascism," by Wells: "The Situation in France before and after the fall of Poincare," by Simmonds: etc. Also, a sensational article by Ilerriot. head of the French government, advocating the union of France and Germany, a most beautiful crpniea. "The Prince who learned everything from books," by Cristobal de Castro, and Crane's editorial. Contains also this Sunday issue numerous pages devoted to motoring, "base hall," horses, eHA-r jrtfinlMho- fashion of interest. To complete the excellent reading material in this issue, we offer the interesting Revista Popular, on the front page of which appears an admirable color drawing by the great Cuban tourist Conrado Massaguer. The magazine has curious articles of great interest, such as "Dapper Don before the Prison," the story of the famous artist Elena Patter- I son with a famous bandit: "The Worst Land the United States has Ever Had", of extraordinary scientific value; "Bones Prove that Panama was an Ocean", a curious historical and geological study, etc. Needless to say that the four color comic pages, which have been so well received, will also appear. YESTERDAY THE APPEAL IN THE CASE OF CARLO AROCHO AND JACINTO CLEMENTE WAS HEARD BEFORE THE SUPREME COURT. Yesterday, at two o'clock in the afternoon, the trial on appeal of the two men condemned to death, Carlor Arocho and Jacinto Clemente, was heard before the Supreme Court. The People of Puerto Rico were represented by Prosecutor Figueras, and the defendants by their counsel, Ledos! Muñoz Morales and Tizol. The defense attorneys made vn bul ante argument before the Court, on the errors committed by the lower Court, and the Prosecutor also consumed nn turn defending the previous sentence, which sends the defendants to the scaffold. After the arguments, the Court reserved the sentence, which is expected to be pronounced before the Court goes on vacation. For Summering A'quila esnléndida Residence to 10 minutes of Rio Piedras, good road for automobiles. Fully furnished. It has "De'co" lighting and water cistern. Infor- , nrnrá Tel. 398 Sant. Advt. GRAPES PEARS CHERRIES AND I PLUMS WILL ARRIVE ON MONDAY FRANK 8. SOLER. Tetuan 35
Interesting details of a trial held in Ponce against the former Hda. Commissioner of the municipality of Yauco.
The defendant, who was represented by Ledos.
Toro Fernandez y Tormos, came out freely acquitted - Last Wednesday was held in ! our District Court the hearing of the - <as<> criminal against don Hereiclio Itoi drígtiez Pacheco for alleged infraction of article 372 of the I'eI nal Code. being Commissioner of Hacienda | of the Municipality of Yauco, in the feclms í comprised between January 10, 19"1 and I January 31, 11)22. I This same case was heard on November 14, 1922, and after a guilty verdict was handed down, the defendant was sentenced to one year in jail. However, subsequently, on appeal, the Supreme Court reversed the sentence and ordered a new trial, on the grounds that the defendant had been convicted and sentenced to one year in jail. The Supreme Court, on appeal, reversed the sentence and ordered a new trial, on the grounds that a certain unnecessary and immaterial bias had been admitted, that is to say, that the mental activity of the jurors was biased against the defendant. This time the Court also presided <4 Hon. Díaz Cintrón; the Prosecutor Mr. Agustín E. Font represented the People and the defense was represented by attorneys Toro Fernández and Leopoldo Termes. THE JURY THAT TRIED The jury that tried Mr. Rodriguez was constituted i>by Mr. Angel Figueroa and Mr. Angel Muñoz, UeMuana Dúnt: - José t'áaqttez jr Braulio Castillo, of Ponce; Raúl W. Lucas, of Guánica; Luis Antonio Mattel i f.iminuelli, Pedro Torres Rosa and Mario ('amacho, of Yauco; Radamés Ranzá, i of Peñuelas; Lorenzo Rodríguez, of Guayanilla; Felipe Zaragoza, of VillalI lia; Narciso Cardanedo and Zoilo Colón, (of Coamo. All of them represent reliable social values. This was an exceptional Jury of the most complete significance in terms of the intelligence, economic responsibility, and moral stature of its members. To all these qualities we owe, mainly, the result of this judgment, so much in harmony with what the public opinion expected, after having seen the parade of the firm's firm and the other party. 1)1 RATION OF THE' VIEWING I I I I I.a roll call began at half past eight o'clock on the morning of the Jes núércoí, was sns[>ended at 12:40; was reapn- ! dó at 2:35 I*. M.; it was suspended again at 8:00 o'clock in the evening and continued ! at !) prolonging itself until twelve o'clock i the same when the Jura| do retired to deliberate, returning with a veI redict of inculpability at 12:05 ¡ o'clock ¡ o'clock on Thursday. TEOKI\ OF THE PARTIES V EVIDENCE i The theory of the prosecution was the exis (Conunu" at i" pagiu* 2"
Of the same blow and in the same place, died who had killed a guard in Yauco.
Does this confirm the saying "he who goes down in flames goes down in flames"? In the city of Yattco lived a year ago an individual named Hermógenes Santiago, son of Gumersindo Santiago, alias "Tiboré". | The latter was confined in our Fresi ¡ dio for his entire natural life, convicted of having murdered a baker for the purpose of robbery, in the Naranjo neighborhood of that municipality. This Hermógenes Santiago was fond of the police companies and for a time he became a bloodhound of the insular police forces: he frequently assisted them as a witness or as a witness. Thus he was acquiring merits and overnight he was seen wearing the Police uniform, not without some harsh criticisms. Hermogenes did not know how to or could not hold on to the position he had climbed without major difficulties and one day he ended up compromising it. Saving his money, he left the police force. A little later he began to run into people with whom he had not done much good in his life and, among those with whom he had his quarrels was Dolores Parra Exía, alias "Yoyo", who one night inflicted on him a tremendous stab wound in the stomach, which was the direct cause of his death, later on. Now last Friday "Yoyo" was also stabbed in the same place as Hermógenes. His killer was a guy named ' Gregorio Torres, who has been released for having lent his fa- i vor a bond. This story confirms the popular saying that he who kills with iron kills with iron 9 I PROTEST AGAINST THE LEGIONS I Caguas, July 18, 1921. EL MUNDO, San Juan. Members of the Republican Allied Republican Committee will protest against the organization of Unionist Legions only, for being an attack on our rights, destructive of the due solidarity, and with the beautiful and contrary Barceló thought. We will explain in due course, pointing out covert enemies. V F. RODRIGUEZ ORTIZ. ,
Don't miss tomorrow's sensational races at LAS CASAS RACING PARK.
House FOR RENT, San Justo Street No. 35, it is suitable for industry or commerce; it was occupied with the Department of furniture and household effects of GONZALEZ PADIN, has three high floors and the first floor, prepared for modern trade, it is an ideal local well located and very spacious.... It is also very suitable for a large Hotel with restau" rant on the first floor. Information: ANSELMO GONZALEZ PADIN. Park Street. Tel. 01 black. Santurce, P. R.