- -
1 A PAGES. 3 CTS. i H "'fuerú Líes' I ' Destrato" BM*I t "L IMS. - Bes SU.
-- L * 1 A J "AGS. 3 CTS. | Ir tatotre te.ee ■ li Va as" -" "-te '> 1 'J'St
MORNING
MORNING
FubMsted ata lUtrfinaed author pwte a, iyT, "a 11" U lU flaa Ólflw"< SX ÍZL porta Bito, By orto ot Ue PmoMobK A. Z. PwMto Ouwal. Bal writ ao amad ota* auto, | ÍXurr tt, me, at the POM OMm a" Baa Jaaa, Parte Mee" GMtt tota""r toorto) aato the tot < aywh B, UTO
AMOVI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 27, 1924
NUMBER 1827. ♦
' Governor Towner yesterday promised the seamen who make up the Strike Committee, that he will make representations in the North for the last scale of wages requested by the workers!
| The seafarers, in turn, will - The workers will meet in assembly to take a definitive decision in this regard.
Yesterday, it would be eleven o'clock in the morning, the Strike Committee of the dock workers visited Governor Towner, at his Palace in Santa Catalina. The Governor received them very cordially, attended to them in every way, and asked them to give him an account of the latest developments in connection with the dock strike. The seamen did so, and then the Governor gave them a table. Governor Towner promised them that on his next trip to the North, he would make representations to the headquarters of the national companies operating in this capital to request that they comply with the seamen's request to grant them the last wage increase to which the workers will agree through the Mediation Commission. Of course, the Governor cannot assure that his efforts will be successful, but in any case, he made a formal promise to them that he will be interested in this matter on his next trip to the North. . At the same time, the Governor indicated to them that they would do well to resume work on the docks on the old scale of wages until such time as he can report to them on the outcome of his efforts in the North. The Governor believes that in this way he will be better able to make the request personally, since he will have greater moral strength and his position will be more solid. THE MARINES' RESPONSE The sailors, after listening to the Governor's indication, told him that they did not want to go to the North. Governor, told him that they could not commit themselves to anything, since they were only the intermediaries of their comrades, but that they would meet in a general assembly as soon as possible, to give their opinion on this issue. U"-- hdad adéwntfc h* brete* this eigarrlBr it - "*""♦ polar do! command. ' ■ Vi
a reply one way or the other in a timely manner. The Governor acquiesced to the wishes of the Strike Committee. The state of strike may thus end at a moment's notice, or else continue without hope of a solution. Everything depends on the final resolution adopted by the workers, gathered in assembly. THE WORK OF THE MEDIATION COMMISSION I The Mediation and Con-filiation Commission, as our ' readers will remember, was to meet yesterday,' 1 at half past eleven o'clock in the morning,' with Governor Towner. However, as the marines were early, the Governor instructed them to appear before the Commission to give an account of the result of the interview they had just held. The sailors, therefore, appeared before the Commission, which was assembled in the office of Ledo. Texidor, and gave an account of their actions. Then, the commissioners instructed them to meet in Assembly, and to give them an answer on the result of the same, in order to act accordingly. If the workers decide to return to work, the Commission will terminate its mission, with the satisfaction of having avoided a conflict, i. If the contrary happens, then, it will also terminate its mission, since within the powers conferred by law, it is not possible to do more than what has been done. VANZETTI IS CRAZY BOSTON, die. 26. (United Press.) - Vanzetti, the Italian who was convicted along with another Italian, filmed Sacco, accused of having committed murder and robbery, and who was confined in Charlestown prison, had to be taken to the hospital because of poor health. Prison employees claim that Van-Zetti has lost his mind. It will be remembered that this defendant has even provoked possible international conflicts, since the Communists of all countries have made innumerable efforts to have him declared free. FOR SALE Reasonable price Dodge 2 ptj. 1922 model, finished paint, new hood and general repair. Can be viewed by Garage Andreu, Aguilar & Co. License No. 1613. Tel. 257 or J. M. C. cío BEHN BROS; INC; Advt | BRANDI | VILLA ST. - PONCE |
also sion, since it <
LAST WORD OF THE MODERN SCIENCE f The Sojo Pharmacy is pleased to inform its patrons and the general public that it has installed a cabinet for the application of Chlorine Gas, for respiratory ailments and especially for the treatment of influenza. The treatment is in charge of the reputed physician Dr. F?W Juan, or if you wish we put the cabinet at the disposal of the physician. Honfe db 1 to 3 daily or by appointment. - _ SOJO INC. PHARMACY. Telephones 81® *-" 491 Stop 15 Santurce, P. R.
My ■
IS THE CRISIS SOLVED. Yesterday afternoon, met in the offices of the "Jockey Gub", situated in the Bouret building, all the gentlemen who form part of the Territorial Committee of the Historical Constitutional Party. The purpose was to seek a solution to the crisis that has begun in the Republican-Sodalist camp, due to the resignation of Mr. Roberto H. Todd, as elected Mayor of this capital city. During the whole afternoon, the situation was discussed, struggling to reach an understanding, a harmonious term that would satisfy everyone, but it was absolutely impossible and at six o'clock in the afternoon, the session was suspended to continue at nine o'clock in the evening. | At that hour, they met again, and the discussion continued. At the time of this writing, no practical agreement has yet been reached, so they are still meeting, despite the lateness of the hour. However, we have it on good authority that last night the matter was to be resolved one way or the other, and we can assure our readers that at this hour the problem of the municipal distribution and the resignation of Don Roberto has been resolved, either in favor of one or the other. The meeting was absolutely secret, and not even the most significant leaders of the Socialist Party were invited to the meeting, since it was purely to resolve their own affairs in the family, as we would say vulgarly. NEW YEAR'S DAY RECEPTION AT THE FORTALEZA The Governor and Mrs. ToWer will remain at their residence at La Fortalezá, all the afternoon of New Year's Day, and will be pleased to receive their friends from four to six o'clock that day. V
! If not, please call: 333 or 334 and we will send an employee to adjust it free of charge. This is part of the service we provide to our subscribers. PORTO RICO GAS & COKE COMPANY - Tatuán 75
? SPECIAL PRICES ' j¡ during Easter and New Year .■. I Henry W. Dooley J 9 Tapia St I Te! 1295 Sowturco
1 New, Fine and Beautiful Suits W - FOR GENTLEMEN AND YOUNG MEN - I High Quality and Fancy Models Purchased Specially For 1 __ J? -: EASTER AND NEW YEAR r RJLL-BALLOOM SI MEDIUM BAUOOM -: PRINCE OF OALES STYLES s-g Colors "Pouder - "Atlantic Sand' 1 - "Olive Green" and otrot | Made of Virgin Wool. Selected, Confection. KIRSCHBAUM I Many Nice New Colors, including / -:SEA BLUE and BLACK:- V $20 - 125 -W30 - -- $37.50 Each Suit with Warranty. - In all sizes. Fine Straw Hats, New Wide Brim Models at $2.00 and $2.50 ; - - "31 Qonzalez'Pddin Co, Inc. MtoMtotototoMWBl IN THE HEART OF THE CITY J MMtototototo ■i i---------a
BL' COMPAS" TYPOGRAPHIC COMPANY hereby summons all the shareholders of this Sodedád, for the Ordinary General Meeting to be held on Sunday, 29th of September, 2010. > will be held on Sunday, the 29th of the present at 1M 10 A.M. in the premises of the ndgqst (Cristo 6) with the purpose of electing our Directors and resolving on the estedé of said corporation. San Juan, December 22 do P del VALLE ATILES. prbsidbmte. Advt.
Mr. Jaime Both Alcalde and School Director of Corozal, fired two shots at the engineer Mr. Antonio M. Navas, ■ 7
B Mr. Nms is CapiáB Íe lUNserva, ¿teaéí h (Me federal ¡orisfito en esteras?' The day before yesterday, miéroolM, the people of Coroul witnessed an event that filled them with consternation and, %ngustU, for being involved in it two* do loa highest representatives ¿e, that society. As he left his house, calmly as usual, without having the slightest suspicion of what was going to happen, Mr. Antonio M. Navas, engineer, who is currently in charge of the works that the municipalities of Oorosal, Ciales and Morovis are carrying out with the money from the last loan, confronted Mr. Jaime Bon, mayor and school principal of that town. Pulling out a Colt revolver, he shot his son-in-law twice. Mr. NAVAS MIRACULOUSLY SAVES HIMSELF They were so close that the shots had to be fatal by necessity. Two Uros were shot at point-blank range. But, precleammte, this was what saved Mr. pnee by extending with lightness left was able to deflect the revolver in time. In fact, he still has two scratches on his hand from the trigger. The people came to the scene and the incident had no serious consequences. THE MOBILE The cause of this personal displeasure is the divorce of Mr. NaviA The Court has had to intervene in it because the parties do not reach an agreement regarding the amount that the wife is to receive from the husband, and also as to the visits of the father to his" children, which are currently in the hands of Mr." Navas. She, as (Continued on p. 3)
YESTERDAY AN UNHAPPY WORKER PERISHED TRAGICALLY ON THE NEW YORK WHARF.
WHO WILL BE THE REPLACEMENT FOR SEÑOR TODO, IF HE INSISTS ON RESIGNING? ' ■ p a. " Everything indicates that the candidate of the socialists is Ledo. Femando J. Géigel, who was a candidate for Resident Commissioner in the past elections Aan caando machos have thought of Ledo. Martinez Nadal, the socialists seem to have ruled out his candidacy, believing that he would not accept the nomination.
Yesterday, a newspaper of the afternoon, I ventured to give a possible substitute for Don Roberto H. Todd, as head of the administration of this capital, in case he insists on resigning, remaining at the head of the Department of Immigration. When we were aware of the maneuvers in the coalitionist camp, and of who might be Don Roberto's possible replacement, we did not want to say anything because we had the firm conviction that it will be Mr. Todd who will continue as Mayor-elect. In case the opposite should happen, and since someone has given m candidate, we have to inform our readers about what is available in this regard. We have been collecting impressions here and there, we have talked to some of you, and we can assure you that if Roberto's resignation is accepted, the candidate of the Socialists, and of the vast majority of the pure ones, will be Ledo Tornando J. Géigel. Moreover, some have even assured us that if Roberto is adamant about his resignation, he will be one of the defenders of the candidacy of Ledo Géigel. Géigel. However, we must state for the record that Ledo Géigel has at no time expressed any desire to be a candidate for the
He has, moreover, done all he could to stay away from the latest developments within his party. But his friends, among them the socialist leaders, believe that Ledo, i Géigel has excellent gifts as an administrator, and that it would be a good support for Don Roberto, if it is not possible, to reach an understanding that satisfies everyone. i HE LICENCIADO ¡ MARTINEZ NADAL i We have it on good authority that in the first moments it was thought that Ledo. Martines Nadal, but lately we have spoken with coalition leaders, who have told us that the candidacy has ceased to be considered, in the belief that the person himself would not accept. His position as Prek sidente of! party, his friends allege, , calls him to the Senate, where his figure po- * BtiesF-est ". fiamdda á Acquire greater .1 In addition, we also assure also that /el Ledo. Martinez Nadal, also, has never expressed his desire to appear as a candidate. If we bring his name to .j collation, it is because his friends have thought of him to replace Mr. Todd. I AND FINALLY, . DON MANUEL F. R0S8Y And in conclusion, we must assure * the evening paper, that the candidacy of the old politician and excellent gentleman, Don Manuel F. Rossy, has not been seriously considered, and that yes : he is held as the indlscuI tibie candidate for city attorney. VICTIMS OF A FIRE SALTVILLE, die. 26. (United Press). -Four persons were seriously injured in a raging fire which broke out at the Teja Hotel, which was reduced to ashes, i In this region there have been numerous fires at Christmas time. In one house, Christmas Eve was being celebrated, and several of the candles used to light the Christmas tree set fire to the house. As a result, six people perished, among them some children. The property losses are enormous. In the near east eight persons perished frozen, who were covered by snow, because they had no home to spend Christmas Eve in the warmth of the fire. Twelve people have died in this district, victims of the an telDQVilism diwm fren ado.
Um box, CMtemtaA m aafanfavil, le üi m hit terriKe tad pedio, lauáidole to the water, sia that his corpse has been eucoatc Des men, se "nju al agw, is the hope of rescuing him debair te.-B taw de te anpaia Yesterday, about .eleven o'clock in the morning, a friend telephoned us, to give us te news that on the wharf of the "New York and Porto Rico Steamship Co.", a misfortune had occurred. One of our editors went immediately to the site of the event, and was able to gather the details of the dreadful tragedy, which deprived a happy worker of his life. HOW THE TRAGEDY HAPPENED The steamer "Corozal' * docked at the New York pier yesterday morning, carrying cargo and mail, or immediately, the workers of the company set to work, eager to unload quickly, so that the ship could leave for the island without suffering any delay. Several seamen were assigned to hold No. 2 under the direction of a foreman. The work was carried out in the greatest order and with all regularity, and nevertheless, shortly afterwards, one of those workers spoke of Mr. Fate as a victim of fatality .... Among the braceros was Bienvenido Ottvo, who, when he went to help lower a crate, as we were informed by the policeman who conducted the preliminary investigation, and as he told us from the statements of the other braceros, did so unluckily, He was so unfortunate that a box containing an automobile came upon him, striking him a terrible blow on the head, which knocked him overboard and threw him a great distance into the abyss of the waters, which opened up for a second to give way to the victim. The braceros, horrified, saw how the water spread in concentric circles, and Olivo disappeared from their sight. Thus ended the life of the unhappy worker, who had come from the island to earn an honest living for his family, who may still be unaware of the misfortune that had befallen him. . TO THE WATER: The sailors ran to the bridge, and Braulio Santiago, more animated (Continued on page 2) TRES BANDERAS TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY "La Dueña del Mundo" by MIA MAY 1 -TOMORROW SUNDAY:- GEMIDOS DEL ALMA (The Broken Violin) For the First Time in San Juan
PRICES This is what you have to see before you buy your footwear. All our styles are marked in the window. See them and compare our prices with our competitors. Our "FAVORITE "* line for men has no competitor. VISIT US AND YOU WILL BE CONVINCED. GONZALEZ MARTINEZ & CO. Tanca St. No. 11 San Juan, P. R. BETWEEN FORTALEZA AND SAN FRANGSCO. GREAT CHRISTMAS GIFT None will be so appreciated by your wife and children as a KOHLER & CAMPBELL PIANO or AUTOPIANO More than two thousand instruments sold in 25 years accredit the Kohler & Campbell piano as the best in tropical climates. Ask your agent for more information: TEODORO AGUILAR SAN JUAN, P. R.