ELMUNDO
in PAGES. 3 CTS. I OficlnaT: "Puerto L-lco jj. Z Pustredo" Bldg. ■ Vf r>L 1222 ' ~ B ° X 3<B '
n LACL-LAH SemMtra - - - - 14 tw II A Afio - - - - 97
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR VI SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (#-. 8Ó1) authorized by the Act of October 6, 1917, on flic at the Poet Offtca of Ban Juan. Porto Rico, By order of the President, A S. Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 81, 1919, at the Pott Office at San Juan, Porto Rl-o, (United States of ▲merles') undec the Act of March 3, 1879.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 1924 NUMBER 1800.
Is there a bread monopoly in San Juan that the price of this article again?
"The cause that bread is expensive and bad is the legislators, the Health Department, the public and the storekeepers", says the owner of the bakery "Puig & Abraham" "the price of bread will continue, unfailingly, to rise, because the flour market demands it, fluctuating but high and with tendencies to rise", says the well-known merchant José Méndez Fernández.
There have been so many protests received in this editorial office due to the high price of bread, that we have seen the need to make a complete information of this important matter and to inform the public about what is really happening with this article of daily consumption. We have not wanted to let ourselves be carried away by passion or first judgments that more often than not are false, and, keeping in mind the policy of this newspaper to present to the reader the truth of the facts at all costs and above all, we have interviewed the main people involved in the matter, and we have heard all the parties: flour merchants, such as the firms of Ballester and B. rernández Hermanos; the owner of the bakery Puig y i Abraham, who refuse to join the bakers' society that currently exists and to which they are in competition, and the originators of the idea of creating a cooperative j to reduce the price of this staple neoa^j|d 4 Al. Mr. Miguel Bula Soler, to whom the monopoly of bread in San Juan is attributed, we have not been able to see him in spite of our best efforts. Yesterday Br. Juan de la Paz León came to our office to complain about the situation in the most bitter and strongest terms. He told us that bread was at eleven cents and threatened to rise to twelve very soon. That the cause of this high price was an abominable trust that was thinking only of its own profits, important TOMORROW SUNDAY THE Puerto Rican premiere of Marshall Neilan's supreme work El Aposto! The Stangers Banquet ' By CLAIRE WINDSOR and HOBART BOSWORTH
don't give a damn about the effect it has on the audience. HOW THE TBUST WORKS "The work of the trust,'' continued Mr. de la Paz Leon, "is to close every new bakery that opens, giving a certain rent to its owners. In this way they alone elaborate and control the prices and the quality as they please. Not only the suffering people, but also the government, are harmed by the existence of such an association. Mr. de la Paz explained to us that the government was being harmed, because since almost all the bakeries were closed, the income from taxes decreased considerably. "As they do not work'', this gentleman told us, ''they do not have to pay a penny to the treasury, while their owners, very comfortable in an armchair in their house, receive the income that is passed on to them, thus profiting from the government and the people. ' ' A COOPERATIVE TO PUT BREAD AT SEVEN CENTS Mr. de la Paz León together with Mr. Cristóbal Bey, and others, have a project to establish a cooperative. The shares will be $2.00 each, and they believe that five thousand families will join in the protest by taking one share each. As the members themselves will consume the bread, so the business of the new bakery would be splendid from the start.
ciple. They plan to sell the bread at seven cents a pound.
WHAT PUIG AND ABRAHAM SAY:
We immediately went to see the owner of the Puig y Abraham bakery, on Salvador Brau Street, who is currently competing with Mr. Buiz Soler's bread. Mr. Cristóbal Puig gave us detailed information about the case, beginning by saying that he was against the current association of bakers, since there were some people in it whose actions were absolutely reproachable and that he did not want to join them. It should be remembered that Mr. Puig was Treasurer for a long time of another similar association that existed in San Juan under the name of The San Juan Bakery Corporation, and that as soon as he was elected president of the same, such was his displeasure with the way business was being conducted, he dissolved it, as he told us, for the public's benefit. PUIG AND ABRAHAM WILL RAISE THE PRICE OF THEIR BREAD The first statement that the dear gentleman made to us was that from the first of next month, his bread will be sold one cent more expensive than usual. This increase will be salient in wholesale sales, and is due to a tremendous increase in the price of flour. Mr. Puig told us that it is not the bakery owners who are to blame; it is the legislators, the people, and the middlemen who are to blame for the high price. THE PEOPLE ARE TO BLAME I The people are to blame, because the people want too much convenience, and
Compare the Lucky Strike cigarette to any other cigarette Quality speaks.
GARAGE BRANDI VILLA ST. - PONCE
NOTICE TO FARMERS I have for sale cane seed F. C. 306 of the best productive quality. Recognized by the Experimental Station of Rio Piedras. Will report: Santo Buxó. Box 65 San Lorenzo, P. R. Advt.
DR. MARTORELL Participates to his clientele and the public in general to have moved his Dental office in front of Plaza Baldorioty (Altos de la Porto Rico Drug.) Phone 1777 San Juan 15 DAYS OF FESTIVALS Great patron saint festivities in the city of Humacao, P. R. During the days of December 8 to 24, 1924. Proposals for the lease of stalls for public spectacles will be admitted until 2:00 p.m. on DECEMBER 1, 1924. For information:-Dr. LOPEZ DEL. VALLEY, --Humacao, P. R.
On his arrival in New York, the top Socialist leader, Iglesias, makes sensational statements to a reporter of "La Prensa."
Iglesias qualifies as ''Electoral Tragedy of November 4" the elections held lately in our island The socialist leader affirms in the United States that the culprits of the abnormal situation prevailing in Puerto Rico are Governor Towner, Attorney General Coats and the Legislature with their amendments to the Electoral Law
Dones, a "pure" Republican, also appeared before the American Federation of Labor, and signed a resolution presented by Iglesias before that organization.
- Because we consider it of great interest, we publish the sensational interview that one of the reporters of our New York colleague, "La Prensa", gave Senator Iglesias when he disembarked in the great American city: On his way to El Paso, and coming from Puerto Rico, from where he arrived on the steamship "Porto Rico", Senator Santiago Iglesias, head of the Puerto Rican Socialist Party, was in New York yesterday. Nothing could be more interesting than to hear his opinion on the recent elections, in which the alliance formed by the historic unionist party and the republican faction led by the leader Tous Soto obtained such an overwhelming victory. Senator Iglesias did not hide his opinion, nor did he hide his statements. To a representative of "La Prenjdqiflmiyitn of the Continental Hotel, he expressed in vibrant words, in paragraphs of rapturous indignation, his protest against what he called "the electoral tragedy] of November 4". The Socialist leader condemned in detail and as a whole the procedures used by his party's adversaries to achieve victory. There was no sorrow for the defeat in his mind, but rather an ardent protest against the outrages and violence that, he said, had been committed against the Socialists to snatch away an overwhelming victory assured in the elections if the citizens' vote was respected. -There have been no elections in Puerto Rico," he declared; "what there has been has been a blatant theft, I frank, of the popular vote. The socialists were assured of a complete victory against the alliance formed to
The socialists were assured of complete victory' against the alliance formed to do away at all costs with socialism, which the elements ¡ coalitioned against them feared. Senator Iglesias, reversing the terms in which the results of the elections on the island are officially recorded, declared that his supporters would have won if the counting of the votes had been done legally and if the right of the people to vote in accordance with their free opinions had been respected. "We would have had one hundred and seventy thousand votes against, at most, one hundred and ten thousand of our enemies. We would have won in 38 or 40 municipalities and our adversaries would have triumphed, at the most, in 35. All in all, we can assure that we would have had, in the worst case, 15 percent more votes than the total obtained by the Alliance. Immediately the Socialist leader presented a formidable list of charges against the Alliance, against the electoral, judicial and police machinery of Puerto Rico which, belonging to Unionists and Republicans allied to them, overwhelmed and ran over the masses of the people affected by Socialism. "Our supporters," he declared, "were persecuted, harassed, threatened and mistreated throughout the island. Their protests were futile. Peasants tried to exercise their rights at the polling stations, only to find themselves violently thrown out of them or to find their votes blatantly scored to our enemies ..." Mr. Iglesias tirelessly cites data. In many municipalities, when the election should have begun at nine in the morning, the polling stations had not opened at eleven. "I personally protested, says the senator, in San Juan, and it was useless." In many other districts, the Socialists saw their observers expelled for trying to oppose the frauds. In others, voters saw their ballots crossed under Alliance candidacies, despite their protests. Vote buying was blatant. In many places, the public forces terrorized the socialist voters, mistreated them and fired on the crowds.
and fired on the angry crowd.... Senator Iglesias triumphed by fifty thousand votes in spite of everything, he notes. Mr. Alonso, Mr. Giménee and Mr. Martínez Nadal also triumphed. "Per 0 the elections in general, opines the Socialist chief, were stolen by force, fraud and bribery, in more than 30 municipalities and 15 representative districts." This is completely intolerable in a democratic and republican regime and under the flag of the stripes and stars. And the Socialists in a mood of extraordinary exaltation, their leader tells us, are preparing to protest with all their energies in this country. "The worst of all, what hurts me most and what is most serious in this situation, summarizes Mr. Iglesias, is not the electoral defeat of now. The party, after all, has not lost any strength in its electoral representation: we maintain practically all our positions in the Senate and in the House. But whether I was elected or re-elected by 50,000 votes is of no importance. After all, we men are all alike and some rulers tend to resemble others across party lines. The terrible thing, the painful thing, is the collapse of the civic education that our people had had for twenty years and that was bringing them closer to the exercise of their rights in all their fullness. This is what is tragic, that those thousands of peasants, farm laborers, workers in the cities and in the fields who believed that they had guarantees under the democratic regime of the United States to freely express their opinion, will lose their hope in those principles as a consequence of this enormous political setback that we have experienced. The scandalous outrage that we have been made victims of with the complicity of the electoral, judicial and police organization of Puerto Rico, controlled by the Alliance to the exclusion of all representation, í Continued on page 8.)
ill B Mi pure olive SI i] v °i L f
SOLAR I SPECIAL PRICES 8 during Easter and New Year's Day. I Henry W. Dooley 9 Tapia St. I Tel. 1295 Santurct
UL LAST TIME Today arrives in our port what has ADMIRED THE WORLD: THE NEW STUDEBAKER 1925 MODELS. COSTAS & CO. will be pleased to inform you. EXCLUSIVE AGENTS FOR PUERTO RICO SAN JUAN PONCE Allen 75 Concordia & Luna - i SUB-AGENCIES Mayagüez, Arecibo & Humacao
GOOD OPPORTUNITY We need Director Expert in costume making and all kind of hand work. Must speak English. --Apply personally to MORRIS E. STORYK Isabel 2a. No. 5 Marina San Juan" P. R.
THEATER TRES BANDERAS -:TODAY -- SATURDAY - TODAY:- San Juan Premiere EL GANCHO Y LA ESCALERA (Hook and Ladder) Mildred JUNE and Edward DAVIS
threatens to go up
"It is uncertain that New York City is full of signs protesting against the last elections in Puerto Rico," says Mr. Sheridan Lee, who returned from the North on Monday Mr. Lee adds that if there had been anything he would have seen it, for he comes from New York.
Last Wednesday we reported in our columns that we had learned from persons arriving from New York that the city of New York was invaded by posters, in which the republican-socialist pro- 1 testa commission states that the elections in our island have been a farce and that therefore they should be annulled immediately, adding, these persons, that everywhere these immense posters can be found, especially in the most crowded places, such as the docks, promenades, etc. .... I These reports seem to lack veracity, a reporter of ours, speaking yesterday with the distinguished continental Mr. W. Sheridan Lee, tall, employed in the docks, promenades, etc.. Sheridan Lee, tall, Government employee, who returned Monday from the United States on the steamer "Caracas," learned that the said gentleman had been several days in New Yor before embarking for here, and, he says, the vaunted protest signs were nowhere seen by him, least of all on the docks, pbá- néce&VlWnferiffc' he had to pass before taking the boat that brought him to Puerto Rico. So," said the reporter to Mr. Lee, "the profusion of posters in New York is a bluff? I Mr. W. Sheridan Lee nodded at our words, and then we dis- ! asked of him rejoicing that I was already among us again. comforts are paid for with money. "In our establishment,'' continued Mr. Pnig, ' ' ' there, over the counter, bread. however much flour may rise, will never sell for more than ten cents Ja pound At present the public is paying eleven because instead of coming to get it, you have to take it 3 your home and trust it to them for afiar (Continued on page 5).