ELABNDO
in PACS,3 CIS. I JR Oleteas: "Puerto Bioe ■ g m Ilustrad*** BUg. g tm. rate. - b" mb.
¡1Q PAGS.3CTS. I /k MmMtrs 10
EX A.M. DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR W
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (Ma. 801) Act af Octebet S, 1417, en tie at the Beat ■an Juan, Forte BHe, By order ut the Proridoat, A. B. GenenL Entered aa second elasamatter, February "1, 181", at the Poet Ofloo at Ben Jura, Porte Meten ef America 1 under ths Act of march 1, 1ST."
SATURDAY, MAY 17, 1924.
NUMBER 1616.
FOR THE THIRD TIME, JUDGE ODLIN, OF THE FEDERAL COURT, DISCHARGES A JURY OF THIS COURT.
B Judge wanted to know where the women's suffrage suit had stopped to see if he could find women for the jury panels of his Court The Prohibition case against Don Manuel Cerecedo was held in Federal Court. The defendant was not present at the express wish of his defense attorney Mr. H B. Francis. Francis, as he later explained to the jury in his brilliant defense speech. The evidence was given by the special prosecutor Mr. Gonzalez and a Mr. Serrano, his son and his daughter testified, all affirming that one night, on April 17, 1923, Manuel Cerecedo arrived at the former's house and gave him a room for which he paid him $25.00 and that he then introduced some boxes and that he later transferred the contents of the boxes into sacks. The son declared that as soon as he realized that what he was talking about in the house was contraband he told his father to take it out of the house because it could be compromised and that Cerecedo was in the house three days and two nights; that one day Manuel Garcia came to look for the sacks that he could carry and took 18 sacks of drinks; that he posted the other drinks in the surroundings of the Anea about two hundred yards from the house, buried in the ground, Captain Igaravidez declared. Everyone was sure that it was Cerecedo, although as he was at the Court, they could not indantify it. The witnesses also spoke of a document signed by Manuel Cerecedo delivered to the father and of the letter brought by Manuel Gar¡ cla r, also signed by Cerecedo and Captain Igaravidez and the witnesses said that these documents were delivered to Prosecutor Wells but did not appear among the accusatory documents as evidence. The case was very ably presented to the Court and then to the jury by prosecutor Gonzalez, and counsel Francis in his address to the jury explained his client's absence from the courtroom at length and justified it, in his opinion, by the long practice and experience he has in matters of this nature. (Oontlnfia on page 2) MATO J QUEEN ELECTION CONTEST Tickets for the voting will be on sale at the Paris Basar, Gonzalez Padin, Oarbia Bros., Puerto Rican Casino, Spanish Casino and Knights of Columbus. The Queen chosen in this pageant will be crowned on May 31, at the Municipal Theater, in a reglo baile do etiqueta. ▼ote for the sefioríta of her sympathy and will help the Poor Children's Wardrobe. G.
Senator Iglesias sends us a copy of the following letter he has addressed to President Gompers: San Juan, P. R. May 14, 1924. Mr. Samuel Gompers, President American Federation of Labor Washington, D. C. Dear Sir and Brother: - Two daily newspapers of San Juan, have given publicity yesterday to the letter addressed to you, signed by Mr. Antonio R. Barcelo, President of the Unionist Party, and Mr. Jose Tons So- i to, President of the Republican Party. \ Said letter is dated April 29, 1924, for which reason I believe it will already be in your hands. The character and purposes of the said letter are the result of the Alliance which has just been organized between the intellectuals of the Unionist and Republican parties and the great interests. The letter is extraordinary, coming as it does from these representatives of the big interests which control the largest Üfe 1¿ IfaausfrtlKynas 'riquófcts'of the Island, and which have been for many years, the most terrible adversaries of the American Federation of Labor and of the labor movement throughout the Island. The signers use the defamatory charge of communism against our so-called Socialist Party of Puerto Rico, when it is a positive fact that the name "Socialist" in its true essence is an improper name applied sincerely to the feeling and knowledge of socialism prevailing among the leaders and workers throughout the country. It is indeed very significant that these gentlemen were in such harmony with us when we were in Washington supporting the Joint Resolution of the Puerto Rico Legislature. Now, they are acting as if they have been ordered to separate their association after having obtained their desired purposes. They want and need now to separate the American Federation of Labor from the activities and influences of the so-called Socialist Party of Puerto Rico. That is good, because it shows that they have learned something more in regard to the distinction between the American Federation of Labor and the Socialist Party, but they fail in their integrity when at the same time they are- - PARK - Saturday, May 17, 1924. JACKIE COOGAN in "MY CHILD" A Comedy by BUSTER KEATON. - Tomorrow - "THE SINISTER DIAMONDS" With BEBE DANIEL, JAMES KIRKWOOD &. ANNA Q. NILSON Matinee 3:30 PM. M.- "SPEED". FOR SALE: House furnishings for sale. For information: Avenida Miramar No. 3, Parada 11, Phone 44, Santurce.
TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY Complete Show by the unrivaled singer and dancer AMPARITO GUILLOT NOTE:--Complete show, no movie. 1 7 PRICES: Ground floor, $0.75. Upper floor, $0.50. WHITE CAPACETES - KAKI* $4-00 per C. O. D. ' CABRER STORE-Ponce.
f* in i P r PERMANENT GARAGE SERVICE - GASOLINE - BRANDI WASHES .- p F ON I f E
"The incubation of the Alliance was perhaps obtained in the offices of General McIntyre, Secretary Weeks, and some of Wall St., and assisted by the instruments and advice of the high magnates," says Senator Iglesias in a letter to the President of the American Federation of Labor, Samuel Gompers.
They are asking for the political cooperation of the American Federation of Labor for the benefit of their joint Allied Party. As you know, Mr. J. Tous Soto was the one who continually pleaded with us for the formation of a coalition between the Republican Party and the Socialist Party to implement true Americanization on the Island, against the independentists of Mr. Barceló's Unionist Party. Now he (Mr. Tous Soto) has changed his mind and has formed an alliance of the Unionists, DEMANDING THE DISSOLUTION OF THE SOCIALIST PARTY, hoping at the same time to conquer the cooperation of the American Federation of Labor on the Island and in Washington, to favor the Aliancista Party. The incubation of this Aliancista Party was perhaps obtained in the offices of General McIntyre, Secretary Weeks and some of Wall St." and assisted by the instruments and advice of T< Iftos áftgaitterf*>é ''cóntfolan interests of sugar, tobacco, transportation and banks of Puerto Rico All these combinations have been elaborated for an end FEARING THE RESULT OF THE NEXT ELECTIONS. As you know, we exposed before the Congressional Committees the deplorable economic and industrial conditions suffered by the working people of this Island: Such conditions were presented by me in the hearings of the House and Senate Committees. We denounce the existence of an Income Tax Law, by which the speculators of the Island pay only ONE THIRD of the Income Tax on the Island, (Continued on page 8).
Villar & Co. Inc. Apartado 201. Tel. 1450 San Juan, P. R. They sell the best wheat flour brands "LUNA DE ORO" "CRUZ DE QUALIDAD" ' Price without competition. Proof makes faith.
The defendants of Domingo Canales are getting ready to raise before the Supreme Court impjptes questions of law in favor of their defendants.
I was ! plimented to the Towner Healer with whom he had extensive missions. In the afternoon ',aM "yer, Messrs. ■ Barceló and ToiiB-'/Sfio, leaders of the ■ Alliance, accompanied by , the other coéprifirádos appointed by ej DirectoMV® to greet Governor Tow|íqMty to inform him that the Alliance Committee had que<Mft®ficia¡ly consi titrated and that OdMfs its members ha- ! b had already takenqfrjjjyésion of their car- ' gos * i The comfslangjB of the Alliance I were lar&JjsEto changing im1 pressures cou'iJBBMChief of the Executive i about l<w£SW)ósitos and good . wishes of and the interview proved suinatg^RRcordial. ■ | He from the moment he heard 'j&jflRlflo dél Manifesto 1 of the seño1 ó y Tous was decidraflHkfé in favor of i that they would perform them : a work of dey0fl||wiía and concord to traljMfcen favor of the ! gejinMt|R interests?dcl country, already in , | ways of beautiful idea i exteriorized s]4E "isf action in seeing i the partiesádHMHicos /raternizani do in that of getting stabgfinÉ" this island a more and liberal government within i of which reach a degree and felicii dad. Mr. Barcflór" and Mr. Tous 1 Soto had an extensive interview with the Attorney General from which they came away aita'rtipnte pleased. i The interview was confidential and to date we have not been able to learn ¡ the matters discussed. When Mr. Barceló and Mr. Tous Soto returned from these missions, they were seen crossing our streets in the same automobile, which produced a great effect on the public, since they were the two main leaders of the Alliance, and seeing them go so fraternally, it was thought that the Alliance must be of great effectiveness in that it will subsist in the future.
There was a time here when for abominable murders no conviction could be obtained in the Jury compatible with the magnitude of the crime committed De facto was Capital punishment abolished -i / 41 /, .1 J ■ 4 "í tyjNhnrU mingo Canales (a) --Nfboa", the death sentence, imposed by the Oorte fiel Segundo Distrito de San Juan, in j 'a cause that followed him for having taken the life, violently, Pedro Figueroa, Foreman of a mosaic factory in Santurce, an event that occurred back in the month of August 1923. We stopped at the threshold of one of the doors of the courtroom, when the fans were already pouring coolness on the podiums, and one of us was already in a state of harmony and concord among its different components.
BEST .....! The Newest....! :: - :: The Cheapest....! ■ < f IN GENTLEMEN'S CLOTHING AND EFFECTS Only by visiting our departments you will be able to get it. Handmade, handmade Denim Suits Good and Fine Shirts and guaranteed at superb quality and colors 12. 14.50 and $16. 75 and 98 cts. Palm Beach Suits Genuine Good T-shirts and Shorts in colors chosen to all of the best quality-worth double 8.50 10 and 12.98. 50 c. 59 c. and 1.00 Fine Gabardine Suits Lightweight Superior Bathrobes unlined, nice colors to quality, colors, sizes and styles $16. 3 98 and $6. Qonzalez Cpadin Co., Inc. LA UniCA-CASA On the ISLAND at FIXED PRICES
$600.00 For an Exclusive Design Living Room Set, six pieces, wicker with handblocked cushions. LOPEZ MISSA & Co. IncTanca 3-Teléf. 1231
With Little Money at the "Bazar Ahorro", Fortaleza 25, you can get a rtaje, hat, shirt and other articles of clothing. There is an outrageous bargain if you want to economize, don't forget that Manolo limits himself. Tel. 1579.
The spirit of equality that informs the "Alianza Portorriqueña has begun to set in.
"It is more humane to shoot us than to kill us as they are killing us '-says one of the patients confined in the tuberculosis hospital of La Perla Yesterday visited our editorial office one of the poor patients who, in the Tuberculosis Hospital located in the neighborhood of La Perla, of this Capital, await the hour when death, supreme liberator, unties them from the moorings that tie them to this life for them full of misfortunes and miseries. NINE MONTHS AGO... For nine months he has been struggling with death; he has seen it arrive daily! in that place to take away one, two, three I of his companions, amidst the indifference of the directors of that charity center, and amidst the natural dread! that it causes to the sick. For nine months he has been struggling against the misery and shortages to which all the patients of the Hospital are obliged to suffer; and now, when it is no longer possible to remain silent, his voice of protest is heard, rising more than a complaint, in a plea, in an appeal to the feelings of humanity of our municipal authorities. POOR NUTRITION... We are told by our visitor, that the' food given to the poor en- ¡ ferraos is most deficient and poor <me BUBfiK CoiNMia rice and grains to evening and morning. Not a glass of milk, not "a bowl of soups; nothing that can nourish those poor organisms undermined by the sinister Koch's bacillus. Before, the sick man explains to us, they gave us milk at ten and three o'clock; milk soups at lunch, meat and soups in the afternoon; coffee with milk in the afternoon; coffee with milk in the afternoon and in the afternoon; coffee with milk in the afternoon and in the afternoon. Judging by our reports, the Commission obtained there conclusive and decisive information. We know that there is no other way. To annul the race in which the two aforementioned horses appear and to suspend the starter Mr. Jaime Todd. We believe that this must have been within the criteria of the Riding Commission. Otherwise... FOR RENT A magnificent apartment with three rooms. Suitable for family and office. Julián Pérez Sevillano will inform. Cruz 23, altos. Buy a pack today. If not satisfied Gilles & Woodward will refund your money. wiill Clean your typewriter for $2.00. Add up and cash register for $5.00. MILLIONAIRE WITCH OJEDA Phone 355 San Jose 37.
practice already in San Juan Several names of prominent Republicans sound for public positions in our municipal Administration Among them, that of civil engineer Don Miguel Ferrer for Commissioner of local 0. P. The Municipal Assembly of San Juan which has been meeting since last Thursday has adopted several important ordinances, among them the following, the operative parts of which we publish: BE IT RESOLVED by the Municipal Assembly of San Juan, Puerto Rico : Authorization to the Commissioner of Public Service, Police and Prisons to make assignment to "El Pueblo de Puerto Rico" by means of public deed, of the usufruct of the following parcel of land to be segregated from the one on which the buildings destined for Municipal Hospitals in Santurce are located: Plot of 35 meters in front by 18 in depth, in adjoining by the North that will be by its front, with the Central Avenue; by the South, with the Hospitalillo for the insane; by the East eon the building called "House for the Director of the Hospitals"; and by the West with the passage that gía. This concession is made for the sole and exclusive purpose of constructing in the described parcel a building that will be destined to establish in it the School of Nurses of Puerto Rico. This concession shall cease to be valid from the moment in which the building to be constructed on the parcel, the usufruct of which is hereby assigned free of charge to El Pueblo de Puerto Rico, is dedicated to purposes other than those specified in this Resolution, or destined, or destroyed, or abandoned." "The Municipality of San Juan, Puerto Rico, is hereby bound to appropriate in the Regular Budget for the Fiscal Year 1924-25, an appropriation in the amount of TEN SIXTEEN THOUSAND TWO HUNDRED AND TWELVE DOLLARS AND TWENTY-NINE DOLLARS AND TWENTY-NINE (Continued on page 6) TOMORROW SUNDAY Grand premiere of THE ENEMY OF THE WOMAN Amphitheater $0.40 Luneta $0.25 Why pay for expensive hotels ? GUEST HOUSE EXCLUSIVELY FOR DISTINGUISHED FAMILIES, MODEST PRICES, CAREFUL SERVICE. Mrs. Lucila G. Riera. 230 West 107 Bt., NEW YORK, Near Broadway. References >- Stíbbe Bros. Inc. Dr. J. S. Belaval. M. Alfonsi. "TAQUIGRAPH 1 A competent young man, with good references, is wanted to work in a commercial office. requirement that he have some general knowledge of commerce. For inquiries contact Box 131, AGUADILLA, P. R. Advt,