THE WORLD
í A PAGES. 3 CTS. I ■ ■ ■ S "Btatí" H-00 ■ ■ ■ ■ Vn ASe *7.50.
in PAGS.3CTS. I 1% -óletaMi '''PamiTKr 111 \ llwtraá*" RMg. I II \r "L isas. - a "s teas.
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS p
YEAR VI
-AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published mid <ia "rtb "M under pene" (Ve. eux) liMS oy tae act oí ucmmt e, MI?, on Ble M the Fort Otico o mu jum, Porto BM4, By order of the President, A. -. Postmaster General. Entered m second class mattei February 91. ISIS, at the Poet (Mice e* San Juan, PartrBo, (United States of America! under the Act of march 3. 1"7'
SATURDAY, APRIL 5, 1924
NUMBER 1581
In the inscriptions held in Santurce an incident arises between a member of the local electoral board and the Captain of the Police fl señr
of the Police fl señr Gámbaro protested of a pracÜGB gme he believes arbitrary and that he inteÉéé initiate affi by the referred fundHirio and the Ledo. Martínez Dávila, member of the Insular Board of Elecdtoes.* Arrest o. did not take place B1 Thursday afternoon we learned of a personal incident that with votive of the inscriptions in Santuroo had arisen between the assemblyman gr. Gámbaro, who is at the same time member of the local Board of elections, and the i Captain of the Police of San Juan, ■ Mr. Blanco. The versions we had on the matter were contradictory, for there were those who said that the former had assaulted the latter with his fists, and that he had made use of his revolver to fire a shot that went to wound a third party, who was oblivious to the matter. Others, however, denied this, thus making the incident uninteresting for reporters. In view of this situation we decided to interview some of those concerned, and in effect we went to Mr. Gámbaro, (Continued on page 6) OORDOVA DAVILA WAS WELL CONGRATULATED YESTERDAY* WASHINGTON, 25.-Mr. Felix .Cordova Davila, resident commissioner of Puerto Rico, was visited today by his friends and companions who went to con-, tarfut the arrival yesterday of his commissioner has three daughters and his first daughter. In- j fcérádM that mother and daughter are sien- ! ten perfectly well. WE NEED some competent salesmen for the automobiles we represent PACKARD, HUDSON and KBSEX. If you think you have the necessary qualifications come and visit us. SANTIAGO A. PANZARDI, LTD. Allert 74" Box 1436. San Juan.
Dr. Veve emphatically denies a report in "El Tiempo" HE IS NOT A PARTICIPANT OF THE REPUBLICAN-80CIALIST PACT Fajardo, April 1924. EL TIEMPO, Please rectify information published Tuesday saying I am a supporter of the Republican-Socialist Pact. I remain neutral as long as the present political state lasts and the Mayagüez assembly has the last word. After that I will act according to my ideals and my conscience. SANTIAGO GOES. "Neither Mr. Dexter, nor Mr. Me K. Jones are inscribed on the lists of our Party in this city," says Henry W. Dooley "It was only an act of courtesy on our part to accept them to be part of our meeting" "You Democratic Party in this city has no need to give Mfefacdooes, fluestrarecord is given" he adds Our readers are up to date on the latest events to which the meeting held by the Democrats of this city on the 29th day of last month has given rise. For the purpose of enlarging our information on this matter, we went yesterday afternoon to the office of the well-known Continental Mr. Henry W. Dooley who gave us interesting particulars of the meeting held. "I must tell you first of all," he told us, "that I have read the statements made by Mr. Dexter, as well as others which have been kindly written against us by certain elements in the city. Say you in your (Continued on page 14)
French steamer "figuig" ON HER NEXT MAY 5 TRIP SHALL LEAVE SAN ¡ JUAN DIRECT FOR LA CORUÑA AND THE HAVRE. ... i 1 Admits passage and cargo for the above ports. For further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. agents. I i Telephone No. 257. Tanca-Tetuan, San Juan. | > PARQUE charl.es chapijn ; mmdo ££ VAGABUNDO : April and SEE TO BELIEVE : WHAT FOOLS MEN ARE : T ■ i =¡ A r* 17' PERMANENT SERVICE AVjUL GARAGE - GASOLINE - WASHES .NDl MUNICIPAL TODAY SATURDAY TODAY f ■- - - w>; ut of the prodigious violinist and superb dancer ROUSKAYA::: ■t Tomorrow Sunday, second performance.
Is that a Democr jóa or a Dictatorship which has put in pittica the Local Committeejof the Republican Party í dealing with the present political situation-questions, iilignant, the Ledo. Juan B.
Soto, figure-cum-faithful republicanism urges Our role-he adds-is not that of the politician who seeks to get in tune with what's most flattering to the crowd, using it in theicalization of his own designs.
The notable lawyer leader of the Republican Party, Don Juan B. Soto, sends us the following article: DEMOCRACY OR DICTATORSHIP? For the second time, to our knowledge, it is suggested in the columns of "El Tiempo'', the convenience of quo THE NEW TELEPHONE RATES: Important Work of the "Porto Rico Telephone Company'' In our Monday edition we will insert an interesting article that was sent to us by the "Porto Rico Telephone Company''. It is a work that should be of interest to all telephone subscribers, because it gives a detailed and ample explanation of the way in which the telephone service is to operate with the new rates that have been approved by the Public Service Commission and that will be put into effect from one moment to the next. The work also explains ■ the development of the company's business in recent years and the reforms proposed to improve the service not only in this capital city but also throughout the island. The work contains the tables of the new tariffs and by them the reader will be able to see the price of the different telephones that can be used as much, by the houses of commerce as by the private residences. * EVERY WEEK RENO-i VAMOS NUESTRAS EXISTEN-! We ALSO HAVE FOOD FOR POULTRY FEEDS FOR BIRDS, HORSES, PIGS, PIGS, Etc. VILLAR & CO. INC. P. O. Box 201.-Phone 1450 San Juan, P- R. Hato Rey, Puerto Rico. February 21, 1924. Señores Villar & Co, Inc, San Juan, P. R. Dear Sirs: I have the pleasure to state that the "VITALITY" feed for dairy cows is one of the products of that nature that I have used in my dairy, with the best success, until now, From you my dear friend and S. S. Lorenzo VALCARCEL. Protected Tobacco Thermometers STUBBE BROS. INC. Gray hair disfigures the face and gives an appearance of premature old age, all of which can be avoided by using the incomparable 'WORmr which dyes the hair instantly.
It is proposed that the Local Republican Committee in this city dictate to delegates to the Assembly the criteria to be followed in the upcoming meeting in Mayagüeg. It is also proposed i to the Local Committee that it submit to a re- ! ferendum of the Republican electorate the question of whether it will "accept the olive branch and fifty per cent of the pulic p u l a i s , or reject the olive branch and all the rest to continue fighting our adversaries". I do not know what the Local Committee of the PaAido will think, nor do I know its intentions at all. Nor do I try to give it guidelines, or suggest ways forward. I But I do know, and I must publicly con- ■ sign it, that the Local Committee of the Republican Party has no authority to dictate to the delegates the criterion ' they should take in the Assembly, nor to submit to the ba fndicaaa, nor any reia- [ tive to principles or procedures which I I I should follow or which our Party should adopt. The delegates to the Assembly have been appointed and elected in the same manner as were the members of the Committee, and in accordance with the constitution of the Party; and neither the said Committee, nor any other body or person within the Party, has authority to implement procedures which have not been expressly or tacitly adopted in a sovereign Assembly. Nor can the aforementioned Committee, by regulation, resort to a rendum, in the manner suggested by the enthusiastic co-religionist Mr. Gonzalez. | For this, it would be necessary for such a procedure to be authorized by a (Continued on page 12) ¡ THE "LIGAO" PARITIDO Now that there is so much talk of coalition and merger, etc., it is good to remember that the cement LIGAO used by Jiménez, del Valle & Co. in the manufacture of their floor mosaics, is superior and long-lasting. Buy ' their mosaics at our factory, Highway 121, Stop 17. Advt. AUCTION On Monday, the 7th, at two o'clock in the afternoon, ■ will take place the auction of expired garments, at the lending house of F. Burgos & Co., Alien No. 55. serve notice of this announcement to those interested ! "" The reason why the Ame| rican Tobacco" Co. is selling ! 40,000,000 Lucky Strike daily, is due solely * to its excellent quality. 1 ' I used the "West Indian Goiter" and it highlighted the best spirit I have ever used in my life. : jMstribnidom: K JnUá á Co. A(Urt
i HSR : W ' 1 ' fe ■-uitA 1 -'- ihaS liíBSsiii 1 HARRY F. SINCLAIR, the mag- I nate who has been at the center of the es- i oil scandal, reading, before the Senate Committee, a plea prepared in advance in which he declines to make statements and setting forth the reasons why he refrains from testifying in the momentous matter. The Secretary of War made a recommendation to Congress that Puerto Rico be granted the election of Governor 1 MUMdñññfKHi 1932 *- - The auditor will be kept under Federal jurisdiction and his appointment will continue to be made by the President (United Press. Special to THE WORLD).
WASHINGTON, D. C. April 4. (Via All America Cables) - Secretary of War Weeks has made a recommendation to Congress to include in the bill amending the Organic Act of Puerto Rico a provision for the election of Governor to take effect after 1932. The Secretary of War made the request that the Auditor of the Island continue to be under federal jurisdiction and that his appointment continue, as heretofore, to be a presidential appointment. Teatro Olimpo TODAY Saturday, April 5. Reappearance of the notable international canzonetísta and dancer Amparifo Guillot New núrperos- New dances. ■ 1 ■q* ■ ■■■ WRITING MACHINES Hepsration in general of typewriters, calculating machines, phonographs, etc. P. R. TYPEWRITER REPAIRING SHOP, TEL. 288, ALLES '11, BOX 1445. San Juan, P. R. RENT 2 LARGE FLOORS FOR RENT for Offices, Hotels, Factories in the most central part of the city in San Francisco No. 36. Ask for information to RODRIGUEZ BLANCO CO. L Tdéfoho 1448 P. O. Box 1503 San Juan, P. R. 4 Advt,
"There are serious difficulties in carrying out an understanding with another party without each party losing its persona-.
Yesterday afternoon rumors reached our editorial desk that the city's bus chauffeurs were threatening to go on strike if they were not paid 25% of their daily cash earnings by the owners of the vehicles. In order to find out what might be true in the rumors, we had to contact one of the bus owners, who told us that the chauffeurs had indeed given them a period of three days to answer their demand and that this period expired today. He also informed us that at least 90% of the bus owners were not in agreement with the salary increase demanded by the chauffeurs, believing it to be completely unjust and unreasonable, and that they preferred to keep their vehicles until new personnel could be found rather than agree to such a thing. i According to reports supplied by our informant, there are at the present time about 125 buses in operation. In the event of a chauffeur's strike, we would find that no more than twenty would be able to continue providing their services, as they would be driven by their owners, but the rest would have to be put into a corner until new personnel could be found and it is not so easy to get a hundred of them. Small air compressor with its engine; etc. Will report: F. ECHEVARRIA Tel. 1177. Santurce.
In an interview he gave in December with the Socialist leader, he expressed his opposition to a pact with the Republicans. In order to show what was the way of thinking of the Socialist leader, Senator Iglesias, last December when he returned from the United States and when he had not yet embarked with the Commission of the Legislature, it seems appropriate to reproduce here, some paragraphs of this interview, which seem to us to be of the utmost topicality. Here are the manifestations of the Socialist leader at that time, which appear in our edition of Friday, December 14, 1923: "Interested in knowing the opinion of the labor leader in relation to the so hackneyed matter of the re-public-Socialist pact, we asked him for his opinion on this matter. i (Continued on page 14) -¡ DON LUIS TORO' 'I On Thursday arrived from New York the very prestigious ca1 ballero and distinguished friend of ours 1 Señor don Luis Toro, president of < the Porto Rico American Tobacco | Company and valuable element that dis■| fruit of well-deserved affections in the Puerto Rican so- ■, ciedad. 5 Mr. Toro proposes to spend -¡several sittings on eata.isla, news i which will please the nurterózas amis- -■ tades with which he counts throughout the country i'e] esteemed gentleman. 5 EL MUNDO is pleased to en- > viarle you a cordial greeting of bienvei! nida. FOR SALE i A reputable gentlemen's store in the most - centric of San Juan, and with the ¡ quantity of merchandise that - the buyer wants, ask for information. Telephone 1448 P. O. Box15O3 San Juan, P. R.
HOW MUCH IS YOUR CREDIT WORTH? Everyone benefits from what they own. What benefit are you getting from your credit? Your credit represents cash on hand. Use it to buy electrical appliances on credit at all our stores. DEFERRED PAYMENTS Porto Rico Railway Light SPowerCompany Bayamón, Caguas, Fajardo, Humacao, Manatí, Río Piedras, San Juan, Vega Baja. l-l 1 I 1 I 1 I 1 1 1 i 1 I 1 I 1 l l l-l-l-bl 1 M-l-H-I-l-i I I I I I IHWllll 1 I I I 1-1 lil-l-H-L For Spain. Special Voyage ;! STEAMER "REINA MARIA CRISTINA" !¡ It will arrive from the port of New York around the day :: 18 of the current month, in voyage for the ports of Cadiz and :: Barcelona, (Spain) - This steamer has abundant chamber available for passengers who ' interest to embark by said steamer. '; For annotations address to - - - SOBRINOS DE EZQUIAGA AGENTES GENERALES. J * SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO. ., t I 1 11 l .M. i ! I l l 'I-M. 1- ¡■ I I I-I 'I-M-! I 1 I I I l l b hM'.|-14 I-b-l-I I i- FT " T '