EL.HÜNDO
1 P PAGES. 3 CTS. I ÓÓcÜmI tuerto ¿ico j í i, Hu*tr "do" Bldg. I ■■ reí. 1822. - Box 345.
lin PAGS. 3 CTS, ■ g 8etM.tr* - - - - 84.00 111 Vn Afio "7-"<
DAILY MORNING
MORNING
AMOVI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of October 6, 1817, on file at the Bost Office of San Juan, Porto Bieo, By order of the Preeldent, A. 8. Burle mí". Postmaster General. Entered as second ciao matter, february 21 1819. at'the Poet Office at San Juan, Porto Htco, State" of America") under the Act of march 3, 187"
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1924
NUMBER 1773.
Both parties involved in the Ponce litigation appear to be disoriented by the Supreme Court's decision and request the Court to clarify the terms of its decision.
H Attorney General files a new important motion, on behalf of Mr. Oliveras, Ledo. Coll and Cuchí solidta of the Supreme Court to state whether its ruling implies the reinstatement of the former to the office of Mayor of Ponce.
The Supreme Court should also order the Hon. Francisco Farra Capó, and at the present time the Hon. AbeI lardo Aguilú Jir is performing such duties, and therefore, the office of Mayor of Ponce is today occupied by a third person who is not a party to the present proceedings. | 5.-That given the form in which the operative part of the. That given the way the operative part of the sentence is worded, and in view of the facts previously stated, it is impossible to clearly determine the scope of the sentence, and whether or not the defendant, in accordance with said sentence, may or may not take possession again of the office of Mayor of Ponce, until the Quo Warranto is definitively substantiated; and by virtue thereof, this Hon. Court: "That in view of the importance of the matter involved, not only under its legal aspect, but mainly because it is a matter that seriously affects the public interests, it is requested that the disposition of the sentence be made more specific, in accordance with the foregoing. SUPPOSED- that this party respectfully submits to this Court this 31st day of October, 1924, in San Juan, Puerto Rico. Respectfully, H. P. COATS, Attorney General of P. R- - In the motion filed in the same sense by the party of Mr. Oliveras, through his attorney, Mr. C. Coll Cuchí. Coll Cuchí, it is alleged that the Court rendered a judgment stating that on the grounds of its opinion, the Court resolved to revoke, and revoked, the judgment rendered by the Ponce Court on August 23, 1924, and that the case should be remanded to said Court for further proceedings not incompatible with said opinion; that according to the jurisprudence, the revocation of a judgment implies the nullity of the same, leaving things the same as they were.(Continued on 2nd page) Tuesday, November 4 On this day the barber shop "EL (FIGARO)" will not open its doors. PEDRO TRUJILLO
- The Hon. Attorney General, filed yesterday before the Supreme Court a new motion related to the Ponce lawsuit, which reads as follows: ¡ I IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PUERTO RICO ' ' ' ' . . ' I El Pueblo deserto Rico, on motion of the Attorney General, j Plaintiff and appellee, vs. Blas Oliveras, Defendant and appellant. Civil 3451 Appeal from the J . District Court of Ponce, i MOTION TO The Hon. Supreme Court: Appearing before this Hon. Supreme Court is the Attorney General of Puerto Rico, in the above entitled case, and for the purpose of determining the scope of the judgment recently rendered by this Hon'. Court, respectfully submits: 1. -That although it is true that this "on, declares the sentence of the Ponce District Court revoked, nevertheless, in making such revocation, this Hon. Court states that there is good cause to justify the nullity of an appointment of Mayor, when such appointment is made by the Municipal Assembly in an extraordinary session, without specifying in the call, that such appointment would be a matter to be dealt with by the Assembly. 2. -In the complaint sworn by the Attorney General and by the Prosecutor of the Municipal Assembly. Attorney General, and by the District Attorney of the District of Ponce, it is alleged that the appointment of Blas Oliveras was made under the conditions of nullity set forth above. That the judgment issued by this Hon. Supreme Court, in its dispositive part, revokes the judgment of the District Court of Ponce, and remits the records to the same for further proceedings not inconsistent with the opinion. 4. -That in this case, after the sentence of the Ponce District Court was issued, it assumed the RENT A magnificent local street door, with four apartments, kitchen, good sanitary service in West Precinct No. 5.
In compliance with the agreement of this Central Board of Directors, I CONVOKE AN EXTRAORDINARY GENERAL MEETING to be held in the Salons of the Spanish Casino of this Capital, at nine o'clock in the morning of the next NINETEENTH OF NOVEMBER, to be held in the Salons of the Spanish Casino of this Capital, at nine o'clock in the morning of the next coming day. . The matters to treat are the following ones: 1- It will give account the Directive of everything acted the date to arrive at the construction of our aorial building. * 2- The same Board of Directors to resolution of the Extraordinary General Meeting a modification agreement of the proposal relative to a loan up to the sum of $500,000.00, made by Don Enrique Zorrilla, with amendments of the Delegates Don José Berrocal, Don Justo Juan, Don Nadal Reines, Don César Rodríguez, Don Enrique Leiguarda, Don Emilio S. Jiménez and Don R. Baragaño, and approved by the Extraordinary Assembly of October 23, 1922. This Extraordinary General Assembly may only be attended by the "Delegates of the Locals, as long as they meet the conditions required by Article 24 of our Regulations. San Juan, P. R. October 9, 1924 JOSE PEREZ LOSADA ENRIQUE ZORRILLA Secretary Accidental President
"I sincerely believe that Rafael Diez de Andino, who represents order and peace within a collectivity that offers everyone guarantees, is the best of the candidates vying for victory in San lian," says Don Félix Córdova Dávila The opinion of Sr. Félix Cordova bávida, President of the Aliancista Board of Directors and Resident Commissioner in Washington, about the Aliancista candidate for Mayor of San Juan, said yesterday for EL MUNDO: '"I STAND WITH DIEZ DE ANDINO'" "I intend to vote for the candidacy of Rafael Diez de Andino, among other reasons because he is an honest man, and because between Roberto H. Todd, socialist, and Rafael Diez de Andino, aliancista, ía**eiección is not doubtful for any man who loves the and that of Puerto Rico. "MR. TODD IS NOT LEGALLY QUALIFIED TO HOLD ANY PUBLIC OFFICE IN . Mr. Roberto H. Todd is a friend whom I esteemed, but his association with the Socialist forces disqualifies him, as far as I am concerned, from holding any public office in Puerto Rico. "DON RAFA IS THE BEST OF THE TWO CANDIDATES FOR MAYOR'' "This is not the time to consider questions that were settled when Mr. Diez de Andino was nominated as the Alliance candidate for Mayor of San Juan. "Now the question to be decided is which of the two candidates is the best, and I sincerely believe that Rafael Diez de Andino, who represents order and peace within a collectivity that offers everyone guarantees, is the best of the candidates vying for victory in San Juan." THE ENGLISH CABINET WILL NOT MEET UNTIL TUESDAY LONDON. Oct. 31. (United * Press.)-The members of the English cabinet, after careful study, agreed to adjourn rasta sessions on Tuesday, tn which they are to meet under the chairmanship of Macdonald, to decide what is to be the attitude 'of the government after the defeat received at the election polls. Commission Merchant seeks SALESMAN with experience in general supplies. Send references P.O. Box 94; San Juan, P. R. j- Buy a pack ' today. If you are not satisfied, Gilles & Woodward will refund your money. IIÜJ NEEDED Young, competent translator, English to Spanish; must also have knowledge of journalism. * Please contact the Director of this dUriQ.
DUIH ■ Interesting "statement" by Messrs. Antonio "R. Barceló and José Tons Soto, protesting against certain insidious propaganda of their adversaries The performance of the Gptarnador-they say-is limited to approving the regulations and has no authority to impose them Yesterday afternoon Messrs. Barce ló and Tons Soto gave EL MUNDO the following STATEMENT In order to put an end to the insidious propaganda of the enemies of the Puerto Rican Alliance tending to present us as hostile to the various proclamations issued by the Governor in electoral matters, we wish to publicly state that, in accordance with section 12 of the Electoral Law, the authority to dictate rules and regulations resides solely in the Insular Board of Elections composed of the Superintendent of the Puerto Rico Union and Puerto Rican Republican parties, and therefore no action can be taken by said Board without the consent of said parties, which constitute the majority thereof. The representatives of the historic parties are men of the absolute confidence of their respective collectivities. The Unionist representative. - Mr. Amadeo, is Secretary General of the Union of Puerto Rico party and also Secretary of the Pneri tofriquefia Alliance. Mr. Martínez Dávila, ■ representative of the Puerto Rican Republican party, is a candidate for the House of Representatives for the Second District of San Juan. The action of these men is endorsed by us as heads of the major political parties, and by all Republicans and Unionists/ The Governor's 'action is limited to approving the Regulations. He has no authority to enforce them. If the opposing parties fail to appreciate the righteous performance of our men and falsely attribute the paternity of the election rules to the imposition of the Governor or to favoritism with the Socialist-Pure Coalition, so be it with them - with their consciences; but to carry the propaganda to the point of presenting us as hostile to the rules of the Board of Elections approved by the Governor and proclaimed by the Executive Secretary, is so false and unjust that we cannot but protest against this insidiousness and make public that our respective parties, disciplined and faithful guardians of the law and of the public tranquility, will strictly comply with the regulations of the Board of Elections approved by the Governor and proclaimed by the Executive Secretary, will strictly comply with the requirements of the regulations for the operation of public service motor vehicles operating as public carriers between fixed points and over specified routes approved by the Public Service Commission on June 3, 1924, all of you should have renewed your semi-annual licenses on September 30, 1924, at the latest, having complied in advance. You are also advised that after that date you should have renewed your six-monthly licenses. You are further advised that after September 30, 1924, any certificate holder who has not renewed his license is dealing illegally and in open violation of the regulations. Be advised that in order to renew a license, the examination of the vehicle approved by the mechanic of the Department of the Interior, the receipts for contributions and Workmen's Compensation and the bond document must be sent to this office. Francisco del VALLE, Jr, Secretary, i Public Service Commission. " ■ ... * ***
says D. Angel Rivero "To my home I have returned and there I will be at the service Jo of my homeland to write its military history", he adds 'I want to emphatically deny that duik ca nor before now my most esteemed friend, Roberto H. Todd asked me for support for his candidacy", he goes on to say As this Captain Rivero, last Captain General and Governor General of! Puerto Rico, by the Crown of Spain, was the first and the last to fire his cannon during the Spanish-American war in Puerto Rico, and as recently, the old soldier has again required his annas entering as in' son of war in the political field, We went to the elegant bungalow he lives in, on the corner of Taftj Street and Loizá Street, and there we found him, dressed in white, but with a military cap on his head. He received us with extreme courtesy ■ because Rivero has been a combat journalist and at present he is our and "Puerto Rico Ilrstraac's" tail-' horadar. He introduced us to his private office to which the branches of a large mango tree cover the sun's rays; there we saw beautiful models of cannons, mortars, German guns, Austrian howitzers and howitzers. German guns, Austrian howitzers, terrestrial spheres, barometers, thermometers, hygrometers, electric machines, test tubes, lenses, mcroecopes; a whole ¡ i laboratory including a small alam-34qtB*-q "a "w "ecMfloar*y'anaÉíBBr liqaé--. two alcoholic. Adon, on the walls a portrait of His Majesty the King of Spain, with this' dedication: To Captain Rivero. Alfonso XIII. and also hang portraits with their corresponding dedications, do Maura, la Cierva, Conde de Bomanones, ueneraies uerenger, Acna, Riqéelnié, Burquete and Primo de Rivera. In place of honor are the portraits of Muñoz Rivera, Barbosa and De Diego, Jaime Bagué, Dr. Ashford, Viftento Balbás, Jorge Adsuar, his nephew, and many others. Outside in the garden, a profusion of rose bushes, honeysuckles, Spanish jasmine and bluebells, red and purple. And we began our interview as follows: -Can you tell us, Mr. Rivero, what has been the cause of your recent political attacks on Mr. Diez de Andino? -My attitude has been the result of offenses and slights received from that gentleman who is not only my friend but also my relative. I needed to claim the respect that my age and other circumstances give me; and for that reason I refrained from any defense of my pen. But on the occasion of having to communicate to Mr. Diez de Andino certain resolutions of our Governor Mr. Towncr. I asked him for an interview, which he did not grant me on the spot, I went to his office, and there he received me without the need to make an entrance. He tended me (Continued on p. 13) FOR SALE AT THE "BAZAR AHORRO" Fortaleza 25. At burning prices; suits, hats, cashmere gabardine caps, cashmere pants of the best quality at the lowest price. Silk and yarn shirts at any price. Don't forget that MANOLO IS LIMITED. ' / TeL 1579. Advt. UNPRECEDENTED La Bayamonesa on clearance includes a lot of Holeproof stockings from' Sr "s. Guaranteed value of:-$2.00 at 50 cents par. They are not past their sell by date. BOOKKEEPER , Experienced and co■knowledge of English wanted. Send references.-Apartado 94, San Juan, P. R. __.
"I needed to reclaim the respect that my age and other circumstances afford me."
A young Puerto Rican man five dis : paros five years ago in Jersey City, to a lovely 17-year-old girl who was to be his wife.
This compatriot of ours, finding himself spurned, tries to take the life of the one who has made him suffer so much, and has been sentenced to three to twelve years' imprisonment, and it is feared that the girl will be useless for the rest of her life.The aggressor has promised the authorities that as soon as he regains his freedom he will marry his victim / There, in the northern lands, one of our compatriots has been the protagonist of an episode of horror and blood, in which jealousy and spurned love played a very important role. Here is the story of a tragic idyll, the story of how a Puerto Rican who went to the United States after a more flattering future, is wounded by love, and that love, which could have been his happiness, has been his misfortune, and has led him to the cell of a prison, instead of to the paradise of lovers. Pedio Solis is a young Puerto Rican of good presence, he is twenty years old, and some time ago he left for Uncle Sam's land. I looking for a solution to the economic problem, which is so difficult to solve in our island. | He disembarked in New York City, but soon after left for Chicago and settled there permanently. Everything was going very well. He enjoyed a . salary which enabled him to live comfortably, and our compatriot, ere-' yó he felt that the.3 difficulties were over for him. LOVE I But there is something in life from which no mortal can escape. Sooner or later it knocks at the door of our heart that maddening little devil that is called love, the arrow wounds us in the middle of the chest, and we have to respond to the imperious call of the divine child. Those who have loved, know that it is impossible to dominate our emotions. And that was the case with Peter Solie. One day love knocked at his door. The chosen one of his heart was an American sweetheart, a cute little twink who was only 17 years old. Marion Stiles was the one chosen by his fellow countryman to be his life's companion. He declared his love for her, and the girl reciprocated his affection. The young Solis, formalized his engagement with Marion's parents, and already they seriously thought of getting married, with that anxiety of those who love each other very much, and wish to realize at all costs the golden dream of their lives. Marriage (Continued on page 4) A young lady with experience in general office work WANTED. For more information:- P.O. Box 851 Santurce At the first opportunity buy the ORIENTAL HAIR DYE, and you will be delighted with the result. It discreetly makes gray hair disappear without leaving any trace that reveals its use.
In tomorrow's "EL MUNDO". The most sensational article by Luis LLORENS ' TORRES. "H Mundo" will publish tomorrow one of its best Sunday editions. - Did you know that Oscar Wilde, the famous writer, is alive and lives in Paris? The most interesting manifestations of the mystery surrounding the death of the famous Lord Kitchener - A sensational article by Llorens Torres, a local and foreign journalist - A masterly work by our illustrious collaborator, Ion. David Lloyd George So bernia, is the word to describe the magnificent Sunday Edition to be published tomorrow by EL MUNDO. Its numerous cable and local information, sensational articles, adventures, comic pages, etc., justify our assertion. The adventure page that we publish tomorrow could not be more interesting. It is profusely illustrated, and is the story of a famous Austrian beauty who carries upon her a curse, an evil spell, which results in the most frightful death for all gne 4 tt/ttan of love. It is the story of how' a" precious mu- ! jer. cannot taste the delights of love, because all her lovers tragically perish. One commits suicide, another meets death in a duel, another perishes in a car accident, and so, from tragedy to tragedy, Mítzie, that's her name, is currently isolated in a clinic, exposed to the risk of losing her mind. We publish a sensational article in which the reader will learn that the famous writer Oscar Wilde is still alive and lives in Paris. Why did Oscar Wilde pretend to be dead? Everything is told in this article. There appears also, another very interesting story, deciphering the mystery that until now had surrounded the death of Lord Kitcener, English military, who met his most tragic death in Ru| sla, in the early days of the war. Our illustrious collaborator, Hon. David T. George, makes this week a most interesting study of the elections in England, which should be read by all lovers of international politics. 1 We devote a whole - page to the continuation of the beautiful novel "The Shadow of the East", which we began (Continued on page 4) The best water <fe table - EVIAN WATER - Slightly diuretic. No taste whatsoever. Used in all the great hotel restaurants of the world. Drink Evian water and you will protect yourself against diseases caused by contaminated water. Drink Evian water and your kidney will work better. imported directly by, J. M. BLANCO, ínc. (Farmacia Blanco).
GARAGE BRANDI VILLA ST. - PONCE |
Teatro Tres Banderas DEBUT of the KINGS of EVASION TARRARRURRA & Co. TODAY SATURDAY > SUNDAY Show without Movie ' DENNY ín 8 A Single Tanda at 8 ' A and S TARRAlSuR^ ER ; PRICE: 50 and 35 - 35 25 PRICE: 50 and 35 -- 35 25