ELMBNDO
in FAGS.3CTS. I II BeaMtre 84.00 I If Va '*** - - - - tf-W
lin PACS. 3 CTS. i I I Office": lili Hfirtrfide" BÜ". I A W X -- BCT SM.
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR Vi
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
IPuMlahad and distributed andar permit (So. SOI) anthoruidWTue Act of October 6, 1917, on filo at tbe Foot Office of I San Juan, Porto Bice, By order of the President, A. 8. Bur > Wk, Pos.tn aster General. Entered as second class matter, 1 February Si, ISIS, at tbe Poet Office at San Juan, Porto united States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1879.
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 9, 1924
NUMBER 1534
the lives of all the owners of the old sugar cane mill have been recorded where the macabre sapphacon was found.
A seal of fatality seems to have been imprinted on the fate of the "Independencia", due to the supposed curse of the wreckage found on board.
NOW, PERHAPS, THE "BAD SHADOW" OF THE SHIP WILL END WITH NO FURTHER RESULTS TO REGRET.
The disturbing mystery continues to surround the affair of the human remains discovered on board the former gunboat "Independencia", which we reported in our yesterday's issue. According to reports, the authorities were on the ship yesterday, but were unable to get anything clear on the matter, other than to establish doubt as to the true nature of the bones found, making more or less capricious judgments in order to get out of the way as best they could. However, several people who, together with our reporter, saw the discovery, believe, with all certainty, that they are human remains, which they would not have any inconvenience in repeating if necessary. PUBLIC SENSATION The referred information caused deep public sensation, being many people who ventured yesterday to cross the bay in order to visit the "Independencia". The telephones of our Editorial Office rang their bells repeatedly, being heard from different parts of the city asking for further details on the matter. wTqjj* oapnreit rój|awl yotter"<B ¡enteró of the fact. To this > retpondtemM that an unknown person M approached the reporter mysteriously, and telling us to disregard his name and surname, because it was of no importance for the purposes of what he was going to tell us, he blurted out the news at the drop of a hat, then disappeared with great strides. The rest is already in the public domain, having been published in yesterday's edition. THE CONSUL OF STO. DOMINGO The Consul of Santo Domingo, Mr. Sócrates Nolasco, has expressed his opinion on the macabre discovery! in the "Independencia" ..... Mr. Nalasco does not believe that the bones found in the most secluded corner of the gunboat belong to any victim of President Lili, because, according to him, the crimes committed by the former were part of his government program, and were carried out in full sunlight, precisely so that they would be known, " S> Presents: " " " THE THIRD ALARM | " (The Third Alarm) >> $ Ella Hall, Johnnie Walker << >> - Ralph Lewis ?? <<' Among the 52 Greatest Films s< " dcI 1923 " Dedicated to the Anonymous Heroes SS of the Whole World " " . THE FIREFIGHTERS! " , I I I ll.ll ■l.-iilVlI. I ! ' - Do you want to have your complexion free of spots, freckles, pimples and blackheads? then use the Cream "CutiperfecDistributors. R. JULIA A CO.
everywhere, and have the effect of a public chastisement. Mr. Nolasco is of the opinion that, surely, those human remains date from the time the ship was being built and were those of some worker murdered there by his companions, who then took all kinds of precautions to disappear 'the body of the crime', hiding it in the most hidden place of the ship, in the hope that they would never be discovered. FATALITY The Consul, although he declared that he is not superstitious, believes to find, in the finding of these remains, however, some justification for the almost disastrous role played by the aforementioned ship in the history of the sister Antilles, and in the lives of those who were connected with it. The "Independencia" was the smallest of a group of three ships owned by that Government. Its presence there was an apparent revolutionary touch, if one takes into account the numerous revolutions in which the country was involved since its arrival in Quisqueya. Delving into the history of the ship, with the help of Mr. Consul, we find that tragedy has epilogued the lives of all the owners of this steamer, from Lili to the murderer of Mon Cáseres, presidents of the Republic, to the bad' financial grade Don José D. Riera, from San Juan, who was her penultimate owner and succumbed in a car accident on the highway to Are- cibo. The Consul mentions the amputation of the leg of Don José de Diego, some time after his return to Puerto Rico aboard the same steamer, and, although he does not assure that this is true, the Consul gives the benefits of reasonable doubt to the facts pointed out, by linking them with the supposed curse that the mai cabro finding that we reported yesterday may have exerted on the fate of the " Independencia ' '. Today the old gunboat is the property of the Portilla Foundry, which is reducing it to pieces. Perhaps, ' now will put an end to the possible ' ' bad sleep ' ' of the ship with no further results to regret. PARIS, February 8. (French cable). - Today the German Ambassador to France, Mr. Poincaré, has asked for an audience with Mr. Von Hoescn. Von Hoescn, in order to present his credentials to the latter and then to President M. MiUerand. , ::: PARK::: TODAY SATURDAY JUSTINE JOHNSTONE in "THE FILIAL INEXPERIENCE" Tomorrow * Sunday LEAH BAIRD in "DO NOT DOUBT YOUR WIFE"... Also: ''LOS NINOS PELIGROSOSOS" "BOLÍVAR PAGAN ABOGADO Y NOTARIO Cortes Insulares y Federal Office: Calle Alien, across from González Padín. P. O. Box 883. Telephone: 1476 SAN JUAN, P. R. ■ ■ "
4 H < H U 1 11 1 1 MH + FH 'l "t ■Í-l-"*44"44"44"44"44-"" " Y FOLLIES OF PORTO RICO AM members and friends of San Juan Lodge No. 972 - who are talcing any part whatsoever in the follies of Por- " tn Rico, are requested to be at the Olimpo Theatre ! Saturday aftenoon, February 9th, at 2:00 P. M. sharp for a ; dress rehearsal of the entire company. ■ '' . J. S. GECK ¡¡Í Musical Director 2 ■ , . -* '" ' - . - " - ■ . _ ■ ■ * *
In the financial centers it has been learned that the Act authorizing the six million 1 will be challenged by N. Y. ' St AlfGA THAT bTv "WD OF ALA EXCEEDS THE 5 "ILLIONS OR CREDIT MARGIN TO WHICH P. R" IS ENTITLED UNDER THE JONES I LAW.
In addition, it is believed q. said law leaves municipal borrowings unprotected.
< By the last mail has reached 8an Juan news of indisputable importance for the economic development of our country, as well as pira the plans of public works 1 which the Insular Government has in mind to carry out. We received a report yesterday, the veracity of which we assure you, to the effect that prominent N. Y. lawyers, representing large banking interests, are making studies to see how they can successfully challenge in the courts the law of the Legislature of Puerto Rico which authorized the issuance of ¡ ' six million bonds. According to reports, the alleged challengers allege that said Act is unconstitutional and arbitrary, because by virtue of it the Insular Government has been made to extend by some five million the credit margin of ! 30 million fixed by our Organic Charter, while leaving municipal loans, many of which have not yet been paid. They also allege the challengers ♦h -arbitrary said implies a considerable excess over the valuation of the island, which, according to them, is unconstitutional. The valuation of the island, according to reports, amounts to a respectable million, it being in proportion to this sum that the margin i of credit to which the Go- ! I biemo. I If this plan of the referred bank interests is carried out, there is no doubt that, at least, a waiting period will be opened in the processing of such an important loan I (Another of the allegations that have been made, judging by the data that we have, is that with the Law of reference ' the rights of the municipalities are violated, since the credit margin to which they are entitled is reduced in relation to the general valuation of! I i ' according to the Jones Act.
I N S u p p E R A B L E S .y-, ■
Hundreds of children have been forced to attend classes in makeshift classrooms without sanitary and hygienic conditions exposing them to the risk of contracting any disease.
N IGUAS CASAS OCCUPIED BY GONZALEZ PADIN HAVE BEEN FACILITATED FOR SCHOOLS AND THEIR ROOMS ARE TRUE POCILGES _" "
The narrow staircase inside, represents a serious danger and in the case of an earthquake or any accident, the most dreadful tragedy will occur without remedy PARENTS WHO ARE CONCERNED ABOUT THE LIFE OF THEIR CHILDREN, SHOULD PROCEED TO REMOVE THE SCHOOL UNTIL ADEQUATE AND DECENT PREMISES ARE FACILITATED.
When, in the daily press, censure of a serious wrong and the pointing out of a public deficiency are pro- fected, there is generally the belief that the newspaper which undertakes the bitter task of seeing that they are corrected, exaggerates the note in order to achieve its purpose and to satisfy its own self-respect. In the present case, it will appear to those who have not visited the building where the classrooms belonging to the Lincoln School have been placed, that we exaggerated the story. COMPLAINTS RECEIVED We were approached by some parents who begged us to go and visit the place where the children belonging to the aforementioned school were being taught. They explained to us, slightly, some of the details; but they told us that it was better for us to proceed to ascertain the truth, dglfi ¿etgetaplie situagjóg w in, that I OUR VISIT In the afternoon of yesterday, and fulfilling the order of those gentlemen, we went to visit the expressed premises. The reason for this untimely change of location was due to the fact that the school authorities were forced to vacate the old house on Alien Street, because they were required to do so by the owners of the same, and while the building under construction on Sun Street was being completed, they had to look for a place to temporarily install the school there. (GENERAL CONDITIONS OF THE HOUSE The house where these classrooms have been temporarily installed was inhabited by the firm of Gonzalez Pa
i din and was used for storage. As it has now been converted into a school, some interior divisions have been made, and in the classrooms of the center there is a complete lack of air and light. It is not possible for the children, even in the middle of the day, to read easily, unless they suffer from a visual impairment due to the effort they would have to make. ! The classrooms are so cramped that the children have to be crowded together, and it happens that two or three children have to sit at the same time at one desk. ! The dust and cobwebs, the dirt on the walls and floor have not been removed and it looks more like a pigsty than a school. The lack of ventilation makes almost all the classrooms feel a suffocating heat that makes it impossible to see the front of the house and its rays penetrate into the interior of the classrooms, the children suffer horribly from the inclemency of the sun and many of them leave class completely congested. A young lady teacher told our Editor that on the first day a teacher was forced to retire ill due to the conditions described above. Numerous children, we are informed, have had to stop attending classes because they have become seriously ill. AN INEVITABLE TRAGEDY The house to which we refer consists of three floors, all of which have been converted into classrooms, containing more than fourteen classrooms. The imminent danger it offers is that it has to reach all the classrooms only one entrance at the front, i and on the first floor. To gain access to the other ; floors one must first cross the entire first floor to the interior. Here there is a dark, narrow stairway, down which hundreds of creatures have to climb and descend with great difficulty. If by misfortune an earthquake were to occur, however small it might be, and even if the house, though old, were not damaged, the mere alarm that this would produce, would result in a spontaneous tragedy that we do not want to think about. In such a case we would have, we assure you, to witness the inevitable death of countless creatures, for RENT an apartment, suitable for a family, in the ''Tobacco Palace". They will inform in the same building. Advt. VILLAMIL In the Marina sells the famous "FEDERAL" rubbers. They are the best and the cheapest. Try them and you will not use others.
Even in the case of the elderly, the difficulty in reaching the street would prevent any attempt at sal- . vation. | So that our readers, and mainly parents, do not think that what we are saying is unfounded, we invite them to go today to verify what we are denouncing. ! It is inhuman that the lives of so many innocent beings are placed at the mercy of Providence and that no attempt is made to protect them from any contingency. I SANITARY SERVICES i Previously used as a store and warehouse, the sanitary installations in this house are among the most deficient we have ever seen. On each floor there is only one room of this service for two or three ) classrooms of more than fifty children, and on each floor there is only one room of this service for two or three ) classrooms of more than fifty children, and the toilet is in a classroom in full view of all the children, and it is inert that the children have to enter it in the presence of their classmates, which is contrary to decorum and morality. The stench emitted by these premises in such bad conditions invades the entire classroom and we are sure that if these children continue to be exposed to serious illnesses. THE AUTHORITIES MUST ACT IMMEDIATELY It is necessary to close this school immediately and to impose either the renovation of the house, which we consider impossible, or the fitting out of another house that meets the desired conditions. The school authorities cannot, and are not obliged to, place the life and health of the children in serious danger. They have the obligation to pro- ¡ cure, by all means, to obtain suitable houses and they should never have vacated the one they had until they were sure that they were going to have premises that would meet, at least, conditions of sanitation and health. M. Presentation of the superb de Luxe comedy "DE MALA SUERTE' (out of mat) with HOOT GIBSON TRES HERMOSOSOSOS REGALOS TRES In the evening at 7-l|2 and 9 P. M.' Puerto Rico premiere of UN DIVORCIO FRACASADO I (Is Divorce a Failure?) with Leah Baird.
P A D A r r r PERMANENT SERVICE VB GARAGE - GASOLINE - washes I BRANDI .- TT*
The CensuffPeriodisb'ca
' The rulers prone to establish prior censorship, say > always that they do it in the name of I order and tranquility of the State; but, in reality, they establish the dictatorship ofLreilencio in the name of their own tranquility. And they do not get it, because to force to be silent indicates that it could not be answered successfully to the reasons of the muzzled one. Eküiombre public < who subtracts siw®anducta to free examination, proves that it is she deleznable o He who fears to be judged, already . ' 7 F. G. In an interesting letter that he addresses to us, the Colombian Dr. Rozo, in which he gives an account of all the Oysters that he has carried out on the Island in fulfillment of an important mission of the Government. He commends the progress of our public instruction, the work being carried out by Dr. Asb/fi and the interest and zeal shown by our men of government for the progress of the island. We publish below an interesting letter sent to us by the illustrious guest of this island, Dr. SanÑago Rozo E., a Colombian pro- : minent who ! has arrived in the capital on important errands to his government and with the object of providing reports and details related *to the counterfeiting of Colombian banknotes and stamps, according to the investigations carried out by the police here last year. In the letter, Dr. Rozo j dedicates to us and kindly d* 4bdo ebrazon. Here is the letter: Sr. Director of EL MUNDO ¡ Very distinguished friend: i An article on impressions of ; Puerto Rico, given the various orde- : nes of its present progress, would cover columns and columns of a newspaper as popular and well accredited as yours; because it has an intelligent group of collaborators; of accurate and complete Insular and Foreign information; of a suitable and most valuable building; of a machinery with all the modern advances on printing; and above ¡ all of an Editor, who, like you, j has taken exact notice of the diI verse manifestations of modern diarism < ■, to make interesting and; I (Continued on p. 11). ¡