THE WORLD
jn PAGE? 3 CTS. I Oncln*": "Puerto aic¡>~ ■ ■ ■ ■ Illustrated" Bldg. 1 1222 - - - Bo " ><a -
IIP PAGS. 3 CTS. I ■ ■ ■ Semester W-'J0 | I 1> ün * 7 ' 60.
MORNING
MORNING
YEAR VI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published - and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of October 8, 1917, on file at the Post Office of San Juan Porto Rico, By order of the President, A S. Bhrieson, Postmaster General, hntefed as second class matter, february 21, 1919, at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rico, (United States of America') under the Act of march 3, 1879
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 4, 1924
NUMBER 1745.
O alcalde de San Juan, Sr. Diez de Andino, formulates serious charges to the pure candidate, Sr.
Mr. Todd, when the latter was the head of our Municipal Administration, and the Mayor of San Juan, Mr. Diez de Andino, made serious charges against the pure candidate, Mr. Todd, when the latter was the head of our Municipal Administration.
nicipal Administration reproduces d Mr. Diez de Andino part of h "fornie de Auditoría, on the administradén of D. Roberto in which he drank old debts for value of $90,572.30 was not appeared in the budgets and not even in the accounting books * El Alcalde- de San Juan, Sr. Diez de Andino, gave us ayor to publish the following article: I ¡ECCE HOMO! As it is only a few days since Mr. Roberto H. Todd, in a letter addressed to the Auditor of Puerto Rico, denounced the procedure carried out by the present Municipal Assembly of San Juan, in drawing up the ordinary budget for the fiscal year 1924-25, asking that said budget be declared null and void for not having included in it the outstanding debts of the Municipality, it is good for the people of San Juan to be given an exact account of all these things so that they can appreciate with true knowledge of cause the procedures of the Administration of the aforementioned Mr. Todd, even if only lightly, comparing them with those of the present Administration. In our allegation we proved to the point of satiety the error committed by the former Mayor of San Juan, and we clearly stated the status of those debts, which could not in any way be included in the aforementioned budget, since they were considered to be pending payment, which necessarily have to be balanced with those pending income. We also indicated that the former, i.e., the debts pending payment on June 30, 1924, amounted to the sum of $148,100.75, against the latter, i.e., those pending collection amounting to 3207,021.56, of which sum $155,026.11 belong to property taxes, whose data are confirmed in the annual liquidation rendered by the Municipal Auditor and in the letter of the Hon. Treasurer of Puerto Rice dated July 12 last, and balancing, therefore, one against the other it will be easily seen that there is still a balance in favor of the ingre- , (Continued on page 5) " ELECTORAL COLLEGES We offer "BEAVER BOARD" cardboard suitable for polling booth divisions in the following sizes: 8' x 32" 10? x 32" 12' x 32" 12' x 32" 12' x 48" KORBER & CO. INC., San Juan, P. R.
"It is absolutely uncertain that I propose to make any adherence to the Alianza Puertorrique-ña.-I have firmly retired to private life and have not the slightest idea of altering my ac-
The only manifestos I am concerned with now are my pleadings for the courts in which I have the good fortune to appear because I am involved in certain matters," he adds. Leopoldo Feliú has been one of the most signlfi cant figures within the Republican Party, and that during the administration of Governor Reily, he held the high office of Chief of the Department of Agriculture and Labor. Lately, the pure ones nominated him for the envied and debated post of candidate for Resident Commissioner in Washington for the Republican-Socialist coalition, a nomination which he refused to accept, while clearly stating that he was determined to abandon active politics, at least for the time being. But it is the case that one of the afternoon newspapers, welcomes in its columns the, rumor that the Ledo. Feliu had made his adhesion to the Alliance, as well as that he had held an interview with the senior political Bar. í - Even though the news surprised us, one of our editors went to the offices of the aforementioned gentleman, from whom he requested some statements in this regard. The Ledo. Feliú told us the following: l THE BREAKING NEWS ROUGHLY DISCLAIMED It is absolutely untrue that I intend to make any adhesion to the Puerto Rican Alliance. I have previously stated in writing that I am not having any partisan participation in the present political activities. I have firmly retired to private life and I have no idea of altering this attitude. It is true that I was in the offices of the board of directors of the Alliance, but I went to confer with sefior Barce'. 5, whom I had had summoned as a witness in the recent mandamns case heard in the District Court of the Second Judicial District of San Juan in which I had the honor of representing, in union with the distinguished compañero Mr. Cuevas Zequeira, the plaintiffs, sefior Agrait and other esteemed gentlemen of 'Arecibo. Nor is it true that I propose to
To All Good Socialis* tes and Pure Republicans: Just received a gTan assortment of BONE ELEPHANTS from Germany, in the colors Red, Blue and Blahco, symbol of the Coalition. Order today by C. O. D. at the price of one peso dozen. Go to the Julia Pharmacy, Calle de San Justo next to the Mallorquína. SAN JUAN, P. R.
APPOINTMENT By the SOCIEDAD ESPAÑOLA DE AUXILIO MUTUO V BENEFICENCIA DE PUERTO RICO, has been appointed Dr. Don Fernando Figueredo, medical specialist for diseases of the nose, throat, ears and eyesight. The consultation, for the members, is from 2 to 3 P. M. in his private clinic, Fortaleza 59, altos. San Juan, P. R., October 1, 1924:
TODAY!!! TODAY'.'J Base Ball at Parada 8 Ribosch vs. S. J. Athletics AT 4 P. M. Grand Stand-50 cts. Bleachers-25 Children-20 TOMORROW: 10 A. M. Boxer CASANOVAS Exhibition AND SECOND GAME OF Ribosch vs. S. J. Athletics 3:30 P. M. Last challenge of the day between "Panthers" and "Elephants" Prices: usual.
SWIFT & CO. Participate to their clientele have moved to No. 1 Commerce Street (Ochoa Building), 5th. floor.
Our tomorrow's issue
The whole battery of lustrous exclusive collaborators of "íl Mando" focuses its cannons on the most varied topics and of more palpitating actuality I of the columns of our number of Sunday By the variety and the palpitating and extraordinary interest of its local and cablegraphic informations, and gives its articles of collaboration. Tomorrow's MUN DO will be one of the most eagerly contested by its numerous and consistent readers. The world's illustrious writers, exclusive co laborers of THE MUN 24DO, Lloyd George, Frank Grane, Simonds, and Wells, discuss according to their respective specialties topics of deep interest and importance: in well-considered and well-written articles. For example, this week's article by the famous novelist H. G.'. Wells, for example, is one of the most beautiful and ju goso of the celebrated writer jHÜáplco. er. In the article, which we will be discussing tomorrow, there is an intimate desire to see a radical change in the things that characterize our way of life and make us, the inhabitants of this world, unhappy. Lloyd George discusses the danger to world civilization posed by the possible awakening of the peoples of Orlen te; and Simonds discusses the coming entry of Germany into the League of Nations and the importance to the world of publishing no manifesto. The only manifestos with which I am now concerned are my pleadings, for the courts in which I am fortunate enough to appear for ■ being entrusted with some matters. | Any news of a particular nature that is published in relation to me and which does not bear my signature, or which is not authorized by me personally, is of no value whatsoever.
ALL OF SAN JUAN GO TO TODAY, SATURDAY, OCTOBER 4 TO SEE THE POWERFUL PLAY FOR THE HONOR OF HER SISTER ("Lost In a Big City") -:WITH:-~ IVY WARD - JOHN LOWELL - and - JANE THOMAS
The municipality of San Juan refuses to comply with a circular (faith the P. R. Auditor's Office because it considers it contrary to the regulations of the P. R.
The municipality of San Juan refuses to comply with a circular issued by the P.R. Auditor's Office on the grounds that it is contrary to accounting regulations and to the interests of the Administration.
The administrators of the municipal public affairs do not accept that it is a law to send to the Auditor the data requested by the latter in relation to the annual liquidations of the regular budgets.
? - In the hands of' one of our reporters. Yesterday two circulars from the Auditor's Office of Puerto Rico, addressed to the municipalities of the island and requesting them to send to said office certain data in relation to the annual liquidations of the ordinary budgets of each town, copies of which are given below as well as the circulating versions of the alleged answer given to the same by the Municipality of San Juan. Municipality of San Juan. Here are the circulars: September 13, 1924. CIRCULAR Data to be sent to this i Office in connection with the annual liquid- ! cations* of the regular budgets. TO THE MUNICIPAL AUDITORS: 1.-The following is hereby requested: I (a) That they do not enter in their books the credits which remain outstanding from previous years as "Unpaid Outstanding", until such time as they are sent to this Office and approval is given to the following data:* June 30 of each year, duly classified. I (b) Detailed list, certified by the Municipal Treasurer, comprising the outstanding receivables as of June 30 of each year, which are actually collectible. (c) Detailed list, certified by the Municipal Auditor, of all obligations (receivables) of the municipality, payable from budget appropriations, which remain outstanding as of June 30 of each year, classified according to the name of the appropriations against which the same were contracted. (d) Certification by the Municipal Auditor indicating the credit balance in each of the appropriations against which they are outstanding on June 30 of each year. 2.-If prior to this date you had recorded in the
If prior to this date you have entered in the books of the fiscal year 1924-25 the credits corresponding to the outstanding obligations resulting on June 30, 1924, please do not authorize any payment against the same, until you comply with the provisions of this circular, and obtain the prior authorization of this Office for payment. 3. The data referred to herein shall be attached, insofar as necessary, to the annual budget statements. 4- Please note that the documents requested herein should indicate separately, for the purpose of liquidation, the accounts corresponding to the regular funds and those corresponding to the imprest funds. 5- These instructions refer only to the funds and appropriations of the ordinary and supplementary budgets when they are liquidated jointly on June 30 of each year: - I te on June 30 of each year. Therefore, in no case should you include in the data requested amounts corresponding to specific funds, such as those coming from loans, donations, deposits and guarantees, etc. 6- The ordinary and supplementary budgets must be included in the annual report in the first part of the year, showing the totals resulting from the operations of said budgets. A . rymtinHaaion. A . r-"r- itratfMnSn ±o- ¡ such, operations concerning borrowings and ! other special funds will then be inserted. Sincerely, A. G. BISHOP Acting Auditor of Puerto Ríen. September 22, 1924. TO THE TREASURERS AND 1 MUNICIPAL AUDITORS: ' Gentlemen: ' Herewith enclosed are the new forms Nos. 42, 43 and 44 for municipal accounting. These forms are sent to you to facilitate your compliance with the provisions of the circular of this Office. my affairs and interests, I have no need to have a proxy and for that reason I have revoked the special and general powers of attorney of June 28 and July 6, 1923, both conferred on my son Don Rafael Palay Acosta before the Notary Don Pedro Amado Rivera, leaving him in his good opinion and fame. This revocation has been before the Notary Don José Martínez Dávila. As of today any person having collection, payment, purchase or sale that relates or may relate from now on with my interests, must address exclusively and personally to the undersigned at my residence Calle Parque No. 8, Santurce, P. R. f Telephone No. 297 Rojo, Santurce . I also announce my desire to sell my house Parque No. 8, Santurce, which may come to see any ( person' who wishes to buy, warning that I will not try or accept the i intervention of any agent or missionary coj, as I do not pay any coi mission. í Eva GEORGINA ACOSTA and KNIGHT j Parque No. 8 Telephone No. 297 Red. Santurce, P. R Advt.
The quality of this cigarette has never been changed nor will it be changed. The quality alone has made this cigarette the most unique cigarette in the world.
GARAGE BRANDI VILLA ST. - PONCE
FLOUR GOLD MEDAL WHEAT OLD WHEAT Constant existence B. Fernandez & linos. SucrsMARINA, SAN JUAN P. R.
Dr. Melendez, of Puerta de Tierra, locates twenty cases of measles at the "Beneficencia" ranchón.
Beneficencia" ranchón and ten meters from the "Brumbaugh" school.-EI Dr. Silva, of the Health Department, confirms the truth of the facts.
truth of the facts
The houses have been quarantined and the children living in the houses that are affected are excused from attending classes.-the Tabor of the Department of Health.-One of the victims has already died Desiring" to expand the information, which in connection with eight cases of measles in Puerta de Tierra we gave lately, one of our todactors went to the office of the active Dr. Melendez, head physician of that neighborhood, from whom he requested some reports. Dr. Meléndez, ! with his proverbial courtesy, was pleased to oblige us and made the following statements: TWENTY CASES OF MEASLES i "The reports I am about to give you are in no way intended to alarm the public, but on the contrary, so that everyone, both the health authorities and parents, take the necessary precautions to prevent this insignificant outbreak of measles from taking on greater proportions, and then we will have to lament worse consequences. In the morning, on my daily visit, I found twenty cases of measles at the "Goodwill" ranch, which is situated about ten yards from the Brumbaugh school. - I THE AFFECTED PERSONS The persons affected by the disease are the following: Vicente Delgado, Isabel Rodriguez, Jose Rodriguez, Carlos Rodriguez, Antonio and Juan Ferrar, Delfin Serrano, Carmen and Julia Serrano, Alicia Baldorioty, Rosa Maria Marrero, Jovita Marrero, Gallsa Marrero, Daniel O' Neill, Andres Perez, Edicha Santana, Rafael Montañez, Maria Montañes, ¡ Adriano Velez. ONE OF THE PATIENTS HAS DIE ALREADY i One of those attacked, Felix Delgado, son of* Pedro Ignacio Delgado, died as a result of measles, and his certificate of defun- - (Continued on page 4)
Yesterday morning a trial was held in the Court of Dis- (Continued on page 4).
Court, in which the Bishop of Puerto Rico. Bishop of Puerto Rico. Bishop Caruana, representing the Diocese of this island was the plaintiff. The defendant's attorney, ledo. Toro fernández, in an incident of the trial, expressed that those who repudiate confession, who do not take communion, who blind d hell and who do not pay tithes or first fruits were not Catholics Yesterday morning an interesting lawsuit was held in the District Court for the 2nd Judicial District of San Juan because of the quality of the persons involved in it, the allegations of the parties and the legal questions raised. It is a case of injunction to recover the possession of real property, promoted by the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church in Puerto Rico by its Bishop Monsignor Jorge J. Caruana, against Mr. Bamón i Fornier, doctor in medicine and veterinary surgery. The parties are represented by attorneys Heriberto Torres Sola and do# Tqjw Fer&ándeB" The lawsuit, sworn by the Bishop, alleges that one year prior to the filing of the lawsuit, the Church was in possession of a Catholic chapel located in ! the San Anton neighborhood of Carolina, and that in June of the present year the defendant violently and illegally entered it, removing carpets, candlesticks, altar cloths, candlesticks, pictures, basins, pews, bell, and quinqués, refusing to return possession of the said chapel and objects. The defendant read a preliminary objection of lack of cause of action and informed the Court that, since this was a summary proceeding to recover possession OF PROPERTY, it was a summary proceeding to recover possession OF PROPERTY. The defendant read a plea of lack of cause of action and informed the Court that, being a summary proceeding to recover possession of REAL PROPERTY, the loss of such possession is set forth in the complaint conclusively, without any facts being adduced; that the act of getting the plaintiff the objects related in the complaint as charged, does not create the right of action being exercised, as the Injunction Act No. 43 of 1923, as amended, does not protect the right of action.
| wEytinGHÓvSE 1 ■ fflllll 5f Best Delicacies and more Economy l J "1 L a m8no right of the industrious mistress of I I // J house. An automatic, clean, sif (fV-WJa lenient servant-for very little money. $6.50 from I B BT W I cash or installments. W Call phone 163 or visit us. porto rico ruway, m & powcr co. San Juan, Puerto Rico V ■ i ii JJ -todayFORREST STANLEY MARJORIE DAW - in ■ THE PRIDE OF PALOMER - Sunday: AGNES AYERS in THE DAUGHTER OF FORTUNE.