ELM9NDO
1Q PAGES. 3 CTS. I g 14-00 ■ f _ Un Afio $7.50
n PAGS. 3 CTS... g Offices: "Pusrte Mee - g Xluitrado" Bldg. M TeL 1222 ~ ~ ~ B " 848 '
MORNING DAILY',
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR VI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
PebbaMd aadw pemit <Bo. wi) MfcMgwe -y*. 0 " ' ' ! ! -* "- ? "*" Otflee et fai Blee, By order of the Present, A 8. *°*J""** mttoc, fohmory M. ÍO1V. M tb" Pont OMoe M So" J-a, PsVto Wiw (United Bteteo of taterfaa) watee tee det det af surah S.18TS
SATURDAY, JANUARY 5, 1924
NUMBER 1504
We call the attention of our colleagues in Pius. Rico to the unheard of fact that from abroad they try to use us to carry out certain scams.
From the newspaper "El Heraldo", which is published in Havana, corresponding to December 21, we reproduce the following: f "Before the Secret Police yesterday a complaint was made by Mr. Daniel Guzman Acosta, a native of Hu- i ( macao, Puerto Rico, twenty-three years old, and accidental neighbor of Avenida de Italia (Galiano), number 127, high, against the placement agency of Beers and Company, located in O' Reilly nine and a half. He affirms that he was made to come from his land with the promise of a good job as a stenographer, with a salary of two hundred pesos, charging him a commission of three pesos, without to date, in spite of the passage of nearly twenty days, having been employed, nor does he glimpse the possibility of it. i. FROM THE PRESS HE HAS LEARNED OF THE PROPOSITIONS OF THE AGENCY! Mr. Guzman says that last September, while he was in San Juan de Puerto Rico, he read in the newspaper of that city, "El Tiempo", an advertisement in which a placement agency, located in Presidente Zayas street, number 9 and a half, Havana, was requesting the services of several stenographers, with salaries ranging from one hundred and fifty to two hundred and twenty-five pesos a month, at their own expense. It was a tempting proposition, a good chance for Guzman, so SIOOOJOO TAX EXEMPT BONDS OF PORTO RICO Eids will be opened at the Bureau of Insular Affairs, War Department, Boom 3042, Munitions Building, Washington, D. C. at 2 o'clock P. M. February 5th..., 1924, for Public Improvement Bonds of Porto Rico, to the face value of *3,000,000. Bonds are dated July 1st , 1923 bear interest at 5-0 0 per annum, payable semi-annually on January 1 and July 1, and are in coupon form in denomination of $1,000 only. Bonds are payable annually in series of $500,000 each on July 1, 1944 to July 1, 1949 and are redeemable on July 1, 1943 or on any subsequent interest payment date. Principal and interest will be payable at United States Treasury, Washington, D. C. The Attorney General of the United States has passed upon the legality of the issue. Bonds are acceptable at par as security for deposits of public moneys or postal savings funds of United States; also for deposits of Potto Bican funds and as security required by law of Porto Rico to be deposited with Treasurer of Porto Rico. Bids should be enclosed in envelopes marked "Subscriptions for Porto Rico Gold Loan of 1922 (1943-1955) Public Improvemet" and addressed to "Chief Bureau of Insular Affairs, Room 3042, Munitions build, ing, Washington, D. 0. Blds must be I accompanied by Bank draft or certified i check for 2 0 0 of par value of bonds bld for' payable to Chief Bureau of Insular Affairs, in Now York Citv funds. Acoepted subscriptions will be payable February 19, 1924 at a bank in New York City to be designated later, which will make delivery of the bonds or bearer interim certificates exchangeable for the definitive bonds. The right is reserved to reject any or all bids. For further particulars address the .BUREAU OF INSULAR AFFAIRS,. Washington, D. 0. Advt.
I C* AD AfT PERMANENT SERVICE I w GARAGE - GASOLINE - WASHES I RnTA Wni - ponce I JOlx/UlLLzl io P. R. - ' ¡ . ■ - -
Better than anyone else could testify to this, im young Puerto Rican who was the victim of such scams.-He was made to go to Havana, with tempting promises, which then turned into "buche y pluma."
He immediately decided to write to the Agency requesting the job he wished to fill, since he was a stenographer and spoke English. i THE AGENCY IS PROPL I CIA TO. GIVING A GOOD JOB TO THE APPLICANT On September twenty-first, Guzman received a letter from the Beers Agency, which he received by mail and which appeared signed by I R. Calapell. In which they told him that he had a job as a stenographer for English and Spanish, and that the salaries would be in accordance with the applicant's aptitude, enclosing a form ex- ¡ presing in it the conditions of the job they were announcing, among which was that he had to pay three pesos for the commission. The Agency's reply could not have been more satisfactory and he decided to accept the offer, so he sent by money order in a letter addressed to Beers and Company, the requested three pesos commission, of which the Agency acknowledged receipt. GUZMAN EMBARKS IN HIS COUNTRY ! FOR CUBA, HALAGADO PGR RI SUENAS ESPERANZAS The Agenciare* Beers, ended up, in another letter, by telling Guzman that he should come to Havana and that she could place him for having been established for many years and having good relations among the houses of commerce, official centers, sugar mills, offices in general and among all those who would need employees. He was assured that he had already reserved a position as a first-class stenographer in Spanish and English for Havana, with two hundred pesos, without housing or food. There was nothing more to wait for, since it was the golden fleece that Guzman was given, so he embarked for Havana on the third of November, and immediately went to the Agency, where he presented himself to take possession of his job. THE WAITING WAS INACABLE. THE JOB NEVER ARRIVED FOR GUZMAN The Puerto Rican says that he was greatly surprised when the Agency told him to wait for the following day, since they still needed some other requirement to be met so that he could take his job without any hindrance. But the following day came, and he was given a new waiting period, and so on, days and days went by, until he began to suspect that they wanted to make fun of him. The young man from Humacao added that at that moment a friend told him that it was all nothing more than a gross comedy, that there were no stenography jobs in this country, even if they knew English, that were paid with such a fabulous salary, and that the agency was a "bluff". GUZMAN FORMULATES. THE COMPLAINT AGAINST THE AGENCY. He finally, yesterday, accompanied by his keen friend, went to the Secret Service and filed a complaint with the Guaranty Officer (continued on the sixth page). , (Is Matrimony a failure?) Tomorrow Sunday HELEN CHADWICK in NAVE.
On Wednesday last the Central Board of the Unionist party met to consider different matters.
A protest was presented to that body against the Local Board of this Capital, which is charged with numerous violations of the rules of the party. Last Wednesday a meeting of the Central Board of the Unionist Party was held for the purpose of considering various matters of importance pending before that body. In these days there had been insistent talk that the leadership of the majority Party would meet from one moment to the next to adopt agreements of real political transcendence. This meeting of the Central Board was attributed to the need to proceed to the adoption of an agreement in relation to the attitude assumed by the Resident Commissioner, Mr. Córdova Dávila, in anticipation of presenting a Bill before the Congress and which attitude has brought as a consequence that the Republican Party protested that Mr. Córdova Dávila should assume such an attitude prior to the meeting of the Commissioners of the Legislature. Of course, the Central Board did not discuss this question at the meeting held a few days ago, because it seems that it understood that the statement given by the President of the Party to the agreement adopted by the Territorial Committee, the most important matter that was the subject of discussion before the Central Board was the one concerning the complaint that Ja Fmtenüdad had filed with the leadership of the Party. Unionist of this city against the Local Committee. We are informed that the' series of car| (Continued on page 6) SUSPENDED RECEPTION DANCE OF THE KNIGHTS OF COLUMBUS For the evening of Sunday the sixth a reception-dance was announced in the building of the Knights of Columbus in the County, but on account of the death of the mother of Monsignor Caruana, it has been suspended for a later date which will be announced to the public in due course. The other events that were announced in the program will take place on Sunday without alteration in the announced order. The organizing committee hopes that all those invited to the ball will attend the ceremony of the blessing of the building which will take place tomorrow from four to six o'clock in the afternoon and which promises to be, judging by the enthusiasm, truly grandiose and lively. THE most practical gift of Kings A PAIR OF SHOES ' 2 from::: "The Devils of the Square" Two great Departments of fine and Eanomic Draft. La Vbperade Reyes . at the Condado Vanderbilt Hotel Saturday, January 5 Another Gala Evening DINNER and DANCE Excellent Orchestra Souvenirs. Please reserve your table early. Advt
A distinguished ¡dragon of this dudad has been denounced for tampering with the parfor the manner in which he set about advising a tooth of his.
To the police who fié to practice a refistro in the estaNednihito of a client of the Ledo. Carlos í. Torres seems not to have liked the legal opinions of the young lawyer Yesterday we were informed that ®1 Ledo. Carlos J. Torres had been denounced for disturbing the peace. We immediately went to meet with the distinguished lawyer, because we were informed that the matter, by its nature, was extremely curious. In fact, Mr. Torres confirmed the news and explained to us, in detail, what had happened. Mr. Torres says that one day he was called by one of his clients for an urgent consultation and quickly went to his establishment to render his professional services. - It was that the police intended to carry out a search in the establishment to see if they could occupy any quantity of intoxicating beverages. Mr. Torres' client was calling him to enlighten him on the right he had to prevent an illegal search or to prevent an outrage on the part of the public force. Mr. Torres told his client that in these cases, the first thing the boarding school had to do was to make sure that the authority that was going to conduct the search was in possession of a warrant duly issued by the competent official and ... then to allow only those DEPATARMEPTTO DE - HACIERA ♦ * NEDOOMffKjt THRfcfONTÉteÜCIONES SÓBRE LA PRO. PIEDAD * ¡ívTsi TO THE TAXPAYERS i You are hereby reminded that January 15 being the date fixed by law, for closing the schedule of assessments to be in effect for the next fiscal year, the Department hereby sustains its ruling that as from January 16 of said month, no applications for transfer, reassessment or division of property, for tax purposes for the coming fiscal year, shall be entertained. The Collectors of Internal Revenue and the Property Appraisers will comply with the orders issued by this office, especially in Circular No. 1067 (No. 329 B. P. T.,) This announcement is a reproduction of the one permanently posted in all the Collector's Offices of Internal Revenue as a reminder of the old rules established by this Department in accordance with Articles 289 and 295 of the Political Code. The purpose of this rule is to avoid the Department the administrative conflict that would result from the non-observance of the same. San Juan. P. R" January 3, 1924. J. W. BONNER, Treasurer. Advt.
\ I Don Vicente Maura I HAS DIED ■ ■ ■ His children Cándida, María Luiza, Federico and other relatives ■ absent, have the sad regret to inform of his death, and invite his friends to the act of burial which will take place ■ today at 4 T. M.leU the cemetery of Río Piedras, ■ Funeral home: Delicias No. 5, Río Piedras. H No obituaries will be distributed. Please do not send a coronary, H H
The Free Federation washes its hands, like Pilate, in the matter of a possible agricultural strike. 5.
The following telegram was received yesterday morning at the offices of the Free Federation of San Juan, and a copy of it was delivered to the press: ''Loiza Aldea, January 3, 1924. Mr. P. Rivera Martínez, Acting President, Federación Libre.* San Juan, Puerto Rico. Colonos announce start of harvest on January 7. Workers invade local offices demanding information on petitions and impatiently announce their decision to strike if they are to be ignored at the start of work. We advise that the Ponce agreements be maintained and it seems that we will not be able to stop the general protest of the agricultural workers. Next Sunday we will hold a sugar cane workers' convention in Rio Grande. We await instructions. If the conflict comes, declare the Federation, no one will regret it more than the institution of the Free Federation, but no one will be more responsible than the employers themselves for not having reached an agreement with their workers in time. The employers have had plenty of time to avoid the conflict, and the government has had ample opportunity, with the means at its disposal, to make the parties reach an agreement. I "itieáefcóa casa "4U8 were specifically set forth in the order. After these explanations, the client asked Mr. Torres if he could close his establishment at any time, to which Mr. Torres replied that he was perfectly entitled to close his establishment whenever he deemed it convenient, since the establishment was his and no law obliged him to keep it open for a certain number of hours. The last question the client then asked him was how he could make people leave his establishment, in case he was going to close it, if they did not want to do so, and how he could prevent the public forces from illegally searching his establishment. Well," Mr. Torres is said to have said, "if things reach those extremes, we would have to shoot our way in. This last phrase seems to have been said by Mr. Torres in a joking tone in view of the desperation of the last consultation; but it seems that the police did not understand it this way and this was the fundamental reason for the complaint that has been filed against the aforementioned lawyerf - iBraiMie We do not know that a case as rare and as original as this has been recorded, nor did we know that lawyers run such risks in expressing their legal opinion; but of what results* in this interesting case we shall learn when the trial is held, which is appointed for the eighth. " - 1 S' - - - ' i Bolivar Pagan - ATTORNEY- Office: Allen Street Esq. Cruz. P- O. Box: 883 Telephone: 1475. San Juan, P. R.
Those that the only and true representation of the native colony in the United States is the "Alianza Obrera Portorriqueña" of New York.
A painful and unexpected event shakes the high society of Ponce Miss. Maria Mercedes Campos, who was going to marry soon, dies in a very short time Yesterday, according to the notes sent from Ponce by our Editor in that city, we published the following article, affectionate, expressive and sincere as the two young people who were going to marry, and who until yesterday cherished, happy and hopeful, their dreams of love, deserved it: ** On the 10th of the present day will take place in Ponce the wedding of the beautiful and gentle Miss Maria Mercedes Campos, affectionate daughter of the spouses Don Juan I Campos Acosta and Doña Leonor Fajardo de Campos.Leonor Fajardo de Campos, belonging to the most ' cultured of the Ponce society, with the correct gentleman Mr. Julio E. Parsi, high official of the Bank of Ponce. | The wedding of so appreciated young people will take place in the Church of the Guadalupe, to which undoubtedly a numerous group of friends will come, since the bride and groom enjoy true esteem in that city, i "The news of this wedding will cause joy among the countless friends of the Campos and Pars! families. i "We sincerely thank the invitation that has been extended to us to asfcttr Jas ¡ Mercedita." And an inevitable chill has run through our body, leaving us mute and pale, upon receiving yesterday at noon, also from our Editor in Ponce, a telegram, in whose brief lines we read a whole fateful and painful drama, which has filled with mourning two distinguished families of the Ponce society, and Ponce as a whole, where the spiritual lady, victim of a capricious and fatal destiny, enjoyed innumerable sympathies. The telegram is the following: I Ponce, January 4, 1924. EL MUNDO, San Juan. Ponce society parades before Maria Mercedes Campos died of ceptisemia in forty-eight hours. Mercedes was to be married. Suspend weddings. RAMIREZ. Her white nuptial attire, by an arid decree of life, has been given to the beautiful and distinguished young woman of ■ shroud; to celebrate her eternal wedding with the pale gentleman of death, who, jealous perhaps of the earthly happiness that her chivalrous fiancé offered her, wanted to offer her in turn a superior happiness, in a distant celestial world where there will be white roses to offer her at her passage... For the unfortunate groom, Mr. Julio E. Parsi; for the bereaved parents of the ill-fated Miss Maria Meropdes Campos, and other departed, EL MUNDO has its sincere words of consolation and a heartfelt expression of condolence for the painful loss. REALIZATION Mueblería "El Porvenir" realizes the used furniture to dedicate itself only to the new furniture business. S. BRAU 89. In front of the Police Headquarters.
To said entity are addressed the declarations of the director body against the attitude of some Puerto Ricans residing in the North We publish the letter and the most salient paragraphs of Ja resolution that the Executive Council of the Free Federation addresses to the "Alianza Obrera Portorriqueña,'' of New York, about the attitude of some Puerto Ricans residing in the North, against the leader, Mr. Iglesias Pantín: San Juan, P. R., January 2, 1924, January 2, 1924, Mr. Jesús Colón, Secretary, Alianza Obrera Portorriqueña, Brooklyn, N. Y. Dear Comrade: In order that this Association be informed of the agreements adopted by the Executive Council of the Federaci4n Libre de los Trabajadores de Pto. Rico, in relation to the campaign that a titled group in the name and on behalf of the Puerto Rican Colony of New York City, has been carrying out against our movement and principally against our comrade Santiago Iglesias, I am pleased to transcribe the resolution approved at the session of December 30, 1923, after hearing the report on the work carried out on the Continent, by the President of the Free Federation. Here are the resolutions: ACTION OF THE VO OF THE FREE FEDERATION As to that part of the report of the President of the Executive Council of the Free Federation, which refers to the group or groups,~which in New York, acting and assuming the name of Colonia Portorriqueña, exercise the role of whistleblowers of the labor movement and its men in the United States, the Executive Council of the institution resolves to make the following statements: 1- That President Santiago Iglesias, can have no greater mark of honor and glory, than to have deserved for his activities and efforts in favor of the workers in Oaba, the antipathy and disaffection of General Weyler. 2- That the greatest proof of his never disavowed loyalty to the principles of economic redemption and social justice for the producing masses of the world, and mainly for those of Puerto Rico, is the aggressive and permanent attack by the bourgeoisie, in union with radical titled and social parasites and white-collar siervdb, all gathered in claques, launch withContinued on page 8 TODAY Saturday January 5 TODAY GIFT of the house of DOLLS and premiere of the super-production film in ten acts TRISTAN and ISOLDA Prices: Anf. 40 Lunettes 30 -TOMORROW - Matinee and Evening The BONORIS SAÁYEDRA Zarzuela Company
Brooklyn, N. Y
WOODS Hailing from lampa. Florida, has arrived at the port the American schooner ' Horace M. Bickford" with a cargo of special quality pichipén wood (far superior to all the stock in this market) if you want to build with quality material and at limited prices before making your purchases go to the COMPAÑIA INDUSTRIAL DE SANTURCE PEDRO BOLIVAR, S. EN C. TEL. 425 SAN JUAN, P. R. BOX 250