EL.'WNDO -
16
PACS. 3 CTS. ea. >at - tontito
llfi
PAGS. 3 CTS. -amato" tan ""- " - " - "- "- svjw
MORNING
MORNING,
9*9 V|
ban juan, leek raoi
PaaraM asa smmvmms sus* ** -***----* -. "**". "- a* as ms raa* ucea" "c San tosa, Part SM* Sy actor "f toe PmMm* O to to mal Wiui m eeeeaf elees ■esees, ", me. a" toe Pee> "toe o" ésa Mea, Uta* -" toe Art ef mees* s, im
AUGUST, SATURDAY, 9, 1924
NUMBER1690
Visits by pure leaders á h Fortaleza have become -v ' more frequent lately.
itetataa W tataruatar inriér, ta ttaur Ík Puras certain tetares * --- The visits of pure leaders to Fortaleza, have become more frequent during the last few days. It seems <jt "e the estrangement is coming to an end, and "q®e things will go differently from now on. This attitude, of the Puros surely obeys to the fact that the elections are approaching, they are in full period of registration of candidacies, and Fortaleza is the center for all these matters. THE CONFERENCE WITH THE GOVERNOR . Lately, the Puros put in the hands of the Governor a long memorandum, and also held a conference with him, from which they came out very satisfied .... We have tried to ascertain the matters discussed at that conference, and one of the most significant elements in the Puro movement told us some details of the conference, which, judging by his own words, was most cordial. The conference lasted more than two hours, so we must believe that the subjects discussed were several. | A FEAR OF THE PURE ONES?.... It seems that during the course of the the Cigars outlined the tetaúóri justified or not, about the impartiality which should be enjoyed by the (Continued on page fl) * ■■i , i, 4 * * *" ii 1 1 1 i' 1 "" '*"J 1" sépfiqy carregjp of, the anitn' "uto hwCij Ttfr "no* caba- -" ouadro - Advt *' Ccnr$>te a packet today. If you are not satisfied Sillos A Woodward Jo will refund your money.
It will be assured that so flegado secret agents to investigate the adunde Sai Juan h Mayagua is bat atra investígadéa Persons creditable to us have informed us-that by the steamer "Porto Rico" which arrived Tuesday in this city, from New York, two agents of the Federal Government arrived on the island for the purpose, according to them, of making a minu- ; cious investigation at the San Juan Customs. According to reports, said officials are staying at a hotel in Santurce and have already begun the work entrusted to them. [The object of this investigation is to determine if certain irregularities have been committed by an employee of the Customs Department who has been denounced to Washington by another employee of the said Department, and who signed several affidavits stating the alleged offenses committed. We give these brief notes as sim pie information, because although we know that the federal agents are really here, we do not know if they are precisely in such wanderings. Persons with whom we have spoken on the subject have told us that the alleged investigation of which we report is due to the state of - - ""se Í5 As a gift to his numerous customers and to the general public, he is offering all his stock at the cost (For six days Come and see this great bargain, which is exceptional. I will sell all merchandise at no profit, only covering expenses: Suits of all kinds, shirts, caps, hats, som breros last novelty, all very cheap, razors GEM 34 cfs. ¡ package and a machine is given away Take advantage of this opportunity agree that Manolo is limited. TEL. 1579 BOLÍVAR PAGAN ATTORNEY AND NOTARY. Cortes Insulares and Federal Office: Alien Street, in front of González Padín. P. O. Box 883. Telephone! 1476 SAN JUAN, P. R.
CATHOLIC ACADEMY COURSE OF 1924-1925.
Will begin on. September 1. ! Elementary school, whose diploma is recognized by the ItepartanWtto of Instruction. Ensefiansa Superior, with excellent laboratory, and also recognized by 01 Department of Instruction. Commerce, in all its subjects* in two* years. Science , DoméatioM with complete equipment ' $e .cachea jr labors equally re- -. ConócMp the Department of ; Tusfrtjcéidn. ' ah?'/ ,r practice of Re "ligfon coéfoñne to Catholicism.
PAYMENTS: Kindergarten and First Grade, $2.00; Second Grade, $3.00; Third and Fourth Grades, $4.00; Fifth and Sixth Grades, $5.00; Seventh and Eighth Grades, $6.00; Senior and Business, $8.00. \ The school is open every morning from 8 to 11 o'clock until the fifteenth of August. Students are begged to ¿ oersonate /at the offices of the Acá- < bernia to secure their places. <¡ Apartado 1236, San Juan de Puerto Rico. ,
TODAY ~ SATURDAY - TODAY IlaAIMV "DOGS AS ARTISTS" ¿tow totolítfmam. And cuplés extraordinary of the ovacionadla 2ÜB EMILIA BENITO
l FINCA DE VENTA V Se Venden 150 cuerdas, de buen terreno llano, colínf dffita* W" la carretera de Bayamón < Comerlo y a .3 kilóB mwBhe mH pueblo de Bayamón. It has abundant water coV rriento own for any crop. Stores and esK ouélé omÉ 1 teta farm is sold because its owner can not de*jtafKU. < JBe dim facilities for payment. No ni * nlsnénnlotlOWL. Pesquera, Edificio- de EL MUN>
b cútanles pastad sedemetal squedas violations of tauigradta laws at Puerto Rko
Mués y esemles p MayigKi y Sm Jus, respectivaaente? i' We have had reports that the - Commissioner of Immigration, Mr. B. H. Todd, has received numerous anonymous reports of alleged immigrants who, according to the passquineros, have landed in the country at the ports of San Juan and Mayagüez on board sailing steamers, and who had arrived here deceived by the handlers of the said vessels, who had to offer them "villas and castillas," as the saying goes. I The supposed visitors are believed to have left their respective countries, using for their journeys the savings that after hard work they had conquered over there. As we said at the beginning, it is believed that, if the species is true, these individuals have been deceived, assuring them that they could enter here with impunity. í With patience, it is to be supposed that these unhappy people have spent days of anguish at the mercy of their pretentious benefactors. I The anonymists assure us that through the port of San Juan entered a boat bringing several subjects of Don Alfonso Xni. and that through the port of Mayagüez penetrated another with some of the ill will and excitement prevailing among the various federal officials in Puerto Rico, who, according to reports, accuse each other in the most ruthless manner possible, having turned the federal Navy building into a veritable "ella A® grilles". The Navy, according to gs|hos "hq I che, there are also DegxÓariUtM agents committed 'in connection with the eontarabanáos in general.
PURE ENGLISH YARN DRIL SUITS: Cut and handmade - one by one - by expert and competent tailors Wet-dipped for more than 48 hours to GABARDIN SUITS: Lightweight and unlined New and Elegant styles. Precious Colors All sizes available at *16.00
PAJA HATS For Gentlemen and Young Men, We Just Received Many Beautiful New Styles-Current Value $3.50 I PRICE Come pick yours today. | SPECIAL
Qonz4lez Cpadin Co" lnc< , FRfiNTF A LA FUAZA P "inCl*-AL
Don't miss Sunday's racing at Las Casas Rading Park. Seven sensational races that will make for a delightful afternoon. ' Advt.
SÉ VÉNDE: newly built wooden house, located-"n Hato Rey (Ciudad Nueva). Will inform; J. -Rodriguez. Phone 328 green, Santurce.
THE STRONG HEAT of these days imposes FRESH AND LIVER DRESSES.
GENUINE PALM-BEACH SUITS: First-Colored" Beautiful and Selected Fabrics and Material Absolute Guarantee. In all sizes at $ 3' 50 . $ 10- $ 12 98 CASIMIR BATISTA SUITS Lightweight and unlined Made expressly for the tropics.' Serious and beautiful colors in All sizes. * $ 16.00
Once you visit the "Las Casas" racetrack, you will become a regular visitor. For the pleasantness of the show and for its beautiful panorama Advt.
IMPORTANT Do you suffer from pyorrhea? Do you have irritated and bleeding gums? Take care of them with the most effective treatment known:*- '-- '- QUARTZ LIGHT DR. F. B. PONS !¡ EÁfio Padín No. 506. "
SATURDAY PARK - TODAY - SATURDAY ALMA RUBENS AND LEW CODY in THE VALLEY OF SILENCE Paramount drama in 7 act". SUNDAY - AUGUST 10 - SUNDAY Ltodi BAIRD and Vernon STEELE in "THE DEVIL AT THE FLY".
IM"
MRS. ZEQUIERA ! AND FUERTES JEBÜLTAR WB* CONVENTION AYER DISTRICT Dfc ÑHÁCAO WERE ■ ELEMIS MRS. JOSE L. FERNANDO ! GALLARDO JKl REPRESENI TANTES DISTRICTS j OF YABqftwj NAGUABO I ■ Con motive nomination of the | Ledo. R. for the I office of Senadflfer the district of Humacao, po"" designaI ción that was bfeQljfli the General Convention celebradjjjWf this capital on the 25th dvl originated in that district .WjHftniento of protista that estabJBfcndo in danger ! success take body has been forming. . ! Those in ' the Convention SHgexpressed the ver- ' (slope compromisa- ! rios as it hdjKjWercido pressure ' by the directOMalEi that resuitai ra that did not ' have the detrito simbáWtaK. With I this motive,'and pgnggflprle a new | opportunity 4 defei tí'.dos, <-e jsJhtievas conventions under- the praHta that all ' would abide by the same? Yesterday' the conventions were held, under the. of Messrs. Bareel0* and Tods WKy after getting tied í®" jost fyydatos, Mrs. Cuevas ¡Íequeirí^/jBwrtes, obtaining "io each tino seik w&os. Two ballots were vdtaAmy white. the .Jmhrectorio resolíy'orá. the í>r. Celis preAeai" a .itanieN¡¡p|jftffa which, in the triumphant Atendiese candidates I (Continued on 6a A page)
fl akuMe de Punce denies that Mr. Parra Caqaé has "the tendons to return to the office which he reuunoara
The mefidewdo ímciMario says that this news is the work of the ledo. Toas Soto The Mayor of Ponce, Mr. Blas Oliveras, was in this city yesterday in the company of the President of the Municipal Assembly, Mr. Monesca u. A reporter from EL MUNDO took the opportunity to ask him about a telegram that shortly before had seen the light of day in a local colleague, announcing, among other things, that Mr. Parra Capó intended to return to the Ponce Mayor's office. The coincidence of having seen Mr. Parra Capó visit Fortaleza in the morning sharpened our reporters' curiosity and we insisted that Mr. Oliveras give us a "sta- ¡ tment" on the matter. He gave us the following statements: i "I have seen a telegram published in yesterday's edition of "El", signed by its correspondent in Ponce, where it is stated that Ledo. Francisco Parra Capo will again take charge of the position of Mayor of the City of the South, on the grounds that the matter of his resignation was not in call to be dealt with by the Municipal Assembly on the night his resignation was accepted. This assertion is absolutely absurd, for the following reasons: Because in the call of the Municipal Assembly it was stated that it would not be considered any message submitted by the Mayor of the city. The message sent by Mr. Parra Capó to the Assembly consisted of his resignation from the position he held as Chief Executive of Ponce. The message sent by Mr. Parra Capo to the Assembly consisted of his resignation from the post he held as Chief Executive Officer of Ponce.
0 Ledo. Ortiz Alibran, State Treasurer of the order of the Knights of Columbus, makes
interesting statements about the monument to be erected at the "Mandamus" resort.
fl appeal of "Mandamus" by Don Rotarte H. Todd against the Executive Secretary, Mr. Salda-1 ña, has been again filed with Judge Wolf, and will commence to be heard on Thursday, the twelfth of the present month at 2 P.M. For the third time, the appeal of Mandalnus, of Mr. Roberto H. Todd against the Executive Secretary, Mr. Saldaña, has been filed before Judge Wolf of the Superior Court. Our readers know that this appeal has no other purpose than to demonstrate that the Puros represent the true Puerto Rican Republican Party, and that therefore, they have the right to register their candidacies as such. Of course, if this should be granted, it would be the greatest triumph that the Puros could oble- ' ner, since it would give them all the prerogatives and privileges that the party of Tous Soto enjoys at present. TO BE SEEN ON IHA TWELFTH AT TWO P.M. After the Man- | damus was filed before Judge Wolf, he esto-I vo studying the matter at length, and dict<> an order, that the '- Executive Secretary, by his representatives, appear, on Tuesday the twelfth of the present month, at i two o'clock in the afternoon, to show cause [ should be issued. Next March, then, the lawyers of Don Roberto will return to the old struggle with the Attorney General, to see if it is possible that the writ of Mandamus be issued, and then enter into the merits of the case, which is what they desire. e'e'los wish. ' I i ¡ THE APPEAL IS MORE RADICAL' i The new appeal of Mandamus I ' filed by the Puros is much more radical than the previous one, since it is based on the unconstitutionality of the amendments recently introduced to the Electoral Law in force. | The Puros intend, therefore, to throw to the ground all the legislation that in <sc sense was made in the extraordinary session of the Legislature, declaring null and void for being unconstitutional all the amendments introduced. As our readers will see, (Continued on page 6.) :: fspedáulos that presents The Firm Bruno & Vázquez 'I.. Inc. " Tomorrow Sunday, August 10th ... Rialto " (First Anniversary Day) " MATINAL AND EVENING. Estre- " ; ' no in Port Rieode THE GOOD SUPPLIER t *' by Hobart Bosworth, Elinor " - - - Fair, and Robert Me Kim. :: prices >- :: -- Matinee 20-15-15 -10. ■ ' Evening 35-25-25-25-15 I Three Flags :: " EVENING: - Puerto " - - Rico premiere :: THE BROKEN WING + by Kenneth Harlan, Miriam *' -- Cooper, Miss Du Pont Walter -- ' Ix>ng. X Prices: - 35-35-25 -15. ::: Popular t ::: (evening) i THE GOLDEN CAGE I I I é by Gloria Swanson- and Cofirad T I - - - Nagel. I " I I Prices :- 20-15. t The 1 Houses ± ::: (noché) I FAST CEMENT i by Richard Talmadge t -" Precióse-i 20-15 J -; IMPORTANT:- J -" Premieres at the Rialto at I ' 2:30 the sensational drama by .... Juan Centella, DEAD OR 1 ALIVE J Prices:- 10-5. T Hl IIHH HHÍ 1111 If fifi.
Aguada On the occasion of having received the press of this city a cable transmitting the news of having been appropriated the sum of thirty-eight thousand dollars, by the convention of the Knights of Columbus for the restoration of the statue of the discoverer in Aguada, we visited yesterday (-) their offices our friend Mr. Ortiz Alibrán, to ask him to tell us if there was any information < n possession of the dignitaries of the Order eonfirmed the referred cable, and he manifested to us the following: L;i person most authorized to give any information respecting d< the affairs of the Order is >Mr. Faustino R. Fuertes. Jr., Secretary of State of the Council of State of Puerto Rico, who substitutes for the Deputy of State, Mr. Mendia, for the duration of his absence, but since Mr. Fuertes is in Naguabo and it will not be easy for you to communicate with him, I can give you some infi rm;.eion in that respect. E! señor .Andino Lopez, Gran < afallero of the Council of San Juan has already received a cable from Señor Mer.dia announcing a triumphant co(Continued on ls page 2) | A LOS DUEÑOS DE GUAGUAS ver *" ■'-tato --jy*--*' '- *"* * .' * In view of the regulations of the Public Service Commission, The Marylmd (usually i Company | S is pleased to offer to you its Automobile C Policy covering the following risks: [S ACCIDENTS TO THE PUBLIC ! '> h; The Maryhad Casualty :[ [s Coiii|)My ■; ! Has per motto: j > ¡l; GUARANTEE ;! LIBERALITY :■ PROTECTION ¡[ Ask for all reports quo ps* J* ■ ted you want will be immediately > .leMW". Let us <fauiorf(a<ío ' h advantages of our policies ¿ ( Im". [General "Agent" <[ : VICTOR BRAEGGER, ¡ [ \ Manager Ins. Dept. ¡ Tel. No. 1281-2 Tanca St. 3. ¡ : ► SAN JUAN, P. R. - < - ¡" ■ wr" < ' They say Molinera won't be able to re- ; sist the push of some of - the horses that are to run - the next dothinjp. Will he pew it like Marta B?. -" ; - - - - - - -i - - Mit. J. - * -