ELMCINDO
1 n PAGES. 3 CTS. I 1% ~OI "cfii""i "fuerto Ríe o Sil Ihiitrado""ld<. 1 Tel- 1228, - MR
Il P PAGS. 3 CTS. |y
MORNING JOURNAL.
"st r 1 , ■■■■ .rTr.sssssss ARO VI.
"■ ■ "*-ggmMg8ssxaa...' i i-i 1.1." 1 SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
diatributad and" pcrmtt~ (Ko. 801) "atiu>rUedby the Act of October 8, 1817, on file at the Post Office of Published anddlettionteg. p president, A 8. Bnfleson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, t?e y OfLe at Porto Bko. (United State, of America) under th. Act of march fi. 1879
The Nationalists of this capital, have filed in the District Court, a writ of mandamus, against the Executive Secretary of the P. R., Don Eduardo Saldaña.
Said writ tiesde to compel the Se! aetario fjecutive to certify sis t tfüaáéfl any, the candidacy of ledo. Ortií Attráu for mayor of San Foan for the Nationalist party, as well as the names of the members of the Municipal Assembly for said party. The petitioners allege that they cover the quota that the law establishes to iisaibir a party IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF SAN JUAN, P. R. Juan J. Ortiz Alibrán, Rafael Bernabé, Hermógenes P. Vargas, Julio César González, Agustín Ortiz, Laureano Viñas, 4 Abelardo Ruiz Morales, Manuel M. Ramírez, Faustino Fuertes, Rafael Sancho Bonet and Manuel C. Muñoz, plaintiffs, v. Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico: Hon. Eduardo J. Saldaña, defendant. Civil No. MANDAMUS. Petitioners appear in this case, represented by their attorneys Rafael Sancho Bonet and Mario Figueroa del Rosario, and request the Court to issue a Writ of Mandamus against the Hon. Eduardo J. Saldaña, Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico, in support of which petition, they allege and state the following facts: FIRST:-That the petitioner (Continued on p. '¿ ¿) IN THE COURT OF LAW OF THE COURT OF LAW OF PUERTO RICO. FIRST:-That the petitioner (Continued on p. '¿) IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO. FIRST DISTRICT NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that this Court has designated the 21st day of October, at 9:00 a.m. for the reading of the Criminal Calendar, so that the defendants may appear and request the hearing of their cases, which will be done in accordance with them, to the extent possible. BY ORDER of the Hon. Judge Charles f - E. Foote. Eduardo Sein CASALDUC. Clerk, 1st District. Advt.
Sensational manifestations of the Colonel of the Insular Police, Hon. Lewis, calling all the statements lately published about his department erroneous
"I believe in the free press, but it is-1 toy opposed to erroneous manifestations, said yesterday the well-known gentleman, Mr. Lewis, Colonel of the Insular Police of Puerto Rico. THE SERVICE RECORDS SPEAK! SERVICE RECORDS SPEAK "This department does justice. In arranging to upgrade our officers or corporals, or sergeants, or policemen, we let their service records speak. Of course, I am the first on duty. It would be impossible if there were a vacancy, and four shifts to fill it, to move them all up in grade. In this process the one with the best record gets the promotion. The records of all the chiefs, etc. lately promoted are not secret. They are available to anyone who wants to see them. We are gentlemen here. COMPLETELY UNCERTAIN "There is chivalry in everyone: spj-. fiole and American. We could not conduct ourselves in the manner spoken of by the one who inspired that article; to do so would already be to fall from the height to which chivalry and Justice lead us. "It is completely uncertain that we would have- ■ preferred. No!! The one who was No. 1 on the ladder, that one has won the grade. We have to choose, and we choose those with the best service. "Even if it was my father who was on the list, and made No. 3, I would not understand it if there were two others before him, "The only influence beside the Colonel is the record of those to be promoted. "I never lend myself to things that I consider illegal and unjust. That is what my 25-year service record says. CAPTAIN AND POLICEMEN; i EVERYONE WITH THE SAME OPPORTUNITY ' "From the highest captain, to the policeman who has just come into the service, ' everyone has an equal opportunity in this apartment. j "This can be attested to by those in the department who have always proceeded honestly and efficiently. "We demand the utmost of fairness wherever there is.
■ ■■■■ " '"""" ti (ASA W SPAIN IN PUERTO RICO CENTRAL BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONVOCATION * In compliance with what has been agreed upon by this Central Board of Directors, I CONVOKE A GENERAL EXTRAORDINARY MEETING to be held in the Salons of the Casino Español of this Capital, at nine o'clock in the morning of the NINETEENTH DAY OF NOVEMBER next coming. The matters to be discussed are the following: 1--The Board of Directors will give an account of all that has been done to date in order to reach the construction of our social building. 2--The same Board of Directors will submit to the resolution of the Extraordinary General Meeting an agreement modifying the proposal relative to a loan up to the sum of $500,090.00, made by Don Enrique Zorrilla, with amendments from the Delegates Don José Berrocal, Don Justo Juan, Don Nadal Reines, Don César Rodríguez, Don Enrique Leiguarda, Don Emilio S. Jiménez and Don R. Baragaño, and approved by the Extraordinary Meeting of October 23, 1922. This Extraordinary General Assembly may only be attended by the Delegates of the Locals, as long as they meet the conditions required by Article 24 of our Regulations. San Juan, P. R. October 9, 1924 JOSE PEREZ LOSADA ENRIQUE ZORRILLA Secretary Acting President
"£the only thing that could influence me in favor of the promotion of a captain or officer of the insular police, *is his record of service. ÑI do not lend myself to what I consider illegal, and unjust, and so says my record of 25 years of service , says the Hon. Colonel of the Insular Police.
I nccesidr.'I of imposing the force of law. "It is not that we preach what we do not perform. We have always set the example, and to prove it so, the records of our actions, open to public inspection, will always tell of the correct procedure we continually carry out. WITH REGARD TO PUBLIC RALLIES "To all political Chiefs we require them to keep within their powers as to order, and the first who succeeds in getting beyond the just means provided by law, and enforced by the police, will be brought to justice, without regard to who he is, and on the spot. ' ■ With regard to what lo;; newspapers have said about fas proceedings of; correct Captain Blanco, I am i studying the data presented for my consideration, and I will duly make known c! result of that investigaLoteiífí" ' - ■ >..." DA VIS 8E SHOWS ACTIVE IN HIS PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN NEW YORK, Oct. 17 (United Press) Democratic presidential candidate Davis delivered a sensational speech in the state of Illinbis, from the special train in which he was traveling, emphasizing the fact that the present ' election campaign, is to be made > neither on the basis of the constitution, nor on the basis ' of the future government, but on the basis of the present government, with all its administrative scán' dalos and corruptions. ' He added that the Republicans' determination to meddle with the Constitution on every occasion and circumstan- ' cala, has no other purpose than to pro- - duce a powder keg, to make the electorate forget the recent administrative scandals,' which are still fresh in the memory of all. Davis leaves for Chicago,' where he will deliver a political speech, and where there is great enthusiasm to hear him, s Lafoyette made a speech in Minneapolis, and among other things said that the radio station had refused to broadcast his speech to all parts of the nation, because the service was monopolized by a few, who were his political opponents. He added that he pledged his word of honor that the next Congress would intervene in abuses of that nature, which are completely in opposition to the American Constitution. Comapre the Lucky Strike cigarette with any - otre cigarette Quality speaks, yes I GARAGE : BRANDI VILLA ST. - PONCE
"Mr. Toas Soto, enough with your pride ¡"fondado and let's go to the Ateneo to discuss, and there I will prove to you that the formula "Sovereignty within Sovereignty" is a solemn nonsense.
Dr. Víctor Culi y Cuchí, leader of the coalition, replies to the article on the subject "Sovereignty within Sovereignty" recently published by Don 1 sé. Tous Seto In "La Correspondencia" of October 15, at last, comes Ledo Tous Soto providing the proof he believes he has to convince the Puerto Rican people that "The Sovereignty of the People of Puerto Rico within the Sovereignty of the United States" is nonsense. To tell the truth, we had a better concept of Mr. Tous Soto's capacity than what this argumentation reveals. All his argumentation, all his proof is adverse to him. lo.-Cl states that "California is a sovereign state with sovereignty limited by the sovereignty of the Union". That is to say that the Sovereignty of the Union is above that of the State. Here, the lawyer is 1 tablece maximum* and minimum Sovereignties. But then comes the ¡ Academia de la Lengua and says in its l Interpretación Filosófica y Jurídica ¡ del Lenguaje; (p. 1318), "SOBE- t RANIA:-Altcza y poderío sobre to- j do. Supreme dignity. Indisputable authority, unique and indivisible. From the Latin: super'. over, above". 2nd.-Bring to his aid Hamilton, in an article published in "The Federalist". Oh! crass error of the polemicist! It is precisely that article that proves us right. Let us see, The State of New York the 'fícülos not to vonfederation" to make a fodération in which each of log reserved and retained its sovereignty, liberty and independence. This is expressly stated in the Second Article "Article II. "Each State ratins its sovereignty, liberty and independence". Thus they remained for ten years; but seeing that this brought about a general contradiction, establishing a competition prejudicial to the harmony between Es(Continued on p. 9) IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIH "THE. SHADOW ~ OF THE ORIENTÉ" BY E. M. HULL The famous author of "THE SHEIK," has just written a new novel, full of dramatic action and colorful sceni1 co, which constitutes the most sonai do literary triumph of the celebrated t writer. "EL MUNDO" has acquired the exclusive rights of translation and publicity for Puerto Rico of such an exciting work, whose first chapter will be published next Sunday. * The Shadow of the Orient" is the story of tragic loves, in which vivid pictures appear, full of color and strength, of the distant and mysterious Orient, of the golden deserts of romantic and novelistic Arabia, of the slums and the Latin Quarter of the City of Light, and finally of the calm and refined atmosphere of an English manor house. Don't forget: The First Chapter will be published on October 26th in the "Sunday Edition" of EL MUNDO. ORIENTAL ® hair dye, and you will be delighted with the result. It makes gray hair disappear without leaving any trace of its use.
NUMBER 1759. _ _ i . - -
On the road between Humacao and Las Piedras several Allied leaders of San Luán were the object of an alleged political attack.
They were shot with a ¿isp:The alleged attack is believed to have been a mistake, since it must have been directed against a third person who was not in the car Thursday, at about 12 o'clock noon, on your stretch of road between Humacao and Las Piedras, on your stretch of road between Las Piedras and Humacao, the car in which the Allied leaders Lastra Charriez V Palés Matos, Diego Padró and Alfredo Vargas were reportedly returning to San Juan from a political excursion on the island, was shot at by a firearm... Fortunately, and although the bullet grazed the American of the last one, none of the travelers was wounded. The previous news, as well as the details of the case that we transcribed, were given to us yesterday by one of these gentlemen, whom we met in the public thoroughfare: the poet José de Diego Padró. The travelers had visited Vie" qres, where they took part in Alliance rallies and were returning to San Juan in the automobile of the candidate * Oensi dor for the District, Don Faustino Fueí tes. D® passage through the towns of the route, they also spoke in other alliance rallies, without anything abnormal occurring, because their speeches, says Par < always were subjected within the ' most:. correct procedures of the cuV ture and of the good discernment. After leaving Humacao, they crossed as in a vertigo the road from that city to Las Piedras, enveloped in the solemn majesty of the night. The spectacle of the car that flew, perhaps it seems a little violent, with vi sor. of fantastic cavalcade of the Fa West; but 1- ©, very explicable is in one: travelers that return satisfied of the result of their managements by the distant insular east. (Continued on page 4) SR. 8. R. DAVENPORT In the steamer "San Lorenzo", has arrived to San Juan Mr. 8. B. Davenport high officer of the Export Department of Colgate and Company. Mr. Davenport is coming on a business trip and will visit his numerous customers. ' We wish the distinguished traveler every success in his business and present our compliments. "NOTICE TO TRADE e - I do not authorize any person; . . to ask for money on my behalf I Joaquin TRIGO
"Indeed, I made the tale of the two dogs l| back in 1916, but I referred to the opposite of how Mr. Uorens applies it now: Torres", says the vice-president of the Senate, don!
Juan Hernández López "I could also refer to those who in Reily's time supported the despotic and tyrannical Governor, to whom they followed submissive and grateful for those worlds of God, many fat and well eaten dogs", he adds In the edition of the day before yesterday, of "El Imparcial' appeared a story of the notable intellectual, don Luis Horens Torres, titled "Los Dos Perros" (The Two Dogs). As protagonists of his story, the writer makes two dogs appear, to whom he gives the name of Don: Barce, and El Gallego. But let's get down to brass tacks; the fact is, Don Luis Llorens Torres, conceived the paternity of the above mentioned and interesting story, to the Vice-President of the Senate, and distinguished unionist politician, Don Juan Hernandez Lopez. Precisely, yesterday we met Don Juan in the street, and taking advantage of the occasion, we asked him for some manifestations in this regard. Here is what the distinguished public man told us: -ve - ' A STORY DATED FROM 1916. i ' 'Indeed, I seem to remember that I wrote the story of "Los Dos Perros", back in 1916, at a party held at the Academia de la Lengua, to bid farewell to de Diego, who was leaving for Spain. CHANGE OF ' PROTAGONISTS. But I did so referring precisely to the opposite of how Mr. Llorens applies it now, to his own taste and whim. "I was referring then, to those who supported the continuation of the Foraker Act regime against those who called for its repeal and replacement by a regime of free and self-government for Puerto Rico. MANY FAT DOGS. I could have also referred to those who, in Reily's time, supported the despotic and tyrannical governor, to whom many fat and well-fed dogs were submissive and grateful for those worlds of God, supporting him in his campaign of defamation and hatred against the liberties and rights of the Puerto Rican country. 'I *: IJjj' £ I AM ONE OF THEM. "My tale, of course, cannot by-the < -.:SATURDAY:~Edward HEARN, : Ruth RENNECK 111 í - AT ~ M THE FIRE BRIDE -SUNDAY- Wilfred LVTELL ! Norma SHEARER! A Victim of the Law
Extraordinary issue of the Sunday Edition of "ti Mundo" The founding of San Juan, by the eminent historian Dr. Víctor Co'.l y Cuchí, is one of the many and very interesting articles that fill the pages of our Sunday edition of EL MUNDO will be one of the issues that our very numerous readers will be most delighted to read, as they will find in our interesting Sunday edition, besides a select and pleasant reading, sensational information, cablegrams of great world interest, and comic pages of indisputable humor. In this morning's issue, which consists of numerous pages filled with a lot of good reading, in addition to local information, which, as always, is of great interest, we publish notable works by eminent writers who deal with their proverbial mastery and authority on matters of vital importance, whether historical, political or scientific. Among these articles deserves special mention the remarkable historical work of our distinguished collaborator and eminent Puerto Rican historian Dr. Víctor Coll y Cuchí. "La Fundación de San Juan" is the title of the article of reference, and it is a beautiful page of history where the elegant and traditional style of a good writer is united with the most pleasant details that the talented historian seeks to make his work interesting and beautiful. This page is illustrated with Continued on the 6th. p. 1 ever have application to those who per 1 the contrary of those are today on the 1 side of a governor like M-* Tow ner, (I enter them), who is united 5 with the Puerto Ricans, in the demand ■ for a regime of government proper and 9 complete for Puerto Rico, which implies nothing less than the election of the governor by the will and vote of the Puerto Ricans." AGENTS WANTED for underwear in every town on the island. Those who have experience in the field and can produce quantities may apply for references and guarantees. Please contact Underwear, Hotel Condado or San Juan, P. R. " - """"
Ü Compagine Generate Transallantique. French Steamer "MACORIS" << Expected in this port coming from France via Haiti and Cuba ; << from November 2 to 5 and will continue voyage to HAVRE. For further information, please contact ¡ j BEHN BROTHERS INC., Agents j ; % Telephone 257 San Juan, P. R. ¡
I REQUEST > I to purchase a small machine for Central Azucarera that is in good condition and near ' ' San Juan, Ponce or Mayagüez. i J Business direct with the owner and payable in cash. Give Prices and Details of Machinery to: P. J. R. - BOX 1364, SAN JUAN, P; R.
J SATURDAY, OCTOBER 18, 1924