ELAf&NDO
Ift PAGS.3CTS. I 1% díetaa: "hato Hm ■ ■■■ Dwtii"" BMa. g ■ ■ ■ "-!!! Ittt. - BexDM.
1 n PAGS. 3 CTS. ■ i BeaMtr* S4.M II Vn **- 07J"
LX A.M. DAILY, EXCEPT SUNDAYS!
ARO VI RAN JUAN, PUERTO RICR
gabUghed HHttaUd n "er leí ("<■ SOI) -Ue Act W OeteDer S. HIT. lie "B tte Foei OfAce et ' Sea Jasa, Porte BHe, By orle""t the PreeMaBt, A. S. Bartaaa, Poakaaatat 9aa "caL Batata* aa aaooa* alan aattar, febraary 11, lili, al tta Pee" Oflae at Saa Jaia, Parta Ble", fOaMM BtaHa af AMWtea) salar tho Art of ■ereh ", im
SATURDAY, JUNE 14, 1924 i NUMBER 1640.
Yesterday afternoon's session in the Senate culminated in a partisan debate.-Senators Tous Soto and Martinez Nadal engage in a partisan discussion and each tries to explain his position within the Republican Party.-The situation as viewed by an Editor of "El Mundo"
Iglesias gives a lecture on socialism and Don Antonio Barceló takes the chair to answer him.
Yesterday afternoon's session in the Senate was one of the busiest we have witnessed in our Legislature. And no wonder, since the bills that were to be brought up for discussion had to give rise to heated debates. At four o'clock in the afternoon the session was declared open, and the following senators responded to the roll call: Barceló, Abril, Benítez, Zeno, Hernández López, Igle sias, García, García Ducós, Martínez Nadal, Martínez Dávila, Susoni, Jordán, Castillo, Tous Soto, Cuevas Zequeira. Several petitions were presented and a motion was approved by Senator Hernandez Lopez to suspend sessions 11, 16, 23 and 34 of the Rules of Procedure. Immediately after, S. 9 to amend session 40 of the Registration and Elections Law, which establishes that a candidate may appear in more than one election ticket, was discussed. Senator Iglesias asked for a "no" vote and openly declared himself in favor of such an amendment, which had been opposed by the majority in 1920, and that he was now introducing it at his convenience. This caused the President to leave his seat to reply to the allusion, stating that the circumstances were valid and with them the procedures, and that the majority was only responding to the voice of the people who requested that the law be amended in that sense. Furthermore, he added that those who benefited from the amendment were the socialists and that if this were not the case, Senator Iglesias would never have voted in favor of the bill. Once the incident was over, and there being no opposition, the bill was approved in first and second reading unanimously. BILL NUMBER 3 IS A BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING BREAKING
The Senate immediately passed S. P. 3, to amend Session 37 of the "Registration and Elections Law", which in summary prohibits that no party registered by petition may use the name or part of the name of any organized party, and stipulates that for the registration of candidates, it will be necessary to present before the Executive Secretary the signatures of twenty percent of the electorate of each municipality, each duly sworn before the justice of the peace or municipal judge. Senator Cuevas Zequeira, co-author of the bill consumed a turn in favor, and immediately the discussion arose. MARTINEZ NADAL AND IGLESIAS AGAINST THE BILL i Senator Martínez Nadal requested a vote against and spoke at length stating that the bill itself had no other purpose than to put so many obstacles to the registration of the Pure Republican Party that it would be materially impossible. He added that it was an abuse to pretend that if it were to form an opinion, it would have to present for its registration the signatures of twenty percent of the electorate, something that had not been required of the organized parties we have today. And the fact that it is the municipal judges," he said, "who have to swear the affidavits, and not a general affidavit for all the applicants for registration, but a sworn affidavit for each one, is another obstacle that has no other purpose than to create obstacles for us. Anyone would say that the majority is afraid of the cigars". Iglesias made the same arguments as Martinez Na dal, but added that the Puerto Rican Republicans had delivered their Se me ha perdido un sobre grande con 3 giros adentro, aceptado por Padilla & Co., de Caguas, el que lo entregue en casa Primitivo Martinez, Alien 42 será gratificado. Carlos PIERANTONI. CENTRALISTA: We are interested in buying old quarries of 6" wagons, and IVá" and 2" angles. Communicate price and quantity to P. R. cío EL MUNDO. <
ideals and going with the unionists. And I could not but catastrophe arose. SENATOR TOUS SOTO IN- ! Upon hearing such a statement, Senator Tous Soto, who had not taken part in the debates, asked for a vote and stated that the Puerto Rican Republican Party had kept its statehood program intact, that they had only gone to an alliance with the Unionists, not to a merger, and that the purpose of the bill being discussed was precisely to prevent dissidents, out of self-love and human vanity, from wanting to present themselves to the public as organized parties. "If there is sufficient strength of opinion in favor of those who claim that the people are with them in spite of their dissidence," he said, "let them prove it with facts, since there is nothing more just, since majorities have the right to be respected, and the fuse was lit. He stated that if they were dissidents, it was never for reasons of envy, self-esteem, vanity, etc., as Mr. Tous wanted to make it appear, but because they believed that the Puerto Rican Republicans had surrendered their ideals and that they would defend the ideal of statehood until they died. This resulted in a counter-reply from Senator Tous, and the President of the Senate, Mr. Antonio Barceló, was forced to call the attention of the debating senators to the fact that they were deviating from the matter at hand. The tempers were somewhat pacified and the bill was finally approved, but not without (Continued on p. 3a.) REXACH RACING AND SPORTING CORPORATION NOTICE All tickets of favor issued by this corporation have been cancelled. Any person who believes himself entitled to it, must apply for it tomorrow Sunday before 12 M. at the offices of the racetrack.
CAFE "YAUCONO" The only one that has been accrediting the name of Puerto Rico for more than 20 years, putting it at the height that belongs to it; using coffee from the best farms of this beautiful Island, traveling around the world and beating the best brands. We do not do like others, who knowingly and discrediting Puerto Rico, use chopped chickpeas and other mixtures. Use pure YAUCONO. JIMENEZ & FERNANDEZ
Sunday's* Races will be of pulsating interest. The intrepid "Sunoco" and "Los Muchachos" will have to secure their place in the Pool. Reserve your box early.
In New York, two Puerto Ricans have a heated argument, which had a tragic epilogue, as one of them received several stab wounds that caused his death.
M. GASTON DOUMERGUE THE NEW PRESIDENT OF FRANCE, ELECTED YESTERDAY BY THE FRENCH PARLIAMENT | i ¡ ¡ i M. Doumergue, has had a bri- , llanté political career, beginning coI as a colonial judge, and later he occupied a seat in the Chamber of I)i1 putados for Nimes. In the Ministry of Combes he held the portfolio of: i Minister of Commerce, retaining e) j l the same high post in the Min : sI teries of Sarrien and Clemenceau. In ! the Cabinet of M. Briand in the year I and 0.9 he was Minister of Public lust--''-s ,■ *. -eines-rw-1 | From 1909 he was Senator, until "I i December 8, 1913 when he was I elected President of the Council of M¡- ■ nisters. | the entire program. The matters <1< i general character, which the Bishop has to deal with are of transcendentai importance, not only for the Catholics of Puerto Rico, but for the whole country. There are many questions and problems that need to be solved, and all the constituted organizations of the island are in duty bound to lend their cooperation. THE CATHOLIC WORKERS WILL SEND A DELEGATION "The Catholic workers of Puerto Rico will attend the Congress. A delegation of seven workers will have the right to take part in all the debates, to present motions, in short, all the privileges of a delegate. The workers' problem will be one of the questions to which special attention will be given at the Assembly. The terrible crisis that the workers are going through in Puerto Rico must be solved, and the Catholic Church is ready to lend all its cooperation and help. I can assure you that this will be one of the most important issues to be discussed at the convention, and that something good will come out of it for the benefit of the workers of Puerto Rico.
Some 42 municipalities of the ¡island were represented yesterday at the meeting held at the Municipal i Amendments were approved for submission to the legislature.tl Ledo. íont Suárez presented a revolutionary motion As announced, yesterday, at 4 o'clock in the afternoon, the important meeting of the Municipal Assemblies of the island began at the Municipal Theater of San Juan, with the purpose of agreeing on a plan of amendments to be submitted to the Legislature regarding the Municipal Lev, which is ¡ pending amendment during the current legislative session. Seven presenters presented their credentials on behalf of 12 municipalities of the island, as follows: Ceiba. Luquillo. Juncc<. Manatí, Mayagüez. Juan Diaz. Barros. )■ jardo. Toa Alta, Cidra. Arecibm Ai ¡ Ixmito, Cayey, Naguabo. Guayama. Salinas, Rio Pirdias, Viga Raja. Humacao, Vieques. Arroyo. Trujillo Alto. Rio Grande, Hatillo, (water'. nabo, Santa Isane!. "Sari Lorenzo, r Añasco. San Juan. Sabana Grande, Yauco. San Sebastian. Lares, Aguas j . Buenas and Barceloneta. On motion of Mr. 1- ei nandi z i Garcia, of Cayey, the board was constituted as follows. Pre- ¡ sident. Ledo. Ramirez Santibañez, Secretary, Natalio Bayonet, both from San Juan, who were unanimously proclaimed. ! Immediately after the assembly was constituted, Mr. Ramírez Santibáñez took the floor, who in brief sentences explained to those present the true purpose of the act that was being celebrated, and the importance that the resolutions that would be adopted in the same would have for the life of the municipalities of the island. A committee was then appointed to visit the Legislature for the purpose of obtaining copies of the pro(Continued on page 5) today.- SATURDAY, JUNE 14, 1924.-TODAY. 'The Rio Grande North' with JACK HOLT & BEBE DANIELS. Tomorrow Sunday: "LOOKING FOR THE WOMAN". Matinee 3:30 P.M. "Speed". FOR RENT A magnificent premises for establishment with sideboards and counters in Calle de San Agustín No. 125, Parada 7, Puerta de Tierra and an interior room for living quarters. Will inform Julián Pérez Sevillano, Cross 23 Altos. Advt.
Glicoiodina
ins-
The victim and the killer were close friends, but the fatal shadow of a woman came between them, and the friendship turned into implacable hatred The killer went on the run after the murder.Then he presented himself to the Police At seven thirty minutes past seven in the morning of yesterday was killed the young Puerto Rican of 23 years of age, born in Arecibo, Ismael Quero, who resided at No. 254 west of 116th street and was a printer, according to reports obtained by the police; and who had worked in the small restaurant ''Dairy Lunch" located at number 259 of the same street near eighth avenue, where he came to meet his death The killer. Ernesto de la Fuente, a native of Puerto Rico, is only seventeen years old and is being pursued by the New York justice system, which had not found him all day yesterday, according to reports received by an editor of "La Prensa" at police headquarters, thanks to the kindness of Captain Cary. ! GOOD FRIENDS ' i Ernesto and Ismael, as countrymen and film friends were according to the police, loved each other as good friends and companions. frequently going out together and attending dances and other diversio- ; nes. On Tuesday they went to a dance at 66th street and Sixth avenue where they met a young lady whose name has not been given and it appears that from their conversations and dances with the young lady, certain differences arose between the two friends which for the moment had no serious consequences, each retiring to his home after having spent the evening as well as possible. DISCUSSION AND REYERTA 1 Yesterday at about seven o'clock in the morning, Quero went to the restaurant where his friend Ernesto worked and ordered the breakfast served to him by his friend and companion of the night before, While serving him the coníContinued on page 4t - ■'■■■■-w The quality of this cigarette has never been changed nor will it be changed. The quality alone has made this the most popular cigarette in the world. wlS|
I.impies and brightens your teeth. Effective against bad breath.
The FIRST electric stove was brought to Puerto Rico TWELVE years ago. It is STILL serving Santurce. The electric stoves we sell are the most modern and efficient stoves manufactured. Buy conscientiously. Porto Rico Railway Light & Power Co.
Villar & Co. he. Apartado 201. Tel. 1450 San Juan, P. R. They sell the best wheat flour brand" "LUNA DE ORO" "0UT7. DE CáLmán"
TI? A TD A A MT TMIPIP A I TODAY SATURDAY, JUNE 14 T924 AT 9 P. M. " 1 DA 1 1 1\V iTlUlllVll ALi Colossal PREMIERE by the MARINA UGHETT1 Company of -i i "i. o i ' ■■ ■ j a sensational operetta in 3 acts ::LA BAYADERA MAfllUU SUNDAY AT 3:30 P. M. GREAT MATINEE, BEST-OF-ALL AT HALF PRICE. IN THE EVENING AT 8:30 P. M. EXTRAORDINARY PERFORMANCE-SEE PROGRAMS OR ASK BY PHONE.
The Catholic workers of Puerto Rico will have the right to send seven delegates to the Catholic Congress to be held on Sunday, July 6, in the city of Rio Piedras.
The labor problem will be one of the most important issues to be discussed at said Congress HIS ILLUSTRISM, MR. BISHOP MONSEÑOR CARUANA RECEIVES DAILY HUNDREDS OF CAR-I TAS FROM ALL PARTS OF THE. The enthusiasm is indescribable - The message to be read by the Bishop is transcendental. j I One of the most talked about issues during the last few days has been the Catholic Congregation to be held soon. The fact in itself that the Catholics of Puerto Rico will meet in a magna assembly is already something of transcendental importance, and it must affect at least ninety percent of the population of the island. Yesterday we were talking to Don Rafael Pietrantoni, Mastei of the Fourth Degree of the Order of the Knights of Columbus, who gave us interesting details about the question. I MONSEÑOR (MhUANA AND SEVERAL KNIGHTS OF COLON ARE ORGANIZING THE ASTO ''Mr. Bishop, Monsignor Caruana, has called several members of the Order' d* -lofr-Caballeros de i 'Atolón, tra cooperation in the organization of the Catholic Congregation, ¿which is to be held soon in Rio Piedras, -on Sunday the sixth of July. We have been working actively and everything is already prepared for the great catholic assembly. For this purpose, we have prepared a program that will surely be received with enthusiasm by all the Catholics of the island. THE PROGRAM THAT HAS BEEN PREPARED "At nine o'clock in the morning of Sunday, July 6th - Mass of the Campaign. At ten o'clock the Congress will open its sessions and the Bishop's message will be read. ! Immediately will proceed to the organization of the Congress, and the presentation of credentials. At twelve o'clock a tea will be declared, and a group of distinguished ladies will serve a splendid lunch to the delegates. At one o'clock in the afternoon it will reopen its sessions and proceed to the presentation of motions, etc., in accordance with the Bishop's message. 1 THE BISHOP'S MESSAGE IS TRASCEDENTAL ¡ I "The message of Monsignor Caruana will be the most interesting part of