■■ ObL m - -■ te"■ U H'
BPAGS. 3 CTS.
AA PAGS.3CTS. >11 Semester tv
IMARKI DB EX MAAXNX,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
AMOVI
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RIOS
FaMtotat aoe wtutK oaewt psssm (■-. eeij esMíi^^y ef Osmuni % mi, en file a> dta tas Otn" w ■en ¿sea, Poste SHa By o "te _et te Preslliaq fteotoomo esniqal. atesad ae. sensed otes amttez," february SI. lili, ei te Pte Otee et gee ten, Porto "teltepid .eteoo ot doiwteS oteo te Ata W aoroh ¿1ST"
SATURDAY, JUNE 7, 1924
NUMBER 1634.
Córdova Dávila after holding an interview with the leaders of Congress and obtaining from God a formal promise that the bill dd gober-
The President of the United States has consented to the postponement of the bill until then, and the President of the United States has consented to the postponement of the bill until then.
B jresitate CoolWge has written to Cordova an interesting letter stating that he supports the "measures which the War See. has (UNITED PRESS. SPECIAL TO THE WORLD) WASHINGTON, June 6.-After having held several conferences with various prominent leaders of the House and Senate, the Resident Commissioner, Mr. Cordova Davila, who has been formally and positively promised in several interviews that the bill granting Puerto Rico the power to elect its governor will be passed in the December session next, has consented, though with marked displeasure, to its being postponed until then. CORDOVA'S STATEMENTS After this decision of the Resident Commissioner, a representative of the "United Press" went to visit him and he made the following statements: *' < Tb I have Ja absolute confidence and assurance that the Bill will be, passed at the next session of DecemA LETTER FROM MR. "COOLIDGE In a letter which' President Coolidgq has written to Cordova Davila, the President says, among other things, the following: "The Secretary of War, Mr. Weeks, has sent me the letter which he has addressed to the Acting Chairman of the Committee on Territories and Insular Possessions of the Senate, expressing his approval of the Bill, with slight amendments, authorizing the election of the. Governor by the people of Puerto Rico to take effect in 1932 and thereafter. This recommendation of the Secretary of War has my hearty approval." NOTE:- Yesterday morning cablegrams were received in this capital informing of the efforts being made by the Resident Commissioner to have the Bill brought up for discussion. The above cablegram was received by us at three o'clock in the afternoon, and today being the day appointed for the closing of the present session of Congress it is to be assumed, logically, that this decision of the Resident Commissioner has been adopted when he saw that his efforts were not going to have satisfactory results due to the large amount of legislation pending before the Congress. BARCELONA, June 6. (United Press)-The labor crisis in the textile industry is worsening. The number of workers who have nowhere to earn their bread is increasing, and the forced unemployment of the industry is a cruel reality. By testamentary disposition has, come to gird the forehead of the Virgin of Pilar a crown, whose value exceeds twenty thousand hard.
The atmosphere prevailing in the American Congress is entirely favorable to our aspirations to elect our governor-if the bill is postponed to be considered in December, we may be sure that it will be approved, and that should suffice," he said.
The extraordinary session will be very busy, but we will work hard, we will put all our energies into the work, and we will fulfill the duties we have contracted with our country," he adds. Our readers are aware of the patriotic campaign which has been waged during the last few days by the Resident Commissioner in Washington, Mr. Córdova Dávill, to see that the bill granting the elective governor to Puerto Rico prospers in Congress.* The joint commission of the legislature that went to the United States to demand greater freedoms for our island did a titanic job. The members of that commission forgot all the quarrels that divided the Puerto Rican family to think only of the welfare of the homeland. They had in their minds a supreme purpose, to form an environment in favor of a governor elected by our people. And now this project is under consideration. The whole island is pending the decision of the American Congress. All our hearts are full of hope. 1 And... yesterday we were talking by telephone with the illustrious public man who has carried on his shoulders all the responsibility of the campaign, the one who has succeeded in getting all the sensible people of Puerto Rico to unite in a single aspiration, in a fraternal embrace, to get the Congress of the United States of America to grant us the right to elect our own governor, since we have demonstrated a thousand times that we are ready for it. We refer to Don Antonio ■ R. Barceló. Mr. Barceló, with a voice that vibrated with enthusiasm, made the following statements. I THE ENVIRONMENT IS FAVORABLE TO THE BILL OF PUERTO RICO ''Puerto Rico is currently nurturing a supreme aspiration: that of being able to elect our own governor in a relatively short period of time. We have been united in demanding that right before the national authorities, and today, we have joined the two historic parties of Puerto Rico, to work together for the interests of the homeland. The atmosphere prevailing in the American Congress is entirely favorable to our aspirations to elect our governor. The Resident Commissioner, Mr. Córdova Dávila, is making heroic efforts8 to get the bill prosperous and approved in this session of Congress. The President himself, Villar & Co. he. Apartado 201. te!, 1450 ' San Juan, P. R. They sell the best wheat flour * brands , ORO" D 1 1 ' . .1 i . rruoM nace va. i
Prestigious members of the bar are carefully studying a plan for reorganizing the District Courts of this capital The present system is considered deficient and an attempt is made to make the procedure faster and more convenient Text dd project under study and interesting manifestations of the ledo. Molina de St. Remy Among the different matters to be dealt with in the extraordinary session of the Legislature to be held next Wednesday, the 11th of the current month, is the introduction of amendments to the last Law reorganizing the Courts of Justice of this judicial District. Knowing that prominent members of the Bar Association of this capital city were interested in having a proper reorganization carried out that would make it possible to make the courts more efficient. Knowing that prominent members of the Bar of this capital city were interested in a proper reorganization that would make the procedure in our Courts more efficient and quicker, we went to meet with Ledo. Henry G. Molina, who made us, in summary, the following statements in relation to what they propose to submit to the legislators: ''Unquestionably the situation that exists now, in the form in which the District Courts of this capital are organized,'' he began by telling us, ''is abnormal. Today, from the time a lawsuit is filed until its final resolution, it takes from two to four years, and it is necessary that we begin by introducing a reform in the Court where these lawsuits originate in order to remedy this evil. For this capital District and metropoI telling us- it is convenient to take into account the system established in other metropolises such as London, , New York, Manila and Havana. They have only one Court with the necessary number of judges. All cases are filed in that single Court and then distributed among the judges according to a system established by an internal regulation. " With the reform now being sought l to be introduced it is proposed to have a single i District Court of San Juan, with - a Clerk's office, a marshal and a Fis. * calía. The court will consist of three ' judges, each having the entire jurisdiction of the court as if it were com- ¡ posed of a single judge. There will be three b chambers devoted to the conduct of criminal and civil trials and the third , chambers devoted to all preliminary proceedings, ex-parte matters, rebellions. extraordinary appeals, attachments, etc. In this way, judges holding trials will not have to be interrupted to attend to a multitude of matters of secondary importance but which must also be given immediate attention. In this way, it will be possible to resolve ráMM. - u "uu. a
'it's - TOASTED I Run" a pack I today. IF no eutá aatig- [ fecho OtHoo < WoodL tfevolvori su
I A A PERMANENT SERVICE ■ _ T/ . i Awmswte ■ M> GARAGE -. GASOLINE - LGVADQB I RB ANTYI villa ponce
The asaabte mndpahs of the island inidaa mi mrimiéñ" to inpedir that in the próxi-.
The entire island, as suggested by the two letters we are publishing, does not seem to support the legislative 'affaire' of creating governments by commission, such as the one announced for San Juan, and abolishing the municipal assemblies. nicipal assemblies. Since the beginning of this movement we have noticed a profusion of comments on the matter as a truly crazy idea. because, they say in virtue of it, it tends to the absolute capitalization of the public powers, * Today, it can be assured, knowing the terms of the Proclama.de! Governor summoning the *feglslators, the sentiment against *0 a reform of such nature continues "n increase, and it seems proposed to present the trente de battle to those who in*n$an the plan, ja in order to prevent éstJ from reaMce in the possible form in which sé sé cree-ha da plantearse this announced refirma. Here, in San Juan, for example, there are many who protest against the legislative amendment to which we refer, tacUp.ndqiO'de lamen table and absorbing, gtekiq tries to stifle the spirit ofótetepoo Ael pteblo, and puts, de paso, fos that pass them good intentions, qupi m satisfy, iferegan, to qúlén'^|M||^ l Wf that and amás a'fornique cono, cen the situation-true of the cesas. Moreover, they comment, with that fingunier.to of the reality, it cannot go to another place than the one that leads to the fierce fight, with which the cohesion of the 'Alian za' could be deeply resented. These elements, with whom we have spoken, consider that not only must good faith be proclaimed for the final struggle, but that good faith must preside over all the actions of those who loudly proclaim "their cordiality and sincerity in the general handling of Alliantism. To give an exact measure of what is the true feeling that is beginning to be initiated on the island in this matter, we reproduce below these two interesting letters: Yauco, P. R., June 4, 1924. Mr. Fres, from the Municipal Assembly. San Juan, P. E. Dear Colleague: I assume you are aware of the statements made by Mr. Barceló published in ''El Imparcial" of yesterday, Tuesday, June 3, regarding the intention to amend the Municipal Law, creating the Government by Commission and annulling the Municipal Assembly, if such a measure were taken by the Legislature, the highest representation of the people in its Municipal Government, faithful guardian and watchdog of the interests of the people in its administration, would be annulled. - In agreement with Mr. Barceló that the Municipalities should express themselves as to the amendments that should be made to the current Law, but we should initiate an assembly to discuss the amendments that we should suggest to the Legislature, and that it should leave the law intact. gislature and which will leave the repre(Continued on page 6.) BARATILLO I|N THE BAZAR "SAVING" FORTALEZA 25 Suits, Shirts, Hats, Cashmere and thread pants and everything for Cñíballeroi and children, do not forget that Manolo is limited. Visit him T< 1579. Box 1246. v
Hon. jaez Odlin makes important new statements on the Jury "affaire," which aroused such strong controversy throughout the country's press
B alte fsedMarie evades a question as to whether women are more suited than men for jury duty in P. R. I only wish there were an experiment to be made. Turning to other topics, Mr. Odlin censures the L U. Congress for the Japanese "affaire" and says that Me Adoo is not tqn erratic After the strong controversy aroused by the jury affair and the possibility enunciated by the Hon. Judge Arthur F. Odlin, of the Federal Court, our editor Pietri visited the office of the said official on Tuesday, delivering to him a questionnaire of several questions on the same subject, in order to ascertain what was the judgment of the distinguished magistrate since the repeated ''affaire" has been the subject of the most extensive discussions throughout the press of the country, including, moreover in our questions some of a different nature, but which, given the matter to which they relate are of no less topicality and interest than the former . Hbn. Judge Odlin accepted with the greatest complacency our questionnaire, and after walking his eye over it, te" ntetataOt qun*|biilestarla his pre. guntas, opportunely..... In fact, yesterday, skillfully translated into Spanish by the interpreter of the Tribunal Ledo. Luis A. Castro, our colleague received the answers of Judge Odlin, which he puts here after the respective questions he asked him: Q.-Do you believe that the system of trial by jury in Puerto Rico is a complete or partial failure? A.-I have never said that the jury trial system in Puerto Rico is a complete failure, but I have often said that it is a partial failure, and my recent experience has strengthened that conviction. Q.-Do you believe that there is any remedy for the situation, other than substituting men for women, in case women had the necessary legal capacity to act as such? R.-Without hesitation I answer in the affirmative, that there is a remedy. It seems to me that this remedy consists in the education of the youth who are now in the high schools of the island and in the University of Puerto Rico, in what concerns their civic duties. They should be made to understand that as soon as they are 21 years of age, they will be called to serve as jurors, and emphasis should be given to the importance of the oath they must take to act as such jurors. I have been told many things in confidence, which, of course, I cannot reveal, coming as I do from persons who have served on juries that have returned highly improper verdicts. The proof, in my judgment, is positive that many men in Puerto Rico, when they take the oath and say that they have no formed opinion with respect to the case they are about to hear, they mislead the Court. They go into the jury deliberation room and argue about aspects of the case that were never revealed in any way in the courtroom. And some of the elves have even insisted that other jurors be guided by statements made about alleged facts about the case by witnesses and litigants that have not even been mentioned at all in the courtroom. I have respect for
the man who answers in the affirmative to the preliminary questions put to him as to whether or not he has a formed opinion about the case, for this relieves him at once from jury service, unless his opinion is of a transitory nature. But the sad part of the case is that many men who have deep-seated convictions before they enter the courtroom will revoke the case on the evidence given in court, and then proceed to break the oath thus taken. j Q.-Do you honestly believe that women are better qualified than men to serve as jurors in Puerto Rico and elsewhere? A -It is impossible, of course, to con- jtest this question, except that I ( would wish an experiment to be made. The reason I have for it is : that women in several States of the Union are performing jury service most satisfactorily. I spoke to a Judge of one of the Superior Courts of New Jer-1 sey, who told me that he had been using women as jurors in important cases for three weeks and that they had performed their duties as jurors admirably. I recently learned that Federal Judge Thompson in Philadelphia had impaneled the first panel of women jurors ever used in the Federal Courts, and that the result was entirely satisfactory to him. No one has yet suggested to me any reason why women in Puerto Rico should not enjoy the same privileges that women in the several States of the Union enjoy in respect to their duties as citizens. Q.-Is it or is it not true that prominent women in the United States and elsewhere, who have been asked about this matter, have refused to participate or take part in the responsibilities and burdens involved in these new privileges and rights? A.-This question must certainly be answered in the affirmative. There are many prominent women in the United States who have expressed their disapproval of sharing with men not only the responsibilities inherent in jury service, but also the responsibilities arising from the right to vote. This fact, however, is no reason why women who wish to share their civic duties with men should be prevented from doing so. Must, WE OFFER NEW HARVEST Medium potatoes in barrels received by last steaming. FRANK S. SOLER Tetuáh 35. phone 571. usmsteMteteteteteM.
f FOR SALE . JA Hudson Super Six automobile ■'ron splendid condition. Reports. S. GUIÑONES. Phone 1542 S. J. or 595 Santuroe" ' - -
La KíBBbB < Bt - v iwl r ■ Atn k. , . j ' - ./ w ' a /MI ' < - A / / / H f "I i r - ■ f;' x flB r 'fM ■ 1BB - Uh -11 - fn THE HONORABLE JUDGE ODLIN AND OUR FELLOWSHIP LORD PIETRI.
be noted that although there are more than 30,000,000 Americans entitled to vote for President, only 15,000,000 exercised this privilege in 1920. There are thousands upon thousands of men who are entitled to vote and yet do not avail themselves of that privilege. I know personally that in some States of the Union, some men have deliberately refused to serve on juries. Later, when some incompetent juror returned a ridiculous verdict, it was the same citizens who refused to perform their own duties as citizens who were the first to censure the Court. No argument is needed to show that, because some women refuse to exercise their right to register and vote, all women should be deprived of that right. And it is ! equally true that because some women do not wish to serve as jurors, there is no basis for excluding women who wish to serve as such jurors. i P.-Is it or is it not true that prominent women in the United States, women who are really of sound public opinion and are LEADERS among their sex, have expressed the view that they do not agree with the idea that women should overnight be placed in such a position that they can and should assume the duties of men, particularly in regard to civic responsibilities? A. The answer to this question has already been given. It is true that many prominent women in the United States and elsewhere have always been opposed to the idea of woman suffrage. This number, however, is diminishing as is shown by the presence of one or two women in the Congress of the United States, by the splendid performances of Lady Astor in the British Parliament, and by the presence in the highest court of Ohio of a lady, Miss Florence Allen. Moreover, the 19th Amendment would never have been passed by the men of the United States unless the great majority of the women of the United States had asked for it. It is a source of satisfaction to me to know that the distinguished Puerto Rican statesman (Continued on page 7a.) June 7, 1924 TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY OWEN MOORE in FI "THE SULTAN" Tomorrow: The Temptation of Lsjo