THE WORLD
10 PAGS - 3 CTS I JK Uütaas: "Ptrart" Mfc" ■ 1 " DwtreO" SWf.
Q PAGS. 3 CTS. BcaMtr* U4.Ó" ■ ■ ■ Oí U" BT.M.
MORNING DAILY.
> x CLP TO SUNDAYS
ARO VI
-AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
tUOlUÍK <UMM" .4*. *"A, -Wyá -> A"" M uaraatt -, 1V17, "a *!- M *a" r "M WJK""r I San Jm, Port* Bjee. By "f Ua PtmUm*. A. S. S. PoMwartor 'taeraL Snteret m eeeeaa elaee Mtter, febreary "1 i "i". -" tbo Pan Oflm o" "M Pwa, Pem Mw. AftntM BtatM af HaWj "Mar Mm Aal af mam 1. irr" ■ ■ ■ ■ i - "*-"-
SATURDAY, MAY 24, 1924
NUMBER 1622.
flder socialist Kder Santiago Iglesias, in his eagerness to make his minority party strong, has taken steps to get the Knights of Columbus association to join the political movement of the pure socialists and republicans.
Although the idea is that the aforementioned Catholic association will not discuss any political question, this has given rise to the idea of holding a Catholic Congress to be held in this city or in Rio Piedras next month The Bishop has sent circulars to the parish priests of the island so that they may gather the Catholics in each locality and proceed to designate their respective delegations.
When, a few days ago, the Socialist Party held the meeting. When, a few days ago, the Socialist Party held the meeting of its Executive Committee for the purpose of approving and sanctioning the projected coalition between this party and the pure Republican Party, in the memorial of its leader, Senator Iglesias, he emphatically stated that the Socialist Party, for the purpose of counteracting the enormous danger that the Puerto Rican Alliance represented for them, was determined to unite with the Republican Party, was determined to join the Puro Republican Party and invited to join the movement any other public organization of liberal ideas that would like to cooperate in what they called a work of salvation of the people against capitalist interests. This statement of the socialist leading body was interpreted as giving the nationalists the opportunity to join the public-socialist coalition and thus have a better chance of success. This circumstance, apart from the credibility of the person who informed us of it, leads us to believe that there is reason to believe that it is true. that there is reason to believe that it is true] that Mr. Iglesias is trying to get not only the Nationalists and any other political group to join them in the bloc that they intend to form against the Alliance, but that his efforts have also been directed towards trying to obtain the support of other important institutions and groups, even if they are not of a political nature. -- In this respect we understand that the Socialist leader, a few days ago, went to hold a conference with Mr. Manuel Mendía, an important and prestigious figure of the very respectable Order of the Oaba'leros de Colón, with the object of making some sharp proposals to him in the event that they should agree to support and second the movement initiated by the Socialists and pure Republicans. Mr. Iglesias alleged that up to now the Catholic element of the island had been completely ignored in the government by the GREAT MÉETING OF THE NATIONALIST PARTY . Next dnm ; ngo, 25th, a great meeting of the Party will be held in Baldoriotv Square. u retreta will end at half past 8 o'clock and jp that time the meeting will begin. 'The following speakers will speak order listed: 'Tédo. Angel M. Villamil, Ledo. Fernando Torregrosa, ■Ledo. José S. Alegría, Ledo. Pedro Albizú Campos, T <do. Mjruel Marcos Morales, Ledo. José Coll y Cuchí. Advt. ' THE COMMITTEE.
1| Majority Party and that posib'emen, t|te would remain so for the Alliance. What Mr. Mendia replied to Mr. Iglesias is something we have not been able to determine. What is certain is that Mr. Mendia immediately gathered many of his friends and brothers in 1 the Order, to explain to them the intentions and proposals of the Head of the 1 Socialists without, of course, any agreement being reached, since it seems to be the intention and purpose of this important Association to remain completely detached from all interveu- ! It seems to be the intention and purpose of this important Association to remain completely detached from any involvement in politics, since this could greatly affect it and harm the work it is doing in favor of Catholicism, which is its fundamental and unique mission. i A few days ago, precisely, and on the occasion of a version similar to this one, which circulated in this capital, it was publicly stated that the Knights of Columbus Association did not intervene in politics and that it did not favor any of the different partisan groups, each of its members being free to act as best suited to their particular interests. i. t, " " " ! * -■***'. ">- ' I The interview of Iglesias with Mr. Mendia was, as will be seen from what we have said, fruitless; but it seems to have been a motive for the Catholic element to consider necessary the meeting of a great Congress for the purpose of discussing important questions of a general nature and adopting important agreements which are considered to be truly transcendent in our public life. At present, negotiations are being made for the celebration of this Congress, which will probably be held in the coming month of June, in Río Piedras or in this capital. I This great Assembly will be attended by delegations from all the towns of the island and the Bishop, as we have been informed, has sent circulars to all the parish priests of the island so that they may send the most significant members of the cha- ■ tolicism to their respective towns to designate the delegations and to send them to the Assembly. Matinee 3:30 P. M. "SPEED."
r A D A r F PERMANENT SERVICE K* nn /tLvjUí garage - gasoline - washes BRANDI v, x L o LA - I Geronimo Carreras y Carreras H He has died at Juncos after receiving the Holy Sacra- ■- ment." K His wife, children, grandchildren, siblings, nieces, nephews, cousins and i H. other relatives and friends beg to commend his H soul to the Almighty and to attend the carrying of the body, which will depart from Martin Peña to the Santurce Cemetery at 10 1" A. M. today. For which pious act they will be recognized. Ño W will hand out obituaries. i . . ... SantúHe, P.. R., May 24, 1924. - '1
fl Committee of the Board of Trustees which is studying the appointment of a president for the University of Puerto Rico, has not yet decided to present its report, although it announced two weeks ago that it had unanimously agreed to recommend Dr. Benner I - ' Yesterday at ten o'clock twenty-five minutes in the morning, the Board of Trustees of the University of Puerto Rico met, agreeing on several things, and leaving the most important ones unfinished. We refer to the appointment of a President for our University, a position that was created by our legislature because it was really needed, and we see no reason why this appointment should be postponed for weeks and weeks. In fact, we had hoped that in yesterday's session this appointment would be made and we find that the special Committee that deals with this matter is not yet in a position to present its report. And they come to say this, when two weeks ago, according to an official report that we have kept, they announced that they had unanimously decided to recommend Dr. Eernner for that position, and that if they had not done so, it was because all the members of the committee were present at that session. And now after two weeks, after having taken action for one year, they say that they are not yet in a position to present their report. It is something that does not fit in logic and that we cannot explain. Also the committee which is making an investigation of recent events at the University, and as a result of which a large number of students are deprived of attending classes, has not yet made a determination, and will meet again today at eleven o'clock in the morning to discuss the matter. We sincerely believe that this matter demands more urgency, in view of the importance of the matter and the special circumstances, and we hope that the gentlemen who form these committees will make a determination, since they have had ample time to do so, so that the Board may act. The Treasury Committee recommended and < Continued on page 2) clones to Congress. The reserve and absolute discretion which is being maintained in this matter is of such a strict and severe nature, that it is impossible to predict with accuracy the main object of the verification of that Congress. T. M. S. S. S. West Notes Will leave San Francisco direct for San Juan on May 28. Buy 25-40 C. F. Will report: D. Fernandez, Cayey, P. R. % "<*"■. ■ , Clean your typewriter for 12.00. Add up and cash register for 15.00. MILLIONAIRE WITCH OJEDA Phone 355 San Jose $7. .Wiiliitii "Mlhl " - ... To Pharmacists Milk" for the famous French purgative "Vichy" should be addressed to S. R.-San Francisco 3, San Juan.
5ensa<jtona/es statements of the Federal Court Judge to a representative of "El Mundo".
CHILDREN'S WEEK ..... BLESSED BE YOU! because you are the sublime prelude to the greatest conquests that can be achieved by a people who have been struggling for many years for their absolute freedom. ! Blessed are you and will be in the history of time,' because in your memories, all the paternal cora zoues have opened in this country, like the smoky lords of this land to the sweet and soft kiss of the dawn, Puerto Rican mothers, fathers and families sighed the most ineffable of all blessings, blessed are you because at that instant when the innocent caste of Boiicquen' climbed the august summit of the governmental power, the earth...., "the flowers...,, the laughs, and the birds painters of this kingdom intoned <1 holy and sublime song of the toindita freedom. Ex to the hetaldos of the future happiness of this land I Blessed are you . Sediana of Innocence! Juan¿ dg GRACIA. Penitentiary of Puerto Rico. San Juan, P. R., May 21, 1924. By means of a very effective plan, the ¡literal ¡a in Puerto Rico could be almost completely in ten "and eighty months fl almirable plan to obtain this great benefit has been outlined to us by the Dept. dílÜirícSfl The probiemd of analfatism occupies today the attention of every Puerto Rican who longs for the happiness and welfare of our homeland. If we are to enjoy greater freedoms, if we aspire to enjoy the right to choose the man who will govern the destinies of our island before 1932, it is necessary to undertake a worthy and redemptive crusade, to contribute effectively and unselfishly to completely destroy the illiteracy that today obscures the horizon of patriotic liberties. The plan that we publish below, outlined by Mr. Gaztambide, senior employee of the Department of Instruction, was especially for El. MUNDO, pleasing our Special Editor, the young schoolboy Teofilo Maidonado, who exchanged impressions with him in his office at the Baldorioty School. We recommend to the Portorriqaeño People in general to study carefully this conscientious work and we hope its realization will bring to our island innumerable benefits. Here are the notes written by our Special Editor, after the interesting interview he had with the aforementioned official: "The problem of illiteracy in Puerto Rico is not a question of time as it is thought. It is a problem that depends solely and exclusively on two things: First, union of thought and action of all noble and altruistic citizens and (Oontlnúa in if p. 2)
For believing, with much foundation, 1 that the phrases, lately uttered by the honorable Judge of the Federal Court Mr. Arthur F. Odlin. who has demonstrated, or at least has pretended to demonstrate, have produced intense impre-, sion in public opinion. The fact that he has exalted our women, which has given an extraordinary impulse to the aspirations of the Feminist group, still very weak, which strives to obtain rare liberties in Puerto Rico, as much as it has seemed to depress some of our men, based on the scarce aptitudes they show, according to the Judge himself, to constitute a suitable and competent Jury, we wanted, given the importance of the matter, to visit the high representative of the goddess Astreri. In our aspiration to inform the Directors about what stirs and moves public opinion with the greatest intensity. Judge Cdlin seemed to us a very sympathetic figure, in spite of all that has been said about him. He speaks calmly, but conceives and formulates his TODAY Apropos of what is suggested in yesterday's ' edition of "La Democracia" regarding the awarding of the prize offered by our distinguished friend Manuel Mendia for the best information presented on Press Day by young students, we thought it appropriate to know the opinion of the donor of the prize. The Publicity Committee, chaired by our colleague Mr. RomanaCce and Mr. Mendia, believe, first of all, that the prize should be awarded to only one of the boys; taking into ' account that each one will work separately, and although it is true that all will strive to achieve the best information, the one who achieves this was undoubtedly the one who did the best and to whom the prize offered is justly deserved. We disagree with the opinion of the esteemed colleague as to the Jury, for we believe that no one better than a newspaper editor is more authorized to decide which is the best done in- ! fonnative work, since he knows in depth the inner workings of modern journalism and what must be interesting, well written and best presented information in order that it may have the desired effect on the public and the reader. We recognize in the gentlemen whose names were cited by "La Democracia", indisputable talent to form the Jury of reference; but it is our opinion that the gentlemen who form it should be fully within the current journalism for the reasons previously exposed. In addition, we do not believe that the Directors of the newspapers are a part of the interest of the Jury. Apartado 201. Tel. 1450 San Juan, P. R. ; They sell the best wheat flour brands ' i "LUNA DE ORO" "CRUZ DE QUALIDAD" Price without competition. i Proof makes faith. SALON BROADWAY SAN JOSE 21. Specializing in haircuts to Ib Boston pare ntñás and señorú- I tas. i RAFAEL GR A J IRENA.
1 opinions with astonishing speed. The first stumbling block to our "debut" as journalists was that the Court was in session, no less, and that the judge could not suspend or adjourn the proceedings. On the other hand, it was of great urgency that, in spite of everything, we should talk to him, since it has not yet been possible to achieve the transmission of thought at a distance, by telepathy, except for the investigations that Professor Murphy, of the University of Colombia, is doing with real faith. Determined to do everything, and in spite of knowing that it was absolutely impossible, at that solemn moment, to carry out our mission, because the Judge was devoted to the sacred task imposed on him by the goddess Themis, who does not usually per-! | We told him, through one of the most beautiful clerks of the Court, what was the mission that prompted us to ask him for a few minutes of audience. The honorable Judge, as soon as we invoked our status as journalists, not only sent us in with all prou ltit< ti", ¡hJfrrtfaVWñ of ! public, but also had the cor| .tesía to seat us beside him; a;to I honor which we do not deserve, but which the ; Judge granted, availing himself of our ! humble person, to the Press. We had also the good fortune that the Jury was going to deliberate in those' j instants The Honorable Mr. uann, I who has always shown himself to be all affability and courtesy to the representatives" of the Fourth Power, granted, since it is not going to judge ei work of each newspaper, but, within the greatest spirit of equanimity, the works presented by the boys, as if it were a literary contest where works were sent without the already expressed purpose of being published in certain newspapers, to be judged later. Thus, both Mr. Mendia and Mr. Romanacce believe that what has already been agreed upon regarding the awarding of the prize and the Jury should remain in place; and they earnestly beg the members of the Jury to please attend the meeting that will be held on Monday at two o'clock in the afternoon at Mr. Mendia's offices for the purpose of evaluating the works presented. THEATER OLIMPO TODAY SATURDAY TODAY j The great singer and dancer' AMALIA MOLINA "PAPAITO" by Jackie Coogan. Tomorrow Sunday: Matinee and Evening: :: AMALIA MOLINA
The quality of this cigarette has not been changed nor will it be changed. The* quality alone has made this cigarette the most popular in the world,
Many jurors have shown signs of not knowing the extent of their oath. "The more influence women have, the better results will be obtained.-There are jurors who formulate their opinion," assures Mr. (Mimantes that they act as such.-Women are more prepared than men," declares the Judge, "simply because they are more moral,-The main cause of erroneous verdicts is due to the fact that many jurors decide questions before they act as jurors.
The main cause of erroneous verdicts is due to the fact that many members of the Jury decide the questions before acting as members of the Jury, he gave a ten minute recess, which we took advantage of to submit, without further ado, to the following very important "interview", judged by us as such, in virtue of the serious statements made lately by the aforementioned gentleman. I Here are the terms of the eonversaj ción that we held, and to which i lent himself very willingly, we say again. The representative of the Justice: -A newspaper as authoritative as "La Democracia", founded by the most ir stre public man of the country and directed i by an excellent journalist and literary man, Don Mariano Abril, who fought alongside the Frócer in all the most difficult patriotic campaigns fought for him. Could Your Honor tell me what is true in this accusation, which must have been much commented on in the four corners of the island? I really do not know what the author of those lines wanted to mean. I am honored to have as many friends among the Puerto Ricans as among the Americans residing on this island. -Since, in the exercise of my difficult and lofty mission, I aspire to make good use of the brief hours of my apprenticeship as a reporter, could you tell me on what grounds you ventured to affirm "that it is to be regretted that women cannot form the Jury in Puerto Rico since men are not prepared to exercise such a function? -(Continued on p. 4.) Lone Star Steamship Co. DEPARTURES of the steamer "SOUTHSEAS" " Orange May 27 Beaumont " 28 Galveston " 31 DEPARTURES of the steamer "SOUTHLANDS" Orange June 10 Beaumont " 12 Galveston " 15 We beg the Trade to order their shipments by the vessels of this Line. SAN JUAN MERCANTILE CORP. General Agents P. O. Box 54. Telephone 840 San Juan, P. R.
Compagnie Generale Transatlantique; FRENCH STEAMER "CARAVELLE" 1 Expected in this port from Cuba, Haiti and Puerto Plata on May 27th and will continue voyage to Havre. It admits cargo and passage for the mentioned port as well as other ports of Northern Europe. For further information contact í Behn Brothers loe. Agents. Telephone 257. San Juan, P. R. 1