ELAÜNDO
1 n PAGES. 3 CTS. I g OsclnaT "Puerto Ueo ■ / Huettedo" Bldg. ■ 13M - ~ BOX 8<B1 -
in PAGS. 3 CTS. I g -BWMrtri 84.00 | / VB Afta ".80
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR VII
,- Pubusaea ena dURribuwa nadar peron (Me. 801) antaorlied by tne Act M Octobar S. IS 17, os tie at tin Bert OfSoo et San Juan, Porte Bieo, By order of the President, A 8. BWleoon,,, Poetmaater General Entered M second elans natter, february 81. 181" at the Peat Office at Beu Juaa. Porto Bice (United stelae of Autries') under the Act of warch 8, 1878.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
SATURDAY, JANUARY 24, 1925
NUMBER 1932.
Grand tribute to His Majesty, Alfonso XIII, King of Spain, on the occasion of his birthday.
The Spanish societies and institutions constituted in Puerto Rico, visit the consulate of the glorious Nation my formal protest against the campaign of defamation, that some misguided Spaniards, are developing against the gracious monarch, -ti message of the Spaniards of P. R. to King Don Alfouso.-Bellas fra-ses.-Something stronger than the memory.
Yesterday, January 23, the whole Spanish nation was ablaze with festivities and enthusiasm on the occasion of the birthday of H. M. Alfonso XIII, King of Spain, August Sovereign of the old mother country. The Spaniards, residents of Puerto Rico, worthy sons of the heroic Iberia, also celebrated with great splendor, the great date of the birthday of the great Sovereign, King Don Alfonso. THE VISIT TO THE CONSULATE Yesterday, at ten o'clock in the morning, the directives of the Spanish institutions constituted in Puerto Rico, the Casa de España, Casino Español, Sociedad Española de Auxilio Mutuo y Beneficencia, Real San Juan Foot Ball Club and the Junta Local de la Casa de España en San Juan, visited the Consulate of the glorious Spanish nation, whose offices are installed in the Tobacco Palace, to testify their adhesion to the great Spanish Monarch, in the person of his represeiftífité tyfi'Puerto Rico,. Illustrious Mr. Ernesto Freyre de Añdtade, Consul of Spain. *In representation of the referred institutions, the following gentlemen, worthy and prestigious social elements, belonging to the Spanish Colony, attended: Don Rafael Fabian, Don Avelino Vicente, doh Enrique Zorrilla, ASOCIACION DE PRODUCTORES DE AZUCAR DE PUERTO RICO Cable on the Market of "■ Aricar - Sellers at $4. M for prompt delivery; for delivery in fetapro at *4.59. Market still. Buyers are fully stocked at present.FOR RENT In Tobacco Palace building, Second Floor right. Comfortable, constant water. Will inform ALONSO RIERA & CO. Phone 527 San Juan | GARAGE | BRANDI I VILLA ST.
don Pedro Bolívar, don Enrique García Cadórniga, don Leopoldo Martínez, don Simón Largé, don Mariano Rodríguez, don Romualdo Real, don José Rullán, don Manuel Martínez, don Diego Agüeros, don Juan Roig, don José María Valle, don José Aguirre, seño*? López Pérez, Don Juan B. ¡ Arzuaga, Don Francisco Ballester, Don José Pérez Losada and Don Ignacio López Merjeliza. RECEPTION The commissioners, who were called upon to carry out such a pleasant and noble mission, were received by the worthy and prestigious Consul of Spain in this capital, Illustrious Mr. Ernesto Freyre de Andrade, and by the cultured and distinguished Vice-Consul, Mr. Manuel Mañzuco. There, in an atmosphere of frank fraternity, effusive greetings and strong handshakes were exchanged, thinking at the same time, in how many corners of mother Spain, similar acts were not being celebrated at those moments, as a warm and fervent tribute to King Don Alfonso, so dear to all the Spanish people. The prestigious and excellent gentleman, Don Rafael Fabian, on behalf of the Spanish institutions represented there, took the floor, and in beautiful and heartfelt phrases, offered to the most worthy representation of the Mother Country, Most Illustrious Consul, the homage of the Spanish residents in Puerto Rico to the August Monarch, and the expression of the most fervent devotion (Continued on page 2) 1 1 ¡ - - - - - '. 11 Dr. de la Vega General medicine. Specialist in diseases of the stomach, liver, intestine and rectum. He informs his clients, friends and relatives of his return from the U. S. and offers his professional services in his new specialty. Phone 904, Sant.
BANCO DE PONCE Having knowledge that some shares of this Bank are being offered we wish to place on record that the undersigned has purchase orders without limit as to amount, from the following gentlemen:- DON ARTURO LLUBERAS, < DON JUAN EUGENIO SERRALLES DON MANUEL GONZALEZ, DON MARIO MERCADO, DON GENARO CAUTIÑO, DON LUCAS P. VALDIVIESO, DON JUAN CABRER, JR., X V>QON HERMAN WIRSHING, DON GALO BALZAC FARIA, DON PEDRO JUAN COVAS, \ DON DAMIAN MORELL, \ DON ANTONIO MORELL. BANCO DE PONCE P. J. ROSALV, - * w- j . Manager
The Com. of Agriculture and Labor, Mr. Chardón, is not in Washington, but in Havana.
On his arrival in Cuba he states that he went to Washington "rio member ■ of a political commission demanding greater liberties for P. R. At the instance of the See. of Agriculture of the Republic, Gen. Betancourt, will give a lecture. The press invited rare said act Among the Cuban newspapers lately arrived in this editorial office, is an issue of ''Mercurio", one of the most important newspapers of the sister anti lia. The colleague publishes a very interesting information about the Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Chardon, which we have thought it appropriate to reproduce. Contrary to what was believed in our newspaper, Mr. Chardón is no longer in Washington, but is in Havana, so he will not be coming with the others. Here is what "Mercurio" says: Dr. Carlos E. Chardon, Secretary of Agriculture and Labor of the Insular Government of Puerto Rico, was yesterday morning conferring at length with the Secretary of Agriculture of the Republic, General Betancourt.
The visit of the high Puerto Rican official obeyed rules of gallant courtesy to the old general and Secretary. He comes from Washington Mr. Chardon. where he went as a member of a political commission of his country in order to negotiate with the powers of the White House for the free election of presidents "by the people of Puerto Rico. According to his impressions in this respect he is hopeful that Washington will accede to this patriotic petition of the Puerto Ricans" who wish to freely elect the men who should integrate the government of the small, but beautiful and rich island. Chardón is a young man, not yet forty years old, and is an educated and competent agricultural engineer. At the request of General Betancourt, Dr. Chardon will give a lecture on the development of the disease that attacks the sugar cane known as "Mosaic' V or "Yellow Stripes" and how to combat it, This event will take place on Monday 12 of the current in the halls of the Agronomic Experimental Station of Santiago de las Vegas. THE "MOSAIC" PBOCHDE OF PUERTO BtOO Úi i. ' -'-'-'■■'--S' ' Secretary Betancourt explained to us that he had institigated and obtained from the cultured Puerto Rican Mr. Chardón the holding of this conference because he "Mosaic" swore he was from Puerto Rico from where he had been interred in Cuba, believing, ' for that reason, Mr. ChaAjpnjm- ' torteado to speak on the subject that is so interesting for the progress of our first national indus- ■ tria. CIRCULAR TO THE TRONIC COMMISSIONS As already announced, they are located in the interior of the Repu(Continued on p. 6) COLMADO ESPAÑA Parada 37% Tel. 29b Hato Rey, P. R. Large assortment of general provisions. "Happy Feed Store", "Happy Cow Feed" (for Dairy Cows). "Happy Hen Scratch Feed", - "Happy Hen Laying Mash Feed" (for laying hens) SOLAR Horse Feed 16 solar - 750 nVc $900.00 cash $1080.00 installments. HENRY W. DOOLEY No. 9 Tapia St. Tel. 1295 - Santurce. i
The well-known and distinguished gentleman, Mr. Norval P. Nichols, recently appointed Commissioner of Immigration of the Island, and whose appointment, as just and wise, has been viewed with sympathy by all Puerto Ricans, of whom he has always been a noble and disinterested friend. EL MUNDO, once again, associates itself with the general jubilation that this appointment has produced.
'■ " r- -- - - - -~ -- : The People, the Opto, of Agriculture and Labor, and now Justice, protest against, the'Equestrian Commission.
the Equestrian Commission signe in the error of believing that in Puerto Rico there are no capable persons to fill the office in which they have. failed.
The Equestrian Commission, which so generously gave us the rancor in our attacks against it by admitting that it is true that the "goats" are being slipped in without it being able to do anything, thus confessing its incompetence and discovering the selfishness that leads it to remain attached to its post even though it itself admits its failure, continues the long series of desacierten that it has lately taken as a rule. It seems that the Honorable Commission has insisted on putting itself in front of all the departments of the government, and to live by itself, imperious and mistaken. THE CONTEMPT OF MR. RICHARDSON. As if the blunders and blundering that the Commission has been consummating ─ as if it were not enough
the Commission has been committing ■ for some time now, now, to crown it all, it occurs to its worthy President, a particular friend of ours, by the way, that without any ulterior motive, highly esteemed in this editorial office, to face justice. i As our readers already know, the Hon. Judge of Ponce, Mr. Rafael Díaz Cintrón, ordered that the "Honorable Equestrian Commission by itself, or through its employees, agents, agents, servants and subordinates, REFRAIN FROM IMPEDING, PROHIBITING OR INTERVENTING IN ANY WAY OR POEM ALAGUNA WITH JACINTO MARRERO IN HIS JOCKEY OFFICE". But, as can be seen from the above, the Honorable Commission that so benevolently behaves with the "joc- < Continued on p. 2)
INSULAR RACING COMMISSION OF PUERTO RICO NOTICE For general knowledge it is hereby made public that in accordance with Article 189 of the Regulations of the Insular Riding Commission, approved on November 25, 1924, all colts and horses born in the Island of Puerto Rico that are to race in the racetracks of Puerto Rico must be registered in the STUD BOOK of this Commission before February 23, 1925, and after this term, the Insular Riding Commission may deny any registration. Henceforth, all foals born in Puerto Rico that are to be raced at the racetracks of Puerto Rico must also be registered within six months of birth. For further information on this matter, please contact the Comisión Hípica Insular, San Juan, Puerto Rico. San Juan, Puerto Rico, January 23, 1925. J. PEÑA REYES. Secretary-Auditor.
The Executive Committee of the Municipality of San Joan of the Carnival festivities has agreed to make a fair of significant hnportance.
Among the projects are: a bohemian night, a tribune of artists in the Plaza de Armas, where a Jury will award the artists of Puerto Rico who best interpret their respective roles. We will have tenors, dancers, musicians, etc. The Municipal Administrators of San Juan are activating the general preparations for the superb celebrations of the Carnival of 1925. The Executive Organizing Committee, has met lately taking very important agreements. A BOHEMIAN NIGHT. One of the projects of singular interest that will delight the people of San Juan and its neighborhoods consists of the ingenious creation of "A Bohemian Night", whose originality will please all those who will be present in the Plaza de Armas during these ■ nights of official festivities. The plan itself consists of a brilliant production, very interesting for the comical details it contains, and which, together with the activities of the Committee of Popular Festivities, so ably and competently presided over by Don Antonio Baran, will be one of the most bri- ! liant, in the magnificent project of the festivities. A TRIBUNE OF ARTISTS. j. . Qllteáfc JMMLeje.Ws xnás beautiful creations j ciones the directors of these popular festivities, after the Bohemian Night, will be in the Tribune of Artists, a large stage that will be erected in the Plaza de Armas, and in which will repre sent their various and different roles all artists of Ja capital and the Island who wish to compete. - A Qualifying Jury will witness the dance numbers, the buffo-dramatic representations, melodious, classical, spicy songs, political imitations, etc., awarding the winner a large sum of money, and an honorary diploma from Mayor Robert H. Todd, as a reward for his valuable artistic services. GENERAL INTEREST. On the occasion of these very interesting festivities, the Mayor Don Roberto H. Todd', and his private secretary, the learned gentleman Mr. Conrado Asenlo, receive daily numerous congratulations from the San Juan trade and the public in general, who appreciate these demonstrations on the part of the municipal administrators. SAN JUAN WILL BE DRESSED UP. On the occasion of the municipal holidays, the capital will dress up for the corresponding celebrations projected by the various committees of the Executive Board" - X lawyer and joiaho i Bouret Building, San Juan P. R. '=--S-S5SS5S "iT's " toasted j r,' I compare "I Lucky Strike cigarette with any other cigarette Quality speaks.
The Opto, of Instruction imposes a new burden on rural teachers by forcing them to take a census of illiterate persons, in each neighborhood.
They are forced to go from house to house, walking on impassable roads. the circular was sent a week ago, with the signature of Com. Iluyte, and the order is being carried out to the letter.
News reached us that the Department of Instruction was about to impose a new burden on the poor rural teachers, forcing them to take a census of all the illiterate persons in the rural area of our island. At first, we were reluctant to believe it, but we thought it was all within the realm of possibility, and decided to confirm the news at the source. And IT IS TRUE In the morning of yesterday, one of our editors visited the Secretariat of the Department of InsTrnction, and there we were confirmed : the news in all its parts. A CIRCULAR FROM HUYKE Indeed, a week ago, more or less, the Commissioner of InsTrnction, Mr. Juan B. Huyke, sent an official circular to all the Inspectors of schools, instructing them to order the rural teachers to proceed as soon as possible to take a census of all the illiterate persons in the rural zone of Puerto Rico. 1 And it is natural, a circular of the supreme jeje, must be put into practice CONSULATE GENERAL OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC IN SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO ■ NOTICE i i i Dominican citizens residing in San Juan, P. ¡ R. and other points of the. Island who are not yet registered in the records of the Dominican Consulates, that they may go to this ¡ Consulate General located in ¡ Apartment No. 213, second floor j of the Ochoa Building, or to the Consulates of Mayagüez and Pone© and Vice Consulates of Aguadilla, Arecibo, Humacao Fone©. Arecibo, Humacao F Gnámca, to fill this requirement of Law. Rafael Ortiz ARZENO, Consul General. San Juan, P. R.. January 21, 1925. Advt.
immediately. Thus, all the inspectors gave orders to the rural teachers to undertake the task, and the order is being carried out to the letter. ANDA, ANDA, JUDIO ERRANTE - The rural teachers must carry out this new work, without suspending their classes, without altering the program, it is an extra that the Department gives them. The overburdened teachers know, that their classification depends on 1> promptness with which the supreme orders are executed, and they have undertaken their work, with that, resignation of those who cannot adopt any other attitude. To do this work, the poor teachers are forced to devote to it the few hours of rest they have during the days of the week, and in addition, most of Saturday and Sunday- Otherwise, they could not fulfill the order, and that means unemployment, and for some, the lack of bread at home. And so they go, like the wandering Jew. (Continued on pg. 6* - FOR SALE: Rol* áiisénfar "e mi dueñoñe guagua RECREO NO. 1 with franchise between Rio Piedras and San Juan. -For information- LUIS F. ORTIZ Tel. 7$ f Box 116, Río Piedras* | José L Pesquera S REAL ESTATE \ g Purchases, sales, mortgages J S and all kinds of business so- : 3' on rustic and urban properties. Administration of properties for a modest commission. Building of EL MUNDO | SAN JUAN, P. R. 8
I SELL 500 SHARES OF THE BANK OF PONCE JULIO MIRAILH PONCE, P. R.
Her parents, siblings, children and other deu "h "h "s request their friends to attend to the conduction of her body, from the mortuary house, rte Comerío Street No. 25, Bayamón, to the cemetery of said town, which will take place at 4:30 p.m. today, i I I I I 4:30 p.m., today. M. of today, iw "r for which they anticipate their pro- I I I deep appreciation. | I will not distribute obituaries. J | I