ELMUNDO
T7 PA6S - 3 CTS - I I I /■ oatinu: "Puerto Mico | ■ temí Humado" SUtg. t) ft | Tel. 1M2. - hex 3*6.
PAGS. 3 CTS. Semester - Z4.00 A Aflo Z7.50
DAILY MORNING
DAILY
VIL YEAR
SAN JUAN. PUER?O RICO.
IyvNUUed M4 "tatrtbOMd niutor perwlt <W". 801) a "ta "riM<l oy Lúe -.Octab*. " inw ' ■ra Juan, Porto Bico, By ordei of tbo President, A A A >u "l "*on. Ptm.-Mr Offtcoot.
■--■ - 11 -->■■■■ --- ■ ■ ■ I A fierce battle is being waged in Washington over the appointment of Mr. Wells
fl Executive Council will meet Monday, 'expressly, to approve the ordinance for the two and a half million dollars of the San Juan Township I Substantial form in which the bonds of this borrowing will be written í '- the bonds of this borrowing.
i Next Monday, as we learned yesterday, the Executive Council of Puerto Bico will meet in extraordinary session, for the purpose of giving its approval to the ordinances of the $2,500,000 loan, voted by the municipality of San Juan to make certain public improvements and for other purposes authorized by law. i * Among the improvements to be covered by said loan are the present San Juan Aqueduct system; the sewerage system of the Capital and Pta. de Tierra, which is unfinished; reforms in the hospitals, especially in the one destined for the Surgery Hospital; repairs to the streets of San Juan, Pta. de Tierra and San tur ce; reforms to the municipal buildings, public markets and cemeteries; construction of other buildings such as schools; the extension of Brau Street and, finally, to consolidate part of the guaranteed debt of the municipality. The bonds to be issued shall be dated the first day of July, 1925, and shall bear interest at a rate not to exceed four and one-half percent per annum, both principal and interest payable by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico at San Juan, Puerto Rico, at his office, or at any bank or depository in Washington, D. C., New York, or Puerto Rico, at the option of the purchaser, and who shall be designated by the Municipal Assembly of San Juan de Puerto Rico. The Treasurer of Puerto Rico shall appoint the Bank so designated as fiscal agent for this loan. The first interest will be paid on January 1, 1926, and the remaining interest will be paid semi-annually on the first of July and January of each year. Said bonds shall be i numbered sequentially from ' "1" to "2 500", inclusive, and ' shall mature and be paid in sequential order of numbering. Said** bonds shall be substantially in the following form: I x UNITED STATES OF AMERICA Number-- g-- Municipality of San Juan, Puerto Rico as THE PORTO RICO DRUG COMPANY The chemicals which we use in the preparation of the recipes are of the highest quality. i i i The patents which we sell- i i i month are always fresh, i Weekimnte we receive from : Europe and the United States ' where we have purchased- ■ res and own office which is I < in charge of obtaining the best í° r - ¡ Our prices are unrivaled. 1 Our service is divided by department and we are therefore able to give you the best possible attention by choosing the most competent personnel for each department. We are proud to assure you that we have nothing to envy to any drugstore in the United States. i The island's pharmacists always receive their orders in our wholesale department, which is completely separate from our retail business. i Advt i --r i .i ' '1 i- r , P
.. The Municipality of- , Puerto Bico, a municipal corporation of Puerto Bico, for value received, will pay to the bearer the sum of ; ( )-dollars in gold currency of the United States of America of current weight and law on the first of 19-, together with interest from the date of this bond, at [ rate of percent, per annum ' payable semiannually in lawful currency of the United States of America on January first and July ■ first of each year, upon presentation and delivery of coupons, as they become due. This bond is one of an issue of $ payable, in sequential order of numbering in the fe-1 I chas and in the following form: Said bonds are issued in accordance with the mitteiáad coBcedMa byj lia law of the Legislative Assembly <of Puerto Bico, entitled. j "Ordinance authorizing the incurring of a bonded indebtedness by means of a bond issue in the amount of $ --, to make certain public improvements in the mu1 nidpment of Puerto Bico, and ', for other expenditures authorized by i the Act'', duly adopted on ' j of -*--. of 19-, and approved ¡ by the Executive Council of Puerto ' I I Bico on -- of --- of 19-. ' - We hereby certify that 1 exist, have occurred, and have been ' duly performed all the * conditions and things the Existence, 1 , occurrence and performance of which, prior to ¡ the bond issue, and in the 1 ; same, ex%m the act of the Senate and , House of Representatives of the United States| of America, in Congress assembled, entitled, "An Act to provide a civil government for Puerto Rico, and for other purposes," approved on Hand 2, 1917, and the statutes of Pto. Rico, and that the bond issue, of which this is one, together with all outstanding obligations of the municipality, does not exceed the limit set forth for indebtedness, and that the good faith of El Pueblo de Puerto Rico is irrevocably pledged for the timely payment of the principal of and interest on this bond, in accordance with its terms. This bond is exempt from the payment of taxes in the United States of America and in Puerto Rico. In witness whereof the City of Puerto Rico has authorized the Mayor and the City Clerk to sign this bond. The coupons shall also bear the signature of the said officials in facsimile engraving, and this bond shall be stamped with the official seal of the Municipality of , Puerto Rico, this day of 19 . Mayor. See. Municipal. (COUPON FORM) i - i Number . $ The municipality gives ■ ■ , Puerto Bico, a municipal corporation of Puerto Rice, will pet the bearer the and ■ , itar.it.-. = Municipal Theater TODAY - SATURDAY 30 -. TODAY The great drama in 7 acts "THE FATAL LBGADO" (DanfWMa Money) ) Predoo- tS - 15 and 10 Matinfe " tal 2 and ?:8Q )
' í-: * " , fI cable is running steadily.-Judge Odlin's amb¡ gos will give battle in the Senate.
The nomination of Mr. Wells is made, but has not been sent to the Senate - Senator Mosos is not resigned to defeat (The nomination of Judge Wells! is still on the table, while Judge Odlin is still administering justice in the Federal Court. I ' No one doubts that Mr. Wells has been appointed at this point, but it is no less certain that in Washington the fiercest of battles is being fought over this presidential appointment. We know that the wire is constantly running between Port Bico and the national capital over this affair, and that some have postponed their trip to Port Bico expressly to fight in Washington for the appointment of a successor to Mr. Odlin other than Wells. i IN THE SENATE It is certain that the friends of JW Odlfaq will do battle in the Senate if the President insists on sending the appointment in question. I The appointment d" Mr. Wells made that day has come the lnolur "far'*>"aW'-ñ" the c*<mtette Mnitffe da Mr. Odlin qtte did not expect em attitude of Oasa White. Senator Moses, Vice-President of the Senate, who had promised Mr. Odlin. that he would be nominated for a second term, is not resigned to defeat, so it appears that if the nominee goes to the Senate, he will face intense opposition from the Senate. But the truth is that so far the nomination has not been submitted to the Senate, so if in * rtrtnd of the prosit that certain congressmen may be developing in the White House, will it be nominated at the end of euequn puertorriquoÁof Some do not lose their minds and sign ln¿taata by --; ÉX JUDGE MO CORMLBK RULES AGAINST W| fiOHENY | ANGELES, May 29. (Uni.' ted Press.)-Federal jngg McJ Ootmick has ordered lá Pan-Ame-rican Petroleum Transport Cc._ whose owner is Doheny, to rescind io contracts for oil reserves in favor of the gqh|a<no, as they were obtained by means of frau de and conspiracy, --""i - "L ■ .i . TWO I and White WINE, everyone can make it at home and drink it at the cost of 30 cents bottle. No more secret"; Easy procedure, v "Q 1 '■ i . CIRO MALATRASI 1 Box 513 SarrJuan * ■ P?o. bico. dinner LEGAL COMMITTEE -¿j May 28, isas?' I Notice is hereby given that this Committee will hear in public hearing, to be held on Tuesday, June tas next at its satfn of sessions at ( two o'clock in the afternoon, all persons who desm" fefftmar on joint resolutions 20 and 38 such Senate, relative to the South Coast Irrigation. WSOTO, "tamrte. j tai Brillante 00 mind léfono
Senator Aponte states that he is convinced that the Income Tax bill will be amended again by the Senate Treasury Committee ' . <
"At the last meeting of the Treasury Committee, the original report was amended to clarify some of the main chapters of the bill." The attitude of the Senate Finance Committee in ordering that the report issued on the "Income Tax" bill, which had already been announced to be discussed before the Senate, be rescinded, has been a cause for great com- ! tion on the part of our legislature. NEW AMENDMENTS. Yesterday morning we asked Senator Aponte, an associate member of the Finance Committee, to explain to us the changes made in the text of the bill-Haig since it had been brought before the Committee again. "At the last meeting of the Finance Committee, we proceeded to en. ' mend the original report which this same Committee issued for the consideration of the Senate, which proceeded to fix some of the main chapters of the bill." IS THE TAX RATE AMENDED? "The Senate will begin decisions on this last report immediately. as the new amendments are related to numbers and do not largely alter the wording previously effected. ! "The members of the Finance Committee are doing everything possible to present a report which will bring together the basis of greatest benefit to the country, being careful not to impose excessive charges on the taxpayers. j . I .THERE WILL NOT BE MUCH , ¡ DISCUSSION. - "Inasmuch as the Committee on : > Finance has already proceeded to make *, a conscientious study of the i principal provisions of the Bill,. having summoned at hearings i the various elements which may assist in the making of the pro- ' yect, it is expected that when the report of the Committee is brought before the . ¡ Senate, it will be immediately approved." day of 19-, the sum. ¡ dfr dollars, in legal i currency of the United States of . America, in Washington, - D. C., New York or Puerto Bico, for semiannual interest on that date due and corresponding to bond number-, date first of Mayor | City Clerk I This ordinance, as appears from the same, shall take effect on ■ Monday next, subject to the approval ¡ I of the Executive Council. i
LAST DAYS ■ ■ ■ - - X Monday and Tuesday, at Four o'clock in the Afternoon, we will continue Auctioning, at San Justo 17, Garments of all kinds at prices ue quemazon, take advantage of the opportunity, tedo guaranteed. J/P. BOURET INC. Sucrs. of Tináufit "The House of Trust" í -- e -- -- "
I BRANDI i GARAGE BRANDI g (Permanent Service) S | Villa 10 - Ponce |
i CINF ! VICTORY GARDEN SUNDAY 31th OF MYO MOST IMPERlALE Great Success of the Famous Artist RAQUEL MELLER
Former Commissioner of Instruction Mr. Paul G. Miller has arrived in Puerto Rico.
Moments after disembarking he visited the Hon. t Governor Towner conferring extensively at Fortaleza * I HAS MR. MILLER ARRIVED TO KEEMPLAZAH HON. JOHN B. HUYKE, WHOSE TERM IS ABOUT TO EXPIRE? On the afternoon of last Thursday, Mr. Paul G. Miller, former Commissioner of Instruction, arrived in Puerto Rico. Miller, predecessor of the Hon. Juan B. I tluyke. | Moments after disembarking, he went to Fortaleza to confer with Hon. Gov. Towner. The interview lasted a long time, the matters discussed being unknown, ' IN THE DEPARTMENT. DK I INSTRUCTION In the afternoon of yesterday ntfs eneon- 1 tramo Mr. Miller on a general vi- ¡ sita he made to the Depar- - tment of Instruction. After the routine greetings, we asked him to tell us what brought him back to Puerto Rico. We also asked him if he was going to replace the Hon. Juan B. Huyke, as it was said, whose term of service was about to expire, "IT WAS TIME TO RETURN" "I have lived here a long time," Mr. Miller began, telling us with his usual kindness, "so it was time to return. I have been touring the Central American countries, studying the instructional procedures employed in each of them. In Mexico I visited many of the' state normal schools, - and also the federal normal, which is the best school building in that region." After so long* away i from the island, I hope to stay here now. Wherever I have been I have heard of 'how Puerto Rico's affairs are going." CUBAN GOVERNMENT ATTACKS. DO FOB LOS CEREROS | GENEVA, May 29. (United Press.)-At the Labor Conference being held here, the Cuban representative of the workers, 1 Domenech Vinajeras, has slowly attacked the Cuban government for the indifference of the politicians to the sufferings of the working class. THE GARDENS OF THE CHINESE PALACE WILL BE! OPEN '! TO THE PEOPLE. PEKIN, May 29 (United Press- The Chinese will now be able to stroll tran-; 1 güilely e¿ the precious imperial gardens, where formerly only the emperor of the empire could stroll.
Mr. Planadeball appeared before the prosecutor in connection with the alleged "Income Tax" Irregularities.
Mr. Planadeball, a former employee of the Income Tax Bureau, visited this office yesterday to show us the original of a summons issued in his name by District Attorney Massari, of the First District of San Juan, to appear before said official, on the 27th of the present, at two o'clock in the afternoon, for the purpose of bringing charges, if any, against those possibly responsible for the alleged Income Tax irregularities denounced by him in the newspapers. Mr. Planadeball informed us that he had answered several questions addressed to him by the prosecutor Massari on the subject; but, without the person appearing, he did not resolve to make any specific accusation against anyone, since, according to Mr. Planadeball, his charges against anyone. Planadeball, his charges against the Treasurer and certain employees of the Income Tax are not of a criminal nature, but of an administrative nature. As the Grand Jury, according to the Law, is empowered to conduct investigations of that nature, Mr. Planadeball expressed to prosecutor Massari that he would wait for the next meeting of that body to present to him the copious evidence he had in that regard. With which, our friend tells us, his appearance before the aforementioned body was terminated. > LONDON, May 29. (United Press.)--The House of Commons has a probate 1S tttótion of Baldwin to recess until June 9 I . " "j f J 1 l'Xf' Jd ' I i Áy 1 I £ J I t * 11 i I I Uf! -i r i . I |I I - ■ II; i -' ' -! ' ' I I I - i > ' Pafa 1; I security I I H . y! i service I I I ' 'I u' i ' ' I;. H ;i; h .J . i ; ! ■
FGOMAS1 F SK i 1 fl
SATURDAY, MAY 30, 1925
NUMBER 2059.
■|EI Fres, of Id Gompafifa which operates the i trolley business in San Juan, addresses the Mayor and indicates the advisability of suppressing the guaguas > . --
-■■■■■ ■ i r ¡Mr. GILES ALLEGES THAT THE BEST REMEDY FOR ; DISTRESSING TRAFFIC IN THIS CAPITAL i CONSISTS IN SUPPRESSING THE GUAGUAS 'I ¡>He in turn promises that if such is done, they will build the double track and bring in modern electric cars > which will take up less space than the guaguas.
: "Mama" Ferguson, Governor of Texas, addresses Governor Towner í,B next Monday we will be in a position to clear up the alleged "mystery" of Mr. Butte and the Ku Klux Klan, I The Governor has received the following communication from the Hon. Mrs. Mariam A. Ferguson, Governor of Texas: " Executive Department, Austin, Texas. May 16, 1925. "To your Excellency, L i The Governor of P. R., - j San Juan. - > HEALTH; "It causes special pleasure to learn that a direct mail service between the Port of Beaupiont and Puerto Rico is to be established on May 19, 1925. I I ' ' IT IS my desire that the first mail going direct from Port of Beaumont to San Juan, will carry a message of greetings and congratulations, from Texas to Puerto Rico, and express the wish for a more intimate friendship between us on the occasion of this new and closer communication. "With best wishes for the continued success of your administration, I remain yours sincerely, (Fda.) MIRIAM A. FEBGUSON, Governor of Texas. i The steamer "Lake Gadsden" is the vessel which has started that postal service between Texas and Puerto Rico. Having arrived in San Juan yesterday morning bringing cargo, mail and a few passengers. Among them was Mr. P. T. Lawson, an American journalist residing in Beaumont, Texas, who arrived as a special envoy of the Beaumont, Texas Chamber of Commerce, in order to study the commercial possibilities between this country and that port, as well as to strengthen the cordial relations between our businessmen and those of that region. In our next issue we will publish some interesting information on the impressions in our country of Mr. Lawson, who, it should be said, has been in our country for a long time. The Board of Directors appointed the thirtieth of July next at ten o'clock in the morning to hold the General Meeting of the Board of Directors for the current fiscal year in the meeting room of the Bank's headquarters in San Juan, The stockholders are hereby summoned and are hereby informed that, in addition to the current business, the meeting will deal with the amendment of the seventh, eighth, tenth, sixteenth and seventeenth clauses of the Bank's Articles of Incorporation and Articles 10-11 -12 48 of the By-laws. San Juan, May 15, 1925. COMMERCIAL BANK OF PUERTO RICO. A. SARMIENTO Secretary. Advt. . "STUDEBAKER" For sale "Studebaker' 7 passengers, "Sedan". 600 kilometers traveled only. Will report: Box 247, Manatee.
May 28, 1925. Hen. R. H. Todd, Pres., Traffic Commission. i San Juan, P. R. . Dear Sir; I " Referring to the problem of traffic -ingestion on the main streets of San Juan, which that remarkable Commission has been studying, . we respectfully call your attention to the fact that ' one of the principal causes of such congestion is the large number of buses now running on those streets. The obvious remedy is the suppression of these buses, at least in part, and the substitution of electric cars, which is clearly demonstrated by the following figures. The most modern buses vary from 23-l¡2 feet to 26-1 2 feet in length, the average being about 25 feet, or 300 inches long, and have seats for 22 passengers each. The electric cars of the modern type which we propose to bring, should we be granted a franqni- - cia for the double track, will have a lar ' go of 45 feet, that is. 540 inches, " and will have seats for seventy pa " "ajeros each. > On the basis of the length of the ve- - veys it is seen that an electric ca-' rio would occupy 7-5'7 púígJ - 7 inches of street for each passenger, pert* that the guaguas occupy 13-7'H - inches of street for each passenger, or 78 per cent more than an Electric car. If it is calculated that each vehicle must have a clearance of ten feet in front, to avoid the i danger of collisions, it follows that the total space required for an electric C3- ■ rro is 660 inches, or 9-3¡7 inches per passenger, while an electric bus needs a total space of 420 inches, or 19-1'11 inches per passenger, so that the bus requires. From ©bob numbers it follows that, in order to relieve at least in great part the present congestion, it is only necessary to abolish the guaguas and ■ r ustitute for them Electric cars ■ of a modern type. | Respectfully, Cari C. GILES. i Porto Rico Railway Light and Power Company. EXCHANGE MARKET Dollar" 30 e. Pounds 4 87y, Franc" 78.70 Peseta" 26.75 . Liras 4.23 r--rag-; de paao, is already a buep finestro friend, knows Mr. Butté of old and can Sácarnos of doubts as to the pretended relations of this one with al Kfi Kux Klan that so much has interested the public opinion.. I' ' ' ' MtitetamtagU ¡sntip aSAGuafi otni. OAioouf * -ASTILLO "SUPtKABLE COH" AHINEKALMtS, .A6XADABW.lt'. JCANTt. 0UC1TE PA8TU10 ODASPAKTE&t 5T* en PROTEGER "CROQUE FUER. ¡ICO POBEE IR RATON -ttawJtei* HER ARE YOU. PHOTOGRAPHER? Ask hov same price" to MÓSCOSO HNO. & CO. of Ppoce, and it will always be "ir cHente. PONCt DRUGSTORE, Ponce. P. R. '