THE WORLD
M°AGS. 3 CTS. "'Txatsess "Tura i- Duttade" BMg. -et ites. - "" tea.
1 PAGS. 3 CTS, f| lot. "*. "o Oí Ai. - - - "7.80
MORNING DAILY
YEAR VIL
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) suthcri'-d by Ue Act of October 6. 1917, on file at the Poet Office ol San Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. 8. Bur leson Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919, at the Poet Office at San Juan, Porto Rico, (United States of America') under the Act of inarch s, 1879.
SATURDAY, MAY 2, 1925
NUMBER 2031.
i LEADER OF THE ALLIANCE IN PONCE, LCOO. GELPI, MEMBER OF THE LOCAL COMMITTEE, AS WELL AS OTHER MEMBERS, ARE UNDER FUE-'
It is declared odious to political morals that a municipal official use his representation as a member of a committee to intervene in the legislative action of the Municipal Assembly to recommend executive action in certain departments and public services of the Municipality of Ponce. Bl agreement of the Municipal Assembly regarding the Tr¡"' i car Hospital has been ratified Mayor Vivas Valdivieso has a dilemma: either he asks for the resignation of the Tricoche Administrator and others to donate them, putting himself with this action in front of the Alliance Committee or if he does not act in this manner, he puts himself in front of the Municipal Assembly.-*Possible dismissals in bulk?
09 our Editor--en Ronce) , " , Yesterday, at eight o'clock in the evening, the session of the Municipal Asain 1 ÍWM was held, to discuss asm-' related to the invertigr.olon that most of its members ■ ■ carried out at the Tri- ¡ car Hospital. All its members were present. The Ledo presided. "R. ' . Perez Marchand. I The minutes of the meeting were approved the night before last. The rrespondence filed with the Secretary's Office was read, consisting of a letter sent to the Mayor by the Alliance Committee, a report from Dr. Ntaella, in response to the Report of the Municipal Assembly, a letter from Mr. Rosendo Colón, Ad--. nistrad.or of the Tricoche Hospital, a letter from Mr. Vivas Valdivieso. Mayor of Ponce, addressed to LiÁiciado Brunet <el Valle, Aboga- ¡ 'O of the Municipality and te's reply, in a legal plea, to the consultation requested by'the Mayor. I El Ledo. Brunet states in his ale-' SMo two questions in the matter under discussion, one administrative, of an internal order, and the other of a political order. Before proceeding to the reading and
Before proceeding to the reading and voting of three important resolutions of the Municipal Assembly, Mr. Pérez Marchand, from the Chair, takes the floor and declares that the Ponceño electorate is the most conscious in Puerto Rico, and that the day that he would stray from the straight path he has traced in his private and political life, he would not be worthy of remaining in the high office of President of the Municipal Assembly. He said that the union of Republicans and Unionists has been for the good government of the people and that it would be so. He took the floor in defense of the ratification of the Assembly's agreement on the Tricoche investigations, Mr. Ramos Antonini, who expressed himself in forceful, clear and precise terms, palpitating in his words certain prejudices against some elements of the Republican Party of the Alliance in Ponce. Although Mr. Ramos Antonini did not mention any name, nevertheless, our readers will be able to see from resolution number 3 that it refers to Mr. José R. Gelpí, who today occupies the Portfolio of Insi traction and is also a member of the Alliance Committee in Ponce.
Among the people who are members of the Local Committee of the Alliance are our friends Guillermo Schuck Jr., Alfredo Campos. Juan de Matta Jou-I bert, Jaime Clavel! and others. We must state for the record that the Attorney 1 of the Municipality of Ponce, Ledo. i Brnnet del Valle, a few days ago!i told us in the Plaza Degetaj and in i .presence of Mr. Martin Gaudier, < that he was not in good relations with the Alliance Committee. ' We bring this up so that our readers may realize that the situation of the Alliance in this city is difficult and that the tension of relations between these organizations is increasing and that the relations between them are becoming more and more chaotic, unless the Board of Directors of the Alliance should intervene and restore harmony. i After he had finished speaking, Mr. Ledo. Ramos Antonini finished speaking, the three resolutions copied below were put to the vote and were unanimously approved. At the end of the session, Mr. ' Pire, leader and labor agitator belonging to the Socialist Party, from the public room, asked the Presidency to allow him to request a round of applause from the sovereign, since for him the attitude of the Assembly was sympathetic, since its tendency was to morally and materially clean up all the bad things left over from other administrations. Here are the three resolutions that will cause a real stir in the electorate of Ponce. ' I (Continued on 9th page ) | Agents Needed To sell daily consumer items at home. Apply for: PLAZA PROVISION CO. 15 Allen St. San Juan, P. R. "awaited STENOGRAPHERMALE ONLY Must be experienced and efficient in both English and Spanish. Address P. O. Box 287, San Juan, furnishing references. FLINT "THE KING OF CARS** Sub-agents needed : for all districts. Es- : sieve to Alonso Riera & Co. ' San Juan Limonada Polo Norte : The best Lemonade. In 10 dozen barrels. ¿ RIVERO & CO SÜCS. 2 Box 523 San Juan g STEAMER "HOLLYWOOD" Leaving Seattle May 13 from San Francisco May 27 Pass your orders on time. Advt.
Agustí" .Fernández - Francisco M. Zeno " - F. Grovas - FERNANDEZ í CO. 520 González Padín Bldg. INSURANCE - SUBSCRIPTIONS - COMMISSIONS
FOR EUROPE BY THE LUXURIOUS TRANSATLANTICOS OF THE FOLLOWING STEAM LINES FROM NEW YORK WHITE STAR DOMINION LINE - RED STAR LINE AMERICAN LINE - WHITE STAR LINE People who wish to travel with all kinds of comfort can book directly and in advance their tickets from here, by any of these Lines. For more information on prices and departure dates, please contact:- BEHN BROTHERS. INC. AGENTS. SAN JUAN, P. R. TELEPHONE 257.
USE THE ORIENTAL DYE FOR DYEING YOUR HAIR AND YOU WILL BE DELIGHTED WITH THE RESULT It is guaranteed not to contain silver salts (lead or sulfur). FOR SALE AT ALL PHARMACIES Manufactured by TINTE ORIENTAL INC. MAVAOUBZ, P. R.
Nutro Tablets The best restorative tonic for the brain, nerves and blood. They are tolerated by the most delicate stomach; as they do not contain alcohol or any irritating drug.
All chances; are that the Legislature I will be declared in recess at the end of next week THE LEADING GROUP OF THE ALLIANCE IN THE LEGISLATURE DOES NOT HIDE TO RECOGNIZE THE NECESSITY OF RECESS Income Tax and Budget are in turn.-Other bills must wait The legislative caucus last held, dealt extensively with the question of recess of the Legislature, even though it was not officially agreed upon. Then the days passed, and we were beginning to believe that the idea had been abandoned. However, the latest events and the news that have reached us clearly indicate that the idea of a recess had been given up. JOSE CONRADO HERNANDEZ AND HIS BEAUTIFUL DAUGHTERS EMBARK ON THE I ' BUENOS AIRES" RUMBO TO SPAIN Yesterday embarked on the steamer '' Buenos Aires ' ' ' bound for the - Mother Country, Spain, the respectable' ble and distinguished wife of our friend, the illustrious ex-President of the Supreme Court and venerable patriot. Supreme Court and venerable Puerto Rican patrician. Hon. don Jo- ' sé Conrado Hernández, and his beautiful daughters Conchita and Lolita, to whom we wish a happy trip and wish them a safe arrival in Iberia. Not being able to say goodbye personally to a great number of their friends, as they would have wished, for lack of material time to do so, they send them through us an affectionate and affectionate farewell greeting. The flowers with which these distinguished travelers were presented by their many friends were dedicated by them to decorate the grave of their unforgettable friend.
If you want to know how good a cigarette can be, switch to the cigarette that never changes. Gillies & Woodward SAN JUAN - PONCE V. PABON Q.I.VERA Agent of "Cillies & Woodward in Mayagüez.
LATEST NEWS
THE LEGISLATURE RECESS WAS OFFICIALLY ADJOURNED YESTERDAY Legislative work; will be suspended from Thursday to Friday of next week.-A rudder commission Income-Tax bill begins to be discussed on Monday.Hon. Faustino R. Fuertes and other senators will fight the bill Throughout yesterday afternoon the majority of the House of Representatives met in caucus In the middle of the caucus Mr. Barceló was invited "'- to attend the meeting. which he did, accepting the invitation of the representatives. The matters still pending consideration in this legislative assembly were discussed at length. And finally it was officially agreed by the caucus to recess the Legislature. The work will be adjourned from Thursday to Friday of next week, and the recess will be extended for one week, at the end of which time the sessions will be resumed A joint committee will be appointed, of the Senate and House of Representatives, which as we all know is generally called the Steering Committee, to study all the bills pending consideration and make a selection of the best and most necessary to the welfare and progress of the country. ¡ On Monday- will commence discussion of the income-tax project in the Cái ruara, unless another caucus is held at the last minute and it is agreed otherwise. The project is already i favorably reported with in(Continued on p. tt) ¡ Ana Maria Hernandez de Real. I EL MUNDO has its most affectionate farewell greetings for the distinguished travelers, to whom it wishes very pleasant impressions of Spain and a happy return to the native land.
IN THE HALF-LIGHT OF A "MATERNITY" ROOM, THERE ARE ACCUSATORY SIGNS, IRRECUSABLE PROOF, THAT A DELL
There is much talk of a legislative committee g. be moved to Wash.
The House Finance Committee, after the visit to Fortaleza,! worked until two o'clock in the morning THE LAST TOUCHING TOUCHES ARE GIVEN TO THE TAX INCOME BILL To be in tune with the recess, the Finance Com. In yesterday's edition, and in our Last Hour, we reported on the visit to Fortaleza by numerous Representatives and Senators, among others, several members of the House Treasury Committee, before which the most important projects of this legislative assembly are currently before. AND AFTER THE MEETING IN FORTALEZA ' i We also said that the meeting in the Palace of Santa Catalina lasted until five o'clock in the afternoon. At that hour the delegates who had attended the luncheon began to arrive at the House of Representatives. The session ended somewhat late, and shortly thereafter, the Finance Committee (Continued on page 14).
It is proposed that this committee be made up of ten legislators, belonging to all the political parties of P. R. A few weeks ago there was much talk about the idea of the full Legislature going to Washington to work on numerous reforms to the Organic Charter. The idea was later formalized and presented in the form of a Joint Resolution, by Representative Cumpiano, assigning the sum of fifty thousand dollars for the expenses occasioned by the trip. And NOW Yesterday, we heard numerous legislators speak with great insistence, once again, expounding the advisability of having a legislative commission, and not the full Legislature, go to Washington to work for the extension to Puerto Rico of numerous freedoms. The Speaker, Hon. José Tons Soto, has introduced a Concurrent Resolution to demand from the Congress certain amendments to the Charter, among others, the Govem(Continued on page 14)
S. Brau 80 Box 126 San Juan, Porto Rico. SEIBERUNG ALL-TREADS GOVERNMENT OF PORTO RICO UNIVERSITY OF PORTO RICO Río Piedras, P. R. NOTICE OF FREE LAW EXAMINATIONS NOTICE is hereby given to the students of law, by FREE TEACHING, that the above examinations will begin on May 29, 1925, at the College of Law of the University of Puerto Rico, Calle de José de Diego, No. 22, Río Piedras, P. R., Río Piedras, P. R., Puerto Rico. 22, Río Piedras, P. R. New students must submit their applications, accompanied by the Diplomas or credits required to be enrolled, during the first ten days of said month of May, if they have not done so before. J. A. MARTINEZ, Secretary of the Examining Board. Río Piedras, P. R., April 28, 1925. Advt. V. M. I | Fernandez : 6 notifies his clients x § that he has moved his bu- x g fete of attorney and nota- 5 g ry to the fourth floor of EL ' B MUNDO, office No. 6. '
TO VERY SERIOUS The Detective investigates the case, for it involves a deep offense committed upon an unhappy "negrita" who claims to be under 14 years of age' - It is a lurid list of fu- - í rotes, of crime, of truculence, of I blood. The so-called ' - red chronicle" is being filled these days ■ ¡ with regrettable, fatal and ' dreadful events. The variation in crime is everywhere and shakes our police authorities, with a special emotion that sometimes corresponds to the mysterious discovery of a body killed by violence, and sometimes to the search for fugitive and stolen clues. And the agents of public order search, investigate, anxiously, trying to locate the mysterious fugitive who seems to get lost and threatens to vanish. As soon as the ruj mor of homicidal detonations is extinguished, new actors appear on the stage and the '■ (stage is stained with new blooms 1 ! bloody, intensifying in the ! atmosphere the disconcerting wave of ■ the most justified alarm. s The crime of which we are going to give <- account in these lines to engro- - -size the number of those already occurred s has all the traces of having been i committed about nn year ago i against the modesty, the future and Ja - life of a poor orphan, meñor of 14 years. There is, then (Continued on p. 141)
TODAY FOR THE LAST TIME TODAY THE BEAUTIFUL BRUMMEL' (BEAU 'BRUMMEL)
NOTICE Building "D" on Pier No. 6, heretofore occupied by The Asiatic Peti oleum Co. is leased.
FOR PITMAN TAQUIGRAPHERS Interested parties are hereby reminded that tomorrow Sunday at 10 A. M. will commence the Sunday Shorthand practice classes which the Pitman Shorthand Writers Association, offers to its associates at the Association's home, Luna 58, Altos. These classes will include subjects such as cuts, forencé, commercial, etc. The Pitman Stenographers Associates are entitled to these classes without any other requirement than to apply for admission to the same and those who are not Associates must join to enjoy the same right. THE SECRETARY.
.- t i Another Excursion to the Virgin Islands The 8th of May has been chosen for the next Excursion to the Virgin Islands. Remember, for Twenty Dollars you can visit St. Thomas and St. Croix. The steamer "Catherine" will leave St. John on Friday, the 8th, at 9 p.m. and will be back on Monday, the 12th, at 7 a.m. Send your request without loss of time. BULL INSULAR LINE, INC. Pier No. 2. SAN JUAN, P. R.