ELWNDO
1 ft PAGS. 3 CTS. ■ > Illustrated" Slfig. I fC m 1M2 - - Box 848
1 ft PAGS. 3 ITS? I / fimMMrs - - - - M.00 ■ y _ <r" *■" _. "a"
MORNING
MORNING
" YEAR VII SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
p "tuuaea and aietrtbmea anta" (Me. ", me act w ifatae" a, xrtT, ea ate m tee fee " Ótate * Ban Juan, Porto Bice, By order of the Pviotatah A. a Barieaoa, FootauMém OonotaL Ratered M ornead elaea matter, Ubrnary tl. HI", at the Poet Office al Sea Jtaa, Peeta BUe. (Uaftoa BtaUe of fimeriin) wader the Ata et marta t, lÓIB
SATURDAY, JANUARY 10, 1925. NUMBER 1839.
There is still a possibility that we may be granted the elective Governor.
The opposition of Iglesias and Coll and Cuchí as well as the shortness of this session, are the causes that prevent the consideration of the Fairfield bill, Coll V Cueto and the protest campaign makes a bad impression.Washington, Jan. 9. (United Press.) -Special dispatch to EL MUNDO ""'La"' letter sent by Rep. Fairfield, Chairman of the House Insular Affairs Committee, to Ledo. Cayetano Coll y Cuchi, and in which the former states that there is very little likelihood that the Puerto Rico bill will be considered in this short session of Congress, due to the intense opposition being developed by the coalitionists in Washington, has caused an immense sensation in the political circles of the American capital, where the affairs of the island of Puerto Rico are followed with great sympathy. TEXTUAL WORDS OF FAIRx'IELD I Here are the very interesting words with which Representative Fairfield ends his letter to Ledo. Coi. y Cuchí: - - "The situation created by the opposition in connection with the electoral frauds and illegalities is such that I cannot but remain completely impartial in my capacity as Chairman ( of the Committee on Insular Affairs, as far as the approval of the ( Governor's elective Governor's bill is concerned.'' I With Representative Fairfield's statement he makes his attitude on the Puerto Rico bill completely clear. THERE IS A POSSIBILITY THAT THE BILL WILL BE APPROVED. The proponents of the bill admit that there is still a small chance that it will be considered in this short session of the House, although they recognize that its passage depends on certain circumstances. ' . --* The Committee on Insular Affairs has its time occupied with other matters, and the bill is not on the calendar, so that to get it considered by the House of Representatives, it would be necessary to appeal to a special procedure. I DIFFICULTIES There are, however, some difficulties which may prevent Congress from considering the bill, the first being the short time which this special session is to last, and secondly, the negative propaganda which is being carried by the coalitionists, and which, if two-thirds of the votes are required to pass the bill, may prevent its success. IMPRESSION In the political circles of this capital the protest propaganda, which jeopardizes the passage of a bill which means so much to the people of Puerto Rico, has made a bad impression. The joint commission. which came to this capital expressly to fight for the passage of the bill, in view of recent events, has multiplied and intensified its efforts to have the bill considered without delay in this short session of Congress.
BOLIVAR PAGAN ATTORNEY AND NOTARY. Cortes Insulares y Federal Office: Alien Street, in front of González Padín. P. O. Box 888. Telephone: 1475 SAN JUAN, P. R. WANTED Spanish-English Stenographer Office < Pier No. 6. BRANDI VILLA ST. - PONCE |
SEISMOGRAPHERS RECORD A xÜERTE EARTHQUAKE IN EASTERN FRANCE PARIS, Jan. 9. (United Press.)-Belford seismographs, recorded strong earth tremors throughout eastern France today morning and principally in the Cahlon sur P.hone. No details have yet been given of the damage caused by these earthquakes, but it is understood that some disasters will have occurred because of the intensity with which they were recorded by the seismologists.
A NOVELIST'S WORLD TOUR By BLASCO IBANEZ . ' It has just been received by LA LIBRERIA CAMPOS. ALLEN 23 and BRAU 35. SAN JUAN, PTO. RICO
®""* SOON to arrive ■El Vapor "RAVNEFJELL" 1 With a cargo of 16660 BARRILES OF "CABALLITO" Cement Note your orders now for delivery on arrival. Sues, of L. Villamil & Co. GENERAL AGENTS
Two of the strongest Companies in the field of Insurance have combined to offer the public the best that can be obtained as far as Automobile Insurance is concerned by covering all risks under ONE POLICY. ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' 1 Prior to this, it has always been necessary to make two applications to obtain full protection in both Accident Insurance to the Public. Property Damage and Collision, and for Fire Insurance. In most cases your insurance agent or broker took care of such details, but this has always caused you more or less inconvenience. - From now on, you will make only one application and you will be fully covered under a SINGLE COMBINED POLICY in the HOME MARYLAND. ' " - - - ■"t The Home Insurance Company will cover Collision, Fire, Earthquake, Cyclone (and Theft, if this risk is required). The Maryland Casualty Company will cover the risks of Legal Liability (for bodily injury) and Property Damage. Either Agent alone can issue the entire policy. Neither Company needs any introduction or recommendation, as both are well known for their liability and excellent service. Before applying for automobile insurance with any other Company, contact the General Agencies of either Company or your local agent. Maryland Casualty Ce. The Home Insurance Co. VICTOR BRAEGGER 8. at C. KORBER A. CO. INC. General Agents General Agents Góherales Agents Tel. 1282, Tanca No. 3 Tel. 822 Calle Cruz No. 1 San Juan, Pí-R. San Juan, P. R.
COALITION CRISIS RESOLVED
The Federal Court Bar will request President Coolidge to appoint Mr. Odlin for a new term as ? Judge of said Court.
Opening of the Yauco and Fajardo fl Hou. iuez feote electoral pagúeles. declares cm lagar the realises of mandamus interposed by the lotus. Bolívar Pagan Late yesterday afternoon, the Hon. Judge Charles E. Foote, of the First District Court of San Juan, issued a decision on the two writs of mandamus filed by Ledo. Bolívar Pagan in the electoral cases of ¡ Yauco and Fajardo. The order issued is a writ of mandamus directed to the Board of Elections, requiring the Board to recount the voters of the precincts of Yauco and Fajardo, according to the voter lists, and to open the packets of the schools where the discrepancies alleged by the petitioners appeared, as requested in the petition. The Cor te has ordered the board to immediately open said packets Fy comply with the order, or, if it does not do so, to say on the 15th dfl eerrient why it has not done so. It is only fair to record this marked legal triumph of the young judge-consult. When other prominent lawyers have been getting lost in the maze of impeachment suits, certiorari, injunctions, etc., Bolivar Pag.in saw a different way, through the extraordinary writ of mandamus to get the opening of packets and recount of ballots. The First District Court, after careful consideration of the matter, has ruled in accordance with the soUcit.iñj by the petitioners in these proceedings. And in the absence of any special reason why it should not do so, the said Board should open the parcels of the said towns and count the ballots, and so consider the report so rendered, and determine definitely which party or parties have prevailed in the said precie.ts. We will keep our readers informed of these very important matters. l IMPORTANT > Young man with experience in business, for ten years, is absent Jen travels to Cuba for four months, interested in communicating with firms with business for that country or that ' ' ' produce or export products for the same. Address to Aparta1 do 720, San Juan. Advt.
We understand that members of the Bar of the Federal Court of Appeals have been writing to their fellow members to ascertain whether they are in favor of requesting President Coolidge to appoint the Judge of that Court, Hon. Arthur F. Odlin, to a new term. According to reports we obtained yesterday, all the attorneys for the said Bar are in agreement on the matter and will so request the National Executive. A copy of the following letter has been addressed to each interested party: j p ' '**>*'1 "My dear friend:It has been quite difficult, if not impossible, to obtain a complete meeting of the members of the Bar of this Court in the past. An examination dd record has convinced me of this. I take, *p&r, therefore, the liberty of addressing you (Continued on p&g. 6).
At last the municipal crisis in San Juan, in connection with the participation of the Coa- ' lition parties in the various positions of executive officers and employees in the Administration, has ended, to the satisfaction of all parties. Our readers are already aware of the developments in this interesting "affair". This has been the throbbing issue in the commentaries and discussions in all the political circles and political circles of the Orbital and it has been the issue that has undoubtedly been the most talked about in the press during the last few days. There were moments when we all believed that the breakup between the two coalition parties was inevitable. The visible point of contention and the heel of Aquifies
ti OTIf OTRAI SOCIALIST OTIf ADOPTS A RESOLUTION MANDATING THE CHARGE OF PUBLIC FINANCE AND 35% OF LK MPLES POSITIONS. £/ Mayor-elect Hon. Roberto H. Todd addresses a most interesting letter to Ledo. Bolívar Pagán doing justice to the personal merits of the socialist leader The crisis has been satisfactorily resolved for both parties and they are preparing to take joint possession of the Municipality.
In discussing the basis for the appointment of the Department Heads and municipal employees when the candidates elected on the tickets of the Pure Republican and Socialist parties were sworn in, there was no great difficulty in reaching a harmonious agreement. Both parties readily agreed that one Chief of the municipal ga", híñete would be a capable man, chosen by the Socialist Party, another Chief a man re. commended by both parties coaHgados jointly, and the other , chiefs of the cabinet by men recommended by the Party Re-1 puhlicane Puro. It was agreed aóemá<," Ylélimente and in perfect harmony, that 35 per cent. of the other offices of the Municipality should correspond to the
other offices of the Municipality should be held by men recommended by the Socialist party, taking into account in making this distribution an equitable and fair distribution between the two parties and also considering the salary, salary and the official authority of the different jobs. Pe- ■ ro the crisis arose in saying which Head , of department would correspond to ■ the Socialists. These, for a myriad of very powerful reasons, which they alleged, requested that the Chief should be that of the School Directorate, and unofficially pointed to the Lodo. Bolívar Pagán, President of the Central Committee I Socialist of San Juan and at the same time of the Socialist Party. And here was Troya. All the ' (Continued on p. 2)
There is the belief that it will not be the outgoing Mayor Mien
(Hez de Anáio-dicen-lia delegated that mission to the Directorw of Hadeuda, Mr. R. Bemtez.-la Beaefi' cenda eatraite visit to the outgoing Yesterday morning we visited the Mayor's Office in order to collect the last impressions of the current administrators and, perhaps, the first of those who will begin to govern next Monday .... Our task was practically useless, since the Mayor had not yet arrived and the Director of Finance, Mr. Benitez, although he was in the building, was not in his office at that time. The same was true of Mr. González Ginorio, School Director. 8 We were only able to see that of 1 Beneficencia, Dr. GutierreZt 1 who was holding an interview 8 with his successor, Dr. Coll y Cuchí, ! updating him* no doubt, on the affairs of the Negocia- - do of which he will take charge tomorrow. i!" ' ' ' ' > -■■■■.- B ENTREGARAN.... I As it was strongly rumored in the city that the Unionists would not hand over their posts next Monday, the reporter tried to find out what was true in this regard, having been informed that since the Court had declared the appeals filed to that effect without merit, there was no choice but to hand over the posts to the new administrators as soon as they requested them next Monday. JON RAFA NO? In the office next to the Mayor's office, where the visitors who are waiting for their turn to meet with the Mayor meet and chat, we must say that Mr. Diez de Andino will not be present when Don Roberto is to take office, adding that Don Rafa will not be present at the moment when Don Roberto is to take office, adding that Don Rafa with (Continued on page 12). 12) PARQUÉ - TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY - For the last time the colossal play "The Founders of America" ■ (The Courtship oí Miles Standish) By Cha les Ray .---é---■IL'll-J'JLJll'l ■ ■ ■ IR"?*ei "gV u ealHad of eata cigarette Mnca has been changed to the m will change. The <*> lity ""lamente has hechn * cate cigarette the mta putar of matate. -,. w , * OBF / STEAMER WEST JAPPA will leave San Francisco on January 13. Pass your orders ' < time, '