ELMÜNDO
6PAl "S. 3 GIS Office: *'Puerto Rico Dnetrado" Bldg. TeL 1222. - Box 346.
I n PAtoS. 3 cu I Bemeitre - - - - 86.00 I VF On o<>- 9 ' 60
MORNING
I N PATOS,
YEAR VIL.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
1 Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of October 6 1917 or file at the Post Office of San Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the President, A. S. B-ineson. Postmaster General. Entered as second clasi matter February 21, 1919, at the Poet Office at San Juan, Porto Rico, (United States of America) under the Act of March 3 1879.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 1925
NUMBER 4018.
reparations for the assembly of the i tabaqueros M
- ja. e is receiving the list of delegates at San Juan M Rivera Martinez em-l tarcó the day before yesterday.The tabaqueros of the island have begun a new organizational movement and are preparing for a general assembly to be held in Caguas, which will be attended by representatives of all the arts of the island. The tabaqueros, according to information supplied to us, are protesting the wages they earn in the chinchales and small factories and are requesting an increase in them. In the Free Federation yesterday we were interned by Mr. Paz Gránela, Acting President of the Tobacco Growers Association of Puerto Rico, who is already receiving from all ►artes of the island lists with the names of the delegates who are willing to attend the assembly of 'waters to discuss the problems of the trade and determine the conduct to be followed. Mr. Rivera Martinez, President in property of the Asocia:iÓn de Tabaqueros, embarked yesterday for Puerto Rico, according to news previously received, and will be in San Juan from Monday to Tuesday of next week. Mr. Rivera Martinez will preside over the assembly and at the same time give a report of his proceedings before the International Convention of Tobacco Growers which was held in Boston and which he attended as representative for Puerto Rico in union with J*az Gránela, BtmSTIC FIGHTING IN BARCELONA M < BARCELONA, Nov. 6. (U. P.) The contract for the boxing match between the well-known heavyweight pugilists Uzcudum, Spanish, and Herminio Spalla, Italian, which I will be held in this city, has definitely been closed. The contract will be signed next week. MOTOR BOATS' boats and canoes. They are offered for sale at very advantageous prices, completely new. Box 364, telephone 1295 red, 1577, San Juan. For gentlemen's and children's suit LA LUNA CRUZ 23 he iiraiflH l | Expert operators in -' installation of black pipe for steam, water, < vacuum, etc. For more information < I CENTRAL MERCEDITA -: > Ponce, P. R. **
MAKE A VISIT TO "LA FUENTE SODA" CRUZ 17 You will find there an assortment of: CIGARETTES CIGARILLOS "La Restina" "Colectiva" "Cas nos" "Ricoro" 'Violeta' "El Toro Panetelas" 'Flor de Castillo "Marlboro" "El Toro" 'Spur" "Chesterfield" "Portina" "Lucky Strike" and also all known fine cigarette brands, retail and wholesale. ICE CREAM SWEETS SWEETS CHOCOLATES We have improved the service of refreshments and we also have a complete assortment of sweets and chocolates. We serve for christenings and soirées any order of butter and sweets that are entrusted to us at very limited prices. Visit us or call us at phone No. 1652. DON'T FORGET CRUZ 17. MENDEZ & CUESTA
José Coll y Cuchi awarded by the Royal Academy of h Lentua
The prize offered by the Royal Spanish Academy to the best work published in Spanish during the last five years has been awarded to our compatriot Ledo. José Coll Cuchí, for his book 'El Nacionalismo en Puerto Rico", according to news received lately from Spain. This consecration by the most authoritative Court of La Raza is the greatest honor that, in this sense, is done to a Puerto Rican. We join in the satisfaction that must be felt by D ■. José Col! Cuchí, not only for what this represents for him, but also for what it means for the country in general. 'THE MANDAMUS AGAINST THE GOVERNOR i WILL BE SEEN ON THE 16th M The summons issued by the Supreme M In the Socialist hosts intense expectation reigns M The Mandamus filed by the I Ledo. Bolívar Pagan in the Supreme Court lately, requesting said high court to order the Governor of Puerto Rico to proceed to appoint the petitioner, Mr. Pagan, as a member of the Insular Board of Elections representing the Socialist Party, will be heard on the 16th of the present month. The Supreme Court has just issued an order directed to the Governor of Puerto Rico to appear on the 16th to explain the reasons why the Mandamus petition filed by T/Cdo. Pagán proceeds or not. We understand that Attor ney General Butte will appear personally this time in representation of Governor Towner. Among the Socialists there is immense expectation to know the final decision in this matter, since it is known that the Mandamus I filed raises the alleged right they claim to be represented in the government commissions. I And the expectation to which I have referred before is even greater in Yauco and Fajardo, where they are still awaiting the electoral scrutiny that must be verified from one moment to the next, according to the order that the Supreme Court will issue before going on vacation. TOBACCO FLOUR WE HAVE IN STOCK VILLAR & CO. INC. BOX 201 SAN JUAN
Noisy protest erupts in Barrio Obrero
M SEVERAL NEIGHBORHOODS ARE CHARGED FOR WATER FOR TWO YEARS M- This case was unresolved all that time M Last night a protest rally was to take place in the Barrio Obrero of this capital against a certain order that has been issued to proceed by the Municipality to charge for water consumed by several neighbors of the neighborhood during the last two years. The protest has been loud, as the residents of the neighborhood claim that they have not paid for water for the last two years since the houses are represented by the Comisión de Ho gares Seguros and that the monthly payment is supposed to include the fee for water consumption. The amount accumulated over the last two years, although only about twelve dollars, represents a considerable sum for many who are not in a position to pay it immediately. This has led to a protest on the part of the aggrieved parties, who, as mentioned above, were preparing to hold a rally last night. From what has been said it appears that there is an intention to enforce ■ the order in any case, and the neighbors who are threatened with being left without water are truly alarmed. This protest to which we refer is led by neighbors ( Modesto Calderon, Genaro Gonzá- , lez and Petra Falú. , -a-.- .. -i. "- ■- -, i DEPARTMENT OF THE i INTERIOR ' I M AUTOMOBILE DIVISION '< M Nov. 6, 1925. 1 M TO ALL CHAUFFEURS, , DRIVERS AND DRIVERS- j RES OF HEAVY MOTOR VEHICLES JC- - Section 3 (d) of the Automobile Law in force reads, "No license plates other than those prescribed by this Section, and those permitted by Sections 4 and 7 of this Act, shall be displayed on the exterior of any motor vehicle''.'' I have noticed that many chauffeurs and drivers carry on the exterior of their automobiles, attached to the plates issued by this Department, other plates, and that in some cases advertisements are posted which obstruct the license plate number of the automobile from being easily seen, with the result that on certain occasions, when an accident occurs, or when the police have need to take the number of a motor vehicle traveling at a higher speed, it is difficult and often impossible for them to do so. To avoid this state of affairs, I wish to inform all those who drive motor vehicles in Puerto Rico, that the police are being instructed to report those cases in which other license plates are used in connection with the plates issued by this Department, or where advertisements are carried on the outside of the automobiles when they cover the license plates issued by the Department, and I will precede to suspend the license of the chauffeur? The chauffeurs who incur in this infraction, ! for a reasonable period of time. Sincerely, Guillermo ESTEVES. (Announcement.) Commissioner. CLINIC] Díaz García [CLINIC] Diaz García [CLINIC] Ladies are needed who wish to enter the nursing school of this clinic as students. Must have eighth grade diploma and bring two letters from > two well known ladies* of the locality where they reside. Address your application to Manager, Box 953, San Juan.
COLONEL LEWIS AGREES (ON TRAFFIC SIGNALS M
Our editorial of last Wednesday has met with the approval of all government officials directly or indirectly concerned with traffic in the municipality of San Juan. i I Colonel Lewis tells us that he rightly deals with the problem confronting the law enforcement authorities. And that the solution he offers is the only feasible one, not only because of its effectiveness but also because of its economy. THE CHIEF OF INSULAR POLICE, WHO The Chief of Insular Police, who never misses an opportunity to improve the public order service, has told us that the system followed with the traffic should be regularized. The placement of small peasants, an activity that falls under the jurisdiction of the city's municipal government, could also be carried out by the Department of the Interior. Colonel Lewis tells us that this activity would put an end to many traffic accidents. And to complete the work of improving the public order service, Colonel Lewis tells us that white lines should be painted in the center of the most heavily trafficked roads to indicate to drivers of all vehicles exactly where they should travel. The Chief of Police reminds us that a little more than a month ago, he ordered a white stripe to be painted in the center of the famous
González Podio Co" loe. -==r Giveaway...!!! We will give away a magnificent shirt I worth at least two dollars to each person who buys three of them ■■ For $4.50 - THE SHIRTS SHIRT is the most famous shirt in the world of shirts, its quality and fit have placed it above all others. These are the $2 each, NOW 3 for $4.50 i AND ONE MORE GIFT. w Take advantage of this bargain and pick yours up today, it's running out soon, at the main store. Co., Inc. THE HOUSE THAT SELLS EVERYTHING
The buyer of the house of DAMIAN RODRIQUEZ-SACHS & CORegressed to New York and has brought a huge assortment of suits for Ladies, Ladies, Gentlemen and _Children VISIT DAMIAN RODRIGUEZ SACHS & CO(Suers, from P. Schira) Salvador Brau and San Justo. i
f. Soto Gras I ' ATTORNEY NOTARY ! He informs his friends and clients of his return from Europe and the United States and is pleased to offer them again his professional services.
LUIS SANCHEZ MORALES' PROPOSAL ACCEPTED.
M ■ Very important meeting next Monday M i A COMMISSION for the ECONOMIC problem M . Our readers know that recently a very important conference was held in this ca- . pital, which was attended by the Presidents of both legislative chambers, the Chairmen of the Treasury Committees of the Senate and the House, and a representation of the Sugar Producers' Association and the Farmers' Association. At this conference, the latter raised the economic problem facing the island today in relation to the collection of taxes, and requested various legislative measures and even an extraordinary session of the Legislature. They discussed the retroactive effect of the income tax, property reassessment and other economic issues that are on the table at this time. A high spirit of cordiality prevailed in the meeting, with almost all the gentlemen present taking part in the discussion. The Chairman of the House Treasury Committee, Mr. Guerra, explained the reasons why the Legislature had passed the tax laws now in vi''or. Messrs. Barceló, Georget t'. I.andrón, Hartzell, and 'Arce. Mr. Sanchez Morales, Preí('n*ftinúi" in I" R) "Curva de la Muerte", that but for the action of the water in the inadequate painting that had to be used, would have been of great benefit.
Grand Jury finds cause for embezzlement M
Among the numerous cases submitted to the Grand Jury of the District Court of this Capital was an indictment against individual P. Soto, for an alleged crime of breach of trust, consisting of having embezzled from the firm of "Gillies & Woodward'', of which he was an employee, the sum of $4,600 or thereabouts. As stated in the indictment filed by the firm of "Gillies and Woodward'' which, as we all know, is dedicated to the sale of American cars in our Island, Pedro Soto was one of its salesmen and at the end of the week he would lend fictitious b. c. nías to the house. It is clear from the accusation of the injured parties that in the accounts delivered by Soto, clients appeared who did not really exist, and, on the other hand, some clients who appeared as debtors, had paid in cash. The Grand Jury carefully studied the accusation against Soto and finally concluded that there was a cause of action, declaring the accusation established by the prosecutor to be well founded. The trial against the defendant, for I the crime of embezzlement, will be heard shortly, according to reports supplied to us at the District Court.
LAST HOUR M - The Prohibition boat capsized at the entrance to the Morro M A member of the crew drowned.
M And indeed the Prohibition boat has capsized near the first buoy at the entrance to the Morro. The news spread throughout the city, and from five o'clock in the afternoon a crowd of more than two thousand people gathered on the beach to witness the terrible struggle of the boat with the waves. Time and time again, the boat embarked on the S)
n Since five o'clock yesterday afternoon, the news began to circulate in the city that the prohibition boat was capsizing at the entrance to the Mo- I rro, with the engines stopped, and without any defense to fight the rough waves that crashed again and again against the reefs. "fres Banderas" TODAY SATURDAY TODAY Second presentation of the Prince: LEI LANI LOS SAMOANOS New program. All New. Tomorrow Sunday: Last presentation of Los Samoanos and the beautiful drama: RABO LEGAL with HILDA GRAY, NITA NALDI and ROD LAPOQUE. TWO TANDAS EACH NIGHT Los Samoanos will work both tandas. o zDoarr~>o< - ~>o<=>o<~~~d>o 0 TOMORROW4N4 IS SUNDAY 0 o Day for sea tours. Don't U forget it and take your family. A U POPULAR COMPANY o ' I I I All night we give service at the: BLANCO Brau Pharmacy 54. - Tel. 35 Home orders served.
The workers' congress will be transferred for the time being.
This is due to the fact that Iglesias will not be able to be on the island. The reason given is the campaign initiated in Washington M It had been announced in the workers' press on the island that the workers' congress being prepared would take place in the Municipal Theater of this capital on the twelfth day of December, date for which Santiago Iglesias would already be on the island, who would preside over the event. However, at the last minute, the transfer of the date on which this political act should take place is practically resolved. IGLESIAS WILL NOT BE ABLE TO BE ON THE ISLAND. This transfer is due to the fact that Iglesias will not be able to be on the island on December 12, since he intends to attend to the campaign initiated by him in Washington, requesting a congressional investigation of the existing conditions on the island. The Federationists in Puerto Rico do not seem to think it advisable to hold the congress in question until Iglesias is able to preside over it. This question of the transfer of the taxpayers' contributions to the Puerto Rican taxpayers is a matter of concern to the Department of Treasury, which has been in effect since January 15, the date fixed by law for closing the list of contributions for the next fiscal year, the Department upholds its rule by ordering that as of the 16th day of said month of January, no applications for the transfer, reassessment or subdivision of property shall be accepted for tax purposes for the next fiscal year. San Juan. P. R." Nov. 4, 1925. Juan G. GALLARDO, Treasurer (Announcement.
S. LEMA & Co, FOOTWEAR WAREHOUSES GREAT NEW STOCK -'jiiniiiiiiiinniii:i:!iiiiiuiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiii!DiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiainiiiiiiii! iiniwiiiiiiiiiiiimiai:iimmiinii!miiuf!niiiiiniiiiiuainiimniin'iiii " I OLIMPO THEATER MONDAY (NOVEMBER 9, 1925) PRESENTATION IN THIS THEATER OF THE i SAMOANS FULL SHOW | Due to the length of the performance we will only give one run | at 8:30. PRICES: $1.00. 0.75 and 0.50 ;iiiiitr:!iiiiii¡iiaiui!iiiiiiit]iniiiiiiiiiiiiin!iiiiiiiiiii!iiititiiiiiiiii!iiiiioiiiiiiiiumic "fiinimiia!miimiHaiiHinttfflaiinuinuiniaouuHiiiui I Conpagnie Generate Transatlantique VAPOR FRANCES "MAORIS" g 5 Expected around the 14th and 15th of the current coming from Cuba, Haiti and Santo Dom'ngo, will continue voyage with destination to Havre. | She accepts passage and cargo for the above mentioned port as well as for the other ports in Northern Europe. For further information, please contact I BEHN BROTHERS INC. -Agents. | SAN JUAN, P. R. TELEPHONE 257 1 *.
Articles of Collaboration
In our eighth page, of surge to collaborative articles, appears today a work by Ledo. Antonio Gonzá lez Lamas, on political issues. It is the first of a short series that the author intends to publish. THE MAL COMMITTEE MEETS AGAIN 1E WEDNESDAY M The municipal situation will be discussed at length M The Com. de Bene ficencia square and the Socialists M The Central Committee of the Socialist Party in San Juan met last night, as we had reported. However, at twelve o'clock at night only matters of an internal nature had been dealt with and it had not yet been possible to discuss the most important question, namely, the conduct to be followed in regard to the vacant position of Charity Commissioner, which the Socialists allege corresponds to them according to the terms of the pact. At twelve o'clock at night the session was adjourned and it was agreed to hold an extraordinary session next Wednesday to discuss the pending matters and to consider in detail the questions to be considered by the Socialists, which they claim to be entitled to according to the terms of the pact.