EL.HÜNÜO
1 A PASS. 3 CTS. I / II r-i e-f t-i I / o" m rr jhí
in D AGS.3CTS.I I I £ OMui: "Fvtrto B1m i ■ £ Damn*"** BMg. 8 A T< ItM. - 9n M".g
' DAILY MORNING
TOMORROW,
BAO V|
SAN JUAN, PUERTO Rlffl
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authors* tí Uie Act of October 6, 1017, on filo at the Post Office ot San Juau, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. S. Bur'eson. Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1910, at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rico, (United States of America) under the Act ot March 3, 18791.
SATURDAY, JULY 11, 1925
NUMBER 3000.
"The Association of Abo- 1 has no power to recommend the, or - appointee to the, appointment of public officials, * - - Micos.
j This is how Ledo. Antonio Sarmiento in presenting his resignation from the Board of Directors of said Association ' San Juan, July 9, 1925. Mr. President of the Puerto Rico Bar Association, San Juan, P. R. My very distinguished friend and colleague:- I beg you to make known to our Board of Directors, which you pres- ■ ted so prestigiously preside, ' that I am resigning the position with which - it honored me at the last General Meeting. I wish to point out that I am not asking for this resignation to be accepted, but that I am merely informing the Board of Directors of my resignation, because the mandate ceases with the resignation of the representative. Honored to excess by the countless considerations that each and every one of you has lavished upon me, it would seem ungrateful if I did not state the cause of my unworthy determination. It is that, apart from my deep-rooted conviction, which I have communicated to you several times, that the Association, and much less its Board of Directors, has no power to recommend or oppose the appointment of public officials, I am fully convinced that this co-participation in the functions of the executive power of the American sovereignty in this island is not compatible with my condition as a Spanish citizen. For this reason, my dear President, I have abstained from attending the meetings you have convened for this purpose, contrary to my inveterate habit of attending all previous meetings punctually. Reiterating to you as well as to all my other fellow members of the Boards the expression of my regret for separating from you and protesting my enthusiastic adhesion to our Association, I remain always your friend, companion and servant. A. SARMIENTO.
White frost A new batch of the famous White La Nevera fB/ P for ' wWJJF l° s Tropics Ask the one who has one ■si in use. ' We Sell Them at Comfortable Terms GONZALEZ PADIN CO., INC. SAN JUAN PONCE MAYAGÜEZ Stocks in all three Houses ■ ■- ■ ... .... ....
POTATOES AND ONIONS FROM THE CANARY ISLANDS, SUPERIORISMAS SUPERIORISIMAS They offer at reasonable prices, from the brigantine "Luis Casanova", which is unloading. SUCS.DE L VILLAMIL & CO. - " - *
Dr. Coll y Cuchí announces that he will take the Mayor of San Juan to the Courts of Justice.
He will file a certiorari at any moment in the District Court - He answers one by one the charges that the Mayor has brought against him to suspend him from employment and salary. i "This would have to stay that way if we were not in a country of laws and not of despots" he says
Yesterday afternoon we visited Dr. Coll y Cuchí, Commissioner of Health and Welfare of this capital to ask him for some statements in relation to the order of the Mayor, which suspends him from employment and salary. Dr. Coll y Cuchí has stated the following: -The charges made against me by the Mayor, I believe them to be more of a folly than a thing. They are five: The first is the following: that I have sold a "DODGE" automobile, property of the Municipality, without the authorization of the Municipal Assembly. I This is false. The automobile "Dodge" number 886-318, is still property of the Municipality of San Juan, and it is in the garage at the disposal of the Municipal Assembly. The fact that I have bought another car and that I do not use the DODGE does not mean that I have given it to anyone. The second charge is the following:' , making use of the power granted to me by the municipal accounting regulations, I issued an emergency order. I placed an emergency order for two refrigerators for the municipal hospitals. The MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT OF VIEQUES, P. R. K Office of the Municipal Mayor NOTICE i The position is vacant! The vacancy is for the position of Graduate Nurse at the J I Municipal Hospital at the monthly salary j j of $70.00. Applications should be addressed to the Mayor Mu-| nicipaT accompanied by professional references. i Zoi(o CASTAÑO, i Municipal Mayor. Vieques, P. R., June 30, 1925. Advt.
calde believes that these orders are made illegally, but the Municipal Assem- | blea who has charge-, go of this matter has not said its last word, and on the contrary the city attorney stated to the Finance Committee of the Assembly that this purchase had been made legally. i These two charges everyone will see that they fall by their own plaster. i Now come charges three and four which I will explain in the following manner: One day a mission of the San Juan Press visited my office to tell me that the Puerto Rican journalist Pedro R. de Diego was seriously ill and poor, and they were asking me to install him in the Municipal Hospital. I immediately pleased the Press and! a few days later the worthy Puerto R. De Diego gave his soul to God in the Municipal Hospital. Yielding again to the plea of the journalists, I ordered his body to be buried in a niche in the San Juan cemetery. 1 of course on a provisional basis until the Assembly approved this fact. The fifth and last charge is the following: the Maestro de Música Don Juan Vínolo Sáez fell gravely ill with an intestinal fistula, and was confined in the Municipal Hospital to be operated on and there being no bed in the ward for the poor, he was installed in the ward for the well-to-do. (Continued on page 6.) IMPORTANT NOTICE I Due to the large number of requests, we are obliged to open another new course in TYPOGRAPHY AND MECHANOGRAPHY. i. BOOKKEEPING AND COMMERCIAL IN- ' GLES on Monday, July 13. For further inquiries go to ROYAL GREGG COLLEGE, ALLEN 80, SAN JUAN, P. R. Advt. i RENT apartment for living i at the "Tobacco Palace." Will report:--. ALONSO RIERA & CO. Telephone 527. p- . . . ;.-^- aaC=Sa^; . .== THE PORTO RICO DRUG COMPANY The chemicals i we use in the preparation- - ¿ion of the recipes are of : the highest quality. The patents we sell are always fresh, and we receive them weekly from Europe and the United States, where we have our own purchasing office to obtain the best. Our prices have no competition. Our service is divided by department and we can therefore give careful attention by choosing the most competent personnel for each department. We are proud to assure you that we have nothing to envy to any drugstore in the United States. The island's pharmaceutical gentlemen always receive careful attention to their orders in our wholesale department completely separate from our retail business. I Advt * ■' - 1 ■■■■ ~ - - ■ *.... *
I ARRESTED AND GUARDED BY CAPTAIN BLAN-| CO APPEARED YESTERDAY AFTERNOON BEFORE THE BED-! RAEL CORPORAL EMANUELU
In order to facilitate the contempt proceedings a special ¡committee of representatives has been appointed to bring to the House the 'proven facts.-Then the full House, as Supreme Court, will pass;sentence It was impossible to walk the corridors of the House because of the crowd that ■ was in attendance.The corporal is guarded in the barracks by Captain Blanco st"./ r i He* -- MRI H --- mmé ■■ ■' TsN Wv .1 - i Corporal Emanuelli, guarded by Captain Blanco, on appearing yesterday afternoon before the Speaker of the House, Hon. José Tous Soto to answer a charge of contempt of said legislative body.
5 Already in our issue of ' we informed our readers ae ' all that occurred with Corporal; ' Emanuelli, as well as that the House i ' had unanim.daü ■ agreed unanimously to approve the report of a special comí-i ■ sion, composed of se. I ñores García Méndez. Sabater and ' ¡ Flanellas, and consisting of issuing a warrant for the arrest of the aforementioned Corporal Emanuelli so that he would - appear before the House to show l a" -
The information we have received from the House of Representatives is that he should not be condemned for contempt of said legislative body. THE MULTITUDE Our information caused the public of the capital to take a great interest in this question and hundreds of people were prepared to attend the House yesterday afternoon to witness the proceedings.
It was almost impossible to go through the corridors of the Chamber, as an immense crowd had invaded the building, and needless to say that there was not room for a single person in the session hall and adjoining offices. The press sent a large representation. The press sent a large number of representatives to the press, and the press sent a large number of representatives to the press, who were present at the hearing. The public, who are not too familiar with these parliamentary matters, became impatient and anxiously awaited the moment when the hearing of the case would begin. ' j Finally, at five o'clock [I .I .I NEED '' a House in the County, facing the sea, with 4 or more rooms, for the beginning of July: \CERE€EtíO UNOS. & CO. SUCRS, San Juan. P. R. LAS AGUAS Dtrit. ES LA kLlNA YOAlOOUf WÍHC. GTPOSPAISíSff RASTILLO unsurpassed as UAMINERAL.OIGES, A. AGRADABLE,RE. ÍSCANTE. 50HCITE PASTHIO ALL PART5 E -I5TA IN PROTECTING GOOD THAT PUER. RICO POSSESSES } I u.úARRATON DípwJaríi Í í -A, t f n 77-. san n, Ar ,
1 LAST HOUR 1 '¡I GRAND ASSEMBLY OF TRADERS I | OF FOODS É 8 All Traders are hereby summoned to a Magna & 1 8 Assembly to be held in the Halls of the g h "Centro de Detallistas de Provisiones de Puerto Rico", g 8 San Jose No. 26 Altos on the 12th (Sunday) at 9 o'clock g i 8 a.m.: To discuss matters of the one per cent so- £ I'- bre sales. . g DON'T BE APATHetic attend the ASSEMBLY, g and DEFIEND- ñ Various .Merchants. g ISLANDER ONIONS 1 S}DMIÍTI FESTIVAL is held festinadamen- g the O 11 In I I I i i te a lot just re- § cibir of CANARY, cali- ■ I _ , . " "i o , , , , or Keep your automobile at the X select dad. 5 5 i GARAGE BRANDI-f of the island, ASK PRICE at 8 (Permanent Service) £ CADIERNO g Villa 1Q - Ponce g i S 5
niwn(><><><>cK>MíHX "ooooao(HKH>l I ' -' , - " - BEWARE! Be very careful with imitations, even if they look alike in name. For the good of the consumer public we wish to warn that there is only one legitimate Toddy, the authentic TODDY, the one that for six months has been sold all over the Island with increasing public favor. TODDY is scientifically tested and the other products that are sold with similar names are only crude imitations, which smell, taste and touch give them away immediately. Note that TODDY comes in hygienic, hermetically sealed containers to keep the product always pure. Suers, of L. Viilamil & Co.
It is assured that the minority leaders, Senators Martinez Nadal and Iglesias, will be conferring with the Attorney General at any moment on the occasion of the judicial appointments.
We have inTormes that the minority will oppose certain appointments and will do all it can to derail them We are further assured that certain officials who were acting during the last elections will be opposed by the minority
In yesterday's edition we informed our readers that the Senate caucus had agreed to unofficially recommend several prestigious Puerto Rican lawyers for inclusion in the judiciary. ! <And it is natural that this has been done. But it is also very natural for the minority to be interested in the new judicial combination, since it so closely affects and matters to them. ' IGLESIAS AND MARTINEZ NADAL; I Yesterday we were assured ■ ry that at any moment the minority leaders, Senators Iglesias and Martinez Nadal, will hold an extensive conference with Attorney-Genera! Butte on the occasion of the new judicial combination. | i Our readers know, because . EL MUNDO reported it in a timely manner, that both leaders of the mi- . roría conferred with Dr. Butte shortly after his arrival in Puerto Rico and that the Head of the Department of Justice told them that he was coming to do equal justice, without favoritism of any kind, that he would not have pre 1 r ferences for anyone, and that they would always find a Judge ready to listen to them and impart justice with due knowledge of the cause. i i i So it explains why both judges were now, in this very special case, going to the Attorney General to present their points of view. 'OPPOSITION OF THE MINORITY. e¡ We have also had infors -- - - o twenty minutes of the afternoon, the Hon - Speaker, Mr. Tons Soto, announced that he was going to give rise to proceedings for 1 ; >- contempt against the said ca. 1 i- bo Emanuelli. Mr. Tous Soto gave orders s that the warrant of arrest be read i (Continued on pAg. 5i
month that the minority is preparing to fight with all its might: certain judicial appointments, doing everything in its power to prevent the appointments in question from prospering and being sent to the Senate for confirmation. Or better still, we should say that the minorn, knowing of certain nominations, intends to do everything it can to ensure that they do not prosper. DURING THE ELECTIONS. I I I Moreover, we have reports that the minority will especially fight the candidacies of certain officials who acted during the last elections, and whose actions, in one way or another, did not please the political minority in Puerto Rico. I It seems that the minority is willing to present sworn evidence to fight some candidacies and prevent them from winning, if it is possible. I We must take this opportunity to announce that yesterday the Speaker of the House, Hotf. ' Jose Tous Soto affixed his signature at the foot of the bill abolishing Ta i current Ponée District Court ; and establishing in its place two new District Courts. Let us not forget that the majority's recommended appointees to these new Courts are Ledos. Román, Todd Jr. and Don Jesús María Rossy. We will continue to report on the sidelines of the judicial combination. OF IMPORTANCE TO INTERESTED PERSONS I need to know the residence of Mrs. Carmen Fernández de Mediavilla: and Mrs. Josefa Ríos de Ferrer. Address to Jaime Calaf Collazo, Manatí, P. R.
1 BALANCE SHEET J '- 0 ~ OF THE :í BANCO TERRITORIAL V AGRICOLA DE PUERTO RfCO { - w At. CLOSING OF ITS OPERATIONS BN JUNE 30, 1925. : . "'Y -l ■ -- ASSETS??#:. \ ' *'W1 || Cash on hand cash ' > ' / Held by n s. correspondents 320/709.10 , g Corporate Stock and Bonds 806, 93S.Ó6*. - B 1 Mortgage Bonds secured- *- ■* g z.ando Government Insu- ñ ,!§ lar and Municipalities 831,1*00.00 M í; Loans and Discounts 3,366,087.60 íjt --i Long-Term Mortgages $1,604,045.11 ' § Principal Annuities Collected 138,349.07 1,742,391.18 lg Interim Dividend 36,000.Q0 s ) § Bank Buildings 129,144.56 ft iK Other Real Estate 175,219.55 g . Furniture and Fixtures 58,696.51 g 1 |j| Other Accounts t t t 13,427.14 M i, g $8,701,893.04 ' LIABILITIES -- ~ | r ' á Deposits $5,463,037.53 " H Ob igations Payable "J NADA § g (''-édu'as Hipotecarias Emitidas 4 g § Cédulas Hipotecarias Amortizadas 41,405.00 0 5 Other Accounts > j 4,326.21 ?¡ ¡.t Mortgage Note Redemption Fund 8 g CAPITAL: 138,349.07 g Authorized Capital " $2,400,000.00 m :: Capital to be issued 1,200,000.00 g É Cap tal issued and paid-in 1,200,000.00 " g RESERVES AND PROFITS " g TO BE DIVIDED: g g g Reserve Fund 120,000. g Profit to be Divided: -; "; Net Profit for S 6 current year $200,123.76 g Remaining from 320,275.23 g S prior year 151.47 200,275.23' -- H - - - $8,701,893.04 8 § _ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■-i g San Juan, P. R. June 30, 19?5. || :t The Managing Director. The Accountant, S tí L. VENEGAS CASTRO J. ARIAS CRUZ £ t'2