THE WORLD
1 Q °A6S. 3CTS.I I I Jk west: "PMrts Btefl I nutate" BU*. | B te- Utt. - Boz MS.I
I Q PAOS. 3 CTS? I SwiMtr" *>.#- | 11 Da áte- - - 9M
MORNING
MORNING,
YEAR VH
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO <■ -
PnbUabed aad dlterlboted under *exuüt (Ve. >01) enUMCteud b* u>e Act of Oetoker 1917, na lie at te Past Otica af I te* Jean. Porto Rica, By order o f th, Pr.rid.nt, A S. Burlseín. ItaUnT m X. I ternary 11, 1919, at the Poet Otttco at te Ju "n. Porto Btec.T(Pnlu>d BtatM of Aserie") under th. Act of -rri> 3, 117* /
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 10, 1925 |
I NUMBER 3090.
, Appointments will remain for next week xr .
-31--* That is the impression that subsists in Sta. Catalina M The "Puerto Rico*' brings im= portant news -m- Saturday and the appointments in the Governor's cabinet in the ink. Apparently these have as much tail as the third judge of San Juan. For eleven days the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Hnyke, has been acting on an interim basis, since his term expired on the first of the month. As for the Auditing Department, Mr. Me Cown continues to act in substitution of Mr. Kossiujcr, whose term expired six days ago. It is certain that the White House shows no sign of being willing to discuss this matter. The President was in Nebraska three days ago and it is uncertain whether he has returned to the capital by now. But in any case he has not yet had time to leave Puerto Rico. FOR NEXT WEEK The impression we gathered yesterday in Fortaleza is that the appointments will be made by next week, without being able to specify the day on which the cablegram will be received which will put an end to all uncertainty which is even more intense in the official circles than among the people themselves. At least, if President Coolidge does not decide this afternoon to break the uncertainty, there is not the slightest hope that he will do so tomorrow, since it is Sunday, and the President does not take official action of any kind on that day. . 1 ' ON THE STEAMER " PUERTO RICO". - The steamer ''Puerto Rico" which is due in our port on Tuesday, from the United States, is bringing important information from Washington concerning the nominations in the Gabiaata -iel Go. bernador. (Most expect extensive written reports from the Resident Commissioner, Mr. Cordova DaviU, in which he will give guidance as to how the Sojo Stop 15 Pharmacy Contest is to be run. This will entitle you to participate in our Christmas gift of gold coins. oz^>qcl20o<-¿>cc_í>o< 0 MAfCNA IS SUNDAY n O Day for sea tours. Don't U 01o forget and take your family, n POPULAR COMPANY i O ? °2: --
NOTICE Di COLGATE & Co. TO OUR NUMEROUS CUSTOMERS - IN PUERTO RICO To avoid confusion in our relations we wish to inform you that Mr. C. Moran is in charge of all matters relating to the sales of Octagon products (The Octagon Toilet Soap for Jos Provisions establishments) and of the De* parliament of Prizes, and Mr. M. E. Navarro, of the Advertising campaign for Qstagón products. We beg all correspondence to be forwarded to the respective Messrs. O. MORAN.
THE MANNER IN WHICH PROPRIETARY PROJECTS ARE TO BE SUBMITTED TO CONGRESS. RICO
M Mr. Antonio R. Barceló, Pres. of the Senate M The Resident Commissioner's general impressions assure victory M
A. B. Barce'.ó
Next December, when the sessions of the U.S. Congress begin, a Commission of Puerto Ricans will go to Washington, presided over by Mr. Antonio IR. Antonio IR. Barceló, to request from the national authorities radical modifications to our Charter.
to the national authorities for radical changes to our Charter. As our readers know, the petition for greater freedom for Puerto Ricans, which was already approved in the U.S. Senate pending consideration before the House of Representatives, will be amended to conform to the terms of Legislative Resolution No. 6. BEFORE CONGRESS Since Puerto Ricans will request from the national authorities greater participation in the Government of the Island, among other things, that the Island Executive be elected by the Puerto Rican popular will, the alliance directors have conferred extensively during the last few days trying to find the best means for the presentation before Congress of the Puerto Rico Bill. The Resident Commissioner in Washington, Mr. Felix Cordeva Davila, has been in continuous conference with the friends of Puerto Rico in Congress, trying to make the pro-Puerto Rican bill more congenial to the environment. The general impressions he has gathered assure victory. i FORM OF PRESENTATION i Dealing with the Ledo. Antonio R. Barceló on so important a point, the leader of the Alliance has told us that the most probable thing will be that the Bill ' of Puerto Rico will be presented ' before Congress in parts, a thing that if the Senate or the House does not agree with one of the petitions, they can oppose it without prejudicing the others. The rule to be followed is: con| follow the greatest possible liberties. i damente a ios jefes. Also at Fortaleza ce eepe- ' . ran important news and according to j we are told it is very possible that De - gue a letter from General Mclnty- , re to which exceptional importance was attributed ■ Palace Hotel j Lunch $1.00 i Lunch $1.25 J Special Season Tickets.
! fl DIRECTOR OF "LIBERTAD" RECTIEICAAL REPRESENTATIVE GOAL
M AFFIRMS THAT YOUR NEWSPAPER HAS PUBLISHED THE TRUTH --M Refuses to grant the rectification requested M Aguadilla, P. R., October 9, 1925.- Mr. Alfonso Gual, Director of "El Aguila de Puerto Rico'', Ponce P. R. I My distinguished friend I received your letter requesting its insertion and a rectification in my newspaper of the statements attributed to you by Pepe Quintana, in his travel chronicle which appeared in the last edition of ''Libertad''. First of all, allow me to tell you that I am the author of that travel chronicle: the editor who visited you, according to your letter, to exchange a mere courtesy greeting with you and who made the caption that you cannot let pass without rectifying it. Having made this clarification, I deeply regret not being able to satisfy you in the rectification you request, for the simple reason that the statements to which you refer were said by you in the exchange of political impressions that you had with me in the editorial office of your newspaper, in the presence of my colleague Mr. Carrasco, on the morning of our visit. Allow me to refresh your memory: When Carrasco and I arrived at the editorial office of "El Aguila" I introduced myself to you as Director of the newspaper "Libertad" and I introduced you to my colleague as your brilliant editorialist. So that from that moment on you knew who I was, and who was the friend who accompanied me. Minutes later, we engaged in a lively and interesting conversation, and I told you with frank sincerity, the indignation of merchant friends of the island, among them the Liedo. Maisonave, of I. Yauco, by the attitude of the Legislature approving the fought Law of Arbitrios, and I commented ' the damage that this could do 1 in the future to our Puerto Rican ' Alliance; and it was then - when you told me (and this was heard perfectly by my distinguished companion Mr. Carrasco) that the Law of Arbitrios was imposed ' Continued on page 5) THE TIFUS Can be avoided by drinking water that is not contaminated Take: Evian Water The best table water. OLIMPO | TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY The Lighthouse by the Sea I Played by Wm. Cfellier Jr." Louise Fazenda and the famous dog RIN-TIN-TIN-TIN. -Don't miss it. (Matinee and Evening) | nwril'j 'i¿.wniwrtBiw>mteitetewtaW¿"W* l te-i-iwr { ■ Dr. R. Bernabe ! OCULIST . | Embarks on a study trip "I 15 of the coL trident.
-SENATORIAL CRISIS WORSENS BY THE MINUTE .
STETSONA . HATS Lo y! WM CABRER STORES SAN JUAN - PONCE ' ,
The senatorial crisis is worsening by the moment, as shown by the statements that the senators of the majority' ! themselves frankly make in the press, demonstrating how intense their dislike is. j Not even a week ago we published the letter addressed to Governor Towner by Senator Zeno, in which he strongly and energetically protests against the recess appointments. The latest notices we have received are even more alarming. When we reported as Ultima Hora the news that Judge Berga was practically appointed third judge of San Juan, we added that it was assured that Judge Castejón of Guayama would be appointed to replace him. And indeed, our news has been fully confirmed by the executive action. However, the truth is that Judge Castejón has not been the candidate of the senators for Humacao, - ¡ In an information we published the day before Judge Castejón was officially appointed, We reported that the senators for the Humacao district, Mr. Fuertes and Mr. González Fagundo openly endorsed Judge Cordoves and that Senator Fuertes himself had gone to Fortaleza with the recommended candidate to present him to the Governor as the candidate of the district and of the majority. - The following morning the appointment of Judge Castejón was officially announced. The appointment of Judge Castejón has caused deep displeasure to Senators Fuertes and Gonz&lez i Fagundo, whose candidate was not appointed, and we know from a reliable source that both Senators are preparing to reject the appointment of Judge Castejón at the Senate Executive Session in February, on the grounds that the express will of the district has been violated. It is well known that according to the Organic Charter, the senators in any executive session of the Senate are called upon to ratify or reject the appointments made by the Gvbemador in recess. And Senators Fuertes and Gon-' zalez Fagundo are set to exercise that right ANOTHER CIRCUMSTANCE | In addition, we are informed, (Continued on p. 6.)
Representative Gallardo raises a noisy protest my
FIGHT THE GOVERNOR AND MAJORITY CHIEFS M ADVISES THE HUMACAO ELECTORATE TO FORFEIT THE VOTE
M The appointment of Judge to the District Court of Humacao is an abusive he- . che, and clearly contrary to the most rudimentary principle of demo-
■
In the last few years, Puerto Rico has been doing what two or three political leaders have ■ been willing to do, and, to the very personal desires of a governor and an Attorney General, vociferous and proclaimers of justice and the rights of the people, when in reality they are nothing more than mutilators of those same principles. The Senatorial District of Humacao, through the voice of its Senators, its Representatives to the House, its Political Committees, and the Bar Association, submitted to the Attorney General and the Governor of Puerto Rico, the name of a lawyer of clear intelligence, of unsuspected rectitude, and of unquestionable honorability to be "appointed Judge of the District Court of Humacao. The College of Law of the University of Puerto Rico, the Chancellor of the same institution supported the name of the Hon. FAEL i , CORDOVES ARANA, for the aforementioned position before the highest "u- ! torities of the country. It was all in vain. The political bosses, who believe that they are the whole of Fio. Rico/les was convenient to their personal ends that a godson of theirs be appointed to the Corto de Die trito de Guayama, and it was necessary to leave the post va: 1 , no, and, they obtained from an easy government fli appointment of Judge Gabriel | ' Castejón, to preside over the District Court i of Humacao. We have nothing to adduce against this' official, whom we believe qualified for the position. But we are ■ absolutely against the pi| roteada that has been made in making the above-mentioned appointment. The voters of the District of Humacao should no longer go to the polls. It is better to let two or three do their voluniAd because the right to vote in Puerto Rico has become a vile fallacy. Why elect Scnado- ¡ res? Why elect Bepresenta- ¡ tes? If in this Island the only Se ■ nators and the only Representatives of the people are no more than two or three, who have believed that the elections were the last ones held, and that in the future they will not have to count on the will of the people. And it is terrible, too, to have to put up with one or two indi,'viduals redly imported from the land being the arbiters of our destinies on conspiracy.
Gilda Gray andSes sue Hayakawa in Puerto Rico w
M They will be given a royal reception upon their arrival THEY WILL BE PRESENTED TO THE SAN JUAN PUBEICO AT THE RIALTO CINEMA M
m The big film production companies in the United States are beginning to take an interest in Puerto Rico and consider our island as an ideal location for the printing of certain scenes. If not, say the
i G. gZ-At:
cablegram which i_-we received yesterday, in which we are informed that aboard the steamer ''Puerto Rico" has embarked for the island a company of motion picture actors who are coming to "film" here a movie.
mi S. Hayakawa
The film's plot is related to the Pacific Islands. I But what has caused the best imI pressure among the many fans of the cZñe eil I Puerto Rico is the fact that in I that company come none other than Sessue Haya-
j kawa and Gilda Gray. The news has made more than one girl clap her hands. SESSUE HAYAKAWA The great Japanese actor, who in spite of his Asian origin is a handsome boy, is one of the favorites of the American public and in Puerto Rico is no less popular. Very few in our island are unaware of the artistic personality of Sessue Hayakawa. We could say, and we are not wrong, that he needs no introduction. Nevertheless, we insert her photograph for the benefit of the forgetful . I GILDA GRAY, THE . GREAT DANCER And Gilda Gray? If you don't know her that is your greatest punishment. 1 Gilda Gray, who possesses an exceptional beauty, is today the thousandth star of the "Famous Players Las1 ky". And that's an understatement - does the reader know how much this delectable woman earns? No less than £250,000 for each film she works on and a grown percent of the profits. - Gilda has quite a history. She is not a good girl who left the convent to enter the silent scene. On the contrary, she has been (Continued on p. 6.) - i SUITS - SHOES SHIRTS - HATS COLOSSAL ASSORTMENT At prices never dreamed of in Ofncanto > ' 36 -SALVADOR BRAU- 36 Pay a visit or see the Stained Glass Windows. MOONCINEMA TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY REGINALD DENNY gjj Oh. Doctor! CURRENT PRICES.
The Third Game of the World Series that was to be held yesterday was postponed.
(ALL AMERICA CABLES) At one o'clock yesterday afternoon we received the following cablegram: "Game 3 of the World Series has been postponed because of rain."' If the weather improves, the third challenge will be held today in Washington. We will give full details of today's and tomorrow's fights in our Monday edition.
THE CENTRAL BOARD OF THE PTO. RICO.- AGREEMENTS M Ponce merchants' resolution considered M Los Ledos. Ortíz Alibrán and Brown announce that lawsuits will soon begin M After having published the resolution of the Assembly of the Ponce Chamber of Commerce on the non-intervention of the Attorney General in the cases that are being heard in the Federal Court, er* that the most powerful sugar corporations request that the Treasurer of Puerto Ri- [ compel the Treasurer of Puerto Rico to refrain from collecting taxes. co to refrain from collecting contributions amounting to several hundred thousand dollars, the Central Directorate of the Chamber of Commerce (chaired by Mr. Manuel V. Doménech) has been urgently summoned. Domenech has been urgently convened. PONCE RESOLUTION ENDORSED In accordance with the request of 1 numerous merchants of the mu1 nicipality, and of many of the local sections of the Chamber of ■ Commerce established in the various districts of the country, the Central Direction of said grouping of merchants will proceed from one moment to the next to act in conformity with the general will of its associates, endorsing the resolution of the Chamber of Commerce of Ponce, and thus directing it, officially- ! The resolution, officially approved as that of the general body of merchants, will be addressed to Governor Towner and President Coolidge. THE FIGHTING WILL BEGIN Meanwhile, the Ledo. Ortiz Alibrán and Brown have announced that they will soon begin lawsuits against the recently passed excise law. OPPORTUNITY i Due to absence, I am selling living room furniture, dining room furniture and various other items. -Information will be given at Telephone 1231 black, Santurce.
Notices are received from Barret through Mr. Odlin 1A
i A ODLDff i
UHA POLICY WITH LMg THE BEST GUARANTEE 323SaS3S&tSESaESaESXamSEStS2SSSSSSS9Z92SZSEEESESZSZSZ=S!ZSDeS , - CEMENT "LEHIGH" l We offer our customers LEHIGH brand Portr Hnri cement, in sacks, available vs h at Dock No. 6. Order the one you need, because it comes [ little quantity and the demand is strong, f QUALITY PRICE SERVICE Rolan & Tejedor S. en C.
M Ex-Judge provides interesting information M Explains why Mr. Barret changed M
The unexpected change in the head of the Prohibition Department in Puerto Rico has remained shrouded in mystery. It was said publicly that Mr. Barret had been 'transferred to another district because it suited the service.
service. But naturally Radie was very satisfied with that explanation because he felt that there must be some more powerful reason to justify the change which surprised not a few people who did not believe in Mr. Barret's transfer until the very last moment. The last American mail has brought us an interesting letter from Judge Odlin, -of whom we published the photograph with osti information, -in which we were at last told how the removal of Mr. John T. Barret occurred and the place where he is now located. A SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES i And what was not known in Puerto Rico was that Mr. Barret, for special reasons, of an internal nature in the circuits of the United States. ! of an internal nature in the federal circuits, was not considered sufficiently protected in Puerto Rico unless Mr. Ar1 thur F. Odlin acted at the same time as a Federal Court Judge. M?. Barret, therefore, regarded Judge Odlin as a guarantor of his interests. Thus when Odlin was separated from active service and left for the United States, Banet was not slow to follow him, ready to leave certain personal matters to be settled at the headquarters of the Prohibition Department. l MR. ODLTN CONFERENCE WITH GENERAL ANDREWS. And so it was that Judge Odlin, a (Continued on p. 6.) EL FIGARO , ON MONDAY, OCTOBER 12 COLUMBUS DAY EL FIGARO barber shop saloon will only work until 12 A. M-, which I am informing my customers of because it is a holiday legat I PEDRO TRUJILLO