tLL, AISSPMUU
11 °AGS.3CTS? I /■ OZatMe; "Pwerte Bim ■ Ug Daante" BMg. 1 I V "L IBM. - to IU. - - -
|l 1 PAGS.3CTS? | 1 j | eMMzara UáN I "T o" u. - - - tv.* I
MORNING
I MORNING,
ARO VI
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICB
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) author zed by the Act of October 6, 1917, on file at the Post Office of| San Juan, Porto Bico. By order of the President, A. S. Bur esuu. Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919, at the Pest Offiee at San Juan, Porto Rico (United States of America) under the Act of March 3, 1879.
SATURDAY, JUNE 27, 1925.
NUMBER 2087.
A man driven mad by rage murdered his wife with a machete in Arecibo and then committed suicide by slitting his own throat with a barber knife.
A simple argument, typical of spouses, provoked the double tragedy -the marriage had always lived in perfect harmony The victimizer, horrified upon realizing the cruelty of his crime, [sought] liberation in the most horrible suicide.
A new crime of passion has just been registered in a quiet neighborhood of Arecibo. But this cri-j men is doubly horrible, it is the ruin of a home, it is the denial of a love cherished for years and years. It is the story of a man who never doubted his wife, who lavished on her every kind of doubt, who loved her with all the strength of his soul, and it is the story of a man who, in a moment of madness, took the life of his life's companion and then committed suicide, horrified by the magnitude of his crime. NOT A CLOUD... Joaquin Ortiz, white, 38 years old, honest and hardworking, was bound by the laxities of marriage to Guadalupe Hernandez, white, 35 years old. The couple had joined forces many years ago and had formed a dignified and happy home in the Hato Rey neighborhood of Arecibo. He was a slave to his duty, he loved his wife madly. She was a model of virtue. Not a cloud ever clouded the sky of his happiness, until.... THE PORTO RICO DRUG COMPANY The chemicals we use in the preparation of the recipes are of the highest quality. The patents we sell are always fresh. We receive them weekly from Europe and the United States. We have our own buyers and office that takes care of obtaining the best. Our prices are unbeatable. Our service is departmentalized and we can therefore give careful attention by choosing the most competent personnel for each department. We are proud to assure that we have nothing to envy to any drugstore in the United States. The island's pharmacists always receive careful attention to their orders in our wholesale department completely separate from our retail business. Advt
THE SPARK THAT CAUSED THE DOUBLE TRAGEDY! The morning before yesterday, and perhaps for the first time in many years of happy union, an argument arose between the spouses, which slowly became more vehement, until it ended in real displeasure. Ortiz, maddened to see his happiness end, blinded by anger, desperate, lost his reason, wielded a sharp machete that he found nearby, and with the sharp weapon inflicted three tremendous wounds on her neck. The unhappy woman, without uttering a single cry of pain, collapsed to the ground bathed in her own blood, dying instantly. ' THE SUICIDE I Ortiz, horrified, dropped the gun when he realized that in his rage he had murdered the companion of his life in the most horrible manner. DANCE AT THE VANDERBILT TONIGHT TONIGHT, at nine o'clock, a grand society ball will be held at the aristocratic Vanderbilt Hotel for the benefit of the children's home. This is a double attraction, as it will undoubtedly arouse the liveliest interest in lovers of Terpsichore as well as in those souls where generosity and the desire to help charitable works have a sacred cult. The splendor with which the parties are always celebrated at the Vanderbilt County Hotel is well known, and we are sure that this one will not lag behind those that have preceded it. Once again the distinguished hotel will live up to its reputation. The organizers of the ball could not have had a happier idea in working so for the children's home. We wish them great social as well as economic success. Well-established agent, owning his own car. Would work on commission basis, Ponce and south of the island for serious homes in San Juan. Offers to Apartado 168, Ponce, P. R. > - v.. ■ . .■ . .ar, 1 1 I I I | I (| I I I I | I t I I I I I I I I I I I I II 1 ISE FOR SALE I : A LANCHA | ; 27 feet long with - ■ ; "Sterdig" machine in -- ; Ponce. -P.,0. Box 112, - - - ; Ponce, P. R.\"44q.q.q,.| |||||| |HII ( ll'iH-
brutal and violent. And that man, I who for years and years had loved only one woman, whom he now saw lifeless at his feet, murdered by his own hand, lost what reason he had left, considered that under such conditions to live would be the most horrible punishment and sought release in death. He looked for a weapon to take his life and fate gave him a barber's knife, with which he inflicted on his neck a horrible, dreadful wound, leaving his throat completely slit and dying ins ' tantaneously. UNITED IN LIFE AND DEATH : The news spread through the neighborhood with lightning speed. When the authorities arrived at the scene, they beheld a picture of horror and death. The unhappy woman lying on the ground, bathed in blood, and next to her, her husband, who had ceased to be her husband in a moment of madness to become the victimizer, also dead, the blood of their Tens confused, united in life and death.... A meticulous investigation was carried out and finally the bodies were ordered to be removed for burial. And there in the cemetery of the Villa del Capitan Correa there are two tombs, one next to the other, which give eternal rest to the unhappy spouses.... The double tragedy has not yet been able to separate them, has not yet been able to break the bond that tied them together, a happy and fortunate day for an eternity...
I THE FIRST SHIPMENT OF THE MOST NUTRITIOUS PRODUCT £9 BuodY KO MALTED MILK CHOCOLATE FLAVOR HAS ARRIVED It's really wonderful. I Nutritious, wholesome and healthy food. Guaranteed I 100% PURITY I Exclusive Distributors, I EDUARDO G GONZALEZ, CO. I SAN JUAN, P. R. I
CRISIS BETWEEN THE LEGISLATURE AND THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH DEEPENS.
The House approved over the governor's veto the bill allocating $6,000 to buy the works of the great Muñoz Rivera. | Among the bills lately vetoed by the Governor was one, number 428, appropriating the sum of $86,000, to purchase the works of the great Muñoz Rivera and to pass them to the state. I The Governor's veto was not I detailed, but we suppose that his opposition to the bill was due to the policy adopted by him. of not approving any expenditure bill, before revenue legislation is sent to him. That is, a re request for his veto of the bill allocating two million dollars to continue the carrel J (Continued on pM. 5) plan.
ROIC COMMERCIAL BANK (The Women's Bank) Incorporated August 14, 1922. Offices at hfAV.acao and Juncos. i AUTHORIZED CAPITAL PAID CAPITAL PAID $250,000.00 $51,560.00 Shareholders are advised that the Board agreed ; on the 19th of the current to pay a semi-annual Dividend of 3 per cent- > to comprising the months January lo. to June 30, and that in ■ the first days of July checks will be sent to them. ¡ " Antonio ROIG, - President. In our ECONOMY DEPARTMENT we pay - interest of 3lú% up to $500.00 and 4% for larger amounts. ■ We capitalize interest quarterly.
COMMERCIAL COURSE IN TWELVE MONTHS On June 29th, a new course will begin at Colegio PERCY, Ponce Any student who has an eighth grade diploma can finish the Complete Commercial Course in TWELVE MONTHS at the highly accredited Colegio Percy, Ponce. The most important and most famous private school in the teaching of commercial subjects on the island. More than 300 graduates hold important positions in Central Banks, Banks, Trading Houses, in Puerto Rico, Santo Domingo, Mexico and the United States. The faculty is made up of true experts in commercial subjects. The equipment of the faculty is completely modern. Only the best texts are used. The director of the College personally recommends students to trading houses. Many students are placed before the end of the course. Many young men and women from almost every village on the island study at Percy College. We have a large two-story building, located across the street from the College, for boarding boys. The young ladies are provided boarding in the homes of distinguished families, at $20, $25 and $30 per month. The monthly fee for instruction is $3, $6, $9, $12, $15, according to the subjects the student wishes to take. Books and all materials necessary for studies are provided. We accept students at any date and guarantee that no student fails. We admit only students who have an eighth grade diploma. The Boarding School and the College are located in the very center of the city, almost next to the Main Square. . WE TEACH: "Gregg" shorthand in English and Spanish, accounting, commercial law, political economy, commercial arithmetic, salesmanship and commercial efficiency, commercial English and Spanish and calligraphy. PERCY COLLEGE PHONE 463 APARTADO 241 PONCE, P. R
jfl code of office," says Mr. Perez Losada, replying to "La Democracia," "perfectly fixes the responsibilities of a newspaper editor in all fields. For the articles that have a solvent signature, the Director is not responsible at all.
. In the article of "La Democracia"-he adds- erroneous premises are established to arrive at absurd conclusions In the afternoon of yesterday we visited in his office our complained colleague, the Director of "El ■ ¡mparcial", Don J. Pérez Losada, to ask him some questions in relation to the article that appeared in the columns of "La Democracia". Mr. Losa , da gladly acceded to our wishes, and answered our questions in the following terms: -Mr. Perez Losada, did you read the article that yesterday's "La Democracia" dedicated to your newspaper? -Yes, I have read it, as I read everything that is published in the country: it is my job. -Since you are directly mentioned in the article, could you give us your opinion about it? (Continued on page 6.)
THE INTELLECTUAL YOUTH' PREPARES A MANIFESTO TO THE COUNTRY 1
It is a serious and conservative docu- : ment, of high views and of great political transi cence ¡ ■ 1 | According to the information ' : supplied to us today by our colleague in the press, Mr. Ríos Ocaña, first Editor ' of "La Correspondencia", a group of representative elements of the intellectual youth of ? * Puerto Rico has taken the initiative of launching a political manifesto to the country, referring to the great issues that today are stirring in the public conscience. The Puerto Rican intellectual youth wants today to assert its right to intervene in the affairs of the country, wants to take its place in the civic struggles, exposing before the Puerto Rican opinion its points of view and its op- : - J ,:: nions in relation to the problems that confront us in this time of uncertainty. It is not "a youth that 1 ¡'-¡¡s coming to the arena with exalted li- ( i risms or excessive radicalism. ' j It is rather a youth that is serious, j I conscious of its responsibility , l ni i.- the country, that comes with a 1 (Continún in the páir. BL CONCERT OF MRS. PAOLI IS TODAY q By a completely ¥ | voluntary error, a! publishing in the ''Pto. Rico Ilustrado" the photographs | of the charming ladies who will take part in the concert at the Yagüez Theater, organized by the distinguished and notable actress Amalia Paoli, we said qu*. i the concert had already been held and that said ladies are from 1" high society of Mayagüez, when in fact the concert is to be held tonight and so many of the ladies belong to our high social circles in San Juan. We take this opportunity to once again wish Miss Paoli and her beautiful disciples a great triumph. A House in the County, facing the sea, with 4 rooms or more, is NEEDED for the beginning of July. -Direct toi CERECEDO FINOS. & CO. SUCRS., San Juan. P. R. I.I'WWT 1 ■"JM r l I I I I -H-H-1 H < >■! I I I 1 !■■■!■♦ NOTICE So sells a Triple Effec- -- ;; to Standard of 4,500 " i feet (four thousand five hundred- " " tos) heating surface " " in magnificent conditi- -- > nes and with all modern adslanios. Pusds " ;; be seen working at CENTRAL JUANITA Bayamón, P. R. " | J.LI.IJ..IJ..IJ,UUI-J..I I I ■> t l.A 1 ,1
"I wish that the construction of the Oriente railroad be a reality and not a mere illusion ', says Rep. Gallardo.
EXPLAINS HIS ATTITUDE IN THE CHAMBER, WHEN HE WAS ENMEN- ! Representative Gallardo has made the following statements, which clearly explain his opposition to the eastern railroad project and which will undoubtedly be of great interest to the farmers of the eastern part of Puerto Rico. I wish to make a few remarks for the farmers of HuI macao in connection with the eastern railroad project. | First of all, I wish to state that there is not a single person in Puerto Rico who is more interested than I am in the construction of this railroad. Before the elections of 1924 I wrote a series of articles in a Humacao newspaper defending the idea of the railroad, and when the Governor Mr. I Puerto Rico Governor Mr. I i i Towner, I spoke with him on that question, wrote him a few letters on the same subject and at his request, I prepared a memorandum on the law and the idea of the eastern railroad. In the House of Representatives, among other towns, Naguabo, which is undoubtedly the town most in need of the railroad. In Naguabo, it seems to me, if I am not mistaken and I would swear that I am not, there is not a person who is more convenient for that railroad than my father. Dft way then, that I am not a suspect. To my own interests, above them, to those of my constituents, 1 it suits the construction of the eastern railroad. on page 5) tese of doubt! Tous Soto is nothing more than a skilled lawyer, accos" ted to intervene in good lawsuits that produce large sums of money for him.... But, as a politician!... Quia, man, quia! The conclusion reached by the reporter, according to Don Manuel's phrases, is that the invitation to merge between the mentioned sides did not even deserve the honors of the discussion .... NEVERAS For sale in all sizes. Only opportunity of oak and metal. Good for Restaurant, Grocery Store, Butcher Shop, Drugstores, Hospitals, etc. Luna 38, Tel. 1519, Box 1509 SAN JUAN Typewriters OuantízamoR las reoaraclonft" P. R. TYPEWRITER REPAIRING SHOP. H Box 1445, Tel. 1853. Crtxto !- San Joan.
11 :| Luxury Hudson, | ¡ TYPE BROUGHAM c Messrs. SANTIAGO A. PANZARDI LTD. have just received and have in their showroom a beautiful 2 HUDSON BROUGHAM of new type and cordially invite the general public to come and examine this new model HUDSON, g I The Best Investment I have for sale FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS in : :: Mortgage Bonds of San Juan Dock Co. for sale in amounts of not less than FIVE HUNDRED dollars. $ g They bear fixed interest at 9% per annum. < -- -- Will give all information: o F. BENITEZ REXACH. S * g Dock No. 6." , f Yes
"I prefer a thousand times to accept the headship of Barceló to that of the failed politician in Mr. Tous Soto, " - declares Don Manuel F. Rossy.
Yesterday, a reporter of ours incidentally met with 91 Ledo, Don Manuel F. Rossy, prominent leader of the pure Republicans, and in order to know his opinion regarding the announced fusionist invitation formulated by the Republicans of Mr. Tous ■ Soto to those of Mr. Martinez Nadal, who are the same in which our casual interviewee militates, we asked the latter what was his criterion "on the repeated invitation, and if it was true that he was willing to advise his people in favor of the idea. Don Manuel not only frankly rejected any intention of a pact with the Republicans who follow Mr. Tous Soto, but also expressed himself in the most acrid terms against Don Pepe, assuring us that he was the most evil politician there was in the country, so that he - Don Manuel - did not even find it prudent to stop to consider the proposition in question, much less accept it as good, while recommending it to his co-religionists. To the failed politician leadership of Tous Soto, he added, I prefer that of Mr. Barceló, who, after all, is, at least, a sincere and loyal man. And he added: -But, Tous Soto! What has this man ever done! In politics? In the Legislature, today, as Speaker of the House?.... He has done nothing but stumble, sometimes, and other times, make a fool of himself. -And the union with Mr. Barceló was not his own work," the reporter dared to ask. But, Don Manuel, always lapidary and terrible, after remarking that he considered the alleged union proposed at the last minute by Mr. Tous Soto as a simple joke, said that the union referred to by the reporter had had all the characteristics of an iniquitous surrender, of an accommodating transaction, prepared by Mr. Tous himself in Mayagüez, thanks to the armored majorities he had to count on in that famous jorrada? And Don Manuel added, always terrible and fulminating: -For God's sake, my friend!... What a BRANDI I 5 Keep your car in the S GARAGE BRANDI | g (Permanent Service) § 'I Villa 10 - Ponce § MiMiio of the otm waters.... 3A ES LA R.E-1 M A - ¿0 OUf SS-suyo a ¿o uuf Ot OTPOS PK/SOS !/ past i n o B 5 INSUPERABLE CÜHO GUA MINERAL.DIGES. IVA.AGRADABLE.RE. RESCANT. REQUEST STEP 110 N EVERYWHERE E (&15TA IN PROTECT. 0 GOOD THAT PUER. 0 RICO POSEE .GARRATON Drpcsihde -ALltb 77-5ANJÜAA