ELMÜNDO
1 PAGES. 3 CTS. /I Betaeatj-e J4.00 "T Ün Afio "7 M
1 PAGS. 3 CTS. /■ Oficinal-. 'Port Blco Illustrated" Bldg. I | T "L 1922. - Box 3*5.
OlARKj DE
MANaNa
YEAR VIL
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under remit (No. 801) autnoilxe" 1 uy -h- a<a. ot October 6, 1817, on file st Ute Post Office ol 8an Ju*n. Porto Bico, By order of the President, A. 3. Bur ""un. Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 21. 1919. at the Peet Office at 8an Juan, Porto Bico. (United States of under the Act of march 3, 1879.
> NUMBER 2066.
SATURDAY, JUNE 6, 1925
Judge Odlin bid his subordinates a fond farewell yesterday, exhorting them to do their duty.
Solicited cooperation for the new Judge. - At ten o'clock - left by automobile for Mayagüez.
The ship carrying Judge Odlin on board leaves our shores, bound for Florida, the land of youth and lemon groves. Yesterday morning a most cordial ceremony took place at the Federal Court. At nine o'clock in the morning all the employees of the Federal Court assembled in the session room to hear Judge Odlin's last words of farewell. The law to erect a magnetic observatory in San Juan has been approved by the governor. The governor approved the law to acquire land for the installation near San Juan of a magnetic observatory to be operated under the auspices of the Federal Government. Magnetic Observatory to be operated under the office of the U. S. Coast and Geodetic Survey", of ! the United States Department of Commerce, appropriating the necessary funds, etc. The Act reads as follows: WHEREAS, the Magnetic Observatory installed on the Island of Vieques by the office of the U. S. Coast and Geodetic Survey. S. Coast and Geodetic Survey of the United States Department of Commerce, is going to be closed because said island is not appropriate for an observatory of that nature; WHEREAS, the Federal Government has offered to install said Magnetic Observatory near San Juan, if the Insular Government provides it with the necessary land to build said observatory; WHEREAS, The People of Puerto Rico would greatly benefit from this observatory, where the magnetic variations of the Island would be studied, and where a Seismological Station with the appropriate apparatus for the study of earth tremors would also be installed; WHEREAS, it is reasonable that the Insular Government cooperate with the Federal Government for the construction of this observatory. NOW, THEREFORE, Be it Resolved by the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico; Section 1.-The Governor of Puerto Rico is hereby authorized to acquire lands not exceeding five (5) acres in area near San Juan, which are suitable for the installation of the Magnetic Observatory, and to transfer them to the Federal Government for said purpose; PROVIDED, that if at any time the Federal Government should remove the Magnetic Observatory from said lands, they shall again become the property of the People of Puerto Rico. Section 2.-To comply with the provisions of this Act, the amount of one thousand five hundred (1,500) dollars is hereby appropriated as preferential attention from any of the existing funds in the Treasury of Puerto Rico and not dedicated to other attentions. ' MUNICIPAL THEATER TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY THE FAST DETECTIVE By William Fairbanks Prepare for the debut of the fa- , mosos ALEGRIA-ENDHARDT.
The Judge, extremely excited, addressed his subordinates, making a farewell speech. He thanked them most effusively for the cooperation and assistance they had always given him, and exhorted them always to perform their duties and to cooperate with the new Judge sent by the White House. About ten o'clock the Judge took leave of all his friends, and left by automobile, bound for Mayagüez, where he was to embark on board the steamer "Delfina" which goes directly to Florida, where the Judge intends to set up his law office and establish his home. Judge Odlin was accompanied by Ledos. Benicio Sanchez Castaño and Luis A. Castro, who in that way wanted to show their adhei sion until the last moment to the Judge who is leaving us Already the "Delfina" will be moving farther and farther away from our beaches and meanwhile we cannot but remember one of the Judge's last phrases:-■* 'Until the ''Delfina" is not three miles from the coast I will remain the Judge of the Federal Court." WOLF OR HUTCHINSON? Since Judge Wells will not arrive in Puerto Rico for another four weeks, and since there are some cases pending for resolution, one of the Justices of the Supreme Court will act as interim Judge of the Federal Court. It is not yet known which of the Justices will be appointed, but the most likely are Hutchinson and Wolf. Both are characterized by their preparation and thorough impartiality. Meanwhile, there goes the ship that carries Judge Od'in away from our shores. Go to him our most affectionate farewell greetings. FL LCDO. TORREGROSA, REHABILITATED Aguadilla, June 5, 1925. i I EL MUNDO. San Juan. Yesterday the Supreme Court issued a resolution rehabilitating Ledo. Angel Torregrosa, Director of "Libertad", for the exercise ce i his profession of Lawyer and N¿>- , taino. This just resolution of ■ our highest Court of Justice has been received with true jubilation by all the social classes of Aguadilla, where Ledo Torregrosa enjoys general sympathy. O-car VALLEY, Correspondent. EL MUNDO associates itself with the jubilation that this news has produced in Aguadilla and sincerely congratulates Ledo. Torregrosa for the just ruling of the Supreme. -fe Bruje C ie4 > cria en Sa., losé S "BwlMb|j|5'W No. 37. s.-air f,r" bree ando con :ts machines I ' 'WUIWWW'M 1
YOU YOUNG If you want to dress well for little money, buy your# Graduation Suits at EL ENCANTO '" | Gerga Blue-marine from $40 to .... . . $28.48 § from $30 to .... . . . 21.48 p " " - from $25 to j 18.48 £ " " from $20 to _ .... 16.48 5 For children 8 to 18 a Large Assortment. SHOES - HATS - HATS - SHIRTS. £ The most fashionable styles at the cheapest prices. Come i 2 EL ENCANTO 36 - SALVADOR BRAU - 36 or order by mail to 2 RODRIGUEZ BLANCO & C0. Box 1505, Phone 1448 Next to -La Cafetera S
Gov. Towner receives a i m portant missive in which is related the sad odyssey of a supposed Puerto Rican Dr.
The Governor has received the following -caria from Dr. J. Rhodes Longley, of Fond Du Lac, Wis. May 27, 1925. "Governor of Puerto Rico, San Juan, P. R. Hon. Sir: A few days ago I took a stranger, probably a Puerto Rican surgeon, to the hospital, suffering from amnesia. He has an old wound in the upper right side of his skull. He is unable to speak, but pronounces some words that are surgery terms. His left arm and face are becoming paralyzed. Today I am transferring him to Rochester, Minnesota. He wore a Masonic button and ring. Tiepe cena is thirty years old, weighs 165 pounds, and has brown eyes and long curly hair. We presume him to be Puerto Rican because he would scream when shown some Puerto Rican beads or beads, when shown a map, he would place his finger on Puerto Rico with a scream. Any information you may be able to supply will be appreciated, both by myself and Dr. Judde, of the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota". With the above communication comes a clipping from a newspaper at Fond Du Lae, Wisconsin, in which appears the photograph of the person referred to in the above communication, plus the following information: MYSTERY MAN TAKEN TO MAYO CLINIC. He is believed to be suffering from cerebral depressive disorder and will probably be operated on at the Rochester Clinic. Paralysis progresses. That "Fulano de Tal" the man
TO THE QUINCALLEROS To the quincalleros of Pto. Rico, I am pleased to inform you that I have moved my establishment from 21 de la Cruz St. to 70 Fortaleza St., where I have made great improvements. ESTEBAN DIBE.
THE PORTO RICO DRUG COMPANY The chemical products we use in the preparation of our recipes are of the highest quality. The patents we sell are always fresh. We receive them weekly from Europe and the United States because we have buyers and our own office that takes care of obtaining the best. Our prices are unbeatable. Our service is divided by departments and we can therefore give careful attention, choosing the most competent personnel for each department. We are proud to assure that we have nothing to envy to any drugstore in the United States. The island's pharmacists always receive careful attention to their orders in our wholesale department, which is completely separate from our retail business. Advt.
I I I xl mysterious stranger hü has been reo! i gido at Fond Du Lac, Wisconsin, by an: American Dr., who is making great efforts to identify him - The supposed Puerto Rican Dr. has a wound in i the skull, cannot speak and is almost paralytic.-; However, certain tests made show q. he is a doctor, who belonged to the army and is from P. R. - It is supposed that he was robbed by thieves while on his way to the Mayo Brothers' clinic.- Photograph and description of the mysterious personage has been received. In the missive, Governor Towner was requested to inform
i and ■ i ; /i ! i K i i i ¿wlIK- i ¡ iaK i '■ mysterious of Fond rm Lac, is a 1 ■putoj-r who has served in the army and who was left in this city after having been stolen and deprived of all means of identification, was 'or who de- ■ clarified by Dr. R. J. Longley, who left this morning with c! strange man for Rochester. The stranger is rapidly' sncumb.endo of paralysis, occasionio- ¡ nothing by cerebral pressure, due to a blow on a part of the skull already weakened by a war - operation, it is believed. His entire left arm is useless, and he drags his left leg when he tries to walk. For some days he has been unable to speak, owing to cerebral nression which paralyzes his vocal cords. This morning Dr. Longley and Dr. P. J. Mc-< abe and Dr. J. E. Twohig observed the man. Dr. Longley obtained a bundle of Puerto Rican beads, and as they were displayed to the stranger, he anxiously looked at them, turned to the window, looked at them intently, and then burst into tears. The fact that he belonged to the medical corps of some army, was proved, it is believed, by another (Continued on p. b)
I , - "I "I-I-i-i-i í I n 1 ! I I I I I l-I-I-I- , SHOEMAKERS ¡ A About to open our + . t new building with a new- í ¡-í-í- vo equ'po and with fresh merchand- í ¡4- ría, we sell the f T we have in act- í í |t lidad. t ¿ Leather, rubber heels, í J- lasts, etc., at very cheap prices T I. í NIMACA SHOE t FACTORY í Carretera Nueva, Stop 22 T ? SANTURCE, P. R. | 11 H MI! I-!~M n j j j 1-H-b Buy You if Ccntafo i You will make money if before . making your grocery shopping ¡ you ask for our prices. GOMEZ VEGA SUCRS Tetuan 40; Tel. 918; Box 1350 ''STUDEBAKER'' For sale ''Studebaker'' 7 passenger, ''Sedan''. ¡' 600 kilometers traveled only. Will inform: Box 247, Manatí
Horrible tragedy in Sto. ■ Dominga.-A Puerto Rican is materially' crushed by the wheels of a locomotive.
- The body is picked up in pieces.-The victim leaves a wife and three children orphaned. j From our esteemed Dominican colleague, "El Listín Diario" takes the following information: - Blanco Muñoz derailed in the ' sitie mentioned, between the chuchos 13 v 14 Section of Guaymate, and as he was coming at a dizzying speed according to what we have been informed he walked I off the rails a distance of 200 meters. Mounted in the BOTA VACA or sen in the front part of the locomotive were the very precious young Pascual Bonilla, a native of Puerto Rico and driver of the train of canes and Máximo Alejandro, Dominican and brakeman of the same train of canes. Unfortunately, when they jumped the locomotive, they were thrown from the bctavaca with such bad luck that they fell under the wheels of the locomotive, their bodies being completely crushed and horribly mangled. The unhappy Bonilla was divided daily into two halves, one part consisting of the head and an arm and the other of the rest of the body. A few more pieces of bone and flesh of the ill-fated Bonilla were picked up from the track. His body presented a horrible, horrifying, pitiful aspect. Alejandro was also terribly mangled, one of his legs having been detached from the rest of his body. That picture was heartbreaking, impressive. The pen stops because it cannot find words with which to describe that sad event, a scene of pain. I i Jos bodies of the poor victims were left under the heavy locomotive and by dint of much work they were able to extract the bruised bodies of the unfortunate Pascual and Máximo and were taken to their respective residences in this city, at about four o'clock in the morning. On the arrival of the corpses of the poor victims at their respective homes, a truly painful and sentimental drama took place. The mother and wife ! of Bonilla, bathed in tears, threw themselves on the sad remains of the latter, and a picture of deep and intense and pathetic grief unfolded. The same thing happened in the saddened home of the unhappy Alejandro, where a father in the depths of his grief continued on p. 6 (Blue-Marine rajes - CANGA! - A - 13.98 and 19.50 Quality Guaranteed. Great sale of Shirts, Hats, Ties of the latest FASHION. "BAZAR AHORRO" Fortaleza 25 (next to "El Cielo" Come here if you want to save money. MANOLO ALWAYS LIMITS Tel. 1579. Box 1246
THE HOUSE BEGAN DISCUSSION YESTERDAY OF THE NEW WORKERS' COMPENSATION LAW i
THE COMMISSION WILL BE COMPLETELY REORGA=! BECERRIL IRA! AGAIN TO HIS OLD POSITION i Yesterday morning began to be discussed in the House of Representatives the bill reorganizing the Workers' Compensation Commission, a governmental body which has been the object of some criticism of late, whether justified or not. The discussion, judging from the preliminaries, promises to prove inters. The discussion, judging from the preliminaries, promises to prove most interesting, since there are many representatives in the House who are surname*! - i te interested in the problems obre- ! | ros and desirous 0 of endowing the country with ! 1 a body worthy of its progress | | and the advances of the century. ! TOTAL REORGANIZATION i ! When the new Workmen's Compensation Law is definitively approved, we can be sure that the present Commission will be totally reorganized in such a way that many defects will be corrected and it will be possible to make effective the collection of dues. The collection of dues from employers will be made effective. '■ I The number of commissioners will be increased rather than decreased. Mr. Becerril, who for several years represented the Republicans in that body and who was de. Trotted in the last election by Ledo. Santana, will resume, his old seat under the j new law now under discussion. ' ■ The general opinion is that the Republicans should be duly represented in a body where all the other political parties of Puerto Rico are already represented. j In addition, a scientific scale will be adopted, which will be applied inva- j riably to all those cases subject to compensation. i The House after discussing for more than two hours the said law. 1 adjourned until 10 o'clock on Monday morning, at which time the discussion will be resumed, it being hoped that the bill will be passed on the same day, and duly amended. 1 THE BUDGET The budget bill, ac-1 filially at the government printer's ¡ i no, will be brought to the House for j ¡ to be discussed during one of the: -<v>ntlnns in the nfiir. ft"
t-i-i-i- -i~i-i-i-i-i-; - -i-i-í NOTICE ¡ t For sale is a Standard Triple Effec- ;; t to to 4,500 Ipies (four thousand five hundred- " tes) heating surface " t in superb condition and with all modern ade- " lances. You can " T be seen working in ;; T CENTRAL JUANITA 4 -i- Bayamón, P. R. Do you need Mirrors, j Bise'ados Crystals, Edged, Ta- ■ lied or Enameled, go to the PaI lacio de Cristal de José Díaz Carmena, Cruz 10, Tel. 396, QUALITY, PRICE AND SERVICE. CHS | MI) or Store your car at □ jGARAGE BRANDI l o (Permanent Service) g 9 Villa 10 - Ponce 3
News is confirmed by cable that two powerful shipping companies, doing business in Pto. Rico have merged.
THE (NEW COMPANY WILL BE CALLED BALTIMORE INSULAR UNE! A few days ago published a cablegram from our special service, the United Press, in which it was reported that two shipping companies doing business in Puerto Rica were discussing in New York the way in which they could reach my country. At the same time, the ''Journal of Commerce" announced that the stockholders of both companies were willing to reach a reasonable and fair settlement. And the latest news received from New York indicates that the two important shipping companies, the "Bull Insular Line" and the "Porto Rican & American Steam and Ship Co.", have reached a definite agreement to unite and form one company to do the same business on our island. Our readers know that both the Bul! and the Porto Ric ta & i American do business in this i capital, where they have their docks and their respective dr vapo res lines. Negotiations had been going on for several days and even more, for several months there had been an evident intention to reach an understanding. | The understanding was reached in New York, where both companies are headquartered. At present, the well-known businessman Miguel Such, Manager of the Bull Insular Line in San Juan, is in New York. He is being replaced on an interim basis by our friend, Don Juan Melendez Orc-s'tns. NEW NAME According to reports that have reached us, both companies, upon joining forces, have vast plans under study and intend to introduce great improvements to the service. I The nreva shipping company, for1 fashion by the consolidation of the Bull and the Porto Bican & American will henceforth be called. I te Baltimore Insular Line. > We will soon give further details of this important commercial transaction, as even the offices in this capital have no details of the understanding as to the manner in which the consolidation will be effected. We have no doubt that both '<"ni pafiías by joining together will be in a condition to provide better service to customers and that Puerto Rico will ultimately win. I sell for little money two concrete houses in Lo*za street and a wood in paráda 43.- Will inform: J. A. CASTEJON. San Jose 35. Phone 1003 black. YAUCONO THE BEST IN THE WORLD. I¡ FOR MANY THINGS.) lo.-For using the best coffee u ' of Puerto Rico. 2o.-For having the best German machine, with a high level of efficiency and capable of roasting more than 100 quintals a day; the coffee receives indirect heat and, therefore, avoids the smoke and other gases from the fuel. I, 3o.-Because of the system of machinery in general and in sanitary enva- ( sanitary sessions. L, 4th.-For having the best ' "record" of Puerto Rico, pu ! For having the best record in Puerto Rico, pure and unblemished. J Jiménez & Fernández o Phone 406. Santurce. P.O. Box 965. P. R.
WHO WILL YOU FLEE WITH NOW? i WHAT ARE YOU TRYING TO DO WITH ' MR. TOWNER - GREAT SUNDAY EDITION OF "THE WORLD" SENSATIONAL INFORMATION - COLLABORATION OF THE GREAT POLITICIANS OF EUROPE "THE WORLD", which can be proud to count among its eolalK>rad.ors the most famous European politicians, will publish one of its best Sunday editions. And let's relegate it to the epinion of our readers, after ■ having read this review. The crazy information! is venLade i rnmente °ensational. Are you in i t" ratio of the anonymous ones who are cir í rulando against prestigious politi- ; coi? Do you know the aerial plans* involving Puerto Rico? Sai be jisted what is the purpose of the agricultural b> ¡ in the Legislature? What does the Attorney General propose to do this week? What is he trying to do with Mr. Towner? What are the government's plans in relation to San Juan? Who will he fight with now? All these questions and many others will be amply answered in tomorrow's Sunday edition. For the children you can't miss our popular comic section, and for the fans of sports our sports page, dedicated to the base ! hall and the racetrack. Equestrians inI will focus the latest news of lis . races this week at the racetrack "'Las Casas". The collaboration from abroad is masterly Lloyd George enters fully into the great inter national problems, the same can be said of Simonds, Harriot delights us with his chronicles, and Poincaré makes us think by analyzing in a brilliant article the situation of the cabinet over which Palnleve presides. REMIGIO" comes juicy this i time The brilliant historical chronicles that Captain Bii vero sends us from his retreat in Las Cuevas are increasingly read. í The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Hiiyke, publishes one of his best and most interesting articles, which speak so much to the sentiment of childhood. Garton Rageot. Ernesto Monten? i pro and other writers of stature collaborate in our Sunday edition. The Universal ' ' magazine ' ' is becoming more and more interesting, full of aven' tures. In a word, the Sunday edition published tomorrow by EL MUN DO is extraordinary and we will be very satisfied if it succeeds ■ in pleasing our readers, more and more numerous as time goes by. THE CHANGE MEECATE , . Dollars 20 ". Librae 4.87 V, I Frances 73.70 ; Peseta" 2". 75 - Dr*" <23 : THREE . TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY BABY PEGGY at EL CAPITAN JANUARY Free Kids !
V.U ü|| i-'*
[MÍiD I DtuaShGuab DtriL ISAE5 LA R-LlMA LO OUÍ I SUYOAlOOUf WNL. I of oreos PA/sfS f? I PA5TIIIO I tSiNsuPtRABiE ana I MINERAL WATER,0 "GK. I UVA.PLEASANT,RJE. I FRE3CANTE. I 301 KITE PASTE I EX T0DA5 PARTS AND I IN5I5TA IN PROTECT, t 10 GOOD OUEPUER. f TO RICO ROSEE I L.GARRATQN JwetíNñi | 77--5MIJVAN