THE WORLD
in P AGS. 3 CTS. I >*rí£t" Ktee
in PAGS. 3 CTS. || Imirtri H*M II OH Ate 97.80
DAILY MORNING
MORNING
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICQ
Published and distributed under permit (Me. 801) miUwrized by the Act of October " 1917. on Ale "t the Poet Of Ace eft Sen Juen Porto Rico By order of the President, A. 8. Bur leeon Postmaster General.' Entered as second class matter,\ febrnary 21, 1919. at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Wco. (United States of America'! under the Act of march 3. 1879 I
MO Vil
SATURDAY, MAY 9, 1925
NUMBER 2038.
The Legislature adjourned yesterday.
The recess will continue until ten o'clock ja maftana, May 18.-It began last night, at five to twelve o'clock. THE MINORITY VOTED AGAINST THE RECESS.-DONES AFFIRMED THAT IT ALL OBEYED TO A POLITICAL MANOEUVER ■ 1 ■ 111 He added that the mere fact of the Representatives earning only $1 after the ninety days, Implied a penalty.-EI Speaker intervenes in the debates. -An incident between Mr. Dones and Mr. Muñoz Ramos.
The House resumed its work at eleven o'clock yesterday morning. Numerous members of the public invaded the hall, knowing that the bill would be discussed - to declare the legislative recess. After the regulatory procedure, the Joint Resolution was brought to the order of the day so that the Island Legislature would declare itself in recess from last night at five minutes to twelve o'clock, until ten o'clock in the morning of May 18. THE HELM COMMISSION . The Joint Resolution also foresees the appointment of a Steering Committee, composed of nine representatives and nine senators, which will be in charge of studying all the projects presented and selecting the most important ones, classifying them in turn. * The main reason given for declaring the recess, besides the need to classify the bills, is the budget, alleging in the Resolution that while the legislative recess lasts, the Treasury Commission must carefully study such important bill. THE MINORITY IS TERMINATELY OPPOSED Immediately the debate began, since the minority openly declared itself against the recess. Mr. Alonso made a long speech, opposing the recess. Mr. Fiz also spoke against the recess, due to the notable success of the great play "El Mantón de Manila", which was shown on Friday and yesterday, Saturday, this company has decided to repeat this great film TOMORROW SUNDAY, thus giving the public of San Juan and Santurce one last opportunity to see this colossal play.
The legislature was against the recess, alleging that it did not see the need for the recess, when the same work that is now being alleged as the basis for justifying this legislative attitude had been done in previous legislative assemblies without the need to take so many precautions. DONES IN THE BRACKET Representative Dones expressed himself frankly against the legislative recess, and said that it was all a political maneuver. He claimed and tried to prove that the House could not recess after the first ninety days. He made the point that the mere fact that the Representatives earned only one dollar a day after the first ninety days, implied on the part of the author of the Ity a manifest desire to impose punishment for failure to finish the work within the statutory term. The Speaker, Mr. Tons' Soto intervened, and stated that if the House was willing to suffer the terrible punishment of which Mr. Dones spoke, it was perfectly within its rights to declare itself in recess, and then continue its work, after it had been regulated. Mr. Dones continued to emphasize the fact that the House could not declare itself in recess according to the law, and that he wished his vote to remain on record. Mr. Lastra Chárriez interrupted him to ha(Continued on page 5) 17 Bottles of Wine FOR $5.00 Send $5.00 to Ciro Malatrasi, Box 513, San Juan and you will receive by return mail instructions and grapes for 17 bottles of wine. HOLLYWOOD" STEAM will leave Seattle on May 13 from San Francisco on May 27 Pass your orders on time. Advt.
TODAY SATURDAY Big Event at LA FAVORITA San Justo 31 with the EXHIBITION of the LATEST models of BLOND COLOR Shoes, of the latest fashion on Fifth Avenue, New York. See our showcases and you will be pleasantly surprised by the styles, colors and prices. JOSE LEMA & CO. San Jüan and Río Piedras i ¡ I i ] ¡. i ¡...H-l-b l-T I FOR EUROPE BY THE LUXURIOUS TRANSATLANTICOS OF THE FOLLOWING STEAM LINES FROM NEW YORK WHITE STAR DOMINION LINE - RED STAR LINE AMERICAN LINE - WHITE STAR UNE People who wish to travel with all kinds of comfort can book directly and in advance their tickets from here, by any of these Lines. For more information on prices and departure dates, please contact:- BEHN BROTHERS. INC. AGENTS. SAN JUAN, P. R. TELEPHONE 257.
Bolívar Pagán denies that for the present there is any reason for a political rupture between Socialists and pure Republicans "That is a matter-he adds-that could only be settled by the Republican-Socialist popular masses, or sovereign assemblies of both parties" "In case of a ruppiiDiento,-adds Bolívar Pagán-why would it be the Socialists, and not the pure Republicans, who would have to abando* liar the Municipality of San Juan?"
On the occasion of certain information published yesterday in an afternoon paper, about the impending breakup of the Republi-co-Socialist Coalition, an editor of ours saw yesterday in his office Ledo. Bolivar Pagan, who at the same time that he is an official of the Republican-Socialist Administration of San Juan is president of the ! Socialist Party in the Municipality and Vice-President of the Territorial Committee of said party, to gather some impressions on the matter, since this matter has been much discussed in the corridors of the city. The referred socialist leader was not very communicative, and expressed to us that he did not wish to comment in any way on this information. Our reporter, ci Ledo, insisted. Bolívar Pagán expressed that for now *there was no reason whatsoever for a break between the two collectives of the Coalition. He told us that there have been small difficulties with some pure leaders; but no leader A TRIUMPH OF THE CLASSIFIED ADVERTISEMENT OF "EL MUNDO" The well-known composer Don Juan Garriga, whose beautiful compositions have received the applause of thousands of people, and manager of the accredited commercial firm of this square "Garriga Bros.", sent us some time ago the following letter: Mr. Administrator of EL MUNDO, San Juan, P.R. Very dear sir, our leader, who is the manager of "EL MUNDO", sent us the following letter: Mr. Administrator of "EL MUNDO", San Juan. P. R. Dear Sir:- On November 26th I placed an advertisement in the economic section of your newspaper requesting a salesman, and I am pleased to inform you that the result has been very satisfactory, for in two days I have received about three hundred letters in reply to my advertisement. This is a proof of how much is read in Puerto Rico, and of the large circulation of El Mundo. All these letters received from various towns of the island are in my possession in case you need them as testimony. From you atto. and S. 8, Juan E. GARRIGA. -ti-- . ■ .- Apollinaris Q LAiREINA ÉDE LAS AGUAS DE MESA KORBER & (0. INC. SAN WAN, P, R, I Tablets Nutro | .The best reconstitu- 2 yent tonic for the brain, ti nerves and blood. They are to- ti ¡ered by the most 8 delicate stomach; for they contain neither 8 alcohol nor any drug § irritant. tí
in such cases has represented the will and voice of the Pure Party; the Pure Party is one thing, and one or another leader of that party is something else, sometimes quite different. It seems that some people are very interested in breaking up the Coalition; but that is a matter that could only be resolved by the republican-socialist popular masses or sovereign general assemblies of both coalition parties. As for the abandonment of the Municipality of San Juan by the Socialists, I believe that this is a very serious mistake. The Socialists are not in the municipality for anyone. We Socialists, as well as the Pure Republicans, are there by our own respective right. And in case of a rupture, why should the Socialists, and not the Pure Republicans, be the ones to abandon the Municipality of San Juan?" MR. ALBERTO DURAN ARRIVES FROM CUBA The "Guantanamo" that regara this week to our port brought us from Havana our very esteemed friend the prestigious gentleman Mr. Alberto Duran, who enjoys so much sympathy in the sister antilles and in Puerto Rico. i His wife, the distinguished Mrs. Carmen Hernández de Durán, daughter of the Hon. Conrado Hernández, is spending a short time with her father and other relatives and will now return with him to Cuba, where they will follow the quiet path of marriages in which love makes its beneficial influence felt. We wish Mr. Durán a pleasant stay in Puerto Rico. A BEAUTIFUL AND WEALTHY YOUNG LADY WISHES TO MARRY.... See page number 7 Urn S. Brau 80 Box 126 San Juan, Porto Rico. SEIBERUNG ALL-TREADS Car Missing Wanted to know whereabouts of a "Buick" 5-passenger car, black, model 1925, license 6246, missing Monday from in front of the Federal Courthouse. -Will report to Tel. 314 black. Santurce. Advt. | North Pole Lemonade $ 8 The best Lemonade. In Ba- 2 ti rrles of 10 dozen. § 8 RIVERO & CO SUCS. g tí Box 523 San Juan. g tí Interested to know if anyone keeps the archives of Surveyors Don JOAQUIN CALVO and Don MANUEL JIMENEZ and Don MANUEL JIMENEZ SICARDO, who worked in Puerto Rico from 1870 to 1883. Address to: , FERNANDO DEL TORO SALDAÑA. -HOTEL "PALACE". SAN MUAN. _ .
PITIMAMORA The Governor signs the bill that authorizes the Municipalities to allocate funds for the Parque Colón We have had the pleasure of meeting with the prestigious gentleman Don Manuel Mendía in such a state of exhilaration that we had to join him in his demonstrations, which are due to the signature that the Governor has just placed at the bottom of the bill that authorizes the municipalities to allocate funds for the Parque Colón. The following is a transcription of the entire bill: AN ACT AUTHORIZING the municipalities of the Island of Puerto Rico to allocate the amount of their budgets to contribute to the construction of the Colón Park and the road leading thereto, and for other purposes. BE IT FURTHER DECREED BY THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF PUERTO RICO: Section 1-The municipalities of
EL SEÑOR GONZALEZ FACUNDO Y EL INCOME TAX -Since the Income Tax Bill reached my desk, I have read it several times and I still have not been able to understand some of its precepts. They are so obscure that it is necessary to think a lot and relate some articles with others to understand their scope. I do not believe that this Law should be given retroactive effect, because this would cause a great disturbance and would harm interests protected by our current Income Law. The percentage for natural persons is too high and that of legal persons is also very high. Eight percent, in my opinion, would be fair and reasonable, taking into account the needs of the Treasury, but without oppressing the taxpayer. F. González FAGUNDO
PASSAGE FOR EUROPE from New York to Paris, London and Hamburg via Cherbourg and Southampton by the luxury liners RESOLUTE, RELIANCE, ALBERT BALLIN DEUTSCHLAND, CLEVELAND and others Passage in first class from $135., and upwards. For sale by KORBER & CO. INC. General Agents SAN JUAN, P. R. UNITED AMERICAN LINES HAMBURG AMERICAN LINE ARE YOU BOARDING? Insure your luggage against all risks-for the duration of your trip and everywhere you go. -Request information from KORBER & CO. INC. P- O. Box 545, San Juan, P. R.
Ulises Román Birges Advises those with whom he has business that he has moved his office to Santurce, Parada 24, Calle Bolívar, No. 29, where he will be at the orders of §ps related and will attend to matters in the same manner as heretofore. Mailing Address: Apartado 1297, San Juan. For telephone call Information. Advt.
House FOR SALE, San Jorge Street No. 45 Parada 25, Wooden, new construction, place for Garage. Only for $3,200: EL CORTE ELEGANTE Tailoring and Clothing Factory. Tel. 1422 Cruz 12 San Juan. |
A CHILD PERISHED YESTERDAY CRUSHED UNDER THE WHEELS OF TROLLEY NUMBER 8. IN SANTURCE.
Mr. Rivera Martinez dispels doubts about the alleged dissolution of the Republican-Associationist coalition, which, he says, would take place at an upcoming assembly in Santurce. would take place in a forthcoming assembly at the Theater "On this matter, it seems to me still too early to talk about it," he says On the occasion of some notes that appeared in a local colleague about there would be a Socialist Assembly to undo the coalition with the pure, and stating also, that Mr. Iglesias would be replaced in his position in the Federation by the leader, Mr. Rivera Martinez, a reporter of ours interviewed yesterday with the latter who, answering various questions that were asked him on the matter expressed himself ' thus: -Socialist Assemblies, he said, ! we are holding almost every ' day. Our* Party, í the same as j our labor organization ( is, it may be said, a permanent parliament. As to a forthcoming assembly at the Municipal Theater referred to in "The Globe" recently, I have no news. In any month of the year, however, I believe we shall have some assembly, for . ■ - - - "- - --- Puerto Rico are hereby authorized to appropriate in their budgets an amount to be used for the construction of the . Colón Park and the road leading thereto. Section 2.- Any law or part of a law contrary to the present Act is hereby repealed. Section 3.- This Act, since it is of an urgent and necessary nature, shall become effective immediately after its approval. Approved on May 7, 1925.
A new accident must be added today to the already endless list. This time a fourteen year old boy has paid the tribute of blood.* The bloody event occurred yesterday, at two o'clock in the afternoon, between shovels 21 and 22 in Santurce. Here is the official information provided by the police of said neighborhood: HOW THE ACCIDENT OCCURRED According to the prosecutor's investigation, the child Manuel Colón, was at two o'clock in the afternoon yesterday, standing between the trolley track and the highway, in the place already indicated. Towards San Juan a bus and a car were driving, and in the opposite direction was another bus. At the same time, trolley No. 8, driven by moto-' nsta Francisco Guinarde and driver Manuel Rivera Mejias, was also heading toward San Juan at a moderate speed, according to the police. The boy, before whom we generally meet at least once every year. For us it was never a problem to meet, and we have found that there is no party that could meet as easily as we do. This is due to the organization of our party. -On coalition it seems too early to talk about it. I do not know how the majority of our party thinks about this. As for myself, I do know to say that I shall at all times be ready to favor union or coalition with any intelligent liberal group opposed to impositions and made up of such decent people as will make their deeds as good as their promises and words. Experience gained in (Continued on p. 5) HOTEL BELGICA (Formerly Ritzy) JESUS AGRESAR. New Owner Box 640, San Juan, Tel. 1534 Meals by the table and a la carte. Cool and airy rooms. The hotel where it never gets hot, all rooms are exterior. Reasonable prices for subscribers and passengers per day. Meals served at home. i Beautiful view of the bay, near the Docks, Banks, Carriages, Cables, Telegraphs; neighbor of the Tres Banderas Theater. -Visit us.
The event occurred between stops 21 and 22.-Although the motorist rang the bell and made efforts 'to save him, it was not possible. PROSECUTOR CHARGES MOTORIST AND DRIVER WITH INVOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER.$1,500 BAIL.
The group of vehicles marching in different directions, approached the gate of Dr. Delgado's house and at one point attempted to cross, with such bad fortune that he was caught by the wheels of trolley number eight, receiving blows of such magnitude that he was killed on the spot. His corpse was horribly mutilated. The victim lived in the Delicias neighborhood, Republica Street, No. 170. No. 170. THE AUTHORITIES The preliminary investigation was carried out by Chief Llorens and the guard Otilio Encarnación. Then the prosecutor Gomez continued the judicial investigation, taking the testimony of numerous witnesses. Prosecutor Gomez has qualified the crime as involuntary manslaughter, setting bail at $1,500 for each of the accused in order to obtain their provisional freedom. The Santurce police tell us that the motorist Francisco Guinarde desperately rang the bell when he saw the danger and made great efforts to save the child, but all to no avail.
SALE OF A PHARMACY with a magnificent clientele, in front of the Central Aguirre and in a central location in the neighborhoods of Don Manuel Gonzalez. Daily sales : satisfactory. Unique in the town. Take advantage of this opportunity. Ask for information to Ledo. Julio Diaz, Aguirre, P. R. Brilliant Business For sale or lease. Próduce $3,500 monthly. Will inform: Phone No. 418 I Santurce. Box 491 San Juan
AP MILES
FISK|