F.LM&NDO
11 PAGES. 3 CTS. I [I afatau: "Pnart* MU" ■ nútrate" BMg-.
11 PAGS. 3 CTS. fl i ta.ee ■V o" o* rj
OE TOMORROW'S NEWSPAPER
year vn *
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
......... n. . i. w STajta £ ¿rycarras
SATURDAY, MARCH 21, 1925
NUMBER 1988.
The Ledo. Brunet del Valle, member of the Board of Directors of the Alliance, makes serious charges before the Gov. against Judge Diaz Cintren.
Strongly protests against the interference of the legislature in matters of this nature. -He notes that he has taken the case to the Attorney General and that nothing practical has yet been achieved.
Other Ponte lawyers setudan the adiad of the Ledo. Brood. Reports also that Judge Diaz Ontron is using political influence to sustain himself in office, without facing the charges against him.
The Ledo. Bnmet del Valle, member of the Board of Directors and director of the political camp of the Alliance in Fonce, as well as lawyer of the Municipality of said city, is in this city,' in very important negotiations. To this effect, he has sent a letter to the Hon. Governor Towner, in which he formulates serious charges against Judge Días Cintrón of Ponce, whom he accuses of appealing to political influences, without facing the accusations that are made against him, in order to sustain his position. He also protests against the alleged interference of the Legislature in matters that only concern the Department of Justice. SI Ledo. Arjona Bisca- has also sent a letter to the House of Representatives, protesting strongly against certain ing oreadas of te''íegtalMMÉk'<' r ' However, we understand that Judge Diaz Cintron, in turn, is supported by distinguished elements of the Pearl of the Bur. i LETTER SENT TO THE GOB. BY LCDO. BRUNET. Hand 19, 1925. non. Gov. of Puerto Rico, San Juan, P. R. Sir- From the Hotel Pélate, in San Juan, where I am staying, I am addressing this letter to you in the hope of being attended to in the long struggle I have been waging to obtain a remedy. It has been eight long months since, forced by circumstances, I made certain charges against the Hon. Rafael Diaz Cintron, Judge of the Ponce District Court. In making these charges before the*' Attorney General's office, I did so with full awareness of my rights and responsibilities and confident in the good faith and spirit of justice of 100 High Government officials. I thought it unnecessary to rest my complaint on political, religious or personal influences, as I considered it highly improper, and I trusted, in submitting these charges to the Hon. Attorney General that all parties concerned would proceed with loyalty and nobility and would endeavor by all to purge themselves of responsibility, assuming my party of responsibility if the charges remained unproven, but expecting a just resolution if the charges were sustained. I acted in this matter, in my capacity as an attorney, feeling my interests injured by the resolutions, which, in my judgment, demonstrated a deficient technical preparation in the Judges of the Ponce District Court. I assumed the risk of my actions and took the oath of office with full knowledge that this meant a total rupture of personal relations with Judge Diaz Cintron. I was joined by other attorneys for Pence, who, like the undersigned, understood that the District of Ponce needed a Judge, of better preparation and of greater perSE DESEA" Room for marriage well furnished with dresses to the call with good pension, desiring comforts in the center of San Juan in a decent family home, where there are no other or very few guests. References are given and desten*. Address segujda to Sargento de Armas, Cámara de Bepramntantoa.
tone than that of Mr. Diaz Olntron. The Attorney General's office offered us a prompt and impartial investigation and faithfully complied with its offer, bearing in mind that we attorneys who had sworn charges against Judge Díaz Cintrón were placed in a delicate position with said official, and prompt action was necessary, either by dismissing our complaint, if it was unfounded, or by seeking a decent and just resolution that would not injure the interests of the defendant Judge, relieving us of the obligation to continue submitting our cases to his Court. "After a long wait, after maintaining a prudent reserve on the matter, we received from the Hon. Attorney General a telegram which, among other things, told us the following: ' The matter referred to has been taken under Consideration after hearing and taking all the evidence the parties presented. This telegram is dated October, 1924, but the investigation! was made in June of that year, by Mr. Todd, Jr. Attorney General. | At last we were informed that a prompt resolution of this vexatious matter was expected and we were confident that it would be kept within the limits of seriousness, justice and fairness in which, from the beginning, we wished to maintain. With astonishment we have learned that Judge Diaz Cintron, avoiding entering into the merits of the case, is using his friendships and influences, and that he is using his own interests and influences, and that he is using his own interests and influences, and that he is using his friendships and influences, and that he is using his own interests and influences. Prince James, as our readers will know, is deaf and dumb, and so far all attempts to cure him have failed. A new' American specialist, resident in Bordeaux, has given new hope. NOTHING DIES WITHOUT SOMETHING CRYING f Oh. Of how many goods are we not indebted to thee? Thou bringest home to the weary man; Thou givest the night's food to the hungry; Thou givest to the tender bird the shelter lent by the maternal wing; Thou givest to the tired ox of the calf the desirable stable; The hour of rest, whose coming Thou dost announce, gathers around us all that is peaceful in the house, All those beloved objects that are gathered by our penalties; Thou givest back to the child the mother's bosom. I Gentle hour, that instills melancholy and tenderness in the soul of the wayfarer, thrown into the Ocean, remembering him when he was separated from his dear friends, you fill with love the reason of the pilgrim who shudders when he hears the evening sound of the bell that seems to mourn the death of the day. Is it an illusion that reason mocks at? A.v! For me, there is no doubt: nothing dies without algae weeping. - I Urf BYRON |
cemente dé tail Not him
Another visit to the "Cuasimodo" of Río Piedras
The "Cuasimodo" is a phenomenon that has caused great expectation in the whole island the sensational news that EL MUNDO of Wednesday, March 1st of the current year transmits, from its columns, to its readers. It is about "Monchín", you ugly man until the inconceivable thing, that cannot be contemplated without feeling in our body a shudder of horror and repugnance. i Rara to satisfy the curiosity that also woke up in us the anger pressing news and almost doubting its veracity, we decided to see the phenomenon with our own eyes, to make sure of its extra ordinary ugliness. Immediately we managed to locate the residence of the already popular "Monchín". In the surrounding area, there was a huge crowd. With difficulty we made our way through the muí titng, penetrating in a narrow alley, illuminated by the yellowish light of a lantern We descended Ine go by a small staircase of ctui three steps, and finally we enzoú(tramos in front of Ota modest room that houses the referred aborjto of. the n0uralesa. We penetrate in ti room where the ugliness porsónifleada is exhibited. We are already in front of the monster. The first impression we receive, we can hardly contain it. We believed, exaggerated the relationship of EL MUN DO and the sayings of the people; but now we see that everything that is said about "Monchín", is pale before the reality. We can be sure that this horrible man is no less ugly than Quasimodo, the immortal character of Victor Hugo. The Hunchback of Notre Dame de Paris saw through one eye, had a nose and lips; "Moo- . ehin" has none of these features. The feaffiad of Quasimodo is only advantageous to him, in that ¡ he was contracted, and your phenom- 1 nc has a natural trunk, like that of any other person. "Monchin** is friendly and attentive. He answers all our questions in his almost incomprehensible language. I - People say that you get married soon, is it true," he asks. Yes, I'm getting married on Saturday or Sunday, answer, I've already sent a telegram to my fiancée so that she can get ready. -The newspaper told you that you have two; one in Eíladtifla and the other in San Germán, which one is the chosen one? -The one in Fildadfia is the same one in San Germán. It's Laura, that's the one I'm marrying, I wish you happiness, Mopchin. -Harrows, many harrows. -Where do you roqfiras, Monchín, we continue asking him. He answers this question by sticking out his tongue penta through the incision that serves as your nose. I In ortho, they bring him a cup of coffee with milk, which cuts our dialogue. He hides his ugly head i bato na paflo blue, as if not to inspire disgust while taking the rich stimulant. We can only hear a murmur similar to that produced by water running through stones. When he finishes, he wipes his huge teeth with another paflo and gives masterful satisfaedon. BeanudMM* the conversation (Oantíaú. A B " ■ ' "
A BILL TO ABOLISH HIPPODROMES.
To repeal Act No. 86 of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico of August 11, 1923, entitled "An Act to repeal Acts No. 105 of March 19, 1913; No. 42 of April 13, 1916; No. 52 of April 12, 1917; No. 52 of April 12, 1917; No. 52 of April 12, 1917; and No. 52 of April 12, 1917. 52 of April 12, 1917; to create an Insular Racetrack Commission and to regulate the operation of Bancas Alemanas, Pools, or the system known by parimutuel and the, formation of apitastss books, and for other purposes"; to prohibit racetracks in Puerto Rico, and for other purposes.
The resolution appropriating fifty thousand dollars for the full Legislature to travel to Washington has not been introduced. In yesterday's edition, we informed our readers that last night, at twelve o'clock, the deadline, granted by law to the legislators, to present bills that could be brought up for discussion at this session of the L", gislature, expired. j Undoubtedly, this news must have led the public to believe that yesterday the budget bill was also to be presented, and that the final amount proposed by the Finance Committee would be known shortly thereafter. We also believed this at the outset. However, we are better informed, we have to say that the budget project, due to its importance and significance, is the only one that does not have to do at all with the fatal period of forty days, granted by the Organic Charter for the presentation of projects. For this reason, the budget project, which concerns us all so much, will not be presented for a few days, since the authors of the same have indefinite time. However, the Budget Commission is meeting almost constantly, in order to bring the bill for discussion as soon as possible, given the short time available to finish the legislative work. And the FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS RESOLUTION? As for the famous Resolution, allocating the amount of fifty thousand dollars for the full Legislature to travel to Washington to work on behalf of the elected Governor, at the time of this writing it has not yet been presented. Perhaps it may be that its authors will. do so during the night, but the general opinion is that it will not be introduced at this session. The non-presentation of the Resolution should be interpreted as evidence that the Alliance rejects the idea for the time being. Let us wait to see what the final resolution is on this "nnto, which has aroused general interest. The Legislature was in session last night until after 12 p. m. in compliance with the provisions of the Charter. RIALTO Fourth showing of Ja pelicula.de los espejuelos "STEREOSCOPICAS" See it again, each time and "sta more. Tomorrow in the matinee the fifth and last time with the drama PARAMOUNT Nobody's Money Tonight for the last time ÉL PARO BE U JIM iMocieted yflai Oo.
Ex-gohernator Winthrop arrives tomorrow in i San Juan.
! ..J.... r "IT HAS BEEN SO MANY YEARS SINCE I LEFT PUERTO RICO THAT I I IMAGINE I HAVE FOUND MANY CAM- . BIOS",-SHE SAYS. | At 8:45 A. M. will go to meet him at the wharf, Gov., his wife, Heads of Departments, Legislature, Mayor, Regiment, National Guard, Police, and other organized cuerpdv. At te. Fortaleza yesterday we were given the following note: Reception of the Honorable Beekman Winthrop, former Governor of Puerto Rico, on his visit to the island on March 22, 1925. J>1 former Governor of Puerto Rico, Winthrop, has notified Governor Towner that he will arrive with his lady on the steamer Megan tic", on Sunday morning, and that he will remain briefly with us on that day. In his letter ex-Governor ( j Winthrop says: "It is so many years since I left Puerto Rico, that I imagine I shall meet with many changes. At any rate, I shall have great pleasure in visiting you and I er 'La Fortaleza" again, where I spent such happy years." I Oon that occasion, it has been agreed that. To greet the Governor, his wife and entourage, at 8:45 a.m. the Heads of Departments, officers and members of the Senate and the House of Representatives, the Mayor and municipal officials, the officers of the Regiment and the National Guard, the Military Band, the Chief and officers of the Police, the members of the various associations, the members of the National Guard and the members of the National Guard and the Military Band, the Chief and officers of the Police, will meet them at the wharf at 8:45 a.m., the Mayor and municipal officials. The Mayor and municipal officials, the officers of the Regiment and the National Guard, the Military Band, the Chief and officers of the Police, the members of the various associations * of San Jirtfin and citizens, will go to La Porta lesa, where they will be received by the Governor and his wife. Immediately afterwards a public reception will be held at La Portales, during which those who wish to do so will have an opportunity to greet Governor Winthrop and his wife. The Winthrop's will luncheon with Governor Towner's family at La Fortaleza, and in the afternoon will go for an automobile ride, returning later on the steamer "Megantic," which will probably leave San Juan at 5:00 p.m. 3 JF ■ * i 4 to 1 i"' Ww ooffSiBwrjwvnwm vaw O. w wIra Nelson Morris, of Chicago, said to be Houghton's probable successor at ta German Embassy. During dn Wilson's presidency sent as Mi- ¡ nister to Sweden, but still a Democrat, it is said, his appointment will be considered Y "r the President., Jack Dempsey, heavyweight boxing champion, recently married Estelle Taylor, silent art artist. Jack is believed to be close to abandoning his pugilistic career. WILL RUSSIA RECOGNIZE THE DEBTS OF THE ZARIST REGIME? PARIS, March 19 (French Cable)-According to declarations of M. Krasine, Russian ambassador in Paris, made to a reporter of "Le Journal", the purpose of Preobajenski's visit to France is to totalize the amount of Russia's debts during the Tsarist regime to Fronde. As can be seen, this is a measure of rapprochement with Rusta's recognition of the debts of the former empire.
"The electric trolley service in this dubad is past killing."
The Public Service Commission has the power to regulate passenger vehicles, but it cannot dispose of the roads which these vehicles are to use for the service," he adds, adding that the legal power to regulate traffic is among those of various governmental Directors, "It is necessary that a single person should assume the traffic, and after holding the necessary hearings, make provisions for the public.
Among the very important bills presented before the House of Representatives by the distinguished President of the High Legislative Body, Hon. José Tous Soto, No. 219, which refers to the regularization of traffic in this city, has succeeded in attracting the interest of the people, who see our rulers taking care of measures "urgent to the development of the community. The Directors of Rapid Traffic had understood, as had important elements of the Government and of finance, that the P. of the C. I Ñor 219 granted a monopoly to the Trolley Company, already what to the Con< sionado dei Interior to divert the buses by imposing their traj yectoria by the new road which has cost so many thousands of dollars to our Public Treasury. However, the project itself, which is inspired in the best good faith and with fervent desires to be useful to the interests of the capital, provides that before} taking action with respect to the diversion of traffic, the People must be consulted by means of public hearings. And the Commissioner of the Interior is bound to do so. THE SERVICE OF THE CIA. TROLLEY SERVICE To ascertain the opinion of the illustrious representative of the country who introduced the Bill. to which we have referred, we conferred yesterday afternoon with Jose Tous Soto, who' simply and concisely answered our questions as follows; "The electric trolley service *in this capital is past killing time. It is time that the Compa-! < It is time for the Trolley Company to lay a double track, at the same level of the road, thus permitting not only a continuous and easy trip, but also more space to be used by motor vehicles, which in ever increasing numbers traffic on these same roads. POWERS OF THE COMMISSION "The Public Service Commission has express powers in our existing statutes, of THE ENGLISH SOVEREIGNS AT LAST DEPART FOR THEIR JOURNEY LONDON, hand 19, (French Cable).-The Bey George and the Bel- r na Mary of England, have left the RncUngha-m Palace, where they reside, eh journey which has been prescribed by the doctors to the Bey, after his long illness mi Loe Sovereigns so propose to cross France in 01 presidential carriage to the Italian frontier of Mn. dañe and thence in the royal carriage to Genoa where ti Royal Yacht :awaits them. The most recent dispatches announce that the English kings have crossed the whole of France without having made any official receptions or ceremonies. |
regulate passenger vehicles, trolleys, buses, trains, etc.; but it cannot dispose of the roads which these vehicles are to use for the service. "The legal power to regulate traffic is among the attributions of several governmental directors. It is necessary that a single person assume the direction of traffic, and after holding the precise "hearings", make the provisions convenient to the public. "Project 219 only grants powers to the Commissioner of the Interior to regulate traffic on the new road and on the Ponce de León road. It does not manage any. The powers are extensive to all roads in the city. It gives authority to the Coaü"™ caTJiDRFTWwsa- , rio, after consultation with interested parties, the will of the people and the benefit of the community being of course to be followed only as I said before." SERVICE DEFICIENCIES "The two services in use in this capital for the conduct of passengers, the guaguas, and the electric cars, have their drawbacks. "Indisputably I always use the guaguas. I only use the trolleys in cases where there is no other choice. "However, both services are very necessary, and it is quite impossible to eliminate one of them. It is the development of the community that we must attend to; and first of all, with all the preference that the case requires, we must regulate the or- , den of our roads with the needs of the passengers in mind.", The manifestations of the distinguished public man and Pre- ! The remarks of the distinguished public man and Pre- ■ Bident of the House of Repre- ¡ senters, by all accounts indicate i his proceedings in regard to Bill No. 219. His words referring to the service could not be more appropriate and sincere. He has hit upon the evil, and is trying to correct it by legislating in favor of the People, who ' always make their needs known, even over the most serious obstacles. m-x-L - rsOtAREsl ¡ Of different sizes in 1 ¡ Santurce i i i Park, Monteflores, Seboro- | ¡ co, Loíza and Punta Marisa ¡ Request Information from: * i HENRY W. DOOLEY 9 Tapis St | TeL 1295. - Santurce ' 1
1 The office of member of the Legislative Assembly of the Legislative Assembly of the Republic of Puerto Rico is declared incompatible with the exercise of any office or public fund, temporary or permanent, dependent on the Executive Branch or any other branch of government. Executive Branch or of any branch of the 1 Insular or Federal Government r
A MAJOR EET BILL INTRODUCED YESTERDAY BY SENATOR ZERO i IN THE SENATE OF PTO. RICO (March 19, 1925. Mr. Zeno introduced the following bill I LAW i To amend Article 10 of the ; Political Code. BE IT ENACTED BY THE ASSEM- . BLE A LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF P. R: Section I.-That Article 16 of the Political Code is hereby amended and shall read as follows: Article 16.-The office of Member of the Legislative Assembly, with which it shall be incompatible. The office of member of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico is hereby declared incompatible: (a) With the exercise of any public office or function, temporary or remunerated, dependent on the Executive Branch, or on any branch of the Insular or Municipal Government of Puerto Rico, or of the Federal Government; (b) With the performance of any contract or representation, or any management, of any kind whatsoever, of any kind whatsoever, of any kind whatsoever. (b) With the performance of any contract or representation, or any management, by himself or through an intermediary person, that implies any form of rendering professional services before the administrative, island or municipal authorities, to public service or agricultural, commercial or industrial businesses, trusts, unions, companies, etc., whatever their nature may be, whatever their nature". Section 2a.-Any law or part of law in conflict herewith is hereby repealed. Section 3a.-This law shall become effective ninety days after its approval. ITénias o Solitarias! In half an hour and without diet or purifiers, they are extracted, WITH HEAD, by the famous Specialist Dr. RALDIRIS, who in May will embark for Spain, France and Italy. FORTY YEARS OF SCIENTIFIC PRACTICE. Consultations, for appointment: 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. and 8 a.m. to 9 p.m. - 27, Padre Colon St., Bio Piedras, P.R. El Figaro Next Monday, the barber shop EL FIGARO will be open until 12 a.m. on the day of the Abolition of Slavery. PEDRO TRUJILLO. FOR SALE Due to the absence of the owner, all the barbershop furniture, including three new Koken chairs. Will inform J. ORTIZ, Muñoz RiveI ra St. No. 63; Río Piedras.
I For Merchants and Quincalleros S Because of needing space for our new assortment, we are- ' g mos conducting in our premises attached to | " " "LA VILLA DE MADRID" g Large lots of our stock at prices of in- 1 g ventarlo. | J. VILLAMIL & CO. | g Tel. 166. Salvador Brau 51; P. O. Box 764 1 8 SAN JUAN, P. R, ' S