THE MBNDO
12
PAGES. 3 (TS. - - - - S" VO Os "ríe - ■ .a ,
12
PAGS. 3 CTS. Oóéiniu: "Pu "rt". Lino Cn "tr*do" Bid*. f "L 1122. - Bw SU
MORNING
MORNING
YEAR VII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO. L
Puoummo auwiouted naaet perjut (Mo. avi) ui, "n oí October -. AS17, an Mio M cao QfMoo W | ~ " San Juan? Porto Bioo, By ordo" of tko PzoridMi*, A S. B "lo "on, Poetmaotor GttMrel. Batored M weoad olma aantter, I SATURDAY 17 DF FNFQH HF 1095 fobrunry ai. 1"1". -" ti" Pool Offtce at San Jnaa, Porto Ble", (United State" of Aatorle" nadar tho Bol ed atento ", 1ST*| OMDMUU 1 / Ut tNEKU UC 1925.
NUMBER 1950.
Everyone is contestable that the smuggling of racehorses, from the lia- - - - > i . ' > * > ■
The smuggling of imported racehorses is a serious problem for the Island's horse breed.
Since the Equestrian Commission has demonstrated its incompetence to solve this issue, why does the Government take action in the matter by correcting the smuggling that others encourage with their inadequacies?
In our yesterday's edition, and on the front page so that it would be well seen both by the general public and by the persons concerned in this important matter, we published an informative article in which we highlighted some of the serious defects of the present Honorable Equestrian Commission. This is the first of a series. We propose, for the benefit of the people who are going to leave their money in the benches and in the "pool" of the racetrack, to make a vigorous journalistic campaign so that the mistakes are corrected and the wrongs are righted. We want to be the spokesman that will bring to the conscience of our authorities, as well as to the conscience of the gentlemen that compose the Commission, the complaints that go from mouth to mouth, that constant and accusing murmur that the equestrian public raises louder and louder, and that still continues to be ignored or neglected. It is well known that the law allowing betting at the racetrack, although nowhere in it does it say so, was passed by our fdrgftlstmra in order to try to improve the breed of our horses. Oreando el entusiasmo hípico y adquiriendo por medio de ¿1 los recursos pecuniarios nuestros legisladores quisieron hacer desaparecer de nuestra (Continued on page 4) ALFREDO VARGAS Our dear colleague Alfredo Vargas, who, as is well known, shared with us, for a long time, the tasks of journalism, from his position as Editor of EL MUNDO, has joined the editorial staff of the esteemed colleague "La Democracia". The work of Mr. Vargas is not unknown to the readers of this newspaper; here, in this house, he broke his first weapons in railitaitS journalism, and his extensive and diffuse formative work remains in the columns of EL MUNDO as indisputable proof of his slow work. In the editorial staff of "La Democracia ", he will surely be the same of EL MUNDO and go, therefore, to him and to the esteemed colleague our cordial and affectionate congratulations.
" |T 's TOASTED". 8' Compare the Lucky Strike cigarette with any other cigarette Quality speaks.
HOTEL PALACE SAN JUAN PTO. RICO We invite our friends to the inauguration of the "Winter" season, with a splendid COMIDA-BAILE; in our picturesque Terrace, next Saturday 17th of the current month from 7 to 12 p.m. From this date we will celebrate Lunch-Dances every Saturday. Covered Price $3.00. Reserve your table in advance
Rumor has it that Colonel Ross is working to demobilize the Rgt. of ? R Apropos of this version are recalled words spoken by the Colonel at a military meeting A breaking news has! reached us. The version, if true, is of great importance since its realization would surely call into question Puerto Rican loyalty to the United States, or at least cast doubt on the ability of our young men to be Uncle Sam's soldiers. j The version to which we refer, and which we have gathered from the lips of persons apparently acquainted with the matter, refers to Colonel Tenny Ross, of the 65th Regiment, stationed at (Continued on p. 8) ¡
A Commission of the Protest Committee holds an extensive conference with the coalitionist leader, Mr. Roberto H. Todd, in order to collect funds for the campaign. The Protest Committee uses its influence from here to cooperate with Iglesias and Martinez ? adal Our readers know that a few weeks ago I founded on this island a coalitionist Protest Committee, which has what we might call Sub-Committees in all the towns of the pair. This Protest Committee has as its primary and only purpose, to channel the protest campaign before the national authorities in Washington, to obtain an investigation in relation to the last general elections held in Puerto Rico. It is formed by elements belonging to the Coalition, by distinguished politicians within that political grouping. But also forming part of that committee are gentlemen who belong neither to the Pure Republican Party nor to the Socialist Party. Among them are the following (Continued on page 6)
If the aliancistas win the electoral lawsuit, a legal recourse will be presented to make the coalition administrators resign from their posts.
the electoral lawsuit, a legal recourse will be filed to make the coalition administrators cease to hold office.
Otherwise, the electoral lawsuit would have no practical purpose, since it would last for years and years before our courts of Justice.
Before the District Court, First Section, of this capital, the electoral lawsuit has been heard for several days now, with the candidates for the election as plaintiffs, and the Insular Board of Elections as defendant. The hearing of the lawsuit continues on the 20th of this month, and will undoubtedly attract a large audience to the courtroom, since public opinion is extremely interested in it. AN APPEAL AT LAW. The Hon. Judge Foote, will be called upon to decide this suit either in favor of one or the other, according to the evidence and his great intelligence. COLMADO ESPAÑ * Parada 37'4 Tel. 291 Hato Rey. P. R. Great assortment of provisions in general. "Hanny Feed Store, Happy Cow Feed (for dairy cows). "Happy Hen Scratch Feed", - "Hapny Hen Laying Mash Féed" (naja laying hens) SOLAR Horse Feed 8 solar - 1000 me each. $1000.00 cash $1200.00 installment HENRY W. DOOLEY 9 Tapia St. Tel. 1295, Santurce
But in case the ruling was in favor of the plaintiffs, Mr. Diez de Andino, and some members of the aliancista Municipal Assembly, then, as we understand, the plaintiffs' lawyer, the brilliant attorney. Ledo. Muñoz Morales, will file the corresponding legal recourse to have the coalitionist administrators removed from their positions. PRACTICAL PURPOSE. Some people, with whom we have been talking, and who are not aware of such a thing, have told us that they do not see the need for an electoral lawsuit, that it does not promote anything for a future in < Continued on pg. 6)
BANK OF PONCE CONDENSED STATEMENT© OF ITS SITUATION ON THE AFTERNOON OF DECEMBER 31, 1924. ASSETS; i Cash, cash on hand $413,566.87 Bank and Bankers, available on demand z 689,117.26 U. S. and P. R. Bonds 300,000.00 Loans and Discounts 3,475,863.63 Bank Building and other property 149,277.05 Prepaid Dividends 45,000.00 Installation and Furnishing Expenses 18,078.99 Interest Due 33,459.24 TOTAL , $5,124,363.04 * LIABILITIES: Capital - $750,000.00 Reserve Fund 135,000.00 Bonding Fund 2,000.00 Distributed Profits 142,405.30 $1,029,405.30 Deposits 3,979,079.86 Building Bonds 100,000.00 Interest and Interest Expense Reserve 15,877.88 TOTAL $5,124,363.04 z u v J. R. PERALTA. P. J. ROSA Y. Assistant Manager Manager
Under the new Bill, no person holding any office in the Insular or Insular Governments or in any other government of the United States of America shall be required to serve in any capacity.
The Racetrack Commission instead of being composed of five members shall have only three, appointed for a term of one year The following is the important bill that several legislators intend to introduce in the next Legislature : AN ACT TO REORGANIZE THE INSULAR RACING COMMISSION Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico: I Article 1.-There is hereby established an Insular Riding Commission to be composed of three members appointed by the Governor of Puerto Rico with the advice and consent of the Senate of Puerto Rico for a term of one year. The office of member of the Equestrian Commission is declared incompatible with any public office paid by the Insular Government or by the Government of the United States. Said Commission shall be empowered to prescribe the rules and conditions by which the holding of races in the Island shall be governed. Any natural or juridical person wishing to hold races shall request the corresponding license from the Island Racetrack Commission. If the issuance of the license has been justified by the Decision, it may be granted for a term of one year, and all licenses shall contain the condition that all races held by virtue thereof shall be subject to the rules and conditions prescribed from time to time by the Commission. The aforementioned license may, for just cause, be revoked by the Island Riding Commission. The Island Riding Commission shall appoint three judges, who shall form the jury that shall see that the rules dictated by said Commission for the operation of the races are complied with, and the decisions of said jury may be appealed only before the Island Riding Commission, except with respect to the starting and finishing order of the horses in each race. In addition to the said three judges the Island Riding Commission shall appoint for each racecourse at which races are held the following officials: a secretary ; of the jury, a paddock judge, (Continued on p. 8) I
1 A truly interesting Sunday edition. Don Angel Rivero begins
*to publish in "El Mondo" i this week his very interesting series''''Remigio" ' Firpo has been stripped of his '' South American champion tibio - Herriot begins his collaboration - Tales - Adventures -Educating Dad. Sensational is the word we need to define the Sunday edition published tomorrow by EL i MUNDO. Our readers will judge whether we are right or wrong after reading this review. First of all, let's talk about the local information that fills the front page. It could not be more interesting. It could not be more topical. "Who will be the Republican-Socialist candidate for the presidency of the House? Are our politicians paying too much attention to the political problem? Read the statements of the Commissioner of Agriculture, Mr. Chardon, in this regard. And above all, the sensational statements of the President of the Senate, Mr. Antonio R. Barceló. He makes interesting political revelations. So are all the sinformaciones we publish on the front page, related to the insufficient affairs * now, we are going to give our > readers a pleasant new one. Don Angel Rivero, the last Spanish Governor of Puerto Rico, and one of our "prestigious writers, will publish in our Sunday edition of this week, his "Twenty literary series," which he has entitled "REMIGIO". Every week, will appear litio of these very interesting episodes, son of the well-cut pen of Mr. Rivero. The distinguished Puerto Rican writer, possesses an ininnitable grace to narrate past events, and in "Remigio" he makes those who are most worried feel happy. The protagonists of "Remigio" are among us, we greet them every moment in our streets, they are our friends, and hence the literary production is very interesting. We seem to see our readers enthusiastic about the news, and it is not for jhenoe. Our Sunday edition is honored with the collaboration of Mr. Angel Rivero, one of our best writers, and will publish his great production, "Remigio". Our readers already know, tomorrow, { EL MUNDO the first ■ absolutely historical episode, and no one will fail to read it. The Airmen page comes this week very interesting (Continued on p. 8).
"Forgetting the oversights of the past administration, we labor to make San Juan the island's first city in economic and social prestige": Hoi. Roberto H. Todd "In my Dept. I have found many deficiencies. We firmly know that the (obierro) will help us to provide San Juan with a good administration 0 : Dr. Víctor Coll y Cachi "My Dept. carries out its respective managements in the way that I best benefit the interests of the people. I am satisfied with the state in which I have found it": Dr. Gómez Brioso In the visit we made yesterday morning to the mayor's offices of the capital, we were again assured of the efficiency that the new administrative employees are clearly showing in the fulfillment of their official duties. The Mayor's Secretary, Mr. Conrado Asenjo, an aptly named, goes out of his way to give (Continued on p. 9)
(From our Editor in Ponce) Today we inform readers of the full details of the discussions that took place regarding the important political position of Municipal Charity Commissioner of Ponce. As our readers may recall, there have been many names that were mentioned for this position, before and after the elections. But in fact, according to the documents that we publish below, it was Dr. Osvaldo Goy- j : co. This prestigious professional did not want the Alliance to find the first obstacle in the Pearl of the South because of him, when the administration of our dear friend Don Guillermo Vivas Valdi-' vieso was inaugurated. With such a motive, Dr. Goy- j co abandons the rights that assist him to still seek the position j that today is being held by our party-. cular friend Dr. Alvaro Santae11a. Here are the letters and documentation alluded to. Ponce. P. R., January 14, 1925. Gentlemen of the Local Committee of the Alliance, Ponce, P. R. Gentlemen: Enclosed you will receive the ""doMASANA DOMINGO In the matinee, farewell of the applauded number Maravilla-Tirana-Mecareno and the tape "Amor y Odio" Sunday Night - First exhibition in Pto. Rico of Los Amores de Letty (The Love of Letty) with Pauline Frederick and several romanzas by the applauded singer SR. SUSANO POLANCO. Prices Current. SE Jlqüila 7 In Tobacco PalaceJ Building Second Floor right. Comfortable. constant water. Will report ALONSO RIERA & CO. - Phone 527 San Joan.
What a witchy, loquacious would-be upgrader says on the municipal question. Don Roberto, he says, pushes his own. The famous interview of the ¡ consolidation ■- > Ten o'clock in the morning.... A tiny, microscopic rain is slowly falling on the city. I The asphalted street of San Fran- ! cisco, in front of the Plaza de Armas, and the street of the Moon 7>on the traffic side of the municipality, are crowded with people of all colors... like the fish in the story. i Simultaneously the cars are arriving: some are comfortable and flaj mantea: others are plebeian and cheap: they all arrive full of people who come to visit the office of the new Mayor of San Juan. i The plebeian, democratic gua| guas and "foritos", as soon as they give up their career, they leave for the same.... The private cars and some that belong to the municipal government, are approaching the
The truth about certain of the Alliance Committee in Pdnce Dr. Osvaldo Goyco, ñeñemente, prefers, in order to avoid chaos for the Alliance in Por.ce, to renounce his rights as Charity Commissioner.
The original document voted by a majority in a caucus of the Municipal Assembly supporting my name as candidate for Charity Director of this municipality. i Far from being moved by the purpose of giving life to the matter it entails, I am doing it for a different purpose. Last night was submitted to the consideration of the Assembly a message from the Hon. Mayor making the recommendations of the 1 directors of the administration, and the chairman of the Assembly resolved to appoint a special committee on appointments to study the said message and report back in due course. . No doubt the Hon. President, being acquainted with the enclosed document, continued on page 9. We also extend to that locality our conditional sales at COMFORTABLE TERMS. Before buying your furniture visit us at RAFAEL MARGARIDA & CO. Salvador Bren 44 and 89. Tel. 95 and 1248. P. O. Box 273. San Juan, P.R. \GARAGE |l BRANDI |¡ 5 VILLA ST. - PONCE g!
Nerval P. Nichols, has been appointed by the President "to replace Mr. Tedden as head of the Immigration Department WASHINGTON, Jan. 16 (Uni- . ted Press). President Coolidge sent to the Senate the nomination of Mr. Nichols to replace Mr. Robert H. Todd, who resigned recently, as head of the Immigration Department. EDITOR'S NOTE: Mr. Norval P. Nichols, is the head of the reputable firm of this capital "Waldrop Photographic Co.", and has great sympathy with the trade and society at large. EL MUNDO is honored with having been the first paper in Pio. -'Ittro assured that -ei- ■■-ve Commissioner of Immigration would be the continental cuba Hero Mr. Nichols. Our congratulations to the new federal official. - The drivers are engaged in colorful chatter about equestrian liturgies and other liturgies of inferior and superior quality. | With tumultuous intermittences, numerous aspirants to improve their situation appear in a rough avalanche. Cars and trucks roll down the center of the street, in demand of the aristocratic and populous Santurce. The very light rain, almost miContinued on page 9. TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY ' First Exhibition in Puerto Rico. JOHNNY HINES DORIS MAY in the seven-act melodrama EL CONDUCTOR 1492 GRAND SUCCESS! Ask anyone who saw it yesterday!!! Dr. A. L. Carrión has moved his office to 89 Alien Street, corner of Plaza de Colón. Skin Diseases and Syphilology.
IMPORTANT STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS OF THE SAN JUAN COUNCIL OF ADMINISTRATORS
Like the past administration, Roberto Todd's administration also produces discontents and gives rise to budgetary passions that cloud the clarity of the rutile perspectives.
SUITS - 1,200 SUITS FOR MEN - Good Cut. Fantasy Drawings ■ " Very durable. And colors. We ship by mail and C. O. D. Order yours. O. D. Order yours without delay and don't forget to tell us the madldas. THE VILLA OF MADRID J. VILLAMIL 4 CO.