ELMONDO
1Á PAGES. 3 CTS. Qdciaae: "íoru Ktae J* " Ihmrade" Bldg. If M. IMS. - Box SM.
1/J PAGS. 3 CTS. VI taMetee M.00 ■ ■ Va Afte - njo
DAILY MORNING
MORNING
year vn
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
PnbUahed and diattfbnud nMw parait (Me. MI) "ud'Ori?<4 oy trf Ortolm fl uir'' Un Jua, Porto Sloo, By "der of tee PreMeat, A M BW" on , pXxMtar fobrwr n. 1"1". O* Uo Fort Oftoo U Son JWI, Porto Mico, U. XTJ
SATURDAY, MARCH 14, 1925
NUMBER 1981.
Senator Iglesias makes public certain documentation sent by Mr. Barcelo to Samuel Gompers, for the purpose of proving that the So- oartido oartido.
"I insist that the legislature approve a budget in accordance with the recommendations made in his special message by the Governor," says Rep. Ruiz Soler Numerous financiers attended the House yesterday to listen to the reading of Gov. Towner's message - If the recommendations of our first Island Authority are heeded, the budget will not exceed $10,500,000.
Is the Laborers' Compensation Commission out of the Island Budget-the Budget Revision Commission has made that recommendation to the Legislature If that measure is adopted, the Commission will depend solely on its own efforts to sustain itself-is it intended that the Commission should intensify its efforts to collect dues from employers? Apparently, the Workers' Compensation Commission is all the rage these days, for not a single document of a public nature is published in which it is not mentioned, in one form or another. The worst thing for the Commission is that it usually does not come out of it very well. AND NOW THE STORY REPEATS ITSELF. i The "Budget Revision Commission," consisting of almost all the department heads, has recommended to the Legislature that the Workers' Compensation Commission be eliminated from the budget, i.e., that no appropriation be made in the budget for its support. The Budget Revision Commission alleges that this Commission was created to support itself by means of a trust fund, and that it is not fair that a large part of the island's budget should be devoted to supporting the expense of the personnel who serve there. As can be seen, then, the Workers' Compensation Commission has the sword of Damocles hanging over its head, for if the Legislature heeds this recommendation, there will be no appropriation for it in the new budget. This, of course,' will have to be done, in accordance with the 'policy of economies that has been initiated'. (Continued on page 6)!
At ten o'clock yesterday morning, appeared before the Legislature, assembled, in joint session, Han. Governor Towner, to read his special Message, in which the basis of the nine island budget is set forth. I**- t > ANIMATION Long before ten o'clock, it was already difficult to go through the corridors and rooms of the Senate, owing to the great crowd that had assembled there to hear the reading of the very interesting document, which is of such importance. The crowd was heterogeneous, all social classes were represented there, thus demonstrating that our people are increasingly interested in public issues that should concern us all. In the 'lounge 'dé~Ñslóhes of the "Chamber we remember having seen numerous financiers, among others, Messrs. Fabián, Benitez Rexach and Mendía. "m) . f ESSENTIAL POINTS OF THE GOVERNOR'S MESSAGE Governor Towner's Message, in its essential points, recommends, first of all, and above all, economies. That is the policy initiated by Governor Towner. fy #hestro pueblo undoubtedly FOR SALE A cement house and a lot in front of the Rio Piedras Market Square. Inf.:- Tel. 880 blue, Santurce.
will be able to appreciate such a correct procedure of the inhabitant of Santa Catalina, who realizes exactly that it is not possible to increase more the heavy load that on his shoulders - carries the poor taxpayer. According to the Governor's recommendations, if they are heeded by our Legislature, the new island budget should not exceed $10,500,000. It should be noted that this recommendation is based on an intensive study of the matter by the Budget Revision Commission appointed by the Governor, which consisted of almost all the department heads. Not a single department or agency of the government has escaped the policy of economies, so necessary, given the situation of our Treasury. Even the Police Department has been reduced by a few thousand dollars. To the Treasury Department, $20,000. To the Department of Justice, $50,000, and it is hoped to reduce it still further. To the Department of Agriculture and Labor, $78,000. To the Department of 8a| nity $1181157. To the Department of the Interior, $378,447. And let us not speak of the lesser agencies. The attitude of all the heads of departments, who have been the first to recognize the necessity of making economies in order to free our island from the mine, is to be commended. G'i
LA VILLA DE MADRID I s Visit us so that you may appreciate the stupendous = S assortment we have just received. Carpets, Vanity- E s Cases, Necklaces, Wallets, Watches, Tea Sets, and = E Coffee Sets, Collars and trimmings for Suits, Lace and E = Broderí, Ladies' Underwear, Perfumery - , = = s Tablecloths, Suits made for Children, Handkerchiefs, Ta- = = g petes, etc. = S Shirts for Gentlemen and Children. Bathrobes lin- = a dísimas, Collars, Ties, Garters Paris and Boston. Suits made of denim, very cheap, etc. = s P. O. Box 764. Telephone 166 | I J. M. VILLAMIL & CO. I Cordially invite the Public for a chuckle to our mo- ■ ' derno establishment of Refrigerated Meats of all kinds, - conveniently situated at San Sebastian 29, opposite the Pia- : za del Mercado. We also work a complete line of Le- i gumbres for the most discriminating tastes.-This is the first of a series of Stores of the same class, which we shall be successively establishing in San Juan and Santurce. BORINQUEN MARKETS HARRY PIETERSZ TEL. 1590, THOS. J. DAVEY FREE From March 9 to 22, visitors to the SERRA, GARABIS & CO. Pharmacy will be given samples of the famous TODDY ■ In all pharmacies and grocery stores you will find TODDY ■ In all pharmacies and grocery stores you will find TODDY ■ In all pharmacies and grocery stores you will find TODDY ■ In all pharmacies and grocery stores you will find TODDY
Senator Iglesias made the following statements to us yesterday, in which some very interesting documentation is made public:- ' | IS THE INTERNATIONAI OF MOSCOW PAID FOR IN PTO. BICO? - "In order that it may be known with what liberality and unconcern the denouncement and prop<.gin [ of Bolshevikism and Communism in the country is practiced by the public leaders of the Alliance, with the sole object of destroying the influence of the Socialist Party of Puerto Rico in the country, we make known certain documents which were sent to the American Federation of Labor. As can be seen, all the imaginary and despicable means of the perduro have been brought into play, and the delation forged in the > ¡ fable of communism and Bolivianism and taken to Washington, with designs and purposes which do the country no credit. i - "In Puerto Rico, oaths were taken by members of the Socialist Party of Puerto Rico.
oaths were sworn by members of the Socialist Party, in which it is stated "that one-fourth of the dues are paid to the Third International in Moscow, Russia". With these affidavits and with subsequent statements and disclosures that were made, those responsible for the electoral infamies that occurred on November 4, 1924, have sought to justify themselves. | In my capacity as General Organizer of the American Federation of Labor, Socialist Senator, and President of the 8o - - cialist Party, I have decided to publicize these oaths, obtained in Ponce, it is not known by what means, to be used in Wash ington, endorsed by Messrs. Antonio R. Barcelo and Jose Tojs So to. I - "The letter and oaths state the following: ' ALIANZA PUERTORRIQUEÑA SECRETARIA P. O. Box 84.
Compagnie Generale transatlantique French Steamer "Macoris" Expected in this port on April 28 with des- i tino to CORUÑA and EL HAVRE. Take advantage of this opportunity. Only direct steamer for the north of Spain, i Passenger and cargo admitted for the above ports. For further information contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. agents Tel. 257, San Juan Tanca - Tetouan.
Pre - Inventory" The days of our annual balance sheet are near and to lighten somewhat the stocks of the various departments of this house we have made considerable reductions on many articles of first quality: AS FOLLOWS: Ladies' Sleeping Shirts - Children's Clothes Nice Hats -- Printed Blouses Fine Stockings - Underwear - Silverware - Footwear, Various Kinds Sheets, Sheaths, Covers, Bedspreads, Towels, Blankets, etc. Complete Dinnerware - Glassware Sets - Furniture - Bedroom Sets - Living Room Sets - Rugs and many other current items. -taM - COME ENSEGUIDA - - k -i Gonzalez Co., Inc. V 1 THE HOUSE THAT HAPPENS PC EVERYTHING I ======55555555555555=55
cialist of Pto. Rico maintains relations with Moscow 0 Sr. Barceló sent Gompers three affidavits by Puerto Ricans who claim to be socialists and who paid a certain fee that was destined for Russia The letter sent to Gompers is signed by Messrs. Barceló and Tons Soto, as presidents of the Unionist and Republican parties respectively "he main reason why the horror of perjury, denunciation and falsehood are used with such disregard in Puerto Rico should be well known to the country," says Iglesias
San Juan, Puerto Rico San Juan, P. R. June 12, 1924. Mr. Samuel Gompers, President American Federation of Labor, ' Washington, D. O. Dear Sir: "In reference to the correspondence between us, we send you herewith a copy of the Plateform of the Socialist Party of Puerto Rico, and three Affidavits and with them five Red Oars issued by the Socialist Party of America, equal to those which all members of said party have, as is publicly known. Most truly yours, (Signed José Tous SOTO, President Republican Party. Antonio R. BARCELO, Pres. Unionist Party. (Continued on page 2)
Canadian Pacific Steamship Limited Vapor 'Montroyal' 23,500 tons This luxurious steamer is expected in our port on March 15 at 2 P. M. and will be dispatched for Hamilton, Bermuda the following day at 5 P. M. Accepting passengers for the above port. Take advantage of this opportunity, the last of the season to travel in comfort. For further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. agents Tel. 257, San Juan Tanca-Tetuan.
The House of Representatives has appointed a committee to go to the wharf to welcome Ex-Governor Winthrop Great festivities are prepared in honor of the illustrious visitor - Distinguished personalities of this capital, representations of commerce, banking and organized institutions, will welcome Mr. Winthrop.
A short time ago we gave our readers the pleasant news that on Sunday, the 22nd of the present month, the former Governor of Puerto Rico, Hon. Beekman Winthrop, will arrive on our island, even though he will only remain in this capital for a short time. Already in our previous information, we gave an account to the country of the great work done by the illustrious public man who will visit us after long years of absence, while he resided in the Palace of Santa Catalina and was in charge of the direction of our public affairs. 1 I THE CHAMBER APPOINTS A C0M08I0N. At the session held in 1> morning yesterday by the House of Representatives, the 8r. Tizol presented a motion for said high legislative body to appoint a commission to go to the PUERTO RICO HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS AND LANDS TO HEAR A PUBLIC HEARING Next Tuesday, March 17, at 2 P. M., at 2 P. M., this Committee will hold a public hearing to hear the public, a public hearing will be held by this Committee to hear the persons interested in the following projects that are under the consideration of said Committee: R. C. of C. 11:- To transfer to the Municipality of Bayamón a parcel of land and a stall adjacent to the Horace Mann Building, to be used for school purposes. I P. de la C. 118:- ' Authorizing the Commissioner of the Interior to exchange lands of El Pueblo de Puerto Rico for the Miramar road, passing through the south side of Puerta de Tierra to Martín Peña. P. de la O. 67:- , To divert the waters of the Eío Portugués, of Ponce. FERNANDO SUBIA. President. Advt. . SSS- - ■' ■ r- I ACCOUNTING PROBLEMS LIQUIDATION OF A FIRE Problem: The commercial firm Rodriguez 4 Roses had its merchandise insured against fire. The insurance policy covered only 75 percent of the losses caused by fire. (Continued on Page 2) BOLIVAR PAGAN ABOGADO Y IOTARK) Bouret Building, San Juan P. R. i SOLARES i [ Of different sizes in s ' Santurce s i Parque, Monteflores, Seboru- 5 | co, Loiza and Punta Marias, s ' Request information from: 2 ! HENRY W. DOOLEY 5 i 9 Tapia St g í TeL 1295. - Santurce ? í
 The motion presented by Mr. Tizol was approved unanimously, and then, the Speaker, Hon. José Tons Soto, proceeded to appoint Messrs. Guerra, Tizol, Ruiz Soler and Fiz to form part of the committee. FESTIVITIES AND A WORTHY RECEPTION. The Legislature is preparing great festivities in honor of the distinguished guest, and as we understand, the Senate also intends to appoint a committee from its bosom to be in charge of welcoming Mr. WinthropDifferent representations of banking, commerce, the intellectual world, and various organizations of our island, will attend the (Continued on page 6) Miles Miles Miles
FgomasW fisk]