EL.M3NDO
IIA PA6S. 3 ITS. I ■*% OMu: "Paerté Mae I I I ■ testó ' BHg. ■ fsL isas. -
IP PAGS.3 I -- ti.W , "vaaBEaaaaaaUMaaMBBaaBaaaKaaB'
DAILY MORNING
MORNING,
VIL YEAR
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
PublUhsd ud dhrtrlbnud tmtór psrwft dfo. SOI) hr Oetstór 8'1917 <ns 11. "t ttó Psm Oftó. af 8 "u Juan, Porto Elco. By order of th. PrMldnt, A Swiwwa. " "-T*. * ™ nurT r ° rt '"tits 2Ts "tea?iSdi x m
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 5, 1925
NUMBER 4045.
'THE -COURTS OF JUSTICE WILL BE REORGANIZED.
-The Attorney G ner "l will act as soon as the P. is vacated.
* M Jtíen injunctions filed at the last minute embar Kan all b attention of the r "üKf I We have IciUdo/dipl doctor ButE to to a oplnionsover the new law K q "e has begun to govern, limiting- I A do the functions of the Grand Jury. I \E1 Attorney General, before passing any judgment, showed us a letter which he addressed to Governor I towfier, when the bill was before the Senate. He unhesitatingly recommended the passage of the ■sism, considering that the tendency of the various states that make up the American Nation has always been to abolish this old system, which is to some extent unnecessary and deficient. Dr. Butte argued in his letter to the first legislature of the country that the right of trial by jury has always been of a statutory nature, and that the Legislature, seeing that the law did not afford great safeguards, and always looking to the good name of justice, could at any time amend or repeal it. The Attorney General maintains that the last measure adopted will be highly beneficial, and that the country will soon see the results of the law, and that he will be able to make the most of it.
THE TREASURER ATTEMPTED TO COLLECT DUES DUE FROM' 19E9 M
''The Establishments of the Men of Taste" Oa ÉMjüi MU San Juan Ponce IS OUR COMMERCIAL SPIRIT! Represented by this antique BALANZA - holding on each side - the four qualities that have made our houses an OASIS for our tasteful youth. ARE YOU OUR CUSTOMER?
í MACHINES DySÍHIBIR M We fix them with guarantee. f PEDROGO TYPEWRITER | SERVICE I AHen 70 Tel. 1054 li t - .
I ftó JO ORAN BARATILLO DE | I I IL J ■ ■-"O CASIMIR SUITS I I I aD JL\z fine worth al I I I ■ T-' DOUBLE I I I BALLOON suits for n'ños 4 pieces, at bargain prices | H bargain* The best assortment in shirts and hats. | i EVERYTHING NEW AND CHEAP AT THE ¡ BAZAR AHORRO Fortaleza 25 - Box 1246. a Remember that Manolo limits himself. í
Schooner "Virginia" i Having finished the work of dismantling this schooner in the -" port of Arecibo, I am pleased to offer to the shipowners of the country and to those others who may be interested, Js all her equipment consisting of pumps, winch, M 12, 4 and 2 c. {./3! of various sizes, chains, wire rigging of various thicknesses, the complete rigging that moved the rudder, windlasses, masts (81 feet long), masts 50 feet long, booms, and an infinite number of other articles. For more information and prices please contact , - - - fij i .... ,, . A. PLA, JR., S Arecibo, P. R.
PLAINTIFFS CO BIJAN ON A CONSTITUTIONAL PRECEPT I - AL On Monday the case was heard before the I Inez Berga ' After a general revision made in the tax lists of the Treasury Department, the Treasurer of Puerto Rico proceeded lately to issue receipts collecting sums of money owed to the Treasury since before 1920. The first lawsuit that brought this attitude of the Treasurer was heard before the Federal Court. It was a lawsuit by the Fajardo Central. The matter was somewhat different from the one that will be tried next Monday before the District Court over which Judge Berga presides. Central Fajardo refused to allow the Treasury agents to inspect its revenue books for years prior to 1920. He based his argument on the same constitutional precept that will be presented by the Ledo. Ortiz Alibrán on Monday, in defense of the "Santurce Industrial Company". . Four hundred thousand dollars are I (Continued on 6th. pg. 4th Col.)
RENTING an apartment in the first floor of the "Tobacco Palace" will give reason:- ALONSO RIERA A CO.
The trial centers Diaz Cintran will be heard on Monday -M The Petit Jury has already been empaneled M , New defense attorney.immense expectation M
Next Monday, the seventh of this month, the trial against Ledo. Diaz Cintron, who is accused, as we all know, of an alleged crime of voluntary manslaughter. It will be recalled that Ledo. Diaz Cintron was initially charged with an alleged crime of first-degree murder I and later the charge was reduced to voluntary manslaughter. 1 The expectation that reigns in the Pearl of the South is immense, since it is known that Ledo. Diaz Cintron was judge of the court before which he will appear as accused on Monday. The dead man, Ledo. Brunet del Valle, was also a person of great prestige in that city, all of which gives greater interest to this process. According to our editor in Ponce, Mr. Ramirez Brau, it is assured at the last minute that Ledo. José Tous Soto has joined the number of lawyers defending Ledo. Diaz Cintron. The attorneys for Ledo. Diaz Cintron are Messrs. Rafael Rivera Zayas, Rafael Martinez Nadal, Pedro Albizu Campos, Agustin W. Font, Leopoldo Tormes and possibly Ledo. José Tous Soto. Rafael Martínez Alvarez, Dean of the Colegio de Leyes, will also take part in the defense. The empanelment of the Petit Jury that will intervene in this case took place at the Ponce District Court the day before yesterday. It is assured that the corridors of the courthouse and the large courtroom will not be able to accommodate the crowd that will be present.
Grand Jury investigates Mayagüez jail M
- gi,-- . Certifies that the building is in terrible condition -vl - A communication is addressed to the Attorney-General M
TOYS! 'TOYS! ! MANY TOYS ! NEW - GOOD - NICE - CHEAP On the first floor of our building we have the largest Toy Display imaginable. ORIGINAL AND EXCLUSIVE MODELS Mechanical Toys - Wooden Toys - Rubber Toys - Indestructible Iron Toys - Large Garden Toys - Dolls - Fine and Beautiful Pianos - Entertainment Games - Bicycles - Velocipedes - Automobiles - Carriages - Armchairs. Come and bring your children to see the Toys and greet "Santa Claus''; he will be very pleased to shake your hand. SHOP EARLY. Qonzalez 'pudin Co, Inc. THE HOUSE THAT SELLS EVERYTHING
Dr. R. Bernabe OCCULIST Returning from his trip to the United States, will receive in his office from Dec. 2 onwards.
|1 =i French Capacetes I II Co'ores White and Khaki. Order yours by mail, give us the size and color you want and you will pay $.4.00 upon receipt. I Order from any of these addresses: I Lcabrer stores I SAN JUAN or PONCE |
The Grand Jury of the Court of Mayagüez has addressed the following communication to Attorj ney General Butte on the occasion of a certain inspection made in the jail and District Court of that city: Nov. 28, 1925. hon. Attorney General, San Juan, P. R. Sir: In accordance with section 36 of the law of the Grand Jury Sub-Division B, by which it empowers the Grand Jury to investigate the state and condition of the jails, we wish to inform you that this Grand Jury, understanding that it was necessary to fulfill this duty, today went to the District Jail, located in the city of Mayagüez, inspecting the same, regretting to inform you of the following. That the building destined for this service is in no way inappropriate to house human beings, no matter how criminal they may be. It lacks light and is unhygienic and there is no means of improving it, given the inadequate construction of the building for these purposes and the old state it is in. We therefore desire as a matter of indisnensable necessity the erection of a building which will not only meet the conditions of adequate strength but will also be hygienic. If the Hon. Attorney General saw- ' a visit to the building in ; question, he would not conceive how 1 could possibly have maintained the fate which has been given to it. (Continued on p. 6, 3rd col.) ;
WWMWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWV I DAMIAN RODRIGUEZ ¡ SACHS & CO. i Received the general assortment ¡ for Christmas. j Suits for Ladies and Se- ! j VISIT THEM ¡ Salvador Brau and San Justo. |
CEMENT In the coming week we expect a new shipment by steamer "Juno" of the celebrated "CABALLITO" brand Portland Cement which we shall sell while unloading lasts at the rate of $2.65 a Barrel Sues, from L. Villamil & Co.
There is talk of a protest by the Arecibo trade.
DELIVERY OF CARGO RECEIVED BY SEA - M - I Competition of the San Juan Trade
M Á If we remember correctly, several weeks ago we dealt in our columns with a certain "Affaire" that arose in Arecibo between the commerce of that city and the "Arecibo Dock and Shipping C<X", the company that is understood to be responsible for loading and unloading the steamships at the docks. t ! On that occasion . a letter from Mr. Pla, in which he spoke of the rumor then circulating that the merchants were preparing to unload merchandise in San Juan and then effect the transfer to Arecibo by railroad. Mr. Plá is secretary of the Arecibo Dock. Mr. Plá's statements led to another letter from the Manager of the Railroad Company and the matter was terminated. But the Arecibo press that we have received in this editorial office returns to the matter and says ■ that there is serious protest on the part of the commerce, due to the way in which it is receiving the merchandise, which is giving rise to ( certain disorders and damages. And to this effect the Arecibo press says that the merchants are complaining that they are not receiving the merchandise on time and that they are being victims of the competition that the commerce of this capital has declared to them. I It is also said that the "attracted by concept of customs ' ck c! port of Arecibo are diami| (Continued on page 6, 3rd. col.) ' there will have to make act of presence from very early.
"THE COMMERCE MUST ABANDON ALL ATTITUDE OF H0ST1LITY".
1 M M MELMEES -laoit liras somos ranFiSEims", mieu ' M "A peace without victory between the taxpayers and the Government" M, Don Miguel Morales, President of the Chamber of Commerce, and presently a member of the Economic Conference, answering questions we put to him, has made the following very important statements: The mission of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce within the Economic Conference is to act, through its two representatives in said Conference, with the aim of, together with the other members of the same, to study a plan which, when put into practice, will re-enable our public finances, (Continued on p. 9, 6th. col.) THE NEVER SEEN IN PV$"TO RICO M Go, Mr. Cosuraianta, go in haste to (Md, the authentic firm, in the Navy and provide yourself with a GUAítl class- -L meat never seen in the logging, so that MATE the hámWextraqne exists among consumers, des- ' of time 1nwemarl "1 since in j "0" moredip lo >"ARATUA> to- , two M bring the worst ips- ; lie jos, tadurtve) caring tm bledo he Hoxiestax and the health of the ' ptteDHL You go in haste, Mr. de- ' taQteU before that ' ÜhWMMinbrio tasajo pure POSrJM* . r. TCadierno, Benefactor of! people. , - - - - - (Announcement) , For gentlemen's trujes and nifioc THE CROSS MOON 21 ; FOR RENT ' a magnificent residence at ! Alien 92. ' Will inform: ► I ZORRILLA, SAENZ A CO. Tet.1057 [ SOCIEDAD COOPERATIVA DEL PUEBLO L M RIO PIEDRAS, P. R J ~ NOTICE t Notice is hereby given iTo the stockholders of the * Sociedad Cooi£rMiÍe*.4gl Pueblo t that eñ General Assembly'Regular í held " effect on Sunday, 29 j novfadbft, m tqmió the 'agreement to f continue? The work of the Assembly will continue next Sunday, the 6th of the current month, at the Mayor's Mu " nldpaL at 8 o'clock in the evening. t 80 SfifálÓS to all the acóíonis- , tas to attend this meeting, as the matters to be discussed are of great importance. j 8the general public is invited. Ramón Negrón FLORES, ' Chairman. K José B. SEGARRA. Secretary. i (Annrcio) NEEDED 1 '■ - - an experienced mnern to atemtep a poeor month old baby girl. References required. Will inform Ofteta 6, Parada XI, by Tel. 2057, Sah Juan. 4-5. SÍEMir a BEST SURTIDO db fine joguetts, at THE GLOBE Ve* mitírtros precies. Sán Ji#" Nt". 3$. Between San Frínclsco and Lima. '
The Pres, of the Medical Association makes his strongest protest against the attitude being observed by the Municipalities of the island M
fs so much the objection to the Uega-dedara-in Materia de Beneficencia that the doctors feel depressed at having to accept an incumbent M
- re Dr. E. Fernandez Garcia, President of the "Medical Association of Puerto Bico", has poured i sensational manifestations in the last "Bulletin'' of that institution, which should not go unnoticed by the general public, as they are contracted to such important topic as the health of the people. The young, and already notable galen/ ! while praising the Department of Health for its campaign in regard to the medical phase of its work, protests, energetically, against, the municipal governments of the island for their indifference ■ before any movement that signifies progress in matters of Public Beneficence. "Unfortunately," says Dr. Fernández García, "the governments are still indifferent to any campaign that implies progress in the field of public welfare.
wto in matters of Beneficence, pnes, ni ann when the Association, with the best desire, has offered them free and spontaneously its services to study the "status" (Continued on p. 9, 5th col.) NOTICE M We advise our subscribers in Condado, and those residing on Carretera Nueva from Parada 15 to Martin Peña, as well as those in Barrio Obrero and Seboruco, that since it is necessary to make certain changes in our equipment at the Santurce Plant, electric service will be suspended in these sections of Santurce from two o'clock until four o'clock in the afternoon on Sunday, December 6. PORTO RICO RAILWAY LIGHT A POWER COMPANY (Advertisement)
Pata Us Dlat de Navidades Christmas is fast approaching, and we, in anticipation of it, wish to congratulate you. We would also like to express our intimate gratitude for your valuable cooperation during the year. On the other hand, we wish to notify you that we are ready to provide you with a service at the height of the moment; a service that, beyond any doubt, allows us to guarantee the fast, complete and safe delivery of all kinds of packages. We have also made a special discount on our Tar fa. This is despite the fact that we have recently introduced a free home collection and delivery service. You will see: BETWEEN SAN JUAN AND NEW YORK (With delivery to 72nd St.) Boxes not exceeding 50 lbs. or 3 P. C. $2.50 Boxes not exceeding 250 lbs. or 6 P. C. $3.50 Boxes not exceeding 400 lbs. or 10 P. C. $4.50 Packages not exceeding 400 lbs. or 10 P. C. $4.50 Packages not exceeding 400 lbs. or 10 P. C. $4.50 Packages not exceeding 250 lbs. or 6 P. C. $3.50 Packages not exceeding 400 lbs. C. $4.50 Packages at 10 Cts. per pound. BETWEEN TWO POINTS WITHIN THE ISLAND A package weighing 1 lb. .... ...,7c. For each additional pound 1c. We are counting on your valuable help as we have up to this point. So do not hesitate to call: all the staff of this company is eager to serve you. Don't forget: order your parcels, gifts and orders to be delivered by PORTO RICAN EXPRESS. Cordially yours, P, J. Bras. General Manager.
--y-;;; - , , , -j-.j PONCEÑOS Y FORASTEROS He "Salon Fem:na", elegant barbershop of Francisco Rodriguez, offers the best service. Visit us. i SQL 4. - TEL. 732 - PONCE |
Stenographer Needed - Come in person to office 513 i Edificio González Padín or write to P.O. Box 470, San Juan.
Cement "TIGRE" FINISHED RECEIVED BY STEAM "MIRA" LIMITED PRICE TAKEN AT QUAY NO. 6 BEFORE BEING STORED. F. FREIRIA, S. EN C. MARINA, SAN JUAN, P. R. APARTADO 912 PHONE 14$.