EL.'fflNDO
'1 4 °AGS.3CTSU I /I OSataM: "Fiarte I U| Dlrtní" ' Blág. *g 1'"-"- 1 "H - Btt SM
| l 4 PA6S.3CTS? I g* Va Ala - ~ _ _ fTA*
MORNING
MORNING,
YEAR VIL
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and diMrlbuted under permit (No. 801) authorized by uw a,- oí Óciubar ". 1917, file TTthe Foñ OfScm olí San Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. S. Burieatm. Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter. I february 21. 191S. at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rico,. (United States of America 1 ) under the Act of march 3, 1879 I
SATURDAY, JULY 18, 1925 _____ "
NUMBER 3007
"I accuse the President of the Senate, Don Antonio R. Bátelo, of using his political and legislative influence for personal vendettas".
THIS IS HOW MR. LASTRA CHARRIEZ EXPRESSED HIMSELF BEFORE THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
"In Puerto Rico, in order to think, you have to ask permission from the President of the Senate, or turn your back so that he can swing the whip, not of the feudal lord, consecrated by tradition, but of the Yankee cowboy," he added "A DIVERSITY OF CRITERION DETERMINED THAT MR. BARCELO DENIED MY SALUTE AND DECLARED HIMSELF MY ENEMY".
As we consider it to be of great interest, we will publish in full the speech delivered in the House of Representatives last Thursday afternoon by Mr. Lastra Chá rriez, on the occasion of the amendments introduced at the last minute by the Sanado to the bill reorganizing the Workers' Compensation Commission. The speaker began in a firm and paused tone, stating that he would first enter into the critical part of the bill, in defense of his thesis. I am going to maintain, Mr. President and Representatives, that this law is a copy of the Workmen's Compensation law of Washington and Ohio, and that it is a servile copy of the laws of both states of the Union. In the United States this law has an industrial character, hence the fact that it is one hundred A NECESSARY CLARIFICATION .-T We must and wish to state for the record, that the beautiful poetic work entitled "Preces Infantiles" which appeared in the glossy pages of the last "Puerto Rico Ilustrado", is the son of the inspiration of the distinguished lady and cultured Puerto Rican writer, Doña Isabel Andreu de Aguilar. "Due to an absolutely involuntary omission, which the management of "Puerto Rico Ilustrado" has greatly regretted, such a beautiful literary composition appeared without a signature. We also wish to clarify that in the last stanza, where it says: "Que le sepas servir aquí es tu hermano", it should read: ' Que le sepas servir aquí EN tu hermano". We thus fulfill a duty by stating today that it is h distinguished lady Doña Isabel Andreu de Aguilar who is the author of "Preces Infantiles." MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT OF VIEQUES, P. R. Office of the Municipal Mayor NOTICE The position of graduate nurse of the Municipal Hospital is vacant with a monthly salary of $70.00. Applications should be addressed to the Municipal Mayor accompanied by professional references. Zoilo CASTAÑO, Municipal Mayor. Vieques, P. R., June 30, 1925. Advt.
The introduction of a scale of compensations is a very interesting idea, because the work performed by the worker in the industry is more intellectual than physical, and the amount that each one of them receives in case of an accident according to the scale can be uniform, since the worker who runs a machine does not spend less or more energy than the one who works the glass in the furnaces because it is a mechanical work".
I spoke to the Speaker of the House, Mr. Tous Soto, I spoke to the representative for Utuado, Mr. Muñoz, I waited thirty days, forty days, as many as necessary, and it was not possible. And faced with the dilemma of allowing Puerto Rican public life to be governed by acts based on rancor and personal revenge, thus creating chaos in society, I find myself in the sad need to accuse, without entering into private and personal matters, the President of the Senate, Mr. Antonio R. Barceló. (Here arose the incident with the Speaker, which is already known to our readers, and which was satisfactorily resolved). -The speaker then, to prove his assertion that the bill obeyed neither a study nor a need, pointed out in addition to the reasons for criticism previously stated, the culminating fact that section six of the bill contains these two fundamental points:-1,-The creation of a ''bottle'' for Don Joaquin Becerril and the removal of the present President of the Workers' Compensation Committee, Mr. Cintron Lastra, who was to be paymaster. This means that Mr. Barceló punishes not only directly but also collaterally and in the family those who criticize his policy and who maintain their own policy as opposed to the one he maintains, determining an absolute renunciation of the rights of the country, of its prestige and of its political dignity''.
That he could not allow his arrogance in the matter of the presidency of the House to be the subject of a bill expressly made to punish him by removing his relative, Mr. Cintron Lastra, and where it was agreed that said bill be amended as the former wished because it was not in the interest of its author. That then Project 112 remained paralyzed and mute in the conference committee, without anyone remembering it. "But the appointments from Washington in the cases of Attorney General and Judge of the Federal Court, the impositions of Santa Catalina, the veto of our best laws, and in a word, the reactionary policy of the metropolitan administration against the liberal policy of Puerto Rico, arose. In the face of this situation, I presented a policy to be followed in the face of Mr. Barceló's accommodating, sweet-farming, and renegade policy. We went to a caucus and there I maintained with all my energy and enthusiasm my policy against Barceló, and the policy of the President of the Senate triumphed. And that which was a clash of ideas, a collision of thoughts, a diversity of criteria, immediately determined in Mr. Barceló's dictatorial temperament that he refused to greet me and declared himself my enemy. "Poor country! It is well that the Andean snowdrifts and the Spanish-American plains, with their high proud summits and their endless extensions give birth by the exuberance of the wild nature to dictators like Rossas and France that silenced the freedom of the conscience with the lead of their armed assassins. There at least there was the gesture of the rough man who kills freedom and of the romantic idealist who dies for freedom. While liberty of conscience was asserted in England by Rogers Williams and Cromwell's soldiers and in continental and philosophical Europe by the Encyclopedists and the French revolt and in America by the Puritans and the electors of the Virginia Constitution, in Puerto Rico (continued on page 11), the "liberty of conscience was asserted by the Puritans and the electors of the Virginia Constitution.
''But in an agricultural country like Puerto Rico, where anemia devours laborers, and where the laborer, unlike in the United States what he yields is physical labor, cannot receive equal compensation the laborer who by opening a ditch for his vigor clenquez of only ten per cent profit as he who by his enquenquez gives only ten per cent to. Moreover, in the United States, where the compensatory scale is in force, there is no commission of five or more members because, applying the mechanical scale, a single commissioner can do the work with the investigation practiced by the subordinates under his orders. In Puerto Rico, on the contrary, this law has been made in a nonsensical and unscientific manner, copying that of the United States, without taking into account the physical conditions of the workers, our wealth, which is agricultural, and also leaving in place a commission for the application of the compensatory scale when the United States can mechanically apply it with only one commissioner. THE POLITICS AND PRINCIPLES PART -'*And now, Mr. President and Representatives, I will maintain that to denounce an immoral act of a political and public nature by accusing the President of the Senate and head of a political party on the island of such an act is a thing so serious, that it must be carefully considered. Convinced as I am of this immorality, I still wanted, before taking it to the parliamentary tribune, to seek the means of rectification. I tamed my temperament, I tied up my nerves, I exhausted all the diplomatic steps to that end. I spoke to Mr. Córdova Dávila so that he would intervene.
The speaker then went on to state that this bill, after being approved by the Senate on the first occasion by virtue of an interview between Mr. Lastra and Mr. Barceló, in which the former had told the latter that it was the only opportunity for the Senate to approve the bill.
NEVERAS Unique oak and metal opportunity. Good for Restaurífrit, Colmado, Butcher's shop, Apothecaries. Hospitals, etc. Luna 38, Tel. 1519. Box 1509 SAN JUAN
-'.-CINEMA LUNA -:- TODAY SATURDAY TODAY Premiere of the series, entitled: ON THE NETWORK with JACK MULHALL directed by the CHIEF of the . POLICE OF NEW YORK We will also show the dramatic comedy LIVING IS BETTER with JJOUGLAS MAC LEAN.
RENT Magnificent premises with three apartments, kitchen, good sanitary and independent service. Reasonable price. -Will inform: West Precinct No. 3, Altos. JOSE FERNANDEZ.
NOTICE to contractors icoksmt® I can supply any amount of clean coarse sand, yellow or white. Deliveries will be made on site immediately. Special prices for .importance contracts For information call or write to GONZALO APONTE, APARTADO 40, SAN JUAN; TELEPHONE 244 AZUL, SANTURCE.
El Ledo. Toro Cabañas, on behalf of the corporation "El Imparcial Inc." has answered the lawsuit filed by Mr. Barceló.
£1 lawyer of "El Impar-, cial" has contested the em placement made against his defendant, alleging that it is out of Law - r A few days ago we reported on the lawsuit filed by Mr. Barceló against Ledo. Cayetano Coll y Cuchí and the corporation "El Imparcial Inc.", demanding from the parties an indemnity of one hundred thousand dollars, for certain articles that under the signature of Ledo. Coll y Cuchí appeared in our colleague "El Imparcial". | THE SUIT HAS BEEN CONTESTED Today we can inform you that by ! I" that refers to the defendant "El Imparcial Inc.", the lawsuit has been duly answered, within the term established by law, by the distinguished lawyer of this capital, Mr. Luis J. Toro Cabañas. The answer to the lawsuit of Mr. Barceló against "El Imparcial Inc." was filed in the District Court, Section SegúnHa, last Thursday afternoon, and because we believe it to be of interest, we propose to express what is the main basis on which the defense's answer is based. THE IMPUGNMENTATION IS CONTESTED The Ledo. Toro Cabanas, in its answer to the lawsuit, contests the summons made to "El Imparcial" and alleges that the lawsuit has not been made within the law. To justify this assertion, Ledo. Toro Cabanas, that the lawsuit has been filed and directed against the administrator of the newspaper "El Imparcial", when in due course of law it should have been filed against the President of the Corporation "El Imparcial Inc." or against any director or head of the referred corporation, and not against Mr. I Goyco, who is an employee, not of the corporation, but of the newspaper. I but of the newspaper. We do not know how this question raised by the defense will be resolved, but we promise our readers to keep them duly informed. As for Ledo. Coll y Cuchí . we do not yet know if he has decided to answer the lawsuit filed against him, demanding indemnity of fifty thousand dollars.
Situation of the American Colonial Bank of Porto Rico ON THE AFTERNOON OF JUNE 30, 1025
ASSETS Loans and Discounts $7,419,755.27 United States Bonds 310,707.65 Puerto Rico Government and Municipal Bonds$ 699,572.34 Joint Stock Land Bank Bonds 203,250.00 New York City and First Class Railroad Bonds 146,330.49 Stock of Banks and Corporations 110,341.73 Bank Addresses. Furniture, Vault 314,527.16 Guarantees to cover acceptances 7,124.90 Held by our Correspondents 1,291,158.64 Cash on Hand 1,664,351.92 2,955,513.56 Other Resources 142,864.40 $ 12438,987.80 H. L, Cochran, Vice-President.
LIABILITIES Realized Capital $ 1,000,000.00 Reserve Fund 400,000.00 Retained Earnings 166,694.00 - Pension Fund 13,306.13 Reserved for Interest and Contributions 5,616.93 Outstanding Dividends 7,181.00 Guaranteed acceptances from our customers 7,124.90 Cashier's Checks 1,843.89 Discounted acceptances with our guarantee 25,000.00 To Correspondents 55,661.00 Sundry Accounts 152,120.92 Deposits: U.S. Treasury $ 47,950.07 Checking Accounts 10 456,156.96 10,504,436.03 $ 12,338,987.80 Chas. E. Lawton, Manager. - . 'f v .-'i
"'Government by law and not by men is the recognized type of Government by which all.
■p. > y W H o f R W DO OTAN C IR WOOtk
Mrs. Dorothy Campbell Hurd, of Bryn Mawr.. I'a" champion of States l nidme in the difficult game of "golf".
And it is because the leading men should have more brains than nerves, so that they do not waste their energies gesticulating or shouting for any futility, all these men who should always have the responsibility of the acts they perform or the ideas they expose. t Perhaps Mr.? JTous Soto, a profound connoisseur of politics, who is also a great psychologist, to the point of establishing, with his constantly demonstrated equanimity, a school of legislative and political tolerance for those who believe that the best way to make laws is to put stridency where eloquence and erudition are required, and to appeal to extreme attitudes where a calm and serene temperament that convinces, but never intimidates, should stand out. Afterwards, the reporter approached the table of the popular undersecretary of the Chamber, Carmelito Martínez Acosta ... . This -a journalist at last- lives so identified with the reporters, that some call him their spiritual boss, not because he is AN INDISCRETE like them, but because he always finds a kind, human excuse to justify the REPORTER'S FAULTS And it is because Carmelito is ''human, too human", as the author of Zarathustra said. The last point where the ship of the reporter anchored was next to the table of the friend Basora Mostré, silent legislative "clerk". The friend Basra is a complicated temperament.... He is usually kind when he does not have in his hands the preparation of some chamber document. of which he fears that the reporter will have news before l'ontlnfÍH pti the u "g. 8.)
RENT an apartment for housing in the "Tobacco Palace". Will inform:- ALONSO RIERA & CO. Telephone 527.
we must fight". I Text of the Governor's speech on the occasion of the laying of the cornerstone of the Capitol of Puerto Rico -~ i "The national power is united with the local government proper an Inte- ¡ res to iln to achieve the welfare of the whole people" "We are a part of that great nation, not confused within it and lost in a mass which cannot be distinguished, but as an individual unit, with our ! sacred rights protected by power, free to live our own lives, and to make our own laws" I At half past nine o'clock yesterday morning, the official ceremony for the laying of the cornerstone of the Capitol of Puerto Rico began. The Tribune of Honor was filled with prestigious ladies and gentlemen of great social and political prominence. Surrounding the Governor and the Governor were: Sánchez Morales, Juan B. HuygJ Barceló, del Toro Cuebas, CobaUes Gandía, Hernández López, González Mena, and Rodríguez Serra. Representing the House, Mr. Planellas, Mr. Castellón, Mr. Sabater, and Mr. García Méndez. Representing the Senate, Messrs. Jordán, García Ducós and Zeno. Representing the. Representing the Executive Cabinet; Messrs. Huyke, Ortiz, Chardón, Kessinger, Butte, Esteves. Representing the Federal Court: Messrs. Wells, Gay and Henson. Representing the Insular Police: Colonel Lewis and Captain Blanco. Representing the Municipality: Mr. José Gómez Brioso. Representing the Department of Justice: Messrs. Butte, Muñoz and Todd Jr. Representing the Supreme Court: Messrs. del Toro and Wolf. Also, Messrs. Thomas, Benner, Bagué; Córdova Dávila, and others. I THE OFFICIAL CEREMONY After the reading of the official Act approving the project to build the Capitol of Puerto Rico, he took the floor > Continued on page 2)
Teatro OLIMPO HOY - SABADO - HOY UNA DAMA PERDIDA (A LOST LADY) A play for bereaved married couples and other distressed ladies (MATINEE and EVENING).
SELL 0 RENT í tni County home. I ALSO SELL all my furniture and pictures, including my collection of Japanese furniture brought expressly from Japan, before the war, today almost impossible to obtain. Unbeatable conditions. CAY. COLL CUCHI Teb 286 Alien, 82?
Interesting imp. cessions on the sidelines of the' current Legislature that. seems to have no end.
The still sonorous precincts of the laws.-Legislators¡ strident and legislators reposeful. - Sensations of a reporter, for whom, like the present Legislature, there will be no recess either. At the time the reporter made his visit, there was no session. The Chamber was almost empty and resembled a temple at hours when it does not pay tribute to the faith. Few representatives were in their seats. As we stood there, we felt the desire to tour the various legislative offices. As in a portrait gallery, we saw a few heads, emerging, apparently pensive from the long-suffering furniture, which at this hour must be jaded by force of feeling; The same was true of the presidential chair, which was exalted by Matienzo de Diego, etc., until we arrived at the Ledo, where we were able to see a promise made under a pledge of honor turned into a reality, in a moment of political frenzy, in which friends are the object of all kinds of deference and offers. until reaching the Ledo. Tous Soto. Hustle ¡ public man, the figure of more positive and exceptional merits in our current politics. In our lightning visit, we saw the feisty and fully successful parliamentarian Lastra Chá-, rriez; Tizolito, one of the decisive champions of popular representation; Guerrita, a Saxon type who did not want to be a part of the party. a type of Saxon who does not speak to waste time, but does his business with great skill; Alonso, leader of the so-called radical party; Rieckehofi (Don Germán) always making long sighs as a result of his bulky body which prevents him from moving with the agility he would like; Sabater, irreplaceable President of the Legal Committee and a few others who formed a brief group of which the most outstanding was the Hon. Chairman of that legislative branch, and the silent Godreau and his brother on the votes. 8r. Gual. Slight were the moments that we heard the Speaker speak We felt- ' we wished to congratulate him on the success with which he has channelled the parliamentary work, during these last few days, thanks to his tact and ' political skill, for one would not conceive of a "Speaker" who would tu.! see the ferocious attitude of a do-. mator of wild beasts. ... On the contrary, the sensible opinion
Mariíta Vélez López Díaz HAS DIED Her afflicted parents in communicating the sad event to her friends, beg to commend her soul to the Almighty and to attend the conduction of her corpse to the Cemetery of Santuree, which will take place at -1 P. M. today, for which merciful act they will be grateful to you. Mortuary House, " County 25, Stop 17. ' Santuree July 18, 1925.