ELM1NDO
1 n PAGES. 3 CTS. I g OMbm: "PxMrto kleó~ ■ / Dnrtrado" BMg. 1 te 1,M * ~ B " 848 ■■■■■■■■■■MMiMBiteMBitoMaatelMMi
in PAGS. 3 CTS. / ■irtlHi - - - - 8*.#9 - - -
MORNING
MORNING
YEAR VII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
" ' -L- J ■ ■ ■ ■ . Pauiaaae. ane totrtonud under perditt ("e. SOI) MUwmé "*-*?_-* O*"*** e, 18ZV, oa tie M tac Pee" OfSee "S I 8m Juu, Porto Ble", "r "é* of the TteeMen", A -- <Hnerrt Batoreá M ■"""■< claaa aattet, febrnary "l.Tltl". M the Port Office rt Sen Juea, Porte Me" (VSBed auto" tt áwrieM the AM "r aareh A ISTt.
SATURDAY, JANUARY 31, 1925 I
NUMBER 1939. '
The "American-German Joint Commission" in Washington hearing the "affaire" of the international claims against theGno. of Berlin, rules the first case of the steamer 'Carolina' in favor of a Puerto Rican, re-
The distinguished Colonel Ross, who is soon to embark for the U. S., rectified before the Rgt. a certain version which was circulating about his alleged intentions in relation to the native soldiers £n WaaAington-dfjo-expreatré that you are worthy of all praise.
On the occasion of certain notes which we inserted a few days ago to the effect that Colonel Ross, of the 65th Regiment stationed here, had said that he was willing ' to work for some day ' mobilizing the native troops in the United States Army, the distinguished military man seems to have found it necessary to acla1la1ar that version, and to that effect it is averred that he did so on Thursday ' morning in a brief speech he delivered before his ■ men, a few days before ' leaving the country for good to take up another analogous chiefship in the North to which he has > been appointed. ' Military discipline, according to pa1re, prevents the re1 vealing information of the events occurring in the corresponding spheres and it is therefore made difficult 1 the investigative work of the reporter in those domains. 1 But, THE WORLD with reports gathered from here and there has verified the veracity of' Mr. JRoss' last statements, which are demonstrative that the Colonel never said what was attributed to him, or if he did say it in a moment of obfuscation or doubt, he has been able to live up to his intellectual gifts, rectifying it. According to our reports, the distinguished Colonel Ross, on the eve of his farewell for the United States . United States, has addressed the ■ ¡ men whom for some time he had been commanding to the effect that he never uttered the phrases . which the version attributed to him with , respect to the Puerto Rican troops, of whom he had the best opinion and would so make known : -_ 1 TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY LAST EXHIBITION OF "La Hermana del Dolor" WITH ADAPTED MUSIC | SOLARES I 15 solares - 750 m¡c $1125.00 cash (1.50 m[c) $1350.00 in installments HENRY W. DOOLEY No. 9 Tapia St Tel. 1295 Santurce
to the proper authorities in Washington as soon as he reported to them. Mr. Ross praised the moral and intellectual qualities of our boys, adding that it would be impossible to find them better in any other soldier in the world. He was, they say, sorry to hear of their early retirement from the Regimental side, and, deeply moved, added that they would always have in him the same protector and friend they had had until recently. The Colonel ended by offering a cup for the company of the Regiment that would be victorious in the machine-gun trials now in progress. This morning the Regiment will reconvene to give its farewell salute to Colonel Ross, who embarks within the next few days. j . _ . _ -! GENERAL PRIMO DE UVERA SPEAKS MADRID, January 30. (United Press).-When interviewed by a United Press reporter, General Primo de Rivera stated that he had under study a new administrative program which would undoubtedly be highly beneficial to the general interests of the country. He added that the Board of Directors would not be changed for the time being, since it had the confidence of the nation in general. He stated that the Directory considered all Spaniards as equals in the scales of justice, and that it speaks all kinds of considerations and privileges, even for the enemies of the administration, as long as they do not openly violate the laws, or provoke alterations of the public order, in which case, the competent authorities could not but immediately acíbar. He states that the army is fully disciplined, and that its loyalty to the King and the government has been proven on a thousand occasions. Moreover, he informs, that A is completely sure that the difficulties with Morocco are over, and that from now on, public order in that region is guaranteed. ~RENT* -In the Tobacco Palace building, second floor on the right. Comfortable, constant water. Will inform ALONSO RIERA & CO. Phone 527 San Juan. Advt.
(f NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC We beg to inform the public in general that from today Lord Salisbury cigarettes will be available in all parles Per pack - 15 cts. - GILLIES & WOODWARD I
/sident in Jayuya
Petitioner's attorney was Ledo. Gonzalez Lamas, who has, in addition, other analogous cases against the petitioner.
The latest steamer-mail from the United States brings news that the International Commission, created in 1921 to settle the claims of American citizens against the German Government for damages suffered during the Euk War, is progressing in its work, which is to be completed before the end of the current year. Among these claims are many filed by Puerto Ricans who were victims of the sinking of the "Carolina" by a German submarine in 1918. One of the first cases settled by the Commission of those of the "Carolina" series is that of Mr. Domingo G. Rodrigues, farmer of Jayuya, who has just been awarded, as compensation, the [amount of 86,000.00, for loss of money and personal effects, with interest at 5 percent from November 11, 1918 to date Wo, and, in addition, 88,000.88,000.00 with interest, as indemnification for health damages suffered by the claimant in this case, or a total of interest (Continued on page 2) -" ' MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN, P. B. '/DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE | OFFICE OF WATER SUPPLY NOTICE Having examined the accounts of the water subscribers in San Juan and Rio Piedras, there is a considerable debt pending payment. This administration resolves to grant a non-extendable term until February 3rd next, so that the amount may be paid at the Municipal Treasury; having stated for the record that after said date the water service will be suspended to the subscribers who have not paid their debts, and also notifying the Sanitation Department for the purpose of payment. R. K. TODD, Mayor. in Juan, p. R* no. 26, 1936. ¡"solares 8 solares - 625 m|c $1250.00 cash $1500 in installments HENRY W. DOOLEY V Tap vt [■Tel. 1295 - Santurce.
nrAÑGAn SÉ VENDE | g A new house of concrete, without brand new, modern, ' 8 with all the necessary comforts, unbeatable ¡ 8 conditions sagitarias, hot and cold water, six ha- | B bedrooms-bedroom, Living room, Dining room, Kitchen, Garage S double, 2 Quartos do Baño, and 2 Quartos with sanitary service. For more information call Tel. 696 green, Santurce. | g ANTONIO GARCIA, Calle Republica, Parada 22 or write to Apartado 754, San Juan, P. R.
This afternoon you will meet at the Palace of St? Catalina Palace, prestigious elements of our social world, under the presidency of the distinguished gentleman Don Manuel Mndía.
| The meeting will deal with the organization of the ball that under the auspices of the Chapter of the Red Cross in Puerto Rico will be held at the Municipal Theater - The President of the American Red Cross, Mr. Manuel Mendía, has called an important meeting to be held today, Saturday at 4 o'clock in the afternoon, at the Santa Catalina Palace, for the purpose of organizing the ball that under the auspices of the Chapter of the American Red Cross is about to be held at the Municipal Theater. The said ball, which will take place on the 17th of February next, will be for the benefit of the Relief Committee of the American Red Cross Chapter, of which Mrs. Towner is president. This new initiative of the esteemed friend Mr. Mendia will undoubtedly result * in a ' new great success for the Red Cross di(rection, which is thus engaged in carrying out the charitable work outlined in its progra- ' ma. The following is a list of the ladies who have been summoned to the meeting to be held this afternoon at the Santa Catalina Palace. Mrs. John T. Quinn, Mrs. Rafael Carrión, Mrs. Earl K. Burton, Mrs. Miguel Muñoz, Mrs. Arturo Rodríguez, Mrs. Francisco Vizcarrondo, Mrs. H. Y. Cochran, Mrs. Juan G. Gallardo, Mrs. María Luisa G. de Amy, Mrs. Jaime Bagué, Mrs. R. Diez de Andino, Mrs. Charles Hartzell Jr. Mrs. Charles Hartzell Jr., Mrs. Joaquín Miró, Mrs. Manuel Mendía, Mrs. Teodoro Aguilar, Mrs. H. P. Coats, Mrs. Isabel A. de Mier, Mrs. N. C. Manyon, Dr. Antonio Fernós, Dr. Víctor Gutiérrez Ortiz, Mrs. G. Brewer. Rev. Mariano Vassallo, Mrs. Francisco Mendía, Mrs. Angela Amador Navas, Mrs. W. Biscombe, Mrs. R. Guillermety, Bra. de 'F. Montilla, Mrs. E. Carbia, Mrs. F. del Valle Jr., Mrs. E. Jiménez, Mrs. Francisco ' Soto Gras, (Continued on p. 6) ■r.'Efc-¿r - The quality of this cigarette has never been changed nor will it be changed. The quality alone has made this cigarette the most popular in the world. "
The full Joint Committee, and the Resident Comm. visit the Pres, of the Fed. Ame. of Labor and formulate serious charges against Iglesias j ,4
UDEH SOOAUSIA, IN HIS ULIIM UREA, IS INWCNA-OO.-PERMANEaRA IN WASHINGTON UNTIL HE COMES EHACASADO 0 TRIUMPHANT Rep. Fairñeld directs Iglesias to bring from Puerto ! Rico some commissions of citizens to appear before the Senate Committees, and corroborate the protest.-All the evidence supplied by Iglesias is being printed by the U.S. Congress and the U.S. Congress.
f The latest correspondence which ¡ 1 ' from Senator Iglesias has been received by his friends and co-religionists in this capital, is full of interest, - and furnishes, moreover, interesting information which is not known in our island. t| GRAVE ACCUSATIONS - AGAINST IGLESIAS | The leader of the Socialist Party reports that the full Joint Commission. The Joint Commission in plenary session; which is J-ULTIMA NORA ' . .. . T- ' The coalitionists win t : electoral lawsuit of Fajardo and Yauco.-The Insular Board of ; Elections must recount the electoral ballots of both towns > z Some days ago, we informed . to our readers, that the Ledo. Bo lívar Pagán had filed a writ of mandamus to force the Insular Board of Elections to proceed with the recount of the ballots in Yauco and Fa > jardo, where the allianceists have triumphed only by a few euan- ' tes votes. k The hearing was held before Judge Foote, of the District Court, First Section, who, after hearing both sides, reserved judgment, which was announced yesterday afternoon. I We have not inserted Judge Foote's opinion in full, as it is too lengthy. Judge Foote has ruled in favor of the coalitionists. He bases his opinion on the fact that the Insular Board is obliged to proceed to the counting of the ballots cast by Mr. Barrios and Mr. Barrios.
The Board, composed of Messrs. Barceló, Guerra Mondragón, González Mena and Bird, accompanied by the Resident Commissioner in Washington, Mr. Córdova Dávila, lately visited the President of the American Federation of Labor, Mr. William Green, formulating terrible accusations against Igle sias himself, and at the same time handing him a document, in which the charges formulated are related in detail. IGLESIAS INDIGNANT Senator Iglesias is indignant in his last letters to his friends in San Juan, expressing himself in strong terms against the Aliancista leaders for what he considers an unspeakable abuse. He states that if this bothers him, it is not because of the consequences that the accusation may have, since he is supported by the FederadtaMi ; all the P "W' will consider the attitude of the Allied leaders as violence in ex-! tremely reprehensible. He will remain there as long as necessary. The socialist leader states that he has no fixed date for his departure to Puerto Rico. But he does state that he intends to remain in Washington until one thing or another is known, and he can return to our island either defeated or with the victor's laurels on his head. The American Federation of Labor has authorized Iglesias to remain in Washington as long as necessary for the purposes of the protest. As for Ledo. Coll and Cuchi there is no certainty, but ed very likely to stay with Iglesias also. FOR SALE For sale ''LA VIOLETA", well-stocked establishment of footwear and fabrics, spacious premises and accredited site. Stop 15 Santurce ANGEL R. ROSENDO Will be able to inform:- Don Manuel Velilla, Santurce; Messrs. M. Camblor & Co, San Juan. Telephone 398 Advt pWCmMCCTMBNUlMEt 8.88MCB30ffi8C i GARAGE I BRANDI ; | VILLA ST. - PONCE ■
AN INDICATION ' FROM FAIRFIELD TB1 Representative Fairfield, Chairman of the Senate Insular Affairs Committee, has indicated to Iglesias, q. he should take to Wash ington several committees of doubtful P. R. us, who could speak ; English well, and who pndisaan ooaa I appear before Congressional committees to corroborate the protest instigated. Iglesias says that Fairfield told him that if he could do so, he was willing to set a date for a "hoarinc* 'Ly that there would be great paohabilMaiM that Congress would agree to set up a commission to investigate the economic, political and political conditions in Puerto Rico and to investigate the alleged fraud or illegality" committed in the last elections. Iglesias is enthusiastic and optimistic, even though, at the same time, he is outraged by the accusations made against him. English and Spanish stenographer REQUESTED. Address to Groelier Society, San José 10, San Juan. Advt. Jose L Pesquera REAL ESTATE § ! 5: Purchases, sales, mortgages and all kinds of business so- ' | on rural and urban properties, j | Administration of properties for a fee. e w -fúl OFFICES: S Building of EL MUNDO | SAN JUAN, P. R. A sample book of penknives was lost, the return of which will be well rewarded. 4 MIRAMAR HOTEL
A Central Mortgage "Boca Chica" I own and wish to sell a third part of the Mortgage of the Central and Hacienda Boca-Chica, of Ponce, currently mortgaged for $650,000.00. It pays an interest of EIGHT AND A HALF PERCENT. This mortgage was assigned by THE BANK OF PONCE, which is OBLIGATED TO THE EVICTION AND SANITATION OF THE same. For further information about this business, please contact JORGE OPPENHEIMER Ponce, Pto. Rico * -J,
fl Municipality of San Juan owes one hundred and ten thousand dollars coi 87 ctvs. for electric lighting served during the last three years.
At the next meeting of the Municipal Assembly, certain documentation will be presented which will be of a serious sensationalist nature. The situation of municipal affairs at the present time is not as austere and satisfactory as could be expected and is far from being relieved. As if a virus destroying administrative normality had attacked the municipality, it is known that there are services in poor condition, and that the Administration owes 8110,000 and 87 cents for electric lighting for the last three years, making sure that the budget appropriation for these purposes was distributed in other attentions not incompatible with the Administration. A member of the Municipal Assembly, whom we spoke to yesterday on this subject, also informed us that the Municipality was on the verge of bankruptcy, and that he did not wish to accuse all the outgoing administrators of being responsible for such a state of affairs, but that it was true that their very bad management was taken advantage of by two or three lively people to make money at the expense of the taxpaying people, without taking into account the damage they were inflicting on the men who were in charge of the Municipality and the Party to which they belonged. Moving on to other topics, he assured us that in due time the Municipal Assembly of San Juan would be studying certain sensational documentation about certain acts of the past Unionist Administration, and that this was the most beautiful opportunity that could be presented to the public to know how the outgoing officials administered their interests. Among the aforementioned documents, it seems, there is an alleged report of the former Director of Municipal Public Works, Mr. José Oanals, dated November 3, in which the aforementioned engineer states that the works of Aqueduct 1 are a disaster, and sets forth the reasons that in his opinion he has to formulate such a conclusion about the Aqueduct 1, and that he is not able to make such a conclusion.
farnwdaSerra Garabis&Co, S. en C At No. 31 Fortaleza Street, and opposite "'Los Muchachos," a new establishment will open to the public today, Saturday, set up with all the requirements of modern times. IWF> The owners of this establishment are Messrs." Serra, Garabís &. en C., who at the same time that they have surrounded themselves with competent and capable personnel have provided themselves with a complete assortment of patent and perfumery of all kinds and origins. It has been chosen to put at the head of the same the well-known Ledo, in Pharmacy, the young Don Luis E. Romus, who to his great experience in the branch unites his brilliant executions within the profession for which he has been named member of the Insular Board of Pharmacy, position that at the present time he occupies. The public of San Juan is invited to visit this new establishment, where order and good taste are evident. All those who visit us the first week of its opening, starting next Saturday, will be treated to a free gift. Advt I Dr. Ramón M. Suárez I | Immunology (ASMA, Hay Fever Etc.) | From 10 to 12 a.m. and from 2 to 4 p.m. Ave. Ponce de León No. 166. Telephone 1404 and 236.