THE WORLD
I | n PASS. 3 CTS | I l| M.M ■ I VF ***" ■" - ****
i n pass. 3 cts7[ I Officials: "Puerto Biso ■ Illustrated Illustrated" Bld<. 1 tel 1222. - Box 346
MORNING
MORNING,
YEAR VIL.
| SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
I Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized oy the Act of October 8 1217 on 11* at the Post Offtce of Ban Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A 3. B'u PoRtmarter Generali Entered as second class matter february 21, 1819, at the Post Office at Ban Juan, Porto <A.o. (Umted States of America') under the Act of march 3 187"
5 "IN THREE YEARS THE UNIONIST PARTY HAS SURRENDERED ITS IDEALS THREE TIMES. IDEALS," SAYS MARTINEZ NADAL
M "THE COALITIONIST FUSION AGAINST THE FIERCE OF REACTION" M Autonomy that greens the colony M
I In an interview we held with Antonia B. Barceló. Barceló. fe, the latter told us that the merger of the so{¡gjallist and republican forces 1 ; purely fraBtearía, since there was no ,dÍKeal that could unite them sinceraNKpite. Yesterday we visited in his buffet feSted Ledo- Martinez Nadal, desire- £■ to obtain some declarations in connection with the assertions- I MKs of the President of the Senate. The Acaudillo de los Puros made the following statements: "It is the opposite of what Barceló affirms. The Puros have an ideal, the ideal of Statehood, the only one that has remained unchanged in Puerto Rico, because we have never quoted it at the price of power or official positions. The So(¿alists also have their ideal of workers' redemption and at the same time worship fervently the American democracy. Our ideas have absolute affinity and the patriotism of the Pure and Socialists, proven a hundred times, will contribute to the formation of a bloc of forces to raise it against the forces of reaction. On the contrary, the Unionist Party ' led by Mr. Barceló and the Republican Party led by Mr. Tous Soto, united in the Alliance, have an Idea! mezqni- ' no, founded on economic bases of personal convenience, only for the very adi- i ATEES TIMES HAS RENDERED ITS IDEAL: * "->*The Unionist Party of Mr. Barceló had an ideal; the In. <"pendency, and surrendered it in the epo- ■ fca of Reily under the fire of that jpVrnador for fear of losing popX oions in power. And he ratified " surrender in Ja wretched ¡lA V I S O l r Store your car at the L GARAGE ECHEVARRIA Go As little as $8 a month. Martin Pena - Tel. 1556. F -' gentlemen's and boys' suits Fla moon [K CROSS 28 t FLOUR I $ FOR 1 TOBACCO I <¥ WE HAVE EXISTENCE * VILLAR <& CO. INC. BOX 201 SAN JUAN
Towner's time, reneging on Campbell's ideal of a commonwealth with which they had substituted independence, to fall into the arms of an autonomy that reverted to colonialism. So the Unionist Party has surrendered in three years, three times its ideas, in its continuous balance to stay in power''. TOUS SOTO ALSO SURRENDERED HIS IDEAL: "The Republican Party of Tons Soto, on entering the Alliance also surrendered the ideal of State and replaced it with that of Colony in Autonomy, and also by the eagerness to approach the heights of power, whose delights until then they had not been able to savor. We, the Puros, on the other hand, have defied the wrath of the government and the Majority Parties and have preferred to remain in the midst of defeat and persecution rather than surrender our ideal. The socialists have not surrendered theirs of workers' redemption, which is also ours, within the constitutional norms, and they also feel an intense affinity with our political program. Now, let impartial opinion judge who in Puerto Rico are those in Puerto Rico who have the ideal. GENERAL CHANG TSO LIN, THINKING OF RETREATING ] OSAKA, Nov. 27. (United ' Press.)-General Chang Tso Lin I has stated that he intends to retire to private life and hand over the command of his armies to his son. See HOTEL PALACE renovations ad on page No. 3 IAnheuser Busch's I, Ginger Ale at $2.50 A case of 2 dozen | Special price until f on 30 Ñov. 1925 Korber Co. Inc. SAN JUAN PONCE ÑOS Y í FORASTEROS The "Salón Femina", Francisco Rodríguez's barber shop, offers the best service. Visit us. SOL 4. - TEL. 732 - PONCE
The Free Federation was also not invited to the Crime Congress M 1 Its directors complained about the omission. M j They assure us that they had their points of view in this matter M L ' It seems that the Congress of Crime is going to give rise to many protests because of the omissions incurred in extending the invitations to the event. Those who are complaining allege that if a general 1 invitation had been extended exclusively to all , they would not 1 have hesitated to attend . But * that considering that not , ■ few personal letters were , ■ sent requesting cooperation B from different persons in the island it was not wise to show up without any official re- - piesentation. -1 It seems that while special attention was paid to the invitations of private citizens, certain institutions which by their position in the community were called upon to present their views were completely ignored. , I To this effect, among the complainants is j a ' counted the Free Federation. Yesterday s J we were informed by I09 officials | a of that association that they were ignored by the Department of Justice and therefore í did not believe themselves authorized to attend the Congress. At the same time we have been told that they had their very special views on this matter of crime in Puerto Rico and that as representatives of thousands and thousands of Puerto Rican workers they would have been pleased to attend the Congress and to give their full cooperation to the Department of Justice. We must therefore also count the Free Federation among the complainants, since we have been asked to make it clear in our columns, so that it will not be believed that the workers of Puerto Rico have refused to cooperate in the movement that is beginning. 1 i ¿ ¿uiiiniiiiiiii!Uii:!¿iiiiiiiiDiuiiHiHi¡a!iiiiiiiiiiiiiitC!iiiiHiii!inimi'í I CEMENT I 2 S < n g Our cement M | Obourg, which has been so well accepted in this island, has arrived with the advantage that now it has = g come in barrels. | ABOY VIDAL & CO. INC. | u S = - 'JBiiuiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHQaiiinmiintiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinuHiii" We repair them in this workshop 8_ with guarantee and reasonable price. J. C. PEDROGO ¡ Alien 70 Tel. 1054
NUMBER 4039. i
LEDO. DON JOSE JULIAN MCNCLOVA HAS DIED His wife, Doña Carmen Sosa, his daughters Doña Antonia. Doña Pepita and Doña Amparo; his sons-in-law". Don Jnan E. Cruz. Don Jose Labrador Vlñals and Don Emilio Ponce de Leon, his brothers Don Felix and Don Pedro, his grandchildren, nieces, nephews and other relatives and "La Correspondencia de Ihierto Rico'' invite his friends to the act of burial that will take place in Rio I'iedras. at four o'clock in the afternoon, today, leaving from his residence in Jose de Diego street.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 1925 í
"TOUS SOTO WILL CONTINUE IN POLITICS", SAYS BARCELO.
A conflict of scales arises in San Juan M THE BALANCE OF MR. BARCELO CONTESTED M The federationists allege that it corresponds to them M A few days ago we published the news that Don Antonio R. Barcelo had presented in the meeting of the Board of Directors held lately a project of insignia for the Alliance consisting of a scale. This insignia implies the absolute equality that must exist between unionists and republicans, and judging by the enthusiasm with which the idea was received in the heart of the Directory, it is evident that there is a decided intention to accept it as the insignia of the Alliance now and of the fusion later. But now the conflict of scales arises, which, in the case of the Alliance, is a conflict which, in the case of the Alliance, has been the subject of a very serious controversy.)
THE ECONOMIC CONFERENCE WILL SUBMIT A PLAN TO THE GOVERNOR M It will then be submitted to the Legislature M DEBT CONSOLIATION. THE STRUGGLE FOR HARMONY BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT AND THE CON LRIBUYEN-TES.-SPEAKS SANCHEZ MORALES M
The Economic Conference, whose main objective is to study a plan to solve the current crisis facing the country and, above all, to adopt measures to harmonize relations between the government and the taxpayers, continues to work unceasingly in its efforts to draft a plan to be submitted to the Governor before the ¡ Executive Session of the Legislature. Yesterday, we interviewed Senator Sanchez Morales, eager to provide our readers with extensive information regarding the work he is doing on the plan.
IVI ■ - ■ i to date has been carried out by the Commission, and the well-known public man pleased us by expressing himself in the following terms: "The Economic Conference, as you know, has been divided into sub-committees and the one to study the issue of the consolidation of debts has already met. The plan is to have something pre . pared by February for submission to the Goi bernator for his consideration, in case he sees fit to recommend to the Legislature what the Conference advises." "The most interesting thing that can ! (Continued on p. 6, 4th col.)
■ "IA FUSION IS PRACTICALLY IEE1 CHA AND NO ONE JA STOP" "Córdova Dávila, Gsorgetti and Santoni, three ideal candidates for the Presidency." M "I wish I could return to my Pacu from where I should never have retired!" M
- iv Again we have visited - Don Antonio R. Barceló, who is still ■ bedridden as a result of the flu that attacks him, to know . his opinion regarding the latest determination of the Ledo. Tous Soto, of which we reported in our columns in Thursday's edition. EL MUNDO needs from you," we said, "some categorical, explicit, categorical manifests ciores, in relation to the statements of the Speaker". To which we were answered by the maximum Chief of the ' Union of Puerto Rico. "I do not see that they have the importance that has been given to them. What happens to Mr. Tous Soto is the same thing that happens to me. Harassed and even desperate as a result of this painful struggle imposed on us by the duty of a leadership, mistreated and even vilified by those who cannot obtain from us the achievement of their aspirations, we feel on more than one occasion disappointed and even dejected, with the desire to let go and abandon the road which, as Mr. Tous Soto says so well, is full of thorns and thistles." i ; "In this position of ours, which, as Mr. Tous Soto says so well, is full of thorns. is molded in that glorious posi- . tion in which our predecessors Betances, _ Ruiz Belvis, Corchado, Baldorioty . and Muñoz held and bequeathed to us, a position from which _ one cannot and should not accept paid . positions, but, on the contrary _ give to it all that one has, without the least reserve, to avoid the darts of intrigue and slander which constantly stalk us, it is necessary to have a temper of soul such as g . I need A furnished House in the County. Dr. López de la Rosa, Tel. 528, San Juan. SOLAR PROXIMO TO LOS MUELLES For rent cheap a 1500 meter so'ar own for *stiE>ar woods. -Phone 2063, San Juan, Apartado 47Ó, San Juan. pharmacy SAN MATEO TEL. 1495 - STOP 25 Guaranteed home service. No matter the distance. RAFAEL VELEZ ARROYO
n-■ them, so as not to feel at every moment as we feel, and as they felt many times, with the desire to abandon the heavy and painful burden and lose ourselves at a given moment in a backwater on the road, longing for peace and tranquility. At such a moment, surely, the reporter of EL MUNDO found Mr. Tous Soto, and letting his words naively express what his heart felt, he expressed himself in the way he did. There is nothing special about it, therefore, if we analyze it properly. "After that, he will surely have felt and thought that he no longer belongs to himself, and that fatally for him, he has no choice but to (Continued on 5th p. 2nd col.) t--- Tpadin'I Sell better clothes for I less money. i ¡" - Palm-Beach Suits new colors and styles at $9.90 Gabar dina Suits great variety of colors $11.90 Fine Wool Suits for Youngsters models ¡ * 16 - you Porous Suits (LANA) nice colors and styles $4.50 Ballon Pants wool Gray and Cream ' 3.50-5 and 6 Straw Hats new fancy ribbons 98-1.50 and 1.90 on the second floor. PADIN
Christmas stamps and tuberculosis A PENNY THAT CAN MAKE MIRACLES M Campaign that begins.-The altruistic bor M Operates for two years in our island, doing a work worthy of all commendation, the "Society to prevent Tuberculosis in loe Children'*. A few weeks ago we dealt precisely with the praiseworthy work that the directors of this association are doing in our society. Children predisposed to contract the horrible disease are taken under the care of the society, they are fed acbidam<>nte, they are forced to do appropriate exercises, and when they are safe are adopted by families pi teeth that ensure them a bright future. The mission of the "Society for the Prevention of Tuberculosis in Children'' could not be nobler. But of course money is needed to carry out this altruistic and patriotic work. And the directors of the society have found a very e.'ec tive means. Besides, the contribution is so small that no one will be able to earn any money. Since time immemorial, "Christmas stamps" have been used in the United States. These are very attractive, red and light green, with an inscription that says: "Merry Christman knd Good Health". They cost only a penny. And from one moment to the next the campaign will be started to put these stamps on sale, the funds collected for that purpose being earmarked for such excellent workEvery letter, every fei card (Continued on p. 6, 3rd col.) ~A superb residence for rent at Alien 92. will report: ZORRILLA, SAENZ & CO. Tel. 1057 I -Jiinii i n n.fi i. i -j- " TO CURE YOUR EYES, THE PORTO RICO OPTICAL CO. TRAIES FOR (ABHLIROS BIG ASSORTMENT Balloon from $16.50 and up. PALM BEACH Legit $8.98. CASIMIR $9.98. Flannel Pants $5.50. VISIT US DAMIAN RODRIGUEZ SACHS & Co. (Suers, ae P. Schira) Salvador Brau San Justo. ■ - '■ - ■
Reassessment of property to be suspended --M.
The Governor will order it from one moment to the next He is compelled by the conditions { 1 through which the country is passing - Governor Towner will proceed from one moment to the next to order that the reassessment of the property be suspended. After having studied the documents referred to him by the Farmers' and Sugar Producers' Associations, he came to the conclusion that the conditions of the country do not permit such a radical measure. In spite of the fact that the Executive has the intimate conviction that the property should be re-assessed, it will give orders for the inspectors of the Treasury Department assigned to this work to cease their functions. The tax readjustment which has been provided for, would have brought into the Island Treasury, according to the estimates arrived at, < more than one million dollars. Pa- < pray that for years past there have ' i been certain privileges in the | appraisal of the property, as has , ' (Continued on p. G, 3' col..) I
■ I
GOOD OPPORTUNITY Concrete house for sale, centrally located in city site, with magnificent future. -Rent $235 per month. -Mortgage of $18,000. -For information: BOLIVAR PAGAN,. Bouret Building, San Juan. v
Dr. R. Bernabé i OCULIST Returning from his trip to the United States, will receive in his office from I December 2 in I | onward. I
New Shoe Prices in Our Storefronts t
Nougat! Nougat! I JIJONA - ALICANTE - MAZAPAN YEMA Y FRUTA $60.00 Quintal i SUCRS. DE L VILLAMIL & CO. SAN JUAN iiuucjilHiiinHiaiimiuiuiuiuiuiininiiaiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiintiiiHiHiitiiDiuiiiiiiiiiiinmuiimuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii'i
' '-
FINISHED ii TO RECEIVE j i FOR LADIES AND LADIES- j [ HATS AND SUITS. Colors ( i and styles of latest novelty. < ¡ Silk suits from $5.98. ' i Hats from $1-98. i [ DAMIAN RODRIGUEZ, ¡ ! SACHS & CO. S (Suers, by P. Schira) ¡ ! Salvador Brau and San Justo. MWMMWMWWVWWNNAMWk
OPPORTUNITY We have three OLDSMOBILE Model 30, 6-cylinder cars left, which to liquidate them promptly we offer them at a price below cost. R. M. PIETRANTONI "The Rubber Store" SAN JUAN, P. R.
Are Causing a Real Surprise to the Public * I