THE WORLD
10 PAGES. 3 CTS. I -OScAdm: -'Puerto Lio® | B I I DxwtreJo" BJ4g- * ■ Mw ia>a - - B ""*".
1 A PAGS. 3 CTS. I rl lototr" MV4 I If áfio "T.50
DAILY DAILY OF
I T.50 DAILY MORNING
year vn
Publtaliaa and dlrtributod turnar pratt ("-. MI) Mttwritoa cj Ad tí October ". 1817, oa ále at tke Bert Otate -* San Juan, Porto Rieo, By order of the President, A S. Wleafct, Poataaqter GeaoraL Bntored ae ae aeooad olaae matter, febraary 81, 1818. at the Poet Ofloe at Sea Juan, Porto Rice, (United VtMee 'of Aaortoa) undec the Bet of Marek ", 1ST"
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 21, 1925
NUMBER 1960.
The Ledo. Lastra Chárriez replies to Mr. Barceló.
There is a risk - says the Mayor of San Juan, that the Chief Sanitary Officer will order the closure of all the market squares in the Municipality.
-The San Juan Plaza is in a pitiful condition - Sanitary regulations are violated to the detriment of the public.
The following letter concerning the poor condition of the municipal market squares has been sent by Mayor Todd to the San Juan Municipal Assembly: Fbro. 7, 1925. Han. Municipal Assembly, San Juan, P- R. Gentlemen:- Referring to my letter of yesterday's date concerning the report of the Direc- 1 tor de Beneficencia, I must state that in my frequent visits to the market places of San Juan, Puerta de Tierra and Santurce, I have come to the conclusion that all three require immediate attention or else we run the risk that the Chief Sanitary Officer may order their closure. ( PLAZA DE SAN JUAN The conditions of the San Juan market are truly pitiful. The meat stalls that were built with all the care and luxury possible, as is customary in the countries of the North, are completely abandoned and dirty and the roof on that side of the aditicio is in very bad condition. The toilets in both the men's and women's toilets are also in deplorable conditions due to lack of cleanliness. It is true that for some time the upper part of the population has not been receiving the benefits of water from the aqueduct due to lack of pressure, but taking into account that both the auctioneer of the plaza and the Municipality have workers paid monthly to attend to the cleaning, if the previous Municipal Administration had had a person to attend to this service, it would not have been possible for it to reach the state of abandonment that it is currently in. In the first days that I visited this establishment it was not possible to enter the toilet room, to go to the bathroom without covering one's nose. Iloy is already different, after having undergone a constant cleaning, it is in THE DAY OF WASHINGTON On the occasion of next Monday's Washington Day, the barber shop EL FIGARO will close on that day at 12 A. M. PEDRO TRUJJO. M. PEDRO TRUJILLO ENGINEERING INSTRUMENTS FOR SALE I Transit (Dietzgen) with triped, ■ 1 leveling red and rod level, (new) 3 range poles, (new) 1 blue print press (5 x 3.3) 1 drowing table (6 x 4) PERFECT CONDITION Any reasonable offer accepted. PORTO RICO BOARD OF FIRE UNDERWRITERS. Telephone 213. - Ran Justo No. 2 Dr. Pedro Perea I GENERAL GRAPHY Padin Building |
The doors in the center of the plaza are in a condition that deserves to be taken care of. Without order or order and without attention to the rules of sanitation, food and other articles are deposited under the tables j destined to the vending as well as in the upper part of all the stalls, in most of them, I shine infinity of fabrics of sacks to cover the rays of the sun, in the most part of them, I shine infinity of fabrics of sacks pa- ! Something must be done by the Municipal Administration to remedy this problem, and it would be necessary for the Assembly to take this need into account when making a loan for public works. GROUNDING PLAZA. This place was never built for a market place. There, during the World War, the Insular Food Commission erected this small, light and inexpensive building to serve the Commission's traffic. When the war ended, that ranchon became the property of the Municipality to be used as a market place. I do not remember that during all the previous administration of the undersigned Mayor, a single cent was spent by the Municipality in that sense and by the traces that this place has, it is clearly seen that the Administration that has just left, has not spent anything either. It must be recognized, however, that this square is a source of income and that some part of what it produces should be allocated to its repair. The capacity of the premises occupied today by the plaza is quite small, but taking into account that there is a piece of premises to the West of the plaza, which is also ours because it has been ceded to us by El Pueblo de Puerto Rico for the purpose of repairing the plaza. MAYOR NOTICE I call the attention of all those who have outstanding accounts receivable with this Municipality, contracted prior to the twelfth day of January next, so that they may produce them, in legal form, as soon as possible and address them to the undersigned Mayor. Carolina, P. R., February 7, 1925. AURELIO Mil.LAN. Mayor. 225 acres of land for sale, immediately adjacent to Bayamón. Facilities for payment. Will report: E. J?., Ponee de Leon 168, Parada 19? Tel. 1332, Santurce. I-BRANDI I VILLA ST. - PONCE I
| DID YOU KNOW that the most colossal film production ever filmed, entitled THE JOROBADO OF OUR LADY OF PARIS, will premiere shortly at the OLIMPO Theater in Santurce ....? It is a marvel of cinema, far superior to any work that has been presented to date; and it is performed by the famous actor Lon Chaney of the Universal Brothers Cor.
PACIFIC ARGENTINE BRAZIL LINE. We beg the gentlemen merchants to order their shipments on time by the direct steamers of this Comany.
Vapgr "WEST CACTUS" will depart from Vaplr "West notus" will depart from SEATTLE, lo.
SEATTLE, March lo. SAN FRANCISCO, March 7. SEATTLE, April 5. SAN FRANCISCO, April 11.
In addition, these steamers will accept cargoes bound for MONTEVIDEO and BUENOS AIRES. BEHN BROTHERSJNC. Agents. Telefonó N". 257 Tanca Tetnán
SOLARES 6 solares - 625 m|c $2.50 meter cash, $3.00 meter in installments. HENRY W. DOOLEY No. 9. Tapia St Tel. 1295 Santurce
Asociación Dueños de Caballos de Carrera CONVOCATORIA In accordance with the by-laws of this Association we hereby summon all members of this Association for the regular monthly meeting to be held on Saturday, the 28th of this month at the Rexach Racetrack offices at 8:00 P.M.J. All members are requested to attend on time." Sincerely, A. URRUTIA, Secretary Advt.
We cordially invite the Public for a visit to our modern establishment of Refrigerated Meats of all kinds, conveniently located at San Sebastian 29, opposite the Pia- :■ za del Mercado. We also carry a complete line of Legumes for the most demanding tastes.-This is the first of a series of stores of the same kind, which we will be successively establishing in San Juan and Santurce. BORINQUEN MARKETS HARRY PIETERSZ TEL. 1590. THOS. J. DAVEY 2
The parliamentary and political situation, created by Mr. Barceló's letter, is of the utmost seriousness, arousing deep interest in all sectors of opinion.
The Socialists, through the mouth of their Secretary General, deny that the historical parties ever invited them to form the Puerto Rican Alliance.
Mr. Barceló's letter to General Me Intyre has been the subject of conversation everywhere. It seems that in the House the document has the support of the majority of the representatives, notwithstanding the fact that a small number of them are said to sympathize with the attitude of the combative delegate, Mr. Lastra Chaniez, it being thought by many that these representatives wish to make a party issue of the statements of the representative at large against the alleged attitude that the Northern authorities have been maintaining with respect to the status of the island. Needless to say that this alleged state of affairs creates an interesting parliamentary and political situation in the Lower House whose final results no one is able to foresee yet, if one takes into account the welter of principles and interests that are stirred up in the chamber's hemicycle. The situation, then, is entirely delicate, and it would be even more so, it seems, if the waiting period introduced yesterday morning by Vice-President Guerra did not grant unlimited time to the Special Commission of the Chamber studying Mr. Barceló's letter and the resolution of Ledo Lastra Chárriez. This attitude of Mr. Guerra, they say, has come in handy, since "the unlimited time", they add, allows many difficulties to be settled. í As for the initiative of the minority withdrawing its dissenting vote on the "affaire", they say, it is not a problem.
-í As for the minority's initiative in withdrawing its dissenting vote on the "affair", it is a logical consequence of the former, and the preconceived desire to remain on the lookout for future proceedings in harmony with the circumstances of the moment. With respect to Mr. Barceló's letter that has provoked all this "affair", the Socialists, through the mouth of the Secretary General, have spoken in this way: "The letter from the head of the Alliance is a wonderful document of relief inspired by the great failure of the so-called Legislative Commission with Governor Towner at its head. And the letter is even more stupendous after having been considered an official document of the Senate of Puerto Rico. Said document in many of its extremes is full of self-serving and ridiculous accusations against the Socialist Party and the Protest Commission that went to Washington, that it is not possible that the Unionists dare in the private field to subscribe to them as ridiculous, and Mr. Barceló knows it, that the Socialist Party was ever invited to join the so-called "patriotic movement" of the Puerto Rican Alliance, nor was that ever the intention or purpose of Mr. Barceló and Mr. Tons Soto, leaders of the movement. It was never received by the president nor the secretary of the Puerto Rican Alliance.
Mr. Sánchez Morales elected Vice-President of the Senate The Sergeant of Annas, Mr. Palacras Salazar, withdraws the resignation from his position that he had presented to the Senate.
Senator Iglesias asks by cable that his third hand be excused for not having taken the oath of office - In five minutes the bill that provides $42,000 to the Insular Board of Elections to cover a deficit is approved in its three readings.
At half past five in the afternoon, and not at four o'clock as announced, the Senate session was opened. Mr. Fagundo, Mr. Fuertes, Mr. Guerrero, Mr. Iglesias, Mr. Nadal and Mr. Perea were absent. Senator Ducós arrived at five o'clock and Senator Jordán arrived a few minutes before the opening of the session. At about four o'clock the gallery was crowded with people, but tired of spitting, they left until the chairs were quite empty. The session lasted only fifteen minutes. Some of the press reporters also left their seats. MR. SANCHEZ MORALES ' ELECTED VICE PRESIDENT Mr. Hernandez Lopez, when the election of the vice president of the Senate had arrived, rose to propose Mr. Sanchez Morales. All present exclaimed at once with a unanimous "Secundo!" The election having been made so lightly, the President, Mr. Barceló made the following appointments:
Mr. Sánchez Morales as Chairman of the Committee on Hak rienda; Mr. Hernández López for the vacant seat on this committee, which the minority had voted for; and this same senator for the vacant seat on the Nominating Committee, at the same time as the Chairmanship of the same. Thus it is that The minority was left without representation on the Finance Committee 1 MR. PALACIOS WITHDRAWS HIS RESIGNATION Mr. Palacios who had submitted the resignation d" his post of Macero irrevocably two or three days ago, withdrew it today with the consent of the Senate. THE SUFFRAGISTS ASK FOR THE VOTE The Social Suffragette League presented a petition requesting the adoption of legislative measures to order and regulate women's suffrage. A CABLE FROM IGLESIAS i The following cable was read from Mr. Iglesias sent through the Committee on Insular Affairs: February 19.
With Narcissus Perfume from China May Perfume *'~ h °and Saturday all ladies who visit rzwl our perfumery department, ffl ® "NARCISSUS OF CHINA" lUgfl ■ is the newest, richest and most chic perfume yet produced. v/n í __ There is nothing better or so subjugating. A Thousand Come today, Saturday, to sniff and appreciate it. - GONZALEZ PADIN CO.
'the resolution which prompted Mr. Barceló's editorial, is but an extract from his letter to General Mck lntyre," he says "If Mr. Barceló had published with his views, said re* solution, it would have given place toi the country to know what my attitude is," he adds.- "If Mr. Barceló had published with his views, said re* solution, it would have given place toi the country to know what my attitude is," he adds. "As a member of the Central Board, member of the Chamber, member of the Board of Directors, and friend of Mr. Barceló, as he says, it seemed to me that he had the right to have his newspaper publish together with the criteria that Mr. Barceló pours out in his article about my attitude, the resolution that motivated his editorial," he continues.
The Ledo. Guerra Mondragón recently presented a resolution before the House, in the sense that said high legislative body should endorse, as the Senate has done, the letter that Mr. Antonio R. Barceló sent to the War Department, through General Mck. Intyre, and which has been published by the press of the country Shortly thereafter, Ledo. Lastra Chárriez, presented before the House a Resolution to replace that of the sefior Guerra, requesting in substance the same as the Vice-Preri dente of the House, but with different expression and form as to. The text of the same. The Resolution of Ledo. Lastra Chárriez is known to all our readers, since it appeared on the front page of yesterday's edition. Finally, yesterday's "La Democracia" published an editorial article entitled, "Z* Attitude of Representative, Mr. Lastra", in which the former Vice-President of the House is censured for the way in which his Resolution is written, the text of which is already known. SANTIAGO IGLESIAS. Senator Aponte asked that this cable be laid on the table without íContinued on page 6)
We visited Ledo. Lastra Chárriez at his office in this capital, to ask him for some statements in this regard. We found him surrounded by numerous friends, but he made a pause to attend to us, and answered us in the following terms: -I have read the editorial entitled "The Attitude of Representative Lastra" published in yesterday's "La Democracia" and I really thank Mr. Barceló for the concept he has had of me, due to his kindness, in the appreciation of my public conduct. I have nothing to say as to the purpose of the above-mentioned editorial; Now, being a Member of the Central Board of the Unionist Party, a Member of the House of Representatives, a Member of the Board of Directors and a friend of Mr. Barceló, as he says, it seemed to me that I had the right to have his paper, that is, "La D""o" cracia' ' published together with the opinion which Mr. Barceló pours out in his article on my attitude, the Resolution which motivated his editorial, which in my opinion, is nothing but an extract from his letter to General Mck. Intyre. If Mr. Barceló had followed the Resolution with his views, he would have let the country know what my attitude is, as is evident from the Resolution itself, in spite of the opinion that the distinguished President of the Senate has of it. 1 This not having happened, I am forced to beg the public opinion, that before judging, they read the Resolution published in yesterday's edition of this newspaper. That is all I had to say". 192 5 BIG SALE FOR CARNIVAL Navy blue and black slang suits. Casimirs in assorted colors. Large stock in yarn driles, palm beach and cool-crash. Special styles shirts for dances. Shoes, socks and more items for men. Our prices are unbeatable. EL ENCANTO 36 San Francisco 36 RODRIGUEZ BLANCO & CIA. San Juan, P. R. ; Advt. PHARMACEUTIST j Needed to run a pharmacy. For information, call P.O. Box 371 or tel. 267, Caguas. SUAREZ & CO. SOLARES I ' Of different sizes in j Santurce . -ti i Parque, Monteflores, S<>boru- C [ co, Loiza and Punta Marías. 5 ¿ Request information to: " - ( ! HENRY W. DOOLEY í 9 Tapia St. Tel. 1295. - Santurce ¡
THE HABIT IS WHAT MAKES THE ■ MONK In all the lines that we work, ha- , You will make the "classic, exclusive type", that has to give distinction and actuality to your person, at the cost of a moderate expense "Bostonian Shoes" "Windoor Straw Hats" tn STORE Salvador Brau St. SAN JUAN