ELMWNDO
°AGS. 3 CTS. Office; "Puerto Bico I Dnatrado' * B14g. T®1. 1222. - Box 345.
14
PA6S.3CTS. Semester - - - - $4.00 * One Afio- $7.50
DAILY JOURNAL OF
THE MACANA,
- - - YEAR VIL ¡ - i
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
I Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) euthorized by the Act of October 1917.' on flie at tbe Post Offlce of" San Juan, Porto Hico, By order of the President, A. S. Bur.a8on, Postmaster General. Ente-ed as second class matter I feb-uary 21, 1919, at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Blco, (Unit-id States of Amerlcal under the Act of march 3. 1879
/ SATURDAY, AUGUST 15, 1925
NUMBER 3035.
An informative triumph of "El Mundo" M
~ B Commissioner of Agriculture sends n cablegram to Washington M Echoes protest of Puerto Ricans M Corno consequence of our information on the inconvenience suffered by travelers who, coming from Puerto Rico, arrive in New York, the Hon. Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, Mr. Chardon, in order to contribute to the solution of such a lamentable state of affairs, addressed to the Steamship Company, the "New York and Porto Rico S. S. Co.", the letter which follows: August 12, 1925. Manager, New York and Porto Rico Steamship Co., San Juan, P. R. Sir: According to what we read in today's EL MUNDO, the agents of the Quarantine Service of the United States Department of Agriculture are searching the luggage of passengers going from Puerto Rico, and we would like you to inform us what is true in this news. Sincerely, CARLOS E. CHARDON, Commissioner. In reply to the foregoing letter, Mr. Chardon received the following from the manager of U steamship company, in which, as the reader will see, the information of ours which has given rise to this incident is confirmed in all its parts: San Juan, P. R., August 13, 1925. Mr. Carlos E. Chardón, "Continua w> la (>ag. 2) COLEGIO PUERTORRIQUEÑO DE NIÑAS CURSO DE 1925-1926 La matrícula pana el curso de 1925 -1926 en el Colegio Puertorriqueño de niñas estará abierta, eñ la oficina de la Srta. Principal del mismo. Poncc de Leon Avenue, stop fifteen, every working day, beginning on the 17th and until the 22nd of the present, during the morning hours and from the 24th to the 81st, in the morning and afternoon. Course from first to eighth grade Commercial course High school course For any information by mail address correspondence to P. O. Box 919 San Juan The school year will begin on the eighth day of September next. (Announcement).
■ ■■■ ■ ' QUEEN GUILLERMINA SUFFERS ANOTHER AUTOMOBILE > ACCIDENT.
AMSTERDAM, Aug. 14- I (United Press). - A speeding touring car collided this morning with the automobile occupied by Queen Wilhelmina. The accident occurred near Her Majesty's summer residence| The odd thing about the case is that although the royal car was completely wrecked, the Queen was uninjured. The "chauffeur" who ■ caused the chooue was arrested immediately after due * investigations had been made. L - - - ■-...JL_ S I he Racetrack Commission will be the only one to authorize the sealing of repeated frames -M- This was notified yesterday to the Racetrack Corp, -M- INSULAR RACING COMMITTEE M-- Attendees:- President Mr. Richardson, Commissioners Monserrat Jr. and Diaz Collazo. The reports of the Jury, Timekeeper, Veterinarian and Inspector of the Benches and Pool were read on the results of the races held on Sunday, August 9, 1925, at the Las Casas Racetrack. The starter imposed the following penalties: In the first race (Continued on page 2) General Me Intyre will arrive aboard the St. Mihiel j - w---Ent. Mihiel j - w--He will be at San Juan on the 23d. '-The news we get at Fortaleza -M- We were the first to give the noi tice that Gen. Mc-Intyre. Chief of the Bureau of Insular Affairs. would come to our island, even though at first it was not possible to give the exact date of his arrival, as it was not officially known. However, yesterday, and in making our daily visit to the Palace of Santa Catalina, we were able to obtain more complete details, which we pass on to our readers. - AT ST. MIHIEL I l < According to the reports we obtained General Mc-Intyre will come to . Port Eico on: board the transport > St . Mihiel, which regularly touches l at this port, bringing troops and I materials for the 65th Regiment. i , In addition we have learned ! that the transport sailed out of the Channel of (Continued on p. 2) ti . J ÍBADRENA TEL1431I I ELECTRICISTA Santurce
The law to regulate the use of automobiles of the Insular Government, with the amendments introduced to the bill by the House of Representatives, has been finally approved by the Legislature. As our readers may recall, this bill, introduced by the President of the Senate following the return to Puerto Rico of the Legislative Commission that went to Washington to request greater freedoms for the Government of the island, originally only exempted from the control of the Island Government's automobiles.
Huge hawksbill, which was caught on the park's beach by a skilled fisherman, weighing no less than 600 pounds. -The Loíza road, where this enormous animal has been taken, has become a Mecca for the curious.
THE USE OF GOVERNMENT AUTOMOBILES IS REGULATED The Governor, the Speakers of the Houses and Heads of Departments excluded from the readjustment
by the Executive Secretary, the Governor's car. All public employees would have to request the automobiles they need for official services from the Bureau of Automobiles, under the direction of the Executive Secretary. THE BILL WAS AMENDED In the House of Representatives, the Bill was amended in its fundamental basis, excepting from the control of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, the following page. gt
CONSUMER LEAGUES ARE FOUNDED i - M - The purpose is to protect the native industry and to establish a common interest M-- ■ Yesterday we learned at the offices of the Free Federation in this capital, through Mr. Alfonso Torres, Secretary of the Industrial Cooperative, that very soon associations to be called Consumer Leagues will be founded and organized in Puerto Rico, the purpose of which will be explained hereinafter. I NATIVE INDUSTRIES. The Industrial Cooperative is preparing to establish various native industries, which will be directed by workers, who will be ' (Continued Van 6th page.) i
Hri) .In the "BAZAR AHORRO" 1 1 til to . TT ,J° rtalcza 25 (A" of El Cielo) I i JU ? CASHMERE SUITS ARE WORTH TWICE AS MUCH. II ,DON'T MISS THIS BARGAIN | | > - WE SERVE C. O. D. - BOX 1246. A 1 - * %
m. They offered cooperation and pre-sented plans.-EI Committee was well impressed M The Excise Law is still in conference M Drugstore owners and druggists, as our readers know, have begun noisy protest on account of the excise tax provided for in the excise law. They allege that it is not possible to apply to them the special tax on sales and then the special tax on perfumery, etc. ■ . as this will lead to their ruin. I ¡UN HEARING ; To this effect they requested a hea ing ¡ of the conference committee which ,' understands the law of arbitration, said hearing taking place the night before last. j Representing the druggists appeared the firm of Beléndez & García. On behalf of the pharmacies, Mr. Luis Garratón, and on behalf of the foreign drugstores, Mr. Villegas. The hearing lasted until one o'clock in the morning. The defenders of the pharmacists argued that they did not wish to put up obstacles, but to cooperate and that a reasonable tax should be approved, besides the fact that they wished to (Continued on page 61 n¡ M San Juan. P. R August 12, 1920. i Mr. Adolfo Mesorana, San Juan, P. R. i My dear friend:- I have always tried to avoid making recommendations either of people or things, thus avoiding indirect responsibility, for- , recommending a thing or a person that is good, I sometimes rely on the thinking of others. 1 i who have another appreciation of that same person or of that same cesa. But on this occasion I put aside all these scruples to tell you, friend Mesorana, that the Aui top'.ano of the brand "Mesonera" ¡ qr.c I bought from you last week is the most perfect and most finished instrument that I have been able to appreciate in the many years that I have been "walking" with these instruments. That soft nuance, that extraordinary melodiousness and harmony, that vigor of their voices together with the "little bit" that they have in the harmonic box, make these pianos unsurpassable in the highest degree of perfection. That, then, is my humble opinion regarding your autopianos. Cordially yours affmo,. Vicente Font CAMUÑAS. 1 We place on record that Mr. Vi ¡ rente Font Camuñas, ELEVEN ¡ . years ago had been using auto-pianos of ; other makes and the last one he had, j he believed it was unsurpassed and on hearing j carefully one of our MESONORA he did not hesitate to sell I his and own one of ours- ■ tras. . It is necessary to know that this correct gentleman, is a great ' ' dilettanti ' ' of the piano and we consider him and he is considered in this capital as one of the best pianolists in Puerto Rico.(Advertisement).
PARIS, Aug. 14, (United Press) - On his return trip from London where he was holding an interview with Chamberlain, Briand almost lost his life His train had to pass through a place where a derailment had occurred. The wagons were obstructing the track- Briand's train was heading straight for a collision with them- At this someone noticed it, raised the alarm and the train was diverted, passing on the same side of the overturned wagons, Briand being saved by the derailment, and the train was saved by the wagons. -Yesterday afternoon we paid a visit to the offices of the Prohibition Dept. to meet Mrs. Marta B. de Dacosta, who acts as acting-director in Mr. Bariet's absence. The fact is that a certain newspaper the afternoon before yesterday made serious accusations against the Prohibition Department in Puerto Rico. (This led us to the Prohibition offices, where Mrs. Dacosta asked us the following questions (Continued on page 6). M - Numerous Representatives, coatestan this question for "The World''-MPróxima to end the present legislative session we thought it appropriate to question as many representatives and senators as possible in relation to the fate of their projects. And we decided to start with the House and then go to the Senate. Yesterday we questioned five representatives, whose answers we publish below, in the certainty that they will be read with real interest. The question submitted for their consideration was:- Have you achieved for your representative district all that you proposed? I I REPRESENTATIVE GALLARDO. Representative Gallardo, con-! j testified in the following terms: "I can tell you that in the i < amara I have achieved the triumph ■ of all my projects, which greatly favor my district, because in them I put all my heart and soul.
FOR RENT In Hato Rey, Parada 35. A house with more than a rope of land fenced with wire netting and with many fruit trees- Has garage for two cars. Will inform: J. SALGADO JIMENEZ, Parada 11, Telephone 131 black, Santurce.
M Sorry not to apply ninety days in jail to certain vagrants M The great work of the Asoc. Protectora de Mendigos i M News reached us that the Hon. Judge Manzano Aviñó, of the Second Section, Municipal Court, had returned to the Asociación Protectora de Mendigos five unfortunates who had been arrested by the guard Colón and { taken to said court by virtue of a municipal Ordinance q. ¡ exists in this capital, strictly prohibiting begging. I Since our informants told us that the accused had escaped without any punishment, we thought it appropriate to meet with Judge Manzano Aviñó so that he could tell us what was true in the matter I DISCRETIONARY FACULTY I ¡ We met him in his private office in the Municipal Court and he immediately prepared to attend to us, with that kindness that is characteristic of him. When we told him what was the purpose of our visit, he called to his presence the! He then called in Guard Colón, so that he could give us more details. The guard Colon indeed says that last week the Judge, after considering the case of five beggars brought to his presence, had ordered them to be taken to the presence of the ladies who run the Asylum, so that they could be confined there. Judge Manzano Aviñó then explained to us the reason for his decision. I am going to explain to you what is going on," he said. "The five cases you refer to were something special. They were all unhappy old men, useless and helpless, who for the first time were brought into my presence. The spirit of the law in this case is not to send these wretches to jail, but to send vagrants and recidivists who make begging a disgusting business. It was for this reason that I ordered the guard Columbus to take them to the Asylum which is run with tañto in tusiasm and nobility by the Beggars' Protective Association I "But you may be absolutely certain that if I do that it is by faithfully interpreting the spirit of the law by virtue of my discretionary fa- ■ culties, and bearing in mind that these are old people (Continued on page. 6) 'SALON FEMINA (BEAUTY PARLOR) The best barbershop in Ponce for ladies and gentlemen acquired oor Francisco Rodriguez. Elegant works according to models. Careful service- Visit us and you will be satisfied. -Salle del Sol No. 4, -- Ponce, P. R. | House in Condado ¡i z -* For sale in the best *- site of Condado, a *- ** magnificent residence of '* * % concrete with one thousand meters ¿ of lot. Price: $17,500, ? would be considered a *' % exchange for rustic *. < -- near San Juan or Ba- ♦♦ > yamón. Understand with *♦ :- JOSE L- PESQUERA £ ? Building of ''El Mundo* ? San Juan. , ".
IN RIO PIEDRAS RAFAEL MARGARIDA & CO. OPENS TODAY ITS NEW FURNITURE STORE 61 Muñoz Rivera St.. Phone 285 VISIT US
ANOTHER ALIANCIS-i TA MAYOR PRESENTS HIS RESIGNATION
I 1 The Mayor of Cayey, Mr. Fernán- ' dez García, resigns It is not known if it will be accepted by the Local Com- It is not known if it will be accepted by the Local Com.
It is not known if the resignation of Mr. Fernández García will be accepted by the Local Committee; since, judging by what they say, Don Benigno has resolved not to leave the mayoral seat until he is in a position to hand over to the substitute, and finished, certain public works that began to be carried out under his administration. | The resignation of the enthusiastic I "Premier" of Cayey has been ge- ¡ I neralmente commented by the ge' i.crales sympathies that there enjoys the j i enunciante.
Our Cayey correspondent informs us that for days the news has been circulating insistently in that city that the Mayor of that town, Hon. P. Fernandez Garcia, has presented his resignation from his post before the local gliancista committee, alleging, according to reports, that it will be accepted due to his - multiple particle-1 res occupations. The news has spread rapidly throughout the town, despite the reserve in which it was held in the local committee of the Alliance, and it is expected that Mr. Fernandez Garcia will, at any moment, tender his resignation at one of the next meetings of the Municipal Assembly. For this reason, the political sensation in Cayey is immense, to the point that we are assured that political directors of the city are already working on the selection of the resignation successor, in case he maintains his attitude. According to our correspondent, the local committee has not taken any action with respect to the re-election.
who the jury has just convicted of first-degree murder with mitigating circumstances. He was defended by the well-known jurists Tizol and Miranda, the prosecution being led by Prosecutors Quiñones and Figueras.
LAST TIME The Supreme Court of Humacao notified the Humacao Court
Yesterday afternoon we learned that the Hon. Supreme Court had sent to the District Court of Humacao the notification of its decision in the first degree murder case against Davil Luis Philip, who, as our readers know, had his death sentence confirmed by the High Court.
Court the death sentence imposed on him by the lower court. According to reports, the Hon. Judge Eerga, who presides over the Court of Humacao, will at any moment indicate the date of the execution of the aforementioned defendant.
I CECILIO ECHEANDIA ■ - ,.
The hearing of the owners of Farmacias M
BRIAND IS MIRACULOUSLY SAVED
Judge Manzano Aviñó and begging.
NOTICE I wish to inform that I have appointed as General Agents for Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, Messrs. "FERNANDEZ A PEREZ, S. en C.", San Juan. GEORG DRALLE, Hamburg.
NOTICE ¡ | LA HORMIGA DE ORO ? '' Will remain closed J ♦i MONDAY and TUESDAY -' For balance <
Automobile Owners Tires will go up in price very soon See Announcement on Page Nine.
Í F1 EVENT IN PONCE TODAY - AT - DELICIAS AND BROADWAY J I JACKIE COOGAN . | U DAYS OF THE CIRCUS
I- Teatro OLIMPO - - - ; TODAY SATURDAY - TODAY "THE DARK SWAN" Is the flirtatious woman preferred, or the chaste and simple woman? -??????