THE WORLD
E
PAGES. 3 CTS.
E
PAGES. 3 CTS.
taMtoa f-1 a-4 M "M" Vi áU m n m m tT
ommii au" DMHia' 1 BMg. YaL IMS. - Bax
DAILY MORNING
MORNING DAILY,
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act O f October 8. 1917, on fila at the Port Otica ot San Juan, Porto Bico, By order of tha President, A S. Bnr¡esou. Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919, at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Bico, (United States of America) under the Act of March 3, 1879.
SATURDAY, AUGUST 1, 1925
NUMBER 3021.
VIL YEAR
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
"WE FIRMLY BELIEVE THAT THE RETROACTIVE EFFECT TO THE O' INCOME-TAX LAW IS UNFAIR, ARBITRARY AND DISTURBING."
 ADD "And besides that would tend to harm the consumer, leaving the interests of the great rich safe" "My party remains in the place of honor that it has occupied for a generation".
On the occasion of the recent publication by EL MUN DO of a very important plan of our illustrious friend, the Speaker of the House, Hon. José Tons Soto, by means of which the economic crisis would be satisfactorily resolved, we ask for an opinion in this respect from the leader of the pure and representative of the minority in the Senate, since we are always in the habit of giving the opinions of one side or the other for the benefit of our readers, who in the end, and using their sound judgment, are the ones called upon to resolve it. What is your opinion,--we asked you, -regarding the idea of taxing imports by imposing certain duties and with the prior authorization of the American Center? I í - "In no way can I believe in the effectiveness of such a plan In these economic matters I like to speak with absolute fian-' queza. I must therefore say that in my opinion taxing the importation of goods would be a return to the old legal struggles. That would be the only thing we would be gaining. We are all familiar with the old difficulties on the fringes of interstate commerce, and in Puerto Rico it would only be a repetition of the same history, apart from the difficulties and conflicts which it would create for the island government," TO THE CONSUMER * "Besides, you may be absolutely certain that such a plan would be detrimental to the consumer, would place on his shoulders an even heavier burden than that which he is obliged to support. the one he is forced to bear at this moment■FaaSisxrrx- ■ HOUSE FOR RENT Avenida Miramar No. 19 corner carretera nueva y ca-I He Palma. 850 meters plot. < Will inform: phone 405, San Juan, from 9 to 11:30 am and I 2 to 4:30 pm. '
The situation is already unbearable for the unfortunate taxpayer, who is the one who, in the end, has to bear the heavy burden of the budget, since the powerful avoid paying taxes. e "Do not doubt for a single moment that in one way or another, the interests of the great rich will be safe. A formula will always be found to make the people pay. And I could not give my vote to a plan of that nature. "Besides, it seems to me that on economic matters the minority has already been sufficiently explicit. And what about politics;' we asked. "I have nothing new to say to you. Can I say more if I tell you that my party, undefeated and glorious, remains steadfast in the place of honor it has held for more than a generation? Others could not say as much. And that is enough. We will always act in accordance with our conscience of honest men, without forgetting the interests of the oppressed people, and above all, taking good care that our ideals always remain safe. AL ESCAPE What's the hurry? Surely he is not going to mass at twenty miles per second. He runs to buy one of those shirts advertised in EL MUNDO - READ AND USE - "EL MUNDO" Classified Ads.
. SALE OF SEVERAL CARS AT COST Wishing to realize the stock we have of 4 "OLDSMOBILE" 6-cylinder cars, model 30, we offer them strictly at cost. If you are interested in purchasing an automobile, take advantage of this opportunity by buying one that will save you a few hundred dollars. THIS IS NOT AN ADVERTISEMENT, IT IS A REAL REALIZATION * Visit us, See them, Get our prices and you will be convinced. R. M. PIETRUNTONI "La Tienda de Goma" SAN JUAN, P. R. Ill . 4 . z --'A -' .--> \ . r - fc, í . - ■ ■ i . "Í . >Í . -V - X' ' X - ' X - "'-te - , ' - - -
This is how Senators Aponte, Fuertes, i Gonzalez Fagundo and Martinez express themselves in explaining their vote in the Upper House "We hold further that said clause will bring long litigation of doubtful results.-They add-We hold that the amount that retroactivity will bring will not save the situation of the Insular Treasury." k , They further explain that they vote in favor of the bill for avoiding a conflict, but that they only yield to the force of the majority .... -♦
The Legislature has just imparted its final approval to the income-tax bill, td and scepter wished it Mr. Haig. It will thus be intended to put into effect the retroactivii d, the twelve and one-half per cent coi í mo rate of taxation, etc. The Senate approved the bill by a unanimous vote. But there are four distinct senators, four columns, ■ who have held their ground up to the last moment, and who, if they voted for the bill, it was to avoid a crisis, inspired by their patriotism, since the others did not want to give in on the retroactivity clause. We do not want to say ■ a word more. We have said enough. Now, let the country judge. But if they will be more eloquent than our words, these emphatic statements of the distinguished senators Aponte, Fuertes, González Fagundo and Martínez, who express themselves in such clear and emphatic terms that there is no room for misinterpretation. Here are their statements, which they have had inserted in the official Senate minutes: j The undersigned Senators, in voting in the affirmative on the report of the Conference Committee on the Income Tax Bill, explain their votes, stating the reasons which they have had in mind for doing so. . I We strongly believe that by giving retroactive effect to the In5 come Tax Act , it is unjust , arbitrary , disruptive , and the income will not be what it is calculated to be , and the law . will bring lengthy litigation of doubtful results . We also contend that the canj tity which the rei troactivity might produce will not save the situaI tion of the Insular Treasury; but in ■ view of the fact that the majority of the Senate and House unanimously, are agreeable to such an Act and it could not be passed without our votes, thus bringing a conflict of ' economic and political order, not wishing to throw upon us such responsibility, we yield to the .1 This is how the country should understand it, for not otherwise and with a healthy and reflective criterion, as we have studied these questions of such vital importance, could we vote in favor of said bill, insofar as it is given retroactive effect. Our opposition to the bill, voting in accordance with our criterion, would mean the failure of the legislature, since we would have no income tax law and therefore the treasury would lack the necessary income to meet the budget expenditures. Such is the situation and therefore our votes have yielded to the majority. Senate Chamber, July 3u, 1925. José R. Aponte. Francisco González Fagundo, Arsenio Martínez, Faustino R. Fuertes. NEVERAS - Unique oak and metal opportunity. Good for Restaurant, Grocery Store, Butcher Shop, Drugstores, Hospitals, etc. Luna 38, Tel. 1519, Box 1509 SAN JUAN WE WANT expert and responsible AGENTS to sell "STAR" cars, in the cities where we are not represented. We require good references. SCHLUTER & CO SUCR. S?n Jttan, P- R.
111 . LAST HOUR . ■ THE MAYOR OF SAN GERMAN . HAS RESIGNED WITH IRREVOOABBE CHARACTER THERE IS DANGER OF A [ BREAKUP BETWEEN . | UNIONISTS AND RE- , i PUBL1CANOS i Yesterday, at the last minute, we received the following telegraphic dispatch from our active correspondent in San | Germán: 1 EL MUNDO. San Juan ' "Dignified Mayor Tió has presented the resignation of his office with irrevocable ca- ! rácter. The Alliance is feared to be broken because the republican and unionist wings. 5 ñas and unionists, aspire office. ! > Dr. Néstor Rivera, Dávila, ■ Montalvo, Lagarde. Public opinion completely divided. J. BARE/ . CORRESPONDENT. . ! R'S NOTE -Given the armo- - - ( nia reigning in the Allied ranks | it is almost indubitable that a prompt 1 intervention by the Directory will satisfactorily resolve1 this question. 1 ■ e. - ... BIG DANCE IN 3 > BARRANQUITAS i: " IA BENEFIT OF THE SOLDIER'S M-CNUMEN-r TO -1 We are informed by our dear , i friend Don Luis Felipe Cuchí, Se. - We are informed by our dear friend Don Luis Felipe Cuchí, Secretary of the Pro-Monument Committee, that tonight, in the patriotic village of Barranquitas, a splendid ball will be held for the benefit of the Soldiers' Monument. Monumento del Soldáñb, and for which by means of these lines the educated society of this capital is invited. 3 In Barranquitas are ac1 tually distinguished families ae x the island and San Juan w which s with the cooperation of the cult© alcals of , have organized the patriotic act, which is expected to be filled , with the greatest lucidity. s ' ========= UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO RICO RIO PIEDRAS, P_ R. j August 1,1925. c It is hereby made sai ber that enrollment for the coming "school year, 1925-26, is open from this date. . Applications for admission to any of the colleges of the University of Puerto Rico at Rio ' Piedras must be accompanied by the official report of the grades ' obtained in the four years of study of the scientific course of the high school . Applications for admission to the 1 RURAL COURSE must be accompanied by the grades obtained in the first two years of the scientific course of the High School and also by the official birth certificate issued by the - corresponding Civil Registry. HIGH SCHOOL (High . Scholl). -The number of vacancies in the high school is so limited that the University is obliged to give preference to students from the Rio Piedras and Trujillo Alto schools, and then to third or fourth year students from neighboring towns where there is no high school. When applying for admission to the University, the postal address must be attached. J. F, MAURA. "Registrar," Unit, of P R.
Cama-1 ra Commission to investigate the effectiveness of the order of the Gonfissioner of SaI . - . . <
nity to Jos workers prohibiting the partial repair of houses, renders its report The problem denounced in the House by Rep. Mr. Cobaltos Gandia was studied in all its parts After an extensive visit of investigations in the city of Are- . cibo. the Commission appointed by the House of Representatives to study on the spot the problem denounced by Rep. Mr. Coballes Gandía, leader of the Allian- [ za in the lower House, and one of the most preeminent speakers in the country, has just rendered a most important report proposing salutary amendments to the Law, providing for public health, in such a way as to grant the Commissioner of Health powers to make exemptions to the strict rules for new construction, in cases such as the one motivating the investigation. \ The residents of the city of Are' cibo have complained to their representative in Parliament, Mr. Coballes, that according to the law of the city of Are' cibo, the city of Are' cibo has not been able to meet the requirements of the law. Coballes, that according to an or- - den of the Commissioner of Health, - based on the codes in force, the partial re. j construction of houses was not permitted in that city, unless all the modern apparatus of perfect hygiene was installed. Cos bailes, appointed Messrs. Coballes 1 Gandía, Pérez Cruz, Pavía and Alon- ' so, to investigate on the spot the conditions denounced by the workers of Arecibo who lacked the resources to comply with the requirements of the Dept. of Health. Before leaving for Arecibo, Mr. Coballes Gandía explained to us in [ the following way the main purpose of the projected visit to the city of Arecibo, a visit which was to be made in the company of the Sanitation Commission: B ¡ "The purpose of the Commission is not only to seek the means by which the owners of damaged or deteriorated houses can repair them, but also, with the cooperation of the I but also, with the cooperation of the Administration, to create a workers' slum in the city of Arecibo, thus solving one of the most important and transcendent issues in the life of that progressive city". o WORKERS' SLUM FOR ARECIBO In its report, the House Commission indicates the convenience of creating a workers' slum in the city of Arecibo, since the municipality has a large number of acres of land available for this purpose. The Commissioners of the Interior and of Health will have to finalize the general plans for such an important and beneficial project, if the Legislature approves the report of the Commission with the measures it proposes. 3 RETIREMENT LAW DEFEATED The House defeated at the last minute the Employee Retirement Law, which has provoked so much discussion. - " ■ i ... - 1 : 'J- : -- s -- . I : NOTICE TO OWNERS OF AUi TOMOBILES AND TRUCKS PVBLI- . COS and PUBLIC ANIMAL-DRAWN CARS. i Having received the license plates for the municipal licensing of public cars, trucks and trucks, and public animal-drawn cars for the year 1925-26. hereby notifies all owners of such classes of vehicles that they are requested to stop at this office within the first fifteen days of August next, in order to obtain the same and not to be detained in their free circulation by the police. R. H. TODO, - fc Mayor. - July 30, 1925. Advt
I "The Court begins by regretting that the lack of equanimity in some of these gentlemen has given rise to the intervention of justice, which has to be carried out in them as in any other citizens"-declared the Hon. Manzano Avifíó in delivering his judgment in the Urrutia-Wilson "affaire".
We can assure that three months will not pass without making it impossible for "chivos" to enter P. R. THE PRES. OF THE HIPIC. HIPICA, MR. RICHARDSON, HAS A PLAN UNDER STUDY, WHICH WILL BE COMPLETED BY THE END OF THE YEAR.
He clearly explains everything that has happened in relation to the salts project He defends the right of all citizens to express their opinion from the columns of the press I Our good friend and distinguished representative to the House, Ledo. Cumpiano, has made the following statements, to our questions, in reply to what was said by the representative Mr. Sabater. i "As Mr. Sabater, not king 'friend of the EXHIBITIONS in the press. . " But I am of the opinion that it is the duty of every public man to speak out on that position which will most or least affect directly and indirectly the opinion of those who observe, follow and judge him. It is the duty of every legislator to inform not only his constituents of his actions in the legislature, of i his proceedings in the legislature but to inform the People in general of all those things which are i of transcendent importance and which affect the development, prosperity and integrity of that people. i! "To speak to the people who have the right to know all the mo ! The people have the right to know all the movements and evolution of the legislative body which they created, to reveal to our citizens the speculative schemes which are created against them, to cry out to them through the press to know their enemies, to see the real danger which threatens to destroy them, is not to show off in the press, but to fulfill the greatest duty which every man of pride and honor assumes on being born in a free land or on adopting the citizenship and accepting the constitution of a People. "That is what the pren- ; sa was created for and to deprive the citizen of cono' cer all the problems that affect him , Continued on P.,9 The FNCANTO After their BALANCE SHEET they have lowered all stock by 40%. Yarn, Palmbeach and Tropical Cashmere suits special for SUMMER. - In shirts we have a PHENOMENAL assortment. - Shoes, the latest news from the American market. -: COME TO EL ENCANTO and you will be well dressed for little money. RODRIGUEZ BLANCO & COMPANY 36 San Francisco 36 See Nuestfas Vidrieras l 4
ALWAYS WITH THAT EVIL Currently that plan is being studied by Attorney-General Butte It will be explained at length to the Hon. üob. Towner. - If there is something that is being discussed in equestrian circles, it is the recent entry of the famous "chivos" that are so detrimental to the equestrian sport in Puerto Rico. The Island Equestrian Commission, and especially its worthy and active President, our good friend Mr. Richardson, have fought with all their might to counteract this evil. But it has all been to no avail, for so far no effective plan has been found to obtain the necessary evidence to bring the culprits before the courts of justice. This question has been worrying Mr. Richardson for months and months, to the point of robbing him of his peace of mind, as he realizes that the "goats" continue to enter the country without anything being done to prevent it. Nevertheless, EL MUNDO can assure from now on -and we should be the first to give the news because we know the plan and we know how effective it is- that three more months will not pass without making it impossible, but absolutely impossible, to bring "goats" to Puerto Rico to race in our racetracks. And if we speak with such certainty, it is because we know that the President of the Riding Commission, Mr. Richardson, has under study, or better said, already ready, and pending definitive action, a vast plan, so effective, in itself, that ends once and for all with the terrible evil of the "chivas", discontinued on page 12 SALON FEMINA (BEAUTY PARLOR) The best barbershop in Ponce for ladies and gentlemen acquired by Mr. Francisco Rodríguez- Elegant works according to models. Careful service. Visit us and you will be satisfied. -Ualle del Sol No. 4, - Ponce, P. R. I
The accused appealed the sentence imposed on him, which condemned him to pay a ten dollar fine As we announced in our last edition, yesterday morning the Hon. Judge Manzano Aviñó handed down his decision in the case filed by Major Urrutia against the National Guard, Mr. John A. Wilson. The distinguished magistrate based his decision on an interesting opinion that had to be read aloud by the Secretary of the Court, Mr. Lopez. Lopez, which reads as follows: Municipal Court-San Juan, I*. K. See. Second. THE PEOPLE OF PUERTO RICO. v. JOHN A. WILSON CRIMINAL: NO. COMMITMENT AND ASSAULT r . - RESOLUTION AND SENTENCE. In this case the defendant, John A. Wilson, is charged that on July 14, 1925, at the National Guard Bureau in San Juan, with intent to cause bodily harm to the complainant, he assaulted and slapped the complainant's hands and hands. The court begins by deeply regretting that perhaps the lack of equanimity and serenity of mind at the precise moment of the commission of the offense, in one or the other of the two distinguished members of the military institutions who appear in the case as defendant and complainant, respectively, may have given )- otitfQ to the judicial intervention ** and that, according to the law and the facts, the ends of justice, in the judgment of this court, were met in them, as in any other citizens. Defendant was represented (Continued on page 5) I SELL or RENT my County home. I ALSO SELL all my furniture and pictures, including my collection of Japanese furniture brought expressly from Japan, before the war, now almost impossible to obtain. Unbeatable condition. CAY. COLL CUCHI Tel. 286 Alien, 82. ,
BIG REFURBISHMENT REPAIRS We realize teda stock at less than your basket. U VILLA DE BILBAO L. COSTA & CIA*, S. EN C. i ! BE CORONATION BALL I Hereby make known to invitees 3 that tickets for admission to this party, which || will be held on the evening of last Sunday- a go at the Municipal Theatre, may be obtained at B Luna 58. I| Gentlemen's tickets 1.00 Paradise 0.25 S' TiekHs i "erán sold" at Taquill" from 10:00 A. M. I