ELMIJNDO
1 n PA6S. 3 CIS Oíd": "Puerto Km ; A nutrado" Bids.
1 1 1 n PAbS 3 ctF [ ¡I I l| ""Mrtre 86.09 j I I - V *** ' '
DAILY MORNING
I N A.M.,
YEAR VIL
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
I Published and dletributod under penult (Wo. 801) by the Act of October 8, 1817. on file at the Poet Office of Í San Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A 8. Burleson. Postmurter General. Entered as second deca natter, ' february 21, 191", at the Poet Office at 8an Juan, Porto Rico, (united States of America) under the Art of march 8, 1879 I
NUMBER 4032.
saturday, november 21, 1925.
A pre* I liminary meeting of the Directorate of the M. Alliance.
In Isabela, Mr. Barceló and Mr. Tons Soto were to meet yesterday. On Thursday last a very important conference was to be held between the Unionist leaders and the Republican leaders of the Di- 1 rectorio of the Alianza. On that occasion, Mr. Antonio R. Bar- ■ celó left San Juan very early in the morning, accompanied by members of the Board of Directors, Messrs. Jesús Benítez Castaño and Arturo González Prado. Mr. Tous Soto also left Ponce to meet with 1 the party presided over by Barceló. The < meeting point had been dis- i placed in Isabela. But an automobile accident occurred to Mr. Tous Soto, which prevented the political interview that the leaders of the 'Directorio planned to hold. The transcendental matters on their agenda were postponed, according to what we were informed, until yesterday, when they would have met. COMMISSION TRIP POSTPONED It appears that the leaders of the Board are planning to postpone the trip of the ProPuerto Rico Commission. The resident commissioner in Washing ton, Mr. Córdova Dávila, will then be in charge of carrying out all the work before Congress. This new decision of the alliance directors was motivated by the fact that the congressional legislative authorities favor the Puerto Rico Bill. They will be able to obtain the information they believe to be appropriate from the reports of the committees which, during the last session, considered the Island's petition. The meeting to be held tomorrow by the Board of Directors of the Alliance will, because of these changes in the program, be extremely interesting; some of the problems to be solved are very complex, and it seems that Mr. Barceló's prediction that the Board will meet for at least three consecutive days will be fulfilled. -(ITALIAN CORPORATE BONDS SOLD. M-NEW YORK, Nov. 20. (Uni ted Press.) - Banker Morgan has reported that the bonds for one hundred million of the Italian loan have been sold to-day. M SEVEN OFFICERS LEAVE FOR ARICA M WASHINGTON, Nov. 20. (United Press.)-In response to Pershing's request for reinforcements of personnel to effect the Tac na and Arica plesbiscite, President Coolidge ,has sent him seven army officers. Lots in Miramar The best located with affirmed streets, sewerage and light, are for sale at reasonable prices. Write to BENITO ZALDUONfcÓ P. O. Box 782, San Juan, P. R.
MILLIKEN" STAINLESS STEEL BUILDINGS, ready HUI Centrals, a'-
own for centrals, a - macenei, cinemas, grandstands, dairies. GABAGE8, workshops, etc. -They are erected in one week. They have no columns in the center and the entire space can be used under roof. The most economical, strongest and fastest that can be built I make contracts by supplying the building assembled on site. {Representative:
lans BEXACH, Tel. mp gant. Box 319 SAN JUAN.
SUPREME COURT ISSUES IMPORTANT OPINION
M Deals with the reinstatement of an official to a public office THE PROCEEDINGS PROPER FOR THE SEQUELING OF EVIDENCE M Before the Supreme Court an appeal was filed from a judgment rendered by the District Court presided over by Judge Foote, - requesting the reinstatement of the plaintiff to the office from which he was removed. Upon resolution, the case, which was included in the files of the Supreme Court under number 3347, remained as decided by the lower Judge, confirming the judgment issued by him that reinstatement was not appropriate. The associate justices of the Supreme Court base the opinion rendered in the following case on the following important points of law, which will serve, in the future, as the science by which all the courts of the island are to be guided. "A petition for mandamus is insufficient to obtain the reinstatement of the petitioner in office," says the Supreme Court, when it shows that, in a hearing held, there was no absolute lack of evidence for the removal, but an appreciation of it by the person who made the removal. 1
THE ASSOCIATION OF LAWYERS WILL COOPERATE IN THE CONf CRESTS OF CRIMES.
I- ■ M ; ITS PRESIDENT MR. J. TEXIDOR M WILL STUDY THE PROBLEM OF CRIMINALITY M
The President of the Bar Association, Mr. Jacinto Teodor, recognizing the great importance of the Crime Congress organized by Attorney General Butte, has summoned all drow to cooperate in the great undertaking. This was announced by Mr. Texidor, as soon as he received the circular from the Chief of the Department of Justice. It is the purpose of Mr. Texidor to ask the lawyers to study the problem of crime in Puerto Rico. Numerous legal scholars of prestige are preparing to cooperate in the planned rethnion. They will study the problem that we have planned from these same columns, presenting to the congress any argumentation that may be beneficial to the general aims of the movement. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE HELP OF LAWYERS ... The help offered by lawyers has a very important significance. Among those who could effectively reduce the total number of crimes in a country, with their influence before the courts ... A good barber shop for little money in Calle del Parque, No. 36, Parada 42*4, Santurce. ANGEL D. ORT1Z GONZALEZ
The lawyers are the principal parties in the case. Illinois Supreme Court Justice Marcus T. Kavannah, in analyzing the causes for the increase in crime in that state, pointed to lawyers, legislators and judges as the only three culprits. With the determined cooperation of the lawyers, a further step has been taken to solve the critical state of crime in this country. RICHSHOFEN'S FUNERAL. -- M-- BERLIN, Novq 20. (United Press.)--Rkhshofen's funeral was well attended. Several airplanes with mourning flags flew over the cemetery. President Hindenburg attended the funeral. Marshals Regalius and Cessler and several generals of the old and new army also attended. -r Richshofen's funeral took on a true military character. The troops fired their rifles three times in succession juhto the grave of the illustrious dead man. Gessler spoke emphasizing the great courage of the man who did so much for aviation. Luther, who was holding an important political conference with several leaders of his party, suspended all work to attend the funeral. i i i I SOCIEDAD ESPAÑOLA I J DE AUXILIO MUTUO Y I | BENEFICENCIA DE I | PUERTO RICO f | A vacancy is advertised for an Inter- | nal Physician at the Sanatorium. Applications should be addressed to the undersigned. g | The President, Í Í Ai/elino VICENTE. | = San Juah, P. R. I 1 Nov. 21, 1925 |'.
LA AGUIRRE BUYS PRO, PIEDADES FOR $150,000
M Our landowners continue to disappear - "-M THE TRANSACTION TAKES PLACE IN SANTA ISABEL M Our landowners are slowly disappearing. The special circumstances in which our landowners are living, the con- , ""cESB ,""cESB , the high cost of living, all conspire against them, bringing them to a situation in which ! that the last remedy the last ' , letter, is in the sale, In speaking t thus we mean the small ■ landowners, and do not speak of , 1 those landowners who own thousands and thousands of dollars, qvJe , nes by their own economic position have other means of do- . fense. i Our editor in Pence ; informs us of an impoitix;tíeij "a ■ transaction which has taken place ■ in the jurisdiction of St. Isa1 (Continued on p. 7, 6a. coi.) i - - The supreme court goes on to say: í "The 'mandamus' is not the proper procedure for weighing the - evidence presented by the parties and deciding whether or not it is sufficient to prove the charges against a person removed from his employment, but only when there is an absolute lack of evidence to justify the removal."
The new Bishop 1 of Ponce will soon arrive , . - The problem of the cathedral's habitation is already being thought of in order to receive him M THE PROBLEM OF CATHEDRAL HABI LITAR.-D1FI- ; CULTURES M-- Monsignor Byrne, Bishop of the Diocese of Ponce, will soon arrive on our island. It was with great joy that the Pearl of the South received the news that Rome is sending a bishop for the first time, something that has been ardently desired on the south coast for many years. The news that has reached us indicates that already in Ponce they are thinking about the native preparations to receive the new Bishop with dignity, and there are even articles in the local press inciting the Catholic people to be ready to receive Monsignor Byrne with palms. The arrival of Bishop Byrne to Ponce will undoubtedly bring a religious revival to the south coast, especially if one considers that the new Bishop has always been characterized by his activity, of which he gave faithful evidence while working in the Philippine Islands. In Ponce they were confronted not only with a difficulty, consisting of the lack of a suitable Cathedral to receive the new bishop. At first thought it seems that it was thought to fit out a new cathedral in the city and consecrate it as a cathedral, but evidently some difficulties have arisen, since nothing more has been known in relation to this matter. We do not know if at the last minute the Ponceños will resolve to expressly build a Cathedral, where the new Bishop will officiate. The Mediation and Conciliation Commission submits its annual report to the Governor M j It makes important statements in it, and reviews its work during the year 1924-25 -M- The Mediation and Conciliation Commission of Puerto Rico has submitted its annual report to the Governor. The Commission states in it that it does not wish to enter into angry and useless details, which would obscure the work and lead to no practical result. It is sufficient for the purposes of the law to give a full, not detailed, account of the work carried out by it, and the result of its intervention in the various cases in which it was required by law to participate in the settlement of disputes between capital and labor to the extent permitted by the provisions of the law itself. We can affirm, says the Commission in its report, that most of the cases which have been brought before it, the intervention of the Commission, its offer of services to those interested in the conflict, the visits of inspection and investigation by the Commissioners, the study of the situations, the meetings of the Commissioners with the representatives of the parties in conflict, have produced extremely flattering results for this Commission, and above all for the high purposes for which its creation was intended. There have been occasions, he adds, when the conflict seemed more bitter, the clash more severe, and the difficulty more difficult, a simple meeting of the parties concerned with the members of the Commission, a exchange of impressions, and a few more meetings with the members of the Commission. (Continued on p. 9, 4th col.)
New Coalition Secrets Revealed
A CAUCUS HELD BY FARIZA ON THE (ELECTION DEBT M-- ; The Local Committee ratifies its resolution of censure M The Local Committee of the Pure Republican Party agreed yesterday morning to submit the following statement to the supreme body of the Coalition: STATEMENT I.he causes which prompted the Resolution which has brought about the appeal of the Socialist Central Committee, are as follows : When the coalition parties took office, a conve- . i.io was held between the Local Committees by virtue of which it was agreed that the Socialists would have 35% of the jobs and the Republicans 65'r, and in the same manner the debt contracted for the past elections was divided, that is to say that the Socialists would pay 35% of the debt and the Republicans 65'<. 1 From the month of January in which he took office, until June 22 of this year, the Socialists had not yet contributed any amount to amortize the debt. On June 22nd of this year a joint meeting of the two Local Councils was held to discuss the budget that was then being prepared by the Assembly, since the Socialists alleged that it was being reduced and requested a readjustment. At this meeting, a commission composed of Mr. Aybar and Mr. Sosa was appointed to investigate what the Socialists were alleging and to render a report on their investigations, which resulted that the Socialists were only enjoying 31% of the jobs. In view of this, the (Continued on p. 9, 3rd col.) ■"-- The Board and the appointments in the Administration M The situation will be considered tomorrow M The Majority receives confidential news M As we have already announced on other occasions tomorrow, Sunday, the Board of Directors of the Alliance will meet in extraordinary session to ' deal with very important questions of a political and administrative nature. We can assure you that ¡ the last American mail brought i to this capital absolutely- ■ confidential news relating to the forthcoming [executive appointments, viz: Commissioner i of Insular Instruction and Auditor ! of Puerto Rico. And in addition we know that the leaders of the majority also rei cibievon confidential information coming from Washington and related to this same matter. The majority leaders are therefore duly oriented as to the manner in which this question of appointments will be resolved in a few days. The reports we have are that this question will be dealt with unofficially at tomorrow's meeting of the Board of Directors and that even though perhaps no definitive agreement will be adopted for the time being there will be an exchange of impressions. In any case, the men of the majority are aware of everything that is happening and of the way in which the White House will resolve this question. Fdrmacia SAN MATEO TEL. 1495 - PARADA 25 Home delivery guaranteed. No matter the distance, j > RAFAEL VELEZ ARROYO |
The Local Republican Committee strongly criticizes Martínez Nadal.
The Governor can make the appointment of a Charity Commissioner, the socialists claim that there are seven assemblies in the city. M CLAIM THAT THERE ARE SEVEN ASSEMBLY MEMBERS OPPOSED TO THE CENTRAL GROUP.
The local crisis offers ample room for political observers who are trying to get ahead of the events and reach possible compromises. At the last minute we are assured that the appointment of Co , missionary of Charity of this capital could finally be made by the Governor if the current situation is prolonged for a few weeks, i The Socialists have placed their hopes in the actions of the: Municipal Assembly and let us ': explain. The socialists consider that in this dispute that they have with the Mayor they have seven votes in the Assembly against four votes for the steering group. The Socialists claim that they have the four votes they are entitled to and three of their own.
I rrespond and in addition with three Republican votes. Moreover, they claim that some of these Assembly members who think as they do have already expressed it frankly in the press. If the version of the Socialists is confirmed, it is quite possible that the appointment sent by the Mayor would be rejected by the Municipal Assembly. In that case the Mayor, ? according to the law, would have to appeal to the Governor, who for his part has thirty days to decide between the Mayor or the Assembly. And here is how in the simplest form it could be the Governor who ultimately decides who will be the new Charity Commissioner of San Joan.
The attorney for the Chamber of Commerce went to Wa'lfngtíHi on a special mission M j M r. Henri Brown also represents the --sugar growers and farmers M HE TOLD COOLIDGE THAT THE CONDITIONS OF THE COUNTRY ARE WORST M
After several important meetings had been held in which the principal sugar growers, merchants and farmers of the country took a leading part, Mr. J. Henri Brown, a well-known lawyer of this capital, embarked on a special mission to Washington. A trip formed aj caler of the latest discussions between the directors of the wealth of the country, when emphatically protesting not only the excise law, but also of the re-taxation of property, is of great significance. It is undeniable that Mr. Brown is driven mainly by the sugar mills. The emphatic opposition he has made in the national capital to talk of reductions in the import tariff, which protects Puerto Rican sugar against competition from Cuban sugars, is thought-provoking. CONFERENCE WITH PRESIDENT COOLIDGE. Mr. Brown has conferred with President Coolidge, de Regalo.... ... i Segu inos giving away a "MANHATTAN" shirt ! worth about $2.00, to ' each purchaser of 3 of them for $4.50. MANHATTAN" shirts are the most famous shirts in America, their excellent quality and careful workmanship has placed them above all their peers. These we offer are $2.00 each, and now 3 for $4.50 plus one free. Take advantage of the bargain. Gonzalez Padin Co. For men's and children's suits LA LUNA CRUZ 23
According to the latest wire dispatches received in this city. In his interview with Mr. Coolidge he discussed at length the critical situation of the country. He discussed at length the executive situation in Puerto Rico. Mr. Brown told the President that the general conditions in the country were terrible, due, in the main part, to the low price of sugar during the last harvest. I Having accomplished his mission in the national capital, Ledo Brown will return to Puerto Rico at any moment. Brown. Although we have confidences that cablegraphic details of what he has secured from Coolidge have been received in this capital, merchants as well as sugar loggers and farmers, await his arrival with great anxiety. Miss Olimpia Colon wishes to express by these lines her most cordial affection to all her friends and clients who, either personally or by telephone, have shown their interest and sympathy for the danger that the small "AMERICAN BEAUTY SHOP" was in during the fire that destroyed the shoe store and shoe warehouse of Mr. and Mrs. Cuétara, Sr. Very grateful to all, to Mr. A. de Car di who in his automobile transported us promptly to the site of the event. Announcement. 1054 This is the number of our Telephone. Today our WRITING MACHINE WORKSHOP opens to the public. Fast and guaranteed service.-Alien 70-Tel., 1054. J. C. PEDROGO FOR LADIES AND LADIES HATS AND DRESSES, arrived by last week's steamer: you will find them at DAMIAN RODRIGUEZ, SACHS & €0. (Sucre", from P. Schira & CO.) Salvador Bran Esq. to San Justo.
NO APPEARANCE BEFORE THE SUPKEMOUS BODY OF THE COALITION Submit a statement explaining the resolution of censure to the Socialists Meeting in extraordinary session to consider the letter sent to them by the President of the Pure Republican Collectivity, requesting them to appear in full at last night's meeting of the supreme body of the coalition, the Local Committee agreed to refuse outright. It also agreed to strongly censure Martinez Nadal for his conduct in prejudging the attitude of the Committee. Here is the resolution approved to that effect. WHEREAS: On this day a letter has been received by this Committee from the President of the Party, Hon. Rafael Martínez Nadal, inviting us to appear at a meeting to be held tomorrow, Friday, at the residence of Senator Santiago Iglesias, and to which we must attend with all the documents related to the "affair" of the debt that the Central Socialist Committee has pending with the Republican Committee, in order to resolve the appeal filed by the Central Socialist Committee against the Resolution adopted by this Committee on November 17. WHEREAS: The Chairman of the Pure Republican Party, Hon. Rafael Martinez Nadal, taking full responsibility, (according to his own words) publicly disavowed this Committee, treating it in rather harsh terms, going so far as to label it a PESETERO COMMITTEE, when Martinez Nadal himself knows that this Committee has eloquently demonstrated that it is not such a PESETERO COMMITTEE. WHEREAS: This Committee in * tends to believe that the President of the Pure Republican Party has exceeded his powers by disavowing this Committee in the manner he has done, since such authority lies solely and exclusively with the Supreme Committee of the Coalition and after hearing and studying the case in all its details. WHEREAS: This Committee believes that the President of the Party has already prejudged the matter and it is very clear what the final decision will be on this appeal; Therefore: Be it resolved by the Local Committee of the Pure Republican Party of San Juan; FIRST: To maintain as valid in all its parts the Resolution dated November 17. SECOND: Not to attend the meeting to which the President of the Party has been summoned, since this Committee has already been disavowed, which disavowal will be the same decision that the Supreme Committee will ultimately make. "- THIRD: To send to the President a statement of the whole process that motivated the ResoTu1 tion of November 17, so that the Supreme Committee may resolve what it deems appropriate. Having been approved this Resolution by the Local Committee of the Pure Republican Party of San Juan, on this date we request the ' present copy to be sent to the President of the Party, Mr. Rafael Martínez Nadal. (s.) Antonio Bazán President, San Juan, P. R., Nov. 20, 1925, Nov. 20, 1925. i ' ' ' ' ~ . 89- , , ,, | | | IMPORTANT OF INTEREST TO TRAVELERS AND COMMERCIALISTS THE HOTEL ROMA I lowers its prices, enlarges the ¡ premises, and improves the service In , the ROMA welcomes you to one of its own FIRST-CLASS HOTEL , CLASS I Alien 39, San Juan. - - 1 - ■