ELMÜNDO
1ft PAGES. 3 CTS. I g m - tsst* ■ g DwtraSe" BMg. ■ NL IBM. - Peg SO.
in PAGS. 3 CTS. I g Zimitii - * $4."" I y - <r* - rr.Bf.
MORNING
MORNING
YEAR VIL
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
I Bnbliahed and distributed under permit (Ko. 801) authorized by the Act of October 6, 1017, on file at the Poet Office of i San Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. 8. BU' leson, Postmaster General. Entered u second class natter, J february 21, 1918, at the Poat Office at San Juah, Porto Bi co, (United States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1879.
SATURDAY, APRIL 4, 1925
NUMBER 2002.
Mr. Gay. candidate for Judge of the Federal Court, falls within the term "bona fide resident" referred to in the House Resolution.
Mr. Gay, a candidate for Judge of the Federal Court, enters the term "bona fide resident" referred to in the House Resolution endorsed by Gov. Towner, Mr. Coats, Mr. Wells, and Senator Curtis B. Judge Foote is another candidate for that office with a chance of receiving the Legislative In May of this year the term for which Judge Odlin, of the Federal Court, was appointed, will expire. And naturally, candidates are emerging to replace him. Even the legislature itself has just sent a Resolution to President Co ♦ oMdge, and to the Attorney General of the United States, requesting that a native or bona-fide resident of Puerto Rico be appointed to the office of judge of the Federal Court. We have the best reports that the current Federal Court Judge. Mr. Arthur F. Odin will remain in office, as he will be appointed for a new term by President Coodlige. However, true to our standard of conduct, we must give other news which reaches us and which may or may not be confirmed. MR GAY, CANDIDATE. Some considerable time ago, we said that one of the candidates for the office of Judge of the Federal Court ( was the present Prosecutor of that high body, Mr. John L. Gay. In the last few days, and "on the occasion of the Resolution adopted by the Legislature, there has been much talk about the possible appointment of Mr. Gay. And why these comments? Precisely because Attorney Gay is within the term "bona-fied resident of Puerto Rico" referred to in the Resolution approved by the House and Senate. Judge Odlin is not a bona-fide resident of Puerto Rico, since he has not made his home on the island, nor does he have an interest in Puerto Rico. The same is not true of Mr. Gay who is within the powers that qualify a person as a bona fide resident. In connection with this information, we know that Gay is a bona fide candidate. He is claimed to be endorsed by Hon. Governor Tow(Continued on pAg. 61 *. MfHÉMMWOilWWM*" WRITING AND ADDING MACHINES We guarantee repairs. P. R. TYPEWRITER .' REPAIRING SHOP Box IMS, Tel. ISM, Crtrto 10 Son Juan. P. B.
TWO FEDERAL LAXORTE SUB-MARSHALLS! EMBARKED THURSDAY TO ATLANTA DRIVING 3 PRISONERS Sentenced to varying penalties.-.There are several cases pending sentencing and Grand Jury action ün Guanlca juvenile pleads guilty to a postal offense, but asks to be sent to a reform school in Washington On Thursday of next week, and aboard the steamer "San Lorenzo'' will embark for the United States, two Federal Court Sub-Marshalls, the first Sub- > Marshall, Mr. Henry Hindell, and the 2nd Sub-Marshall, Don Alfonso Ojeda. Both federal officials will escort three young Puerto Ricans who are going to serve their sentences in Atlanta City. Atlanta City, convicted of various crimes. One of them, Natalio Gonzalez, is serving two years in Atlanta. Edwin Lavergne, is sentenced to serve two and a half years. And finally, Eusebio Torres is sentenced to serve three years in prison. PENDING JUDGMENT AND GRAND JURY ACTION The case of the minor Juan Rodriguez of D. R. CARRION Our friend Don Diego R. Carrion has been appointed general agent in Puerto Rico of the very important insurance companies Great American Insurance Co. of New York; Aetna Casualty and Surety Co. of Hartford; and The Automobile Insurance Co. of Hartford. These companies have been represented on the island until now by the firm of Hartzell, Carrion and San Juan. We congratulate our friend Carrion, wishing him all the great success he deserves in his new business. LADIES! LADIES! Until April 15 only we will be making silk crepe suits, from $10.00 to -$6.49. -Don't miss them. BAZAR WELLCOME ' Stop 16, Highway No. 82 SANTURCE
wW I H I I I , MB WaMM * Vk ■k RM ■ 1 I NUTRO TABLETS I ■ TAKE NUTRCL-I owe life and happiness ■ R to these tablets and never cease to recommend them. ■ ■ ■ The best tonic for the brain, nerves and fl ■ 1 blood. ¿-4*1 -<X) in all apothecaries.
A 'PRELIMIJ NAR REPORT FROM THE AUDITOR RESULTED IN THE REMOVAL OF MR. PURCELL FROM THE INCOME TAX BUSINESS.
"MR. PURCELL MUST WAIT FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE EVENTS," REPORTS HON. JUAN G. GALLARDO "The audit investigation will continue relentlessly against all those who have failed," alleges Hon. Kessinger "It is untrue that I have filed the complaint," says the Treasurer It has been little more than a week since the sensational affair of the Income Tax Negotiated began to ring in public opinion, an affair which reached the height of its importance yesterday morning. The Treasurer of Puerto Rico was formally accused by Mr. Purcell yesterday morning of having intervened in the scandalous reductions made in the tax amounts of the most powerful and wealthy corporations in the country. I THE TREASURER SPEAKS In order to know the answer given by Mr. Juan G. Gallardo, Commissioner of the Treasury, to the statements published under the signature of Messrs. Purcell and Planadcball, we visited him at his general Government offices, where he kindly responded to us, expressing that he had nothing to reply to the published statements. However, after we told him that he was not concerned about the accusations made, with a look on his face (Continued on page H" ¡ ¡ . S. i-, Guanica, now in Rio Piedras, who we understand has pleaded guilty to a postal offense, and to whom Judge Odlin appointed defense counsel, Ledo. Gabriel de la Haba. We are informed that this minor has requested that he be sent to the Industrial and Reformatory School in Washington, D. C. CL where he will learn a trade, and in addition, master English perfectly well. There is also pending for Grand Jury action the case against Jose Orellano, accused of a postal crime, consisting of a $19,805 fraud in the San Juan postal office, in which he was head of the Money Order Department.
Teatro Municipal Today Saturday, April 4 TWO GREAT FUNCTIONS VESPERTINA at 3:30 p m The jewel in 2 act" of Don Gregorio Martínez Sierra that reached so resounding success the day of its presentation: CANCION DE CUNA AND the precious dialogue that seems monologue, or monologue that seems dialogue of T. RamírezASI SON TODAS Interpreted by Ernesto VILCHES and Irene López HEREDIA EVENING AT 9:15 9a. -dé ABONO. For the first time in Puerto Rico, the wonderful Chinese tragedy in 3 acts, the greatest CREATION of Ernesto VILCHES, in which he obtains his most brilliant personal success. iWU LI CHAN6 TOMORROW SUNDAY Two Select Fundones. Matinee at 3:30 -* Evening * at 8:30 Ask for the special program.
Where are the heroes?
f With unprecedented frequency the press has been publishing lately the embarrassing scandals of some of the government's offices. The irregularities sometimes are tightrope walking in which the political hucksters execute minor ones, others seem to involve millions of dollars mysteriously missing. There is everything. The laughable equilibrium has been pulled suddenly by some hand, something has moved it, and everything augurs a fatal - and tragicomic - fall. j The impassable line created by the despicable party disciplines, the dense mesh of compa" drazgos and reciprocities, the impenetrable barrier erected by common interests, compromised positions and pledged words, all this infamous machinery that obstinately keeps the public away from the truth of what is happening in the governmental spheres, is beginning to fail, to weaken, to break. Let the curtains be drawn! Behind them we will surprise the great men of the country without the usual shaving, we will see them without the sanctimonious gestures with which they cover the perversity of their views before the masses. We are already beginning to surprise them. They believed that ignorance would be eternal, that deceit would never be discovered, that the cheap tinsel of their false prestige would always continue to look like gold. What a mistake! The one who asked to sacrifice himself for the fatherland, giving it his most meritorious services, we have found him crouching by the ark, pocketing his money. He who longed to give his blood for the country, we have found him cowardly compromising. These are the martyrs, these are the patriots. Let the bugle sound its shrill cry, and again we shall behold them wanting to come self-sacrificing, courageous, to the sea for the country, to beg to be allowed their holocaust before the altar! Yes, little by little the Courts of Justice will be reveiándoI notos to all. One by one they will fall wounded by the lightning ■ of public contempt. But what shall we say? No, there will be no such thing; it was meant to be, but it will be otherwise. The cover-ups will return, the godfathers will appear again to save the guilty, and the country will suffer the scorn of this new mockery. Everyone will continue to be honorable, all martyrs, patriots' Why? For a very simple reason, because the glass roofs do not let anyone throw stones at anyone, they save each other because the fall of one is the ruin of the other, because they are so related to each other all those who cause this alarming situation, that by affinity of kind and companionship all are interested in that no one appears before the eyes of the people as what it really is and gives embarrassment. The truth is this, and it is this in spite of the incense, the fifes, the graves, the tributes ..... In spite of the imbecility*jos who applaud, the reality is one. Why are the letters in the possession of the secretary of a Court not published....? Why do the patriots not make them known throughout the country and then try to cleanse themselves of so much ignominious stain which they cast upon their reputations? Why is it that when irregularities are discovered in any branch of the government the matter does not go beyond a resignation or, what is more wretched still, a .'Continued on p. 2)
i SWIGCETFBRiOTHERS I i i "i = -dLlflHk = /V s y y y y i y i y = - - ;1T7 I I I LMZjyffWn = ■ ■ S? 7 r , i y ? BKMw 7 i i i i U Ijli w i i i I | U I ' h ■> ; l IHl i = ■ fl I'i' *''■ ■ ■ fl i É --4- i /íííh'l i Latest creation of the House I HART SCHAffNfR & MARX i . .
THE EXPENDITURE BUDGET OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN FOR THE YEAR ID25-26 WILL AMOUNT TO Sl,l í 1,325.66
THE DEPARTMENT OF INSTRUCTION HAS THE BIGGEST SHARE OF THE BUDGET, FOLLOWED BY THE BUREAU The new budget proposal will be discussed by the Municipal Assembly on the 14th of this month. In view of precisely that reason, we have obtained some data on the Municipality, which we pass on to our readers. REVENUE AND INCOME Adding up* the various items, we find that the Municipality of San José during the year 1925-26 will have a total expenditure amounting to $1,111,325.66. And with what does the Municipality propose to cover all these expenses, the reader, and especially the taxpayer, will undoubtedly ask. 1 According to the estimates which have been made by the department concerned, the Municipality of San Juan during the year 1925-26 will have* a total revenue amounting to $1,121,133.70. If we study these figures, it will be seen that the authors of the project, showing great prudence, have still left a margin of $0,808.04, undoubtedly for unforeseen expenses. There is therefore no danger that the administrators of San Juan have overspent for the new year. INSTRUCTION AND TREASURY. According to the numbers we examined yesterday, the largest (Contínfia m the 6th page).
GUERLAIN All the exquisite and elegant perfumery of GUERLAIN The most famous House of Paris At very low prices in the FARMACIA BLANCO in San Juan and Santurce AMALIA ISAURA - IN - A Fuerza de Arrastrarse DE - Don JOSE ECHEGARAY SOLARES | | From different tnmafios ea 5 Santurce i i i Parque, Montefloree, Seboro- 5 ¡ co, Loiza 7 Punta Marías 5 ¡ Ask for information to: 5 HENRY W. DOOLEY 5 9 Tapia St ? Tel. 1295. - Santurce 5 "MXMMJOOOOOOOQDOOOOQOOOCKv "5S5!!!£SSSSS5SS**CC5S|iBBIIiaillvQSSS5SSS5SS53SS5 FOR RENT A splendid home in Avenida Fernandez No. 5, Parada 12. For Reports in the same house, high.
The illustrious orator Don Rafael Montoro, from Coba; the eminent writer Don Jose Vasconcelos, from Mexico, and institutions of world prestige such as the Royal Spanish Academy, the Ateneo de Montivídeo and a multitude of magazines and newspapers in Spain and America, have highly praised the speech delivered by Don Jose Coll y Cuchí in Santo Bomlngo, on the occasion of the crime of the Race.
We paid a visit yesterday in his happy home in Santurce to our dear friend Don Jose Coll y Cuchí, to talk about social issues. We found him writing and surrounded by papers. To a question from us, he replied: -I am answering some letters from friends abroad. I have acquired many good relations in Europe and in America, to defend Puerto Rico. You see this archive of newspapers and this enormous collection of letters. It has been almost two years since I began this work of mentally leaving Puer'tu Rico, and I am preparing for a tour 'né, to which I have been invited in order to occupy the tribune in all the republics of America, on the subject of Ibero-Americanism. Here I have the invitation. We did indeed see letters from the prominent men of Spain and America and the most prestigious newspapers and magazines. The name of Don José Coll y Cuchí is nowadays spreading all over our world, and his works are the object of commentaries? that elevate him to the summits of intellectuality. We could not but ask him how is it that nothing of those triumphs and of his great work . is said in Puerto Rico? Some day it will be known, because the truth always triumphs. You see, my good friend: as you see it now, there will come the opportunity to let everyone know. j Then we asked our dear compatriot to let us be the ones to make it known, even in part. And Don Pepe agreed, and that is the reason for these notes, which are insignificant before the tribute of admiration and affection that Puerto Rico must pay him. Among the great number of letters we read those of the Royal Spanish Academy and of the Ateneo of Montevideo: and he allowed us to [copy some words from those of the famous Cuban orator Don Rafael Mon toro and of the exalted Mexican writer Don José Vasconcelos, written to Don José Coll y Cuchí, congratulating him for his grandiose speech on race, the one for which they gave him the precious star of brilliants. Vasconcelos told him: "I am deeply interested in your work. I thank you very much for all your contributions to my magazine. Count me as a modest collaborator of your great patriotic work". And Montoro writes to you: "Allow me to send you the testimony of OLIMPO and VICTORY A SINGLE SINGLE SAND at 8 P. M ' The Covered Wagon" (The Covered Wagon) With Lois Wilson, -- J. Warren Kerrigan, - Ernest Florence. The best movie in the world. SELL Fine living room and desk furniture. -inform^- Phone 130 Santurce.
| FRENCH STEAMER "MAQORIS" 1 [ Expected in this port from the West Indies 1 I about April 21, and will continue her voyage to I k CORUÑA and HAVRE. j k Freight is accepted for the above ports. 1 [ For further information contact 1 BEHN BROTHERS INC Agents, Telephone 257 Telephone Edf. ( k San Juan Tanca-Tetouan 1
ULTIMA HORA (/ "The review of accounts in the Department of Posts of P. R. accuses great deficiency and lack of competence" So declares the Grao Jury of the Federal Court in a letter sent to the Juer Odlln.The letter is related to the Orellano case The indictment will be read today against José Orellano, accused of embezzling $19,805 i The Grand Jury of the Federal Court has brought an indictment against the following persons: Pedro Avilés, accused of the theft of postal package items at the Río Piedras post office, will be read the indictment on the seventh of this month. Against Manuel Cerecedo, accused of sending lists of Santo Domingo lottery tickets through the mail, the indictment will also be read on the seventh. i In the case of Domingo Valdca, who was accused of an alleged crime of theft of bankruptcy funds, the Grand Jura| íOnttnfia in ln pte. O [ my sincere admiration." J Amigo don Pepe, we told you, this is a lot: the great Montoro admi- [ ra you as an orator: and the great Vasconcelos asks you for the collaboration . of your pen. But why don't you publish your speech here for the country to know? ,! -I am going to make an effort and I will publish it in a pamphlet to give it to the country. i[ We left that home of happiness, leaving the compatriot among his parents and children. THE WORLD is carried away with rejoicing' for the triumph of the friend k, and < fulfills the duty of * making known to the country the prestige - that abroad gives it a shoulder of talent and patriotism. ' COMMISSION HIPICA INSU. LAR DE PUERTO RIOO ' NOTICE THE COMMISSION HIPICA IN. * BULAR agreed in the session of March 31, 1925, conce. A period of ten (10) days from the date of this notice, for all those stables or persons who have applied for registration of horses or foals in the country, to submit the photographs by duplicate as provided in Article 189 of the Regulations; it being understood that those who do not comply with this requirement within the requested period, the applications submitted will be cancelled and denied. * The applications submitted will be cancelled and the registrations will be denied. San Juan, Puerto Rico, April 4, 1925. J. PENA REYES, Secretary-Auditor. Advt.
S=3