THE WORLD
1A°A6S.3CTS. I Otets: --Faorto B1m ■ I ■ Dutrad"" BMc- I R Y "L IMS. - Box 345.
rinPAGS:3Cfs? | | SoBMtre -- - - - 85.05 I I I II Vw Ala-" m 9M
JLA MARAÑA
JLA MARAÑA,
' ¿ YEAR VII
-AN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
Published end distributed under permit (Wo. 801) authorized by the Aet of 'u -iavr - - "-sBen Jun, Porto Kico, By order of the President, A 8. Burienon. Postuuwter Geaerel* zJzt OfU *. - a L 1919 ' " M Suu JuL. Port. Bfco. (Umud "X X
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 3, 1925.
NUMBER 3083.
Pending appointments to the executive cabinet are expected at a moment's notice.
M I Asenos stated this at Fortaleza CHANGING 1MPRESÍOÑÉS WITH MRS. HUYKE AND MC COWN M. 1ORD0VA DAVILA HELD IN WASHINGTON A NEW CANDIDATE FOR INSTRUCTION . - - -
Dr. Colly Cudí exonerated in the Boston Circuit Court M i ficho Court reverses the decision in this case by Judge Odlin 1 M llN TRIUMPH OF THE LEDOS. DEXTER AND C. COLL AND CUCHI M - The Court of Appeals of ton has just fa-w ¿ * llar 1 case degpnBMM Contempt of theE Federal Court® by which hable® was tlour friend the " ' ' . Dr. Victor Coll yJjT ; * *£ Cuchí to serve|Mtag r ¡. 60 days in ' Cibo. _ The court doing due justice to the prominent physician, our good friend, praises in the sentence the manner of the sympathetic doctor. The lawyers Frank Dexter and Cayetano Coll y Cuchí, who were handling the appeal, have obtained a great triumph given the terms in which the opinion of the Court is expressed. All the errors pointed out by the eminent lawyers were also considered by the Court. In the manner as Tie expresses the (Continued on 6th. page.) _ j Palace Hotel Lunch $1.00 Lunch $1.25 Special Subscriptions 1 L. =
Of the departments in the Government of this island which by the responsibility they represent are ranked among the most important the one of Public Instruction oéüpa principal position. This is the reason to justify the growing interest of the whole country to know the pending appointment for the direction of that educational department. There is also another incentive to public comment. The candidates who have been sounded for the headship of instruction, by their competence, are qualified to carry out the functions it represents, with I success. The fact that political intervention is ruled out in the selection of candidates, and that any agreement that may have been made in this respect by any party is considered little more than null and void, is fully confirmed by the information that we have lately obtained. THE CANDIDATE OF THE ALLIANCE. In government circles it has been learned that the Alliance has recommended its candidate for the post of Chief of Instruction. We have not been able to confirm this news. However, we have it on very good authority that Resident Commissioner Córdova Dávila has proposed to General Me Intyre, so that he in turn may propose to President Coolidge, the candidacy of Mr. Masó, a Puerto Rican who resides in the North. WASHINGTON CORRESPONDENCE - The fate of the candidate proposed to the national authorities by the Resident Commissioner in Washington is not yet known. Mr. Maso is considered an authority on educational matters, and although he lacks the preparation and experience of the present Commissioner, Mr. Juan B. Huyke, he is still a strong candidate. (Continued on page 81.
a- TSI- - - - - - - - -.TV T r [ COMPAGNIE GENERALE TRANSATLANTIQUE i VAPOR fRANCESTARAIBE' .... It is expected in this port on October 7 proce- ¡ dente from Cuba, Haiti and Santo Domingo and from here it will continue direct voyage to Le Havre, (France). Admits cargo for the above mentioned port as well as for all ports in Northern Europe. Please reserve your berth in advance and for further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. agents, San Juan, P. R. Telephone 257.
f CEMENT ''LEHIGH" ■ We offer our customers LEHIGH brand PortA jand cement, in bags, available goes in No. 6. Order the one you need, as it comes w and demand is strong. ■> PRICE SERVICE I Rolan & Tejedor S. en C.
FOR RENT ij Three large premises recently repaired, in o the Marina, next to the Arsenal with service to two streets, j formerly occupied by (os Abarca's workshops. For further information, please contact: > Apartado Correos 354, San Juan. Telephone 653, San Juan or P.O. Box 1182, San Juan ' Telephone 1731, San Juan.
■KHDM*&OP.*.UHPIRWOOD. h.M Michael Arlen, novelist and playwright, on his visit to Hollywood. He will direct the production of his masterpiece "The Green Hat." The question of dry law is once more raised in Pto, Rico -u- A new case on appeal to the Boston Circuit Court M Harassed sentenced to fine and 90 days in jail M j ( Much has been said on our . island as to whether or not the national prohibition law is here in force. Time and again different lawyers have 'announced that they will take the case to the high courts of the United States i to have this legal question ( settled once and for all. But it is certain that so far, at least we are not aware of any specific case that has been taken to the Supreme Court in Washington. THREE HUNDRED DOLLARS FINE AND NINETY DAYS IN JAIL On the sixteenth day of September last, the case of Manuel Ramos, a citizen accused of possessing and selling brandy, was heard in the Federal Court before the Honorable Judge Wells. After the prosecution and defense evidence had been given and the case had been masterfully argued by Prosecutor Gonzalez, the jury that heard the trial found him guilty of the crime charged against him. Manuel Ramos was consequently sentenced to pay a fine of three hundred dollars and to serve ninety days in jail. The defendant's attorney, Ledo. Luis A. Castro, filed a motion for new trial which was argued on September 26 before the Honorable Judge Wells, and was denied, as well as a motion for "in arrest of judgment''. Counsel Castro appealed the case to the Circuit Court of Boston, and in addition to the other grounds alleged as grounds for reversal of the judgment it is contended that the national prohibition law is not in force in Puerto Rico. (Continued on page 3.) I For sale cheap a 3 ton White truck* with brand new tires, cavia and hood. Inquiries: Garage Borinquen, Bayamón or Seiberííng Rubber Agency, RECINTO SUR 53, San Juan. Dr. R. Bernabe OCCULIST | Ships on í - j study trip on the 15th of co | i rcurrent.
SAWAD BEGINS OVERSEAS CAMPAIGN M
GREAT OPPORTUNITY You can buy your own concrete house with your own plot of land in: CIUDAD NUEVA Modern urbanization, ideal for residences, with only paying cash 40% of the cost and the rest in three years in annual, semi-annual or quarterly payments, at your best convenience. Come visit us and you will be able to appreciate the DRY LAND, the always prevailing breeze, wide streets and planted with trees, which makes this urbanization uha Garden City, ideal for residences. CIUDAD NUEVA Box 17 Hato Rey, - Parada 33 - Phone 1301 or 715 green, Santurce.
It is desired to publicize the work being done in Puerto Rico M SPEAKING WITH THE HEALTH COMMISSIONER, DR. ORTIZ M The Department of Health, ably directed by Dr. Pedro N. Ortiz, is one of the departments of the island government that is campaigning best for Puerto Rico in the United States. Dr. Ortiz is one of those who believe ■ that the better we are known in the North, the more likely it is that our rights will be recognized. But he does not merely hold these beliefs, he also puts them into practice and uses every means to ensure the effectiveness of his methods. A MAGAZINE To this effect, Dr. Ortiz, is edi- ¡ Continued on page 5 I The owners of public automobiles wish to be heard by the authorities of San Juan in an affair which they consider to be of interest to them. The Municipal Assembly will take them into account in the event that this matter is finally dealt with ] M 1 '* fia the - penultimate session of the Municipal Assembly, a communication signed by ¡ ' numerous owners of public automobiles of San Juan, requesting ', that body to allow them to appear before any Committee of that body to present their points of view on the sites to be designated for the placement of automobiles in this city. ' The Assembly unanimously j . agreed to reply to the said gentlemen, that in case the Assembly should adopt any ordinance relative to that matter, they would be * heard and that they should apply to the Special Traffic Committee, which has in its hands all matters relative to traffic in this city, its President being Mr. Roberto H. Todd, Mayor of San Juan. It was also agreed by the Assembly to request from Mr. Mayor, news on the current status of the said Commission, and its delicate task, honoring the magistracy. We have known Mr. Sepúlveda 1 for many years. We have 3 followed him in his per- ( sonal unfolding, which has been a series of only- 1 lids triumphs by virtue of his pro- ' pious effort- persistent, great, worthy- and therefore we know what he weighs and what he is worth. When he was just a teenager, his aiitions took him to the judicial offices where he rendered intelligent services as an amanuensis and was a journalist with a liberal spirit, with a fighting temperament but without exaltations. Later, in those days of cruel uncertainties, in which perhaps due to a regrettable ( fíVmtlnús on page R) TOBACCO FLOUR We offer it at a price that does not admit competition. ALONSO RIERA & CO" Inc. Tetuán 58-60 and 62. San Juan, P. R.
000<ZZZDO<ZTDO<ZZ2>OCZZZ>0 ü NO MORE Sf ADMITTED and n PORTRAITS FOR TL CON- O y COURSE OF "PUERTO 8 Q RICO ILLUSTRATED" U 2 Com© days ago i j I I had been announcing, ,the day before yesterday (J (J (J setiembre 30, at five o'clock in the afternoon, the deadline for [ I admission of portraits for the Beauty Contest that the O O O popular magazine "Puerto Rico f] Ilustrado" is carrying out closed. x O O p. From now on only those that the ReU vista received up to the closing mo- X O O O mentó will be published. 2 The sympathetic struggle in which a Story & Clark IJ o autopiano is offered as a Prize to the o O O gentile victor is taking more and more interest, especially now that the end is approaching. There are only a few months fl left before the final scrutiny.
The Free Federation does not sponsor an emigration to Hawaii M The ¡dea will not have the endorsement of Federationist leaders . They contend that they would be worse off there than here M In our yesterday's edition we published a cablegram from Washington in which it was reported that the War Department and General McIntyre are sponsoring an emigration of Puerto Ricans to Hawaii as the most effective and practical means of satisfactorily solving the problem of the unemployed. In the opinion of the! national authorities in Hawap 1 there is scope for accommodating our' excess population with great po- 1 sibilities of success, ' THE LABOR NEGOTIATE It is not yet known what the attitude of the Bureau of Labor will be when this question is formally raised, but we do know that the head of that Bureau, Mr. Honoré, is carefully studying the War Department's idea before venturing his opinion. THE FEDERACION LIBRE Now, as to the Federación Libre de Puerto Rico, to which numerous workers are affiliated, we can assure you that this organization will in no way sponsor an emigration to Hawaii and that, on the contrary, it will prevent those affiliated with the Federation from marching together with the other workers. The aforementioned leaders of the Free Federation maintain that neither the climate, nor the customs, nor the working conditions are favorable to the Puerto Rican workers, and that these would lose out with the change, since at least here they are in their own land and have the protection of their government, while there they would go to fight in the large sugar cane plantations, in very disadvantageous conditions according to the opinion of these leaders. The opinion p U e 8 efi this matter is already beginning to manifest itself CINEMA LUNA TODAY - SATURDAY 3 _ TODAY THE LAST PERDAÑO With the Astros: VIRGINIA VALLI - AND - FORREST STANLEY A topical, luxurious and exciting production. A truly extraordinary film. * Last Minute! | i : ' CASPOID ' ARRIVES ! : , , , § i the wonderful remedy :: * ti : for H CASPA and - fx : í)e Sale in the Pharmacies" $-.
THE MUNICIPAL SI- WON IS COMPLICATED! IN SAN JUAN
M There is a divergence of criteria ; as to the Charity Commissioner M THE QUESTION WILL HAVE TO BE SUBMITTED TO THE TERRITORIAL M The Socialist-Republicans of this capital continue to be concerned about the appointment of the new Charity Commissioner. In reality, the socialists are as in- ¡ terested as the pure ones in this question, since they wish to claim the office and do not know the opportune moment to do so, although they remain in expectation. The latest developments are complicating the situation, and adding to the interest in this "affair" which has been so much discussed during the last few weeks. DIVERGENCIES OF CRITERION AMONG THE PURE The fact is that at the last minute the Hon. Domingo Se-j púiveda is already definite-[ tively in this city to take up his post. -His appointment to District Judge is considered one of the successes of the Executive M. He was sworn in.
4. he took possession of his office of District Judge on 19 and is now definitively among us. I Well come ' s < | the integérrimo ma t ■ gístrado! 1 St. John has < 3 -true compla- ■ :ence in receiving- ■ le and in cooperating ,
with him for the purposes of the better administration of justice. The appointment of Don Domingo Sepulveda signifies for the Eie- ] cutive of Puerto Rico one of its . brilliant and positive successes, for 1 he brings us an official who i meets the qualities of suitability, i 1 industriousness, probity, goodness and character, to fulfill airosa- *°n- i * - - ' -- - - - - ■ _ I
HOTEL RESTAURANT ROMA On the occasion of having* changed ownership, this reputable Hotel, after having undergone major renovations tending to Jar a better and faster service, offers at situation prices the most exquisite and best prepared dishes at extremely cheap prices. Visit us and you will be convinced that nowhere else will you get the service and food at prices like at the Hotel Restaurant ROMA, located in the commercial center of San Juan. MAS & RIERA Owners Alien .39 Tel. 276 San Juan, P- R-
Fernández Vanga says merger will kill Puerto Rico Union
M I ACCEPT THE ALLIANCE SO AS NOT TO STOP BEING A UNIONIST M THE TERRIBLE DILEMMA - THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ALLIANCE AND MERGER M
One of our editors wanted to interview Mr. Fernandez Vanga yesterday to offer our readers his latest views on the throbbing question of dissolving the Alian za of our Historic Parties to form the Fusion of elfoa. After overcoming some difficulties we were able to enter his office where he received us with great cordiality. -We come in the name of THE WORLD. Welcome; as long as neither the Devil nor the Flesh comes after us, welcome to THE WORLD. -Which is better than in bad company. You occupy the largest seat-he continued, -pointing to the comfortable rocking-chair in the center of the room. you.... -No, no, you; - and a little im peratively he pointed to the chair again, and he sat down, not in a chair, but on the table that serves as a desk, next to the chair. | Thank you very much, you're welcome. If you smoke and you have what to smoke, I don't offer it to you because I gave up the habit some time ago. | And I haven't acquired all of it. - I -You still have time. If you dare to acquire it, you know: "Smoke what your land produces". -Do you have any interest in native tobacco? I -If I did, I would smoke, and I wouldn't have told you the latter without first agreeing on the price of the advertisement for your newspaper. I Ah;... I didn't come to you to look for advertisements. They are sent to EL MUNDO voluntarily in greater quantity than you can publish them... I have come to talk to you about politics, -To talk to me or for me to talk to you? -To talk to me or for me to talk to you? 1 Then let's talk; you start. I And we begin like this: (Continued on page 7)
All indications are that the Secretary of the Executive will move to Audit Auditor Int Me Cown con ferenced yesterday with Messrs. Towner and Van Deussen M EXCHANGING IMPRESSIONS WITH CANDIDATES ' I M- Aim is about to decide on the appointment to Audit of Port Ri co, a position of President Coolidge's exclusive concern, and for which Messrs. Van Deusen, Me Cown, Terry, and Siegmund Siegmund Terry, among others, have been sounded out. Terry, and Siegmund. "Among the persons named to fill the position vacated by Mr. Kessinger are the names of valuable elements in our society, persons of recognized prestige, whose experience in various activities of new government, qualify them to figure with distinction in any nomination of importance. CONFERENCE IN FORTALEZA However, in spite of the unquestionable high chances of the above-mentioned gentlemen for appointment to the Auditorship, one of these, Mr. R. J. Van Deussn. figures prominently as the one destined to receive the Presidential appointment. It would be a deserved promotion. Justifying our assertion is the fact that Mr. Van Deasen, from all indications, is (Continued on pAg. 8 i O tomorrowTs° SingTo O' ° Day of sea rides. Don't U forget and take your family, ri POPULAR COMPANY O<ZZZ>O<ZZZ>O<ZZZ>O<ZZZ>O<Z=Z>O<ZZ or.
OA-£N■TQP fr ~H^' - I K I O I O Geo SAHOFRS " CO> \ *OSt" " co / ' J. z " y-- ¿ . z A Svc* j / x Á M 14.""-" E ■ s--@r "1AYAGu £ A = \ O C ClHTMOH <■ * 1 1B 11 W * I H IJ " I jf HIM/-. V=*J~~ - \ z < PONC" ■ '- i 6v*yAiha maaiahi \ ~ ~~ KORBER "r CO. INC.W.% FIRE - CYCLONE EARTHQUAKE AUTOMOBILE-MARITIMOUS-POSTAL PACKAGE-POSTAL PACKAGE-REMISSIONSOTVALUE-EQUIPMENT- ACCIDENTS FIANZAS STUBBE BROTHERS, Inc. moved their Offices and Warehouse to 71 Alien Street, (opposite "Santiago A. Panzardi Ltd."), where at the orders of their customers. !cn mies imw I HAVE JUST RECEIVED 2,000 BARRELS FOR THE STEAMER "MIMI HORN" F. FREIRIA, S. EN C. MARINA, SAN JUAN, P. R. APARTMENT 912. TELEPHONE 143.