THE M1ND
11 n PAGS. 3 I g nema": "Fvartv Btet ■ > rienraae- BM*. g tam - **-
1 q PAGS. 3 CTS. I g Baratre m BAM | tn M >. M "T.M
MORNING
T.M. JOURNAL,
YEAR VIL
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by me Act of October 6, 1917, on file at the Post Office Of San Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the President, A. S. BiKieoon, Postmaster General.* Entered as -nond class msttsr, febniary 21, 19 IS, at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rico, (United States of America 1 ) undec the Act of march S, 1879.
SATURDAY, JULY 25, 1925
NUMBER 3014
TERMINATION OF THE PRESENT LEGISLATIVE SESSION DEPENDS ON THE ATTITUDE OF THE HOUSE.
At the last moment it is intended to end in two or three days.-However on Thursday afternoon no understanding had yet been reached as to the Income-Tax THE CONFERENCE COMMITTEES HAVE INSTRUCTIONS TO WORK UNTIL EVENING The block of the House remains in expectation, awaiting the conference report.-Unless i a caucus does not resolve otherwise, it will not be possible I to end before the last day.
The uncertainty is not yet over, but we can at least say that the termination of the present legislative session depends on the attitude of the House as far as the conference report on the budget is concerned. It is therefore a matter of a day or two, or of weeks, depending on circumstances. AT THE LAST MINUTE. But we do know that at the last minute the watchword is to finish as soon as possible, perhaps within two or three days. What we do not know yet is whether it will be definitively finished, or if, on the contrary, the fundamental legislation will be approved and a recess will begin in three or four months' time. " However, as we have said before, everything depends on the attitude t which the House adopts as far as the budget is concerned and the rebate which is imposed. THE SITUATION. As of Thursday afternoon, that is, the day before yesterday, no agreement had been reached on the in-come-tax and the budget and excise taxes had not even begun to be discussed in conference committee. Therefore, everything that is done will be done at the last minute, because of those who have come up unexpectedly. We have also received reports that the conference committees have been instructed to activate as much work as possible and if possible to work late into the night to reach an understanding. Especially the conference committee dealing with the budget will have to work very hard to submit its report on time. THE HOUSE BLOC. As for the Chamber's bloc, it is the Committee of the Board of Directors, which was appointed by the Board of Directors on the thirtieth day of July of next year. The Board of Directors appointed the thirtieth of July next at ten o'clock in the morning for the celebration of the Ordinary General Meeting of the current fiscal year in the meeting room of the Bank's domicile in San Juan, Tetnán 5, the * shareholders are hereby summoned and are hereby informed that, in addition to the current business, the reform of the seventh, eighth, tenth, sixteenth and seventeenth clauses of the Bank's Articles of Incorporation * and of Articles 10-11-12-18 of the Bylaws will be discussed. Ban Juan May 15, 1925. COMMERCIAL BANK OF PUERTO RICO. A. SARMIENTO, Secretary. Advt. - TODAY - - TODAY - ■" 1 . " 1 I I I Imperial Cinema ; 1A SCHOOL OF US WIVES'
The Senate, which is composed of seventeen representatives absolutely opposed to the budget cut, is known to remain in expectation, awaiting the report of the conference committee and ready to vote against the report if it imposes a pay cut for employees and the elimination of items and appropriations. IT WILL NOT BE POSSIBLE TO FINISH, UNLESS.... The impression we were able to gather yesterday afternoon in the House is that it will not be possible to finish before the last day if the block is held in place. Now, if on the other hand, a caucus is held, and that caucus resolves to the contrary, and the bloc decides to change its mind, then and only then will the Legislature be able to finish within two or three days as intended. And after all, we can no longer affirm anything at this point.... We too therefore limit ourselves to remain in expectation, promising our readers that we will keep them duly informed of everything that happens. ■ ■■■■■ i. What are the plans of the Allied Directorate? WHAT IS THE PLAN THE MAJORITY HAS AT THE LAST MINUTE? GREAT SUNDAY EDITION OF "EL MUNDO".- SENSATIONAL INFORMATION Our Sunday edition this week fills our burning desire to make each edition surpass the last. And for those of you who read our last Sunday edition and noticed how interesting it was, this is no mean feat. Our news section couldn't be more interesting. We have picked up on the front page the sensation of the day for the benefit of our many readers. Do you know reader what soji the plans of the Alliance Board of Directors? Do you know what the majority plans to do at the last minute? What does Dr. Butte tell us about the new judicial combination? What about <je cierAGUA DE "EVIAN" U MS *611* D! MESA Used in the world's leading restaurants and hotels; mildly diuretic. Price per case: $11.00 net. AGENTS FOR P. R. J. M. WHITE. INC. I SELL 0 RENT my Ondado home. I ALSO SELL all my furniture and pictures, including my collection of Japanese furniture brought expressly from Japan, before the war, today almost impossible to get. Unbeatable conditions. CAY. COLL CUCHI ■ Tel. 286 Alien, 82.
In an interview held between the Governor and Major Wilson. the former offered the latter that the National Guard item would be reinstated in the Budget Yesterday the hearing of the case brought against Mr. Wilson by Major Urrutia was adjourned A reporter of ours exchanged impressions yesterday with Major Mr. John A. Wilson. Chief of the National Guard of Puerto Rico, in order to know his opinion about the recent elimination by the Senate of the appropriation for expenses of said institution which had been included in our budgets for some years. Mr. Wilson, among other things, told us that he had conferred with the Governor on this matter, and the Chief Executive had made representations to him to the effect that said matter would be settled favorably, for the interests of the Puerto Rico National Guard, since he - Mr. Towner - would render his good services to the Legislature, so that said item would be included again in the Island Budget, still pending approval before our House of Representatives. As far as we could learn, Mr. Wilson is very optimistic in this matter, and believes that the new Expenditure Bill will not be passed without a corresponding appropriation for the National Guard. Mr. Wilson attaches extraordinary importance to this question, alleging that our National Guard, being the first in the United States, is well worth the sacrifice of the necessary funds for its support. While we are on the subject of Major Wilson, we take this opportunity to say that we met him in the corridors of the Municipal Court presided over by Hon. Manzano Aviñó, awaiting, as we learned, a case of assault and battery that Major Urrutia has filed against him, as a consequence of the personal incident between the two of them, which we reported in these same columns. The trial was adjourned for next Tuesday, it having been announced that the municipal prosecutor, Mr. Flores, will take part in it. The defendant, Mr. John A. Wilson, is represented by the well-known lawyer Mr. Damian Monserrat Jr. on the trip to Washington by the Legislature? Do you know what happened lately in Fortaleza? What plans does Colonel Lewis have? Who is the mysterious character who is in Puerto Rico? All this is cleared up in our Sunday edition tomorrow. We devote a whole page to selected reading by great authors. This single page is enough to pass the boring hours of Sunday morning with great fun. And for the many readers of "Remigio" it is our turn to give you this time some good news in compensation for the disappointment we gave you last week. The journey of his life that Don Angel Rivero writes this week is very interesting and also has the writer has other very important things to tell our readers. (Continued on the 6th page.) SALON FEMINA (BEAUTY PARLOR) The best barbershop in Ponce for ladies and gentlemen acquired by Mr. Francisco Rodriguez. Elegant works according to models. Careful service. Visit us and you will be satisfied. -Calle del Sol No. 4, -, Ponce, P. R. i
THE JOURNAL
Burdened with the weight of injury comes a colleague distilling bile. Don't honor his innocent fury: to the CANASTO with him! Never go down to the infectious brothel; the Press is light; and, faithful to its mission, it must not use the barbaric dialect of the filthy still life. Are there journalists who die in the mud? Give them courage to get out of there: let them climb up; let them clean themselves, if they want to climb up to you. Fight the adversary face to face and you will conquer social respect: be firm, unyielding, uncompromising, but never uneducated..... And when armed with the clumsy insidiousness comes to your table fetid paper in which the microbe of envy breathes, to the BASKET with him! Luis MUÑOZ RIVERA.
The Legislature will not finish its work on Sunday : Representatives and Senators deny the information in a newspaper yesterday stating that the House and Senate will be in session until Thursday of next week at the latest t "Readers of "El Mundo" can be completely sure that we will not have finished hesita on Wednesday or Thursday of next week", say Representatives Messrs. Tous Soto, Castejón, Cumpiano, Berrios, Muñoz, Planellas, Miranda, Valdivieso, Lastra Charriez, Guerra Mondragon, Romani and Senators Triarte, González Mena and Aponte.
. | In a newspaper of yesterday afternoon, under the heading "The Legislature Closes its Sessions,'' it is emphatically stated that the House, Senate and Senate intend to declare themselves in permanent session to work during Saturday and Sunday, closing immediately the Legislature. 1 the Legislature, so that I next Monday it will be possible for the ( 1 Audit and Treasury Departments to order and prepare for the payment' } 1 of employees under the new budget." ' ROUND NEGATIVE To the Senators and Representatives i we met yesterday afternoon we put the following question: ■ -It is assured in "La Democrax cia" that the Legislature finishes its j work on Sunday. What about that....? Mr. TOUS SOTO: ■ ' ' I estimate that it will be completely impossible to finish the most necessary legislative work before Thursday of the following week". i SENATOR APONTE: "No, no, no. You can be completely sure that we will not finish before Thursday of next week. MR. GUERRA MONDRAGON: "That cannot be. We will finish by the end of next week. It is completely impossible to finish before then. The Joint Income and Expenditure Conference Committee has not reached any final agreement. ' ' MR. GONZALEZ MENA: "By tomorrow, Sunday? What will it be? It will be by next Friday. There is still work to be done. MR. BERRIOS: "No way. There is no possible way to finish the three pending projects of conferen-' j cies before next Wednesday." I
MR. MUÑOZ *' That I am not of the opinion that we will come to finish by the end of next week.'' ' 'ü LUCAS P. VALDIVIESO: "We will not finish until Wednesday or Thursday of next week. In any case, I plan to embark for the Canary Islands on Friday of next week. ' ' 1 MR. PLANELLAS I "It is completely impossible to finish before Thursday of next week. I don't see how we could finish by tomorrow. ' ' MR. MIRANDA. "I am of the opinion that we will finish early next month. before? No way." MR. CUMPIANO: "We will be finishing the urgent and absolutely necessary tra| lows by the beginning of August. Everything that remains cannot be done, before ' ' '. MR. CASTELLON: "We will finish when the House wishes. And that will not be before Thursday . . MR. ROMANI: "We will not finish until the beginning of next month. It is impossible to finish before then. MR. LASTRA CHARRIEZ: "Surely the House will finish its work from Thursday to Friday. No one who is aware of the pending work can say otherwise''. i | MR. TRIARTE: "The Senate is waiting for the reports of its Committees of Conferences in I . RENTED Magnificent premises for family with , three apartments, kitchen, good sanitary and independent service, i Modest price. -Report: Recin- ( to West No. 3. Altos. ' JOSE FERNANDEZ
The Income-Tax will be passed as desired by the House.-Lower House policy has succeeded in conference committee.
The watchword was q. the Legislature seated last night in permanent session Although there are three running holidays, there will be work.-In the House there was a noisy protest The bloc representatives will accept if they come out of permanent session, but are willing to sit a month if necessary.
I 1.he situation has become more and more complicated in the last hour. The slogan we picked up late yesterday afternoon was for the Legislature to declare itself in permanent session last night until adjourned. As our readers know. And in spite of everything, if the Legislature is declared in permanent session, as we can assure you, then there will be continuous work from today until it is possible to finish. This has given rise to a noisy protest yesterday among the vast majority of the representatives, who in the corridors spoke in frank and clear terms, stating that they did not accept this last minute determination. THE BLOCK IN ACTION The representatives who form the famous bloc, the vast majority of whom are enthusiastic young people, full of energy and courage, told us yesterday afternoon that they will accept the permanent session if they are defeated, but that they are not prepared to remain in permanent session for as long as necessary, At the same time they tell us that the budget has practically not been discussed in conference committee, that the same thing is happening with the excise tax, that in-come-tax the salvation of the bill depends on a senator of the minority, and that they are not willing to act at the last minute with such haste, especially when it has been possible to wait until now. WHAT THE LEADERS WANT. Meanwhile, the leaders, and especially those in the Senate, want it finished Monday through Tuesday, claiming that if this is not done, the crisis will become more and more intense. That is how things stand. We shall see what attitude the House adopts, on whom the situation now depends. - 4 fi* EXCHANGE MARKET Dollars (N. Yor*) 20 C. Pounds 4.87 114 Franc" 76%D Pesetas 26V 2 %D Lira" 3.92 - - - a." . . ■ - * .1* ■"■ fc-"V" -L 11 T, inflows and outflows for a few days from now. However, I don't think we will be finished before Thursday. ' ' HIGH EMPLOYEE Of important firm would accept pro.' positions for work with serious San Juan home. Office practice- Traveling experience- Possesses both languages. Best reference your current position. Box 577 - Ponce. . NEVERAS Unique opportunity in oak and metal. Good for Restaurant, Grocery Store, Butcher Shop, Drugstores, Hospitals" etc. Luna 38, Tel. 1519, Box 1509 SANUUAN
"Mr. Gay knows as much about law as he does about zoology: to say that in Florida there are crocodiles instead of alligators"- said former Judge Odlin in correspondence to his friends in P. R. Mr. Gay, says that he never knew anything about the law. According to the information we have obtained, Judge Odlin does not forget his friends in Puerto Rico and, consistent with them, he often writes to them, taking advantage of the occasion of each letter to reply to those who have said something unpleasant about him, or to pass on to his friends some news that the former judge considers of interest to us. Such as, for instance, the following I To a friend and fellow-colleague of ours, ex-Judge Odlin. during these' last few days, he has sent a note addressed to the late Judge j Sweet. In said humorous note, Judge Odlin refers to a report which appeared in a Tampa, Florida, newspaper, in which a reporter interviews Mr. W. R. Bennett, former Colonel of the Puerto Rico Police, connected with the insurance business in Puerto Rico, and to the question, "What was the matter with him? -What was wrong with) Judge Odlin . in Puerto Rico? ... . Bennett coni, testified, that Odlin, was backed by the lawyers, by the people of the island, but could not get along with the insolent government. Surely, that this is a mistake and has to do with the way those here pronounce the word, (insular) which, hearing, perhaps, with such ra- ■ pidity the Tampa newspaper reporter, thought it was some "insolent government," and applied that epithet to the government s that could not get along with Judge Odlin. ANSWERS MR. GAY In another epistle which the judge addresses to another -friend of his, intimate, don testa Mr. Odlin those manifes(Continued on the 6th. page.) , A part of the houses in San Francisco No- 71 occupied by the Porto Rico Drug Co. and Cruz No. 31 is FOR SALE. Loss 39, Stop 43'/ 2 , Santurce. Advt. CONSTÉ Dcmo advise my friends and the trade in general that I NEVER belonged to the furniture house" qne jiraba with e! name of Lópex Nussa & Co. Know also that nine months ago I completely left the commission business, devlcíndome at present to the branch of stationery exclusively. VICTOR R. LOPEZ NUSSA ■*E1 Paper Man" i san juan. Rich orchard
Senators Gonzá* lez Fagundo, Fuertes, Iriarte and Aponte have been left alone "If I were left alone, my vote would be the only one against the IncomeTax Law," says González Fagundo For the bill to succeed in the Senate it will need the vote of Senator Martínez Nadal, who is not in San Juan Some senators are preparing to speak out and tell truths as soon as this matter comes up for discussion It is painful to say so, but the public should know what the real situation is. What is certain is that at the last minute it has been resolved to approve the income tax as desired by the House, that is, with the retroactive tax and a four thousand dollar exemption. It is therefore evident, and it is good for the country to know it, that the policy of the Lower House has triumphed completely within the conference committee. Until Thursday afternoon, the Senate bloc stood firm, in its place of honor, fighting the retroactive measure and requesting a five thousand dollar exemption. But then there was an understanding, and it was expected that late yesterday the report would be finalized absolutely favorable to the points of view supported by the representation of the House. The only difference now is that the exemption will be four thousand dollars, that's all .... FOUR COLUMNS In conference committee, Senators Gonzalez Mena and Zeno defended at all costs a five thousand dollar exemption and they have practically triumphed, since they have succeeded in getting the House representation to accept a four thousand dollar exemption. But as for Senators Gonzalez Fagundo, Iriarte, Fuertes and Aponte, who fought with all their might against retroactivity, they were defeated, in spite of their convincing arguments, even though they did everything they could to show that retroactivity is ruinous and harmful. Senators González Fagundo, Fuertes, Iriarte and Aponte "have been left alone, absolutely alone, but firm, converted into columns to whom no one has poCont.tnued on page 5 MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT OF VIEQUES, P. R. Office of the Municipal Mayor NOTICE The position of graduate nurse of the Municipal Hospital with a monthly salary of $7h.00 is vacant. Applications should be addressed to the Municipal Mayor accompanied by professional references. Zoilo CASTAÑO, Municipal Mayor. Vieques, P. R., June 30, 1925. Advt. fAJARDITO UNE Trips to Ponce by the central highway in a luxurious "Packard Touring" $3.00 one way seat. Departs daily at 12:00 o'clock. Inform San Jose 14 or Telephone 1870 A