EL, "WNDO
E
P AGS. 3 CTSj Office; "Puerto Rico Illustrated' ' Bldg. TeL 1222. - Box 845.
PAGS.3CTS.I Semectre - - - - M 00 Rn Afio- -( - - "7 50
JOURNAL OF
AHO Vil
LA MANANA,
BOLIVAR PAGAN ESM CRIBE A SENSATIONAL ARTICLE AGAINST THE LAW OF . SALES -M-
' Socialist leader makes an invitation to the people to join in protest with the commerce M Silent and eloquent, has been the protest of the San Juan Commerce against the new internal revenue law and its sales tax. All the dry goods establishments in the Capital have closed their doors, as an expression of their energetic repulse to the old and arbitrary law which, im- , puts a new hindrance and a new burden on the Commerce, already so heavily burdened and punished by the Government. The beautiful and brave gesture of! Co- * * 4 < ' mercío, is seconded and applauded i 5 by the consuming classes and by the people in general, who it is they who ( in the end, directly or indirectly, create all the wealth, sustain tt ' all the enterprises, and pay all the taxes. I That political movement that > ' developed in the country by founding the so-called Alianza Puertorriquecon so much noise of empty hullabaloo, that waved to the winds banners that were said to be of progress, reforms and vindications, and that culminated in the fraudulent election of an almost homogeneous Legislature, and.i has offered its fruits to the Puerto Rican people. All the legislation approved by those spurious chambers, daughters of fraud and violence, scorning the sacred principle of popular suffrage, is a rickety, reactionary, ruinous and claudicating legislation. We will carefully examine all this legislation, so that the people who can vote and elect, and so that all the institutions and living forces of the country, may know how during the presidential period they were deceived with false promises, and how they have finally been defrauded of their legitimate hopes and how they have been betrayed. The legislation passed is fundamentally of two kinds: the one referring to the political and civil rights of the citizens and their parties and various public and private organizations and institutions; and the one referring to the public finances, to the tax policy of the Legislature, in order to obtain the indispensable income for the support of the Government. No Legislature, since the American civil regime was organized in Puerto Rico, has lasted so long. None was inaugurated as promised with so many flattering promises and in the midst of so many naive hopes. (Oautínfi* en u pt*. *) I ... UNPRECEDENTED, house for rent Wood with Garden and Patio, double sanitary service, agrai dable and fresh site. Hato Rey, Stop 34, Highway. -Will inform house next door. RENT eí second floor of the house . Alien 37. Will inform, R. FABIAN & CO. - Tel- 755 San Juan.
' : 'v The Excise Law is an impracticable Law! because it will unduly tax commerce and the people Propaganda Committee CHAMBER OF COMMERCE SAN JUAN SECTION.
Captain Donald Baxter Mac Millan, who according to the most recent telegrams has desisted in his endeavor to organize a new expedition to explore the polar regions. AÜÜÍlTACIONl¡rE HONORS PUERTO RICO --M-- José Coll y Cuchí, i(brain director" of the race in Iberian America M THE GREAT CONGRESS TO BE HELD IN SOUTH AMERICA M A formidable Argentine Association has organized a Congress of Intellectuals and University Students of America, to be held in one of the most important;; cities of South America early next year, to discuss and take agreements on the vital problems of the New World and its relations with the other countries of the orb. The Commission organized'-a has invited those who are prestigiously known, as the invitation itself states, for their intellectual work; - that is to say, the list of those invited has been made taking into account the works that have been favorably judged in America and in Europe, whose authors have treated with intellectual elevation the transcendental matters of the present and future of the peoples of the New -World of which the mentioned Congress will deal with. We have learned of this great event because we have seen the invitation received by our dear friend Don José Col! y Cuchí, prestigious in this country and abroad as a great Americanist writer. The invitation is, extended in very satisfactory concepts for the talented friend, accompanied by the due docu(Continued on Ga. page.) | DR. R. BERNABE | I OCULIST I I I 1 5 He will be absent from his office from the 24th to the 30th of the present. 7 5 £
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
- ..... . I I I I I I I --■----I I- I ia Published. and distributed under permit (Ho. 801) authorized oy <(- r Act of October - s" 1917" oñ - "Ü - at _ Eánp5 "t -T ' San Juan, Porto Bico, By order of the President, A S. Burleson. Po.nuuwtei General ' Entered m ¡ocond clas. feb-uary 21, 1916, at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Bico, (United States of America) under the Act of march 3, 187" j
FAMOUS ARCTIC EXPLORER
The political situation in Ponce continues
Mr. Lastra Chá rriez clarifies his position - M
M [I mayor Mr. Vivas Valdivieso gives to the publicity im-i portant telegrams M THE CASE OF THE LCDO. GELPI M (From our Bedactor in Ponce) Ponce, August 19. On the occasion of Mr. Rosario R. Gelpí. having given publicity in "El Aguila'', of a telegram sent to Mr. Guillermo Vivas Valdivieso by the leaders José Tons Seto and Antonio R. Barceló, the Mayor of Ponce, the mayor of the city, Mr. Rosario R. Gelpí. Barceló, the Mayor of Ponce, our dear friend, Don Guillermo Vivas Valdivieso, gave us for publicity all the correspondence of the case that has this community SOBBE LAS I ABMAS August 19, 1925 I Hons. Antonio B . Barceló and i I José Tous Soto. I San Juan, P. B. ¡ I Becibí telegram. Senate and House of Representatives amended the Municipal Law giving the Municipal Assembly the power to initiate proceedings against the Mayor. Failure to perform my duty in this case could result in prosecution of the Mayor for failure to comply with legislation. In the Municipal Assembly, a motion has been filed to suspend the Mayor from his duties - Jut - - HABIA THE ATfORNEY-GENEKAI. M " ¡ ¡ Interesting statements on the judicial combination M The news reached us yesterday that Judge i ¿costa Quintero, of the District Court of Mayagüez, had been temporarily suspended from his duties as such by virtue of an order of the Department of Justice, office of the Attorney General. The fact is that the day before yesterday, an important trial was being held before Judge Acosta Quin- ¡ tero when he was called to the phone. Minutes later the Judge appeared in the courtroom and reported that he had received orders from the Department of Justice to temporarily cease his duties as Judge, and announced at the same time that the testimony of the witnesses and the trial he was holding were declared null and void until his successor was appointed. Knowing of this news we decided to inquire at the official source and yesterday morning we visited the Attorney General, Hon. George C. Butte, at his office in the Red Palace.-NO = THERE IS NO FINAL DECISION : Once there we imposed on him of the i Continued on " page. t>i ■ I House in the I ¡ > County !* .For sale in the best ;♦ I site in the County, a % magnificent < concrete residence with a thousand feet -- of lot. Price: $17,500. < Would consider a < swap for rusticx > farm near San Juan or Bayamon. Understand cod < JOSE L. PESQUERA IEdificio de "El Mundo* |¡ San Juan. || - / " ' We repair and sell WRITING MACHINES i P. R. TYPEWRITER REPAIRING SHOP , Tel. 1856, Box 1445. Christ 10, ' J. SANJUAN j
ivi WISHES THAT HIS ACTION ON THE REFERRAL OF THE CONVICT Philip --M BELIEVES IN HIS DEMENT M On the occasion of a loose leaf that appeared in La Correspondencia' ', our friend, Don Alfonso Lastra Chárriez, made the following statements yesterday: "I have read an information published in yesterday's "La Correspondencia", which maintains among other things that "An eminent jurist has said that the convict David Luis Phillip, had no real opportunity of de lensa". I do not know who this eminent jurist may be; but neither does it matter to the case. i want to say now, that Phillip's defense attorney, in the District Court of Humacao, my distinguished colleague Mr. Marrero, did for his defendant as much as humanly could have been done by the most eminent lawyer in the country. As for the fact that I am ultimately defending the defendant, it does not mean that I am opposed to any other colleague defending him as well. I did and do this out of humanity and out of the conviction I have of Phillip's insanity. -I want to say no more for today. The matter is pending resolution and I must wait confident in the justice of the officials and agency who have the case under their responsibility."
HORRIBLE CRIME IN MOGA M SEVEN SHOCKING KILLINGS M A thorough investigation is carried out M The wave of blood continues to sweep over everything in its path. The crimes follow one after the other with a frightening frequency. The dagger in these last days has replaced the revolver. It could be said that the terrible white weapon is ready, as in its good times, to come out on top of its reign and snatch the scepter from firearms. This is undoubtedly due to the fact that the authorities have launched a vigorous campaign against those who carry prohibited weapons and it is easier to hide a dagger than a revolver. In addition, the recent cases of high-profile individuals who have had to serve time for carrying firearms has had its effect on the mood of the crowd. In this case we will now review, the sharp dagger has also been used to take the life of a human being. (Continued on page 2).
A LITTLE EM-i PRESTITO FOR THE MUNICIPALITY i M
SATURDAY, AUGUST 22, 1925
| The threat of lowering salaries! to employees 1
The borrowing approved will be covered by the banks of the capital city and at the last meeting of the Executive Council, very important agreements were reached on many projects pending final consideration, among which were several municipal ordinances on borrowings amounting in all to more than five million dollars. A SMALL BUSINESS VENTURE. The Council agreed to postpone until the next meeting the borrowing of two and one-half million dollars for the municipality and to give final approval to three municipal ordinances! providing for a small borrowing of a little over one hundred thousand dollars. . Neither the Governor nor Commissioners . linyk" and Kessinger being present, it was agreed to postpone consideration of the loan requested by the San Juan administration for public works, although the Commissioners of the Interior and Health reported that there was an essential need for many of the constructions being proposed. i. (Continued on Ga. page.) I
' IOTA HORA I M THE GOVERNOR PROMISES TO CONVENE AN EXTRAORDINARY SE- ' SION THE LEGISLATURE ,-1 M s Advises the commer- ' cials on the conduct they should follow --M-- From Yauco we received at the last hour very interesting information, especially for all the island commerce. Our readers know that Governor Towner was in Yauco yesterday, reviewing the National Guard. The parade i-1 began at three o'clock in the afternoon. In the plaza a pavilion was erected from which the Governor, together with other personalities, witnessed the parade. Ixis merchants rio the districts to i I'once-Mayagiiez. gathered in the a , theater of the population, ready j take advantage of the opportunity. Shortly after and while the >1 jiarada was taking place, a commission of merchants. presided over by Don Gabriel To(rres, appeared before the Governor < Coa tin a" in the o&una.
The Budget will be reduced to ten and a half million dollars ELGOB. SHALL USE THE BISTURI M The employees will not be free ; from a pay threat until ¡ ■ the <d Governor has affixed his 1 I signature to the foot of the pre ¡ ¡ assumption bill and it begins to take effect It is not yet time therefore to assert I outright that the employees have i escaped the ■ ha parron. For me ■ no<. the news that we have gleaned I in official ■ circles is not very ■ reassuring. In the first place.' : suffice it to say that a (-omission. < composed of several members of the, j cabinet of the Govt-niator is con , i tinnamentedly working on the presa-1 ¡ post sent by the Ix-gislature ■ ¡ and it seems to us that it is not precisamcn i i i te to leave it as it was in ! | l iado qne ><- they take that job ( | neglecting their work in their 1 resi>eet!vas deiiendeneia-. i i i We are intormíi that the salaries of not a few officials q. may rejsistir the rebate will be altered pu-j i the Executive and ( ¡ne also alga ! nas little needed items corre-' ¡ ráu l.-.i mi-nia luck El. P.ISTl líl PEI. g< > i ;i:it \ a i -< i] ¡ Jicspnés- to confer with a >s , (Continued on 6th. page.) Tax Law begins to take effect M ' CIGARETTES RISE IN PRICE I -M-■ All San Juan invaded ¡by billboards.= The "dead city" - M ¡ L.'> excise law inevitably has to cause a hike in almost every item of merchandise. The Governor, as many readers know, signed the law before leaving for Yauco, and since it has immediate application, this means that the Treasury Department is already preparing to take action and is ready to send its trade agents in commerce, giving general instructions. As this is a sales tax, every merchant who is willing to comply with the terms of the K'onfiüúa on pég. 2> ' ' ' i . j EMPLOYEE M For Fabric Warehouse we ne ¡ cesitamos you competent for mostra dor and travel. Do not apply for this position j without good references, and esenba! stating your activities and salary you are interested in. EMPLOYEE" Box IMí. San Juan, P. B. Advt. DENTAL EXAMINATING BOARD M CALL FOR EXAMINATION -- M The Dental Examining Board of Puerto Rico hereby announces examinations for Dental Surgeons, which will begin to be held on September 1, 192ñ, at 9 A. M., in the Dental Examination Room of the Dental Examining Board of Puerto Rico. M., in the room occupied by the Board at 3 AUau Street. The applications and other documents required by law will be forwarded to the undersigned President from the above date until the 29th day of the present, when their admission expires. Dr. J. M. BIRD. President San Juan, P. B., August 20, 1925 (Announcement).
tCC "VRlGHTj(eY|tONÍ_VilwJcQ. *"W "O"< Prince Antoine Bibesco, has been sent to the United States as minister of Rumania, to confer on the debt of this nation with the American commission in Washington. ÍCÍOMIS. RESIDENT EMBARKS MONDAY -M - The Island in frank solidarity with Mr. Felix Cordova Davila .-_M A VISIT BY THE ILLUSTRIOUS PUBLIC MAN TO OUR EDITORIAL M Everyone in the country undoubtedly knows that the illustrious Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, Hon. Felix Cordova Davila, arrived a few weeks ago on the island to visit his family and to confer with the Governor and his political friends. The arrival of the distinguished public man caused great joy in Puerto Rico, as his popularity is matched by his patriotism and enthusiasm for the country's cause in the national capital. And now, upon learning that the Resident Commissioner is embarking, we must cause grief to his many admirers. What is certain is that Don Felix will embark next Monday aboard the St. Mihiel transport for New York, from where he will continue on to Washington, to continue there his noble and worthy mission in defense of the country's interests. THE ISLAND IN SOLIDARITY WITH MR. CORDOVA FAVILA Mr. Córdova Dávila mar Continued on page 5 ípoUinaris
R LA REINA A DE LAS ÉÉ ÁGLAS B DE MESA jpa KORBER & CO. SAN JUAN, P. R.
KORBER & (0. SAN JUANJ. R. % NI EVO .ASSORTED IN < ;j "La Cagueña":;"- Of the most modern and fashionable fabrics, in silk and cotton. \ In addition we offer Creppes. ** Canton plain and carved at 75 cts. yard. Cbi- ♦* "- na and Georgette creppes at $1 yard. ** Cna visit and you will be satisfied. Stop lG' /2 . Santurce. g
All free for the sick ex-military.-.The United States Government always looking out for them M Now, when Doctors Lippit and Merhoff have introduced important reforms in the hospital of ''Monteflores". nestled in the suburb of the same name in i Santurce. it seems appropriate i take the opportunity to di- ; rigimos to more than twenty nr.l vete I war veterans, the vast majority of whom are Puerto Ricans residing in the country, and who, by virtue of their condition as such, are subject to the benefits of the Act of the American Congress which provides for the hospitalization of those who, as a result of military service, or previously, have contracted some disease which makes it impossible for them to earn a living, provided, of course, that those who believe themselves entitled to such privileges have been honorably discharged from the Army. It has always been the intention of the Government to see to it that the beneficence exercised by it in favor of the Puerto Rican veterans is always effective, and that those who really need it obtain it at once, since the appropriations made for that purpose should be invested in the most profitable manner possible, in accordance, therefore, with the parental wishes of the Government and the needs truly felt by those concerned with this matter. It appears that thousands of vete.ra i Continued on page 2) COLEGIO PUERTORRIQUEÑO DE .NIÑAS CURSO DE 1923-1926 ; Enrollment for the 1925-1926 school year at the Colegio Puerto Puerto Rican de . 1925-1926 at the Colegio PuertoI rriqueño de niñas will be open, at the office of the Sata- Principal ¡del m same. Ponce de Leon Avenue, stop fifteen, every la- . borable* day beginning on the 17th and until the 22nd of the current, during the morning hours and from the 24th ,:i! 31, in the morning and afternoonCourse from first to eighth grade I Commercial course I High school course 1 For any information by ¡mail address correspondence | to P. O. Box 919 San Juan i The school year will begin on the locho day of September next. (Announcement >. PHARMACEl TICO. I M We need one to offer you a magnificent proposition if you turn out to be the real man we need. Must be of ' age to make contract, healthy: job is one of responsibility. Salary and profit sharing. We want to help a young man to set up on his own, who is willing to be a "self made man'' under our moral and financial help. Write without loss of time to "Pharmacist" c o. Admor. THE WORLD. antlncio POPUIAR COMPANY If you are stifled by the heat and eating is your agony, walks by Iá< bay is the best remedy. A Municipal Theater TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY The Black Swan (THE DARK SWAN) C"" Which is preferred; the flirtatious woman or the chaste and simple woman? (Matlnée and Night).
TRY SOMETHING GOOD among The f / í the best í /, best /Yhe mildness /'he r \AMERICA'S BEST / \ THt ORltNUI I 8* Phi li p Mor r is The Fashionable Cigarette in the North The smoothness of Virginia tobacco combined with the aroma of Oriental- - P R U E B E L jp S ! - .Y. .
U.S.A. Ul - AND THE ROMANIAN DEBT
SENSACONAL GLASS GLASS DISPLAY A $9.99 sensaconal the finish of your choice, Oak or Mahogany, I deliver them in Perfect Condition to your establishment in cash or installments. Remember I dominate the GLASSROOM MARKET Cross 10 Box 1034 JOSE DIAZ CARMENA Tel. 396 San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 3042.
OF GREAT INTEREST TO THE TWENTY THOUSAND VETERANS THAT EXIST IN PUERTO RICO M