THE WORLD
1 p PAGS. 3 cts. I ~<aanM¡ "Fnerta Wú" III' Duttü BMC. I W Ht im. - Box Sé."
in PAGS. 3 CTS. I |1 ■■■■11*- I ■■ U* AB" - - - - KtM.
MORNING
MORNING
YEAR VIL
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Act of Ottober 6, 1917, on file at the Post Office of San Juan, Porto Bico, By order of the President, A. S. Bur leson. Post mister General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919, at the Post Office at San Josa, Porto Bico, (United States of America) under the Act of march ft, 187" ' t " l| 1 ! 11 1 - "S -■"" ■- ■ I I I
SATURDAY, APRIL 18, 1925 I
I HUMERO 2017.
TALKING WITH DON ENRIQUE GONZALEZ.
THE RED CROSS CAMPAIGN BEGINS WITH AN ENTHUSIASM NEVER SUSPECTED Everything indicates that the quota which the Red Cross has imposed upon itself will be covered NOT ONLY SAN JUAN, BUT THE ENTIRE ISLAND, IS DEVOTED TO COOPERATE IN THIS BEAUTIFUL WORK l/a beautiful army of some 80 ladies is in charge of the campaign in San Juan.-.The corporations are preparing to beat their own "record" of last year DON ENRIQUE GONZALEZ BELTRAN DESCRIRL £ £ ; BE, ENJOYED, THE SUCCESS THAT THIS INITIATIVE WILL HAVE.
In a timely manner, we made known to our public the preliminary plans of a campaign that the Red Cross intends to carry out with the object of adding 10,000 more members and to collect some funds. Yesterday afternoon we had the good fortune to meet by chance Don Enrique Gonzalez Beltran, the distinguished gentleman who for his recognized merits has been made President of the Committee that directs this movement, and needless to say that within a few words our conversation turned to such an interesting subject. A campaign of this kind is one of the most beautiful works that can be undertaken, for it is well known so that we need to remember that this money stops very little time sterile. It immediately goes to cure some ailment, to remedy some evil, to wipe away some tear in the most humane and 'generofeá magic way that can be imagined. Don Enrique Gonzalez Beltran, kind as always, updated us on the progress of the campaign. THE RACES OF THE HYPODROME Yesterday was the day destined for NOT E3 NATIONALIST QUESTION On the occasion of having been cited, among other people, some nationalist leaders for the investigation that is practiced in the Federal Ca - te, the opinion has been diverted, believing some perfora, that it is about nationalism. Yesterday we published the letter of Judge Odlin on this matter and in nothing he mentions nationalism, which does not eart¡."<ú' us, because the ideals are protected by the Constitution and the Paxi.id'' ectñ legally registered in cl go* biennium. Judge Odlin's letter attributes to the newspaper of the complaint "anarchist character". The nationalist newspapers have been recognized by the Federal Government. gcRBcrcrcRcefflccFixJouFotRwsoouBiGCT 1 SOLAR K Of different sizes" -" 5 g Rantnrée e B Park. Monteflorre. Reboro 5 ■ co. Lotza r Punta Martas i H Request Information at I B HENRY W. DOOLEY 9 Tapia St " E 9 Tel 1296. - RaMtnrre.
■ the beginning of the movement that is to last until the 26th. It is inau- ; gurated by the racecourse races in which the Towner Cup was the main attraction. The economic success was complete. The grandstand ticket offices were sold out by quarter to three o'clock. '¡ 1 THE ORGANIZATION -i IS COMPLETED J ■ i Already the organization is complé-j tamerite finished in all its dei í talles and has begun to function > i as a true machine of great power. Mrs. Ashford and ! doña Encarnación Molina de Ro- - dríguez Serra have taken charge of the > Santurce sector and so much enthusiasm- ; mo inspires them and so much care is given ■ in making their work as produc- . [ tive as possible that the most brii liant triumph is already taken for granted in that i. aristocratic neighborhood. In San Juan, . Mrs. de Mendía, together with > de Freiría and Vicente's, have attacked the problem with extraordinary energy . | . and a blind faith in success. Mrs. Margarita de Mar- . I tínez Alvarez is in charge, together with other distinguished ladies of this society, of the Sub-committees. A beautiful army consisting of about 80 of the most distinguished ladies of this capital will carry out the beautiful ideal that the Red Cross wants to crystallize with this campaign. San Juan, generous as I always, will know how to respond as she 1 knows how to do, to the request for , help that the Red Cross makes through ■ these ladies and señori' tas. And thus we will all cooperate in the salvation of our poor countrymen, for all the money now collected, will be for use (Continued on p. 2) PHARMACY - DE - BLANCO IN SANTURCE I We have established a Pharmacy ofit' ciña at Parada i 18'/ 2 , corner of Villa- : j mil street. ! Under the technical direction' and exclusive assortment of J. M. " Blanco, Inc. B We keep the serums and I Biological products in Neve3 r? "'' "' 5> SPRAYING MACHINES V ADD i We guarantee the I repairs, j P. R. TYPEWRITER j REPAIRING SHOP S Box 1445, Tel. 1853, Christ 10 i ! San Juan, P. R.
1 Compagnie Generale TrasaMque L FRENCH STEAMER "MACORIS" [ Expected in this port from the West Indies I about April 21" and will continue voyage bound for the | CORUÑA and the HAVRE. L Charter is accepted for the above ports. í For further information please contact ! BHIN BROTHERS INC. Agents I Telephone 257 Telephone Edf. b San Juan Tanca-Tetuan.
Does the clarification of the tragic death of Heredia obey to a fact so many-
... - ■! € -fxi . ' I -■ ■■< Policeman Francisco Trinidad imprisoned by order of the Prosecutor and then released. Those who amuse their imagination with the fantasies created by the? novelists perhaps do not realize that real life is as lavish, if not more so, in curious incidents, in varied events, in tormenting dramas and terrible passions, of a quasi-primitive hue and of an extraordinary in- 1 tensity; these, ne- j cess, perhaps, an evident demonstration of this assertion and it occurs to the repor- ter that perhaps none could offer them more interest, than the tragic event in which last week the after ! The most novel episodes compete, as in the ever-changing show of an eerie cinematography, to subjugate the growing curiosity of the readers, always anxious for the throbbing note, for the violent and intricate event that puts a chill on the nerves and ghostly visions in the mind. The judicial authorities who in these last days of the event have not slackened in their inquiries, inquiring into the details of the crime, and have managed to determine during the last 24 hours, as we announced yesterday, the reason for the horrifying tragedy, and discovered the presumed "real culprit" of the crime, as well as the curious passionate background of the alleged murderer, and of his victim, which are interesting to a degree that is impossible to imagine. From the face of the reports published until yesterday and from the declarations that in our own office the ex-policeman Venancio (Tuto) Rivera made to us, the main part of the clarification of this fact is due to the work of this personage, that from the following day of the crime was constituted in the house of the widow, who was ill, and in a supposed correspondence to the friendship that united him to the victim he exhausted all his efforts until obtaining that the woman spoke and related everything what she knew. His first attempts were always useless, negative, because the widow, in her dark and painful simplicity, seemed to resist the pleas of his friend, fearful that something terrible would fall on her life, confusing her in misfortune. As it was, the alleged drug dealer tells us, he appealed to the last and desperate resource on Wednesday morning, and told her: -If you do not tell me what you know I will go to the grave of my friend, and kneeling on it I will invoke his spirit until I get a confession, because it is not fair that an innocent person will pay ... And now comes the interesting part, judging
judging by what ex-cop Rivera tells us. Our informant warns that when he finished his speech, the sick woman was transformed, covering her face with a deadly pallor and her features sharpened as happens with corpses.... She was then- . Í í I* ' ■ - . ' > 1 ' 1 ' 1 "pgsl ' ■ La Juanita González, wife of Heredia, who at first refused to testify and then accused the soldier Fido Ghigliotti of having killed her husband. The body was rigid and a deep and deep voice spoke through the trembling lips of the widow, in a gangly and panting syllabic, which put terrifying chills in the body of our informant, when he heard that the widow of Heredia said: -On that bench, standing, with his chest torn with wounds is he....
And he says that the soldier Fido Ghiglotty, not only stole his wife's affection, seducing her, but also murdered him. Rivera adds that since he did not understand the spelling of the alleged killer's surname for the moment and asked the sick woman again, she spelled it until he managed to write it down on a piece of paper, together with the other phrases of the alleged seer. In support of his assertion, the ex-po-licensee shows us a few small cards on which they are written.
tical, supernatural? THE WOMAN WHO ACCUSED POLICEMAN TRINIDAD COMPLICATES TO DETECTIVE REMEDIO LOPEZ CONFESSES THAT HER FIRST DECLARATION WAS FALSE AND THAT IT WAS DETECTIVE LOPEZ WHO URGED HER TO DECLARE IN THESE TERMS Prosecutor Gomez issues a warrant for her arrest for perjury.
in pencil, the words previously transcribed. i This supernatural fact evidenced Rivera's belief that Heredia had been killed with a military pistol, considering that our informant is an expert in ballistics and the bullets that the police have are not from the SHKal ' -w w y gi ■ 1 i. f }'i WÍ3 II j '' /' |' t* i Ana María Rivera Betancourt who accused the policeman Trinidad as the author of the death of José M. Heredia. The Rivera made sensational statements before the Prosecutor yesterday. same kind as those according to him employed in the murder of Heredia, which was ", he says, those usav in the army 'es tiraderas do pistola. - . . - - "'.■ ■ . If, as Rivera says, the elucidation of this fact obeys to supernatural cf.csa, it's 'thing that not
1 w" - JWw ' Pensioned policeman Venancio Rivera who contributed to the clarification of the horrendous crime.
This is not discussed and that we leave to the responsibility of whoever informs us, since we are not eyewitnesses of this nor of what has been previously said about this matter..... But, in any case, the case is extraordinary, fantastic, and deserved to be taken into account to show as we said at the beginning that in real life there are also things that look like novels, tragic "real" novels. Described that novel side of Heredia's death, precisely because of how novel and fantastic that
jfl ■ F ■ ■ ■ . jIbHHHH i Prosecutor Gómez, who is leading the investigation of the grave crime. seems, we will now report on the activities that have lately been carried out in order to make clear, .in all its clarity, the magnitude I of the deed done, which began j with the simple tints of a casual he(cho, anodyne almost, and has i i become a true center I of terrible and poisoned passions, where blood, crime and unbridled love have written one j of the blackest pages of ia ¡ criminality in Puerto Rico. In the afternoon of yesterday the prosecutor Gó- . mez called to his office the Betan- ! court, who, it is said, has begun to serve a sentence in connection with some garments, and seeing the formidable slant that the "affair" of the "drowned man of Puerta de Tierra" has taken, he subjected her to the corresponding interrogation about her previous statement against the policeman Trinidad. The corridors of the Court, near the Prosecutor's office were crowded with curious onlookers and the rumor of the various comments about the ca- ¡ so made one think of a great colI mena touched by fantastic, sonorous ¡ anxieties. I ANA MARIA RIVERA RIVERA BETANCOURT BEFORE PROSECUTOR GOMEZ After taking the testimony of numerous witnesses related to the murder of the unhappy Heredia, the Hon. Prosecutor Gomez called to his office yesterday afternoon, the woman Ana Maria RiI vera Betancourt, whose first clarification led to the imprisonment of the policeman Francisco Trinidad. f The interrogation of this witness was conducted in the most skillful manner by Prosecutor Gomez. Ana Maria began by ratifying her first statement, and again accused policeman Trinidad of having murdered Heredia. The prosecutor called her attention strongly, and made her see that we all had to appear one day before an omnipotent God to answer for our actions. Don't you realize," said the Prosecutor, "that with that statement you can send a man to the gallows?" Ana Maria began to flinch, but continued to repeat that Trinidad was Heredia's murderer and that she had seen him. But don't you know," continued the prosecutor, "that a man who is in jail today (and who is not Trinidad) has confessed to the murder?" "Don't you realize your attitude?
From the four cardinal points of the Island the directors of "El Ancora" frequently receive enthusiastic letters for the speed and seriousness with which it covers all its commitments, paying the policies I religiously, for which all the followers of "El Ancora" - contrary to what usually happens in this order of things - always turn out to be its most determined and fervent propagandists. Each follower of this very important Insurance and Accident Insurance Company can be said to be worth tenfold, since they themselves, by spreading the exact fulfillment and the activity that "El Andera" prints on all its commitments, are the ones who win for it the greatest number of members, who multiply rapidly with each passing day. Below we publish one of the numerous congratulatory messages that ''El Ancora'' has received these last days, and that, for being that Company, that has the privilege of having been born generlnamente portorriqueña, honor and prez of the terruño, we are pleased to reproduce. The very worthy directors of 'El Ancora'; its active Administrator, Mr. González Orona, as well as the enthusiastic Agents of that Company, are pleased to reproduce it.
"El Ancora" continues to obtain triumphs everywhere "IT IS ONE OF THE BEST ACCIDENTS' SOCIETIES IN THE WORLD '.- SAYS A KNIGHT WHO ENJOYS MUCH ESTIMATION.
The company, Mr. J. A. Matrero and Mr. A. Marrero Jr. should be proud of such enviable triumphs, which should serve as an encouragement and example. Here is the congratulatory message to which we have previously referred: " ''Areaibo, qbril 8, 192S. To the Directors of "EL ANCORÁ", Ponce, P. B. Messrs. Through the Agent of that Society in Arecibo, my brother Miguel Jeannet, I have received chek number 1780, against ''El Crédito y Ahorro Poncefio", for EIGHT HUNDRED AND FORTY-NINE DOLLARS TEN CENTS, in payment of the accident of my deceased wife María Marín Shwa, and of which I was the assignee, being subscribed in the first category, letters A, B and C. My most sincere thanks for the interest shown by ostedea in the payment of the referred policy, which accredits "El Ancora" as one of the best societies against physical accidents, assuring you that I will be a propagandist of said Ins Ititndón. I WILL BE A PROPAGANDIST OF THE SAID INSTITUTION. | r " - Advt.
Do you want to be sure of collecting the amount of your policy when a claim occurs? ' _ . Contact THE INSURED PROTECTIVE CO. OF AMERICA Compañía Protectora de los Asegurados. Gonzalez Padin Building, 5th Floor. Telephone 1946.
R. V. Perez Marcband is pleased to inform his clients and friends that he has established his Law Firm and Notary Public Office in the Ponceño Credit and Savings Building, and-that having separated from the Tous Soto & Perez Marchand Partnership, he will apply independently in the Courts of Justice of the Country, Administrative Centers of the Government, in the Federal Court for Puerto Rico, Circuit of Appeals in Boston and in the Supreme Court of the United States Tel. 194. -Ponce < Box 922.
THE LICDO. MOLINA AND FEDERAL COURT JUDGE ODLIN.
"I learned long ago not to be frightened of anything,"/ Bolivar Paqán says in reply to Mayor Todd.
"I am cured of fright. -I know how to face situations with serenity and character", he adds THE MUNICIPAL CRISIS IS COMPLICATED The coalition is now considered to be broken I The elec- ' torate of this capital is more and more concerned about the differences of criteria between the pu- ! ros and socialists, or better yet, and to make the matter more concrete, between the Hon. Mayor, Don Roberto H. Todd and the Municipal Treasurer, Ledo. Bolivar Pagan. The question has become more interesting at the last minute, with the intervention of Iglesias, highlighted in our yesterday's edition, and by the no less emphatic manifestations of Mr. Todd, referring directly to Bolivar Pagan. Yesterday morning, we met Bolivar, and when we showed him Don Roberto's statements, he expressed himself in the following terms: I don't think it is right "I don't have to say anything now. I do not think it is right for the Municipal Treasurer to engage in public debates with the Mayor on administrative matters. I have already said everything I had to say, for now, in my statement published on Monday in the columns of EL MUNDO: "I have been authorized by the Municipal Assembly to appear before the Treasury Committee, to expose my points of view in relation to this position, and I will do so in a timely manner. (See page 2).
Molina is of the opinion that if Judge Odlin has not been appointed at this time, it is very likely that he will not receive the presidential endorsement He proposes to work towards the appointment of a bona fide resident of P.R. He indicates several candidates The Federal Court Bar Association may ratify its previous agreement by making a modification! Much has been said these days about the Resolution approved by the House of Representatives, in the sense of requesting the President and Attorney General of the United States, that upon the expiration of the term for which Judge Odlin was appointed, a native or resident of Puerto Rico be appointed to the position of Judge of the Federal Court. In view of the general interest aroused by this matter, we visited yesterday at his office in this capital, Ledo. Molina of St. Remy, from whom let us hear his opinion concerning the attitude of the Legislature. Ledo. Molina expressed himself in the following terms, in answering our questions: J i ( THE APPOINTMENT OF JUDGE ODLIN ' I must state to you that in my opinion, if Judge Odlin has not been appointed so far, it is very possible that he will not be appointed. And if so, then the Puerto Rico Bar should make an effort to see that if Judge Odlin is not appointed, that a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico, who is familiar with our laws, institutions, and institutions, be appointed to the office of Judge of the Federal Court of Appeals.