wta I ILÍ®® KJ rí
no Kgs. 3 crsl / > Otetaa: "h "rW *im I < > Dutrado" I £,0 t "L EMI - 1*1 MB.|
EPA6S.3CTS. MMatre - - - - - ".BB VB Mo- M
(MAR/O OL
MORNING.
YEAR VIL.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
I FnbUshad and distributed under permit (JTa. BOlj (>s -i" Jkr: of October ' 4. ÍBIT ¿n lie afee Peet Often *t I 1*1 Joan, Porto Woo. by oraer of th. Proetdeirt. *. K General EoUrne m sooomi dav sumac ,| febroary 81, 181". "" tao Post Otflce at Ban Joan, Porto ¿Putted States of Aaterkai nnd" u,, Act et et etnreb ". 187"
NUMBER 4004.
I SATURDAY, OCTOBER 24, 1925
'San Juan aqueduct needs inspection" - - - - - - -- ■■ ■ ■" i .■■■i- . -M-. _ - - - k
i "I BELIEVE THE ASSEMBLY SHOULD NOT BE POSTPONED" M ASI OPINION OF SENATOR MARTINEZ DAVILA --M Combats for now the final solutions.-CommentsI rios to the political moment* m Yesterday afternoon we visited in his office at 15 de la Cruz Street, the distinguished senator for Guayama, Ledo. Manuel A. Martínez Dávila, with the purpose of asking him some questions related to the political moment, questions that he kindly answered. Do you believe," we asked him, "that the fusionist program should contain final solutions? -I understand that we do not. continued on p. 6.) brought by the prosecutor for the consideration of the judges and juries. The names of the new Grand Jury members will be made public soon after the inscription is made.
DEMAND EXPLANATIONS FROM TOUS SOTO M WHAT IS THE MOTIVE FOR THIS ATTITUDE? M The Republican-Aliancists had. M As a result of a meeting held the day before yesterday by a number of Republicans of the Alliance, in order to discuss the latest political statements made in the press by their Chief, Speaker Tous Soto, it was agreed to write an "open letter" addressed to the notable public man, expressing the surprise provoked by his attitude and, at the same time, telling him to tell the reasons he has for the way he has been doing these days. Said letter appears subscribed, in the first place, by the well-known Republican-Allian-cist leader, Mr. Manuel Texidor, followed by the signature of more than one hundred elements belonging to said group. Here is the letter: OPEN LETTER Hon. José Tous Soto, Pres, of the Puerto Rican Republican Party. San Juan, Puerto Rico. Sir:Deep is the anxiety reigning in the P. w
I Five o'clock in the afternoon. We enter the private office of Don Antonio R. Barceló who receives us with great cordiality. We are taken there with the firm purpose of questioning the President of the Senate on the political moment that is of equal interest to all. Mr. Barceló gives us a white card and we ask him again and again. Here is how the head of the Puerto Rican ■ Union expresses himself when commenting on the current affairs that we parade before his eyes with our incessant questions: Yes, I have read in EL MUNDO the sympathetic manifestations of the American journalist magnate, Mr. Scripps. This good American, when he spoke of our island, spoke from the heart; if only all the Americans who come here would also speak from the heart...! Mr. Scripps said the only thing he could say, what he had to say. Our political problem, so complex and intricate in its depths, unfolded before him in all its superficial simplicity. He saw it as such problems can be seen : from the deck of a private yacht, through the smoke of a good cigar, with only a few hours' stay in port, and with the prospect of weighing anchor the next morning. Just as well that j -
+ R. I. P. Dn. Maximino Sobrino y González HAS DIED His widow. CtitPÜ! a R. de fenbrino (Andente), eos lujan In and Conchita, (aumente): si." Áohrinos Maria and .Itrio; even brother" in-laws, relatives and demá" deudos, present and absent to participate " so íuMusU new 1c invite to the burial of the corpse, act "foot sc I arará to effect today to l"" 11 of the maftana, departing from !n mortuary house, street Egozcue. stop 23, to the Cemetery of San Juan, for whose net Ir qnptlurán eternally grateful. Note: No obituaries will be given. Please send artificial wreaths.
BARCELO COMMENTS ON THE POLITICAL MOMENT
THE ALARMING SITUATION OF GUAYAMA M THE ABANDONED SCHOOL BUILDINGS M The lamentable state of the Aqueduct M From the report addressed to the Governor by the Mayor of Guayama, we extract the following: "The aqueduct service was delivered to the present administration. in the greatest state of abandonment; the dam reservoir full of earth, branches, trunks and animal and vegetable detritus, filled the edge of the dam wall occupying the space destined for water, to the detriment of public health and the normal functioning of this part of the system. The feed pipe from the dam to the reservoirs, abandoned to its own fate, with a large hidden break in the first siphon of the Guamaní River, where it discharged a considerable volume of water. The general meter dismantled and unusable; the cleaning keys broken and useless for the Continued on page 9 0 MAfTiNA IS SUNDAY fi O Day of walks by sea. Don't v í I I forget and take your family, r U POPULAR COMPAWIA °< >O< >o !
"SCRIPPS SPEAK WITH THE HEART A JUF ! CIO OF THE PRESI ENTE OF THE SENATE A SMILE OF BITTERNESS AND THANKSGIVING "To Washington, to fight, to work, to demand justice."
- approached our things with kindness and sympathy.... But we, those of the little island; i those of us who cannot and do not want to - weigh anchor, because we must and ) need to be well anchored to . the reality of things; those of us who are in - the - obligation to look at . our problems from within, . one day and another day, we cannot > throw the bells into the air, as others do, in the face of the demonstrations . We can only smile with bitterness, and with gratitude, of course, at the spontaneous words of his righteous heart. Why should I speak to you again about my ideas on the political problem? I have already said everything I had to say. The country knows perfectly well where I stand with regard to my ideas on the subject. On the other hand, this is not the right time to ramble on about such things. It is the right time to move and to act. Soon we will return to Wash ington, to raise again "I problem, to insist on self-government, to give battle to this state of things that weighs us down and depresses us. The fight will be hard, I foresee it. But we must not shirk it. The hour of supreme efforts is coming, and it is a consolation that the idea of the Alliance has i on p. 5) : ■
t Requiem Mass For the eternal rest of the soul of Pon José Nevares Landrón It will take place in the. Sta. parish church of Ntra. Sra. del Pilar in Rio Piedras at 9 o'clock in the morning of Tuesday, October 27. His widow, children and other relatives will be grateful for his attendance and prayers for the eternal rest of his soul.
M TEACHERS' ASSOCIATION IS REORGANIZED M SECURE CRISIS AT THE NEXT ASSEMBLY M Separate from the Dept. of Instruction. M The Teachers' Association is facing a very difficult situation. The fact that its directors are employees of the Department of Instruction has on more than one occasion brought about a manifest crisis that has threatened to split the important entity. However, there had not yet been a resolution to give official impetus to the protest that was rising up in all quarters. Now a very easy solution to this problem has been found: a salary will be assigned to the President of the Teachers' Association, and he will be guaranteed in this position for a term of four years. The proposal, which comes from one of the members of the Teachers' Association, Mr. Juan Carreras, is currently being considered by all the local sections of the teachers' union in the island. The endorsement of the resolution by the Delegate for Caguas is expected from one moment to the next. What is more, the consideration of such an important step for the life of the teachers' organization has been recommended, and it is expected that the local committees will amend the resolution.
4178 acres, flat and fertile, between Cataño and Bayamón, adjoining the highway and the railroad track of the American Railroad Co. It has gold and some "Santa Cruz" cane. Explendida situation and conditions for any business. -Entiéndase with JOSE L. PESQUERA, Building of "The San Juan-.
ICRITIGO STATE 'OF PUBLIC HEALTH IN FAJARDO Ml-i The population attacked by malaria fever M MOSQUITOS CUfr \ DEN PORTODAS PARTAS M A very great uneasiness has caused in the sanitary spheres the< latest news of the zone of infection in the municipality of Fajardo. Dr. Antonio Arbona, when reporting the anomalous situation, gives very important details in which he states that at most a third part of the population has been attacked by malaria. The situation is desperate because those attacked refuse to cooperate with the authorities, submitting themselves to the special treatment provided by the Government. The contagion, therefore, is on the increase. BLOOD TESTS In the last blood tests made at the Fajardo municipality, scandalous results were obtained. As a consequence, an inspection was made around the town, and it was found that within a kilometer of the town, the land was invaded by breeding of Anopheline mosquitoes, which were identified. - i The cases of malaria so far known indicate that many are acute cases, but the vast majority are chronic cases. - < MOSQUITO EXTERMINATION i According to the reports we have obtained, the work of exterminating the mosquito is progressing remarkably well, and the carriers of the parasite have been sterilized. These include-according to Dr. Arbona-people who are walking and who at the moment do not suffer from fever, but nevertheless harbor in their blood the parasite and can therefore infect the mosquitoes that remain to be infected, giving rise to the mosquito spreading the infection and multiplying rapidly in immense volume with serious risk to young people, children and the elderly. . As a rule - Dr. Arbona, in charge of the work being carried out in that area, continues - the treatment methods used vary considerably, but in most cases the people are very concerned about curing the infection after the clinical symptoms have been alleviated. The mayor and quality physicians are cooperating to improve the situation. Ojo, Que La Vitli li'iii f Don't waste your time; take advantage of a" ' trip to San Juan to get your eyesight treated. Visit the PORTO RICO OPTICAL CO. Fortaleza 32 Phone 573
Palace Hotel Lunch $1.00 Lunch $1.25 Special Passes
TODAY'S THEATER - SATURDAY - TODAY PREMIERE OF THE BIRTH OF A RACE 50c. LUNETTES ONLY. RAFAEL V. PcREZ MARCHAND ATTORNEY AND NOTARY Federal Court and Courts of the Country Edificio Crédito y Ahorro Ponceño Tel. 194- Ponce, Porto Rico, Apartauo P22
NEW CHICAGO DANCE HALL FOR 5,000 PEOPLE
Chicago will soon have a ballroom with room for 5,000 people. The building will cost $1,000,000 and will be built by the Longacre Company, of New York City. The hall will measure 100 x 150, with an extra 30 feet of width for people to walk around in. The decor he inferred:? has been designed, after careful study of European amusement centers, by Andrew Karzas.
Alonso defends the congressional research.
The investigation requested by the Puerto Bico federationists through the American Federation of Labor is being strongly opposed by the majority men, who consider that such an attitude on the part of the minority is only a ploy to derail the legislative commission that will soon go to Washington. Yesterday we were talking with the Socialist Representative, Dreamer Alonso, who made the following statements: FROM McKINLEY "The majority is sadly mistaken in criticizing in a partisan spirit the congressional investigation which we are requesting. This petition does not date from yesterday, but from many years ago.
This is what the report submitted by the Biological Laboratory to the Dept. of Sanitation says
THE INFORMATION WE ARE PUBLISHING IS OFFICIAL
From the last official report submitted by the Biological Laboratory to the Department of Health we copy verbatim the following: WATER I "232 water samples have been examined and very few of them are within the U. S. P. H. A. Standard. A special study has been made during the year, showing an excess of fermentation and contamination of the water by the ColiBacterium. We attribute the contamination to some of the causes enumerated: years, since Me ' Kinley's time, and therefore it can in no way obe ! decerate to political circumstances of the moment which neither I concern nor interest us. THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM "We hold and have always held that all political improvement is bound to fail if the economic problem is not first satisfactorily solved,
1. The use of deficient equipment. 2. The use of the filtering m'uíi "o and filtration plant at intervals only. 3. Carelessness or deficiency in operating the equipment. Practice shows that the San Juan aqueduct needs a special inspection by the Insular Health Department and a more absolute control over all the aqueducts of the island that purify their water by artificial methods. I í ! co on the island. And we want Congress to realize the state of misery in which our workers are living, because we know that Congress itself can do much to remedy the situation. We are to so- . bid for that investigation to ascertain why while the ' Hawaii without recourse to sales tax and with as much wealth as we have is holding a pre- * (Continued on fia. page.)
News is expected from the War Dept.
M Emigration efforts M Labor bureau considers the problem M-A cablegram received in this capital several days ago confirmed the news that the War Department, through the Bureau of Insular Affairs, is sponsoring an emigration of Puerto Ricans to Hawaii and that efforts are being made to have at least a few thousand Puerto Ricans transshipped free of charge on government ships to that territory, where they will go to work on the large coffee plantations. j NEWS The negotiations to which we have referred are being carried out by the War Department and the results are not yet known. We do know that in our circu- (Continued on ff).
$60,000 PER HOUR LOSS IN U.S. FIRES.
The annual loss, from fires, in the United States is $16 per second, $60,000 per hour, day and night; and $535,372,782 per year. American losses come to $4 per capita, while those of England are 90 Cts., France 49 cents, and Hc'anda 11 cents. This tremendous loss is 'putI. according to calculations, at the cost of a row of houses 2 000 miles long. E' number of claims made to s'*"-*"-*'- \s companies for fires comes to 162,427 for wooden houses; 37,531 for brick houses and 282 for fireproof houses.
iOS NUtVoUS TRI-' BUNALS OF OIS-, {RITE OF ST. JOHN M-
Grand Jury insaculation on Monday M TWO DAYS LATER CASE SIGNALING M > The reorganization of the district courts in San Juan has if <*> total, as all núes-: tros readers know. However, the establishment of a new court will greatly simplify the work, which will be of great benefit to the public and will greatly help in the decongestion of the civil and criminal calendar. Reorganized Ips district courts of the capital, is in tur-| not the Supreme Court and according to ' reports we have there is the purpose of limiting by legislative action appeals to that high Court in order to make the work less burdensome to the jpeces. THE GRAND JURY. ' According to reports qqp we have obtained the District Judge, Don Do0 Sepulveda, has ordered that ¿(■'■'-proceed with the empanelment of the Grand Jury on Monday, the 26th next. The Grand Jury law was the subject of certain amendments at the last regular session of the Legislature, but these amendments were filed as they only affect the constitution of the Grand Jury in administrative cases. In addition we have reports that two days later, namely, Wednesday, the 28th of the present month, there will be the official marking <ie of civil and criminal cases pending action by The court. Among these cases there are some very important ones, such as homicides, murders, etc. etc. The three district tribunals of the capital will soon be working on the new critical term, which is always more difficult than the civil term because of the very nature of the cases that are
ONE. BSEnK3IHasmSEén|BaSESBaKBSSaeBSESEaSZ2532SS23EE3SESC25 ANNOUNCEMENT EXTRAORDINARY The Condado Vanderbilt Hotel takes pleasure in announcing a Reception and Dinner Dance ' in honor of MISS GILDA GRAY Famous Players Lasky Star now filming "ALOMA OF THE SOUTH SEAS" Saturday Night, October 24. Special music by Carmelo Diaz and his Orchestra of twelve, and the Royal Samoan Singers. Reservation can now be made Santurce 741. Only guests of the Hotel and those having dinner'will be admitted. $3.50 per cover.