THE WORLD
14
PASS. 3 CTS. Office: "Puerto Rico Ilustrado" Bldf. f "L 1222. - Box 346.
E
PA6S. 3 CTS. Semester - - - - |5.00 ! ün Year- - - 9.50
DAILY MORNING
MORNING,
anno vil
8 AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (Me. 801) authortzcd th" Act of October - 1217, on file at the Poet OfSoe of Ban Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. 8. Burleson Postmaster General.* Entered as -rood ri""" rwaHar february 21, 181"", at the Post Office at 8an Juan, Porto Bico, (United Otates of America) under the Act of march 3, 187""
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 19, 1925
ISSUE 3069.
NEW JUDICIAL OFFICERS APPOINTED BY GOVERNOR
Ledo. Marcelino Romani Prosecutor of the Dio. of San Juan.
Ledo. Angel Acosta Quintero Ledo. Miguel A. Mhñoz District Judge of Ponce Judge of Dto. of San Juan
Ledo. Roberto Todd Jr. Fonce Dto. Judge
Ledo. Ricardo A. Gómez Prosecutor of the Dto. of Ponce
Mr. Charles E. Foote Judge of the Dto. of Mayagüez.
Ledo. Domingo Massari Prosecutor of the Dto. of San Juan
Ledo. José R. Gelpí Prosecutor of Aguadilla (Resigned).
Ledo. Pedro Rodríguez Serra Prosecutor of the Dto. of Ponce.
Ledo. Domingo Sepúlveda Judge of the Dto. of San Juan.
WHO REPLACES ASST. ATTOR-NEY-GEN. MUNOZ? M
1U ATTORNEY - GENERAL TELLS US HE HAS NOT YET DECIDED AND SECOND ASSISTANT POSITION VACANT M The new judicial combination made by the Hon. Governor Towner, leaves vacant the position held by Mr. Miguel A. Muñoz, as Assistant Attorney General of Puerto Rico, as well as the position of Second Assistant held by Mr. Roberto H. Todd Jr. Immediately after we officially announced the judicial appointments, opinion has begun to wonder who will replace Mr. Muñoz and Mr. Todd Jr, in such important positions at the Department of Justice. However, Attorney General Butte, who will have to fill the vacancies that have occurred in his department because of the judicial combination, has not yet spoken of the candidates who are likely to be appointed. WHO WILL REPLACE MR. MUÑOZ? This is the question that many people are asking err'esta capital, as the names for this position are raining down. Attorney General Butte with whom we conversed in the morning ' | I SELL A TRUCK MACK I I I j of 3'/j tons, equipped with grave box for four meters ! j and hydraulic vertical crane. It is completely new. 1 i I I , Will Report: Salvador Quiñones : Río Piedras
American millionaires' will make important donations to the University of Puerto Rico.
M According to our informants, the initiative will exceed a few million M The latest news in the educational centers of San Juan and among well-known elements of our ruling class, is that preeminent American millionaires, those who spend large sums every year in favor of education in general], have offered the Chancellor of the University of Puerto Rico, Mr. Benner, their financial cooperation for the good of the said educational center. According to our informants, the offers so far made to the Chancellor amount to several million dollars, and it is hoped that with this money the University of Puerto Rico can be placed on an enviable footing. It is said that Mr. Benner will make a timely trip to the North in order to initiate this praiseworthy purpose which, if true, will exalt him before the country for his good intentions for the good of our youth and the country in general. Any further information we may obtain will be promptly published by us. yesterday he told us that he had not yet thought of the subs- ¡ titutes for his two Assistants, as he never seriously thought of parting with them. "First I need the Lamp of Diogenes," said Mr. Butte, "and with that I will begin my search." HE DOES NOT KNOW OF THE OTHER APPOINTMENTS. Attorney General Butte has also told us that he does not know of the additional appointments to be made by the Governor, thus completing the Judicial com bination, among which is that of the third Judge for the District Court of San Juan. Splendid Premises FOR RENT, Tetuán 59 i for October 1st, next. Telefonée: 1258, -RAFAEL CUEVAS- - - -
t Da.MERCyíESALDREYDEDIAZCOlLAZC I HAS DIED I B Her d "H<onsoladu husband Don Ventura Diaz Collazo, her parents. I Hon. Pedro Aldrey and Doña Rosenda Montilla de A'.drey, brothers B uncles, brothers* in-law and other relatives to share with you this B painful news invite you to the burial of the body, an act that will take B effect today at eleven in the morning departing from the almost B mortuary in the street le Alien No. 2 to the Cemetery of San Juan B No "e distribute obituaries.
' "Why didn't they send the contributions to the municipality?"
M THAT IS THE QUESTION ASKED BY THE ADMINISTRATORS OF SAN JUAN M The mayor explains the situation to the As'blea i , i Among the administrators mumI cipales of San Juan, runs a version that buzzes and flies, as the i bees of Classical Greece, and is ' this: Why are not received the 1 amounts of the contribution that corresponds to San Juan? j The commentators, so far cloud of that matter, but not 1c ■ reason .... And the part of the public opinion aware of the ''affair'' asks, first, why these funds are not being sent to the municipality, and then, why is it that San Juan is facing so many obstacles to the development of its administrative plans? ! Since this is a matter of interest, we went to the municipality yesterday to learn of a document addressed by the Mayor to the Assembly, explaining the reasons why the Hon. Treasurer of Puerto Rice has not yet sent the amounts of the general property tax that corresponds to the municipality of San Juan. The Mayor, as we have said before, addressed a communication to the Assembly on the matter, stating the reasons which, in his opinion, justify such delay. Corroborating previous manifestations, which appeared in this same newspaper, Don Roberto told us that he had gone to the Treasury Department and learned that Achilles' argument for not having made such remittance is that the receipts corresponding to San Juan have not yet been issued because he does not know the tax rate to be charged, due to the fact that the Executive Council has not yet approved the ordinance of San Juan imposing the 15 of 1 per cent to be charged to San Juan.15 of 1 per cent j to pay the borrowing d< (Continued on p. 6.) I rent - an apartment in the "Tobac co Palace." -Report: ALONSO RIERA*# 30. TeL 627 San Juai.
42 INJUNCTIONS CONTKAiEt TESORO PUBLICO
M TABACALEROS PROCEDE AGAINST THE ARBITRATION LAW -M They are meeting in Caguas two consecutive days ' m As agreed by the tobacco growers of the Puerto Bico region. before the Federal Court of Appeals, forty-two injunctions have been filed against the Public Treasury. The legal action of the tobacco producers is based on the Ley de Arbitrios, with its 2 percent tax on sales. The tobacco growers have been meeting for two consecutive days-Thursday and last Friday-in Caguas, center of production of the rich product that supplies Borinquen, having agreed to sue the Treasurer of Puerto Rico to refrain from imposing taxes which, according to the Resolution approved unanimously, are in franc, The Treasurer of Puerto Rico to refrain from imposing taxes which, according to the Resolution unanimously approved, are in violation of the constitutional articles in force, at the same time that they limit the action of the citizens by blocking it with onerous contributions which only serve as insurmountable obstacles to the good progress of tobacco production, forming the taxes imposed, its ficient arbitrariness to economically destroy all tobacco harvesters". i LEGAL STUDY ' i In main form the resolution (Continued on page fia. page.)
Collections in public schools forbidden M
THERE ARE NO PUMPS AND THERE IS NO WATER, THERE IS NO EQUIPMENT, THERE IS DANGER! ASEGURE: ' i A l NC IN DIO-CICLON -TERREMOTO k | H ldrlllrJaTBLl ¿ ó ffi I c Ni AUTOMOBILE - ACCIDENTS-
A CIRCULAR FROM COMMISSIONER MR. HUYKE , -M- j The forthcoming Youth Red Cross campaign -i _M The following letter-circular has been addressed by the Department of Instruction to the School Inspectors of the Island: I To the Inspectors of Schools, I Ladies and Gentlemen: . I hereby call your attention ' to my circular letter No. 108, dated January 17, 1924 entitled: ''Collections among School Pupils," i Teachers are forbidden to solid- ' tar contributions from their pupils for any school activity, ex-i cepting that which relates to the Juve-j ' nil Red Cross campaign. I The fee for this campaign has been reduced to 10 cents per ! capita and even this same contribu- ' tion is in no way to be regarded as compulsory. In the absolute assurance of the strict observance of the provisions of this circular letter, I remain with you. Yours faithfully, (S.D.) JOHN B. HUYKE. Commissioner of Education. NOTE The Red Cross I ivenil Campaign will be carried out during the week beginning November 8 and ending November 14. MANUEL MENDIA. Pres. American Red Cross.
P. R socialist leaders leave for Am. Latin M
M Conde will be the first to leave.-Letter M The latest news which is enough for us, and which undoubtedly is of general interest, because of its very special character, tells us clearly and categorically that six months will not pass without the beginning of the exodus of socialist leaders from this island to Latin and South America. THE CHURCHES NEED THEIR MEN. We have already announced time and again that Iglesias has been appointed Secretary of the Pan American Federation of Labor, and charged with the reorganization of labor throughout Latin America. Naturally, Iglesias cannot even think of doing this work alone. He needs to send men of his complete confidence to every country in Latin America to represent him officially and to follow his instructions to the letter. THE ELEMENT IS IN PUERTO RICO. And Iglesias has understood that the element for that work is in Puerto Rico, among the socialist leaders who have supported his campaigns. The news we have is that Iglesias will be calling these leaders gradually and will be entrusting each of them with certain work in the various Latin American countries. In our island, according to what we are told, only the absolutely indispensable leaders will remain. But the rest will go to Latin America, for believing that they will be able to do their work in Latin America, and that they will be able to do their work in the different Latin American countries, and that they will be able to do their work in Latin America. -Information at: LOS DIABLOS DE LA PLAZA San Juan, P. R.
The uncertainty that for many days reigned in the judicial branch has ceased.
M Talking to the officials affected by the reorganization M Public opinion, without distinction of political nuances or political parties, has at last seen its curiosity and interest in the final result of the judicial appointments satisfied, since for a long time it had been considering this as an imperious national necessity, as ! the definitive, unique measure, which would put an end to the serious problem of uncertainty in the judiciary.The serious problem of uncertainty that had been reigning in one of the most important branches of the Government - the judiciary - as a result of the calm and reserve put in place to resolve such a large matter of so many years of waiting so long for the long-announced judicial combination, it was natural that the mood of the officials affected by this reorganization was invaded by the consequent uncertainty, Each one of them had logical reservations not to undertake their work because of the risk that shortly after their employment they would have to suspend their work because of the official notice that they had already been replaced in their posts, or, at least, transferred to serve in a different area. - It was in the midst of the situation described above that the judicial combination took place.... The public was able to follow, step by step, the cabinet details undertaken to "round up" it.... It was already the semi-official objection taken to the smallest extremes, the professional objection to the candidates, and the expulgation of the supposed executions of various kinds of all of them, as it had never been done before? And of all this (Continued on the 7th page.) RENT A magnificent apartment in Cruz 27 with permanent water and double sanitary service. For reports: LOS DIABLOS DE LA PLAZA San Juan, P. R. 1 " im - ■ ■ POPULAR COMPANY If you are suffocating in the heat and eating is your agony, walks by the bay is the best remedy. L,.-- -■■■■
GREAT OPPORTUNITY For a good business in one of the richest towns on the island. It is sold by having to be absent its owner, A STORE OF MERCHANDISE AND FOOTWEAR. With a remarkable discount on cost prices. Liberal conditions. Will inform: HERNAIZ TARCA & CO. Tetuán 17, San Juan.
Rafael Alonso, president of the Socialist Center I Committee M
NEW DIRECTORATE TAKES OATH M ' It is not known what policy the new directors will initiate M In our yesterday's edition we informed our readers that the Socialist Committee of this capi- ' tal would hold elections to appoint a new directorate. Or better yet, that all the socialist sections of San Juan and its neighborhoods would meet separately, and then hold a general election. Today we can give the names of the new directors for the knowledge of those interested NEW DIRECTIVE President, Rafael Alonso. Recording Secretary, Miguel Bernard Silva. Financial Secretary, José María Torres. Marshall. Anselmo Fer- ; nández. Collector, Rosario Santia' go. Members: Eduardo Conde, Zoilo Betancourt, Angel Monje, Arturo I de Santiago and Rosendo C. goRepresentatives to the Central Committee, Rafael Alonso, Alfonso Torres and Zoilo Betancourt. | The new board proceeded immediately to take the oath of office and to take possession as such. NO ONE KNOWS WHAT POLICY WILL BE INITIATED As for the policy to be initiated in San Juan by the new socialist directive, nothing definitive is known yet. But we are assured that President Rafael Alonso is in favor of suppressing all political activity for the time being and only carrying out organizational and workers' work. This seems to indicate that as far as the Socialist Central Committee is concerned, at least for the time being, there will be no rapprochement with the Local Republican Committee. However, some members of this same socialist organization seem to hold the contrary view, that since the merger is near, the situation must be faced immediately, in order to determine the fate of the Republican Socialist coalition.
I c-/ o A _ E H -yo p SAN JUAHgp- -Blsse 'Aouihkl* '* -. -ftAascieó íy" 0 **- -I a&eo sanoeesocoY \ Z 7 / v *\f S'- - 'C v '.faga ®MAY* lOíciNvaoN ' 1 M-aMLL'I.IIiFiImU= ; ¿"z ú, P0NC" KORBER & C0.INC.^!S%S l 8mBU' FIRE* CYCLONE EARTHQUAKE AUTOMOBILE-MARITIME-POSTAL PACKAGE-REMITTANCES w VA LO RES LUGGAGE- ACCIDENTS INSURANCE