EL MONDO
14
PAGES. 3CTS.| Oflcina: "Pu "rtc Ble* I Dustrado' ' Bita- I t "L IMS. - Box 346. I
E
PAGS. 3 CTS. - "mMtx" 15.00 * Va Alo-1 -1 -1 1.60
DAILY MORNING
MORNING,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Publlahed and distributed under permit (Wo. 801) authored s" th. of bctob¿¿¿"71017. on flle at tbo frwFOtaoi ot" -an Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. ■. Buriewm i ostmaam General. Entered as second TnL, f.bruary 21, 1910, at the Post Office at Ban Juan, Porte Blco, (United States of America) under the Act of march 3, !-?-
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 26, 1925
vile year
NUMBER 3076.
MRS. MCCOWN AND HUYKE ENDORSED BY FORTZA
M NEWS FROM GENERAL MC INTYRE IS EXPECTED M It appears that the majority will remain neutral M General McIntyre has now arrived in Washington and on being questioned by reporters spoke in the most flattering terms for the island administration of Puerto Rico, stating that on the political side all was quiet. Undoubtedly the General will be as emphatic with the President in reporting on Puerto Rico as he has been with journalists. Nevertheless, with two appointments pending in Governor Towner's cabinet, definite news as to the activities of the Chief of the Bureau of Insular Affairs at the White House is awaited with real anxiety in our high political circles. The heads of the majority are convinced that the General's report will have a great influence on the mind of President Coolidge and that he will take it very much into account in making appointments in Governor Towner's Cabinet. Who will be the General's recommended appointees? That is the question which our politicians are asking themselves and which may be answered with certainty as soon as a correspondence is received which is awaited with real anxiety ENDORSED BY I ORTALEZA Yesterday we learned from an absolutely reliable source that Messrs. Huyke and McCown have been effectively recommended and endorsed by Fortaleza for the offices of Commissioner of Instruction and Auditor of Puerto Rico respectively. It is now known. Fortaleza's candidates are Mr. Huyke and Mr. McCown. Now let us wait for developments. In fact, there is a certain fear that we may be treated to a surprise and that some political character with enough strength to soon rule Mr. Honoré will impose his candidacy in Washington, explaining why the Free Federation is not willing to cooperate with the Bureau of Labor for the time being.
I A-gN -TO " I I I 4 I '* - <"*'S ~>A*f c, ao -'-Lly ]^? <c -**-<*- - \ * o, s "cV° ' S\ X** * * *' >z í * s B jfe s *- - '¿±1 W sa= \ o c cintwn ' " * i. n "y ¿ i m i m i j * j iif W/>; -., i' \ -4= A * jX* 0 * 6 * - ■ -i *"*Y*HA
KORBER 8r FIRE* CYCLONE - EARTHQUAKEAUTOMOBILEMARITIMONIQUCTE POSTAL-REMISSALSoiVALORCS LUGGAGE-ACCIDENTS BONDING
i OLIMPO ° °1 | TOMORROW - SUNDAY - TOMORROW 0 I The production of the century. ¡j "MES AL1 N A" n With the first 8 parts. 5
! SuitsTof Cashmere I Exceptional prices at $10.00 l LANILLA PANTS i Top quality at $5.50. | - SEE THEM. -DAMIAN RODRIGUEZ, SACHS & CO., (Suers, by P. Schira) Salvador Brau, Esq. San Justo, F SAN JUAN, P. R.
! "a HGDD. TBADAJO IE(W LA DE BIDS CONTISTACION'.
J SO STATED BY '' REP. At the offices of the Bureau of Labor are surprised that the Free Federation, in spite of having received an official invitation, has so far refused to cooperate with the labor organization in the solution of the labor problems on our island. W ; The Chief of the Labor Bureau, Mr. Honoré, seems to be at a loss to explain that some time ago he sent a letter to Mr. Ra- > fael Alonso, inviting him to cooperate (through the intermediary of the Labor Federation) with the Labor Bureau, and that he has not yet received a reply. Yesterday morning* we were talking with the representative at large, Mr. Alonso, in connection with this matter. I do not want to say anything for the press at this time in connection with the question raised by Mr. Honoré. But I can assure you that the Labor Bureau will receive a reply in due time. We will reply to the letter we have received, as the Sand B - JIcio advises, and in accordance with the ideals which we have upheld through the years and for which we have fought and will continue to fight until the definitive triumph of these ideas. *? "We will tell you the reasons why the Free Federation acts the way it does, and we will make it very clear, so that the whole country will know the great truths hidden behind the scenes, b When we speak, we speak clearly and categorically and we never spare an explanation". Mr. Alonso finally promised to give us a copy of the letter-answer to be diib o 2 >n< >nr >r> 10 maguia IS SUNDAY fj '&, O Day of sea rides. Don't U r - II forget it and take your family. A Rr. u POPULAR COMPANY.
Bolivar Pasan's mandamus vs. Gov. Towner.
M IS NOW READY FOR SUPREME COURT HEARING M A special session of the Supreme M is requested. Our readers will surely be interested to know the outcome of the mandamus petition filed several days ago by the Ledo. Bolivar Pagan against Governor Towner, requesting from the First District Court a peremptory order requiring the Governor to proceed to immediately appoint Mr. Bolivar Pagan as a member of the Board of Elections representing the Socialist Party as one of the two so-called major political parties on the island after the last elections. Judge Foote, issued a resolution dismissing the petition outright and declaring the motion for reconsideration previously requested by Ledo. Bolivar Pagan. Today we can further inform our readers that on the same day of the aforementioned resolution of Judge Foote, Ledo. Bolívar Pagán ra(Continued on 6) THE "COMMERCIANTES RADICAN LOS "MEDIO CENTENAR DE INJUNCTIONS CONTRA ARBITRIOS Jl_- No wait the opinion of the Attorney - General to proceed ,' m "This has no powers to interpret the legislative sentiment say M | The Chamber of Commerce is nl- . The Chamber of Commerce is considering the procedure to be followed against the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, having already prepared half a hundred Injunctions which it has proceeded to file, so that the clauses on which the sales tax is based may be declared inadmissible, as we were informed yesterday morning by the directors of said prestigious group of merchants. THE ATTORNEY'S OPINION. As it was reported in an afternoon newspaper that the merchants were awaiting an opinion from Attorney General Butte on the letter addressed to him by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, we visited on page 5 to find a way over the executive recommendation. THE MAJORITY NEUTRAL v As for the majority party, we are told that it will do its best to remain absolutely neutral, awaiting developments and that it will intervene only if there are suspicions that candidates absolutely alien to the country are coming. It seems that this attitude of the majority is based on the recommendations of Fortaleza, since it would not look well in Washington for the present administrators to have different candidates.
IMPORTANT COMMUNICATION FROM COLONEL LEWIS TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
THE POSSIBLE INEFFECTIVENESS OF THE WEAPON CARRYING LAW M Requests an opinion against the ruling made by some judges,-Can arms be carried so long as they are visible?
Pursuant to a most important communication which has been addressed by the Colonel of the Insular Police, our distinguished and able friend Mr. George W. Lewis, to Attorney General Butte, the Government of Puerto Rico is confronted with one of the most difficult problems, the consequences of which, if not immediately settled, will be truly disastrous for the country, so much so that the Chief of Public Order said yesterday morning, when we went to see him about this difficult problem, that he did not know what to do in case the Director of the Department of Justice should oppose him. ORIGIN OF THE PROBLEM. Our readers are aware of the difficulties encountered by the Insular Police Department in enforcing the law, due in the main part to the shortage of men in the service. I The crime wave which has loved to wipe out the country, has declined markedly, - to the extent that the crime figures still exceed those of any other, and, what is more, exceed those of even the most populous cities - of the globe - since our legislature passed the law prohibiting citizens from bearing arms. A NEW INTERPRETATION. Numerous have been the entrepreneurs for carrying forbidden arms, - more than a thousand arms occupied - and now, when the number of occupied arms exceeds ten thousand - THE STEAM STEER GUANTANAMO DEPARTS AT ELEVEN A.M. TODAY. -The comfortable steamer Guantanamo, which was to leave today at four o'clock in the afternoon from this port, bound for Puerto Plata, Kingston, Jamaica and Cuban ports, will actually leave at eleven o'clock in the morning, as it has been decided at the last Lora. Those interested should take good note of this. The Guantanamo advances its trip by five hours. DISTRICT COURT OF SAN JUAN M NOTICE OF CALENDAR READING M Attorneys and the public in general are hereby notified that this District Court has set October 5, 1925 (at 9:00 a.m.) for the reading of the contentious civil calendar. Attorneys are requested to request in advance the inclusion of the cases ready for trial, being advised that there will be only one reading of the calendar. San Juan, Puerto Rico, September 25, 1925. Luis Vergne ORTIZ. Secretary in charge of Civil Matters. (Announcement)
and now, when the best successes have been achieved by the General Headquarters in its campaign against crime, some district judges of the island have chosen to state in their opinions, the fact that a person may carry prohibited weapons as long as he carries them in public view, as long as he does not order or attempt to violate the island laws and municipal ordinances, or while he is not in a state of intoxication. COMMUNICATION TO THE ATTORNEY. Colonel Lewis, in view of these interpretations given by the Courts to the Law of Bearing Arms, has sent a very important communication to the Attorney General Buttc, requesting that he immediately dictate the corresponding opinion, so that the desire that the legislators had in approving this beneficial law, be kept intact. The Socialist Executive Council has called for a special meeting to agree on the policy to be followed with respect to the labor government, and to adopt a policy to be followed with respect to the labor government, and to adopt a policy to be followed with respect to the labor government. The Socialist Executive Council, the supreme body of this political collectivity, has been summoned yesterday afternoon to an extraordinary session for a meeting to be held on Monday in the halls of the Free Federation of this capital. The summons, so rapid and unexpected, was made by telegraph ¡ This summons follows the ¡ information published yesterday ( EL MUNDO, in which Mr. ■ Honoré, head of the Labor Bureau, stated that the Free ¡ Federation has not yet replied to an official letter sent to Mr. AJonco requesting cooperation in dealing with the problems at hand. The Executive Council will agree at its extraordinary session on the policy to be followed with the Labor Bureau and on the reply to be given to Mr. Honoré. I - GERMANY VERBALLY ACCEPTS INVITATION TO CONFERENCE M-BERLIN, Sept. 25 (United Press)-It is learned that the German Embassies have accepted \~r. balally the invitation to Germany to attend a Security Pact Conference Germany has proposed that it should be held at Lucerne. Germany has asked that the Saar Plebiscite be reconsidered. (INHUNA TODAY - SATURDAY 26 - TODAY MARY PHILBIN - AND - NORMAN KERRY ' - IN - THE MANIQUI * i ieLLLLEST super-ex-traordinary jjjoduction. CURRENT PRICES
Mrs. Clotilde Rodrigue! y Arguelles de Codierno HAS DIED IN POLA DE ALLANDE. ASTURIAS v Her bereaved son. Segundo Codierno y Rodriguez, in informing Buy friends and eonoc'dos te.', painful loss, beg'ei have it present in your prayers and please arlstlr to the mass that in suffrage of his soul will be celebrated e! Monday, day 28 of the current month at 7:46 in the morning in the Church of San Agustin de Puerta de Tierra, for whose favor I will be! extremely grateful. Mo partierJarireiitc is invited.
FROM DIAZ COLLAZO TO FONT SUAREZ "GO TO COURT!
We have been talking to Ledo. Diaz Collazo about the accusations made to the Equestrian Commission by Ledo Font Suarez and we have obtained this statement from him: "I insist on my determination not to get involved in public discussions. I have already traced a way to Ledo-Font Suarez: that he should resort to the Courts. Otherwise he will waste his time uselessly. I have nothing more to say." In the same or similar terms, the worthy President of the Commission, Mr. Richardson, expressed himself.
DOCTOR LOPEZ SICARDO IN THE CAPITAL OF FRANCE M An expressive letter to our editor THE GREAT EXHIBITION IN PARIS. THE DELIGHTS OF THE CITY OF LIGHT M Paris, August 1925. Mr. Editor of EL MUNDO, I San Juan. P. R Dear friend:- Believe me very grateful for the publication of the cablegram sent to that paper from Barcelona by Mr. Real. Undoubtedly, from your text one could know that my condition was satisfactory after what happened to me in that city and which was narrated so pompously by the local press. Since then, I have been receiving demonstrations of affection from my friends that comfort my spirit, to the point of hardly deploring the physical injuries I received; this, together with the spiritual convalescence I am going through in these boulevards and faubourgs, has almost completely erased the memory of what happened. There are so many things that this Paris offers to the contemplation of the soul, that the thought is not given rest in the selection of successive emotions, some joyful, others bitter, but all interesting. Among them, those offered to us by the Exhibition of "MODERN DECORA TIVE AND INDUSTRIAL ARTS" which has been held since April and from which a new direction is expected for the future of these branches of artistic creation. It is installed in the very heart of Paris, on both sides of the Seine, from the Place de la Concorde to the Pont de l'Alma and encompassing within its perimeter beautiful portions of the "City of Light" including the Esplanade des In- ¡ valides and the Pont Alexandre i m. (Continued on p. 5) TERRIBLE ACCUSATIONS OF "LA BOMBONERA" It is accused of being revolutionaryAfter easy investigations it has been proven that three revolutions have been fomented, and those that are still to come. First revolution in Feb. 1981 in "La Ch'na" (refresco)-Se-1 gnnda revolution in mar. 1924 at "La Nena" (cookie)-Third revolution in agt- in 1925 at "El Eléctrico (bread) The ringleaders Messrs. Puig, Abra ham are free on parole to continue revolutionizing the whole Island of Puerto Rico and the public will continue to favor them and admire all their innovations and new products even if they cause more revolution. Soon great reforms in "LA BOMBONERA" all new all modern, the never seen in Puerto Rico. -Advancement is imposed, all electric...
Announcement.
ONLY FOR THE NIAOS ALUMINUM CUPS AT SPECIAL PRICES 1 FERRETERIA FINLAY SAN JUAN, P. R.
¡D/EZ M/L F/RMAS 'HAVE ALREADY BEEN COLLECTED BY THE M/ FEDERATION.
Elderly and young people sign the document -m- A neutralization campaign will be started by the majority M The socialists, or better yet, the federationists continue the campaign to send to Washington a document containing the signatures of one hundred thousand people and requesting that a commission be sent to investigate the economic and social conditions of the working classes in Puerto Rico. THEY ALREADY HAVE ABOUT TEN THOUSAND SIGNATURES The federationists thought they would have all the signatures ready by the end of this month, but they have made a mistake in their calculations. Evidently it is not such an easy task to collect the signatures of one hundred thousand people. However, yesterday we learned that at this point they have collected about ten thousand signatures. The document in question, already published in our columns, has been sent all over the island, and the leaders of each collectivity have different copies, at the end of which there are several blank sheets of paper to take the signatures. The signer is supposed to read the contents of the document first. THE HEADQUARTERS Yesterday we were witnessing the entrance and exit to the Free Federation of this capital, of all those who enter willing to sign the document. Yesterday we saw several old ladies making a cross, under which someone put their name. Old and young Federationists enter and leave the Socialist headquarters at every moment. But judging by the first experiment, if the Socialist leaders really want to collect a hundred thousand signatures, they will have to wait at least until Christmas. A COINCIDENCE By a true coincidence we understand that the sending of this federationist document to the national authorities will coincide with the arrival in the national capital of the legislative commission that is going to' (Continued ei> 6th. page.)
THE AGUADULA PROSECUTOR'S OFFICE IS A LIFESAVER.
PRACTICALLY RESOLVED* VE THE PROBLEM OF THE TER CER JUDGE < M , ; The cigars have sent a ; issue to Governor M I The political-administrative conflict in Ponce has been resolved in the most satisfactory manner. Peace has been signed and the j Ledo. José R. Gelpí, after serving as a member of the Local Committee of the Alianza, is back in charge of the school administration, a position for which he was appointed from the very beginning by the Mayor, Mr. Vivas Valdivieso. This has caused the Ledo, '.lelpí, as a result of being confirmed in his former position, has proceeded to send to the Governor, with ao solutamente irrevocab'*. stt resignation as Prosecutor of the District Court of Aguadilla. It will be recalled that Ledo. Gelpí was included in the new judicial combination. A TABLE OF SALVATION So difficult is the situation arising from the judicial appointments pending final action, that the rcnqncia of Ledo. José R. Gelpí is considered a table of sai meióa that will not go unnoticed by those called upon to act. The position of Prosecutor of Aguadilla, upon becoming vacant, offered an excellent opportunity to satisfy one of the candidates for the position of third District Judge of this capital. And this leads us to believe that now the pending appointments will not take so long, since according to pareoe the fight at the last minute is circled to two candidates tie push for District Judge of San Juan and possibly everything will be solved by sending one of them to the fisla of the Villa del Ojo. THE PUROS SEND A THIRD As for the position of Judge Mu(Continued on page 6.) OPPORTUNITY Fifteen "Singer" sewing machines are for sale for a quarter of their value. Inquire at telephone 585. ANTONIO LEMA CO.
U Attention! 2 0 (j AUTOMOBILES WILLYS - KNIGHT Q PRECIOUS MODELS FOR 1926 2 In the last two weeks have acquired: o o o 01 Touring 66, Mr. C. O. Lord, Santurce. p I Touring 66, D. H. H. H. Balzac, Arecibo. o I Touring 66, D. Rafael Baragaño, Humacao. 2 Q I Touring 65, American Colonial Bank, Mayagüez A | (''Touring 65, American Colonial Bank, Arecibo. o I Touring 65, American Colonial Bank, Caguas. 5 01 Sedan 65, Dr. W. F. Lippitt, Santurce. I Coupe 65, Dr. W. F. Lippitt, Santurce. o DISTRIBUTORS <? ZORRILLA, SAENZ & CIA.
°ULIT°mÁ HORA o<= § A The interesting Magazine "Pro Parque Colón", with more than 125 pages of pleasant reading and ¡lustrated with pro- U or fusion of photogravures, has been offered for sale at the pre 2 A ció of FIFTY CENTS copy and 5 cts. for postage . -It is a magazine that should not be missing in any home or in any Puerto Rican library. Orders should be made directly to the U or TYPOGRAPHY "LIBERTAD" - AGUADILLA, PUERTO RICO J
8 STEAMER FOR NEW ORLEANS OEI steamer "MARIANA" will be dispatched from San Juan for or New Orleans, via island ports, on the 27th of the current coA rrent. i | Accepts cargo. San Antonio Dock. S THE NEW YORK & PORTO RICO S. S. CO. n m .