THE WORLD
11 A lo
°AGS. 3 CTS.
ll A '
■ 1 PAGES. 3 CTS.
Office: ' Port Blco Hu>tx "do' ' Bld<. Tal. lasa. - Box MS.
Senwrtr" 35.00 A Afio-* - - 9.50
DAILY MORNING
MORNING,
YEAR VIL
VIL YEAR
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
NOTHING DEFINITIVE ON JUDICIAL COMBINATION M
RECOMMENDATIONS AND BULK VISITS M The Governor still has one more week M Since, among the current affairs of the day, the next judicial combination is spoken of with greater intensity and preference, and public opinion is commenting with increasing interest on the probabilities of the appointment of judges of real prestige in the community, we visited the Department of Justice yesterday morning to learn, if possible, the last minute details that Attorney General Butte has arranged for the judiciary. I NOTHING DEFINITIVE We have reported that, although in the Attorney General's private offices there are constant conferences regarding the appointments to be made to fill the new positions created by the Law reorganizing the District Courts of San Juan and Ponce, there is still nothing definite. THE RECOMMENDATIONS ARE COMING In the meantime, Attorney General Butte receives daily numerous letters from entities of the country and influential persons of the Government, as well as numerous commissions from legislators and prestigious citizens, recommending different lawyers to fill the judicial positions created by the new law, positions that will have to be filled by the Governor before the 18th. =To Merchants and other persons required to pay the 2 percent sales tax stipulated in Section 62 of the Internal Revenue Law in force, I hereby inform you that the official books containing the affidavits to be filed for the payment of the sales tax are already in the possession of the Collectors of Internal Revenue. It is necessary that each interested party promptly furnish its corresponding tax book in order to comply with the requirements of the aforementioned law. These books will be delivered by the Collectors to the applicants, by means of the adhesion and cancellation of an internal revenue stamp Ce 25 cents on the cover of the same. Juan G. GALLARDO Treasurer of P. 2. (Advertisement). an apartment in the "Tobacco Palace'*. -Will report: ALONSO RIERA Á CO. Tel. 527 San Juan I lili II !■ POPULAR COMPANY If you are suffocating in the heat and eating is your agony, walks by the ' bay is the best remedy.
| TODAY SATURDAY -: TODAY -: A KISS PLEASE! i (THE NARROW STREET) ! < < < Exciting, Sentacional and delightful photodrama in ¡ 1 | EIGHT ACTS. ;¡ i MATINEE AND EVENING ' ¡ ¡ 1 - 11 --- --- -- ; - - - -- - -- -- r 1 | R WMMWMMWMMWMMWMMWMMWMMWMMWWWWWWMMMMVtfkMl 1
Very interesting case of prohibition in the Federal Gorte
TWO WITNESSES AND TWO AGENTS PROCESSED FOR PERJURY M Judge Wells rules in favor of defendant M I A very interesting prohibition case was heard in Federal Court the day before yesterday, in which a good friend of ours, Mr. José Manuel Pérez, a distinguished gentleman who for a long time was Mayor of Humacao, was a defendant. Mr. Perez was accused of selling alcoholic beverages in his establishment, "Café Paris'', in Rio Piedras. And the Bucknell procedure was applied to him, to force him to provide a bond that would allow him to continue his business. The sworn complaint against our friend was authorized by agents Capo and Brindis, acting as witnesses Rafael Alvarez Colon and Luis Cordero, who at first affirmed that Mr. Perez had sold them two quarts of rum, although their statement yesterday was contradictory. EVIDENCE OF DISCARGO I Our friend brought to prove his innocence, official certificates from Dr. Pereira, surgeon of the Hospital of Rio Piedras, and from the hospital of the same name. Pereira, surgeon of the Municipal Hospital of Río Piedras; of Don Ignacio Peñagarícano and of Mayor Emanuelli to prove that on the day of the accusation, he was xe-- ¡ cluded in the hospital, having undergone the same operation. However, Mr. Pérez did not have to use this defense since it was enough with the proof of the charge to prove his innocence. THE JUDGE DECLARES HIM EXONERATED OF ALL GUILTY! The Hon. Wells, after hearing the witnesses for the prosecution, proceeded without hearing the defense, to exonerate Mr. Jose Manuel Perez of all guilt, giving orders to lift the bail that weighed on his establishment. Yesterday, Mr. Perez swore before Prosecutor Gay a complaint for perjury against agents Capó and Brindis and against witnesses Alvarez Colón and Cordero, since the very proof of CHARGE came to show his innocence. TODAY CONTRRAE MARRIAGE DON ROMUALDO REAL M Today is celebrated in Barcelona the marriage of the distinguished young lady of Sari Juan, María Asun- j eión Hernández Usera, daughter of the retired President of the Supreme Court, with our dear * companion, the prestigious caballe- - ro and publicist Don Romualdo Real, President of the corporation "Puerto Rico Ilustrado". We wish the spouses every happiness. On the way from the González Padín house to the Borinquen Barber Shop and both establishments, a platinum pin with an emerald surrounded by diamonds has been lost. The person who delivers it to Mr. ALFONSI, PARIS BAZAR, will be rewarded. SEED OF ONIONS Legitimate of Canary Islands and of the white-yellow kind have just received it and sell it guaranteeing its germination. MENDEZ MARTINEZ & COInfanta Luisa 4 and 6, Marina.
LAST HOUR M THE MANATI CONFLICT HAS BEEN SATISFACTORILY RESOLVED M Manatee. Sept ble. 11. 1925. EL MUNDO. San Juan. i: Information that newspaper today breakup Manatí Alliance is erroneous. j Differences arisen between members, Committee does not justify boasting and , : festination wants to be printed to him asun to. The two Republican members ' who withdrew from the Alliance Committee ' have been replaced by two Republican Committee 1 and conflict does not exist 1 but in the mind of someone who de- ' I'searía breakup was inevitable. ' Alliance Committee has not met , ! because it has not been summoned. It is untrue ( Republicans Committee are not dis-'l (Continued on p. 6.)
IV Our distinguished and good friend, the enthusiastic President of the University of Puerto Rico, Dr. ■ Thomas E. Benner, has made the following very interesting remarks: - "Because of the date on which the Legislature had to finish its work and the inevitable delays in the appointment of the new members of the Board of Trustees of the University, ■-all due to the economic crisis of the last few months- the employment of the new faculty of the University of Puerto Rico, both at Rio Piedras and Mayagüez, has given rise to certain difficulties. A few positions are still unfilled. In Mayagüez, for example, there was a vacancy in civil engineering,
Two aspects of the "Shenandoah" after the disaster and another one an hour before its fatal voyage, moored at Lakehurst.
THE UNIVERSITY AND THE NEW FACULTY' M UNAVOIDABLE DIFFICULTIES HAVE ARISEN. IV! But all will be arranged.- Dr. Benner M speaks.
(I another in agronomy and still another in entomology. The vacancy in civil engineering has been filled by the appointment of a young man from Mayag.iez who recently graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and who has nearly completed his doctorate. Mr. Carlos Chardón, Commissioner of Agriculture and Mr. Guillermo Esteves, Commissioner of the Interior, have helped the University to fill these vacancies with the best candidates. In Rio Piedras the situation is even more difficult. Several positions are still vacant, even though it is expected that they will be filled as soon as possible. We have obtained applications for at least
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) *utíior'¿-d by th- -. ■ - t October 6 1917, on file - "t thi fost Office of 8an Juar, Porto Hico, By order of the President, A. 8. Enr eaot. Fostu aster General.' Enterad ai second <-la" matter, | febrnary 21, 1919, at the Post Office at 8an Juan, Porto Arco. (United States of America) under the Act of march 3 1.7"
DID YOU LEAVE WITHOUT
- I - . . j ■■ ijijii. i_im wi_.il - ' - Sio 48 $io 48 Extraorinary Bargain on Cashmere Suits Nice colors. Great variety in styles. DON'T MISS THIS OPPORTUNITY AT 1 BAZAR SAVING Fortaleza 25 Phone 1579 j
If you didn't get it in High School, we have one reserved for you in the twelve month COMMERCIAL COURSE starting Monday the 14th of this month at "UNDEWQOD PITMAN COLLEGE" Apply immediately. Save your time and be confident of your success. The same discipline of the Public Schools is observed at this school. FREE TUITION LUNA 58 PHONE 1338 GREEN SAN JUAN '
I SELL t'N TRUCK MACK of 3% tons, equipped with grave box for four meters and hydraulic vertical crane- It is completely new. Will report: l Salvador Quiñones Río Piedras.
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 12, 1925
Assemblyman Cabrera launches his quarter to swords M
HE SUSTAINS THAT RESOLUTION 58 IS A VENGEANCE -M- Why he has voted against it again and again M The Assemblyman of this capital, Mr. Cabrera, with whom we were talking yesterday, has made the following statements in relation to the existing conflict between the Puro Local Republican Committee and the Municipal Assembly: - "I fought Resolution 53 of Mr. Diago because I considered it from the first moment in conflict with our party's own Regulations. "When that resolution was put to a vote for the first time, all the Republican delegates, with the exception of myself, voted in favor of it. As for the Socialists, Mr. Marcos Ferrer Calderón voted against it. "As a member of the Local Committee I took the resolution to the committee for action. At the meeting held the committee addressed a communication to the President of our party. Ledo. Martinez Nadal, so that he would officially know that the Municipal Assembly had approved a solution that was in itself a violation of the Party's Regulations. Lii cenciado Martínez Nadal in turn sent a communication to the Assembly indicating the convenience of reconsidering the Resolution for being in conflict with our Regulations. The Assembly reconvened and the resolution was approved with amendments, with me voting against it ! for the second time and also my colleague, Dr. Martínez Roselló. "I am sure that the Mayor did not approve with his signature the said ordinance, which is faithful evidence that he also believes that it constitutes a violation of the Rules of Procedure and because of discipline he did not sign it, allowing it to become law after the five-day period had elapsed. "My personal opinion in this i matter is that resolution 58 was - presented and passed at the Municipal Assembly as an act of i revenge against some member of the Pure Republican Local Committee. ' ' '. We have two of the vacancies and are soliciting candidates for the other vacancies both by mail and telegraph. Although these difficulties will delay the opening of certain classes at the University in both Mayagüez and Río Piedras, it is expected that within two weeks all courses will be running perfectly well. Every effort has been made to avoid delays, and it is hoped that the students as well as the faculty will do everything in their power to make the best of this difficult and embarrassing situation. Although the final enrollment is not yet final, it is evident that in both branches of the University it will be higher than ever. The young men and women of the island are eager K**-- ü i. L-L .j. .. i ■■ DUTCH STEAMER f "POSEIDON" ! will be dispatched on the 14th of the | present for [1 LA GUAYRA i CURACAO ; | SANTAMARIA j i admitting cargo and N passage. í Sues, of L. Villamil & Co. i Agents. H FOR RENT Two-storey house in front of San José Square. Suitable for Commerce the low and housing the high. Will inform: DROGUERIA BLANCO
A comment of the 'interim president of the Socialist party M
I conceive of such a party in a monarchy," he says, "Even though there are certain differences of opinion as to the name to be given to the new fusionist party in gestation, it seems to be practically settled that it will be called the Liberal Party, undoubtedly in memory i of those times when Puerto i 1 1 1 Rico was ablaze with political excitement I ' 1 and liberals and conservatives were fighting tooth and nail to gain <1 power and with it secure the j i defense of the ideals that each ■ each one ■ defended in good faith. | As to the name of the new ' ( party, public opinion has not yet begun to formally manifest itself, especially on the part of those concerned, of those who form part of the majority. i l ¡ A comment to that effect, not from a member of the majority, but from the Acting Chairman of the Socialist Party, will undoubtedly prove interesting. i' 1 1 1. I, however hard I try," says Mr. Alonso, "I cannot explain to myself why my political adversaries try to call themselves the Liberal Party. In reality, at the present time and in the present circumstances, that name has no logical explanation", u 'IN A MONARCHY. r i-i j "I conceive that name of Liberal Party in a monarchy, but never in a democracy such as the one that governs Puerto Rico. l " i "What I do believe is that for my ' 1 adversaries the name doesn't matter much, since liberals or aliancistas, -they will always continue to be as cona serradores as up to now. é Why don't they call themselves that way once and for all and we will win in truth and the public will not be disoriented?" 41 BELGIAN-AMERICAN AGREEMENT TO BE PUBLISHED M Y BRUSSELS, Sept. 11. (Ca- * ble French.) - The publication of the ■ agreement made in Washington for the consolidation of the debt ofBelgium to the United States is led to take advantage of the opportunities g : offered to them in the various _ I courses, and this year their interest is increased by the new impulse which r | comes to give the University the g approval dc-1 project which reor j ganizes it." i ■ LAST HOUR We are pleased to advise all inte1 rested, the transfer of our ofi- " ciñas de Salvador Brau 28 to the building of EL MUNDO, 5th. floor. EMPLOYMENT AGENCY . M- Rivera Viñas & Co. 5 Tel. 1566 San Juan " SEE _ used cars advertised by PANZARDI LTD. 1 on 4th. page.
NUMBER 3062.
THE SOCIALISTS HAVE A SECRET CANDIDATE i -JI-
THE SQUARE OF COM. The position of Commissioner of Beneficence in the capital is said to be Dr. Bocanegra M 1 The position of Commissioner of Beneficence in the capital is still vacant, as all our readers, who have closely followed this process, know. In the meantime, Dr. Gómez Brioso is acting as tai, on an interim basis. As for the staff that served under Dr. VícI tor Coll y Cuchí, no radical change has been made. The electorate is still in the poet ¡ ción, waiting for the Mayor to appoint the successor to Dr. Coll y Cuchí. Who the man of the pure republicans may be, is what has not been clear so far, since, in our opinion, the Local Committee itself has not been able to agree on this question. But it is clear that the situation will be resolved at any moment. In the meantime, we have maintained and will continue to maintain that the Socialists are lying in wait, waiting until it is known who the pure Republican candidate is and then presenting another candidate of their own, claiming that the position is theirs according to the terms of the pact. I Who is the candidate lo the so i cialists? - . -- ER. BOCANEGRA We have made great es efforts to break the unknown and have finally been assured that the candidate of the Socialists is Dr. Bocanegra Lopez. This distinguished physician was recently the Socialist candidate for member of the Insular Equestrian Committee. I " It will take place earlier than expected, in order to put an end to the rumors and interpretations that are being circulated. William Philipps, American Ambassador [ ¡ ¡ and Finance Minister Janson, have agreed on this matter and have prepared everything for the simultaneous publication of the text in Brussels and Washington. The date will be fixed by the United States. 4pollinaris g THE QUEEN A OF THE í| A6UAS S OF MISA ! KORBER & CO. I VIf S "N WAN, P. R.
I A-e, h -ro 1 -j - - - Samo* ns "col \ \ \ ' i B 'x I \ - * 1 A , ' - * "**vama ' * ~>>Gx.MAAiawi \ *"***-**■< ■I : KORBER CO. INC - INCENPlO* CYCLONE- EARTHQUAKE AUTOMOBILE-MARITIMOUS-I POSTAL-PACKAGE-REMISSIONS WVAL0RE5' LUGGAGE-ACCIDEfiies FIANZES I J