i NDO
2PAGS. 3 CTS. Cintrado" Bldg. r "L EiH. - Box
in PAGS. 3 CTS. g "MMrtra 84.00 g _ Ua Afta - - - - -
DAILY DJ
THE MORNING
PubUalMd and distribute under penal" (Me. 801) by the Acto! October a 181T " ti. at 1 -~ w ~" . - "in Juan, Porto Ueo, By order of the President. A ". Bux.oavn. Poet""*" General' Bntiréd M febrnary "1. l "10. at the Post Ofdoe at "an Juan, Porto Blco, (Paitad t "t- ¿d" X SATURDAY 7 MARCH 1925
year vn
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
NUMBER 1920. >
A momentous bill has been introduced in the Legislature by means of which a citizen may establish before the Supreme Court an impeachment proceeding against any Prosecutor or Judge.
-The purpose of the bill is to ensure the speedy removal of a prosecutor or judge who commits a crime.
B bill avoids "midnight dismissals."-Gives equal opportunity to the accused as to the accuser.*Up to now, Judges and Prosecutors are practically above the Law.
A bill has just been introduced in our Legislature, establishing a speedy and expeditious procedure for impeachment and removal of municipal and District Judges and Prosecutors. The bill before us was introduced in the House by Mr. Co*balles, on the 5th of the present month, and on the same day in the Senate, by Mr. Martinez and Mr. Figueroa. The bill, as drafted, may be described as transcendental. It has two aspects. It safeguards the rights of the officials to whom it refers, (judges and prosecutors) and it guarantees the punishment of those injured by the criminal or illegal actions of the' judges and prosecutors in those cases in which such actions do not refer to the "bona fide" appreciation of evidence or to the criteria sustained "bona fide" in matters of law. The provisions' ' ' of the bill, absolutely eliminate the possibility of the recurrence of threats of "midnight dismissals ' ' and imposes the initiation of proceedings by means of a sworn complaint that subjects the complainant to the liabilities of perjury when the complaint is vicious, unfounded or false. t Instead, the bill fills an existing gap in our Legislation. Up to now, our statutes provide for the corresponding sanction through the "disbursement" procedure for lawyers guilty of "malpractice", but there is no statutory procedure for judges or prosecutors guilty of any of the facts that give rise to a "disbursement". So far, in these cases, what is done is to file charges with the office of the Department of Justice, but this office is not required by law to act, and if it does not act, there is no recourse to force it to act. That is to say, practically speaking, judges and prosecutors are by en- < tape of the law. By the bill being resealed the proce' dimlento is established before the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court makes its teco mendation to the Governor, in whom, resides the power to impeach, according to our Organic Charter. All parties are granted the legal opportunity corres- ! pending for prosecution and defense, but are set piaSE ALQUILA 1st. floor of House No. 46 Calle de la Cruz. Very cool. Will inform:- Phone 264 Green, Santurce. Advt.
The case will be settled with fixed and reasonable terms for the termination of the case. Referring then to a matter of such importance, the project cannot be less than transcendental. Here is the bill that concerns us; Senator Coballes presented the following Bill Establishing a quick and expeditious procedure for impeachment and removal of municipal and District Judges and Prosecutors. SECTION 1.-The District Attorneys and all municipal and District Judges, duly appointed and in the performance of their respective offices, may only be impeached and removed in accordance with the provisions of this Act. (a) Having been or being guilty of deceit, malpractice, felony or misdemeanor, in connection with the legal profession or with the performance of their duties; (b) Establishing undue privileges or unfair discrimination in the performance of their official duties; (c) The establishment of undue privileges or unfair discrimination in the performance of their official duties; (d) The incapacity, incompetence, incompetence, or inability to perform their official duties; (e) The inability, incompetence, incompetence, or inability to perform their official duties; (f) The inability, incompetence, or inability to perform their official duties; (g) The inability, incompetence, or inability to perform their official duties. (d) Manifest incapacity, incompetence, and ignorance that prevent him/her from conscientiously performing the duties of his/her office; (e) Violation of any of the legal precepts and rules that govern his/her judicial actions. SECTION 3.-Impeachment proceedings shall be initiated by means of a duly sworn complaint filed before the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico by any person who feels aggrieved by, or who has knowledge of, the actions of the challenged official and who is covered by the preceding section, stating in said complaint, as clearly and specifically as possible, the causes that motivate it. SECTION 4.-After the said complaint has been filed in the Court of Appeals♦Continued on page 2) IíbaraT A house in Calle del Parque is for sale. They will report in the barbershop "EL FIGARO". Pedro TRUJILLO
SOLARES 6 "olares - 625 mjc $2.50 meter cash, $3.00 meter in installments. HENRY W. DOOLEY No. 9 Tapia St Tel. 1295 Santurce
Dr. Pedro Perea GENERAL SURGERY Edificio Padio
Several members of the U. S. Senate are waiting for the President to send to that body the name of Mr. J. B. Huyke for a new term as Commissioner of Instruction of Puerto Rico, to give him a tough fight.
Is San Juan benefited by the Oriente railroad, and does that benefit justify the investment of $2,450,000 of San Juan's tax funds, and whether or not opposition should be made to such purposes? The foregoing questions, which we title this information, are the result of the study made by a special committee of the Chamber of Commerce, charged with reporting on the projected Oriente railroad, now in the mind of our Legislature. A copy of these questions has been sent to all the members of the Chamber of Commerce for their opinion on the subject. Here is the opinion adopted on the matter by the aforementioned special committee: CAMERA OF COMMERCE OF , PUERTO RICO ~ . In compliance with the instructions contained in the letter of the Secretary, dated October 7, this Committee held on the afternoon of the 15th of this month, interviews with the Honorable Treasurer of Puerto Rico and the Honorable Commissioner of the Interior to discuss at length the proportion of taxation which would correspond to San Juan in connection with the proposed law for the construction of certain pieces of railroad in the eastern district of the island. The Honorable Treasurer received us with his customary kindness and placed at the disposal of the Committee all the information he had in his office, supplying us with all the reports we requested/ In the same afternoon we had an interview with Mr. Esteves, Commissioner of the Interior, which interview was attended by Mr. Romero, Engineer of the Public Service Commission- With them we discussed at length the bill and all its details, particularly the share which San Juan would be required to pay by way of contribution in accordance with the bill mentioned. Both officials treated your commissioners with the utmost courtesy and the data and reports they provided us with allow us to render a clear and concise report regarding this important matter. Bill No. 89, passed by the Legislature on July 26, 1921, provides for and directs the' (Continued on p. 5)
Among these Senators is the entire Alabama delegation, composed of former Presidential candidate, Mr. Uonderwood, and the "floor leader," Mr. Heflin A tough battle is apparently raging in the United States Senate over the possible nomination of Mr. Huyke's name for a new term as Secretary of Ins- , traction of Pto. Rico. judging from the information we have, there are already a number of Senators who are waiting for President Coolidge to send such a proposal to the Senate to go and fight it in the appropriate committee, first, and if their efforts should fail before the said orga- ¡ nism, to redouble, then, their campaign in the executive sessions of the Senate. According to reports, the entire senatorial representation of the State of Alabama, consisting of Senators Underwood and Hefford, is reported to be in the Senate. < nators Underwood and Heflin, is the i that will take the lead in es-! I te "affair," according to the co- 1 1 1 irespondence from both legislators in the possession of our particular friend, the Ledo. The letters shown to us by Quiñones are brief, laconic, but in them the two U.S. Senators summon Mr. Huyke to the Senate when the nomination for his appointment reaches the Senate. As we understand it, Mr. Underwood and Mr. Heflin are close friends of Mr. Quiñones, in whose company they have both waged political campaigns in that State. As readers will see, Mr. Quiñones seems not to have forgotten the "discharge" of the post of Prosecutor with which Mr. Huyke had to obey him, when he was acting Governor of the island, in the time of the famous Don Moncho Reyes ..... Quiñones always says that that act was unjust and that Mr. Huyke only did it to please Mr. Reily, who, as he says (Continued on page 6) - | PROBLEMS OF ACCOUNTING LIQUIDATION OF A FIRE ¡ 1- . Problem: The commercial firm of Rodriguez & Roses had its goods insured against fire. The insurance policy covered only 75 percent of the losses caused by fire. ( ' (Continued on Page 2) ]
AGRICULTURALISTS We have just installed in our factory at Miramar, the latest word in machinery for mixing fertilizers. When you come to San Juan visit us so that you will be convinced of the super excellence of our products. PORTO RICO FERTILIZER CO. San Juan, P. R.
YESTERDAY I SHIPPED TO SPAIN THE ILLUSTRE PUBLISHER DON R0- ■ MUALDO REAL
The staff of "El Mundo" and "Puerto Rico Ilustrado" gathered to bid him a grand, sublime and cordial farewell.
The staff of "El Mundo" and "Puerto Rico Ilustrado" gathers to pay him a cordial farewell For several months, we knew it. Our dear colleague, the brilliant publicist and virile journalist, Mr. Romualdo Reai, was planning to leave Puerto Rico to visit the mother country, Spain. Time went by, and we no longer believed in the reality of the trip, we were under the illusion that the presence of our dear companion would not be missed even for a single moment. The absence of don Romualdo Real, even though we knew that it would be brief, caused us intense sorrow, we did not want to think about it. And nevertheless, a week ago we were intimately convinced that the trip was necessary. The intense intellectual work, the harsh blow of fatality, exhausted the energies of our dear companion. It was necessary to rest for some time, a vacation that, even if short, would be an oasis for him. I Finally, the departure was fi-! ■ jada for yesterday. The steamer i Leon XIII, arriving at our pia- . ' yas should take him to the es-. I But was it perhaps possible that Don I Romualdo Real, alma mater of this house, life and impulse of this company, should leave without the staff of EL MUNDO and PUERTO JRICO ILUSTRADO paying him a worthy farewell? 7 No and a thousand times no. The humblest of us. | I would have claimed the honor of being ■ í the first to protest. The movement was spontaneous, it sprang from our hearts, it was the direct effect of the intense affection we all felt for Don Romualdo Real. j And by unanimous decision, it was agreed ! I to hold a meeting on Tuesday of ¡ , this week, to which I would invite Don Romualdo, to bid him a farewell worthy of his 1 chivalry and nobility. At five o'clock on the afternoon of the sea, the elevator of our building - i was working steadily, taking all the staff of EL MUNDO and PUERTO RICO ILLUSTRADO to the splendid terrace. There 1 we were all assembled, more, mu-' 1 cho more than a hundred, in frank , camaraderie. The presence of the entire staff of both newspapers 1 was the most eloquent manifestation ! The presence of the entire staff of both newspapers was the most eloquent manifestation of the great work that Mr. Romualdo Real has done as a publicist in Puerto Rico. There, among us, was our dear companion, always kind, always sincere, with advice and a word of encouragement always on his lips for those who are weak. We all wanted to say something, the heart spoke and not the lips Don Luis Gomez, the dear friend, always enthusiastic and active, and who replaces Don Romualdo in ' the presidency of the corporation .
1 "Puerto Rico Ilustrado" will be a grandiose, sublime, and most wonderful guest during his absence, was the first to read a beautiful work, full of sincerity, intense affection, fraternal eloquence, it was the voice of the heart that manifested itself in warm words, full of emotion...*. Mr. Gómez, highlighted the intense cultural work of the absent comrade, his efforts and struggles, his intense battle, his noble behavior, his nobility, the excellent work that he has carried out, and how well earned he has such a short rest, after so many years of constant effort. In beautiful and heartfelt phrases, he explained the ideals that fill the noble and great soul of Don Romualdo Real, his intentions for the future, his intense affection for this company, which is part of his life, and the inescapable duty we all have to support it in his absence, to spare no effort to fulfill our duty with dignity. The dear friend ended his well-deserved work, asking heaven that we all raise our thoughts to God, wishing a happy trip to our dear President, and that the Supreme Being illuminate the path that will lead us to triumph. And then, in the most spontaneous way, moved by the affection that we all feel for don Roi mualdo Real, one of the cashiers of the house, Conrado Rosario, took the floor to say everything he felt in those moments in which the greatest emotion overwhelmed our souls. Rosario expressed the feelings of all for the absence of our good friend, and highlighted the great work of Don Romualdo Real, of whom he said that, like Ford, he knew how to put into practice, something rare in our island, the methods of cooperation between the worker and the boss, so that in the hearts of all the subordinates there is true affection for the principal, and that they all strive for the triumph of the company. He ended by wishing a happy voyage to the mate (Continued on p. fl'i £LITTLE CONEY ISLAND Stop 2 until March 10. SEE SIXTH PAGE Take advantage of $40 per month magnificent site with I sideboard and counter for Colma-1 do, Haberdashery or Drug Store. Ave. Bo-¡ lívar, corner Carretera Nueva. Stop 24. Will inform Mr. Rivera, Tel. 1305, San Juan.
IR I. P. ■ ELENA PALMA VOA. DE SCHETTINI I HAS DIED H Her children Francisco, Rafael Teresina, Josefina Quin- H tina; her siblings Sergio, Quintina and Esperanza and her hi- ■ in-laws and other relatives, communicate to you the sad M news of her death and invite for the act of burial which D will take place today at 5 o'clock in the afternoon at the ■ Cemetery of San Juan. Cristo 23 Mortuary House. M Please do not send artificial wreaths H San Juan, P. R., March 7, 1925. Q
Full account of serious charges by Hon. Córdova Davila against Senator Iglesias before the President of the American Fed. of Labor.
E. Chardon has resigned irrevocably Fl Deputy Commissioner of Agriculture Mr. Jaime Bagué assures that the rumor is groundless On the occasion of rumors having circulated in this capital last night assuring that the Hon. Carlos E. Chardon had resigned as Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, r.Van Deusen, who kindly made the following statements: "It is entirely untrue that the Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor has tendered his resignation. "What is more, I am sure that the rumor is without truth. ' ' ! TALKING TO THE i DE. BAGUE Immediately after having put us in communication with ei distinguished Captain Van Deusen, we spoke with the Hon. Jaime Bagué, Snb-Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, who about the referred resignation spoke to us in the following manner: "Those rumors are unfounded . Chardón has not resigned. That is heavenly music. Chardón has not even thought about it. ' ' TOMORROW SUNDAY MORNING Morning, 10:30 A. M. Presentation of the famous trio AUDINOT with his orchestra of ten teachers. Fantasy, ballroom and acrobatic dances. Dancers "Pata de Goma" and Mr. Wellers in dances such as Charleston etc. In several numbers will also cooperate the Rialto Orchestra. We will exhibit "Maiy, the Pearl of Cinema". IN THE EVENING. SUCCESS! First exhibition in Pto. Rico GLORIA SWANSON THEODORE ROBERTS VERA REYNOLDS in the drama in 7 acts LAS DESCARRIADAS (Prodigal Daughters) I HAVE $15,000.00 I WANT TO PLACE IN MORTGAGE PLACIDO COLON, NAGUABO, P. R, LECHERIA For sale a well located with magnificent production, cattle! very selected.-Informs:! Phone 305 P.O. Box 1022 San Juan, P. R. Gasoline Pumps For $300 two gas pumps are given away. Take advantage without loss of time. - Inf. Mr. MIR, Tel. 1529, Sant., Martín Peña.
Cífltestarióa of the latter to the Resident Com.-Mr. Green says he does not believe the words of Mr. Córdova iQávila The Hon. Félix Córdova Dávila. Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, has sent the following very interesting document to the President of the American Federation of Labor, Mr. William Green: Felix Cordova Davila, Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington. CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. TES. Washington, D.C. Hon. D C. Hon. William Green. American Federation of Labor, Washington, D. C. Dear Sir: . It has been announced in the press that the American Federation of Labor at its Convention held recently in El Paso, Texas, adopted a resolution, introduced by Mr. Santiago Iglesias, calling for an investigation of the conditions prevailing in Puerto Rico. It has also been said publicly that you, accompanied by Iglesias, visited the President making mention of alleged fraud and illegalities committed in the November 4 election. I am sure that the American Federation of Labor, in thus assisting Mr. Iglesias in his political activities, is acting in the belief that he is right about what happened in the last election and the administration of Governor Towner. But you know only nr ! aspect of the controversy, and I ! believe that in order for you to reach an unbiased conclusion about the situation in Puerto Rico it is necessary for you to know both aspects. I am sending you some data, which will undoubtedly give you an idea of the activities of Iglesias in Puerto Rico and I am going to quote directly, some statements he made on May 1, 1919, after the Fourth Convention of the Socialist Party of Puerto Rico was held in Puerto Rico. Rewards will be given to anyone who can report its whereabouts. -Direct to the editor of this newspaper or call Tel. 185, Santurce. Magnificent apartment for rent for family with 5 apartments, good sanitary service in Recinto Oeste No. 3 Esq. Salvador Brau. Altos. Several apartments on the first floor. ESR1BIR AND ADDING MACHINES We guarantee the ' repairs. P. R. TYPEWRITER REPAIRING SHOP Box 1445, Tel. 1853, Cristo 10 San Juan, P. R.
Last Minute
Sec. of Gov. Capt. Van Deusen denies rumors that Mr. Carlos
FREE From March 9 to March 22 will be given to the customers of the SERRA, GARABIS & CO. Pharmacy with samples of the famous restorative food TODDY In all pharmacies and grocery stores you will find TODDY
Reden Cows Calved Twenty full production, acclimatized American cows for sale. The best cows imported to Puerto Rico will inform - B. ECHEVARRIA, P. O. Box 782, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
We cordially invite the Public for a visit to our modern establishment of Refrigerated Meats of all kinds, conveniently located at San Sebastian 29, in front of the Market Square. We also carry a complete line of Legumes for the most demanding tastes.-This is the first of a series of stores of the same kind, which we will be successively establishing in San Juan and Santurce. BORINQUEN MARKETS HARRY PIETERSZ TEL. 1590. THOS. J. DAVEY
SOLARES Of different sizes in Santurce Parque, Monteflores, Seboruco, Loíza and Punta Marías. Ask for information to: HENRY W. DOOLÉY 9 Tapia. St Tel. 1295. - Santurce
NOTICE Building "D" of Mnelle No. 6 occupied until now by The Asiatic Petroleum Co. is leased.