The. WORLD
M P AGS. 3 CTS. OMbm: "Pwrw Castrated" BMg. Tri. IMS. - "C M8.
MPAGS. 3 CTS. SMKMtrt SAM On Year 87A."
D1AJUO OF
A.M.A.M.
ASO VU
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and dlztrlbotad onder pormlt (So. 801) authorized by t n , Aci of October 6 1017 mi "i. th. v".... Un Juan, Porto Rico, By order of th. President, A 8. Bur loon, a. I.bn "rr M, ITO M ■". ., ... TM. Me* (PMUd
SATURDAY, JUNE 13, 1925.
NUMBER 2073.
It has been ascertained that the Sunday 'pool was also divided among a few "jockeys."
A group of people p rot are energetically against the Equestrian Commission They accuse it of showing no activity to protect the people against frequent frauds It is necessary to investigate the tired of the insxpticable defeats of "Juanita" and "Cubanita" We gladly publish the following letter sent to us, and in which serious accusations are made against the Equestrian Commission, for the inactivity it shows, and against a group of 'jockeys' oue last week the amount of the "pool" was distributed among other people. The protest of these gentlemen is the same that palpitates in all parts of the city. Why is not investigated? Did the horses hold up? Was there fraud? These are questions that the public asks and -no authorized body bothers to answer. If it is true that certain "jockeys" did trjunfar certain horses, thus managing to take the "pool" and incurring, incidentally, in a crime against which our laws indicate strong punishments, we do not understand the cause of the indifference of the Equestrian Commission. If, on the contrary, the "jockys" are innocent, we do not understand why the Commission does not decide to rehabilitate them in the face of public opinion, which passes the most dishonorable judgments against them. If for no other reason, the Equestrian Commission is called upon to act and, if found guilty, to impose on them one of those famous suspensions that end after two weeks. It is true that for these offenses the due punishment is jail, but, as fate would have it, our Equestrian Commission, created to protect justice, has a very generous heart, and often forgets its objective. Here is the letter in question: Santurce, P. R., June 11, 1925. Mr. Don Sergio Romanacce, Director of EL MUNDO, San Juan, P. R. Sir: The undersigned, recognizing er. your enlightened newspaper as the most ardent defender of Jos. interests or the people, beg you to make room in its columns for these lines which are a manifestation of protest against (Continued on page 6.)
CHAUFFEURS For greater identification in your just protest, you must wear the button "CHAUFFE UBS ASSOCIATION OF PORTO RICO". It is worth 10 cts. General orders can be made through a single person locality, drawing money order. . ANTONIO VJLLAMIL (Secretary Central Committee) "El Mundo" Building, San Juan.
i "I really do not see the reason for the alarm of the Municipal Assembly with regard to the two million loan" . I
' The Commissioner of the Interior Sr. Guillermo Esteves assures that only slight modifications were made to the original plan of the Municipality Yesterday morning we visited Commissioner Guillermo Esteves at his offices at the Department of the Interior, with the purpose of asking him some questions of public interest, in connection with the new two and a half million dollar loan of the Municipality of San Juan, still pending before the Executive Council - i r' | "I DO NOT UNDERSTAND THAT ALARM" To our questions Mr. Esteves answers in the following faith: ma; "I really don't know why the municipal directors of San Juan are alarmed. The Executive Council granted them a loan of half a million dollars more than what they had actually requested, instructing them to present the corresponding order. The apparent cause seems to be some slight indications made by the Sanitation Commissioner, who is perfectly within his rights, and who has acted solely for the benefit of the municipal interests, and I was obliged to do so in accordance with a promise I had made to the municipal administrators". - THE SANITATION MODIFICATIONS "As I understand it, the C - GOVERNMENT OF PUERTO RICO ---- PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION NOTICE - PUBLIC VIEW ! I 1 I Notice is hereby given that I ' on Tuesday next, the 16th day of June in progress, at two o'clock in the afternoon, a public hearing will be held in i the rooms of the Public Per. vice Commission, Allen No. 1, A'tcs, for the purpose of hearing all those persons interested in the N ew Regulations for the Operation of Public Service Motor Vehicles Operating as Public Carriers, approved March 24. 1925, and published in "La Democracia" on May 1 and June 1, and in "El Globo" on May 15, 1925. Francisco del VALLE, Jr., Secretary, Public Service Commission. Advt.
YOUTH If you want to dress well for little money, buy your Graduation Suits at EL ENCANTO Gerga Blue-marine from $40 to "28 48 from $30 to 21 48 " " from $25 to _ 18 ¡¿ from $20 to z -1 :::: 16Í48 For boys from 8 to 18 a Large Assortment. SHOES - CAPS - HATS - SHIRTS. The most fashionable styles at the cheapest prices. Come to EL ENCANTO 36 - SALVADOR BRAU - 36 or order by mail to RODRIGUEZ BLANCO & CO. Box lo05j Phone 1448 - Next to La Cafetera ■
The Legislature will have q. to submit Income-Tax and Budget bills to the Governor before Tuesday.
That is the reason why the House and Senate have declared themselves in perma-nente session.-The two-million highway bill is collated with the Budget and Income-Tax bills And it is said that the Governor will veto the highway bill if it is not acted upon in accordance with his policy. Moreover, the Legislature is faced with the problem of reducing the budget to nine million, in accordance with the wishes of the Executive Branch.
LAST HOUR THE SENATE APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE AGREED TO SIGN PAZ GRANELA'S APPOINTMENT i At the last minute we have learned that the Senate Appointments Committee has met again to consider the Socialist appointments and after extensive discussion agreed to sign the appointment of Don Francisco Paz Granela to the Civil Service Commission. I It was expected that this appointment would be officially confirmed late last night by the full Senate. It was also agreed to reject, for reasons already stated elsewhere, the appointment of Mr. Alfonso Torres as a member of the Safe Homes Commission. | It should be noted that the information on this same matter that appears on the front page was made before the Committee agreed to confirm Paz Gránela and when said appointment was pending consideration. But we do understand that Iglesias proposed to emphatically pro1 test the case of Alfonso Torres. tely to create a fund of $15,000. THE INTERIOR MODIFICATIONS I j "With regard to the Depar- I tment of the Interior, the following occurs. The Insular Government lie I i i i s spending a fortune on the cons- i i i traction of the High Cen- 1 i tral School, which to some extent rosucl i . ve the municipal educational crisis, fia ¡ i i cing $10,000 short of terri- I I nar narrating the majestic work. Having discussed this with the city administrators, I was given a promise that the city would provide this small amount of money for the construction of the school. Carmena, Cruz 10, Tel. 396, QUALITY. PRICE AND SERVICE ' bargain I sell for little money two concrete ca-¡ sas in Loiza street and! a wood in stop 43.- Will inform: J. A. CASTEJON, San Jose 35, Phone 1003 black. | A Los | x Azucareros | 5 We have just tested § 5; a new procedure c j at the Central Plazuela £ x to eliminate the filters £ ' x presses without returning the j : cachaza to the mill. Those interested will be able to see it in operation until June 14. § : ai
Slowly but surely we will learn of all that happened at the luncheon held on June 14. We have already learned that at the banquet-conference, the Governor insisted that the budget and income tax bills be submitted to him before next Tuesday. Our readers know that the Governor is anxious to go North on vacation, that he had already had a ticket set aside for long before this date, and that because of the slow pace of legislative work he has been obliged to postpone his trip. The Governor has already insisted that the two most important bills of this legislative session, namely, the budget and income tax, be delivered to him before next Tuesday. * That is the primary reason why both the Senate and the House of Representatives have declared themselves in permanent session, and are working tirelessly, day and night, in order to finish on time and satisfy the Executive. This was agreed upon at the caucus of the legislative majority, held following the banquet-conference at St. Catherine's Palace. Our legislators are thus faced with a difficult task if they wish and are able to pass in such a short time nothing less than the income tax bill and the budget. TWO THINGS COMBINING I But there is another circumstance involved. We have been told that i it appears that the Executive is exercising pre í sion with the two million dollar highway budget I to get in turn the budget and income-tax bills submitted to it on time and in accordance with I its policy. ' Tuesday is the expiration of the ten days ! available to the Governor to j approve or reject the road bill. Hence the two things compagine and relate to explain the permanent session of our Legislature. AND THE REDUCTION PROBLEM But that is not all. The most tris| tee ee that in such a short term the Lei gislature is confronted with the arduous i problem of reducing to nine million the insular budget, according to MARINE BLUE SUITS -GAIN!- t-A-13.98 and 19.50 Guaranteed quality. Great sale of Shirts, Hats, Ties, of the latest FASHION. "BAZAR AHORRO'' Fortaleza 25 (next to "El Cielo" Come here if you want to save money. MANOLO ALWAYS LIMITS Tel. 1579. Box 1245
THE "PUERTO RICO ILUSTRADO" BEAUTY PAGEANT MAKES A PLEASANT IMPRESSION
Very pleasing has been the impression made on both the ■ fair sex and the fúrete the 1 news that "Puerto Rico Ilus' trado" will hold a beauty contest. In yesterday's issue of the popular magazine appeared the bases of the contest and there are already those who know them by heart .many beauties of San Juan and the island intend to take part and the public will be in a conflict not knowing which one to decide on when issuing their opinion. According to the rules exposed by "Puerto Rico Ilustrado" it is absolutely necessary to indicate that the portraits sent are for the contest, otherwise there may be unfortunate confusion. Undoubtedly, all our young ladies will have this in mind. Who is the most beautiful woman in Puerto Rico? Who should be awarded the prize consisting of a luxurious "Story & Clark" autopiano, specially prepared for the tropics? Soon we will be able to admire this rare beauty due to the initiative of the entertaining and interesting Revísta. On the third page, we are pleased to publish the rules of this nice contest. The Health Department has specified among the municipal works to be carried out with the money from the new loan, an item of $10,000 for the repair and improvement of the Hospital of La Perla, a hospital that is in terrible conditions, and about which Dr. Ortiz has directed continuous orders to the municipal administration to improve it or else he will proceed to close it. Of course, as Mr. Ortiz saw that this necessary item was not specified, perhaps through forgetfulness, he proceeded to specify it, something very natural, and within his ministerial duties. "The Commissioner of Health also spoke about the cemetery. Dr. Ortiz is of the opinion that since houses, many houses, have been built around the municipal cemetery, it is essential that the Municipal Assembly arrange and purchase new land, establishing new cemeteries for the municipality. For this service Dr. Ortiz has es. THE PORTO RICO DRUG COMPANY The chemicals we use in the preparation of the prescriptions are of the highest quality. The patents we sell are always fresh. We receive them weekly from Europe and the United States where we have buyers and our own office that takes care of obtaining the best. Our prices are unbeatable. Our service is divided by departments and we can therefore give careful attention, choosing the most competent personnel for each department. We are proud to assure that we have nothing to envy to any drugstore in the United States. The island's pharmacists always receive careful attention to their orders in our wholesale department, which is completely separate from our retail business. Advt
The Senate appointments committee agreed to reject the appointment of socialist leader Alfonso Torres, sent by Gbdor.
Iglesias makes sensational statements to us i in connection with that affaire ' He notes that we cannot ask for the Governor i elective as long as all are not treated fairly and the law is enforced I The leader of the Socialists is ' indignant and announces that he will put his most emphatic protest on record Much has been said in is toa days the "aJfaire" of the Socialist appointees, sent to the 3e- ■ nothing by the Governor and enough now not considered p r said ' legislative body. i The Senate Nominating Committee recently met and agreed to reject the appointment of Alfonso Torres, a Socialist, as a member of the Senate Nominating Committee. The Senate Appointments Committee met recently and agreed to reject the appointment of Alfonso Torres, a Socialist, as a member of the Commission on Safe Homes, on the grounds that the Socialists already have Mr. Alonso on the said body. I Iglesias, on the contrary, states that Alonso represents the American Federation of Labor, as a workers' organization, and that when Alonso was appointed, the Socialist Party did not even exist. As to Mr. Paz Gránela 1 for member of the Civil Service Commission, a letter was received from Commissioner Chardón, charging that the Governor's recommendation. The Nominating Committee agreed to appoint Messrs. Martinez Nadal and Martinez Davila to investigate this matter and in the meantime leave the appointment without consideration. I Senator Martinez Nadal recorded his vote of disagreement with respect to the agreement made with Alfonso Torres. | Mythology is an inexhaustible mine of curiosities, it tells us that Psapphon, wishing to pump himself to pass, nothing less than God, among his compatriots, the Libyans, taught several birds to say: Psapphon is a God; and as the birds said it, the people died in believing it. In the present time there are Psai ions, but they do not use the birds to make a claim, no; it is enough for them to have bombitos eu published in the newspapers. ¡" ; " TRANSFER OF OFFICE AND WAREHOUSE We are pleased to inform our clients, relatives and friends that we have moved our offices and warehouse to 84 Alien Street, where we will continue in the same business as before and where we hope to continue to be favored with the same predilection and confidence as before. RICARDO DAVILA & CO. Advt. I
Yesterday morning the municipal officials discussed with the 6oberna= dor the "affair" of the two and a half million dollar loan.
They raised with the Chief Executive the consequences for the municipality of the policy followed in this case by the Executive Council.
As a result of a communication to the Municipal Assembly by Mayor Todd, including another from the Executive Council in which the two and a half million dollar ordinance was returned, the Assembly invited Mr. Todd to make a statement to the Assembly, in which he asked the Executive Council to return the two and a half million dollar ordinance.Mr. Todd to state his views on the pretensions of the Executive Council of Puerto Rico in requesting the amendment of the $2,500,000.00 borrowing ordinance as to its purposes and to completely change section 11 of said ordinance, giving almost unlimited powers to the Commissioner of the Interior to intervene in the project. Commissioner of the Interior to intervene in the works to be done with the proceeds of said borrowing. Upon hearing the statements made by the Mayor, Dr. Martínez Roselló, made the following motion: That the matter relative to the amendment of the Borrowing Ordinance requested by the Executive ¡ Council of Puerto Rico, be passed to a Special Committee, so that it may report to the Assembly as soon as possible. Seconded by Mr. Pedro Juan Barbosa, put to discussion and after hearing the opinion of Messrs. William D. ¡ López, Marcos Ferrer Calderón, Rafael Landrón, Francisco Angleró, Ramón Cabrera and Pedro Juan Barbosa, said motion was put to vote and was approved unanimously. The Chairman proceeded to appoint the special Committee referred to in Dr. Martínez Roselló's motion and the Mayor, together with Mr. Martínez Roselló and Mr. Femando Montilla, were appointed to form it. ! Municipal Director of Public Works. The latest news we have received from Ponce informs us that the distinguished and excellent gentleman,' Don Vicente Usera, is still quite well from the serious illness that afflicts him. Mr. Usera has great affection and numerous friendships throughout Puerto Rico, for which reason such pleasant news is a reason for general joy, and especially in the Pearl of the South, where the entire society is very interested in the condition of the distinguished patient. We rejoice heartily in the improvement of our good friend, and hope soon to give the news of his complete recovery. the wishes of the Executive. And we all know how difficult is the work of reduction when so many and such conflicting interests are involved. The Legislature will therefore have to | work night and day, without respite or l rest to be in tune with the policy of the Executive. j Will the Legislature be able to have ready by Tuesday the ; * * budget and income-tax bills? '■ - ■ I { NEVERASES i All sizes for sale. Unique opportunity in oak and metal. Good for Restaurant, < Grocery, Butcher Shop, Apothecaries, < Hospitals, etc. < Luna 38, Tel. 1519, Box 1509 < SAN JUAN J
Fortaleza a Commission of the Municipality appointed by the Assembly and composed of Messrs. Todd, Martínez Roselló, Barbosa, López, Bird and Móntilla, in order to discuss ' with the Governor the "affaire" of reference. i THE CONFERENCE ! OF FORTALEZA The conference, as we have already i said before, began at eleven-thirty o'clock in the morning, and lasted until one o'clock in the afternoon. | The special committee consisted of the Mayor, Don Roberto ! H. Todd and Messrs. Barbosa, Bird Jr., Lopez and Montilla. When the commissioners entered the Governor's office ■ the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Esteves, J who attended the conference and directly initiated the design, was already there. j The problem was discussed at length, but naturally, being the first interview, no definite solution was reached. However, the Governor was in favor of reaching an understanding and the commission will report to the City Council today at ten o'clock in the morning. Mayor Todd, whom we questioned on his departure from Fortaleza, told us: "I hope that everything will be satisfactorily settled, always keeping in mind the interests of the city first and foremost. It is true that certain points are being insisted on that are very difficult for the Municipal Assembly to accept. That body is willing to give the Commissioner of the Interior the intervention that the Municipal Law confers on him, but no more. My impression is that given the disposition of good will in which we are all, if the Commissioner of the Interior attends a meeting of our commission, it will be possible to reach a compromise by giving in on both sides. But if I were to insist on section eleven, I fear it would be difficult if not impossible, since the Assembly cannot accept certain points in that section which take away all the sovereignty of the municipality. I hope, however, that it will be possible to reach an agreement." w LAS fiGUfiS DtriL. 1 ES LA R.E.IM A - YOAiOOUf VtfXtL l ' PASTI LIO INSUPERABLE COSIO | JA MINERALtHGES. A, A6RA0A8LE.RE. ÍSCANTE. request pa anuo I0DA5 PARTS E ¡5TA IN PROTECT. GOOD OUE PUER. RICO POSSESS A R RATON ILL IN 7 7- SAN JUAN I BRANDI I S Store your car in the x GARAGE BRANDI g (Permanent Service) g 5 Villa 10 Ponce X :
NOTICE For sale is a 4,500 feet (four thousand five hundred) Standard Triple Effect (four thousand five hundred) heating surface in magnificent condition and with all modern advances. It can be seen working in CENTRAL JUANITA Bayamón, P. R.