THE MONDO
Í11 P AGS. 3 CtF I I I /■ rmmueo; '*PMrta U ■ (Jg DM "ro"" BMa |¡ - I llwu.
Ill PASS. I /I eimni st "* H 1 "W*"- *-- II
morning paper
THE MORNING,
YEAR VIL
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
i "i,. 1 "X ex rt-sás.
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TESTIFIES BEFORE THE FEDERAL COURT THAT. THERE ARE SERIOUS ERRORS IN THE DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF REVIEW AND EQUALIZATION.
In the hearing of the case of the "Fajardo Sugar Co." i against the Treasurer, the Attorney General declares that: "The taxpayer who has paid the taxes due to him has no interest in obstructing an investigation by the Auditor" "It is abusive and an attack on the Government to try to stop the Treasury from collecting the amount of taxes due".
Yesterday morning began to be heard in federal court' before Hon. Judge Ira K. Wells in the case of "Fajardo Sugar Co.'* against Juan G. Gallardo as Treasurer of Puerto Rico (Equity No. 1295 Injunction). Officers of the Department of Justice appeared on behalf of the Government, and Ledo. O. B. Frazer in defense of the Fajardo. * A preliminary motion was discussed as to whether the Auditor of Puerto Rico has the power to order the Fajardo Sugar Co. to present the Ubres of its various negotiations, for an official investigation by the Government, in order to ascertain in finality whether this corporation paid the amount of taxes required by law. Present in addition to the Attorney General were the Deputy Attorney General, Miguel A. Muñoz, who led the main part of the defense; the Auditor of Puerto Bico, W. L. Kessinger, who was to present the report of his investigation in the Bureau of InceflM-Tat; the Treasurer of Puerto Mico, on whose Department all arguments are based; the Secretary of the Review and Equalization Commission, 8r. Martinez; the Director of the Bureau of Treasury Appraisers. THE AUDITOR'S "SUB POENA" The Auditor of Puerto Rico ordered a "sub-poena" (a summons to appear immediately) ordering the "Fajardo" * to present its books with all the corresponding proof, in order to be able to verify not only if the calculations presented to the Treasury by the Central corresponded to those in its books, but also if the calculations in its books were correct. The Fajardo has refused to present its books for inspection GRATIFICATION Will be given to the one who delivers to his düeño, P. González, in the Villa del Jualimar in Cataño, a tie pin, horseshoe shape with brilliant, lost in a bus from R&Vltfnon to Cntañn.
I ' required by Audit. The Department of Justice requests a preliminary injunction from the Court to bring the Fajardo's books before the Court, so that they can prove the illegality of the payment of contributions to the Government. This is opposed by the Fajardo, alleging that the Auditor of Puerto Er- j ■ co lacks the power to order the re-inspection of its books five years after it has paid the apparent amount of taxes to the Government. It is alleged by Mr. ¡ - Frazer in his deposition before ¡ ■ Judge Wells that, ¡ "The Charter confers upon the ; ■ Auditor of Puerto Rico limited powers in the exercise of his powers. It grants him even hands ' powers than those carried by the auditors of the States of the Union. | The Board of Review and Equalization has definite powers in deciding these contentious matters. In our view the ' Auditor cannot review the decisions of the Board with probabili- 1 dities to render a verdict different therefrom. The law does not permit it. If it did so, the Review Boards would be completely out of order. I IS THERE ANY DOUBT ABOUT THE BOARD'S DECISIONS? "By the Auditor's request to review the books of the corporations in which the Board of Revision and Equalization has already ruled, a doubt is cast on the legality of the Board's decisions. Is it to be said that the Board of Revision has acted improperly in these cases?" J To this, the Attorney General Int.! Mr. Munoz replies: i "The Department of Justice recognizes a tenacious and pen- ' verant work on the part of the members i (Continued on p. Sj ---- - - - - | , The Dark Swan You will be interested to read my latest advice on pages Nos. 2-5-6-S. j
LAST TIME - ■■ SPANISH BURDIEL Pressure Filters Arriving! The ones that yield the highest percent purity. Avoid transmissible diseases. Drink completely pure water. Separate El Suyo hardware store "ft AGUILA" r-TT-MARTINEZ HIGUERA S CO. Box 119 Alien 21 SAN JUAN, P. R.
The Deputy Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico, LedoJuan M. Herrero, who belonged to the diplomatic corps of E. IL, calls the attention of our intellectuals to an interview given to us by the famous Puerto Rican lawyer, LedoJuan M. Herrero, who was a member of the diplomatic corps of E. IL.
Since ' El Muido"-d'ce the ledo, í Herrpro-pjbliíó esd interview are > many people who have asked me " prpgwtaf'o if it is easy to enter I the diplomatic service of the 1!!!.... | ! In one of our recent editions we gave an account with an enx *. magazine that one of our editors had with Mr. Walter i Scott Penfield, a noted American international lawyer who was passing through P. R. on a trip to South America. As in ' . the interview Mr. Penfield made mention of the fact that the United States should use the services of young Puerto Ricans in its diplomatic service, and having learned that the j* - Ledo. Juan M. Herrero, at present Deputy Executive Secretary of P. I Rico, was for several years in the United States Diplomatic Service-consular branch-we asked him to give us his opinion as to the statements made by Mr. Penfield. Mr. Herrero gladly acceded to our request and upon our inquiry expressed himself in the following terms: I | - - -" - Yes, sir. I have read with interest the interview you had with the notable internationalist lawyer. Mr. Penfield, after praising the high executive officials lately sent to Rico by the national administration, expressed the opinion that "in view of the existing relations between Washington and Puerto Rico and the bilingual instruction given to the youth, the United States should take advantage of the circumstance and use intelligent young Puerto Ricans in its foreign diplomatic service. ''I - ¿ ? I understand that these statements by Mr. Penfield should not go unnoticed by the Puerto Rican intellectual youth. * On another occasion the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Huyke, has already called the attention of the young people of the country to the great opportunity presented to them to serve the Nation in its Foreign Service. It is not to the first time that they have been thought of (Continued on p. 2).
!! We have learned from the management of "Puerto Rico Ilustrado" that the first scrutiny of the beauty contest it is holding will soon be held. We pass on the news to our readers so that they may send in their votes. We have not yet been able to know the names of the ladies who will be part of the Jury but, of this we are sure, they belong to our best society and have the sympathies of all our "elite". It seems that the "Puerto Rico Ilustrado" contest, with its "Story & Clark" autopiano as a prize, is going well. A great monument to Bolivar will be erected in one of the main squares of Paris Puerto Rico is asked to contribute to the great work For some time we have been" publishing the agreements of the Latin Action Committee, a beautiful association founded in France to further strengthen the fraternal ties between the peoples of Latin origin With true joy we give the news of the latest resolution to erect a statue of the Liberator Simon Bolivar in one of the main squares of Paris. The work will be carried out with money collected in all the nations of Latin origin, both in the old and the new hemisphere. THE BOLIVAR COMMITTEE The Bolivar Committee that will be in charge of this beautiful initiative has already been formed. It is chaired by M. Georges Eeynaíd, senator, vice-chairman of the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee. Chairman of the Action Committee (Continued on p. 7)
A magnificent premises for rent on Mu-' ñoz Rivera Street, No. 38. Former premises of the Banco Territorial y Agrícola. Information:- F. ALVAREZ Río Piedras, Aptdo. 96
I We repair and sell WRITING MACHINES P. R. TYPEWRITER REPAIRING SHOP Tel- 1856, Box 1445, Cristo 10, SAN JUAN
LADIES HATS FOR LADIES SUITS " LADIES NEW SHIRTS " LADIES NEW WALLETS " LADIES FOR GENTLEMEN FINE SILK SHIRTS IN MODERNISTIC COLORS SHIRTS SPECIAL PRICES VISIT US GONZALEZ PADIN CO., INC. SAN JUAN - PONCE - MAYAGÜEZ
"Villa "Villa Palmar" for rent, er Catarlo. It has all the amenities and aqueduct. There same mo inform and by telephone No. 12., P. GONZALEZ
NUMBER 3028.
THE REP. MUÑOZ RAMOS DOES NOT EXPLAIN THE CONDUCT OF THE SENATE TOWARDS THE HOUSE.
The House will defeat the Excise bill rather than allow the cigarette tax to be lowered," thus expressed by Rep.
Coballes I Representatives Ga-' llardo and Muñoz Ramos second his manifestations "The House is not willing to rectify its criterion in this matter" (adds The distinguished and learned representative to the House, Ledo. Coballes Gandía, whom we met yesterday in the corridors of the legislative building, made the following interesting statements on the sidelines of the debated cigarette and excise tax "affair", something that provoked a three-hour debate in the House. Our readers will remember, that the Bafti House has inserted in the Excise Law a tax of- three dollars on every thousand cigarettes whose weight n<>> exceeds three pounds. The bill, with the clause of reference is in the Senate at the present time, pending discussion. The manifestations therefore of Mr. Coballes Gandía have a great opportunity. i THE HOUSE DISPOSED TO , DEFEAT THE ARBITRATION LAW ! "Even if the Senate tries to lower to two dollars the tax of i three dollars imposed by us on every thousand cigarettes, -representative Coballes Gandía tells us, -I can assure you that the House will not rectify its criterion nor accept in any way the reduction." > Representatives Gallardo and Muñoz Ramos, who were arriving at that moment, ratified the paI words of Mr. Coballes and manifested to our editor that they also held the same ( criterion as their colleague for Are' cibo. "But there is still more," our interviewee continued to tell us. "The tax which we have I approved in relation to the ciI garridos is the just, the equitable and reasonable* and pb we are not to accept any other compromise. The House is willing to defeat the excise law rather than allow the cigarette tax to be repealed. "You see that our crite- * rio is formed and that we have not : to back down. We will stand firm in our position, the block will not give an inch, both in this and in others.
IN FRONT OF THE BROADWAY THEATER IN PONCE, A 10-YEAR-OLD BOY MURDERS ANOTHER TWELVE
A TWELVE-YEAR-OLD CHILD KILLED WITH SEVERAL SHOTS THAT INSTANTLY DEAD Authorities intervene promptly, proceeding to the arrest of the alleged child murderer Last Thursday, that is to say yesterday, was the day of tragedies in Ponce. In yesterday's edition we already reported on two horrible crimes committed in that city. Today we must report another one, even more terrible, since the protagonists are two children, and one of them has been killed in a fierce knife fight. On Thursday afternoon, in front of the Broadway Cinema, in Ponce, the boy Palermo Arvelo, only ten years old, armed with a knife, inflicted several dreadful wounds to the boy Guillermo Cuesta, twelve years old. The wounds were of such magnitude that Guillermo died instantly. A simple annoyance between children caused the tragedy, which caused great consternation in Ponce, because it involved two young children and the crime was committed under very special circumstances. . The corpse of the victim was ■ immediately taken to his home, after having been ordered to be removed by the Prosecutor. The alleged child murderer, who, at the age of ten years, has the stigma of having killed a playmate in an angry fight, was arrested. t FIVE AIRPLANES ARRIVE IN ISTRES ISTRES, August 7. -Five airplanes with American aviators have arrived here. Tomorrow they leave for Barcaloj na from where they will continue to the Rifian front. ' ' ' IL fundamental questions. "We are fully convinced that in this way we serve our country better, we are absolutely certain that the people support our attitude, and we believe that this should be enough for a legislator. Do not forget then, the House is willing to defeat the excise law in all its parts, but we must give in on this question, of transcendental importance in our opinion, since it involves the sacred interests of the Puerto Rican people". So much for the manifestations i made to us in connection with this matter by Representative Coballes Gandía. 1 ■■ i SALON FEMINA (BEAUTY PAR LOR) The best barbershop in Ponce ; for ladies and gentlemen acquired oor Francisco Rodríguez. Elegant work according to models. Service! careful. Visit us and you will be satisfied. -Calle del Sol No. 4, - ' Ponce, P. R. Vf NDO 0 RENT my house in Condado. ALSO SELL all my furniture and pictures, including my collection of Japanese furniture brought expressly from Japan, before the war, today almost impossible to get. Unbeatable conditions. CAY. COLL CUCHI TeL. 286 - Alien, 82.
The commerce of the Island, again protests against the Tax Law as it has been passed in the House of Representatives Ponce is the first city to raise the alarm - A telegram of protest sent to the President of the Senate.
l In our last editions . we have been dealing with the law - of arbitrios, already in conference committee, or already definitively ; passed in the House with a special im- > posed on sales of two . ' percent. And we said yesterday that we did not know how the general trade, which was asking for one per cent, would receive this news. The opinion is beginning to manifest itself, as the reader will see from the following telegram, which we received yesterday. Ponce has ' been the first to sound the alarm for the second time. We do not know how other merchants in the various towns of the island will think of it, but at any rate it is evident that the news has not made a very good impression on those affected by the law. (Here is the telegram to which we refer: I Ponce, August 6, 1925. ' i LL MUNDO, j San Juan. I Today we send Hon. President Senate the following telegram: ; Newspapers announce Chamber of Commerce, ' approved Law Arbitrios with two per cent on sales. Commerce j Ponce maintains firm protest against such a bill, considering it harmful to commercial interests. It is highly unfair to want to take five or six million pesos needed to cover the budget by subtracting them from the scarce benefits that commerce can obtain given the current pressure on business. Prevailing economic conditions will not allow us to charge you a meager two percent in sales. Punish luxury items that wealthy consumers can afford but do not impose taxes on all sales that are detrimental to trade or poor consumers. (Continued on p. 6) NEVERAS Unique oak and metal opportunity. Good for Restaurant, 1 Grocery, Butcher Shop, Apothecaries, ■ Hospitals, etc. I Luna 38, Tel. 1519, Box 1509 SAN JUAN '
"The House has passed infinidaide bills which at this hour, after six months of legislation, have not even been infouned by the Senate committees" says . f . "I can neither qnkró believe that the Senate is going to close its sesioües without giving these bills the consideration they deserve," he adds - < 11 Senate seems to have nothing else to do but wait for the Pre* supuesto," sijuc saying ■
Our distinguished friend. ; the learned Representative to the House Ledo, Don Rafael Muñoz Ramos, whom we met yesterday at - his desk in the Lower House and whom we asked for Jai reasons he had for asking for uní relvclo-i of the number of Senate bills discussed by the House and vi-ce-versa, He made the following very interesting statements - -''My purpose in asking the House for an account of the number of bills and resolutions of the Senate discussed by the House, as well as an account of those of the House, approved by the House, which are in the Senate, and which have not been discussed by the Senate. The following is a list of the number of bills and resolutions of the Senate which have not been discussed by the Senate, even though they have no appropriation whatsoever: We have now been legislating for six months. The House, for many days now, has dispatched all the Senate bills referred by that body and, practically speaking, we are with our arms folded, waiting only for the Budget bill to complete our work. If more than a month ago we had received that bill, we would already be at home attending to our business, I think we would be quite satisfied with the intense and hard work we have done. But I hear from the lips of almost all the Senators the version that they, like us, are only waiting for the Budget bill so that once it is approved, they will close their sessions, ending their legislative work, and this is very strange to me. The House has passed infin - daJ of bills and resolutions which have no appropriation and which, however, at this hour®, deques etc six months of legislation, íiqnie (Continued on p. 71 i im. s , f ¡""-T- -r~~~Two apartments for rent in the "Tooacco Palace", for housing. Will inform: ALONSO RIERA A CO. Phone 527
SALE OF SEVERAL AUTO MOVIEES'AT COST Wishing to realize the stock we have of .7 "OLDSMOBILE" 6-cylinder cars, model 30, we offer them strictly at cost. If you are Hiteresado in the purchase of a car, . take advantage of this opportunity by buying one in the r. which saves a few hundred dolíais * THIS IS NOT AN ADVERTISEMENT IS A REAL REAL REALIZATION Visit us, See them, Get our prices and you will be convinced. R. M. PIETRANTONI "The Rubber Store" SAN JUAN, P. R.
I SATURDAY, AUGUST 8, 1925