THE WORLD
1A PAGES. 3 CTS. I OScíhm: ''Fort kloo 'III Hn "tr*do" Bldg. 1 II f * L la88 ' ~ Box ***-
A PAGS. 3 CTS. SeMOtre 84-00 II Vn Wing *7.80
MORNING JOURNAL
ASO VII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Pubiuiwd ana diatributad andar paran (Ve. 801) satkariMd by theor Oatober 8, 1817, an dio M "he Vea" OfSoo at San Juan, Porto Vico, By order ot tha Proeldent, A. S. Barloaos,, Pootnaator General Entered M aeoesd olaaa swttec, fobrnary 81. 1819. at the Peet QfSoe at San Juan, Porto Bloc, (United Troteo or Amarina') und" tte Set ef ■arob S, 1878.
A cablegram has been received from Mr. Barcelo, which clearly indicates, that his message pro- , clamoring for the candidacy of Mr. Tous Soto, was only intended to cover up appearances.
It is also assured that the real instructions from the head of the Union have been received personally and have not been made public - there is some possibility that at the last minute a third conciliation candidate for the Presidency of the House may emerge.
The much debated question of the presidency of the House, which is arousing general interest, is still on the political chessboard, as a note of palpitating topicality. Such is its importance. I A CABLEGRAM FROM SE. BARCELO Don Luis Sanchez Morales, recently reported that he and Mr. Hernandez Lopez had sent a cablegram to Mr. Barcelo. Now, from a source that deserves our full credit, and from persons who have had the opportunity to read it, we have learned that Mr. Hernández López received a cablegram from Mr. Barceló, er. the text of which, and as '- Confidential information to the Vice President of the Senate, indicates to him, that his first message, in which he proclaimed the candidacy of Tous Soto for the presidency of the House, has had no other purpose than to cover appearances, apparently leaving safe, apparently, the ideals that the Alliance has proclaimed, or at least, the immediate ideals, such as, for example, the fifty-fifty. TRUE INSTRUCTIONS At the same time, we have been inSE FOR SALE Modern concrete house located at 12 guau Street, Stop 14. Value $14,000.00. Would deiaría h'no- , teak on 1" same of $8,000. Pope report" direct " A. V., Tanca No. 1, San Jfatn, P. ~R. -:TODAY:- - -.TODAY:- "BROADWAY 1 AT NIGHT" I
The "Unionist leaders, formed with all certainty, that the real instructions of the Union je-l< fe, have been sent personally to each of the Unionist representatives, and that these instructions are in no way connected with the message published in 'La Democracia" proclaiming Tons Soto as candidate. Some Unionist leaders have even gone so far as to tell us that the party has never employed such public procedures to secure the nomination of its candidates, and that if the candidacy of Tous has been proclaimed by the boss, it is for no other purpose than to cover appearances and avoid the inevitable comment if the candidacy of the Republican Party Chairman were not to be considered at all. A CONCILIATION CANDIDATE Others have gone so far as to tell us that the situation, as it now stands, is such that the appointment of a third conciliation candidate will be necessary, that Good Business For sale less than half price: 2 Gasoline pumps, ICompressor "Curtis" with engine. 1 Vulcanizer". Will report: Mr. MIR. Tel. 1529. Puesto Gasolina Martin Peña. rQÍ-fy "it's *J TOASTED | SSL Compare Lucky Strike cigarette with any other cigarette Quality speaks.
The company's efforts to save the situation, and to place in a dignified position the political figures involved in this matter. Nor have we been surprised by this version, since in many assemblies, and even in presidential talks in the United States, a candidate has emerged at the last minute, whose nomination no one expected. And there have been those who indicate that both Mr. Tous Soto and Mr. Ledo. Lastra Chárríez, should abstain from attending a caucus of the Alliance, leaving the representatives in absolute freedom to choose the candidate who in their opinion has the best conditions for the presidency of the House, a person of position and social respect and with legislative experience. THE FINAL ARGUMENT OF THE MUD. LASTRA In addition, we know confidentially that Ledo. Lastra Chárriez, reserves, as a last cartridge, a formidable argument, which has never failed in circumstances such as the present. We have been assured that Ledo. Lastra, if he sees that the situation (Continued on p. 2) $ 1000.0 o You will buy a magnificent lot of 610 mee on the beach near the Park. The rest in mortgage at 9%. Will report: "M", Aptdo. 1387, San <lan. - * ¡[TEATRO -MUNICIPALi Art Season g 8 Superior by the pomp- § g nía RICARDO CALVO | I SUNDAY FEBRUARY 8 | MATINAL at 10 A. M. S Dedicated v ' : ja las Señoras y Señoritas x * feon la hermosa Obra del | insigne bate ? TIRSO DE MOLINA | El VERGONZOSO I | EN PALACIO | ' MATINEE at 3% P. M. " * La Comedia en 3 actos de ¿ * Don José Echegaray 2 | "DE MMJ RAZA" | - NOCHE - t Exito - Exito - Exito - Exito - I El ZAPAnRO I V El REY Creación de RICARDO CALVO |
i i: l : . - i |i - " i ¡ |! ''i; ' -- i ¡: <e ■ i ' ' * i -- i .. a airijase a uomision Hípica insular, San g *' , < g Juan, Puerto Rico. I *" " g San Juan, Puerto Rico, January 23, 1925. .i- | ' J. PERA REYES. ¡ " '-'-'< | Secretary-Auditor. ¡ * " "
~i ' . .11, i Jgj'- - - ¿■A'-' 11 We participate to our favorers that we have II moved our offices and merchandise depots to ' U building, stop 2% occupied by the Union Commercial Corp, * 11 p< * having "surrendered the Silva building. 11 It remains for us to lease the building occupied by Depar|| tamento Miller, with show windows, and anyone II interested may apply for information to ABOY VIDAL & CO. INC. San Juan, P. R. Stop 2%. Telephone 501. - - ■ 1 _ '
Socialist and pure Republican employees eo the San Juan administration, work within the utmost harmony, says im coalitionist leader I - _ _
I '-I i Yesterday an afternoon paper gave ■ an information in connection with the i conduct followed by Socialists i and pure Republicans who des| pawn positions in the San Juan Municipal Adminis- , tration. Er. > said information stated that the Socialists had given a "phenomenal pull" to the pure Republicans in relation to the funds collected from the municipal employees at the end of the year. Yesterday we tried to see the Ledo. , .'Continued on p. 2) i . MR. ROY CHANDLER From Cuba and other countries, which he travelled from triumph to triumph, has just returned the very learned and very worthy gentleman Mr. Roy Chan dler, who speaks Spanish better than - a son of Castile, enjoys in our country many friendships and solid prestige, and presides over the "Cir- - culto Teatral". Mr. Chandler, to whom a reception worthy of his worth has been planned, will leave shortly for Ve- . neznela, Trinidad and other countries. I i We are pleased to reiterate our affectionate greetings. House and Boathouse for rent, magnificent house for rent, stop 10, facing the road and the sea. i It has a boathouse. Price one hundred pesos per month. Will inform Telephone 291 Santurce. Fine furniture for sale. | NOTICE OF AUCTION SENATE OF PUERTO RICO OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY This Secretariat will admit proposals, in sealed sheets, until nine o'clock in the morning of the 9th of the current month, for the printing of legislative documents during the year 1925, and will give interested parties the information they request. San Juan, P. R., February 5, 1925. JOSE MUNOZ RIVERA. Secretary. Advt. 60806060B9BO£6C8%38C8SS08C8S080808080K8%3S83I ' I í
| J. VILLAMIL & CO. | C Tel. 166 p. o. Box 764. 1 C CABALLEROS: CARNIVAL IS COMING 1 ■ ... PREPARE IN f | LA VILLA DE MADRID" j ff Shirts, Black Ties with White Trim, pro- C pias for Tuxedo. White Ties with Black ■ Trim, proper for Frac. Collars, Socks > í J Con Hechas, Etc., Etc. B
LAST HOUR pesias y Coll y Cucbí visit White House -Iglesias delivers my paper.
WASH. February 6 (United Press, via All America Cables). Special dispatch to EL MUNDO Santiago Iglesias and Cayetano Coll y Cuchí visited the White House this morning to confer with President Coolidge in connection with the Puerto Rican coalitionists' protest campaign. Both Puerto Rican politicians spent ten minutes at the White House. I Iglesias delivered to President Coolidge a document in which he presents his political and economic views, which are exactly the same as those presented by him in his recent memorial to Congress. THE DECISION ON THE TREATY OF TACNA AND ABICA * w ' u WASHINGTON, Feb. 5. (United Press). -The White House has announced that President Coolidge, wishes the committee charged with studying the problem over Tacna and Arica involving Chile, Bolivia and Peru, to render its report before March as announced. | The United States, which is acting as arbitrator in this conflict, proposes to give its decision as soon as it has knowledge of the report. |~-Blanco's Pharmacy Established since 1880. We have an expert staff, ' of 6 pharmacists graduated from Universities and duly revalidated. Served all night. We offer quality, guarantee and reasonable price. _____ Advt-
Cunard Line | Tourist Steamship g TÜSCANIA I " Will arrive and depart for g 8 Nassau, Bermuda and New g i York on the 12th of the present. Ex- S x celen te opportunity to go * c to Havana. S S RAPIDITY, GREAT LUXURY, ' 8 COMFORT. For information : For information : Sobrinos de Iz-; I quierdo & Co. 1 g San Juan, P. R.
- . ' 1 TTWI 1 f GOMAS MILLER I i w We will shortly be moving the warehouse and sale of g : < gums to the building occupied by The Union Commercial w Corp, stop 2 and a half opposite the Capitol and as v ■ up to the present we have only established Sub- v B Agencies in Carolina, Gurabo, Rio Piedras and Ca. ■ W guas, we again hereby request, Sub- W f Agents in the remaining towns of the Island. C If The peculiar defects which might have ■ , W had the Miller tires, for some f f f time past, have been entirely corrected with those of recent w f manufacture, resulting in their having been f ■ ahead of the competitors, so far as quali- w f f f ity is concerned. v ■ To give details of the magnificent proposition f ■ what we have in portfolio for the Miller w f sub-agents we wish to name, interested parties may address themselves either personally or by letter to our f f f firm. K I A boy Vidal & Co. Inc. > ■ i San Juan, P. R. > v Stop 2/2- Telephone 501. € w f I "s-- - ■ - -- - -
T,-8? rr'..TT.'j=aaee NUMBER 1946.
i The horrifying tragedy of the stop ciiatro.-lln child mangled by trolley number 22.-this head was separated from the body " , Numerous witnesses.-B grief of a mother and d scream of aoguslia of u Mre.-the mvestígadóo ¡udidal.Arrest of cooductor and motorist. Uia iomeosa muchedumlire
At ten o'clock yesterday morning, we learned that a tragedy had occurred at stop four at Puerta de Tierra. Immediately, one of our editors, went to the place where the grievous event had taken place, obtaining all the information. THE TRAGEDY Yesterday, at half past ten in the morning, the citizen, Agustín López, was walking with his tender little son, three and a half years old, along San Agustín Street, in Puerta de Tierra. Lopez resides with his wife, Andrea Beltran, at number 42 of the street, in some rooms towards the back of the courtyard. When they arrived in front of number 36, due to circumstances that have not yet been clarified with certainty, since the public prosecutor's investigation has not yet been completed, the child, whose name was Fernando, was caught by the wheels of trolley number 22, driven by the motorist Rafael Martínez, and by the driver Francisco! José de Castro, license plate number 183. The unhappy child was caught by the front wheels, and dragged about fifty meters away, according to eyewitnesses of the event. When the trolley stopped, and the poor child's body was pulled out from between the wheels, everyone saw with horror "FOR RENT" In the Tobacco Palace building, second floor on the right. Comfortable, constant water. Will inform ALONSO RIERA A CO. ' Telephone 527 San Juan NOTICE OF AUCTION PUERTO RICO CHAMBER OF REPRESENTATIVES OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY This Secretariat will admit propositions, in sealed sheets, until nine o'clock in the morning of the 9th of the current month, for the printing of legislative documents during the year 1925, and will give : to interested parties the reports that ; they request. San Juan, P. R., February 5, 1925. F. L. AMADEO, ' Secretary.
i,unspeakable, that he had his head com9 pletamcnte severed, and his arms 1 and legs mangled. He was no longer the tender child of a few minutes before, but a human wreck, bleeding, which gave us a shudder of horror. i The father, on seeing his son run over by the trolley, cried out in anguish and despair, and it was necessary to take him home, for he could not stand upright. Our editor, accompanied by Escalona, visited the home of Fernando's parents, and we were able to see the mother, who was crying inconsolably.... And the father, overwhelmed, lost"; his energies, by the rude blow j that the destiny was dealing him. And inside a crude drawer, since the coffin had not yet arrived, the shattered limbs of the dead child, as shown in the photograph that illustrates this information. We could not overcome a $15.00 MILLAR Snowballs I can serve any amount in San Juan and the Island. "Bazar Ahorro" Alien 25, San Juan, P. R. Box 1246 Tel. 1579 l.GARAGE I : BRANDI 1 | VILLA ST. - PONCE g - TRAVELERSneed one with experience in hardware and hardware stores. Write giving references to Box 248, San Juan.
I SOLARES 8 solares - .1000 m[c. $2000.00 cash $2400.00 installments HENRY W. DOOLEY - No. 9 Tapia St ■ Tel. 1296 Santurce
intense emotion, to contemplate those parents, dejected by the des- : giacia, while a huge crowd, invaded the home, and stood along the street of San Agustin, full of compassion for those unfortunate neighbors who lost bread forever the son of sni entrañas, , ARREST / The driver and motorist of trolley number 22, were arrested immediately, and a policeman ascoltó them to San Juan, bread they could yield trip, transporting the horrified passengers. The investigation is being carried out by the active Prosecutor Gomez, and are listed as witnesses, Mr. Manuel Mulero, Nemesio Guerrero, Rafael Oirrero and Felipe Vazquez, who were summoned to testify at two o'clock yesterday afternoon. PUERTO RICO SUGAR PRODUCERS' ASSOCIATION Sugar Market. New York, Feb. 5-12:00 M: Sale of 40,000 sacks for prompt shipment at $4 5". Ledo. Francis H. Dexter ANNOUNCES THAT HE HAS TRANSFERRED HIS OFFICE TO "el mundo" EDá. FICE OF "THE WORLD", GÍUIN. TO FLOOR. SOLABES 6 lots - 625 m|c $2.50 meter cash, $3.00 meter in installments. -* HENRY W. DOOLEY No. 9 Tapia St Tel. 1295 Santurce
This beautiful and luxurious steamer is expected in this port from the West Indies on the 9th of the present and will leave for Nassau, Bahamas and Hamilton, Bermuda on February 10th at 5 P. M. She admits passage for the above mentioned ports. For further information, please contact Bhen Brothers Inc. Agents Telephone No. 257 Tanca and Tetuan San Juan.
I OPENING i FARMACIA SERRA GARABIS & CO. I Fortaleza No. 31, San Juan. I Duróte this week, all persons visiting this | splendid new drugstore will be given samples of ' COLGATE & Co. products 1 comp toothpaste, Eclat talcum powder Florient eta.
■ 11 1 ■ 1 h WE MOVED 41 No. 78 Alien Street, where we will be at the disposal of all our customers and friends. * -jj GOMAS GOODRICH CARLOS DE CELIS Distributor Tel. 437 Aptdo. 942 V. <
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 1925.