>. . ""ZííTyBAL-XLXWCStoi ■* 1 ■I■■■■R , z< I■":-- W ' W" W w \ iA. J i . JÓ - j
I I 11 HL IMt - tex Sta- I ' ■ - - - - - "
MORNING
T H E MORNING
year vn
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Fubllabad aad diMrttratto "mk peratt (Ve. MI) MtaotíM by ", ifi7, oa líe.M tke Ffel QCMe eí Sea Juan, Forte Mee, By order of *Mo Freeidaat, A *. vwteoon, p¿auMtor "onoceL. Vatoed ee mimé deee ■emr. fzbruary 11, MM, e" the Poe> Sea Juan. Porto feeo■ Me CTsSpMj"
SATURDAYb.28,FEBRUARY t>Í ttfil ' .NUMBER 1967,
"The next economic budget will be in accordance with the needs of the country, always taking into account what our public Treasury allows," says don Antonio R. Barceló
"The prestigious Aliancista leader Hon. Antonio R. Barceló, whose activities will take him for a long time to Washington to openly explain the Puerto Rican situation, and to clarify misconceptions while raising the prestige of the country,* has lately made important statements about the general situation of Puerto Rico. THE SENATE PRES? OF THE SENATE SPEAKS ON THE ECONOMIC BUDGET Just as the distinguished politician was finishing his conference with Gov. Towner, we asked him ,q several questions, to which Don Antonio answered with natural frankness and simplicity. "The Legislature expects the Hon. Governor to present the report of the Budget Commission on executive appointment. When this report is submitted for our consideration, we will study all the items of which the next budget will consist. The country should know that the next economic budget will be in accordance with the needs of Puerto Rico, always taking into account what our public treasury allows. "We will certainly make all the necessary improvements to the best government of this country. Accordingly will be our budget for the next economic term." t ■ * * * - ■ - jC'.sUÍJ *■ *■* * ~ ■*"*-- ' XA LEGISLATURE WILL SERVE the people "The Legislature goes to work |W"- K!.,. . asaieeasas'e.aii =- p HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES PUBLIC HEARING The Committee appointed by the House of Representatives to investigate the actions of the Insular Racetrack Commission and the racetracks of Puerto Rico, will hold a public hearing on Wednesday, March 4, at 8:00 p.m., in one of the rooms of the House of Representatives. íx> which is made public for the knowledge of those persons who wish to appear before the investigating Committee. M Joto Ruis SOLER Chairman. ~ Advt.
The annual Assembly of the Chamber of Commerce will begin today in Mayagüez. - According to reports, the matters to be discussed are numerous and very important, for which reason it is expected that a sufficiently large number of members will attend the event to constitute an abundant quorum. Among the main issues to be discussed by this body are the following: Telephone rates, a matter already known to our readers; the situation of rice importers in the country; adopting measures tending not to suppress the port of San Juan as a point of call for ships coming from the Pacific; the taxation of merchandise shipped to Venezuela; the "affaire" of the post offices, etc. These matters will be the subject of ample discussion..... It is our understanding that the Legislative Committee of the Committee for the welfare of the country. The laws to be presented will be considered in detail. "Our attitude will be for the benefit of the People, as we directly represent the electorate." BILL OF GOB. ELECTIVE "Urgent resolution laws have prevented me from studying the Gonzalez Mena project. Certainly the Mu- : nicipal Government by Commission project has gone down very ■ well with the administrators : present. "EJ ,Bill Je,Elective Governor ■ for Puerto Rico will be presented- 5 do to the next session of the Con- ■ gress, since its con- ' sideration at the present short session is impossible." GAANGA ■ I Because of having to ship he sells the ■ complete furnishings of a house. : They will inform: Tel. 723 green or Apartment 31, Bouret Building. ! SOLAR 6 lots - 625 m|c $2.50 meter cash, $3.00 meter in installments. HENRY W. DOOLEY No. 9 Tapia St Tel. 1295 Santurce
LVillamil.&Co.
La VilladeMadrid We would like to inform our numerous clientele that we have established a new Department, dedicated to the sale of our own Articles for* gifts (Notions). We have special pleasure in inviting you, to admire our new assortment in lace, broderies, fine fabrics, etc. Coty Perfumery, Tea Sets and Japanese Coffee Sets, very fine, Rubber Girdles, Brassiers, Ladies' Underwear, Patterns and Figurines Me. Cali. -ComU* plete assortment in articles for Gentlemen. TEL. 16" J. VILLAMIL & CO. BOX 764.
| For general knowledge, it is hereby made public that the Insular Riding Commission has agreed to extend the term referred to in the announcement of January 28, 1925, regarding the registration of all horses and colts born in the country that are to be used to race in the racetracks of Puerto Rico, until March 2, 1925, it being understood that this date will be considered fatal and under no circumstances will the registration of any horse from the country be allowed after that date. B San Juan, P. R., February 25, 1925. J. Pena Reyes. B ' . - - . Secretary-Auditor
The Treasurer will convene public hearings to hear the co-taxpayers of the areas through which the Oriente railroad will pass, in order to fix the proportional rate of contribution.
The Committee of Commerce, which held meetings with the Island Treasurer and the Commissioner of the Interior to broadly discuss the proportion of taxation that would correspond to Fian Juan in relation to the bill for the construction of certain pieces of railroad in the Oriente district of the Island, will render the final result of its efforts, establishing, at the same time, the points of view to be followed by the House on the matter. With both officials, this committee extensively discussed the bill and all its details, including the portion that San Juan would be required to pay as a contribution in accordance with the aforementioned bill. Both officials treated the commissioners with the utmost courtesy, and the data supplied to them allowed them to render a clear and concise report on this important matter. It is known that there will be public hearings to set the tax rate to be paid by each region benefited by the aforementioned railroad system, and it seems that the Chamber of Commerce will be one of the first entities to attend them. The Law strictly fixes the rate of the special contribution at one and three fourths of one tenth of one percent. This means a special contribution for San Juan of 0.17-1J2 cts. per $100 of valuation. Today it pays $2.24 per $100,000. The Public Service Commission will fix the region benefited for the objects of this contribution. The Act says these will be those which will be traversed by the new: lines or the lines junctioned with these new pieces. Since the tracks of the American Railroad Company connect in Carolina with the Mameyes section, some Government officials believe that San Juan constitutes a BENEFICIED region and should bear its share of the tax. The city of San Juan is assessed at $70,000.00. The special contribution would amount to $122,500 per year and distributed over the 20 years it would take to redeem the bonds, implies a high investment of San Juan taxpayers' money in these works. Surely the Chamber of Commerce now wishes to deal with such an important matter, to resolve any contingencies that have not been foreseen so far, and not to oppose it.
HOELSfiBJDO LAST FOR THE GREAT ANNUAL SALE OF FURNITURE AT REDUCED PRICES BUY TODAY CASH - NO ACCOUNTS OPENED LOS NOVIOS Salvador Brau 44 RAFAEL MARGARIDA & CO.
SOLARES Of different sizes in Santurce Parque, Monteflores. Seboruco, Loíza and Punta "Marías. Request Information to: HENRY W. DOOLÉY 9 Tapia St TeL 1295. - Santurce
The -Senate Commission that investigated the Comería fire, renders its tühtme.
"What has been reported ' the press pales before the reality of the incident," says.
! SENATE OF PUERTO RICO SPECIAL COMMISSION. REPORT To the Senate: Your Special Commission appointed to go without loss of time to the town of Come- , river and there inspect and obtain the necessary data and other details , The Special Commission appointed to go without delay to the town of Come- , river and there to inspect and obtain data and other necessary details, in order to be able to recommend to the Senate the appropriate resolution to be adopted in view of the circumstances created by the recent fire which has desolated and plunged into despair more than a thousand of those neighbors, destroying more than a hundred houses, has fulfilled its mission with special care, since it is a misfortune of supreme magnitude. Once in the field of the incident, we were able to observe that all the details reported by the press pale before the reality of the incident. The aspect is in exk trem© desolate and produces an effect of pity without limits. When we arrived at the site of the devastation, the National Guard was already on the scene, giving aid to the unfortunate people who were left homeless and without resources. Tents have been erected and countless military beds have been placed at the service of the homeless. The Department of Sandad, which was strongly represented at that desperate time, has also been involved in public improvements. . . especially if the laws enacting them have already been passed. . ' ' ' 1IF zl r -r I I I ' For safety 1 ' ' * service " I I I i i :¡. c h b. ! i ' ' :" i - ! i
' '* f '■ ' ' ■ ' 4. ■ mós. operating to mitjgar the ■ pain dfe'lqs victims 4 . " ' ' Red*,- also be ágf.protecting eoii food to infortujftadét of! voracious sinister. | The committee believes that there are two situations to be resolved: one is to provide shelter and food to the victims, and the other is to resolve the difficult situation for the future, in terms of homes.. of homes;, respec'/ - Be part of this' in-. . .relation of the propier < dadte destroyed by. ¿t siniestro, 1 eorf erqpéstóñ of the value- of ca'da L a ownerñqs,.i'nqufinos that I, inhabit them and other'data that can-l; of . n sejiíin .of some utility to the ] Comjte that.The Committee is to study the solution to be given to this difficult situation# ./ i íigta Wiftjsión Special, fécO- ( níidWa ai Rejado quq.The report should be passed on to the HadiqndfT's Office, in order to help the unfortunate situation of so many unfortunate victims, but let's not forget that the report should be sent to the HadiqndfT's Office, so that it can be studied and recommended.. victims but ' we must .do this one must .do it in the same way. because at the time* that it is lost in mó¿rífjcos, it results only in an- 4 ' , glo, of anguish* tí ¿nforfjuñios pa-ra' poor Unhappy: that are'..en ¡áspera of our determpyüjjjíq.- * .... 4 < . " ; ét **'-' Respectfully, , , , YOUR SPECIAL COMMITTEE Sái! Juan" ,p. R. - Feb.' 1925. O. Jordán, José V. Figuerrá, Manuel "Martínez Dávila, F" M. Zeno FíMt. Fuertes, Jr. " Úlfíf® THE "SAN JUAN ATHLETICS" LOSES THE FIRST GAME AGAINST THE "STO. DOMINGO''- Slire GIVES A TREMENDOUS FOUR CORNER TOUCH SANTO DOMINGO, (February 27). Special service for EL MUNDO via French Cable. -Today the baseball teams "San Juan Athletics" and "Santo Domingo" faced each other in this capital. The games were very close and the ninth Dominican team was the winner. The athletes were heavily blanked in some of their innings. The final score was 1 3 runs for "Santo Domingo" and 1 run for "fian Juan Athletics". Sun Car and Sijo pitched for both teams, the latter had the opportunity to hit a tremendous four-corner slap shot. All stands were ma ' KISSEL -- --- --- ■ For sale for a modest price, two-seater. Excellent condition. Address DOS HERMANOS Phone 223 black, Santurce. I GARAGE I | BRANDI I VILLA ST. - PONCE i DAIRY For sale a well located with magnificent production, very selected cattle.-Information: Telephone 305 Apartado 1022 San Juan, P. R. I Dr. Pedro Perea I GENERAL SURGERY | Edificio Padín |
* h i ==J ' -w-u-urcriru-u-L-"- u ' U ** u - l ru- u -J
Proposed Ordinance No. 3 to issue bonds of the Münicipio de
ElltoiáO?huirte demiiláníií eijá-ac-ctóii ji<(|O sgíe c$¿ra the répreiisefl- * tafite. Me K. Joiies. adata su postóéir -;
Ik aliaéslas de M luán ao íál -fesiáido déí lawsuit :; v &09|je Wáíte<i Jribaiai preño oportMamentL-Se "tí vjrb fkaoda tí trauscripdép dd rcoñL ' -¿Sé ha <Jel.The lawsuit el^ée, (oral* in San óuznT JSap'fué Ja question .que forms * in yesterday's master edition 'The lawyer of loa 1U potable^,- ' lirado Ledo. drij Lóís Muñoz Sforhles, gave us infetesántísirtia- intonsa*' ción to that pgra prove party the pitoiqlad that tos alianéisT' tas. pe ban.desíotido dql lawsuit by. the famous "Source ATtpro", and that ,they ,are preparing to give já battle before him Tfíbtülal Suprpmb eñ *sif dqlida opportunity. t " * * , * * ' < PRECEDENTS . - f ■"* - y. -The sentence of Judge Foote, denying the Cértiorari, presented bór.lós* aliariústas of this capital was issued on the 21st day of the month of January. 4 t - On the 28th day of the same month, the Ledo. Muñoz Morales filed in the District Court the appeal, and the interested parties were notified. f . TRANSCRIPTION . > No obrtantq, in order to bring to-Tri-bunar Supfgffíb end married on appeal, a transcript of the record is necessary. Plaintiffs' counsel made such a request to the Court on the same day the appeal was set, and the requested order was entered. The stenographer was granted a period of twenty days to proceed with the complete transcription of the record. Later, the stenographer requested a new period of fifteen* days to complete his work. This deadline expires on the fourth day of March. SOMETHING ELSE The fact that at the Tribunal there were many spectators eager to witness the opening game between the Puerto Rican and Dominican teams. Í" Important!í 5.75 For this small sum you can buy a good tra- ' je of "Kool-Krash". Flannel, ? or light cashmere, we dye them in current and x sport, serious and nice colors, many to choose from in all sizes, cut and workmanship of the best. - Come in today -> ? Soamente "on $5.75 | Gonzalez Pndín Co. | Borrero Hardware i § DIRECT IMPORTATION g - WE DO NOT CHARGE LUXURY, g | SELL CHEAPER THAN IN SAN JUAN. | BAYAMON, P.R.
: fi kéd";le ¿e $r"-Nc1t Jto*-'-te-be a legislator, not feinmti.itaO;4átetosal)ílid "ks'. - ' ■>' &do.-í..*!Í ,Tór¿ days, unq "te -loi lawsuit queb qe-follows ep'contira del >eyrete¿tonté,Mc Jones,,, 'nós para fifi publication 1| 9 si-, guíenles mayfe%iapioneEÍ: -" ' ' '" - ' "Sontos- .uñó Abogados, ■ <te lí Sjraaviuda de Fuster .y -¿-.a '-pleito "de revindicsrión, ¥oe y- perjófcioB cofitrá Mr, ,WaL ' tes Me Jones y, wó taj 'earáctér, prpCisa jueemos certain facts ) "after.'U.n loose queen sit id preferential. publishes "Da Ylérrrocra- ' cía" de -ajfer. We want tftíte sé f í RÍM)ERO:^-'.Que' ( we were "oblivious to the. pubjicidad-' da las ale;' gacioñes de la* demanda.' It already said' , PL MUNDO <it was fuqja tendfeheiq. informative what inspired him , that , voluntary 'publication' and to this, what is. an act carried out with perfect'right by a ■ journalistic company, nothing - we - can- > mos .óbj?tar.-4ai things, and yet 4 of qóe we do not ally ourselves the unwarranted reproach of the pri- , mero of the aforementioned periodicals, r let us say that nt> we ca' be in our heads that bn the - "opF¿ nion' sensible of the straw" Anisará deeply displeased the" become public that had -demanded 4 íContinued on p. 2) ■ * 1 . ' 4 ■ - Supreme Court we were informed that there was no one "to% "jWaciÁi, Be. due to the fact that no documents had to be submitted to the said Court until that proceeding there is still a term to file the entire record or statement of the case, and after that proceeding there is still a term to file the entire record in the Supreme Court. It is therefore clear that the alliance members of San Juan intend to take the lawsuit as far as the legal procedures allow. TODAY - SATURDAY 28 - TODAY Carnival parties in San Juan and the exciting drama IF THE MOTHERS KNEW.....! Giusti Program
do unanimously hro m se 'i "wrtká dteí ilíft" en te raliudón de tas "tas ¿i , 4 aaedóctt basta ■toilí'ta fcamMU '" áscsal u Xa" se traste ¡al tffi "4ate kaa dé' reatúaise 'Üs f.i works to eercwarse that tes * expenses qm tan to be made to d . tote>ro "WdstiltMtá atóatela ".totodimle netgsmí . NOTE D> LÁ fi¡BSIQJ <^LZB¿A' 4 . 1 DA BY THE ASSEMBLY XW 4 '.CÍPAL OF SAE JUAN BL DAY | ' FEBRUARY DB 1925, DAY sróü "B¿vSp¿A *43 .The Pte¿denta s *llapri z|, fflídeftJftV J indicates to the áscretartd paye''Mfta "'W "the señoreé that ísuman.'!* Aeámhlex Mtütiétpai -d" ¿ ' ' - X Secreftari paita Mita and " dpn * the" safioflta -siguientes:.. ÉE.. and Martinez RoisUéi .pydró juqp 'boro;. j.orw Bird- Jr , Gonzalo Dta- -; itamóñ Cabrera, Rafa" ! L*¿- * drón, - Frapoíscp William .N D. López, hjarcos:Fegref Calderón ' and the * President br" Lópééé . J Bicaxdó. declaimed abtorta i"'session by -hálfet quorum. X ' W j .. 4 ■ "- ' 1 . A"- - - - -'a - '■ A motion by Mr. Pedro Jftan Barbota, that 'pop- leisisis be given to the minutes of' 4 the Session -cén an amendment given by Mr. William D. t Lópéz to read the " bible minntaP.of the referred Minutes,' " ' by unanimous vote of the Assembly.' is '¿pro "ed*' without ter dá, the minutes rorrespoqdieníe to <a i k 25<de Febre< de 1995. * i "* & Seeretite pyocetoó a la lee- - - - - - n ' ' ' 1.-It is noticed~with a petition of Mr. N. Bellsolell, Militando be excluded from payment of a certain amount of money for '■-onsu-mo of water, which he says he has not made during the months of June, jubo and August of last year. (Continued on p. 2) ■ I ■ ■ ■ I . MAGNfflCO BUSINESS S" sell two excellent 4 and 6 cylinder guaguas, franchised and non-franchised. Will inform Box 931, Tel. 931 green, Santurce. ii l .¡ar?ra,:M"" b w ,i m ii b "", i ■ .y, ":", 1 " " BOLIVAR PAGAN -:- LAWYER AND lOIARIO Bouret Building, San Juan P. R.
íí SEAMSTERS Several expert seamstresses needed to work in shirt factory. If you are not an expert, do not ask for a job. Catalán Gonzalez Co. STOP 24'/ 2 TELEPHONE 1645 SANTURCE vfrr- - - - -*4 í We cordlally invite the Public for a visit to our mo- | x derno establishment of Refrigerated Meats of all kinds, £ * conveniently located at San Sebastián 29, opposite the Pía- ? J za del Mercado. We also carry a complete line of Le- ? ? > gumbres for the most exígsntes tastes.-This is the first of a series of Stores of the same class, which we will be establishing successively in 8au Juan and Santurce. | BORINQUEN MARKETS | J HARRY PIETERSZ t TEL. 1390. THOS. J. DAVEY | :i FINCA - VAQUERIA Y CAÑA | í <[ Very near San Juan- 42 Cuerdas to good yerba Gua- S ; < ( témala, Elephant matojillo -25 cows superior -12 cuerdas S 1 1 cane - house housing and another butler, ranch with estanchos, ¡ - ¡> 2 Garages, etc., with installation water, all in magnificent con- > ¡ - dicioneg - sale milk to dopiicilio to 25 cents average. < 1 <► For sale. -Intonnará N. F. P., Apartado 431, Santurce: