E L M® ND O
R p AC/MAS3CTVS.' I I I Office: "Puerto Rico Ilus(J trado Bldg". -Tel. 1222
10 P AGIRAS 5 CHIS. 1 1 Semester .... .... .... 5.00 and One Year $9.50
MORNING
MORNING
Year VIII.
San Juan, Puerto Rico-
Published and distributed under permit No. 801) authorized by the Act. of October 6, 1917, on file at' the Post Offi". it feTruarv n '>l P °r9% Ri 7.h y \ H-úesob. Postmaster General,. Entered as second _febraar> -1, 1919, at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto lUeo, (touted States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1879.
Saturday, July 31, 1926.
Number 2450.
B 0 S BOGUS PROHIBITIONIST AGENTS RAID A HOME IN SUNOCO.
THE HOMEOWNER BECOMES SUSPICIOUS AND CALLS THE POLICE.
One of the assailants answers with a revolver in hand.
The gun fails to fire, so the guard shoots and seriously wounds him.
A curious event occurred last night on Esperanza Street, in the Sunoco Sub-Barrio. Two individuals, of good presence, entered the home of Mr. Ramon Rodriguez, posing as inspectors of the Federal Prohibition Department. The occupants of the house were thrown out into the street while the "agents" searched the house. Mr. Ramon Rodriguez called the guard Aureliano Martinez, informing him what was happening to him, and expressing the suspicion that he was the victim of a scam. Together they returned to the site of the event, finding there the individuals Luciano Pérez and Juan García, the "Agents" in question. The guard demanded that Luciano Perez show him his prohibition agent badge, and the latter responded by sending him aside, assuring him that he would show it to him. Once they were alone, Perez attacked the guard Martinez, assaulting him. When the policeman was about to repel the aggression, he found himself in front of the barrel of a revolver. Perez pulled the trigger and tied the gun, giving the guard time to draw his pistol and reduce his assailant to impotence, wounding him with the first shot. AT THE MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL: At the Municipal Hospital, were confined the guard Martínez, with strong contusions in the stomach and face, and Luciano Pérez, with a wound in the back with an entrance wound. Perez is in extremely serious condition. JUDICIAL PROCEDURE: The case has been submitted to Prosecutor Flores, who ordered the swearing in of a complaint against Luciano Pérez for a crime of false representation, and for assault and battery. In addition, his companion, Juan Garcia, has been denounced for a crime of false representation. all those lands - of great value - for a period of 999 years. And for the record, he will not accrue to the Island Treasury a single cent by way of rent. "Our work is therefore for Puerto Rico". To this Mr. Barceló replied: "I congratulate you warmly for your work. Puerto Rico has confidence in you". Then the Governor called Prosecutor Gay, and as a farewell the latter said to Mr. Barceló: "I fulfill my duty in defending your country, which is my own." GOOD OCCASION For sale is a farm in the 18'-jiarada. Carretera Central, corner of Figueroa Ave. 1,427 meters, with 4 houses, for information: JOSE C. MENENDEZ P. O. Box 143, Santurce.
IF El. COMMANDER BAKER LOSES THE CASTLE OF SAN GERONIMO, IT WILL BE IN THE HOLDING OF THE INSULAR GOVERNMENT M This was assured by Attorney Gay yesterday to Don Antonio R. Barceló. M Moments before conferring with Governor Towner, Mr. Antonio R. Barceló had an interesting conversation yesterday with Attorney Gay, of the Federal Court. The conversation revolved around the lawsuit that the federal authorities are pursuing against Commander Baker, for the possession of the Fort of San Geronimo and its adjoining lands. In this regard, Mr. Gay told Mr. Barceló the following: THE MOST IMPORTANT LAWSUIT IN PUERTO RICO "We have just finished the presentation of the evidence in the most important lawsuit known in the legal history of Puerto Rico. I am referring to the case against Commander Baker for the possession, which I consider illegal, of the Castle of San Geronimo and its adjoining lands. The "record" of this case is four thousand pages long, it took four weeks to present it before the Court, and it contains three hundred documents of evidence. The record is in the possession of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Hon. Emilio del Toro Cuebas, who heard the case. "PUERTO RICO'S MAIN INTEREST IN THE LITIGATION" "You might think, Mr. Barceló, that all our interest in this lawsuit is to recover ill-gotten lands that belong to the American Government. Not at all. Our main desire is to reintegrate all those lands and the Castle of San Geronimo itself, to the Government of Puerto Rico, which is where they belong. "In 1912, Congress passed a law ordering that all lands under the jurisdiction of the federal government that were not used or that were useless to the federal government be returned to the island government. If we succeed in annulling Commander Baker's contract, all the land at Castillo de San Geronimo will become the property of the Government of Puerto Rico. "If, on the other hand, we obtain an adverse judgment, Puerto Rico will lose that important possession, and the Government of Puerto Rico will be entitled to all of its property.
To the consumers of Techar's cartonboard
By virtue of the damage caused by the recent hurricane, The Texas < Company (P. R.) Inc. has lowered its prices on that product by -35% Compare our price lists today with those above.
La Toja Soap A WOMAN'S BEST FRIEND.
TODAY. TOMORROW AND MONDAY "ROMOLA" - with - ¿ ' 'LILLIAN GISH The success of the season.
25 TEACHERS ASK FOR A RETAKE - SO THEY INFORM MR. HUYKE.
Ies will ask them to continue their service to the country. M "For the good of the Puerto Rican children and of instruction," he says. ----AI--In the last few days the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Huyke, has received about twenty-five applications from teachers of San Juan and the island, who, having completed the time of service required by law, wish to be retired. After carefully studying the services rendered by these teachers, and after analyzing in all their parts the work performed by them during their school work, the Commissioner has come to the conclusion that it would be a sensitive loss for the teaching profession of Puerto Rico if such valuable officials were to retire from their positions. Therefore, Mr. Huyke has decided to address the interested parties, begging them to continue, for the good of public instruction, to collaborate for a few more years in the great cause for which they have sacrificed the best years of their lives. The Commissioner of Instruction hopes that the petitioners will withdraw their petitions temporarily for the good of the children of Puerto Rico and of instruction in general. COLONOS HAVE NOT BEEN OF THE LEAST PUNISHED BY THE STORM M See. of the 'Asociación de Productores de Azúcar M Discouragement spreads because of the low price of this product. M At the offices of the "Asociación de Productores de Azúcar" (Sugar Producers' Association), no concrete reports have yet been received regarding the damages caused by the storm on sugar cane plantations. However, Mr. Felix Hilera, Secretary of the organization, told us that gentlemen who own large sugar cane plantations visit those offices every day, and that judging by the information they give him, he believes that the losses suffered have been immense. "In many cases," Mr. Hilera tells us, "the waters, due to the enormous rise of the rivers, have stagnated in the farms, offering tremendous difficulties in establishing drainage. The rivers have dragged large "balseros" depositing them on the cane pieces. The removal of these fences is so costly that hardly any of the crop would pay for the expenses incurred. Large plantations of sugar cane have been completely buried; avTso EMPRESA NAVIERA DE CUBA, S A. Due to the breakdown of the steamship GUANTANAMO in the port of Santo Domingo, and the return of said vessel from that port directly to Havana has been ordered, the voyage announced for said vessel is cancelled; and in its turn the steamship "JULIAN ALONSO" will leave Santiago de Cuba on July 31, calling at San Juan on August 4, and making the calls at Santo Domingo, Kingston, Santiago de Cuba and Havana on its return, via Ponce. For further information, please contact: SAN JUAN MERCANTILE CORPORATION C. CONDE Admor.-Manager. Box 542 Tel. 840. Muelle Malecon, Section "A".
AT LENGTH C 0 NFERENC1ED YESTERDAY BY MESSRS. BARCELO AND . GALLARDO
DISCUSSED THE MANNER IN WHICH AID SHOULD BE GIVEN TO FARMERS.
M- - Pres, of the Senate is not in favor of a uniform reduction in the contribution.
'Barcelo will order Fa jardo's officials to leave their posts in the Municipality.' - M Tal says the Ledo. Bolivar Pa gán, socialist observer. M We conversed at length yesterday with the Ix'(I". Bolivar Pagan. who has so directly intervened in the electoral suit of Fajardo and Vaneo. Cementing the decision reached by the "Junta Insular de Elecciones", awarding the triumph to the coalitionists in Fajardo, he told us: "Finally we have proven to satiety that the Coalition failed in the elections of the 24th in the Municipality of Fajardo. The question cannot be again brought before the courts, since the recount of the ballots or the second verified scrutiny of the votes corresponding to these municipalities, is simply my process followed in execution of the judgment rendered by Judge Foote and confirmed in our favor by the Supreme Court, in the case of "Mandamus'' filed by me on behalf of Mr. Ignacio Roca, and defended by the Department of Justice and other lawyers particulates. "Next week we will be in possession of the Fajardo administration. "The fact that for two years gentlemen whose candidacies were repudiated by the popular will in the elections of the 24th have been administering that municipality does not indicate in any way that the electoral law is deficient. What it does clearly reveal is that others have been swept away by the currents. We estimate that the losses have been very considerable, but we cannot give concrete, specific reports at this time. The sugar cane farmers are so discouraged because of the low price of sugar, that they are hardly busy sending us details notifying us of the damage they have suffered from the storm."
In a conference held yesterday by the President of the Senate, Mr. Antonio R. Barceló, with the Treasurer, Mr. Gallardo, the manner in which aid should be given to the farmers who suffered the rigors of the "San Bernardo" storm was discussed at length. "I consider the 50 percent reduction in the total valuation of the affected coffee regions to be somewhat exaggerated," said the Treasurer, Mr. Barceló, "and I think it would be more appropriate for the Treasury to carry out an investigation, determine what the true situation is, and how much the losses suffered in each case tend to be for the farmers. "You, Gallardo, should send to the affected regions a group of intelligent men, of recognized competence, who will proceed to determine the losses suffered by each of the farmers, in order to make an individual reduction of taxes. I am not in favor of generalizing the reduction, making it the same for all, and I am in favor of helping each one according to his losses". "Let a group of intelligent men go to the island, observe the damage caused to the crops, and I recommend the reduction that should be made. Then everything can be settled administratively, between you and the Board of Revision and Equalization ' ' '. CORDOVA DAVILA SHIPS ON TUESDAY M Last night we received the following cablegram.- New York juuo 30 (United Press, Via All America Cables.-Special dispatch for "EL MUNDO"). -Cordova Davila will embark for Puerto Rico next Tuesday. UNITED PRESS. month frauds. I am sure that if all the electoral ballots on the island were recounted, the result would be more or less the same as that obtained in the recount of the ballots corresponding to Fajardo. The Republican-Socialist Coalition was and is something formidable, of an enormous popular force. "Mr. Barceló has already assured me that he will send a telegram to the municipal officials of Fajardo. ordering them to abandon immediately the posts they occupy, so that by next week, at the latest, will be that one, which is still in the 3ra.-3 colín.
American Railroad Company of Porto Rico We hereby advise the trade and the general public that traffic on our lines, partially interrupted by the storm of the 23rd of this month, has been fully restored. THE MANAGEMENT
SENATOR ARSENIO MARTINEZ SEEKS PROTECTION FOR THE COFFEE GROWERS.
M Addresses the Governor and the leaders of the Legislature. M Asks for a fifty percent reduction in the tax rate for the next two years. M Our correspondent in Maya, güez, Mr. Pagán Medina, informs us that Senator Arsen'o Martínez is working with real enthusiasm to provide due protection for coffee growers affected by the recent hurricane. Senator Martinez has addressed by telegraph, and in his capacity as President of the "Asociación de Cafeteros de Mayagüez", to the Governor, to the Presidents of both legislative Houses, to the presidents of the Treasury Commissions of both legislative bodies, to the Director of the "Banco Federal", and to the "Junta de Revisión e Igualamiento", requesting help for the coffee growers, who have suffered so much from the storm. He also advocates that the appraisal of the coffee zone be reduced by 50 percent during the next two years, and that then, in the following years, a new appraisal be made, until the total reconstruction of our coffee plantations, now destroyed, is assured. The above recommendations were accepted by the Municipal Assembly, with an amendment by Dr. López Sicardó, in the sense that the price of the lots be first studied by the Treasury Committee. THE RAIL SERVICE HAS BEEN NORMALIZED M Trains are now running regularly. M "Had it not been for the efforts we have made', traffic would still be interrupted at this hour", says Director Jiménez. --M - Train service has now been fully restored. This was informed to us yesterday by the Director of the Railway Company, Mr. Emilio S. Jiménez. The storm caused such enormous damage to the entire route between San Juan and Guayama that it was thought that it would take no less than two weeks to rebuild the damaged works. However, the Company omitted no expense, and working tirelessly, night and day, has succeeded in correcting all the damage within seven days. "In many cases," Mr. Jimenez told us yesterday, "we have had to make provisional repairs in our efforts to reestablish service as soon as possible. The country has not really been aware of the effects of the storm. Had it not been for the immense efforts we have been making, rail traffic would be interrupted at this hour. EL MUNDO gave* accurate information, including all the damage caused by the storm. And I sincerely 1" say, that I never believed that we could carry out the repair work in such a short space of time." "We cannot give you definite information in regard to the expenses we have incurred in this reconstruction work. We shall still have to invest a considerable sum to complete these repairs, which, as I have indicated to you, in many cases we have had to do provisionally." "We have, then, already re-established the service, and as always, we are ready to render to the people an efficient work, corresponding to the favor that the same dispenses to us.".
MARTINEZ DAVILA MAINTAINS THAT FAJARDO'S COALITIONISTS CANNOT TAKE POSSESSION OF THE MUNICIPALITY IMMEDIATELY.
'Unless I am given special help, I will be forced to abandon the work plan for this year' M This statement was made by the Superintendent of Public Works, Mr. Vivoni. M - According to the reports we received yesterday from Mr. Armando Vivoni, Superintendent of Public Works, the Department of the Interior has already announced the subas- ( tases for the reconstruction of the Yahuecas Guayanilla and Toa Alta bridges, which are materially inoperative.} Toa Alta bridges, which were materially damaged by the storm. These works will be carried out on a "pre- . ció alzado" basis, reconstructing them according to the original lines, but with the improvements recommended by the Department, in order to avoid the repetition of disasters. In the "Caniaco" Wall, on the Arecibo-Ponce highway, which suffered considerable damage, completely blocking traffic, thanks to the efficient work done by the Superintendent of Emii liano Lópoez Soto, it was possible to blow up with dynamite an immense rock of igneous rock, making an explosion with great difficulty, and thus rehabilitating traffic between Arecibo and Utuado. The Superintendent of Public Works, Mr. Vivoni, wishes to express to Mr. López Soto his congratulations on behalf of the Department of the Interior. The "Cambalache" bridge will be repaired. It is only hoped that the Central, which bears the same name, will accept the offer made by the Department, which consists of paying for the materials necessary for the reconstruction. In San Germán," says Mr. Vivoni, "where the bridge was totally destroyed, we will not be able to carry out any work for the time being. This is a problem that deserves deep study and analysis, due to the power of the river current. In Sabana Grande it is clear that a section of the bridge is missing, and that it is not sufficient for the abnormal floods. The construction of additional spans is necessary. The construction of the embankment of the bridge over the Turabo River will be announced at auction, and we hope that it will be finished within a month. We will fight with all our strength and resources until we rehabilitate the traffic between Añasco and Aguadilla, and San Sebastian and Las Marias." "We currently have Mr. Claudio, Conservation Engineer, permanently stationed in Mayagüez, Don Carlos González, General Conservation Inspector, in Ponce, and Mr. Fortuño, Construction Engineer, in Arecibo, attending to the works, to reestablish as soon as possible to traffic, all those roads that were cut off." "All these works will have to be carried out from the appropriations earmarked for road maintenance. I will be obliged to abandon in its entirety the plan of works that I had drawn up for this year, unless I am later given help from somewhere." These were the last words of Don A.rmando Vivoni.
-nj- ALLEGES THAT THEY WILL FIRST HAVE TO APPEAL TO THE TRI BUNALS M He cites case law in support of his view. M El Ledo. José Martínez Dávila, member of the Insular Board of Elections, made the following statements to us yesterday morning, regarding the result of the canvass carried out in the Fajardo precinct: "The Insular Board of Elections, according to the established jurisprudence, cannot certify a new election result, nor can the Governor issue a new election certificate, after those who prima facie were declared elected by the Insular Board of Elections in its first canvass have taken office. This theory is supported by American jurisprudence and commentators. To this effect, I can show you the following case law: "A certificate of election, legal or illegal, issued by the board of election agents, (canvassets), confers upon the person holding it, the prima facie right to take office, and is valid until declared void by a competent court, in a proceeding by which its validity may be thoroughly investigated. This is conclusive in all those cases in which the validity of the certificate does not directly enter into the question." "Its validity cannot be disputed erj a petition for mandamus' , to compel the extension of a certificate of election to another person." (15 Cyc. 388) See 20 C. J. 204 and Bates v. Taylor, 87 Tenn. 31© SW 266. "For these reasons, I hold that the decision of the E.Lesson Insular Board has no scope other than to give rise to a new action by the petitioners against the officers who have taken office to which they were elected, pursuant to the certificate of election issued by the Governor of Puerto Rico." "Despite the fact that the result of the scrutiny practiced the Fajardo precinct accuses a majority of votes for the candidates contrary to those who were declared elected, this does not mean that those could conquer the positions occupied today by the candidates of the "Afianza". The Board cannot issue a new certification of the result of the election, nor can the Governor issue a new certificate of election, because this is prohibited by jurisprudence. So the scrutiny practiced in Fajardo, only gives Continued on 3rd.-4 colm.
WIN! Fine shirts for men, great assortment of paints and colors in all sizes. Values 2.50 - 3 and 3.50 Reduced to THREE for * O.OO Take advantage to choose right away. GONZALEZ PADIN C0.
Jarana -- Dance Every Saturday'. Gentlemen $1.00 Ladies $0.25 Children's Dance. on Sunday, August 1. from 3 to 6 P. M. Admission Children and Adults $0.25 at Miramar Catholic Academy.
GANG A Full movie theater almost free. Power projection machine, Deleo power plant, superb Pianola. Only the Joca is needed. It is sold all together or by senarado. Will inform G. J. c| or EL MUNDO.
OPPORTUNITY Premises for establishments. In new concrete building, Calle Parque, corner Calle Hospital. For rent. See them and ask for information at Phone 1135 Rojo, Santurce*.