ELMBNDO
--Port Ble* traao*'* Bld<. á - box 345.
Ifi PA6S.3CTS g| V" All - 9.50 y l "eita----N.M
MORNING
MORNING,
'bg? /ARO HIV
Published and distribuid under permit, "uíh(Mix"-- in" Ari or uctoo*, a ' Sm Juan. Porto Bien, By order W th. A. 8. " fMbruary 81, tal", at th. Port Offlca Port, "w/lfalted State, of A¿Slca> t""m"
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 1926
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
NUMBER 5,016.
HUYKE AND BARCELO MAKE UP
COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE PLAN TO BE DELIVERED TO GOVERNOR NEXT WEEK.
GIORGETTI WORKING ON DRAFT ■-- Sanchez Morales thinks the idea deserves careful consideration. r...'. M - Yesterday afternoon, when dort Luía Sánchez Morales was leaving his office we stopped him on the sidewalk to ask him about the very important question of the Economic Conference. 4)qn Luis was in a hurry, and we were only able to exchange brief words with him. Is the plan of the Economic Conference for an "eomerclal" loan already drawn up? -It seems to me that it is not yet finished, but it will be soon, since Mr. Eduardo Giorgetti is actively working on its drafting. -When will it be delivered to the Governor, we insist. -Probably by next week it will be in the hands of the Chief Executive. "-Do you think the Governor will accept that plan? ■ -I could not comment on that. The plan is a good study, detailed and extensive and deserves all sorts of detehidá consideration. But I could not venture a judgment that depends on the Governor's judgment. What I can assure you is that the plan itself is a well-founded work. ' 1 YOU ARE INTERESTED IN <.'**■ " - . ; yi* 'tí- " READ PAGE ÑO. 16-.
"LANDRON COMPROME TELA DIGNITY AND*SERIETY OF THE MUNICIPAL ASSEMBLY" M Makes this accusation Lcdp. Ortiz Alibrán, in coming to the defense of the Catholic Church. He also accused the assembly members of lacking courage in their actions. --M In response to the statements made recently by Mr. Rafael Landrón refuting a certain statement made by Lcdp. Ortiz Alibrán, the latter told us yesterday the following: "I am very happy to know that there are Catholics in our Municipal Assembly. If so, at the same time that they will see to it that no constitutional rights are violated, they will defend their own, which are sacred because they are those of the majority of the people they represent, when (Continued on page 6, page 7). coL) COALICÍONU'TAS WINS* THE ELECTORAL LITIGATION* OF -' ¿ ' SAN JUAN M The Supreme Court, as we learned at the last minute, has' upheld the judgment of the District Court in the case of Don Rafael Diez de Andino against the Insular Board of Elections. This lawsuit was brought by Ledo. Muüoz Morales. The decision of the Supreme Court is equivalent to saying that the Coas have won the electoral lawsuit of San Juan. * Residential House plots of land for sale at the intersection of the Guaynabo to Bayamón highway, 15 minutes from San Juan. Reports eji the house of the farm on the edge of " road.
Mr. Huyke, in referring to the current law reorganizing the University of Puerto Rico, has publicly stated that "he has never spoken of the unconstitutionality of said law, nor has he stated that he does not agree with the allocation o'e ?600,000 for said high center, but on the contrary, he believes that all possible sacrifices should be made to make this cultural center a true center of education, where our youth could find, next to their home and their families, what they still today have to seek far from their loved ones: the bread of wisdom." .... Thus he refuted previous information published by the "Baltimore Sun".
These public statements made such a pleasant impression on Don Antonio R. Barceló, who had long been distanced from the Commissioner of Public Instruction by certain incidents that occurred between them, that on Thursday, at the meeting held by the Board of Trustees, he publicly expressed his satisfaction to Mr. Huyke, and before the other gentlemen who make up the Board, both embraced each other as a token of friendship. -<** Mr. Barceló promised to write an editorial in "La Democracia", highlighting Mr. Huyke's patriotic courage. - Yesterday we looked up "La Democracia",
and from its editorial notes we found the following.
CASA DE ESPAÑA EN PUERTO RICO - CONVOCATORIA In compliance with the provisions of Article 13 of the Articles of Incorporation, I hereby convene the Ordinary General Meeting to be held at our registered office, in the city of San Juan de ► Puerto Rico, at nine o'clock in the morning of February 28, 1926. J. Only the delegates of the Local Sections may attend said Meeting, provided they meet the conditions required by Article 24 of our Bylaws. * t ' Among the items g. to be discussed is an addition to Article 15 of the By-Laws of the Corporation. San Juan de Puerto Rico, January 13, 1926. - r PEDRO BOLIVAR, A President.
THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE CORPORATION SEALED THEIR FRIENDSHIP WITH AN OPEN MEETING ■ - - M THE ATTITUDE OF THE COMMITTEEMAN OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
- _ - - - M THE ATTITUDE OF THE COM. THE ATTITUDE OF THE COM. OF INSTRUCTION TOWARDS THE -SUN" PROVOKES AN UNDERSTANDING.
"Huyke's attitude places him very high in the eyes of the country": Barceló - "Ideas may have separated me from Barceló, but for the man I have always had my own attitude": Huyke.
Let us quote the following paragraphs, which confirm the news:
This noble manifestation of Mr. Huyke, who has the merit of having anticipated what we said on the same subject in our yesterday's edition, makes him very proud before us and before the country.
We would like Mr. Huyke to always act in this way, just as we would like the shadows that cloud our minds when we make efforts to contemplate in the child to dissipate one day, and above all things always to see his country, ready to meet its fate.He would be ready to meet whatever fate may befall him, whatever it may be in the course of his life, and without prejudice to maintain those noble and honorable views, which every one believes it his duty to hold as to the manner in which he should contribute to his present progress and happiness, and in the preparation of his future. That all may be admitted as a noble expression of patriotism, without those officious and unnecessary exaggerations which depress our dignity, by accepting implicitly and sometimes explicitly, that we are an inferior people who must be subjected to the tule of strangers, with the danger that such may become, as he believes(Continued on 2nd. p. 6th. col.)
MENTAL AND NERVOUS DISEASES NEURASTENIA AND VIRIL DEPLETION r < ZL
CHILDREN HAVING or SOLITARY DOCTOR RALDIRIS DOCTOR RALDIRIS SURGEON, SPECIALIST. WITH 40 YEARS OF SCIENTIFIC PRACTICE ■ - íBe back from his study trip to Europe, offers nuevanfcnU;, his medical services, to his Numerous clientele from all labia, especially in CHILDREN'S DISEASES. Office- 27, Padre Colon St Rio Piedras,' P. R. NOTE:- In "half an hour and without diet or purgatives. extracts the tapeworm or tapeworm, with HEAD. ...Modern treatment against all kinds of worms....
PURE MILK We offer milk from Jersey cows, completely pure and fresh, for San Juan and Santurce. Our guarantee is the following :- Order the quantity you oie" 'see and if you are not completely satisfied you don't have to pay for it, your decision will be accepted by us without any pretext whatsoever. -Will report:- - - - Cardona, 705 s. j.
MOMILK Powdered Milk equal to mother's milk for feeding children - from birth
+ Mrs. Da. María Fernández Llano de Blanco Died in Santurce of receiving spiritual aids R. 1 P. *- Her husband, don Antonio Bioneo Fernándei; hijee, Josefina, AnS timo and Jb "é Min i; and hennano*. Don Francisco, dolía Elisa Vda. c. do Fernandes and dofa Oi.eepción d^SÁnchez; grandmother, (absent); <k. "a Engracia Sufir "z Vd". de Del Llano; uncles, Don Manuel Far- . hsadez Júneos and les auaentes en Espafia; cousins, Miss. Amparo, Ramon and Dr. M. FcrLíndez Nitor; nephew*, noetic siblings and other deudis, deny their friends commend to God, e-. all their orackaes, e. almu of the deceased, and concur in the ac? to the burial, which will be today at four o'clock in the afternoon, par-' n 4? "ontithi, üincbrp from the mortuary house, street of ViÍCSE'.'SM®' 1 N ®- Paraos, 18-1J2 dt> Santurce, Jiasta the cemetery of dicsh population. - yoTA: ~~ Selruega ao enrfen artificial wreaths. ' - '
TROLLS CANNOT RETIRE TOMORROW NIGHT.
As we announced in our antiqx edition, yesterday afternoon, at four o'clock, the Public Service Commission met to consider* the notice sent to it by the ''Porto Rico Railway Light 1 Power Co-*'', announcing that it will suspend electric trolley service on the 28th of this month, at twelve o'clock at night.The meeting of the Commission was therefore of the utmost importance. As it was held behind closed doors we were unable to learn in detail what was discussed at the meeting. Attorney General Butte rendered the legal opinion that will ultimately guide the Commission on this matter. The Attorney General's opinion, in its essential points, is summarized below. The Attorney General, after reviewing the notification sent by the Trolley Company, agrees: That the franchise granted to the Company to enjoy the right to own, operate and extend transportation lines between the city of San Juan and Rio Piedras and to supply light and motive power to the public was granted to it by virtue of a resolution of the Executive Council on May 1, 1909. That as is evident from the no ting sent by the Company to the Commission, the latter does not intend to rescind the franchise in its entirety (Continued on p. 7, 5th col.)
CHEAP...! FOR SALE THESE DAYS WE OFFER SUITS-Palm Beach genuine Keep-Kool tfl Sport and current (34 ai 40) from $12 Reduced to $ - - vil SUITS-Gabardine and Cashmere Batista, Sports, New Colors, all sizes from $16 ' Sift ftft Reduced to sRAV.VV SUITS-Fine Cashmere, pure wool (3 jnas.) New Colors and styles, all sizes, from S 1 ftft $22.50 Reduced to .... "pxu.VV BALLOON PANTS-Fashionable colors, d* a r" a just Uegar all sizes, at $6 $5 and "|>4.UV FULL BALLOON PANTS- 26*inch mouth d "A r*A in nice new colors, at .... .../ $U.Dv STRAW HATS- real bargains, ah - great variety of styles, at $2 - $1.45 and . 4 4Í)C. COME H.OV SAME - SECOND FLOOR. Qonzdlez'padin Co" Inc.. EFFICIENT SERVICE. TOP QUALITY. -- I LOW PRICES
Tons Soto recommended to Ponce senators to retire from the Senate.
IGLESIAS RETURNS TO PUERTO RICO IN APRIL
HUYKE IS DISPUES-! TO REBATTLE" FROM, THE COLUMNS OF THE "SUN" THE ATTACKS ON HIS DEPARTMENT M "The truth must shine k always and we are in the duty of being its defenders," he says. ¡ M ' He maintains that the spokesman of ' Baltimore was not informed in impartial sourceL M In our edition of yesterday we published the news that the Chiefs of the different departments ' of the Insular Government, whose admi- ' nistration has .been severely 1 attacked by the "Baltimore Sun". 1 intend to open a campaign to refute, point by point, the 1 imputations of the aforesaid spokesman. ' This campaign will be carried into effect from the very columns of the ' "Sun". ' Yesterday morning we visited ' the offices of the Department of ' Public Instruction, in order that the ' Commissioner, Don Juan B. Huyke 1 might inform us what was to be ' their attitude in this matter. We publish below the - conversation which took place between ■ i our reporter and the Commissioner- -. nado. i . | -Does the Department think that . you direct to refute assertions of the "Baltimore Sun"? ' I have just read what the Chiefs of De' parliaments are proposing to carry out. I'm fine with that idea. The truth must always shine forth and we are duty-bound to be its defenders. Many of the statements of the "Baltimore Sun" are not in accord with the facts. It seems that their sources of information were not as impartial as they should have been. What the "Sun" says about the Department of my management, referring to the increase of the budget from 2 to 4 millions, adding that the people were not satisfied with the efforts and work of my Department, is far from the truth. I have not yet received any official notification from the Department Heads as far as this campaign is concerned, but I have the idea of publishing shortly an article putting the truth in its place. I would have no objection to join the other Department Heads in refuting the information in the "Baltimore Sun". As for the rest of the country, the Department is sufficiently accredited not to fear these attacks. The true authorities in pedagogy have repeatedly praised the work done in Puerto Rico by the Department of Education. But it is good that from the same columns of the "Sun" the assertions that are not in agreement with the truth are refuted". ' ' FOR RENT In central site for Store and Warehouse, San Justo 13 and 15. Reports:- SUCESORES DE GAMARRA LOS DIABLOS DE LA PLAZA San Juan, P. R. Great Opportunity For z absent owner, a house is for sale. For information: Tel. 1231 black, Santurce. IN AIBONITO - For sale due to owner's departure, a country house with eight spacious rooms. It has an acre of land, and a good yard planted with vegetables. Located at kilometer 77.9. Information:- Box No. 6., Aibonito" P. R.
|The Executive Council of the Federation is meeting for this purpose at any moment. It is certain that the Socialist leader brings new orientations for his party. M I There is great interest among the working people of the country to find out the exact date of the return of the leader of the labor movement in Puerto Rico, especially when Iglesias is said to be definitively abandoning his work on the island. Yesterday morning we visited the offices of the 8o cialist Party in San Juan, where it was reported that Don Santiago will be in Puerto Rico with all certainty, at the beginning or end of April. j The interim President of the party, Mr. Alonso, notified us that they are agreeing on a meeting of the Executive Council' of the Workers' Federation to set the date on which the Workers' Congress 1 in V "raración some time ago should be held. We have learned that Iglesias has been immersed in the universal labor movement and his arrival on the island promises to be a great event for the workers, since Mr. Iglesias will deal with matters of great importance as to the tendencies and orientations to be followed by the party in the future, and there is great enthusiasm among the Socialist supporters to know what the Socialist Senator brings back and to hear about his experiences and efforts on behalf of the workers in Washington.K POLITICO-ADMINISTRATIVE ENSTA. ISABEL Township taken to court.-An assemblyman has been appointed without the assent of the local committee. M Our special correspondent in Santa Isabel, Mr. Lebron Ortiz, sends us the following telegram: EL MUNDO, San Juan. -The political-administrative crisis in San Isabel is becoming more and more serious. The Ledo. Martínez Dávila has taken the Municipality to court for collection of fees that (Continued on 5th. page 8a. coL) THE CITY OF EVIAN The city of Evian wants to dispute with Geneva the seat of the League of Nations -so say the cables- due to the Swiss-Soviet conflict. Evian has an advantage: its wonderful table waters, used unlversahnente by all international U "4Ut" ' who frequent places of distinction; preferred for their digestive, radioactive and I diuretic condition. We could cite numerous and distinguished people of Puerto Rico who, knowing it, do not prefer others. y PROCURELA IN HOTELS, ' COLMADOS AND PHARMACIES. (Advertisement )
Genitol Brewer 111 1 1 Tonic-genital-utero-oyaric Diseases of the womb and ovaries.
' THIS WOULD HAVE HAPPENED IF THE UPPER HOUSE CONFIRMED THE APPOINTMENT OF ACOSTA QUINTERO M Faced with the seriousness of the ri" tuation, Barce¡< intervened and was able to avert the M , '■ - Various comments have been made about the attitude assumed by ol Insular Senate, leaving on the table the appointment of Acosta Quintero for Judge of the District Court of Punce. Acosta Quintero was recommended by the "Alianza Portorriqueña" for the position he currently holds. Why was he not confirmed by the Upper House at the last minute? Our readers will recall that Senators Fuertes and Gonzalez Fagundo openly opposed the appointment of Judge Castejon, alleging that they sustained this opposition only because of a question of principle. When the incident of Ácos ta Quintero arose, Fuertes considered that he should stand by the Senators for Ponce, Figueroa and Guerrero. At the caucus held by the members of the Upper House, Ledo was present. Tous Soto. From the first moments, the idea of leaving the appointment on the table predominated in the caucus. This solution was defended by, among others, Arsenio Martinez? Guerrero, Figueroa, Fuertes and González Fagundo, who voted against Mr. Acosta Quintero. When the meeting of the .Tous Soto and. Arsenio Martinez left for the respective residences of Ponce and Mayagiier ? * Meanwhile, Fuertes saw that the opinion of the Senators who offered him solidarity in the matter of Judge Castejón, was changing, and understood that Caatejóq would be confirmed. He was afraid, and at the last minute, at the last minute, he offered to revoke his opposition against Castejon, (Continued on page 5, col.).
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC Rácenos much comunlcai that already Santurce has three new BARBERIAS equipped oon all the most modern and SANITARY. GLORIA DE PUERTO RICO Stop 23, in front of Porte Rico Sanatorium. EUROPA Stop 22,' Carretera Nueva, corner of Europa. SANITAX Stop 15, Cerra St., corner of Carretera Nueva, next to Farmacia Solange, WE REQUIRE GOOD OPERATORS and THE COOPERATION OF THE PUBLIC. Office: KOKEN COMPANIES, Cruz 27, San Juan (The name KOKEN is your guarantee).
RENT an apartment in the "Tobacco Páfaoe" own for housing or office --Informarán , ALONSO RIERA A CO, .
WE RECEIVE EVERY WEEK b - Medium and large potatoes; Onions in sacks and cages; American cheeses and Mortadella. art Woe prices without Sn- Box 1350 - San Juan.