ELMBNDO
Ifi PAGES 5 CTVS, í | Office: "Puerto Rico lina I (J Bldg. -TeL 1222- i-
yar nrg;., , T , .r , .r , l-. J .~ - ■ ...... IR PAGES 5 CTVS. I Seinestr" - - - - 6-0* U U® A "o .... I
MORNING
MORNING
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
ÍPublighod and distributed tinder permit (ñu. sul ¡ autnariaed by Act- uf Órtuber O, 1V17, on tnv ai ate Vu "i Utfice ai San Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. S. Burlesca, PonU-.a.ter General. Entered at aeeond elaea matter, febraary 21, 1S19, at the Poet Office at San Juan, Porto Rico, (United Slate" of America) under th" Act of march 3. 1878.
SATURDAY, MAY 8, 1926.
Vlh
NUMBER 3061
THE JURY FOUND LUCIANO R. FUERTES NOT GUILTY.
THE JURY HELD ONLY TEN MINUTES M -- JUDGE WELLING, JUDGMENT, acquitted the four defendants on the ground that the charges were not proved. M -- JUDGE WELLS WOULD NOT COMMENT ON JURY DECISION M-Moore now says he will continue to do his duty M--
SMB" 6 ' ■'*' ■ \.
Don Faustino Rodriguez Gonzalez acquitted by federal jury. "We, the Jury, find the defendants, "NOT GUILTY" of the crime charged in the indictment." (s) A. JIMENEZ MENA, President. This is the verdict presented by the Jury that has heard the process quo followed by the government with Luciano R. Fuertes, Alejandro Lopez, Faustiro Rodriguez Gonzalez and Arturo Ricart. The Jury took only (Continued on page 5, Ita. col.) Martín Peña), in the original projects it started from the present San Antonio bridge, on the San Juan-Río Piedras Highway, crossed the Porto Rico Railway, Light & Power Company track, continuing parallel to the American Rail Road Co. track, up to Congreso Street in Miramar; then continuing parallel to the Central Highway and finally joining it at Martín Peña. The project, however, was amended later, remaining definitive as it is being built, that is: From the Caño "San Antonio", behind the workshops of the "Vulcan Iron Works" and "The Porto Rican Ex(Continued on page 13 4th. col.) For rent for $50 concrete house, four large rooms, in good condition, on Calle Iturriaga entering Calle Canals, No. 10. Inf. Tel. 970 Verde, Santurce. Traders If you wish to rent a comfortable warehouse of modern construction, call Tel. 9017, San Juan.
Mr. Richardson, active President of the Equestrian Commission, who was visited yesterday by one of our editors, made categorical and definite statements in reply to the attitude assumed by Rev. Andújar, President of the Parents Association of the José Celso Barbosa School, in refusing to accept money from the racetrack on the grounds that it would be immoral. Mr. Richardson told us that he was somewhat surprised to read Mr. Andujar's statements, but not too surprised considering that he already knew the thinking of this gentleman, with whom he is a true friend.
"IF I KNEW THAT CLOSING THE RACETRACK WOULD SUPPRESS GAMBLING IN PUERTO RICO, I WOULD BE THE FIRST TO ASK FOR IT.
THIS CATEGORICAL AFFIRMATION IS MADE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE COM. OF THE HIPPODRAC. MR. RICHARDSON, PRESIDENT OF THE RACETRACK
He assures that at any time the people's money will be duly protected.
no time at all. Then Mr. Richardson explains that already at a certain meeting Mr. Andujar had made identical statements, and that he had replied that if vice existed nothing was achieved by adapting such attitudes, and that for example it was not to be expected that the vice of drinking on the island would be ended by punishing a smuggler. "If I knew that closing the racetrack would suppress gambling in Puerto Rico, I would be the first to go to Mr. Andújar and ask for it. But the whole country knows that if this were done, that money would be invested in other vice, and unfortunately without any guarantee. At the racetrack, on the contrary, the game is regularized, it is methodical, (Continued on p. 6, 3rd. col.).
HONORÉ ACCUSES THE "ASSOCIACION DE OBREROS E INDUSTRIALES" OF ACTING IMPROPERLY.
The Government of Sto. Do mingo is ready to give fifteen cucx das of land to each Puerto Rican emigrant.
It is only required that our Government pay the transportation expenses.
The Association of Workers and Industrialists of Puerto Rico is making arrangements for the emigration of Puerto Ricans to Santo Domingo. With this motive in mind we decided to visit the office of the Chief of the Bureau of Labor, Mr. Honoré, with the purpose of obtaining from said gentleman his opinion regarding] particular. -Mr. Honoré, do you, as Chief of the Bureau of Labor, endorse the activities of the Asopación de Obreros e Industriales de Puerto Rico to make effective an emigration of portoros de Puerto Rico?
We asked him after the greetings imposed by the routine custom. -No,... I am forced to say no. Said Association has not acted properly in this case,... which forces me to believe that they are not doing their job....
THE NEW ROAD WILL BE READY BY THE END OF THIS YEAR AT THE LATEST.
He explains in detail the work done by the Dept. of the Interior.
Having noticed that the dredge "Captain Huston", which had been filling near the new San Antonio Bridge, behind the Vulcan Iron Works, had gone out to sea without having finished the road embankment, one of our editors visited the Office of the Bureau of Public Works, in order to obtain information as to the reason for the stoppage of the work. Since the Superintendent of Public Works, Mr. Armando Vivoni, was absent because he was in bed, the Assistant Superintendent, Mr. Enrique Ortega, informed us as follows: The Federal Engineer, Mr. R P. Murden, in charge of the Port works, has notified us that it would be necessary for the "dredge" to suspend the filling works in the surroundings of the San Antonio Bridge that it had been executing for this Department because it had to leave for Martinique to put itself in "dike", in order to clean bottoms and attend to the necessary general repairs; it will be back, however, on the 20th of the present and the embankment will be continued. I take this opportunity, which you gallantly give me, to make known by means of the columns of your well-read newspaper, data that I consider of public interest about this road". As we all understand, the traffic problem in the city of San Juan is becoming more and more acute: the avenues that give access to the population; its streets that were originally built without thinking about the extraordinary increase that the capital would have; the growing needs of its one hundred thousand inhabitants, everything makes that heroic measures are taken to solve it, trying by all means to obtain new roads that distribute the "area of traffic", thus giving more amplitude and freedom, especially to motor vehicles. The municipal authorities are making every conceivable effort, effectively assisted by the Police Department, to ensure that their traffic ordinances are of real value against violators; the campaign to educate the people in the sense that they are not to be penalized.
educate the people in the sense of ' safety"; traffic signs and highway laws are having their effect, lessening accidents and giving greater safety to the wayfarer. * The Department of the Interior, on whose shoulders it originally rests that the laws regulating the use of motor vehicles and the police and highway preservation law have positive results for the safety of the general public, has taken special interest that the city of San Juan and its surroundings be served by an ample and sufficient network of highways for all present and future needs. The construction of the La Marina-San Antonio-Martín Peña Highway largely solves the traffic problem in the city of San Juan. This is one of the most important works that currently occupies the attention of the Department of Public Works of the Department of the Interior. The history of the construction of this road dates from the year 1909, when the Legislature assigned $60,00.00 to proceed with the study and construction of the section between the "Puente de San Antonio" and "Mártir Peña". In view of the fact that this amount was not enough, it was increased to $100,000.00 in 1917, but when the preliminary project was made and its cost was calculated, it was found that it was still too small to be able to carry out the construction of the work. In the year 1919 a law was passed by which $108,000.00 was assigned and a special tax of fourteen hundredths (14'100) of one percent (1%) was imposed on all movable and immovable property of the Municipality of San Juan, until June 30, 1921. This section, (San AntonioSE~V ENDE House No. 78 located on San Sebastian Street. It is adjacent to Boulevard del Valle. Excellent location for construction of a residential building. -For information please contact Luis Antonio Ortiz, Box 94, Qayey, P. R. RENT A spacious apartment ventilated and sunny on three fronts. Sanatorium type in Cruz 43 at the corner of San Sebastian. For information, Martinez Hnos. & Co. Tetuán 56 Tel. 308
Cool, Hygienic and Quiet Offices in the best commercial point of the city. Permanent Elevator Service. PADIN BUILDING
WATER! WATER Apollinaris The Queen of the table water. $ 10.00 100 bottles per day. KOWsCO. NC,
"I" RAMON SALGADO SANTIAGO HAS DIED His wife Mrs. Gloria Venegas, his children Lolita and Ramon, his mother Mrs. Mercedes Santiago Vda. do Salgado and other relatives and friends, participate in his death and invite for the act of burial today at four thirty, leaving from the mortuary house Calle del Sol 76 to the cemetery of San Juan, for whose favor they will live eternally grateful. San Juan, P. R., May ¡s, 1926.
THE DEPARTMENT. OF JUSTICE OPPOSES BULLFIGHTING IN PUERTO RICO.
M In a legal opinion rendered to the Acting Governor by the Assistant Attorney General, Llauger, it is stated as follows. M The criterion of this official involves a reply to the consultation of Colonel Lewis. M The businessman Manuel Garcia recently requested permission from the authorities to hold bullfights in Puerto Rico, taking into account that the final set of killing the animal would be eliminated. Colonel Lewis submitted a memorandum to the Attorney General, presenting him with Mr. Garcia's request. For several days the First Assistant Attorney General, Ledo L auger, has been considering the question, and yesterday rendered a report to the Acting Governor, setting forth his views. The active official cites numerous jurisprudence to demonstrate that the spectacle that Mr. Garcia wants to offer, even though, of course, bloodshed and the killing of the bulls is avoided, in itself imposes a cruelty against the animals, and that if the show were to be held, any (Continued on p. 10, 3rd. col.)
THE DEPARTMENT. D E INSTRUCTION has established a scale for classifications.
1.0 DEPUTY COMMISSIONER VIZCARRONDO GUARANTEES
M Inspectors are left with complete freedom of action.-Nevertheless this year certain special directions have been made.
We had been informed, that the Commissioner of Instruction had addressed a circular to the Inspectors of schools, indicating that they would have to make the classifications of teachers, according to a special scale determined by the Department of Instruction. Yesterday we visited the distinguished gentleman, Don Francisco Vizcarrondo, Deputy Commissioner and Secretary of the Department of Instruction, wishing to know the truth about this matter. The well-known educator received us courteously, making the following statements, answering the question we addressed to him-''No, the Department has not established nor can it establish a fixed scale for the classification of teachers. Our school system is uniform and the general working conditions are identical in the various municipalities of the island. It would not, however, be possible to measure the work grades in each municipality and the work of each individual teacher according to a strictly uniform scale.
Forme ' '. The experience in the results of the work each year," he continues, "imposes on us the duty of carefully studying the general conditions of the system and instructing the Inspectors of Schools as appropriate, in order to imprint the greatest possible degree of efficiency in the results. In fact, with particular reference to the classification of teachers, our instructions to Inspectors of Schools are based on our intention to make the system of classifications as uniform as possible. A scale of distribution has been suggested this year as a guide in regard to the general conditions of the island, but this does not in any way mean that these conditions must necessarily be the same in every school district. "The Inspectors of Schools," he adds, "prepare their reports of classifications at liberty, according to the results of the work in their respective districts, and such reports are submitted to this Department wherein the professional record of each teacher is recorded for final consideration. The classifications of the teachers are based essentially on the welfare of the service in general and on that of each teacher individually'. So much for the statements of Don Francisco Vizcarrondo.
CIRCUIT COURT BEGINS TO CONSIDER WHETHER THE NATIONAL PROHIBITION LAW EXTENDS TO PUERTO RICO.
A vociferous appeal is filed on behalf of the owner of a restaurant located in this capital city. M A noisy appeal proceeding filed on behalf of the owner of a restaurant located in this capital has begun to be heard before the Circuit Court of Boston. The High Court will have to decide, according to the memorandum filed, whether the National Prohibition Law extends to Puerto Rico. In the appeal memorandum filed, Ledo. Luis A. Castro, who takes the lead in this important litigation, alleges that Article 19 of the U.S. Constitution has no legal value for the inhabitants of this island. And that, therefore, his represented, Mr. Manuel Colón, owner of the Restaurant "El Vesubio", located at 20 Alien Street, in this capital, cannot be accused and condemned for having infringed said provision. The appellant's attorney, Mr. Luis A. Castro, alleges in the memorandum submitted to the Boston Circuit Court, that the Oengre?o never intended that the 18th Amendment to the Constitution be extended to Puerto Rico, since if he had so desired, it would have been specified in the law approved to that effect, as said law does, in one of its parts, *1 referring to the Panama Canal Zone, a territory of the United States of America. The provision of the Prohibition Law," says the pleading filed, "that no liquor shall be sold, prepared or trafficked in Panama in any manner whatsoever, shows the intention of Congress with reference to that territory. But nowhere in said law is a similar or similar specification made with respect to Puerto Rico. It is evident-continues Ledo. Castro-that Congress had realized that it had already passed an act to "establish a civil government in Puerto Rico and for other purposes," wherein it is left to the will of the people of Puerto Rico, the final resolution of this question, whether Puerto Rico should have prohibition or not. tions in relation to this matter. "Our Department of the Bureau of Labor had organized an emigration of Puerto Ricans to Santo Domingo. This emigration was agreed upon with the Government of Santo Domingo, the (Continued on p. 14, 4th col.)
REVIEW OF REVIEWS COMMENTS ON PUERTO RICO'S POLITICAL, ECONOMIC AND EDUCATIONAL SITUATION M
Nothing can be found in the United States comparable to the efforts of the portorridice. In the latest issue of the important American magazine "Review of Reviews", published in New York, Dr. Samuel M. Lindsay publishes a transcendental article on Puerto Rico, in which he comments in a very favorable way for this island, the efforts made in recent years. Among other things, this article says the following: "The results obtained during the many years of this civil government, from many points of view, are truly remarkable and do not admit of any parallel. "With a territory about two-thirds that of the State of Connecticut, and with a population of one and a half million, nothing is to be found in the States (Continued on 6, út'h. Col.)
Come Today....! WE HAVE JUST RECEIVED LAST STEAM DF New and Beautiful Hats. In front of the Main Plaza. Elegant and Cheap Suits. In the Heart of the City. Fine Knitted Underwear. Very Cheap Handbags and Purses. Fine Stockings in Suggestive Colors. Cute Socks for Babies. Bracelets, Fans, Necklaces Something New Every Day Short Hair Combs, Scarves. - Fixed Prices. Perfumes, Scarves, Vanities.
Co, Inc. THE HOUSE THAT SELLS EVERYTHING.
FOR RENT In Alien 69. First and third floor, high with 6 bedrooms, 9 closets, Suitable for family or offices. Modern concrete construction. ■ Will inform; TeL 2017 1 San Juan."
FOR SALE A Packard in magnificent condition. Santurce, Stop 14, Highway No. 70.
WE ARE SOLICITING seamstresses who know how to sew on buttonhole machine. Shirt factory, Stop 24'/z Santurce, phone 1645 Santurce. ~
EL ENCANTO 36 San Francisco 36 Next to your Balance SHOP part of your stock at less than cost. Yarn Denim Suits -Palm Beach -Gabardines & large LOTS of Cashmere SHOES -SHIRTS & HATS -CONVENE TO - EL ENCANTO before these GANGAS are gone. RODRIGUEZ BLANCO &CO. Box 1503 - San Francisco 36
ARROW SHIRTS - T* -
-■¿ív . r ASFabricators CLUETT. PEABODY & CO. Inc Troy, N.Y-
UAV mun,c IPAL and OLIMPO llvl THE MARK OF THE FOX