✓ , Z /YYY X THE WORLD
1 Q PAGINAS3CTVS. I Semester - - 5.00 | and One Year $9.50
1 Qpaginasscivs I f ° Office: "Puerto Rico IlusI U trado Bldg " -Tel. 1222
M LA MAÑANA NEWSPAPER
Year VIII.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
5 0 MILLION ESTIMATED LOSSES CAUSED BY THE CYCLONE IN CUBA ' M
. M It is feared that the Isle of Pines has been completely wiped out. M There is not even the slightest news of it - The number of dead is over a thousand. ir
We continue to receive cable news of the disastrous effects caused by the cyclone that has just hit Cuba, sowing desolation and ruin everywhere: (FROM OUR "United Press" SERVICE) < The number of people who have been left homeless in Havana and in the greatest misery, according to police reports, exceeds two thousand. More than a hundred boats and tugboats have been wrecked or run aground. The transport "Máximo Gómez" was thrown by the wind with extraordinary violence against the ships "La Fe" and "Puerto Tarafa", which were anchored next to it, leaving all three aground, although it is hoped that they can be refloated. ONE HUNDRED DROWNED IN HAVANA BAY ALONE It is estimated that at least one hundred people drowned in Havana Bay alone. A shipping company has just reported that it has lost ten schooners, and that ten of its seamen _sg .hfeft drowned, beyond doubt. The ships are still recovering corpses floating in the shallows, which are being sent to the city for Christian burial. REPORTS SUPPLIED BY SEVERAL JINETS ARRIVED IN HAVANA Several The last word in Refreshments "Cherry Mellow" Digestive soft drink, he- < cho with Indiana cherry. CHERRY MELLOW Not another word! Packaged exclusively by POLO NORTE Tetuán No. 26 San Juan, P. R. ■
M horsemen coming from neighboring counties and trained to report the effects of the cyclone within a radius of twenty miles, taking Havana for its center. These informants, who. have had to overcome great dangers and risk their lives to reach the city, declare that the towns of Guanajay, Bauta, Guanabacoa, Caimito and Deguajabal are without water, as the pipes of] ■ aqueduct have burst, given the ■ enormous pressure to which they were subjected. They have also been left without light, and there are very numerous casar totally destroyed. ' IS FEARED THAT THE ISLA DE PINOS ISLAND IS COMPLETELY ARRASED In Havana it is feared that the ve(Continued on p. 5.) "I agree with eliminating home medical care in the Beneficencia field" M Declares the Chief Executive of this capital. M "I agree with the policy favored by Dr. Moreno, Director of Beneficence, tending to eliminate home medical assistance to the indigent," Mayor Todd told us yesterday. "I have come to the conclusion that not only the Home Welfare but also the Relief Quarters are in need of radical reform. "There is an intention on the part of the City Council to give this matter preferential attention when, after the new hospital is completed, we are in a position to deal with this problem. "The purposes that encourage Dr. Moreno in relation to this matter, are my own, and those of Dr. Gomez Brioso, who believe as he does in the lack of efficiency of the charitable medical service at home." FOR SALE I admit propositions of purchase, until October 28 for the best barber shop in Ponce, I guarantee it is a good deal. FRANCISCO RODRIGUEZ Sol 4 - Ponce.
"5a
: COMPAGNIE GENERALE TRANSATLANTIQUE Vapor Frances MACORIS We expect this beautiful steamer towards the 28th of the current coming from the ports of the Antilles, and it will be dispatched the same day with destination Havre, direct. She accepts passage and cargo for the said port as well as cargo for the various ports in the North of Europe. Take advantage of this opportunity, and for further information contact BEHN BROTHERS, INC. Agents. San Juan, P. R. Tel. 257. Yanca,l-Te?uan. " 1 '-L.H ■ I ■ " ■ I -a--te.
R. I. P. Don Rafael Palacios Apellániz HAS DIED after receiving the Holy Sacraments. His sons, Rafael, Raimundo, Manuel and Julio Palacios Salazar; str* daughters-in-law, Carmen Garcia Vda. de Palacios, Maria Teresa Fabregas de Palacios, and Catalina Ferrer de Palacios; his grandchildren; his sister-in-law, mother Salazar; his nephews, Maria Ubeda de Sanchez Morales; Aurora Ubeda de Rocco (absent), Luis Sanchez Morales and Jose A. Rocho (absent) and other relatives, ask their friends for a prayer for the soul of the deceased, and invite them to the act of the conduction of the corpse to! Cemetery of San Juan, leaving from the Plazuela de Colon, today, October 23, at 10 o'clock in the morning. No obituary will be distributed. Mortuary, Condado, Magdalena Avenue, Parada 47.
I Published and distributed under permit No. 801) autonied by the Act. of October 6, 1917, on file at the Poet Office at San Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the Preaident. A. S. Burdeaon, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 31, 1919. at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Tico, (United States of America) under the Act of March 3, 1875.
[Yesterday Dr. Moreno made his first visit j to the municipal dependencies of Beneficencia.
M He found that they lack hygiene and that they are deplorably equipped. M The new Director of Municipal Welfare of San Juan, Dr. Narciso Moreno, began his activities yesterday afternoon by making a thorough and detailed visit to the public welfare establishments of the city, such as "Cuartos de Socorro "*, Municipal Pharmacies, etc. that fall within the jurisdiction of his department. After having completed this visit of inspection, we greeted him at the Municipality, where he told us that he had ordered the refurbishing of the relief houses, having found them to be deployable as far as sanitation was concerned. "Of course," he told us, "the arrangements now being made will be of a provisional nature, since, as I have said before, I propose to centralize the welfare system so that all cases will be attended to in the municipal hospital. My purpose is to provide this establishment with an X-ray cabinet, an analysis laboratory and other advances that will put it on a par with any other of its kind." ACCOMMPAÑADO DE SU DISTINGUIDA ES POSA, EMBARCO AYER TO SPAIN, DON ROMUALDO REAL. M On board the steamship "Leon XIII" which sailed yesterday afternoon from our port, embarked for Spain our dear colleague, Don Romualdo Real, president of the publishing company of EL MUNDO and director of the popular and widely read magazine "Puerto Rico Ilustrado". He is accompanied on the trip by his worthy and distinguished companion, the cultured lady Mrs. María Asunción Her nández de Real, who is so much appreciated in our high social circles. Our fraternal friend and companion, goes on a trip of recreation and rest, rest that he has well deserved given his extraordinary work at the head of this house, which was intensified to a great extent during the last months, due to the important improvements made. Mr. Real, in union with his distinguished wife, will go first to the Canary Islands, where his relatives reside, and then he will travel through the main cities of the Peninsula, remaining absent from the country for ten months. "EL MUNDO" has for the I dear companion and his lady esI pose the most affectionate and cordial I farewell greeting, wishing them I happy journey and theq. most pleasant I impressions during their stay I in Spanish lands.
Saturday, October 23, 1926.
Resolved yesterday the "Cámara de .Comercio Insular" to continue the lawsuit of the Sales Law.
IT WILL GO TO THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES k ' ' ' Also Discussed New Rice Contract * H ; S ■llii 7 " x A ¿i t ■y. | s j
♦ : .... .... m _ -*. * ........ An aspect of the assembly hall of the "Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce,'' at yesterday's extraordinary meeting of the various delegations of that organization.
i Yesterday the "Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce" met in extraordinary session, with representatives of the San Juan, Ponce and Arecibo Sections in attendance. During the entire morning the matter related to the decision issued by the Circuit Court of Boston on the Sales and Excise Law was discussed. A telegram from Ledo. Zayas Pizarro, of Ponce, informing that the 18 merchants of that locality, involved in the litigation on the sales law, gathered in his office, agreed to continue the lawsuits, and to take them by way of certiorari to the Supreme Court of Washington. The request for reconsideration by attorneys Cafey, Walter and Gammans of the Boston Circuit Court's judgment in this case was reported. This request for reconsideration of the judgment was filed on the 14th of this month. On motion of Mr. Manuel V. Domenech, the following resolution regarding the case was unanimously approved: "WHEREAS, the Circuit Court of Appeals in Boston has declared the appeal filed against the resolution of the Federal Court for the District of Puerto Rico in the lawsuits filed by a number of merchants of San Juan, Ponce and Mayagüez, challenging : the validity of the excise taxes and the two percent tax on certain sales, on the ground that the said court lacks jurisdiction in equity to hear the matters in dispute, but without prejudice to the right of the plaintiffs to make their claims at law under the provisions of the law of the
WHEREAS, this decision of the Boston court is not satisfactory, much less conclusive, since it leaves the matter in the same state in which it was before the suits of the merchants were commenced, and the same is erroneous, in the opinion of competent counsel; and, WHEREAS, before using the procedure provided by the island legislation, which is long, costly and involves multiple lawsuits, it is possible to follow another path, such as the writ of certiorari to request and obtain a writ of certiorari, and The Socialist Party of Puerto Rico joins in mourning the death of Eugenio V. Debs. M This was stated in a cablegram transmitted yesterday. M The General Secretary of the Socialist Party, Mr. Alfonso Torres, has sent the following cablegram to the leadership of the Socialist Party of the United States. "The Socialist Party of Puerto Rico expresses to you its pro- , deepest sympathy on the death > of our revered Eugenio V. . Debs. t Torree, Secretary. Debs, as our ■ readers will remember, was the leader of American socialism, and has just died near the age of 71 years in a clinic near Chicago.
to have the Supreme Court review the judgment of the lower court ; and, WHEREAS, it is essential to the general interests of the country and to the particular interests of commerce and industry that the questions raised in the suits of the merchants be resolved in all their aspects, after careful consideration of their merits; NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF PUERTO RICO, That it is the feeling of this Chamber and of the merchants associated in the effort to ventilate these questions in the courts that the suits brought by various merchants challenging the validity of the sales and excise taxes should be continued to a final determination by the Supreme Court of the United States; and BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that in sustaining and continuing the aforesaid t PRECIOUS Wreaths and Crosses just received for the next enmernoration of the deceased. - COME SEE THEM - Very Low Prices. $1.25 to $12 GonzalezPadinCo. I INSURANCE Are you insured with us? Continue to use our service at Isabel li (Finlay Building) where we are at your disposal for all your insurance needs. F. CAREERS & ONE. ■ " -
THE MUNICIPAL ASSEMBLY OF THIS CAPI TAL YESTERDAY APPROVED IN PRINCIPLE THE RATE OF EIGHT CENTS PER CUBIC METER OF WATER.
This vote is not final. -There will be a public hearing on Friday. M- Yesterday & at two o'clock in the afternoon, and upon convocation, the Municipal Assembly of this city held an extraordinary session, to consider an amended ordinance, increasing the price of water in San Juan, and establishing a rate for the consumption of the precious liquid. At the opening of the session, the delegate, Mr. William D. López presented a motion for the session to be suspended, since a public hearing had not been granted beforehand. Mr. Barbosa opposed, alleging that the ordinance could be discussed and approved on second reading, without detriment of holding a hearing in due time to hear the persons interested in the matter. The Assembly so agreed, and went on to discuss the ordinance, with several of the Assembly members taking part in the debates. Finally, the part of the ordinance was repealed which provided that the litigating merchants act in furtherance of the wishes and directions of the business community who feel the necessity of obtaining a judicial interpretation of the challenged law; and be it finally RESOLVED, that the Chamber of Commerce hereby gives its endorsement and approval to the necessary steps on the part of the litigating merchants to achieve the end indicated and promises to lend them its enthusiastic and determined moral support." The new rice contract was brought up for discussion, at the request of the "Millers' Association." A committee was appointed to issue a report recommending the final form in which the contract should be made, since there were several motions and ideas on the same. This matter was discontinued on page 8). F. Carrera & Br. M We wish to inform salt buyers that we have moved our warehouse from the Malecon, to the warehouses we occupy on Isabel Segunda Street, (former Fin Lay building), where we are in better conditions to serve our customers and friends. Do not buy salt in grain, nor loose ground salt in bags of 100 Lbs., nor in bales of 150 bags, without first asking us for prices, without a doubt the best in the market. FW7 C<NE today -Saturday 23- TODAY San Juan Premiere of DEAD IN LIFE - with - MARGUERITE DE LA MOTTE JOHN BOWERS Sunday 24 MATINAL AND EVENING Premiere of the beautiful drama THE PRISONER OF HAREN with PRISCILLA DEAN REMATE PORTO RICO BLUE UNE INC See ad on page 13.
Number 2533.
DR. SOTO RIVERA M. WAS APPOINTED SCHOOL HYGIENE DOCTOR OF THIS CAPITAL CITY. SOTO RIVERA M
M He was the candidate of the "Socialist Central Committee" 1M The School Director of this Municipality, Dr. Gómez Briosc yesterday appointed Dr. Soto Rivera, school hygiene doctor, a position previously held by Dr. Moreno and which became vacant due to the appointment of said doctor as Director of Beneficencia de San Juan. Dr. Soto Rivera, as you will recall, was officially recommended for this position by the Socialist Central Committee. The fact that the appointment was extended almost immediately after this recommendation, demonstrates that the local effort continues to bear fruit, beyond the resolution of the welfare director problem. SUGAR MARKET Oable received from Forto Rico International Corp. 11:30 A. M. Oct. 22, 1926. Stock opened, Dlc, 2.79 (4.57) Jan. 2.82 (4 60) March 2.78 (4.56). 5:00 P. M. Exchange closed, Die. 2.77 (4.55) Jan. 2.80(4-58) March 2.76 (4.54). cia the proportionate rate plan. The Assembly agreed that the price of water should be uniform and eight cents per cubic meter served by the present aqueduct. It was also decided to hold a special session for next Friday, in order to hear those persons who wished to appear before the Assembly to present their views on the matter. CONVOCATION M The interested public is hereby invited to appear at a Public Hearing to be held before the San Juan Municipal Assembly on Friday, October 29, 1926, at 7:30 P. M., to state their reasons for the decision. M., to state the reasons they may have to oppose the increase of the price of water in the San Juan aqueduct, from 5 cents to 8 cents per cubic meter. San Juan, P. R., October 22, 1926. R. H. TODD, Mayor. (Announcement) ZZZ í - L I'M A i * A M A ; d jfjft l wff íDTI! iJ w &'N Ira H¡N<" WORLD 8 HR NANDG We need Expert electric sewing machine operators. Good embroiderers and hand sewers. Morris L Stoiyk Infanta Luisa 4 & 6 Marina, San Juan, r. R.