THE DAILY MORNING NEWSPAPER
I 1 1 ? ACIMAS 3 C7VS. I "T Office: "Puerto Rico Due trado - TeL 1222
- i PAGES 3 CIVS. T" Semester 1.00 I One Year 9960
Year VIII.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
PuhlM.ed and distributed under permit Xu. 801) antoriaed by (hr A-t. nf Oro.her 6 1917 <.n fiie at th. P M t nwi,. .< I San Juan, Porto Rico. By order of fbe Preaident. A. S Border. " i. "' I /lebruary 21, 1919, at the Post Off,er at Sa" Juan P-rto R America) nud-r , he Art of march XW79 \.
Saturday, September 18, I 926.
Number 2498.
AGRICULTURAL DIRECTORS INSIST THAT THE COUNTRY'S TAXING CAPACITY BE DONE z
Four mills have neither paid the sugar tax nor made any offer to that effect --M They will be seized if they do not make the contribution. M Dr.r te the last three days, no funds have weighed in the Island Treasury corresponding to the special sugar tax. The Treasury Department has received to date, the sum of 8152.00, including-.
M THEY ASK THAT THE TAXPAYER PAY WHAT IN JUSTICE IS OWED TO HIM M What Messrs. Morales Cabrera and Landrón say to this effect. M
In the Momerial presented by the delegates of the active forces to the Secretary of War, among the petitions made was a study of the tax capacity of the country. For this purpose, it was alleged that Puerto Rico had never prepared a scientific plan to impose taxes based on an analytical and reasonable study, and that this measure was necessary, given the situation of the island. This claim was made in the Memorial, at the initiative of the "Farmers Association", which has been incessantly fighting the assessment system in Puerto Rico.
The contribution paid under protest. Various centers have informed the Bureau of Internal Revenue that they intend to pay the tax within a few days, and the extension has been granted. However, other plants, in spite of having been notified on several occasions by the Treasury Department, have not responded to the communication and so far have not made any offers of any kind. We refer to the following cases:- The "Central Juanita" owes the amount of $7,310.10; the "Central Carmen", of 'L. & P. Armstrong', owes the sum of $8,100; the "Central Vieques Sugar Company", which is under receivership, and whose "receiver" is Don Manuel V. Domenech, owes $4,156.30 and le "Centra? Juliana" of Representative Me K. Jones, owes. S726.13. Total owed to the Treasury, with no promises to pay: $20,292.58. The Hac.end t Dept. has been unwilling to take up to *a fecna drastic measures, awaiting satisfactory olution. If it does not receive an answer from these plants, which have been duly notified, it will proceed to seize the properties in order to collect the contribution. - M PUBLIC LETTER TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE HOUSE OF SPAIN --M
In an exchange of impressions that we had yesterday with Mr. Pablo Morales Cabrera, and Mr. Enrique Landrón, Interim President and Secretary of the agricultural entity respectively, these gentlemen spoke to us once again of the need that exists on our island to carry out a study of our tax capacity, alleging that in this way the taxpayer would pay justly what in reality corresponds to the Treasury. We were told that the "Farmers Association" would not cease to constantly make this request, because they understand that the farmers, as well as the taxpayers in general, are at least entitled to have their properties appraised on the basis of a fair, reasonable and scientific plan.
M SUGAR MARKET M Cablegram received from Porto Rico International Corp., Sept. 17, 1926: 11:00 A. M. -Stock market opened. December 2.74 (4.52). January 2.77 (4.55), March 2.70 (4.48). 3:45 P. M.-The stock closed December 2.76 (4.54), January 2.77 (4.55), March 2.70 (4.48).
You are asked to explain your phrase 'grave and serious difficulties' M We are forwarded for publication the following "open letter" addressed to the President of the Casa de España: / CARTA ABIERTA San Juan de Puerto Rico, September 17, 1926. Mr. President of the Central Board of Directors of the Casa de España', San Juan, P. R. Friend and gentleman:- We are very interested in the future of our Casa and alarmed by your statement in "El Imparcial" of the 8th of September that in order to obtain the money destined to build the building "serious and grave difficulties" arise, we beg you publicly, SESOLICITAN I OPERARIAS | {experts to sew on Singer Electric machines. Permanent work and great prices. We also need good embroiderers. Apply personally at the house of MORRIS E. STORYK. Ca- ? - Jle Infanta Luisa 4 and 6, Marina, San Juan. - - FOR RENT A good residence in Sanlurce: House furniture, a piano and an automobile for sale. Reports Highway 125, FRANCISCO DEL VALLE JR.
as you made that statement and we this letter, answer the following question: Failed the borrowing, what money has that Directive to fulfill the contract resulting from the award of the auction for the construction d' the House that is announced for next Monday 20? Sure that your answer will not be long in coming and thanking you from now on, we remain your friends and servants. A. Sarmiento, Romualdo Real. Manuel Camblor, José Ma. del Valle, Manuel Soto. Félix Suárez, Segundo Cadierno, Manuéi Suárez, José Rullán, José López Péfez".
SEEDS OF ONIONS Completely fresh, in the qualities "Bermuda Coloíhda" and "Bermuda Amarilla'', I sell them at $3.00 a fiber. - IGUEL MORROIG I - 134, - Aguadilla, P. R.
For Moving to the warehouses of Finlay Isabel II, 6-8 and 10, we would yield for rent the four warehouses that we have been occupying, as a deposit, in the Railroad warehouses. Address to: F. CARRERA & HNO.
GREAT OPPORTUNITY 4>e veno truck "MACK", 3'/ 2 Ton., brand new. Borinquen Ave. No. 75, or Tel. 1754, Santurce.
The Resident Commissioner, Don Félix Córdova Dávila, answers the last letter addressed to him by Don Antonio R. Barceló: San Juan, P. R., September 17, 1936. rion. Antonio R. Barceló, San Juan, Puerto Rico. Distinguished Chief: I have read with the attention you deserve the letter you have written in reply to mine dated September 8, 1936. It is my desire to let you know that, far from being mortified by the publicity given from the first moment to my first letter, I have celebrated, as much as you have, that the country has been offered the opportunity to know your opinion and mine, on the very interesting problems that have been occupying the attention of public opinion during the last few days.
If I objected to the publication of my letter, I did so not with the desire to avoid an open and public controversy of the questions it dealt with, but rather for reasons of ethics and courtesy to the Alianza governing body, before which I had submitted the matter for discussion. It was my intention to maintain absolute confidentiality while the issues raised were pending study and resolution. The fact that I had sent copies to the men of the Board of Directors, that is to say, to the members of the court called upon to judge and resolve the matter, was my intention to maintain absolute reserve while the questions raised were pending study and resolution. The fact that I have sent copies to the men of the Board of Directors, that is to say, to the members of the court called upon to judge and pass judgment, is the most evident proof of my correctness and good faith. How my letter was published is something I am unable to explain to myself. I understand, however, that the fact of its publication is of no importance whatsoever, although the anonymous way in which it was sent to the editorial office of "El Tiempo" and the fact that a copy appeared in the possession of a reporter of EL MUNDO, precisely at the moment when I learned that "El Tiempo" was preparing to publish it, did not fail to attract my attention. I still believe that, out of respect and consideration for your colleagues on the Board of Directors, you should not have gone ahead and said that your criterion is the criterion of the Board of Directors, in a matter that they had barely had time to discuss.
"And rnviho least of all those who are ¡atapialados to do so for having lived until today m intimate relation ten ell s" M In such terms Mr. Córdova Dávtla addresses Mr. Barceló.
(Udiar, and on which no resolution has yet been rendered. This is as clear and evident as the ■ 'iz of the d.a. Ethics and fellowship demanded . from you "layor reserve and discretion. I need not repeat myself in replying to your insistent assertion that I have reviled my country. Your accusations in this respect, devoid of any prejudice, must not be formulated with the deliberate purpose of doing me harm. I presume that you have not intended to bring the country down upon me, as is vulgarly said, when you assert that I have offended my people, that I seek to destroy the Alliance, and that I propose to dissolve the Union of Puerto Rico. Allow me to pass over, as a gift to our long-suffering readers, these accusations of yours, which are repeated with the continuity of a rhyme and are already forming a school and educating the ears of our countrymen to perceive them with admirable precision. I see that you copy a paragraph of my letter and that you do me the honor of making it your own. The reproduction of my sentences is so flattering that I am tempted to forgive you your refined irony. I am losing something, however, in this trait of yours, because I have wanted to return your fineness in fair and noble reciprocity, and I have not been able to please you in spite of my efforts and good intentions. You tell me in the seventh paragraph of your letter, "everyone (but in that everyone does not seem to include the members of the Board) knows the agreements of the assemblies of San German and Mayaguez, and also knows the men of the Board; and then you add that those same "everyone", among whom the members of the Board seem to be included, know the tendencies of my intentions and those of my friends of Mayaguez, and therefore everyone can easily judge this matter. That indication or that insinuation, in which I do not wish to see any malice, expressive that there is an understanding on my part with friends of Mayagüez or with third persons, was already pointed out in your first letter, and you repeat it now in paragraphs ten, eleven, fourteen, fifteen, twenty-four, twenty-six, twenty-seven and thirty-five of your second letter, which almost reduces itself to insisting on that insinuation.
that insinuation. I have already denied, Mr. Barceló, and it is not in my character to deny or affirm facts more than once to the same person, or that there is or has been any understanding of any kind on my part with my friends in Mayagüez, or with any third person. You insist on affirming it in spite of the fact that my word of honor is at stake. I will not continue to deny it, but I understand that you should prove your accusation with independent facts before stating it a third time. Let me tell you that, having given my word of honor, you should have kept silent, noble and chivalrous, if you esteem that word at all and do not forget the intimate relations we have had for many years which were enough for me to know you and which should have been enough for you to know me.
You persist in saying that I have declared the failure of the Puerto Rican Union in order to make me believe that I intend to dissolve it. The way you have of arguing is extremely donosa. You refuse to take as a basis the things I say and you pretend to judge me by the things you want me to say, starting from false premises, and attributing to me intentions which are the exclusive offspring of the vividness of your imagination. If I were not sure that your words do not reveal personal bitterness or animosity against me, I would think that, instead of persuading and convincing me, you are trying to mortify me. But I know very well that you do not want to triumph at my expense, but for the goodness of the cause you defend. You know that the triumph that is based on the discredit of others and not exclusively on your own is very poor and miserable.
No one can accuse me of having rung bells in favor of the Vivas forces".
VIVAS VALDIVIESO OFFERS C 0 0 PERA TION TO THE MAYOR ALL
M- He refers to the plans for amendments to the current municipal law. M- He qualifies as patriotic the movement initiated in Maricao. M
The Warden of Ponce, Mr. Guillermo Vivas Valdivieso, has addressed a communication to Mayor Todd, in which he offers him all his cooperation to successfully carry out the agreements of the Assembly recently held in Maricao at the initiative of Senator González Mena. As our readers will recall, Mr. Todd recently addressed all his cohorts on the island, asking them to point out the deficiencies they noticed in the present system of municipal government. WILLING TO COOPERATE In his letter Mayor Vivas Valdivieso says: "The Municipal authorities of Ponce are always willing to help any movement whose purpose is the welfare of the Puerto Ricans, and since this one (he refers to the one initiated by Maricao) has a patriotic character, you can count on our most determined cooperation . " M-
THE CONSTRUCTION WORKS ON THE NEW AQUEDUCTION WERE INSPECTED YESTERDAY -M These are well under way. Recommendations to contractors to avoid lawsuits. M A Commission composed of Mayor Todd, the Acting Director of Public Works, Dr. Gómez Brioso, and a municipal engineer, yesterday made a general inspection visit to the works under construction of the new aqueduct, entrusted to the contractors Messrs. Prann, Benitez, González and Pons. THE WORK IS WELL ADVANCED. The aforementioned Commission was satisfied with the progress of the works being carried out, and especially with the progress of the pipe laying works. OBSTACLES. After conferring with the contractors about the obstacles presented by some properties, preventing the laying of the pipeline.
The bus service between San Juan, Santurce and Kio Piedras is improving greatly every day. The recent introduction of the MACK bus is the greatest step forward that has been taken to date for the benefit of the public. For its comfort, safety and luxury it is always a favorite.
La Toja Jubon THE BEST FRIEND OF WOMEN
the pipeline, the Commission requested that certain changes be made to the original route of the works, in order to avoid lawsuits that are not considered absolutely necessary. it also took full details of the compensation demanded by other landowners that the pipeline would inevitably have to cross. AFTER THE BAN Dad:- What does BRANDI mean now? Son:- After the BRANDI ban, it means..." Ac cosorios pá*n automobiles. Dad:- And why? z Son i- Because the only legitimate BRANDI that you can get in American territory are Mr. José Brandi & Br. in Ponce who are dedicated to the business of car accessories in general with a GARAGE open DAY and NIGHT. (Ad)
Opportunity Accredited merchandise, footwear, etc. establishment for sale, located in one of the most prosperous towns on the Island. -Comfortable installments are granted for payment. -Great opportunity for those who have some money and want to work. Inform: Box 231 - San Juan, P. R.
BUSINESS OF THE DAY We offer for immediate delivery PAASCHE Equipment, for the application of paint for Automobiles. AIR SYSTEM Ask for details and conditions for the sale of SALDAÑA & RIEDER Alien 90, - San Juan, P. R.
LUNA CINEMA The very modern social-Jazzist drama 18 'IOS PECADORES DE SEDA" SATURDAY. - with- Current prices. Adolphe Menjou, Eleonor Boardman.
THE BRIDGES OF AÑASCO AND CAM' BALACEE HAVE BEEN DESTROYED AGAIN.
This is the effect of the last cyclone, which passed close to Puerto Rico M Traffic on this road is interrupted. --M In spite of the distance at which the last storm passed from our island, its effects have been felt in Puerto Rico. What is most to be regretted is the interruption of traffic on the road from San Juan to Mayagüez, via Arecibo, where the Cambalache and Afosco bridges, which had just been (--.■pared after having been damaged by the impetuous co. The bridges of Cambalache and Afosco, which had just been saved after having been damaged by the heavy rainstorms of July 23rd, have been destroyed again, thus interrupting the work that the Public Works Section of the Department of the Interior had been carrying out for a month. The bypass that had to be made on the Central Highway, a few kilometers from Ponce, was also destroyed. The Department of the Interior* is again in activity, trying to reestablish the flow of vehicles as soon as possible.
WOULD YOU BE AMAZED WHY A HEN LAYS EGGS... Surely it would never occur to you to be astonished to see a hen laying eggs? It is a natural fact that a good hen lays eggs. Why then should you be astonished that the CLASSIFIEDS of "THE WORLD" produce such good results: THAT IS A VERY NATURAL FACT ALSO. EL MUNDO is the newspaper with the largest circulation.
HUYKE EXPLAINS WHY HE HAS ASKED INSPECTORS TO COMMENT ON THE SPECIAL EDUCATION COMMISSION REPORT
M The Department of Instruction is preparing an important document that will soon be made public. M- Absolute confidentiality is maintained as to its contents. M
We visited yesterday the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Juan B. Huyke, whom we questioned as to the veracity of the information which has reached us to the effect that Mr. Huyke has forbidden the Inspectors of the various school districts, in a circular letter, to comment in any way on the report rendered by the Special Education Commission.
It is true," said Mr. Huyke in replying to our questions, "that I have sent the said circular letter recommending that no public comment should be made upon the report rendered by the gentlemen of the Special Education Commission. This measure is the result of my desire that there should be solidarity in my Department in the submission of our educational report, which will soon be made public. After seeing the public light our report will be open to all kinds of criticism, but in the meantime, it is desirable, that at least persons in connexion with the Department refrain from making any manifestation in this connection." M EXCHANGE MARKET M Dollars, N. Y. % franc 2.90 pesetas 15.40 pounds 4.86. M MARITIME MOVEMENT M ENTRIES:
American steamer ONEIDA, from New Orleans. American transport Chateau Thierry, from Panama. DEPARTURES: American transport Chateau Thierry, for New York. And you are not unaware, moreover, that a clean reputation, however modest it may be, repels, like armor, the darts that are thrown at it with stupefying punctiliousness.
Since you assert, without being convinced, that I have proclaimed the failure of the Puerto Rican Union, I will reproduce my words so that you may appreciate their only true significance. I have said that the Puerto Rican Union was unable to realize its purposes, and that the Union of Puerto Rico was not able to achieve them.
GE NERAL ATTORNEY BUTTE M . .-i .... ■ He is expected to resolve important problems, i M He will assume the in" ternary governorship of the Island upon the embarkation of Mr. Towner. -M- . ! On board the steamer "Coamo" ena ship day before yesterday bound for Puerto Rico, in New York harbor, the Attorney General, Dr. George C. Butte. The day after tomorrow the high official will arrive on the island. '
Both the Department of Justice, and in the "Public Service Commission," there are numerous matters pending for the settlement of which the arrival of the Attorney General is expected. The annual report of his Department < has been prepared by the Acting Attorney General, Mr. Car los Llauger Diaz, and is only awaiting Dr. Butte's authorization, to be delivered to Governor Towner. Dr. Butte will also intervene in the important matters now before the "Public Service Commission," such as the monopoly of the "guaguas" traffic, the Oriente Railroad, and the question of the increase in the price of the "guaguas," the "guaguas" and the "Oriente Railroad: Oriente, and the question of the raising of. the water rate . in San . Juan. ] Dr. But-i te will also assume the interim governorship of the island, while he remains in the; North, Governor Towner, whose trip is announced. M EMBARKMENTS OF CIGARS AND CIGARR1 LLOS TOWARDS THE U.S.A. M Exports of 1 a 'Porto Rico and Amer can Tobacco Co? | -. - The steamer "San Lorenzo," which sailed for New York on Thursday, September 16, took at this port 334 cases containing 1,878,150 cigars, 130,000 cigarillos (small cigars) and 125,000 cigarettes, all shipped by the "Porto Eican "American Tobacco Company," J ILThe 1,787,150 cigars were classified as follows: Class "A"-1,092,150; Class . -80,000; Class "C"-615,000. ?
TOMORROW Be sure to see the best film of 1925. Tragedy turns to boisterous laughter. CHARLIE CHAPLIN in "GOLDEN FEVER" a dramatic comedy written and directed by CHARLIE CHAPLIN ' RIALTO and OLIMPO Tomorrow at 7:30 and 9:00 MONDAY AND TUESDAY MATINEE " EVENING At 2:30 and 4:00 AT 7:30 and 9:00 PRICES- 35 cts. PRICES- 50 cts.
FOR THIS SATURDAY J Fine suits, cashmere at $10.98 and alpaca at $8.00. TAKE ADVANTAGE DAMIAN RODRIGUEZ, SACHS & CO. (Suers, by P. Schira). SALVADOR BRAU and SAN JUSTO. -