ELM0NDO
! ' G P P AGINAS 3CTVS. | I Office: "Puerto Rico Ilus I V irado Bldg". -Tel. 1222
* .■ !■ - i.-■■■■■" .. Ifl F>AU/N/IS3aVS. Semester - _ - 5.00 J (J One Year |9.W
MORNING
THE MORNING
Year VIII.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Published and distributed under San Juan, Porto Rico, By or< tebruary 21, 1919, at the Pom.
Published and distributed under permit No 801) authorized by the Act. San Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. S. Bnrdeson, 1 tebruary 21, 1919, at the Poet Office at San Jnan. Porto Rico, (Unit)
of October ", 1917, on fPe st the Poet Office at r>"t.m "ater General. Entered as s-cond cías" matter, CÍARaJ" 11 J"- 1- j 1 nr"/-" d staw ,.f America) ua der he Act of march s. 18?" baoacio September 11, 1926.
Number 2491.
THE CONSUL OF COLOMBIA BELIEVES! THAT AN EMIGRATION OF PUERTO RICANS TO HIS COUNTRY WOULD BE A SUCCESS.
M He clarifies what are the living conditions there M He refers to the assignment given to him by his government. M We visited the Consul of Colombia in Puerto Rico, Dr. Rafael Ignacio Gómez, whom we questioned regarding the possible emigration of Puerto Ricans to that Republic. "The only thing certain," Dr. Gomez told us, "is that for some weeks now I have had in my possession an official communication from my Government, in which I am ordered to carry out a study of the conditions of the Puerto Rican worker in all his aspects, in order to determine the advisability of contracting an expedition of workers from this island for the public works carried out by the Colombian government. As it seemed to me the most judicious means, I have given a copy of this note to the Department of Agriculture and Labor, which, in turn, has communicated it to the press. In Colombia we are confronted at the present time with the problem of the lack of arms for manual labor. It is true that we constantly receive in our country an uninterrupted stream of European immigrants, mostly Germans and Scandinavians, but they are still not enough and our Ministry of Industry has to give its attention to solving the problem of the shortage of workers. I believe that the Colm.
THE GOVERNOR HAS NOT YET CONSIDERED THE TERM SUBMITTED TO HIM BY MARTINEZ NADAL M He will wait until the 'mandamus' filed by Ledo. Torres. M Said judicial recourse will be disclosed on the 20th of this month. M As we have informed our readers, the Chairman of the Pure Republican Party, Ledo. I Martínez Nadal, submitted to Go- ! bernador Towner a slate of three candidates to fill the vacancy of a member of the Municipal Assembly of San Juan, caused by the resignation of Dr. Martínez Roselló. The Puro leader had arranged an interview with the Chief Executive, which was to be held last Thursday. This could not take place due to the fact that Ledo. Martinez Nadal had to defend a case before the District Court at the last minute. Governor Towner has not yet considered the slate. He received it moments before leaving for Jájome Alto, and we are informed that he will wait for the mandamus appeal filed by Ledo. Carlos J. Torres to be admitted as municipal assemblyman. This case has been scheduled by Judge Muñoz for the ' 2C of the current month.
Half Price!!! Manila shawls ' of $30 and $35 $| Q50 'Reduced to i TT NEW COLORS AND NEW EMBROIDERIES RECEIVED BY LAST STEAM SEE THEM AND SEE TO BUY YOURS NOW. New hats. - Elephant costumes. Beautiful fans. - Perfumes. Fine stockings in all fashionable colors. Silks for suits discounted at half price. Handbags, - Umbrellas, - Vanities, - Necklaces. Silk underwear. Boxes of fine handkerchiefs and other novelties. GONZALEZ. PADIN CO., INC. SAN JUAN - PONCE - MAYAGÜEZ
GREAT OPPORTUNITY For sale truck "MACK" r 3 1 / 2 Ton., brand new. Borinquen Ave. No. 75, or Tel. 1754, Santurce.
LUNA CINEMA 11 Saturday Running Prices.
La Toja Soap THE WOMEN'S BEST FRIEND.
LOUISE DRESSER. JACK PICKFORD, ' CONSTANCE BENNETT in the tremendous drama, entitled The Goose Woman The most sensational love story ever filmed.
BUY YOU CHEAP SELL: Caps $3.25 Doc. Fountain Pens $4.50 Doc. Shipping C. O. D. I have many other items; ask me for price list. ' BETANCOURT, . 1876 Arthur Ave, Brome, New York,
THE PROBLEM OF INDIGENCE ON OUR ISLAND REQUIRES AN IMMEDIATE AND EFFECTIVE SOLUTION'.
M 'It rises like a hostile phantom in the way of our progress and happiness M Says Dr. Fernandez Garcia, President of the "Medical Association"', M Tomorrow afternoon, at a meeting of the "Medical Association" in New York City. M Tomorrow afternoon, at the "Club Deportivo" of Arecibo, will take place the announced tour offered by the "Medical Association of Puerto Rico" to the leading men of the country. This act, which will be of extraordinary importance and significance for the reasons that inspire it, will undoubtedly benefit the poor and indigent, being as it is the essential issue to discuss, that of public welfare, the one that most intimately affects the unfortunate needy. Here are the manifestations that Dr. Eugenio Fernandez Garcia, President of the "Aso ciación Médica", made to us yesterday in this regard: - "The problem of indigence in our island requires an immediate and effective solution. The morbidity rate is overwhelming in Puerto Rico. It is necessary to bring together the entities of the island, in a tight bundle so that collectively they lend the first fruits of their intellectual activity and all their material efforts to the solution of this problem that rises like a hostile ghost "in the ascending path of progress and our happiness". "We wish to approach this problem from a different angle, whichContinued 7a. p.-6a. colm.
AFTER THE PROHIBITION Dad: - What does BRANDI mean now? Son: - After the BRANDI ban, it means... Car accessories. Dad: - And why? Son:- Because the only legitimate BRANDI that can be obtained in American territory are Messrs. José Brandi & Br. in Ponce who are dedicated to the business of accessories for automobiles in general with GARAGE open DAY and NIGHT. (Announcement) The bus service between San Juan, San Juan and Rio Piedras improves greatly every day The recent introduction of the MACK bus is the greatest step forward that has been made to date for the benefit of the public. Because of its comfort, safety and luxury, it is always the preferred bus.
THE FATHER OF THE YOUNG WOMAN MURDERED IN SABANA LLANA REMAINS IN PRISON
THE AUTHORITIES SUSPECT THAT HE IS THE AUTHOR OF THE CRIME M One of his sons? who is 12 years old, commits him with his statement, M
Judging by the reports that we have, the murder committed last Sunday morning, in the person of Isabel de Jesus, at the residence of Mr. Dryer, who lives in the place known as "Cepero", in the Sabana Llana neighborhood of Rio Piedras, still remains a mystery. In spite of the many investigations carried out by the detective, and the declarations of the numerous witnesses that have appeared before Judge Marchand Sicardó and the Chief of Police, Mr. Sulsona, there is still not enough evidence to accuse anyone as the perpetrator or accomplice of the crime. From the very moment the authorities became aware of the fact, they have not rested in their investigations, hoping to identify the culprit.
The murder weapon, a two-edged dagger, "it is said, has not yet been seized by the police, and it is believed that the murderer hid it in the undergrowth of the forest. And if to all these details and circumstances we add the motives of the crime, which are also unknown to the authorities, and the fact that a safe deposit box, property of Mr. Dryer, in which he kept his money for the payment of his employees, appeared in the vicinity of the house, we can deduce that the case requires work and investigation to be able to clarify it properly. There are other details that we do not want to overlook, so that our readers can form a vision of the consummated murder. Next to the body of the victim a knife appeared, with which she defended herself from her aggressor, since Isabel de Jesús was a brave and daring woman, courage and daring highlighted on previous occasions. There are other circumstances that concur in the fact complicating it more and more. Was the robbery the motive of the crime? Was it family displeasure? Was the murderer a stranger? Was it someone related to the victim? That is the enigma. That is the mystery. THE ARRESTS. At first it was thought to be a suicide. The conditions in which the victim's corpse was found, and the scratches that it showed, made, however, to suppose that it was a murder, to the clarification of which we proceeded immediately. In the first instance, two individuals were arrested, whose names we do not know, because the police refused to give them to us. These individuals were later released, Continued 7a. p.-2nd. colm. ~ ' 1 i - , -i UNIVERSITY OF PTO. RICO M NOTICE M In the present course classes in the subjects below will be held from 3 to 6 o'clock in the afternoon and on Saturday mornings.
Special circumstances are involved in this event that hinder the clarification of this matter. In the first place, the place where the crime was committed is like a small desert, where only Mr. Dryer's house is located. In the vicinity, no other houses are to be found. At a respectable distance from the residence of this gentleman, is that there are some other huts. About six hundred feet away is that of Mr. Dryer's mother, a lady who is at present in the United States. A cry for help would be lost in the far reaches of space. The hour in which the fact took place could not be more propitious for the mystery. It was Sunday at noon, hour in which all the peasants retire to rest, in order to recover energies and agility to give beginning to the hard tasks that await them the following day. Everything in the neighborhood was in the most peaceful silence. The weapon with which the
BARBERIA BílRINQUEN (El Salón de la Aristocracia) The head magician returns After the three-week vacation that the popular JULIO BURGOS is enjoying, he will return to his post at the SALON BORINQUEN ON SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 11, where, as always, he will be at the service of our distinguished clientele. 41. Altos de La Parisién. SAN JUAN. We have Manieure for gentlemen. Dr. J. F. Gonzalez Lares, Puerto Rico. M On his return from his study trip to North America, he warmly greets his clients and friends of Lares. San Sebastián and neighboring towns and offers again his professional services. (Announcement' HOUSE FOR COMMERCE For rent in Caguas excellent premises in front of Palmer Park. Contact Miguel Figuerola, Box 503, Caguas, P. R.
SAN AGUSTIN ACADEMY OPENS NEXT SEPTEMBER "Their studies range from the first grade of elementary school to the first year of inclusive High School. We have received many applications, make yours in time, lest you lose your place. Send your application to the Director, Apartado 87, Río Piedras.
t SUBJECTS History of the Renaissance and the Reformation-3 L. M. V. Diplomatic History-3 L. MV. History of Puerto Rico-5 L. M. V. Spanish - Romanticism - 3 M. J. The Teaching of Spanish in the High School -4 L. M. V. Contemporary Literature 4 M. J. English-Comparative Literature-4 L. M. V. French III - Classical Literature - 3 L. M. V. Economic Geography - 3 L. M. V. Psychology of Elementary School Subjects-4 L. M V. School Administration - 4 L. M. V. "Home Economics Education"- 4 L. M. M. V. "Food la" - 3-5 M. J. "Food 3" - 9-1 S. Interested teachers should be addressed to Mr. 3. Osuna, University of Puerto Rico. Others who are not teachers should apply to Mr. Henrv Doermann. They will pay two dollars for each point. These classes will begin on Monday, September 13. Henry J. DOERMANN, Dean of Administration. (Announcement.)
I N M I GRATION AUTHORITIES EXAMINED ALL EMIGRANTS TO ARIZONA.
--M Some of those who embarked were very weak. M The Bureau of Immigration in Puerto Rico makes for the press an official commentary on the health conditions, productive capacity and degree of intelligence and enlightenment of the emigrants who embarked for Arizona, all of whom were examined and questioned by the immigration inspectors. Here are their essential points: "As a result of our examination we have come to the conclusion that the argument which has been adduced to combat the expedition to the effect that "the type of Puerto Rican laborer is the lowest of those of Hispanic extraction" is completely unfair and completely without foundation. Approximately ni ent e ' five hundred persons, including children and women, formed the first contingent of laborers and we can assure you that at least 'ten per cent of them n ran types of super-excellent quality, and that they will undoubtedly honor Puerto Rico abroad by their intellectual, physical conditions and their determined intention to work. "At the opposite extreme, we have found only another ten percent of individuals who are deficient, illiterate and ill-prepared to succeed. The remaining eighty percent are made up of quite acceptable workers, who may compare■e favorably with the type of immigrants who come to the United States from Europe. "As far as their health conditions are concerned, the emigrants are all in perfect condition. They suffer from no infirmity that can be described as such, even though in the great majority they are in a weakened condition which we attribute to deficient nutrition, but it is to be expected that it will change as soon as they begin their new occupations and are sufficiently remunerated for their labor to enable them to feed themselves in abundance. Continued 7a. p. -5a. colm.
BLANCHE KELLOGG INSTITUTE \lta School v Eighth Grade for young ladies. INTERN AND EXTERNAL 226 Ponce de Leon Avenue. [gÁraSHÓI Stop 5 I' 1 - * ' San Juan. In this workshop we ex- ; elusively use legitimate DUCO materials.
MANY MANY MANY MANY NEWS Come and see our exhibits of new and beautiful articles imported from PARIS - NEW YORK - LONDON - VIENNA. BAGS - PERFUMERY - UMBRELLAS, FANS - SCARVES - NECKLACES, SPANISH SHAWLS - BRACELETS - EARRINGS. We are also the only ones to present the most tasteful objects in PORCELAIN and FINE GLASSWARE; TOILET, LIVING ROOM and DINING ROOM OBJECTS, PICTURES, TAPESTRY, LAMPS. ALL NEW, LIMITED PRICES. ALLEN 27. S. BRAU 45.
A V con nto Iíorber the Best guarantee.
THE PURE REPUBLICAN TERRITORIAL COMMITTEE WILL MEET AT A MOMENT'S NOTICE.
After Tuesday, the 14th, no more advertisements will be admitted for the Special Edition We must inform our thousands of favorers, that after eighteen o'clock in the afternoon of next Tuesday, the 14th, we will admit no more advertisements for the special edition which we are to publish on the occasion of the inauguration of our new press. We are pleased to say that we have received a real avalanche of advertisements. The island trade understood that we were offering a unique opportunity and has taken advantage of it. The deadline we have set expires in the next four days. Those who have not yet sent in their orders, should do so t*500 MILES FROM PUERTO RICO A STORM MOVES M Everything indicates that it will not touch our Island. M-- It is probable that light winds will blow in the eastern region. M The Weather Bureau Director, Mr. Fassig, has informed us that he has received a cablegram from Washington, D. C., informing him that a storm has formed 500 miles northeast of Puerto Bico, moving slowly to the southeast. "The course of the storm indicates that it will not touch this Island," Mr. Fassigg tells us, "and that there is no danger to be feared. We shall have light winds, preceded by showers, in the eastern region of Puerto Rico, especially on the coast," Mr. Fassigg adds.
M Will determine what should be done in connection with the primaries requested in San Juan. -M The President of the Puro ReptS blicano Party, Ledo. Martinez Nm úal, will at a moment " another convene the Territorial Committee to settle at once the policy to be pursued in connection with the petition for new primaries which has been formed by numerous Republican voters in the municipality of San Juan. As our readers will recall, the petition for primaries was made prior to the Pure Republican General Assembly held in Santurce, and on the occasion of which the Pure Committee of San Juan rectified its attitude towards the Territorial Committee. When considering the original Primary petition, the Territorial appointed a special committee to investigate whether or not the signatures of the electors that appeared at the bottom of the document were valid. The Special Primary Committee had to suspend its work due to the convening of the General Assembly of the party. The Commission then informed the Territorial that it was necessary to wait for the General Assembly to be held before continuing the investigation work. But the fact is that the Pure Committee, by rectifying, has retained the confidence of the Territorial and of the General Assembly, for which reason the Territorial will have to meet to determine what should be done. If it turns out that the signatures attached to the document requesting the primary in this municipality are valid, it is understood that immediately the order will be issued to proceed to hold them. SUGAR MARKET M Cablegram received from Porto Rico International Corp, at 10:45 A. M.: Balso opened. December 2.69 (4.47). January 2.70 (4.48). Jdafzo 2.66 (4.44). Received at 3:45 P. M.: The stock closed. Dec. 2.71 (4.49). January 2.73 (4.51). March 2.68 (4.46).