ELAWNDO
O ''AGINASSGTVS. I Office: "Puerto Rico Hus. U tra4,? - íeL 1222 1
C PAG/NáSJCTVS. 11 Semester .... - 5.00 U One Year - - |9.50
MORNING
MORNING
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published "nd di.tribuUxi under permit (Mo. 801) euth.rieed by the Aet. of October ", 1917, oa hl, H the Post Uifioe ill ----------- - -- SATURDAY, MAY 29, 1926 j NUMBER 3082.
YEAR VIII.
TEN DAYS WERE GIVEN TO MONS. CARUANA WAS GIVEN TEN DAYS TO LEAVE THE MEXICAN REPUBLIC.
M The steps taken to obtain the revocation of the order were useless - The papal delegate did all he could to avoid public demonstrations on the occasion of his expulsion.
M
From our colleague "Excelsior", we took the following very interesting information, related to the expulsion of Monsignor Caruana from Mexican territory. This information contains important details, unknown in Puerto Rico: - i "Monsignor Jorge José Caruana, delegate of His Holiness the Pope who had been in the capital for almost two months, left Mexico City last night following orders from the Ministry of the Interior, in the sense that he should leave the national territory, since he had not fully proved how he entered the country and had violated article 130 of the General Constitution, which prohibits foreign priests of any cult from officiating in Mexico. The Apostolic Delegate boarded the train which left last night for Laredo, at 8:55 o'clock, at the Tacuba station, where he was accompanied by THE P R O Í Í iTrADOR GENERAL BUTTE EM BARCA EN BRIEF TOWARDS THE U.S.A. - ' M '- He will go to rest a few days at his home in Texas. M His wife has already preceded him M Attorney General Butte served the dual duties of Governor Ínterim, and head of the Department of Justice, for which a great material effort had to be made in order to attend to the work properly.. For this reason, Mr. Butte has resolved to take a short season of rest, which he will spend at his home in Austin, Texas. Mr. Butte's distinguished spouse has preceded him, as she embarked the day before yesterday, on board the "San Lorenzo." Mrs. Butte is highly esteemed in our society, presides over more than one organization of a charitable and social character, and takes an active part in every altruistic movement. During the prolonged absence of the Attorney General, which will be short, Mr. Butte's assistant, Ledo Llauger, will assume the interim direction of the Department of Justice. Llauger.
Some chantad perSona". Monsignor Caruana refused to take the train at the Cologne station to avoid any demonstration in his honor. Bishop Caruana had been notified for some days that he had to leave the Republic and that he was given ten days to do so. The order was communicated by the head of the Special Services of the Ministry of the Interior, Colonel Delgado. Monsignor Caruana offered to accept the invitation and from then on he prepared to leave the Republic and go to the United States, from where he would then go on to Havana, where he would be the residence of the apostolic delegation entrusted to him by His Holiness the Pope. All the efforts made by the Government to have Mr. Caruana's departure order revoked were useless and the Ministry of the Interior maintained its agreement. The apo r tolic delegate was conferring Friday morning with the Hon. James Rockwell Shéffield, Ambassador of the United States, before this diplomat left for the ciu(Continued on p. 8', 1" cok) ANNOUNCEMENT OF AUCTION M M MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO M San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 22, 1926. On June 7, 1926, the Auction for the following works will be held in the City Hall building, in the office of the Mayor, in a public act: 1. -At 9:00 A. M., the Auction of the works of the following works: 1. M. the Auction for the construction works of an arch dam on the Bayamón River and two tunnels related to the new gravity aqueduct. 2. -At 9:30 A. M., the Auction for the installation of a 30" diameter pipeline and complementary works, from the Filtration Plant in Guaynabo to the dam on the Bayamon River, in connection with the new gravity aqueduct. 3. - At 10:00 A.M., the Auction of the bids for the new gravity aqueduct. M., the Auction of the works for the installation of a 30" diameter pipeline and complementary works, from the Filtration Plant in Guaynabo, to the central road in ilato Rey, in connection with the new gravity aqueduct. 4.--At 10:30 A. M., the Auction of the works for the installation of a 20" diameter pipeline and complementary works, from kilometer 9 of the central highway to the San Antonio Bridge, in connection with the new gravity aqueduct. The proposal form, instructions to bidders, bidding documents and other background information related to the works, are available at the Office of the Municipal Director of Public Works, and copies of the documents may be obtained by means of a receipt that certifies that each interested party has deposited in the office of the Municipal Treasurer of San Juan, the amount of $100.00, which will be reimbursed upon return of all documents complete and in good condition, within a period of twenty days after the Auction has been held. The Auction Board may reject any or all of the bids submitted, and reserves the right to award the contract to the bid it deems most advantageous, even if it is not the lowest in price.
M
IABOY VIDAL A CO. INC I See our ads on I Pages 11 and 14
FOR SALE! Magnificent farm of my property, ten m.*nutes from San Juan, with plenty of cattle, abundant water, beautiful modern stable and inn production of : milk sold at home. I leave part of its value in mortgage at 7% per annum as I also take urban farms on account. Will inform: D. DIAZ ALEJANDRO Tel- 872 Blue. Santa Ana St. Stop 24, Santurce, P.R.
i. Suits, suits!!! of cashmere, yarn and Palm-Beach, at special prices in "La Cagüeña''. The ; of hi'o are made in the accredited factory cíe Miranda Hermanos by exper- ( eos tailors, and wet 4b ñoras in water. Carretera 106, Stop 7.3%, Santurce, P. R.
r PS. J. GOMEZ BRIOSO, Mayor of San Juan-.
"THE FARMERS ASSOCIATION HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH POLITICS."
THEY WON'T GET US INVOLVED IN THE PARTISAN QUAGMIRE".
M Don Rafael Ma. González comments on Mr. Barceló's telegram in these terms.
M Our Board selected men to send to Washington, not politicians', he says. M
-What do you have to tell us" -we asked yesterday Don Rafael María González, President of the "Asociación de Agricultores de Puerto Rico", regarding the telegram addressed by Mr. Barceló, from Fajardo, to "La Democracia", replying to Mr. Landrón,
in which he states that the directors of the Association that you preside, "appointed Mr. Zeno Gandía and Mr. Landrón to go to Washington, knowing that they were bitter enemies of the "Union" and the "Alliance". "The Farmers' Association," Mr. Gonzalez tells us, "has nothing to do with party politics, nor did it ever ask any of its members which party they belonged to. It was always believed by those to whom the Farmers' Association seemed to get in the way, that the best means of des(Continued on p. 5, Ira. col.) GREAT OPPORTUNITY Due to its owner's inability to attend to it, the "Radio '■'-ocerV' s store located at stop 16 ca'le Rucabado No. 8, Santurce, is for sale. For sale or leave in alouiler 'a home. For further inquiries at the "Café Habana", Stop '6 or at the same store, Rucag su d ne jj o GIL RODRIGUEZ GONZALEZ GOVERNMENT OF PUERTO RICO THREE STONE CRUSHERS FOR SALE Located in Juncos, Rio Granr de and Caguas. Bids will be accepted until 2 p.m. June 2. So'icite further details at the office of the Auditor of Puerto Rico.
c I A N 1 VxU-SJ a d rnW r A I D igW A 111 L jMfB E rxv'UIl |E1 rl //j i Uy'iLln piF B FT R NANDU temí" pro p-ro
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS IS ASKED TO CONVENE AN EXTRAORDINARY CONVENTION IN SANJUAN
M
Motivating this petition is the resignation of the 'Comité local aliancista'. M This matter will be discussed at Monday's meeting.-Resignation of Ledo. Valdejully as Secretary of the Governing Body. M {Significant Allied leaders of San Juan, will request the Board of Directors, which is to meet the day after tomorrow, to proceed to consider the resignation presented by the Local Committee some weeks ago. Several candidacies have already been launched, and it is expected that the Board of Directors will have to call a convention soon, interpreting the feeling of the alliance electorate in San Juan. The distinguished politician, Ledo. J. Valdejully Rodríguez, Secretary of the Board of Directors for the "Partido Republicano Portorriaueño", will present his resignation irrevocably at Monday's meeting. He claims that he wishes to devote all his enthusiasm and all his time to his profession. The talented lawyer will
THE COMMISSIONER OF INSTRUCTION OPPOSES THE ABOLITION OF CLASSIFICATIONS.
M
ALLEGES THAT THIS SYSTEM EXISTS IN ALL COUNTRIES, AND THAT PUERTO RICO CANNOT BE THE EXCEPTION.
M-Opines that the Dept. must use some means to determine the efficiency of each
means to determine the efficiency of each. M
The Acting Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. C. H. Terry, referring to the resolution adopted by the "Local Board of Teachers of San Juan," in which the Department is requested to abolish the ebisi- ¡ fications, has told us what he proposes, however, to continue to contribute to the "Alianza Portorriqueña", as a simple rank and file soldier. Other very important agreements will be adopted by the Board of Directors at its next session. The legislative commissioners, according to what Mr. Barceló informed us, will render a detailed report of their actions in the North. In addition, other matters of an internal nature, pending consideration, will be discussed.
The following is published:- l ' "In all educational programs, there is a system of classifications. It becomes impossible to determine the ability and efficiency of teachers unless a fixed rule is followed. The object of the rankings is none other than to improve instruction and raise the "standard" of teachers. I can assure you that there is not a single educational system in the world in which there are no rankings. I do not believe that Puerto Rico is going to be an ex- ¡ ception to the rule, from *rtnn-Io the wise measure, universally recognized as good and ven- tious. The Department has to avail itself of some means to eliminate incomnetent professors, as well as to promote in their positions those who show their efficiency, v ccnoc'miento de la ifiateriu qae imseñan." As you may know, all employees of the island government are subject to the civil service regulations, and these prescribe that each employee be put to a three-month test, to demonstrate the efficiency of his work. This plan is not only followed in Puerto Rico, but also in many parts of the world and especially in Washington, where a detailed "recoro" is kept of the efficiency of all employees." -Have you received many complaints from the masters' "To date not many have been received, but r.-.c it seems that they will be coming in little by little." " ? "The Commissioner of Education er he called upon - to - study ' all these cases, and the only one who can make changes in Ins inspectors' classifications. As all cases are not 'gual, nor motivated by the same circumstances, individual attention will have to be given to each. But all will be done with good care in this Department." -Would these classifications affect the, appointment of teachers in the coming school year? "By no means v in any sense. Any teacher who receives a letter grade of 'G minus' can be assured of appointment. That has always been our rule, and we will follow it hereafter. To date, I have not known of any case at St. John's in which classification can stand in the way of appointment for the next year." Miss Stenographer WANTED with experience in Secretarial work, must be able to take rapid dictation in English and also ci- Spanish. D'rfiase to Mr. M. A. Wa'ker, Porto Rí "an American Sugar Co., Caguas, P. R. (Advertisement) WANTED First class lady stenographer, with experience in Secretarial work, must be able to take rapid dictation : n English, and a'so in Spanish. Apply to Mr. M. A. Walker, Porto Ricin American Sugar Company, Caguas, P R.
ARE YOU GOING TO BUILD? Don't let anyone build you a ranchon to live in, when with the same money you can build a home, artistic, out of the ordinary, worth seeing. I will tell you how. Box 625, Santurce. FELIX ALFARO MIRANDA Architect. Tel 1271, Santurce.
An attempt is made to convene a general assembly of the island trade.
Approximately twelve million dollars have entered the country this year from the tobacco harvest. M TOTAL PRODUCTION IS ESTIMATED TO PASS 30,000,000 POUNDS OF THE ARO MATICA LEAF M Demand remains firm M Our tobacco growers, after so many struggles and difficulties, can consider themselves fortunate this year. 1 It is estimated that an increased sum of twelve million dollars will enter the country from the tobacco harvest. To this has contributed, in the first place, the production, quite abundant by the way, and in the second place, the magnificent prices. It can be said, without fear of exaggeration, that an average sale has been obtained that fluctuates between forty and forty-five cents per pound. Experts are of the opinion that the production will amount to at least thirty million ibers of the aromatic leaf. In addition, the news we have received indicates that the demand in the fel market remains firm. Mr. Linares, head of the "Puerto Rico Tobacco Agency" in New York, appeals to all resources in order to assure our tobacco the greatest publicity. The Governor, on his last trip to the United States, conferred extensively with Mr. Linares, analyzing at length the situation of the tobacco market and the outlook for the future. THE MEMORIAL WILL BE PUBLISHED IN THE NATION'S MAIN ROTATIVES M Zeno Gandía, who arrives in San Juan on June 14, has signed a contract to that effect. M The Agricultural Commissioners will launch a Manifesto to the country. -On Thursday, June 14, Dr. Zeno Gandía, one of the agricultural commissioners, will arrive in Puerto Rico. The board of directors of the "Farmers' Association" will meet immediately after the return of the aforementioned delegate, to hear the report he is to make, (Continued on 6th. page 2a. Col.) FOR RENT A spacious apartment ventilated and sunny on three fronts. Species of Sanatorium; in Cruz 43 corner, to San Sebastian. For information: MARTINEZ HNOS- & CO. Tetuán 56 Tel. 308
M
ASYER WE WERE INFORMED YESTERDAY BY DON RAFAEL M. PIETRANTONI He maintains that there are a number of merchants who do not endorse the memorial. M "If we are the living forces of the country, why are we afraid to fight the Legislature here? "*, he says. M The idea of calling a general assembly of all the merchants of San Juan and other towns of the island is being agitated. This was reported to us yesterday by the distinguished gentleman Don Rafael María Pietrantoni, a well-known businessman of this plaza. "Not all the merchants of Puerto Rico"-he told us-"are in agreement with the memorial, which jointly with the agricultural and sugar delegates, Don Manuel V. Domenech has presented to the Secretary of War." "Even if we were to accept that in the aforesaid document bitter truths are recorded; even if the true situation of Puerto Rico were clearly and categorically stated in it, we merchants understand that this should not have been the policy to be followed by us. For the most part, the issues raised in the memorial can be resolved by the island government. There has been no need to submit them for consideration by the national authorities. If we call ourselves "the living forces of the country," why are we afraid to fight here in Puerto Rico before the Legislature? Why appeal to the national government? If we consider that the island administration has made its mistakes; if we believe that our legislators have not acted in accordance with the circumstances of the moment; let us present to it a united front and take to the Legislature in the next election fights men of our confidence. That would have been a better policy." "The merchants are in no way benefited by a reduction of the island budget. Perhaps it is to the advantage of the farmers and sugar growers. It does not do us traders any good to interfere in political matters. When the various commissions embarked for Washington, we all believed that they would work in harmony for the welfare of Puerto Rico. "If the Chamber of Commerce delegation was going to act the way it did in the North, the opinion of all the merchants of Puerto Rico should have been known beforehand. The fair and correct thing to do would have been to call a general assembly." "Yes, I assure you that there are many dissatisfied. Probably very soon there will have to be a general assembly.
ISlfliAS CEUOIUS ISLEÑAS PATATAS ISlfliAS CEUOIUS ISLEÑAS PATATAS ISlfliAS ISlfliAS CEUOIUS ISLEÑAS PATATAS ISlfliAS CEUOIUS ISLEÑAS will arrive at any moment by "GUADALHORCE" ship consigned to C&dierno Hermanos. Be foresighted and protective of the consumer, Mr. Merchants, by reserving your orders of such rich products.
Olivero, nnc of the aviators arriving tomorrow in San Juan, has his face disfigured by horrible burns. M H E SERVED DURING THE WAR UNDER THE COMMANDS OF THE GREAT D'ANNUNZIO AND IS A HERO __ M- Dugan is one of the youngest pilots that Argentina has. M The personalities of the three Argentine aviators arriving in this capital tomorrow could not be more interesting. We make no exceptions. Bernardo Dugan, Eduardo Olivero and Ernesto Cam- , panelli are three very interesting figures. Let's start with Dugan, the director of the New York > Buenos Aires flight. He is considered to be one of the youngest pilots in Argentina today. He is a fanatic of the north and enjoys a solid reputation in his homeland, where he is recognized for his high spirit of organization. The expedition is not the work of the Argentine government, as some may believe. On the contrary, it is the brainchild of Bemardc Ouran, who has spent a large sum of money on the purchase of the apparatus and equipment. Despite her nationality, she speaks perfect English. Eduardo Olivero is a hero. During the war he was part of the aviation flotilla commanded by the great D* Annunzio. Olivero's face is disfigured by the horrible injuries he suffered in an aviation accident in Buenos Aires. Suffice it to say that he miraculously saved his life. Ernesto Campanelli is a world-renowned artist of stature. He accompanied the Marquis de Pinedo on his famous flight to the Orient, and this in itself is the best recommendation. In the meantime, preparations are underway in San Juan to receive the aviators, who, weather permitting and if nothing extraordinary happens, will arrive in this port tomorrow. Cab'eerama SUGAR MARKET. received from "Porto Rico Internationa! Com" at 1:00 P. M., May 28, 1926: Market plus Fojo. There are bids from Cuba,,, Puerto Rico and Pilipinas nara lleear in June at 2-7*16 ¡(4.21) with no buyers. The exchange opened:-July (4.26) Sent -2-61 (4.39) Received at 5:10 P. M. -May 28. 1926. Weak market. Sales of 40,000 sacks of Cuba for shipment in the second half of June at 2-7|16 (4.21) New Orleans. La. to the Galveston Texas Refinery. At the market Puerto Rico and Philippine Islands offered for Ifefgar next week at 4.18. The bo'sa closed:- July-2.46,(4.24) Sept. -2.59 (4.37) The market was closed until June nrst. a general meeting of all !o* island traders to discuss this matter. We will then decide whether or not to endorse the memorial" - . ; - íí.
WE BEGIN THE SEASON Of everything for gentlemen and boys; place your summer orders. --NEW Swimsuits, fine hats, fine caps, and shirts. LA GLORIA Tel. 2058 Cruz 12 Box 997.
HALF USED TRUCKS IN GOOD WORKING CONDITION: WHITE CLYDESDALE - GÁRFORD PACKARD - FEDERAL - and other" makes See them at the MACK GARAGE at :a Marina. sues DE L. V1LLLAMII £ CO. "We give great payment facilities.