ELMUNDO
ID FAGINAS 3 CTVS. I Office: "Puerto Rico Dus. (J trado Bldg". -Tel. 1222 ■
jlfi PáG/NAS3CTVS. j I Semester - - 8.00 I (J A Afio $9-60
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
YEAR VIII.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
, ruotMAM auü diBiribuwú uMdei panul aOA> "uui.íjwi iba <xi- ul ueuiba" 6, lili?, o* tu* ai ib" t*o "l Uttro* a" i 18a" Juan. Porto Bieo, By order of the Preeidaat, A. 8. bar -laaoa, Poatmaatar G-eaeral. Entered ai aaoond "lasa matter, febroary 31, 1019. at tha Poat Office at Ban Jaan Porto Bieo. (United States of Áaariea) andar the Aet of aaroh 9, 1879.
SATURDAY, JUNE 19, 1926
~ lr ~ NUMBER 2459.
TROLLEY SERVICE IN SAN JUAN TO BE CONTINUED OR NOT ON TUESDAY, TUESDAY.
A committee of the 'Com. of Public Service' is studying the problem at this time. M The construction of the Oriente railroad was discussed in general terms. M At the extraordinary session held the day before yesterday by the 'Public Service Committee,' matters of momentous importance were discussed, such as 'a request of the "Porto Rico Railway Light and Power Company," to be allowed to discontinue electric trolley service; and the petition for a franchise on the construction of the Oriente railroad. In neither case was anything finally settled, but the various aspects of both problems were discussed at length. On the eastern railroad, only general questions were analyzed, without discussing the petition in depth, since this matter requires a more detailed and complete study. Regarding the petition of the Porto Rico Railway Light and Power Company, the same committee that was studying the matter was instructed to continue discussing the conditions that should be imposed on said company, in case its petition is granted. - The aforementioned committee, which is composed of Commissioners Butte, Esteves and Figueroa, will probably render its report next Tuesday at the regular session of the Commission at which it is believed the matter will be definitively resolved. MARITIME MOVEMENT M INCOMINGS: American steamship "Mary "* from the island. DEPARTURES: American steamer "Helen" for the Island. M VESSELS ANNOUNCED: English steamship White Palace will sail direct from New York on June 2, July 1 and 31, September 1, October 1, October 1, November and December 2. z American steamship Maracaibo will leave the port of San Juan for New York on the 25th of the present. Am. steamer "Carabobo" will leave the port of San Juan for La Guaira on the 21st of the current month. American steamer Lara will leave the port of San Juan for Venezuela and Curacao on the 29th of the current month. The American steamship Guantanamo from Cuba and Santo Domingo will call at San Juan, P.R., on June 30, leaving the same day via Mayaguez, Ponce, Macoris, Santiago de Cuba, and Havana. The American steamship "San Lorenzo" left New York for San Juan on the 17th of the current month.
On Monday the High School of San Juan celebrates a tribute to its Beauty and Sympathy Queens. M
The authorities of the Insular and Municipal governments have made an appointment for next Monday at the San Juan High School, where they will celebrate at half past eight in the evening the official inauguration of the new building's auditorium, as a tribute to the beauty and sympathy queens, Ms. Rosalina Acosta and Ms. Pepita Acosta, who are the new beauty and sympathy queens. Rosalina Acosta and Pepita Aponte. Governor Towner will attend the coronation ceremony of the two queens of the most important educational center of the municipality, and will also take part in the inauguration ceremony, together with Mr. Saldaña, Mr. Todd, Mr. Gómez Brioso, Mr. Terry, Mr. Bagué, Mr. Barce'ó, Mr. Hernández López and Mr. Guerra Mondragón. TWO ORCHESTRAS After the coronation ceremony, in which more than one hundred students will participate, there will be a magnificent society ball, to which the most prominent personalities of our "elite" have been invited. About 500 young ladies who are studying higher education at the Central School, will attend; and other young people will be ready to pay tribute to the god of baity La señá enlivened by the orchestra of Carmelo Diaz, who will play in the auditorium, while the school orchestra will play in the galleries of the sumptuous building.
SHIRTS / ARROW ■ QtJír K CLUETT, PEABODY & CO. Inc Manufacturers: Troy. N. Y. L _ o ÍABOY VIDAL &. CO. INC | See our advertisements on pages 10, 11, 14.... |
I J oiré yn&i'Ctw/f Cyl ///" Y/ X"
FOR GRADUATION WE HAVE JUST RECEIVED A NEW RANGE OF SUITS FOR YOUNG MEN AND BOYS.
FOR LADIES: THIN WHITE SUITS All different, made of flowing silks with delicate combinations in trimmings, all sizes are available at $15, $18 and $20. NEW HATS For ladies and young ladies purchased specifically for upcoming graduation parties at $2, $3, $5 and $7. CHEAP GIFTS For teachers and students. we offer a large assortment brought specifically. There is an infi- , nity of personal items for ladies and gentlemen, all new, beautiful and satisfying to the most refined taste.
FOR YOUNG MEN: Elegant navy blue "Double Breast" double breasted double breasted suits with modern pants in the Full ' style, made for Graduation. Price $22.50 Others in current style at $20 and $35. ~ FOR BOYS: Navy Blue "Double Breast'' suits for boys from 10 to 18 years old, modern style with two pants, one long and one short, at $13.50. Others in current style at $8 and $9. WE ALSO HAVE new and elegant shoes; Shirts; Ties. Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties; Ties. Finished to receive
NEW MODELS OF "BOBBY COMB", FANTASY COMBS to wear with short hair, beautiful shapes ">in new colors. K LARGE ASSORTMENT! CHEAP PRICES. i
Qonzalez í Padin Co, Inc.THE ONLY HOUSE ON THE ISLAND WITH FIXED PRICES
La Villa de Paris , INAUGURATES ITS NEW LOCAL Because of the low prices that this establishment sells its articles, and especially effects for gentlemen, we have had to move to the new premises, in Cruz 23, corner of Luna, where we put ourselves at the disposal of our numerous and select clientele. Do not buy without visiting our new establishment, which will be opened TODAY SATURDAY.
2 HOUSES FOR RENT M 1 Santurce, Pasaje Ribot No. 3. Another San Juan, Salvador Brau No. 3. Information: Tel. 656 Santurce and 228, San Juan, Puerto Rico. RENT A CENTRAL APARTMENT, high Colmado Suarez, in front of Rialto, reports in the colmado. Tel. 134, San Juan, P. R.
GALLARDO RECOMMENDED TO THE GOVERNOR THAT. THE NEW BUDGET SHOULD NOT EXCEED $9,000,000.
The Puerto Rican soldier condemned to death in Panama has been declared insane. - M
THE MEDICAL DOCTORS OF THE CITO ARRIVED AT THIS CONCLUSION M He has been confined in a Hospital. M Inquiring yesterday at the Ballajá Barracks about the fate of the Puerto Rican soldier condemned to the ultimate penalty by the military authorities of the Panama Canal Zone, we communicated with Captain Nogueras, who gave us ample details on the matter. -In spite of having acted a Court Martial, which, after due consideration of the case, rendered a verdict of guilty," Captain Nogueras told us, "subsequent inquiries by the army medical authorities have led the military judges to the conclusion that the defendant, in committing the crime, was of unsound mind. - "In accordance with this conclusion of the alienists, our insane compatriot has been confined in a suitable hospital in Corozal, (Panama), where he will remain until he is transferred to a Sanatorium." Sugar Market M Cable received from Porto Rico International Corp. 11:15 A. M. June 18, 1926 Market sustained. Sales made last night were 20,000 sacks Cuba to Arbuckle Bros. at 2-3'8 (4.14) There are offers from Cuba and Puerto Rico for shipment throughout June at 2-13|32 (4.18) Exchange opened, July 2.41 (4.19) Sept. 2.54 (4.32) Die. 2170 (4.48). 4:35 P. M. Mercad" continues unchanged. k Sales for 14,000 Cuba sacks were made to the Federal Ref. Co. afloat at 2-3|8 (4.14). Exchange closed. July 2.42 (4.20) Sept. 2.55 (4.33) Die. 2.71 (4.49)
On the occasion of Governor Towner's intention to recommend to the Legislature to consider a reorganization of the municipal government, we had an interview with the Mayor of the city, Mr. Robert H. Todd, who expressed his views on the subject. Here are his statements:- -' 'I strongly favor a reorganization of the municipal government system, because to date, the many changes that have been made, have not had the result-!
"I STRONGLY FAVOR A REORGANIZATION OF THE MUNICIPAL SYSTEM," SAYS MR. TODD.
M reports that he held a conference with the Governor regarding this matter.
He recommended to Towner that the Commission to study this problem should not be composed of Legislators only.
He reports that he has had a conference with the Governor on this matter. For many years the Legislature has been amending the system of municipal government at almost every session, and no plan has ever been devised that is both practical and efficient. I - "Under the present law, the Mayors of first class municipalities cannot incur in an expenditure of more than six hundred dollars without the approval of an ordinance by the Municipal Assembly. That is to say, that in a case of I (Continued on 5, Col.)
IN A LETTER ADDRESSED TWO YEARS AGO TO BARCELO, HE SUSTAINED THE SAME CRITERION.
On that occasion the Legislature did not follow the advice of the Treasurer.
In spite of the absolute reserve that Don Juan G. Gallardo has maintained, in relation to the recommendations he has made to Governor Towner regarding the budget to be approved by the Legislature in the extraordinary session, to govern during the next fiscal year, we can inform our readers today that the Treasurer of Puerto Bico has made indications to the chief executive that the budget should not exceed $9,000,000. Even though this criterion has been maintained on several occasions by the Head of the Department of the Treasury, in the interview we held with him and which we published yesterday, he refused to inform us of the recommendations he made to Governor Towner in this regard.
Governor Towner in this regard. As far as we have learned, two years ago Mr. Gallardo addressed a communication to the President of the Senate, Mr. Barcelo, in which he stated that the current budget should never exceed $9,000,000,000, and that in this way the Treasury could have a "surplus" to amortize the floating debt in a conside1 rable manner. Nevertheless, a budget of over ten million was approved. Again now makes now the Chief 1 <the Treasury Department is- - these recommendations in an - official way to Governor Towner. Sos- , has that the budget should not exceed nine million dollars.
Senator Soto maintains that the 'Puerto Rican Republican Party' has a legal existence. M
He alleges that if it does not have it, neither can any other political group have it. M Senator Juan Bautista Soto, questioned yesterday by one of our editors regarding his opinion on the statements of Mr. Martínez Nadal, who maintains that the "Puerto Rican Republican Party" does not exist either de jure or de facto, expressed himself in the following terms: - "I am not in agreement with Mr. Martínez Nadal's opinion. It is true that the "Partido Republicano Puertorriqueño" does not currently occupy second place and that in order to present its candidacy in accordance with the current Law, it would have to meet certain special requirements. But that does not mean that such party has no legal existence. I believe that the legal existence of the "Partido Republicano Portorriqueño Portorriqueño" is as real as that of any other party, and that if it does not have it, neither does any other party. -I base myself on the fact that the Law does not create parties and that, therefore, it is not possible to speak of their legal existence. -Political parties are groupings or collectivities, whose existence, unlike corporations, does not depend on a law that determines the form of their organization, and that, by a legal fiction, recognizes them the distinctive characteristics of a person. What the law does is merely to take into account the number of votes cast in an election for the purpose of nominating candidates, two procedures being established: one, by the party which has attained a certain number of votes, the other, by those who have not cast the required number of votes at the polls during the last election. -If one examines the Law, one sees, therefore, that its very terms recognize the existence of parties that must present their candidacy by petition. -The fact that the Law provides that such parties, in order to present candidates, must do so by petition, implies the recognition of their existence. If Mr. Martinez Nadal were correct, it would have to be admitted that the "Par-
L V 1 KUJS A D H7 < R A f/Cj-g I D WÉ? A :> lf® B Hit® L x ü |11H M N A jl //A" r - - Vi t' d. dctiíaUruc M
MILLED SALT (From Curacao and Bonaire) NO SHIPPING Sacks 130 lbs., bales 150 backpacks Telephone 1982. Tetuáfi 14, San Juan t A. PELEGRINA & CO.
"ODE WOULD YOU FORCE ME TO KEEP QUIET IF I DID NOT AGREE WITH SOME PROVISIONS OF THE D' CORDOVA DAVILA PROJECT?"
M He asks this question Bar celó, answering an allusion by Iglesias. M "I have always had the honor of fighting against anything that is in conflict with my way of feeling"/ he says. M Don Antonio R. Barceló made the following statements yesterday, replying to Senator Iglesias: "I do not understand how Mr. Iglesias can say that I am not in agreement with many of the clauses of the Cordova Dávila bill, since in the Legislature we discussed at length, and we gave our approval to the different problems raised in the bill of our Resident Commissioner in Washington. Moreover, I, as a legislator, introduced several amendments to said bill, before submitting it to the consideration of Córdova Dávila, who has now presented it to the American Congress. 1 "As for Mr. Tous Soto having imposed his reactionary measures, and that he has convinced Córdova that he must sustain and defend them in Congress, that is pure fantasy on the part of Mr. Iglesias, and nothing more.... Where are those reactionary measures in the project presented by our Resident Commissioner? What measures has Tous Soto imposed? If this bill were to be approved, would it not be a triumph for us, considering that we will have eliminated all those powers granted to the Auditor by the Kiess amendment? Precisely, with this bill, we will destroy the reactionary measures. That is all I can answer in relation to the statements of the healer Iglesias. "What would oblige me to remain silent, to express my personal opinion, if I did not agree with some of the provisions of the Cordova bill? I have always had as a rule, to fight against that which is in conflict with my way of feeling. To protest courageously and resolutely." ... The "Socialist Party" never existed before 1924, because it always occupied the third place, having the need to present its candidacy by petition. -Whether or not, as a matter of fact, the "Partido Republicano Portorriqueño" exists, is also in my opinion something very simple. I believe that it does, that it exists, although I am of the opinion, that by virtue of the Alliance all its powers have been suspended, having to fill its functions through the new body created by it and by the "Union of Puerto Rico," in accordance with the bases and regulations 3of the Alliance."
FREE WATER FOR THOSE Bring $u" cans and. take all the water you need for your domestic services. CASINO GARAGE
THE INCOME OF THE UNIVERSITY WILL NOT BE ALTERED AT THE SPECIAL SESSION.
There will, however, be some changes related to organization and management. , . M The special committee, appointed by the legislative caucus to draft those bills to be submitted to the Legislature for consideration at the extraordinary session, will not report on the scope of the measures it will propose to the co-legislature. It is only limited to explaining in general terms the fundamental purpose pursued by the various bills. THE UNIVERSITY LAW: Some amendments will be introduced to the present University Law, but, as far as we are informed, the rate of contribution will not be reduced at all. (Continued on 5, CoL) THE MUNICIPALITY OF GUAYAMA AUCTIONS CERTAIN PUBLIC WORKS Mr. Luis Antonio Carattini presented the lowest proposal. __M '- The Municipality of Guayama auctioned on the 16th of this month certain public works, with the participation of 8 bidders from different parts of the island. The envelopes containing the proposals were examined and it was announced that the auction had the following result: Don Luis Antonio Carattini, of Guayama $6,153.20 Don Ramón Lebrón, of Yabucoa $6,450.00 Don Rogelio Capestany, of Guayama $6,400.00 Don Gonzalo Aponte, of San Juan $6,400.00 Mr. G. Brenes, of Guayama $6,653.00 Mr. Carattini made the lowest bid.
General Assembly of Merchants AT THE CARNEGIE LIBRARY Sunday, June 20, beginning at 9 A. M. 7 All wholesale and retail merchants of Puerto Rico are invited to the continuation of the General Assembly of Merchants to be held next Sunday, June 20, beginning at 9 A. M. R. M. Pie t ran ton i Teodoro Vidal José Andreu. ' - ■ ...... 1