THE WORLD
1 1 PAGES 3 CTVS. I si" Office: "Puerto Rico Dus j j Bldg. -Tel. 1222. -
1 1 PAGE 3 CTVS. - Semester 5-00 [ One Year - *9.50 1 ...... i 1 ... ' -
' X \ i i 1 S' y DIARIOIDE LA'MAÑANA
A¡w V||| | SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Published and dlatributed rind- permit fXa. 801) aattwP* *h< Ae" of October - 1S1T o* at Uso Pee* Ofloa a" ' - SATURDAY, MARCH 27, 1926 | NUMBER 3020.
MARTINEZ NADAL HOPES TREASURY CRISIS WILL SOON BE AVERTED.
HE MAINTAINS THAT THE AMERICAN PEOPLE ARE VERY DEMOCRATIC AND WILL LISTEN TO THE FEELINGS OF THE COUNTRY, WHICH IS CLEARLY ANTI-PROHIBITIONIST AT THIS TIME.
With the Volstead Act amended or repealed, our coffers will receive considerable revenue which we have lost.
The Ledo. Martinez Nadal, the important leader of the Turo Republican Party, with whom we had the opportunity yesterday to converse at length, believes that the present crisis of the Island Treasury, in spite of the imminent danger it is in because of the last law of internal revenue passed by Congress, will be averted," stating that the prohibitionist law will undergo a great deal of re-formation to adapt it to the environment. The formidable tribune and distinguished politician maintains that the American government is democratic in spirit, that it always heeds the voice of the people, and respects public opinion, and hopes that, in accordance with the sentiment of the American nation, which is almost unanimously against the present prohibitionist law, it will be repealed, or at least the Volstead Act will be amended, permitting light wines and beers. -We are told by Ledo. Martines Nadal tells us of the procedure to be followed by Congress if it wishes to adopt either of these measures, and states emphatically, that this question will probably be the ''issue'' for the next election, and he concludes that nearly all legislators will choose to decide against prohibition, as at present in force, to allow amendments which correspond to the sentiments of the people. And if any amendment is agreed to, permitting wines and beer, it will be tantamount to permitting the sale of other beverages containing a percentage of alcohol. Puerto Rico may, therefore, by the internal revenue law, impose a tax on the sale of alcoholic beverages.
The government will be able to impose, through the internal revenue law, a special tax on these beverages, and a large amount of money will flow into the government coffers". Martinez Nadal believes that there is a great probability that Congress will legislate in this sense before the end of the current session. And all this he told us, when we asked him to give us his opinion on the internal revenue law approved by Congress, which will bring us close to half a million dollars. -Do you believe that the Legislative Committee should bring this matter before Congress," we asked him. To which he replies: "I see no need for it. The American people are an anti-prohibitionist. Congress will heed public opinion. Our crisis will soon be solved if action is taken on this problem. The Town Meeting accepted the documents of the collaterals selected by the Treasurer. M-- In the last session of the Municipal Assembly, letters were presented by the Auditor of Puerto Rico and the Municipal Treasurer of the city, regarding the collaterals offered by the different Banks of this capital and of Ponce, to guarantee the deposit made in them of the proceeds from the sale of the bonds of the $2,500,000.00 loan. Mr. Pedro Juan Barbosa hl-
USED TRUCKS in good condition "FEDERAL'' "CLYDESDALE", "WHITE", "GARFORD" "RI.* KER", "REPUBLIC'-, "STERLING" and others are offered for sale at low prices and with payment facilities. New "MACK" trucks for immediate delivery, flatbed or dump trucks. Complete assortment of legitimate "MACK" parts. SUCS. DE L." VILLAMIL & CO. - San Juan, P. R. Exclusive agents of "MACK" in Puerto Rico.
THE EXQUISITA I |K BEER IS NOW ARRIVING wlih $ 2 ' 50 a ca j a B&n. f , p ? 1 i Colmados ; ¿BSaSEgjií lili Cafetines oentes de Soda etc. KORBER & CO. INC. S 2L. SAN JUAN, P. R.
EDI//1R00 RUPERTO HOLDS Q. ENEA CORRECCIONAL APPLIES THE CA UTERIO
Barcelo's sales bill plan will be rejected by the Economic Conference.
MEMBERS OF THIS BODY MAINTAIN THAT THE BILL OF PRES. THEY ALLEGATE THAT IT REVIVES THE OLD PATENT SYSTEM AND WILL MULTIPUCKET THE M CONTRIBUTION They favor, however, the reduction of the two percent rate.
Even though the Economic Conference did not officially consider the new sales bill which Mr. Barcelo has drafted, reducing the rate to the uniform one per cent, nevertheless, upon learning the details of the new plan, all were opposed to it, and the view prevails that when it is submitted to the commissioners for consideration, the plan rejected. The Economic Conference has resolved not to disclose its agreements from now on. However, after consulting the opinion of the most significant gentlemen that compose it, we have verified that very few are in agreement with Barceló's plan, because they assure us that it is nothing more than the following motion: "The Assembly accepts the documents that as collateral have been selected by the Municipal Treasurer, to answer for the deposits that are made from the remainder of the $2,500,000.00 loan, in the American Colonial, National City, Territorial and Agricultural, Commercial, Masonic, Popular and Ponce Credit and Savings Banks, as collateral, to answer for the deposits made from the remainder of the $2,500,000.00 loan, in the American Colonial, National City, Territorial and Agricultural, Commercial, Masonic, Popular and Ponce Credit and Savings Banks. Popular and Ponce Credit and Savings of Ponce, further ordering the Treasurer to transfer, as soon as possible, the funds on deposit in the Metal & Mecha-, nlc Bank of New York, to the Banks of Puerto Rico, selected by the Assembly, according to Ordinance
The members of the Economic Conference allege that the same system of patents, by means of which not only the wholesale merchant, but also the retailer, the commission merchant and the consumer will pay, thus multiplying the contribution. The members of the Economic Conference claim that this plan will provoke even more protests than the present sales law, when it is made known in detail to the public. This is what we have found out, in addition to what we have already stated: that the Conference, although it did not consider it officially at the last session, because its author, Mr. Barceló, was absent, nevertheless showed that it did not agree with it, as drafted. The commissioners favor a lowering of the present rate of two per cent, but not in the manner provided for in the new draft of the President of the Senate. No. 158. Duly seconded by Mr. William, said motion was put to vote by roll call, with the following result: Affirmative votes: Messrs. Marcos Ferrer Calderón, Rafael Landrón, Francisco Angleró, William D. López, Gonzalo Diago, Ramón Cabrera, Pedro J. Barbosa, M. Martínez Roselló, and the President, Dr. Jorge del Toro Cuevas. Negative votes, Mr. Jorge Bird Jr. The Chairman informed that Mr. Barbosa's motion was approved by a majority.
THE FRES. OF THE INSULAR CHAMBER OF COMMERCE SUPPORTS THE IDEA OF TAXING IMPORTED GOODS M HE bill is splendid,' says Don Miguel Morales. M- "I understand, however, that it would require a reform of the Organic Charter". M-"Den Miguel, in our yesterday's edition we published the opinion that Mr. Sanchez Morales has regarding the idea of taxing the articles at the moment of disembarkation. Said gentleman manifests himself in favor of this measure and gives the reason to sustain his attitude that this would be convenient because among other things it would avoid lawsuits regarding the constitutionality of certain internal revenue laws. What is your opinion in this case?" After this" introduction on our part, Don Miguel Morales, President of the Insular Chamber of Commerce answers us in this way:- "The idea is splendid," he says.
"The idea is splendid. I agree. with Mr. Sanchez Morales that it would be highly advantageous. Now
THE ASSOCIATION OF FARMERS WITH DENOUNCES THE CURRENT METHOD OF APPRAISAL M They address the agricultural element of the country to be on notice. M They state that numerous cases could be cited in which injustices are being committed. M At the office of the "Farmers' Association of Puerto Rico", we have been furnished with the following statement: - TO FARM OWNERS: The plan of the Economic Conference for the appraisal of agricultural estates provides, as per (Continued on p. 6, 3* coL.) I understand that in order to implement it, a reform of our Organic Charter is necessary, which is always a difficult and late process, that is why the reforms that I proposed in the last interview I had with EL MUNDO seem more convenient. As for the idea, I reaffirm the statements of Don Luis and I think it is totally advantageous". -MWf "MWf
"Prohibitionist Contest. Second Scrutiny
At three o'clock in the afternoon yesterday, we held the second scrutiny of the "Prohibitionist Contest". The entire island is preparing to cast its vote. At that time we had received an average of 130 letters from different towns. The result was as follows:- I favor the Volstead Act, as it is now in force. .... .... .................................... 3 I favor the repeal of the Volstead Act .... 213 I favor amending the Volstead Act by allowing the sale of light wines and beer 63 SEND YOUR VOTE TODAY.
News...! BROUGHT TO YOU EXPRESSLY FOR HOLY WEEK
75" Cangás...!!!! Fine purses of precious colored leathers, with attractive patterns and ornaments. All are worth much more - double the price at which we offer them. Don't miss them, they are a real bargain.-75c and up.
I : - - Just arrived for the last steam Beautiful Hats For Ladies and Girls. New and Elegant Street Dresses, including special sizes for thick ladies. Mantillas. Spanish Shawls and Fans, Fine and beautiful stockings, new colors. Silks and Fine Fabrics, Suits for Children, New and nice Shoes for Boys and Girls, *. Fine Socks, Stockings 3¡4, nice colors, cheap.
75" Fine Stockings Black stockings with beautiful openwork patterns all over the leg. Current price is $1.25. These and other plain and openwork colored, glove stitch, we offer them for these days at 75 and 98c. ' ' ' 1
Mnzalez Pádini (íompany INCORPORATED VfJ - -5ar\
FOR RENT Two apartments for families in Recinto Oeste 3 and 6; and two rooms in Sol No. 74. One in San Agustin 125, Parada 7. Another one in Presidio 28, Marina, Reports in the same ... j - -
VICE CONSULES OF SPAIN M The Governor has received a cable from the Bureau of Insular Affairs at Washington informing him
that the Department of State has recognized Messrs. Miguel Marroy, Francisco Gavilan and Jose Lujan as acting Vice Consul of Spain in Aguadilla, Ponce and Vieques, respectively.
Condado Parada 50.1 A house for rent at the streetcar crossing, with all the "comfort". -Information: TeL 1337, Santurce.
ONLY FOUR MONTHS AGO HE WAS RELEASED FROM THAT REFORM SCHOOL.
M FRANCISCO CUEVAS, EX-EMPLOYEE OF THE SCHOOL, RATIFIES THE INFORMATION OUR LACK OF TACT was going to provoke the uprising of the colored race. M Several inmates, despite being guarded, got so drunk that they had to be carried. M EL MUNDO receives congratulations from all parts of the Island.
In this campaign that we are following, shielded by our honesty and seriousness, we are not guided by personal purposes of any kind. If that were our purpose, this campaign would have lost all its value before our own conscience. We are fighting a system, a state of affairs that cannot last and that needs to be remedied at all costs. And before we continue, we want this to be categorically and emphatically stated. Rafael Rijos Gonzalez, until recently ayo primero and military instructor at the Correctional School, who yesterday made sensational revelations in our columns, has told us about a very interesting case that occurred there. And he told us:-"On the sixth of January of this year, the assistant professor of agriculture Enrique Grana, one of the Director's favorites,' took 18 or 20 asylum seekers out to work in the fields. Three of them -Justo Lorenzo Hernández, I'idel Estrada and Daniel Rosario- found a still full of rum on a nearby farm. They ran away and got drunk as drunkards. When they were brought back to school on
When they were carried back to school they looked like corpses, they had drunk so much and were so drunk. There is a regulation there by which "every employee in charge of surveillance is subject to being charged when a case of this nature occurs. And yet nothing was done, except that the boys went to pay for the negligence of others in the dungeon. s "On the other hand, the doorman was charged for a botí< báladí in which nothing could be proved, for the sole reason that he was not among the favorites." A COLORED RACE UPRISING WAS TO ARISE "Being a military instructor myself I was instructed to take the command of the companies away from the colored j inmates, because it could not be the case that Negroes would command whites. "The colored boys in this case were the strongest and the best trained, so that no matter how much skill I used I always Cont Pg. 11 -4a. Col.
■ OLIMPO Theatre THE PATH OF THE PAST (The Road to Yesterday) The grand spectacle of magician Cecil B. de Mille Saturday, March 27; Sunday, March 28; Monday, March 29. A single run at 8:15 FULL EVERY NIGHT.
SANTURCE ESTA DE PLACEMES M The "Condado Pharmacy", stop 44, is again at the service of the public. The Ledo. Benito Carril, is the one who fills prescriptions at all hours of the day and night. The families of Santurce see their greatest guarantee in the long professional experience of Ledo. Carril (Advertisement). 1 OPPORTUNITY HATO REY MODERNO STOP 37% Wooden houses for sale with material galleries, From $2,200 to $2,500. Will report there: JUAN SANTOS CABRERA
We offer Zinc corrugated. assortment Zinc Cuban Tiles Azadas Chispa No. 2 & 3 Dutch Potatoes Provisions in general Freiré Hermanos & Co. Box 242, San Juan, P. R.
GRAY HAIR AGES
BUT SHOULD NOT BE DYED. DO NOT DYE WITH CHEMICAL DYES, WHICH ARE HARMFUL. USE XófiezCciro Eau de Cologne, which restores the hair to its exact natural color, black or brown. APL,C * "I r* in * in * n *' ,jna oclon cua^u,er# NO ma "CHA laroM. ¡a" hands, W <1 "> J leather cabeE I udo F'absolute- _ < s I mind harmless. í, T7"; I -'* guarantees. I I I EXTIRPA kca"- ■ 'MM' I P ' cn ciaco.