ELMONDO
M' PAGS.3CTÍ7 VflctaB: "Puerto Bico * Honored" Bldg. ( j'k 1828. - Box 3*5.
. ■ ■ ' i ea" HPAGS.3 CTS. A ASo- SAO SomMtrs 16.00.
MORNING
MORNING',
year viii
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
PabUsbod and dlstnbtkad under permit (Mo. #ui> eatnoru*" un a" w oomoot " iai7 " Su Juan, Porto Bico, By order oí Ule Freeident, A 3. BoUeaon. Poeunaater General' Entére february "1. 181", at the PoM OfDco "t San Juan. Parto Bico, (UnftM State, of t "
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1926.
NUMBER 6,010.
HANLON WANTS LEGISLATURE TO APPROPRIATE FUNDS TO ENFORCE DRY LAW.
M-QUICK TRAFFIC ASSOCIATIONS MEET M-THE WHITE STAR LINE'S REQUEST FOR A MONOPOLY WILL BE CONSIDERED M The guaguers are emphatically opposed to the issuance of a new franchise. M The Fast Traffic associations will meet urgently, by virtue of a summons issued yesterday by their president, Mr. Arturo B. Echevarría. The matters to be discussed at this extraordinary session, are, as specified in the notice: 1: -The request for termination of franchise by the electric trolley company; 2: -The petition for absolute monopoly by the White Star Line. The matter is of most interesting character. The withdrawal of the Trolley Company is followed by an application of the "White Star Line,'' requesting that it be empowered to take over the bus service, indemnifying the holders of certificates of necessity and convenience. The president of the "Asociación del Tráfico Rápido'' and of the "Asociación de Dueños de Guaguas", "La Defensa Inc.", has stated to us that the request of the "Whi te Star-" constitutes a grave danger for the guagüeros. The White Star," he says, "should never have made such a request. The Guaguas Association, with the unanimous consent of all its associates, has always requested the annulment of the (Continued on 11, 5th Col.) THE PEOPLE OF PUERTO RICO, DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR Bureau of Motor Vehicles M To all Aspiring Chauffeurs, Drivers and Drivers of Heavy Motor Vehicles. You are hereby informed that as from the 22nd of the present month, written examinations will be held only on MONDAY, WEDNESDAY, and FRIDAY, and oral examinations on SATURDAY mornings. On TUESDAYS and THURSDAYS, motor vehicles destined for public service and subject to franchise will be examined. Guillermo ESTEVES Commissioner. February 19, 1926.
"ROSITA" The Colossal Spanish Creation Y Unes Matinée 3:30 -Evening 8:30. In compliance with the provisions of the Article of the Articles of Incorporation, I hereby, on behalf of the Central Board of Directors, call the Ordinary General Meeting to be held at our registered office, in the city of San Juan de Puerto Rico, at nine o'clock in the morning of February 28, 1926. Only the Delegates of the Local Sections may attend said Meeting, provided they meet the £ conditions required by Art. 24 of our Regulations. Among the items to be discussed is an addition to Article 15 of the* By-Laws of the Corporation. San Juan de Puerto Rico, January 13, 1926. k PEDRO BOLIVAR, President.
HE SO STATED TO A COMMISSION THAT VISITED HIM ON JANUARY 13, 1926.
He also requests that a special corps be organized within the Police Department. M We recently reported that a conference had taken place between the Prohibition Commissioner, Hanlon, and a commission of the "Society of Laborers and Industrialists, "* but we were unable to give details of the same as we were unaware of them. Colonel Hanlon gave us the following memorandum, in which everything that happened is related verbatim: Conference between Colonel A. J. Hanlon, Prohibition Administrator in Puerto Rico, and a Committee of the Society of Laborers and Industrialists of Puerto Rico - The Committee was composed of: Evangelista Calderon, Carlos Vaidejuli and Emilio Navas. Colonel Hanlon: -I am pleased to inform you that it requires a very arduous task to put the Prohibition law into effect in Puerto Rico. Many claim that Prohibition has been a failure on the Island, but their claims go no further. It is very easy to claim that the law is being violated, and* that Prohibition is a failure. We need everyone's cooperation in order for the law to perform its intended functions. The difficulty with the law is that the rich, the affluent, hide behind the wealthy to carry out their smuggling. The timothy makes the poor man responsible for his liquors, for the care of them, and as he is dependent on the rich man for the support of his family, he promises to keep his liquors carefully. For that reason, when this poor man is arrested for violation of the law and appears in court, swearing to tell the truth, he does nothing but tell lies because he is obliged to defend the interests which provide for the support of his family. I am interested if your opinion is equal to mine in relation to this matter. (Continued on p. 9, 2nd col.) Genital Brewer S Tonic-genital-futero-ovarian DISEASES OF THE j MATRIX AND OVARIES -8-1"" "I'I'T 'rXlT'WW EL FIGARO This reputable Barber Shop Saloon will remain closed after twelve o'clock on Monday, the 22nd, being d* Washington Day, which it shares with its patrons. . . PEDRO TRUJILLO GUIL
AN ADVANCE PARTY OF THE AGRICULTURAL COMMISSION EMBARKS IN MARCH.
THE LABOR NIG. DEL TRABAJO IIHARA A LOS TAIBUHALES A NUMEROSAS CORPORACIONES M Wants to enforce in P. R. the Minors Law M The Chief of the Labor NIG. The Chief of the Bureau has conducted an investigation on the Island M Due to the latest events related to the outbreaks of strikes and the "affair", already known to our readers, of the Puerto Rican emigrants in Colombia, we went yesterday afternoon to the offices of the Bureau of Labor, to be informed of the latest events. We were received by Mr. Honoré, Je fe of said agency and he answered our interrogation as follows: (Continued on 10, 5th Col.) HERNANDEZ LOPEZ ACCUSED SCOVILLE TO THE FULL SENATE M He stated that this gentleman had had hurtful phrases for the Legislature, *4wn-- ■ ' - And requested that his appointment as a member of the Board of Review be rejected. M The well-known continental fruitererer Mr. Scoville was appointed by the Governor to serve on the Board of Revision and Equalization while the Legislature was in recess. Pursuant to the Organic Charter of the Legislature, the Board of Revision and Equalization was composed of Mr. Scoville and Mr. Scoville.
F ST ARA FORMED BY MESSRS. SCOVILLE AND LANDRON M
Will raise the economic problem with the federal authorities. At the last annual meeting held by the "Farmers' Association of Puerto Rico'', they discussed their agricultural problems in relation to the laws that refer to them, and saw the need to send a commission to Washington to raise the economic difficulties our island is going through. The Board of Directors was empowered to determine the date on which said commission should leave for the national capital, and to outline the program that it should follow in the United States. Lately it has been agreed that the farmers should embark as soon as possible since, according to them, it is of indispensable necessity to assure the economic well-being of Puerto Rico, íContinued on page 5. 4ta. col.) THE BOARD INTERVIEWS IN ISABELA'S LITICAL-ADMINISTRATIVE CRISIS --M Senators García Ducós and González Mena called upon to use their good offices. M FU mayor is under heavy attack. M The tense situation between Republicans and Unionist "allies'' of Isabela clearly transcends. The alliance committee has immediately informed the Board of Directors of the situation, and lately a commission presided by the distinguished politician Don Emilio Gonzalez, visited Don Antonio R. Barcelo to inform him of the events. The existing tension is so tremendous that the Mayor of Isabela is being the object of great attacks, and the aliancistas request that this state of affairs be investigated as soon as possible, which they consider highly detrimental to the good progress of the municipal administration of that town. The Board of Directors of the "Alianza" in its last meeting, agreed to estut Continued on page 6a. page 5a colJ ¡GANADEROS!!!! For sale, together or separately, 2 Registered Holstein stallions. Modest price. SCN. M. BLAZQUEZ Finca'"La Granja" Río Piedras. IN AIBONITO For sale due to embarkation of its owner, furnished country house, with eight spacious rooms. It has one acre of land, and a good yard planted with vegetables. Located at kilometer 77.9. Information:- Box No. 6., Aibonito. P. R. SELL Plots of land for residential houses at the intersection of the road from Guaynabo to Bajfamón, 15 minutes from San Juan. Information in the house of the farm - on the edge of the road.
In the early hours of yesterday afternoon, news spread quickly through the city of an accident that occurred near the Las Casas Racetrack, when a truck overturned in which numerous children were traveling to attend the school athletic games that were to be held in that park. Our newsroom did not cease for a moment to receive phone calls from parents, in anguish, requesting information about what had happened. The news spread through the city that one of the children had died. The heiSE RENT 7 an apartment in the "Tobacco Palace", suitable for living quarters or office, will inform ALONSO RIERA & CO.
5 N1N0S SERIOUSLY INJURED IN AN ACCIDENT.
A truck loaded with students overturned, and doctors believe that one of the children will not live for another ten hours - at the Municipal Hospital he is being revived with oxygen and strychnine.
The fact that the worst injured child could not be identified in the first moments caused a real conflict among the families of the students. Numerous mothers showed up at the Municipal Hospital, almost immediately after the wounded were taken there. The health center was in a desolate state when one of our editors arrived. Everywhere groups of people were seen, with distressed countenances, besieging those who came out of the operating ward (Continued on 11, 5a. Col.) MRS. DE LA CASA There is no tonic that in nutritive properties equals the excellent NEW STYLE LAGER. CADIERNO ,
NEXT OPENING Of' new location on Allen St. at the corner of San Justo. We invite the general public to witness the exhibition of our showcases, starting Sunday night. FOOTWEAR - SUITS - SHIRTS - STOCKINGS AND SOCKS. Prices and qualities never seen before. THE IMPERIAL ANTONIO LEMA & CIA. San Juan, P. R.
MOMILK r Powdered Milk equal to mother's milk to nourish children from birth.
"Our treasury is not bankrupt," says Venegas emphatically^ Venegas
The Socialists also accuse the American Go* bernadores M Nevertheless, they sustain the campaign of "THE SUN" M They show themselves ready to accept the declarations of Martínaz Nadal M On the occasion of the recent and sensational manifestations of eñor Martínez Nadal, President the Partido Repub'icano Puro, we visited yesterday morning the offices of the Partido SoC'a ista to question the leaders of the labor movement as to their attitude in regard to the words of Mr. Martínez Nadal. Mr. Torres, Secretary of the Socialist Party told us the following: "These accusations of the newspaper ' The Sun" are directly aimed at the national administration, (Continued in 10, 3rd Col.)
"We should not trust empty promises in exchange for which we have sacrificed everything". QUINTANA CAJAS M "I am glad that the Farmers' Association is disassociating itself from the sugar producers", says M-- Yesterday morning, while talking with our dear friend, Mr. Quintana Cajas, representative to the House of Representatives for the Majority, he told us what we copy below: "I am very pleased with the information given by the newspaper EL MUNDO in today's edition regarding the Farmers' Association. It is clear from it that the Association is slowly but surely separating itself from the Sugar Growers' Association. The former has all the sympathy of the country because it represents the small farmers who are the ones who really need help. "I think it is very commendable the action of EL MUNDO echoing the feelings of the country sincerely and with clarity". "I believe that EL MUNDO is assuming a commendable attitude and the popular element responds to the nobility of this spokesman." "Because what is needed here is to speak clearly. With complete clarity, without nititube euphemisms that are responsible for the difficult state the country is going through." There has always been an attitude of submission that is very harmful to us. Every now and then, thanks to this policy of subjugation, we receive insults and injustices that we do not deserve - that we have not provoked (Continued on page 5. 2nd col.) IA BAYÁM ONfSA Before the next inventory liquidates a portion of its stock at prices that are a gift. TAKE ADVANTAGE Alien 37 Tel. 294 San Juan, P. R.
im-m MENTAL AND NERVOUS DISEASES NEURASTENIA AND VIRIL DEPLETION
SUSTAINS THE FRES. OF THE BANKERS' ASSOCIATION THAT THE ARTICLES IN "THE SUN" ONLY DISCREDIT THE IGNORANT.
He also considers the extraordinary session to be premature at this time.
The President of the "Bankers Association of Puerto Rico", Mr. Luis Venegás, made very interesting statements yesterday, on various current affairs. I do not believe that these articles can discredit us before the sensible people who know us in the North. The banking institutions have a high concept of our credit; in the governmental spheres they know that our situation, although difficult, is not promising; only the ignorant can pay attention to these attacks, because they have never studied our people nor are they aware of (Continued on 6, 4th Col.) THE SHIPMENTS OF FLOUR FOR PUERTO RICO WILL BE MADE THROUGH THE TEXAN PORTS This has been resolved by the "Association of Tahoneros". Mr. Ruiz Soler assures us that they are not trying to harm a certain company. M Yesterday afternoon one of our editors was talking with Mr. Miguel Ruiz Soler, President of the "Tahoneros Association" in relation to a certain rumor circulating in commercial circles about the purpose of said institution to request from the American mills that the shipments of flour for the island be made through the ports of Beaumont, Houston and Galveston in the state of Texas. (Continued on p. 5*., 2* col.) THE CITY DB EVIAN M The city of Bvian wants to dispute with Geneva the seat of the League of Nations-so say the wires-because of *1 Swiss-Soviet conflict. Evian has one advantage: its wonderful table waters, universally used by all the international "elite" who frequent places of distinction; preferred for their digestive, radioactive and diuretic properties. We could cite numerous distinguished people of Puerto Bico who, knowing it, do not prefer others. PROCURELA IN HOTELS, COLMADOS AND PHARMACIES (Announcement).
The Senate leaves on the table the appointments of Acosta Qinteró, Linares and Rod. ígueí Inez Castejóa of Humacao was confirmed in his post The senators of the District agreed at the last minute Since Thursday at four o'clock in the afternoon, the Senate declared itself in permanent session, During the whole night the Appointments Committee was in session. At three o'clock in the morning, it was constituted and all the appointments that were still pending confirmation were submitted for its consideration, except for the following: Vicente Rodriguez, for Municipal Judge of Caguaa; Mr. Linares, for Chief of the Tobacco Agency in New York, Judge Acosta Quintero, and Judge Castejon. Of all the appointments submitted, the only one rejected was that of Mr. Scoville. The Senate was declared in recess until yesterday morning at nine o'clock. Throughout the day yesterday, the Committee on Information was in session. It was forty minutes past five o'clock in the afternoon, and they still had not been able to reach agreement on the four pending appointments. Prolonged debates arose in the "caucus" held by the Senators because of the serious objections raised against all the nominees. At a quarter to one o'clock in the afternoon, the Senate was in session. The appointments "rae just sent by the Governor, (Continued at 10, 3a. Co),} ;., ÉL FIGARO' This accredited Barber Saloon will remain closed after o'e twelve o'e he 'Unes 22, being from Washington, which he participates to his clientea. . ■ PEDRO TRUJILLO GUIL OLUS "EXPRES~ . YAH CAME. See our announcement in today's edition. MENDEZ, MARTINEZ A CO.
ANOTHER SHIPMENT OF THE AFFAMED PORTLAND CEMENT "CABALLITO'' arrived by the steamer "ABSALON" now unloading at our new warehouse between Pier 6 and San Antonio. We will continue to sell at a low price for the duration of the unloading. sues. OF L. VILLAM1L & CO.
IBS "i"""" The King of Spain speaks tomorrow for the Readers of "El Mundo".
Our Sunday readers are in a state of excitement. His Majesty Alfonso XIII had tomorrow from our columns and * makes sensational statements. Our special correspondent in Madrid, Miss Constancia Drexel, had lunch in the company of the monarch, with whom she had a very interesting conversation which she then took to paper, the manuscript being approved by the King himself, who had to review it before it was sent to our offices. And this document, which we do not hesitate to describe as transcendental, appears tomorrow in the columns of EL MUNDO. Our thousands of Sunday readers, we repeat, are in luck.