EL A® ND O
T-fw-ilj L--, ■ - | flPAGS.3 CTS. I Oictaa: "Door Btoe III nustrado" Bldg. 1 tel. M2g. - Box 345.
|1A PAGS.3CTS?|I il üa ***"" ~ ,M I II Semester 55.00
DAILY MORNING
MORNING,
YEAR VIII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
/.brnary 81, 1919, at th. Pon OfSe. M Ben JnL, Porto Su£
SATURDAY, JANUARY 16, 1926
NUMBER 4086.
MUÑOZ MORALES CONTINUES TO MAINTAIN THAT THE DEATH PENALTY IS NOT IN FORCE.
-tí- AFFIRMS THAT A PRECEPT OF THE ORGANIC CHARTER HAS NOT BEEN FULFILLED --. M The important question to be resolved by the Supreme Court. M In our yesterday's edition we published a brief review of the case that was heard before the Supreme Court day before yesterday against Carlos Arroyo for first degree murder. Wishing today to expand on such interesting information, since the Court is going to decide a point of utmost importance, we went to the office of Ledo, the defendant's advocate, so that he could give us all the pertinent information on this matter. i , Don Luis, received us with that exquisite courtesy and affability so characteristic of you, and made the following statements: "This is a case of great importance, not only because it involves the life of a man, but also because it will decide once and for all, when the Supreme Court renders its verdict, whether or not the death penalty is in force in Puerto Rico. The case, to me, is extremely clear. By a defect of the Legislature, by not conforming to an imperative precept of our Organic Charter which expressly orders: "No law shall be reestablished or amended, nor shall its decisions be given greater scope nor shall the powers contained therein be conferred, by reference to its title only, but all that part of it which is reestablished or amended, extended or con- " 'funded, shall be enacted 'anew' and published in its entirety," I believe that the death penalty is not in force in (Continued on P. 6, 6th col.). 6, 6th col.)
HUYKE NORA RECEIVED NOTIFICATION 0 FI - CIAL
A CABLEGRAM IN THAT DIRECTION IS EXPECTED OVER TIME M Details contingent upon senatorial confirmation. M Yesterday morning we had an opportunity to exchange brief words with Don Juan B. Huyke, in his office in the Ministry of Public Instruction, on the important question of his renomination for the office of Commissioner of Education. Don Juan is pleased that the President has been able to appreciate his work in favor of Public Instruction in Puerto Rico. He told us that he has not yet received official notification of his appointment, although a cablegram to that effect is expected from one moment to the next. Mr. Huyke showed us numerous congratulatory messages that he has received by telegraph from all parts of the island. As to certain details they cannot be settled until the appointment is confirmed by the Senate. It is certain that the Governor will also hear from the White House in this matter.
THE SPECIAL INVESTIGATION WHICH AUDITORS CONDUCTED IN THE INCOME TAX DEPARTMENT BY ORDER OF THE GOVERNOR MC COWN. MC COWN-"WE FOUND CONCLUSIVE DETAILS OF SEVERAL IRREGULARITIES," SAYS MC COWN.
The investigation conducted by the Auditor of Puerto Rico in the 'Income-Tax Bureau' has just been reported to the Governor by Auditor Int. Cown with very important results. The Bureau was placed incommunicado to facilitate the work of then Auditor Kessinger. The officers of Audit invaded all the branches of the Income Tax Bureau, dug out of the files all the papers, making different verifications. As a result of all this work, it was concluded, as has just been stated by Me Cown. that the whole procedure carried out was not in accordance with the law. And" We found details conclude of several irregularities", dl' ce Me Cown to the Governor in his report, and so does the Executive in its annual report referred in recent days to the national authorities. .THE .INVESTIGATION WAS CARRIED OUT BY ORDER OF THE GOVERNOR , . "The Department of Audit has charge of the inspection of Mbros and accounts kept by government officials charged with giving Opportunity M - We sell a 3 ton. white truck in magnificent condition. t J. LEON & HNO. * South 53rd Precinct, and SAN JQAN,
The report to which reference is made, says the report, "in order to obtain a perfect accounting, and to prevent frauds. During the past year multiple investigations were made in the municipalities, in the municipal and district courts, in the offices of the internal revenue collectors, etc., and seven special investigations by order of the Governor, We found conclusive details of various irregularities. The special investigations were made in the Bureau of In-come-Tax, division of the Treasury Department.'' LAMENTABLE*ACCIDENT Last night at ten o'clock we received the following telegram from our correspondent in Juncos. Director "EL MUNDO" Ledo. Fulgencio Piñero has suffered an unfortunate accident due to a car crash on the San Lorenzo road leading to Caguas. Piñero has a total nasal bone fracture and serious injury to his left arm. San Lorenzo District Chief of Police is investigating. Augusto DIEPPA, CORRESPONDENT.
DAMIAN RODRIGUEZ SACHS & Co. (Suers of P. Schira) Salvador Brau and San Justo. Walloon wool pants at $5.50. Legitimate Palm Beach suits at $8.00. Cashmere suits from $8.00 to $30.00, latest crossbreeds. 1
INSPECTORS AND PRINCIPALS MEETING IN ASSEMBLY.
-M The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Huyke, gave a speech. M Yesterday the Conference of Inspectors and Principals, convened by the Department of Public Instruction, was held in the halls of the High School of San Juan. The Principals of the schools of Puerto Rico and the Inspectors of San Juan, Caguas, Río Piedras, Carolina, Río Grande, Fajardo, Loiza, Arecibo, Vega Baja, Toa Baja, Corozal, Bayamon, Manatí, Camuy and Isabela attended. The opening speech was given by Commissioner Huyke. The program was interesting and the topics discussed were all of a pedagogical nature. Here is the program which was carried out and which turned out to be a real success: MORNING SESSION 1. -Respect for the Law -Hon. Supervision Problems - Mr. Francisco Vizcarrondo. 3. 3.-Methods of Instruction.-Mr. J. C. Morin. 4.-Improvement of In-Service Teachers.-Miss. Elsie Mac Willsey. Problems of Promotion and Classification of Disciples.-Mr. J. C. Rosario. 6. 6. -Study Habits-Agriculture and School Gardens. -Mr. F. Rodriguez Lopez. 7. -Assessing the Results of Instruction.-Mr. Alfredo Silva. 8. Lesson Outlines and the Use of Texts and Reference Materials.-Mr. H. A. Martin. The Teaching of Spanish. -Mr. G. Selles Solá. 10. -Physical Culture.-Mr. Pedro P. Aran. School Property.-Mr. A. Andino. 12. 12.-Carpentry or Manual Work.-Mr. George C. Ure. 13. -Extensive Studies.-Mr. Pedro Gil. 14.-Classification and Nomination of Teachers.-Mr. Francisco Vizcarrondo. THE SUPREME COURT DENIES A PETITION OF LCDO. DIAZ CINTRON. M requested that the. Judge Acosta Quintero to inhibit himself from acting in the case against him for carrying prohibited weapons. M Our readers know that according to a circular of the Attor ney General, any person who commits a crime of blood with prohibited anna will be held doubly liable, one for the crime itself, and the other for carrying prohibited weapons. To this effect, Ledo'. Diaz' Cintron was acquitted in the first trial, but now he has been denounced for carrying a revolver on the day of the well-known tragedy. The complaint has been filed in the Ponce District Court, and Judge Acosta Quintero has been called to act. And to that effect, Ledo. Diaz Cintron, through his attorneys, filed an injunction in the Supreme Court so that Judge Acosta Quintero would not act in this specific case. The petition, according to official information obtained by us, has been denied by the Supreme Court, so Ledo. Diaz Cihtron will have to be tried in the first instance by Judge Acosta Quintero two. L , " . ¿ ,
The Treasurer of the "Farmers' Association", Mr. Pablo Morales Cabrera, has made the following statements. "The Farmers' Association is not opposed to the Retasación. It only asks that it be carried out in a fair and legal manner. It has achieved what it asked for: that it be suspended until two scientific plans have been submitted. The protest of many of our associates is due to the fact that they do not know the fundamental bases of organization of our society. IN THE NEXT ELECTIONS: What attitude will Ja "Farmers' Association" adopt for the next elections? we asked him. To which he answered: "We will support all men who are on our side, defending our principles. We will defend the candidates of any party, who will go to the Legislature to support our program. That is all. We will not do politics, no, but we will simply work without partisan influences in mind, only for the economic welfare of Puerto Rico. "We have the cooperation of 5,000 farmers to date, and each one of them will have at least ten constituents by his side. We are, therefore, almost entirely the portorriqueflo constituency. At present, we have representation in the Legislature, but not the representation we should have." "We are going through a dreadful crisis; not only because of the low sugar prices, but also because of the general crisis. We are considered to be an extremely rich country, when in fact we are a completely poor people Almost all of our properties are mortgaged. The Governor has been mistaken in assuring us that our situation is magnificent, and alleging that the Americans pay ten times as much tax as we do, without realizing that they are much richer than we are.
L 0 S AGRICULTURAL FARMERS WILL INTERVENE IN THE NEXT ELECTORAL CONTIENDA M THE TREASURER OF THE AGRICULTURAL ASSOCIATION ASSURES IT He affirms that they are not going to Washington to discredit, but to fight for the welfare of the country. M--
others. Whoever owns more prop-'age naturally has to pay more tribute. That is logical. But we cannot deny that we are living by dying." HOW TO REMEDY THE EVIL; P' -■ -7T 1 " " * " " ■" There are so many means we have to adopt to remedy this situation, that it requires much time to enumerate them. However, much can be improved j if "o regularize the Treasury if new markets are opened for our fruits; if agriculture is organized on a coope rative basis which will enable farmers to enjoy their benefic >s without their passing into the hands of the big hoarders, and finally, if our property which is almost all mortgaged is liberalized." THE ECONOMIC CONFERENCE HAS TRIUMPHED: "The Economic Conference has triumphed and is triumphing. That body has no executive powers, which can carry its plans and theories into the country. Its object is merely to outline resolutions by which our economic problems can be solved. The fruits of its efforts are already beginning to be seen. She proposes, but she cannot carry out her plans. Then her triumph is assured. The Economic Conference will be composed of all the living forces of the country, represented by representatives of the legislative branches. It is not to be believed that the representation of a whole people will be disregarded by the representatives of the people themselves. It is unbelievable". THE AGRICULTURAL COMMISSION TO WASHINGTON; "Instead of discrediting the Commission, it will go to accredit it. It will be demonstrated in the North, that in Puerto Rico there are men who take care of the economic and social problems of the island. The* agr. cultors are not going to discredit certain personalities. To defend our ideas, we do not have to resort to insults and slander. So much for Mr. Morales Cabrera's statements.
"HE PEOPLE HAVE THE RIGHT TO DEMAND THAT THERE BE NO FRAUD IN THE HIPPODROME RACES".
M THIS IS WHAT GOVERNOR TOWNER SAYS ABOUT THE LATEST COMPLAINTSTHE RACING COMMISSION DESERVES CONGRATULATIONS" AHRMA M
Commenting on the performance of the Island Racetrack Racing Commission during the fiscal year just ended, Governor Towner makes some very important statements. "The results obtained by the Island Riding Commission during the past year are entirely satisfactory," begins our Governor. "The fact that the public is largely interested in the sport, and that it approves of the work of the Commission in securing legality in racing, is proved by the increase in the number attending the races. The public's interest seems to be justified by the lack of other amusements and by the love ¡n-
But he asks and has the right to demand that there be no fraud in the races, and that new measures of "control" be instituted, so that the arbitrary and illegal procedure disappears. This is a difficult task. Experience has shown that it is impossible to enforce regulations that protect the public, except by governmental supervision. The Riding Commission deserves congratulations and the highest commendation for the selfless service it renders to ensure that the rules sanctioned by the Law are complied with, and to obtain for the people, honest races, avoiding fraud", says q! Executive in his report.
WAS LINDSAY A SPECIAL ENVOY OF COOLIDGE?
M SOMEONE OWN THIS VERSION M There is talk of a letter sent* given to Pres. Coolidge in the last days of December. M Many comments are being made about the renomination of Mr. Huyke. Nothing else was being talked about in our official circles. It is the talk of the day. Yesterday we have exchanged impressions with distinguished gentlemen of the city, some of them well-known politicians, others, elements well related to our educational movement. We are going to publish in a non-thesis, the manifestations that we collected yesterday: In a conversation that I held mop with a distinguished gentleman of San Juan, who alleges to be united to Dr. Lindsay by close ties of friendship, we obtained this version that we are going to offer to our readers as we received it. "I am intimately acquainted with Mr. Lindsay. From the first moments I was able to talk to him, I understood that in addition to the mission he had been given, to make a study of our educational system, he had a special assignment from President Coolidge. I read a letter that former Commissioner Lindsay addressed to the President in one of the last days of December. I read a copy of it. It was couched in very commendatory terms. In one of the paragraphs, he suggested to Coolidge, that he would be glad to see him await his arrival in the North before making the appointment of Chief of the Department of Instruction. This he did naturally, drawing on his friendship with President Coolidge. When I learned later that Lindsay had conferred with the President, I assured my friends that Huyke's appointment would not take more than five or six days. And you see how it has turned out."
We welcome these statements, by way of simple information, in order to make known the comments circulating in connection with this matter.
PREPARATIONS CONTINUE FOR POLICE WEEK M A MEETING WAS HELD YESTERDAY AT THE OFFICE OF COLONEL LEWIS M
Police Week will soon take place. The primary purpose being pursued is to raise money for the "Pensions and Retirement" fund. The police need resources to meet their most pressing needs. Many fathers of families have had to retire from the service because of physical inutility, others suffer great misery, with no one to turn to for relief. Colonel Lewis and the Police Commission, in their eagerness to create a fund to be used exclusively for the relief of the members of the organization they direct, have agreed to hold shows for a week, with the cooperation of movie theater owners and other entities, and the proceeds of these benefits will go to the Pension and Relief funds. Yesterday the Police Commission met. It was agreed to summon several local gentlemen to then appoint the various committees that will direct the movement. LA SETA. SERRADLES SENTS ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS: The sympathetic note has already been given by the distinguished lady of Ponce, Mercedita M. Serrallés. She has sent a check to Colonel Lewis for one hundred dollars, for the Pension and Relief Fund. Already the charitable souls are beginning to respond. The people in general will contribute to this charitable work.
THE WEIGHTS AND MEASURES BUREAU POINTS OUT SERIOUS IRREGULARITIES M
THE PUBLIC WAS BEING DEFRAUDED IN NUMEROUS COMMERCIAL HOUSES M The results of an investigation. The Weights and Measures Bureau, in charge of checking and inspecting the weights used by commercial establishments in their daily sales, has just reported serious irregularities noted. The public was being cheated in numerous commercial establishments, even though it remains to be proven whether it was expressly done. The results of the investigation held are very interesting. The eight inspectors used by the Bureau visited the establishments of the island, with the purpose of checking the weighing apparatus in use. The investigation was carried out in all the municipalities of the island. A total of 262,121 weighing devices were checked. Of these it was found that 20 percent were out of law. The general error that could be noted in the devices that did not conform to the law consisted in a lack of weight of about 2.93 grams. In many of the cases, this was due to the continuous use that the weights had undergone. WEIGHING CANE In an investigation conducted at the mills, only 81 percent of the cane weighing platforms were found to be correct. (Continued on p. 6, 3rd column)
S A N JUAN'S ELECTORAL LAWSUIT WILL BE HEARD ON TUESDAY
M HE ATTORNEY FOR THE ALLIANCE CANDIDATES HAS BEEN NOTIFIED There is great interest in our political circles in the electoral lawsuit filed some time ago by the former Mayor, Don Rafael Diez de Andino, and other alliance candidates in the last electoral contest, against the current administrators of San Juan, in the fight for the municipal triumph, will be heard on appeal before the Supreme Court, next Tuesday, the 19th of the present month. Our readers know that the case was originally filed in the District Court by Ledo. Luis Muñoz Morales, on behalf of the alliance candidates. There, the appeal was denied, and then the plaintiffs went on appeal to the Supreme Court. As we said before, the case on appeal will be heard on the 19th. In the political circles of this (Continued on p. 6, 3* col..)
THREE JUDGES ARE ASKED TO ACT JOINTLY IN A CASE AGAINST THE TREASURY.
THE MOTION IS FROM ATTORNEY GENERAL BUTTE M The lawsuit directly affects the Revenue Law. Attorney General Butte, on the occasion of an action pending in the District Court of San Juan against the Treasury of Puerto Rico to recover from the Public Treasury certain contributions paid by the plaintiff to the defendant under protest, has filed before the said Court an important motion to the effect that, in view of the importance of the litigation and the possible consequences thereof, the three judges (in bank) should hear this matter. The referenced motion reads as follows: IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF 1 SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO 1 Durtech Bros-, Inc, ' ' ' k Plaintiff. V8. Juan G. Gallardo, Treasurer of' Puerto Rico, ~ . Defendant. Civil JTúm. <83. Action to recover count, clones paid under protest MOTION TO THE HON. COURT: (Continued in te ||áf. R' Ma. cal.) FOR RENT In te avenida Pont y Andino cor ca de te callo do Lm Plores, Sto* 43, two houses. A" $25- The other $40 with 4 bedrooms, dining room, -olein, dance room, and beautiful yard with bushes do gqlueos and ctros trees and garden. Will inform: Pta. de Tierra. Box 63. Phone 480 and 1644 red. Expert barber needed for barbershop LA PUERTA DE SOL Bayamón, P. R.
LAST YEAR THE EXECUTIVE GRANTED THIRTY-NINE INDEMNTS M After investigations, denied two hundred additional petitions. M Twenty requests for clemency are still pending. M The statistical data recently presented by the Board of Prisons, showing the pardons and commutations of sentences carried out by executive order, in district prisons, show very interesting details. Especially since it was recommended to the recently held Crime Congress that the Governor be asked to abolish these pardons. It was said that they encouraged a certain tendency in old offenders to reoffend, and in new offenders to continue to break the law.
COilliken DE. ACER.O WHt , more than 25 building* "MTM.TKBM" ea Puerto Rico. Adaptable for any construction, and espociaUnonte for theaters, cinema*, saraces, factories, warehouse**, workshops, etc. where o* indispensable requirement that there be no intermediate* column*.-Se ert(en in one week. Ask for price* and cost details Installed* 'Represent!*. LUIS REPACK-" Te. 1,996 ♦ ♦ ♦ Sanlurce. Box.31? * ♦ San Juan