ELMONDO
1QPAGS.3CTS. I > Otela*: "Puerto Bico | / Illustrated" Bldg g TeL 1222. - Box 345.
in PAGS.3CTS / Cu Afio- 9B0 I Semester -- - - - 15.00
DAILY MORNING
MORNING,
añg viii
Published and distributed under permit (No. *01) authorized by taa Acl o> ucwoor ", 4*17. un tie at uta reel vi*c. * San Juan, Forte Bico, By order of the Preaident, A. 8. Bur lea on, Postmaster General Entered as aecond class matter, February 21, 1919, at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Blco. (United States of under the Act of march 3, 1879.
NUMBER 4079.
SATURDAY, JANUARY 9, 1926
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
THE LEGISLATIVE COMMISSION'S TRIP TO WASHINGTON WILL BE RESOLVED ON MONDAY - SO ASSURES MR. BARCELO.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE DOES NOT WANT TO TALK ABOUT HIGH OR LOW BUDGETS, BUT ABOUT THE BUDGET THE COUNTRY REALLY NEEDS. -He affirms that he has answered the letter from the sugar producers. M-- Immense significance is given to the next meeting to be held on Monday by the Board of Directors of the "Alianza Portorriqueña''. The country awaits the determination of the men who make up said body, since transcendental matters will have to be resolved, however, no one knows for sure what issues will be finally planned. Yesterday we visited the President of the Senate, Ledo. Antonio R. Parceló, eager to learn about the points to be discussed at the meeting. The significance of the meeting. The Unionist leader answered us as follows THE TRIP OF THE LEGISLATIVE COMMITTEE "We will first discuss the Rules of Procedure, and then we will decide on the trip of the Legislative Committee to Washington. This is the main issue that has motivated the meeting of the Board of Directors. Then, we will deal with other matters of a general nature, which will come through the Local Boards''. -Would you, as a Senator," we asked him, "favor a low budget to be submitted by the Economic Conference to the Legislature? "I do not want to talk about low budgets, nor about high budgets, because that is very vague. I am only willing to talk and & discuss that budget which we are under the obligation to make, to meet the public needs, and keep our progress at the height of the civilization that surrounds us, and in accordance, it is clear, with the resources that we can dispose of, going in this sense to the limit of our sacrifices. Our future depends on this. (Continued on 6th page.) "fWlO DE REYES Store your car at the Echevarría Garage in Martín Peña, only $8.00 a month. Phone 1556, Santurce.
CONSTRUCTION OF THE BYPASS RAILROAD PROGRESSES.-DON ANTONIO ROIG OBTAINS A FRANCHISE FOR THIS PURPOSE.
THE PROCLAMATION DANCE WAS A REAL SOCIAL EVENT - ** The outstanding note was given by a large poster proclaiming the suppression of the Charleston. M Our society gathered to pay homage to the new Sovereign. M
As had been previously announced, a magnificent King and Queen's Ball was held last Wednesday night at the Vanderbilt County Hotel. It was the Proclamation Ball of the Queen of the Carnival festivities. Since early in the morning, what is most valuable and significant in our society began to congregate in the magnificent social center chosen for the event.
THE FOOD. In honor of the attendees to the dance, the Permanent Committee of Festivities of the municipality had prepared a magnificent meal. It was attended by a large number of distinguished people. They occupied the table in the center of the hall, the municipal authorities, the directors of the Committee of Dance, and the representatives of the Press At the head, Don Ramón Lloverás Soler, President of the Committee of Dance.
THE PROCLAMATION OF THE QUEEN. After the first "waltz" had finished, the ceremony of proclamation of the Queen took place. The ballroom was crowded with ladies and gentlemen of our best society, who had gathered to pay tribute to the new sovereign. In the middle of the ballroom, was erected a pavilion, in which occupied prominent place, the
M LA CENTRAL FAJARDO ALSO WISHES TO EXTEND HIS LINES The farmers of the East consulted by the Public Service Committee. -* M
The Public Service Commission, at its last session held on Tuesday of the present week, adopted very important resolutions in connection with the construction of the bypass railroad. For that purpose, it granted the well-known financier Don Antonio Roig a franchise for the construction of the railroad section between Naguabo and Humacao, with a branch that will extend to Playa de This new railroad line will be part of the Circunvalación Railroad.
In the case of the request of the "Fajardo Development Co. (Central Fajardo) to extend its public service railroad line to Rio Grand*, it was agreed to ask Ift peticiohfiria if it would be willing to build the section of railroad up to the junction with the line of the "American Railroad Co." in Carolina. It was also agreed to request the "Asociación de Agricultores de Oriente" to present within ten days a pleading stating what damages would be caused to the colonists by the granting of the franchise requested by the Fajardo Development Co. to extend only its lines from Mameyes to Río Grande. Also, what benefits would be received if the Fajardo-Development Co. did not extend its lines to the junction with the American Railroad Co. in Carolina, and what benefits would be obtained by the colonists if the present status were maintained.
Srcs. Lloverás Soler, Todd and Alegría. The Committee read the "Queen's Award", announcing that they had unanimously chosen Miss María M. Negrón Muñoz. The cheers and applause of the assembled society showed the joy with which the designation was received. Miss Negrón Muñoz was carried by the Mayor to the pavilion erected in her honor. She was dressed in a very fine white dress, adorned with pink flowers. Her natural sympathy earned her the respect, as all sovereigns should, from those gathered there. Then followed the dance, which was attended by hundreds of couples formed by beautiful ladies and gallant young people. In the "carnets" began to sign up fast, many names: Esther, Carmín, Gloria, Carlos, Manuel, Margarita, Pepe, etc.... THE OUTSTANDING NOTE OF THE PROGRAM. The outstanding note of the program was given by a huge poster announcing to the dancers the agreement of the Dance Committee presided by Mr. Ramón Lio (Continued on page 3) PROPIA PARA HOTEL Se alquila para ocupar inme di afamen te, tercer piso de la casa S. Brau 75, con opción al segundo piso y mirador dentro de tres meses. RIVERO CHAVES & CO. S. Brau 75 Tel. 1155 San Juan.
BE UPS. THE FIRST TO BARREL - QUEMAZON All the luxurious sideboards and showcases of "EL MUNDO ELEGANTE" are for sale. There are them for clothes, perfumery, umbrellas, ribbons, shirts, stockings. All of them are imported and detachable. For more information: ANTONIO LEMA & CO "LA IMPERIAL" - San Francisco esq. a Cruz.
+ Doña Emilia Biscombe de Gandía HAS DIED Her husband Don Ramón Gandía Córdova, her children Margarita, Hilda and Ramón, her son-in-law, D. José Casellas, her mother Dña. Vda. oe Biscombe, her brothers William and Ada, her brothers-in-law Don Pedro and Don Gervasio Gandía Córdova and Doña Isabelle Emmanuelli de Biscombe, her nephew, nieces, cousins and other relatives upon informing her friends of her death in New York, invite them to the act of carrying her body from Pier No. 1 to San Juan Cemetery on Monday, January 11 at 11 o'clock in the morning and thank them sincerely for the pious act.
"EVERYTHING IS GOING WELL BETWEEN PUROS AND SOCIALISTAS" -THIS IS THE ASSURANCE OF THE LEADER REP. PURO, SENATOR MARTINEZ NADAL
M "THE AGREEMENTS OF THE SUPREME COUNCIL ARE BEING FULFILLED", HE SAYS, "RELATIONS IN THE CAPITAL ARE VERY CORDIAL".
The conflict between pure and socialists in the capital, seems to have a satisfactory final resolution, judging by the statements made yesterday by the distinguished politician, Ledo. Martinez Nadal, President of the Pure Republican Party. As our readers will recall, the divergences that arose took on such an alarming character, that the rupture of relations between the two groups was considered imminent. However, all fears seem to have vanished, and it is expected that very soon all difficulties will be definitively settled. All is well," said the leader of the pure forces. -So far, relations are cordial, and it is to be expected that everything will continue satisfactorily, without any problems.
- It is to be hoped that everything will continue satisfactorily, without new inconveniences appearing to interrupt this cordiality".
"The agreements carried out by the Supreme Council of the Coalition, which was called upon to act, are being fulfilled, and consequently, we will soon enter an era of absolute harmony." We have exchanged impressions with other leaders of the coalition movement in San Juan, and all < lies are satisfied with the attitude adopted by the Comité l ocal Puro. The monthly quota corresponding to the election debt has been accepted, and the recommendations of the Socialists are attended to, in regard to the part that corresponds to said party, in the public posts of the municipality. This is what we have been informed.
THE POWER OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO MAKE CERTAIN JUDICIAL APPOINTMENTS IS DISCUSSED.
M IT IS NECESSARY THAT THESE APPOINTMENTS BE MADE BY THE GOVERNOR Some time ago, the District Court sentenced the defendants Generoso Rodriguez and Gerardo Quiñones, to ten days in jail each, for having found them guilty of the crime of adulteration of milk .
Not satisfied with the sentence, the defendants, through their lawyers, Mr. Dubón and Mr. Vías Ochoteco, have appealed the decision before the Supreme Court, arguing, among other things, that the accusation formulated by the ?iscal against their defendants, is fundamentally defective, because the oath of the same was made before an official who was not legally authorized to perform such functions, since said official had been appointed to that position on an interim basis by the Attorney General, and not by the Governor of Puerto Rico, as required by law. In this case, it is good to remember that at the beginning of the hearing of this case in the District Court, the representatives of the defendants raised this issue, through the following request asking for the dismissal of the complaint:
LITIGATION BETWEEN TROLES AND CAGUAS WILL SOON BE RESOLVED M So we were assured by Attorney General Butte, He explains why no final decision has yet been made. M Questioned yesterday by one of our editors, Dr. Butte, Attorney General of Pto.
rsubject raised before the Public Service Commission by the Compañía o'el Tro'e and the owners of the buses in relation to the monopoly of passenger transportation in San Juan, he gave us the following answer:
"First:-That upon being called to trial on August 26, 1925, before the District Court of San Juan, First District, before entering therein, or making any plea, they requested of said Court the dismissal of this indictment because it did not appear from the face of the same that it had been sworn to and subscribed by the Prosecuting Attorney of said Court before the Clerk of said Court. Second:-That the Court reserved its Resolution, and without acceding to or denying the request of these defendants, granted permission to the Prosecutor to be sworn to said indictment, by Order issued on September 10, 1925.
-The pleadings have already been filed by the parties. But there is as yet no final decision 1 on the matter. As you know, this matter is in the hands of the special Commission composed of Messrs. Figueroa and President Esteves for their particular study, and because Mr. Esteves has been ill for a week, it has been impossible for them to meet to act. However, they will soon inform the Commission, which in turn will resolve this matter as soon as possible. As you can see, then, our readers, the litigation for the monopoly of traffic in San Juan between trolleys and buses will soon be resolved.
Third:-That from the face of the indictment now pending before this Court in the present case, it appears that it was sworn and subscribed on August 12, 1925, before Celestino R. Perez, as Acting Clerk of the District Court, Dtto. 1st. by the Prosecutor of said Court. Fourth:-That the defendants now reiterate their original petition] before the District Court of San Juan, Puerto Rico.
OFFICE FOR LAWYERS A private office for lawyers is rented in the "Tobacco Palace". Information: ALONSO RIERA & CO. Telephone 527.
THE GOVERNOR CABLE GRAFIO YESTERDAY TO GR AL. MC INTYRE
I INFORMED HIM OF THE ASSEMBLY'S HANDLING OF THE PROPOSALS MADE BY THE ASSEMBLY.
I expressed my satisfaction with the actions taken in the sale. M Yesterday morning, Governor Towner sent a very important cable message to General Mc-Intyre. In it he gave him an account of the agreements reached by the San Juan Municipal Assembly with respect to the proposals submitted by the American bankers for the purchase of the bonds corresponding to the two and a half million dollar loan. The Governor briefly commented in his message how advantageous the award agreed upon by the Assembly was. EXPRESSES HIS SATISFACTION After telling General Mc-Intyre to officially accept the proposal presented by the syndicate represented by Harris, Forbes & Co., Governor Towner expresses his satisfaction to the head of the Bureau of Insular Affairs for the actions taken in the sale. Never before has Puerto Rico," says the Governor, "carried out a similar transaction.
MUNICIPAL CONTRACT FOR NEW AQUEDUCT TO BE SIGNED M The "Layne" is preparing the final details of the important transaction. m The municipal authorities have concentrated all their attention on the project for the new aqueduct presented by the "Layne" company of New York. The only obstacle that seemed to hinder the smooth progress of the negotiations was already overcome: the lack of funds with which to carry out the work. Once the municipal loan was approved, it only remained for the assembly to sign the contract for the new aqueduct. There is not a single opposition to this administrative step. It was approved by the Harienda Committee of the Assembly, and also by the full Assembly. It was approved by the Municipal Commissioner of Public Works, and also by the Engineer of the present Aqueduct, Mr. Canals. All are satisfied with the new system. All the doubts that arose in the first moments, have been dissipated by the practical explanations of the engineers of the "Layne" house: they guarantee all the construction to be carried out, to the maximum (Continued on page 3).
Proposals are invited for LEASE of No. 33, Alleh Street. Address to P.O. Box 645, San Juan, P. R.
THE FOUNDING MEMBERS OF THE DIAZ GARCIA CLINIC are pleased to invite the Medical Class, municipal and Island authorities, the Press, and the Public in general, both of San Juan and of the Island, to the act of its inauguration which will take place next Sunday, the 10th of the present, at ten o'clock in the morning. In Santurce, Europa Street, Parada 22. Dr. M. Díaz García Dr. Vicente Font Suárez. Juan Pedrosa Celestino Celestino Triarte Dr. Octavio Jordán Dr. A. Ortiz Romeu Dr. Ramón Suárez. Dr. S- Sierra Malbert.
CIAN'S CASE BEFORE THE HIPPIC COMMISSION-THE CASE BEGAN TO BE HEARD LAST NIGHT.
M THE LCDO. FELIU IN CHARGE OF THE DEFENSE. -THE CASE PROCEEDED WITH ALL THE ENERGY THAT THE PUBLIC HAD LONG DEMANDED M
On the night of January 7, one of the most important trials held by the Racetrack Commission took place, since the transcendence of this case is worthy of being followed step by step by every person who gambles his money at the Racetracks, since the decision of the Commission will serve as a precedent for future alleged immoralities. The Commission was chaired by Mr. Richardson, assisted by Mr. Diaz Collazo, Martinez Davila, Del Valle, Castro, and others that we do not remember. Mr. Richardson, with Messrs.
The jockey E, Colón (alias Cacué) began to speak, and all the statements were taken in stenographic record. In response to questions from Ledo. Martínez Dávila, Colón refused to testify because he was ordered to do so by Ledo. Feliú, lawyer of Mr. Luciano Fuertes, owner of the horse Cían. It was offered to the jockey Colón not to punish him if he declared the truth about what happened in the races of January 3, but he insisted on not testifying. Then the witness for the prosecution, Mr. Antonsanti, who declared to be President of the Jury acting at the "Hipódromo Las Casas", was called. He began his statement saying that he had received a complaint from Mr. Abella in which he assured him that the horse Clan was going to be held at the "Hipódromo Las Casas".
THE MAYOR IS SATISFIED WITH THE ASSEMBLY M THE MUNICIPAL WORKS WILL BEGIN IN BRIEF M The Aqueduct is in the foreground. M Yesterday we went to the office of Mr. Todd, Mayor of the city, to question him on the throbbing question of the municipal loan whose sale was approved by the Municipal Assembly at its last session. Mr. Todd told us that he was, of course, satisfied with the action of the Assembly, since in his letter to that body he recommended the same action.
What are, Mr. Todd, your plans for municipal reform when the loan money is received, we asked him. -These plans are detailed in the Borrowing Ordinance, a copy of which is in the possession of the Secretary. In general terms, they are the repair of roads, sewers, the construction of public buildings, the completion of the aqueduct works, the need for which is so imperatively felt. As soon as the money is available, all these important reforms of the city will begin. The first thing to be started is the work on the new aqueduct. It is to be hoped that the Mayor's plans will soon be carried out for the benefit of the city. In addition, hundreds of unemployed workers will now find a place to earn their daily bread. ADVANTAGES OF THE PROPOSITION ACCEPTED. "The proposition accepted by the Assembly-he goes on to tell us the (Continued on p. 3)
the third race. Immediately, Mr. Antonsanti went to the Padock and called Cacué's attention to what he knew. Mr. Antonsanti told Cacué that if he stopped the horse Clan he was going to suspend him for a year, and Cacué told him to watch the race carefully, that he was going to do everything in his power to make Clan win. That after finishing the race, and seeing that Cian had lost with a ' record of 1.05 he called Cacué to explain why the horse had lost, to which Cacué answered that they had not given him medicine that afternoon, because as he had refused to stop the horse, they did not give him medicine so that he would lose. Mr. Antonsanti said that he asked Cacué if he dared to swear to these statements, to which Cacué responded affirmatively. Fellú, that these were declarations of references and therefore the Commission should not accept them. He was defeated, and took exception. Mr. Antonsanti continued declaring that he sent for the pool inspectors and that they told him that there were several tables played, and among them one of more than one thousand two hundred and two thousand.
NEW YEAR, NEW LIFE EL FIGARO barbershop salon will be open every day at half past six in the morning. PEDRO TRUJILLO GUIL
hundreds' combinations, without quo lle(Continued from p. 5)
OOiliiken, STEEL Wrtí " There are my of 26 buildings -'MTT.T.TKBN" in Fort Blco. They are adapted for* any construction, and espe-' cally for theaters, cinemas, garages, fibricaa, warehouses, workshops, etc. where it is an indispensable requirement that there be* no intermediate columns.-They are erected in a* week. Bid* prices and detail* of coata InstBl&doSe Tlepre sentante, LUIS RE?¿AC>b 1*1.996 ♦ ♦ Santurce, Box. 319 m ♦ SanJuarv
SALON "VÍNUS" Tomorrow Saturday will open at Cruz 27 (in front of the Municipal Court) a barbershop where ladies, children and gentlemen will find all the comfort and best service seen in San Juan.
nr l. López de la Rosa Altos de la Porto Rico Drug. SAN JUAN PUERTO RICO
We need Agents in different towns of the l "* la for the confection of women's and children's suits* If you do not have experience in the branch do not apply. MORRIS E. STORYK, Isabel 2a. No. 5, Marina, San Juan.
Informs his clientele that he has just installed an office with complete X-RAY, FLUOROSCOPY equipment. THEN OF