THE WORLD
| Q PAGES 5 C7VS I f Office: "Puerto Rico Ilus1 If trado Bldg." -Tel. 1222
1 O PAGES 3 CI! S I 1 Semester -- - - - 5.U0 1 I I I V One Year $9.50
MORNING DAILY
- YearVIII.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
VIEQUES ROAD CONSTRUCTION TO RESUME IN JULY.
As reported by Assistant Superintendent Ortega. -However, if it can be done sooner, it will be done. In our columns appeared recently a petition from the Chamber of Commerce of Vieques, requesting the completion of a certain road on that island. On this matter we have contacted the Assistant Superintendent of Public Works* of the Department of the Interior, Engineer Ortega, who has told us the following:- "I have read very carefully the Resolution approved by the Chamber of Commerce of Vieques", related to the works of construction and road maintenance service that this Department has in its charge on that island, an important part of Puerto Rico. It is with great sympathy that we see the interest of that Chamber of Commerce, because its road will be continued, since there is no doubt that with its completion a great public need will be remedied and then the neighborhoods of the center of the island will have easy access to the coast and mainly to its main city, "Isabel Segunda "*. "I want, however, to take advantage of the opportunity that you give me through your popular newspaper, to make known to all the inhabitants of Vieques and to the people in general, the fact that the Department of the Interior, especially our Bureau of Works Continued on Page Id " l'.l ' ,■ l,!,yÜaíl!U4pHI!4. ?r? Sl , >■' HÓY - Saturday 30 - HOY . ■"- Be sure to see the beautiful comedy drama The Perfect Flirt i " - with - ■ r 1 COLLENMÓORE \ FRANK MAY SUNDAY 31 Morning and Evening i . . BETTY COMPSON : - in - "■ Eve's Secret.
\Pub!iahed and andar permit No. 801) autonx.d by th. Act. of October 5, 1817, on til. at th. Poet Office at San Juan, Porto Bieo, By order of the President, A. B. Bntdeeon, Postmaeter General. Entered *" second class matter, February 21, 1919, at the Post Office at S "n Juan, Porto Bno, (United States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1ST"
: NOTHING KNOWN AT FORTALEZA S0- : ABOUT TOWNER'S POSSIBLE MARCH TO THE PHILIPPINES
l - M - No news to that effect has been received. M The cablegram addressed to us by our correspondents in the United States, announcing the candidacy of Governor Towner to replace General Wood as Governor of the Philippine Islands, continues to be the subject of discussion in our high political circles. In San Juan, only the cablegram which we gave to the publicity, relating to this matter, has been received. Neither the Executive Secretariat nor the office of the Secretary to the Governor have any reports on this matter, which has provoked so much comment. The Chief Executive has not lately addressed any official communication to Pto. Rico, other than the cablegrams in. forming about his steps in New York in the matter of the strike. CORDOVA* DAVILA FURTHER POSTPONES RETURN TO WASHINGTON M-- He intended to embark on Wednesday, but gave up the idea. M Wants to attend the next meeting of the Board of Directors. Yesterday the Resident Commissioner, Mr. Córdova Dávila, left for Mayagüez, where he will remain for a few days with his relatives in that city. The Commissioner had booked passage to embark for the United States aboard the steamship "Cornelia" next Wednesday, but at the last minute he has desisted from his trip. The reason for this change is his desire to attend the meeting to be held by the Board of Directors of the Alliance on Sunday, November 7th. After this meeting, Mr. Córdova Dávila intends to embark for the North, always encouraged by the purpose of being back in Puerto Rico for the date on which the Alliance Assembly will be held.
I 1 So that Puerto Rican families may have at a very moderate price a house and lot or a lot on which to build a house that will gratify their finest tastes as well as satisfy all their needs. This has been igW the sole object to carry out this great residential parquet. -Get out of the class they call "tenants", be your own landlord. -We have made or we will make you your own cape and you pay in easy installments without interest as rent or we will sell you a magnificent plot of land. Don't buy a house or plot without first seeing what 'FLORAL PARK' has to offer THE IDEAL SITE FOR YOUR RESIDENCE Agents: MUÑ1Z BROS. Phone 1503, Ochoa Building, San Juan. Tel. 25, Hato Rey. Stop 33, Hato Rey
fe ■ . EVEREADYI BATTERIES! EVEREADY BATTERIES" íi The "Eveready" batteries for Radio devices have arrived. Take advantage of the winter season and also the price. We have in stock all types of batteries manufactured by Ja Eyeready. j I H. V. GROSCH CO. [| Telephone 453. San Juan, P. R. S ' í ; \ .... ■ ■
■ VEGA ALTA STRIKE ENDS SATISFACTORILY
M 1 This is due to the efforts of the Mediation Commissioners. 1 -M 1 The sub-committee of the "Commission 1 of Mediation and Conciliation" which was in Vega Alta to intervene in the destemmer's strike, returned yesterday after having spent the whole of the previous day holding conferences with the parties affected by the movement, in order to reach an understanding which would smooth out their differences and normalize the industrial situation. As a result of these confe1 rences, the employers submitted an offer sheet which was delivered by the commissioners to the "Strike Committee" of that locality. The Committee then called a meeting of the strikers, who, after prolonged discussion of the proposal, accepted it in all its parts. Yesterday we received in the offices of the "Mediation Committee" a telegraphic dispatch conceived in the following terms: - l "Strike arranged. By mail sheet with modifications. Rafael Vega Nevares. President - "Gamité Huelga". The work of the commission through its delegates, Messrs. Paz Gránela and Alvarez, has been fruitful, having fulfilled its purpose. ANNOUNCEMENT OF AUCTION -M , .MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN, "PUERTO RICO . M- San Juan, Puerto Rico, October 21, 1926. On the 2nd day of November of the year 1926, at 10 o'clock in the morning, the auction for the acquisition of five thousand (5,000) meters for the Aqueduct of San Juan, Puerto Rico, will be held in the City Hall Building, in the Mayor's Office, in a public act. The proposal form, bidding documents, bidders, bidding specifications and other documents related to the works, are available at the Office of the Director of Municipal Public Works, and copies of the documents may be obtained by means of a receipt that certifies that each interested party has deposited in the Office of the Municipal Treasurer of San Juan the amount of $10.00, which will be reimbursed upon the return of all the documents, complete and in good condition, within twenty days after the auction has been held. The Auction Board may reject any or all bids submitted and reserves the right to award the contract to the bid it deems most advantageous, even if it is not the lowest in price. R. H. TODD, Mayor of San Juan. (Advertisement.) We are in need of Agents proficient in children's underwear and costumes. Only persons who have experience in the trade and can produce the best quality of work should apply. Production should be 25 dozen and up. Permanent and good value for money. Young puncher and stamper with general cutting knowledge. If you have no experience do not apply. P.O. Box No. 1467. San Juan. P. R.
■ "WE DO NOT WANT POLITICS TO INTERVENE IN OUR ASSOCIATION".
"WE FULFILL OUR OBLIGATIONS TO DEMAND RIGHTS" i i M ■ ■■■ ■ ■ This is how the Pres. of the medical entity, Dr. Fernández García, put it. / > m -
.. 1 "The idea of giving permanent character to the service of Jos titular doctors of the country, is not, of course, an official agreement of the entity that I preside." This is what Dr. Fernandez Garcia, President of the "Medical Association of Puerto Rico" told us yesterday. "However, I have consulted the opinion of distinguished colleagues of mine, men of strong intellectual background, and they all applaud the project, because they understand that precisely in this way we will move away from party political influences. "This idea, I will present it to the Committee that will meet shortly to discuss the reorganization of the public welfare system. At the same time, I will present it to the annual meeting of the Association. The incumbents currently serving in the various towns of the island will remain in their positions. When vacancies arise, they will be filled on a competitive basis. We will succeed in stimulating the valuable professionals who today fear and flee from the charitable work carried out in the municipalities. The people and the medical profession will be guaranteed. The doctors will remain in their posts as long as they fulfill their duties. They will only lose their rights to work in the positions they have been holding, by means of charges The tribunal 'haWtíe judge it, estera. composed of three mayors, three doctors, and a particular eaballéro elected by these six members. We do not want; the NO WATER TOMORROW FROM 9. TO 12:00 A. M. --M In communication addressed to us, Mayor Todd informs us that tomorrow, from nine to twelve o'clock in the morning,' there will be no water in this city, on account of certain repairs to be made by the "Porto Rico Railway Light and Power Co.", the company which supplies electric power to move the pumps of the aqueduct. ■ <<" EXCHANGE MARKET M Dollars N. Y. 20c. Franco 3.25 Pesetas / 15.15 Pounds 4.85 NOTICE TO WHOM IT MAY INTEREST I will not pay any bills not made out by me. I am not married nor do I have any other commitments than commercial ones. Luis MOURIÑO. Great Clearance To accommodate the large purchases being made by our buyer in the United States, we are liquidating all our stock at prices never seen before. Don't make your purchases without first visiting our store. LA GLORIA Cruz 12 San Juan, P. R. ' SPECIALTY FOR QUINCALLEROS JUST RECEIVED A great assortment of our own Novelties for gifts and prizes for "Bridge" game. We have also received a superb assortment of foot squares, country work done in Guayacan, boxes of fine writing paper* and cards for Christmas greetings, etc. ' < - Reasonable prices. See our items and prices before you buy. WALDROP PHOTOGRAPHIC COMPANY San Justo No. 9, San Juan, P. R.
■M - policy intervene in our - Association. We fulfill our ¡ obligations, in order to be able to demand the - rights to which we are entitled. > That is our motto: to raise the standard of the profession, based on ■ good services rendered to the - people. To demand rights, when we have fulfilled our - duties; to develop our program in harmony with the authorities of the country, and for the benefit of the - indigent poor. This in regard to public welfare. We wish to * win the confidence of the country, by our upright actions. We want the health of the people to rest in the hands of competent professionals. Therefore, we demand reasonable remuneration. Above our personal welfare, we always see the common welfare of the people. That will be the policy of the "Medical Association of Puerto Rico": to render efficient service, to watch over the welfare of the sick indigent; to fulfill the duties that our profession demands of us and then, to demand the considerations and rights that belong to us". : * PAID YESTERDAY PART OF THE SUGAR TAX L A "CENTRAL BOCA-CHICA" -M It remains, therefore, I suspended the seizure to which it had been subjected. One hundred oxen were seized from the "Central Boca Chica" by the Collector of Internal Revenue of Juana Díaz, for not having paid the amount owed to the Island Treasury for the special sugar tax. However, as we reported yesterday, the directors of the aforementioned plant made a formal promise of payment, which is why the seized cattle was not auctioned. As promised, yesterday the "Central Boca Chica" paid $2,426.16, corresponding to the September and October installments, in accordance with the plan of sixth installments devised by Treasurer Gallardo. The embargo, therefore, has been left in suspense.1 * ' ' ' ' ' THE CHEATING GREAT ASSORTMENT IN CLOTHING MADE Shoes ' Hats Shirts Collars TIES Do not make your purchases without first visiting this house. See the Stained Glass- . EL ENCANTO 36 1 S. Brau. 36 T _ - ■ DR. ANGEL C. CORTES American dentist graduated in 1905, latest procedures in dental surgery. Anatomical artificial dentures. -Office: Weekdays, except Wednesday and Saturday. i-Tanca 8 San Juan. WE NEED I-OPERATORS FOR ELECTRIC SINGER SEWING MACHINE. Byena opportunity to earn money. Apply personally to MORRIS E. STORYK Isabel 2á. No. 5, 6 Infanta Luisa 4 and 6, Marina, San Juan.
Saturday, October 30, 1926.
"PUERTO RICO ASPIRES TO OBTAIN ITS FREEDOM WITH DIGNITY AND DECORUM."
-CORDOVA DAVILA SAID IN STO. DOMINGO "This Republic is the one called to collect our excess population", he declared. ,
During his stay in Santo Domingo, from where he returned the day before yesterday, the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, Mr. Córdova Dávila, was interviewed by the journalist "Jacinto Silvestre". Our colleague "Listín Diario", published in its number corresponding to the 23rd of the current month, the interview of reference, which we insert below: - "El Ledo. Don Félix Córdova Dávila, lawyer of fame in his homeland, is one of the most distinguished and pure political elements of the sister island, Puerto Rico. A close friend and fervent co-religionist of Muñoz Rivera, whose name is a glorious symbol, this great man, thinking of retiring from Washington, had already chosen, selected and indicated him to succeed him in the delicate position of Resident Commissioner in Washington, a position to which he was elected upon the unexpected death of that illustrious procer, Don Luis Muñoz Rivera, and to which he has continued to be reelected ever since. Córdova Dávila, who is currently in our country, belongs to the most vigorous intellectual group of the Unionist Party, today Alianza, in which he stood out since he was a young man because of his intelligence, courage, discretion and patriotism. - In addition to his natural sympathy, Córdova, Dávila, has a fine and kindly manner, the simplicity of a great man. Without the formality of introductions, because we are friends, ' I explain the reason for my visit on behalf of the "Listín Diario" that I represent, and with a frank smile on his lips he puts himself at our disposal. We wish to communicate to our consumers that next Sunday, October 31, our electric service will be interrupted from 6 A. M. to 9 A. M. in the towns of Caguas, San Lorenzo, Gurabo, Juncos, Las Piedras. Humacao, Yabucoa, Naguabo, Ceiba, Fajardo, Luquillo, Río Grande, Loíza, Carolina and Río Piedras. PORTO RICO RAILWAY LIGHT & POWER CO. DAY OF THE DEAD If you want wreaths, crosses or bouquets to decorate the graves on the Day of the Dead, call and place your order right away at TeL 1347 blue, Santurce. The last word in Refreshments 1 "Cherry Mellow" Digestive soft drink, made with Indiana cherry. i CHERRY MELLOW Not a word more! Bottled exclusively by POLO NORTE Tetuán No. 26 s . San Juan, P. R. ---m. FOR RENT the second floor of the house, Alien No. 83: PEREZ BROTHERS Phones 1730, 1720, Sant.
We take in an angle of the high Terrace of the elegant "'Hotel Restaurant Fausto", where he is staying, and there he dictates to me his impressions. I 1 - "It is not easy to express in the brevity of a conference the sensations that the spirit experiences before the contemplation of a town that appears for the first time to our sight. The spectacles are successively unfolded as if parading before our imagination a * '' mate- * Yca. "My impressions are very deep and very sincere. I am not guided by the purpose of flattering the children of this land with my words, in expressing the stirrings of a spirit, in coming in contact with this people. It is customary to utter words of praise when visiting a country. And I do not want to be routine. I wish to tell the Dominican people that from the moment I set foot on its shores I have been receiving very pleasant surprises, that I am attracted by the affable, frank and expansive character of the inhabitants of this country, that I see with pleasure the works that are being started and the progress that is being made, and that, without exaggerating, I have been able to see that, without exaggerating, I have been able to see that the Dominican Republic is a country of great beauty. The city of Panto Domingo offers the traveler the opportunity to know many things that unfortunately are still ignored by the men of our race and by the Saxon people of North America. There are here historical relics worth (Continued on p. 17.) 2 NOY FUNERAL Wreaths WE HAVE > < THE BEST z ASSORTMENT AND < S THE BEST- 5 ? RES RESTS PRICES g * COME TO - CONVINCE -<"- ■ P. Giusti & Co. BAZAR "BABY STORE" Specialties in children's clothing. Beautiful layettes. Selling at lower prices than any others in San Juan. San Jose 31. EMIUA GIRAUD Owner. SEE THE WAREHOUSE for rent, which BRAVO & COI, in the Marina, opposite B. FERNANDEZ & HNOS. are leaving to liquidate their business. There is also an unoccupied apartment in the upper floors. Will inform ARTURO BRAVO Apartado 743, San Juan, or Telephone 1148, Santurce.
Number 2540.
"PORTORICAN POLITICS ENTERS NEW CHANNELS" M
Says Ledo. Bolívar Pagán. M- I do not wish to comment openly on tomorrow's socialist meeting. M Yesterday we greeted Ledo. Bolívar Pagán, whom we questioned about the attitude he intends to assume within the Territorial Executive Committee of the Socialist Party, which meets tomorrow to dicuss political questions of transcendental interest: "For now I do not wish to say anything," -Mr. Pagán told us. "My ideas and my vision on the current political situation, in relation to the invitation of the Alliance, I will take them to my comrades in the Territorial Committee. "Puerto Rican politics is entering new channels. Perhaps we are living the most transcendental moment in all our political history. The moment is decisive for the destiny and happiness of our people. In the face of the serious problems of the present and the future, which are before public opinion, it seems to me that all political leaders must act after a careful study of the situation. "I do not want, I repeat, to discuss the matter for now, before meeting with my fellow members of the Territorial Committee." Lost Key Ring M A reward of cine* dollars will be given to anyone who presents to the Administration of "THE WORLD" a key ring with its chain, containing nine keys. It is supposed to be lost in a bus or trolley. For Rent A 2nd. floor in Tetuán 56 next to the Tobacco Palace. Will report on the first floor. c i A Í31 $ J A i Os&H R A Ü * T™- .mi r, j . 11J á? TítflRwhfoJI , jggOMUNOg B FERNANDS FOR SALE I admit buying propositions, until October 28 for the best barbershop in Ponce, I guarantee it's a good deal. FRANCISCO RODRIGUEZ Sol 4 - Ponce.
FESTA DE JESUS REY MISA DE CAMPARA Fjcsta religiosa en la Academia de San Agustín. Río Piedras. Illustrisimo Monsignor Torres will officiate in the mi*5 Pontifical at nine o'clock in the morning. Next Sunday, October 31, on the grounds of the Academy. The Principal and Faculty of St. Augustine Academy cordlally invite the general public] to honor them with their presence on that day. The children will receive Holy Communion at 8:45. They will have breakfast at the Academy.