ELMONDO
1A PAGS.3 CTS. A Afio- - - - 9.60 g and SeiaMtre - - - -- f 6.00
I nPAGS.3 CTS. I Office: "Puerto Rico ||l Illustrated' ' Bldg. g W Tal 1222. - Box 345.
DAILY MORNING
MORNING,
ARO VIII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
I Publlihod aod under pormlt(No. 801) th * Aet or ocianr n uu ei" "" pm" ari- m 8an Juan, Porto Bleo, By order of the President, A"■ "'"leaon, Portmaster General, Entered as ascend class mattsr, I fsbruary 21. 1010, at the Post Office at 8an Jnnn, Porto *'eo, (United States of America') under the Act of March 8, 1878.
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 1926
NUMBER 5,003.
"I WILL FIGHT EVEN IF I LOSE MY LIFE-TO BE A SLAVE PRE
SENATOR BAUTISTA SOTO FAVORS THE REDUCTION OF THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL COURSE TO 6 HOOPS.
On the contrary, he believes that the higher education course does not admit of any reduction. ' M He argues that if such were to be done our students would be harmed. M It is asserted by well-informed persons that the Economic Conference is considering the plan to reduce the elementary course to six years and the higher course to three as a measure of economy. We have visited Senator Juan Bautista Soto, from whom we requested his opinion on a matter that so directly affects public instruction in Puerto Rico. Here are his statements:- - I am of the opinion that the eight-year course which at present constitutes primary instruction in Puerto Rico may very well be reduced to six years. In the same way, I am of the opinion that it would be a serious mistake to reduce to three the four-year period required in our High Schools. In the last Legislature, I introduced a bill providing, precisely, that the eighth grade course be reduced to six years instead of eight. It was not my purpose to reduce the number of subjects. I was proposing to establish a stable (Continued on p. 9, 6th col.). . : ■ .... A NEW PLAN TO DISCONTEST TRAFFIC IN SAN JUAN It is proposed that the buses change their current route. However, it is argued that they should penetrate the city center. r M We have opened our columns to the public on such an interesting matter as the solution to the traffic problem. The distinguished gentleman, Don A. Nin y Martinez, in dealing with this problem, expresses himself in the following terms: I am a strong supporter of bus service for public traffic within the city, in the first place because they give life to commerce and are indispensable for the public in general, especially for those and employees who depend on the public transportation companies; and in the second place, because, in my opinion, the problem has a convenient solution which I am going to deal with in these lines. I have for some time* been devoting great attention to this matter, beginning with a study of the traffic as it is now established, the inconveniences and disadvantages it offers, and the reasons which from time to time require that the course assigned to the buses be partially or wholly replaced.
As a note of interest to the equestrian element, we publish the following regulations issued by the Equestrian Commission for the holding of claiming races: - 1- Any person with the exception of the owner or his representative, shall have the right to claim any horse for the price at which it has been entered and qje appears in the program. 2.-Claims shall be made in writing, on the forms approved by the Island Riding Commission, which shall be supplied at the racetrack office and shall be deposited in the urn in the Jury's box, before the bugle call authorizing the start of the horses for said race. The form, duly filled out, will be deposited in the box together with the amount of the claim, either in cash or check certificate issued in favor of the person who appears as owner of the horse in the program. 3- If there is more than one claim application for the same horse, the adjudication will be made by the same person.
RENTING an apartment in the "Tobacco PaTace'S" for living or office purposes - ALONSO RIERA & CO.
THE RIDING COM. RACING RULES FOR THE CLAIMS RACES M NO PERSON WHOSE HORSE IS "CLAIMED" MAY REFUSE TO DELIVER IT M Jaquimón and rope will carry the buyers.-The new plan starts on Sunday 21.-Drawing system.
The horse will be drawn by the Secretary of the Jury, in the presence and with the prior authorization of the Jury, and the person who wins the lot will be its owner, even if the animal is alive or dead, healthy or useless, healthy or sick. 4- No horse that has been claimed may be registered in the name of the original owner, within sixty (60) days following the date of the claim, nor run with the same colors, nor remain in the stable of its original owner, nor may be trained by the trainer who trained it before being claimed, nor remain under the administration, direction or care of the person to whom it belonged when it was claimed, unless the horse is obtained again by the original owner as a result of another claiming race; provided that the horse so claimed may not be sold r.i (Continued on 8a. p. 7a col.) CARNAVAL 1926 Navy blue and black suits, shoes and other articles for GentlemenPRICES OF SITUATION The Enchantment 36 - San Francisco - 36
FIERO DIE".
THIS IS HOW A PORTORRICAN EMIGRANT TO COLOMBIA STATES THAT. THE FEDERICAN EMIGRATES ARE SUFFERING HORRIBLE TORTURE - Many have smallpox - The company that took them now demands payment for their passage - Those who flee are arrested. -A colony of spectres - The horrors of hunger. . .. ■ M.. --
> We published in yesterday's edition a letter in which Manuel Rodriguez, a citizen of Aguadilla, addresses the Chief of the Labor Bureau, informing him that several Puerto Ricans are being mistreated in Colombia and that in some cases they have gone so far as to use handcuffs and fetters to subject to obedience those who refuse to obey certain orders. Mr. Rodriguez demands an investigation of our government and offers as evidence a
VI ■ - letter received from Colombia, signed by a Puerto Rican emigrant. The following is the letter: "Cincinnati Coffee Co.", Santa Marta, Colombia, S. A. December 29, 1925. Mr. Aurelio Nieves, Moca, P. R. Dear brother: After greeting you in union (Continued on the 5th. page 7a. col.)
Making of 5,000 Suits 2,000 Suits, Tropical Cashmere, priced from $40-00, $35.00, $30.00 and $25.00. to $15.00 3,000 Suits Palm Beach Genuine, Guaranteed, from $15.00, $14.00 and $12.50. to $9.00 EL ALMACEN de Gonzalez Martinez & CO. Tanca St. II. 'Between Fortaleza and San Francisco. -: VISIT US AND BE CONVINCED :-
POWERFUL AGRICULTURAL BLOC OPENLY OPPOSES LAND RESTRICTION
¿-M Mayagüez, Añasco, San Germán and Hormigueros maintain that if this measure is implemented the country will be ruined.
-The Agricultural Board of Mayagüez, Añasco, San Germán and Hormigueros is the first to oppose the land limitation, answering the extensive interrogation recently submitted by the "Farmers Association". Among other things, the aforementioned Board states that the answer it sent not only expresses the feelings of the farmers of Inayagiiez, but also represents the opinion of the neighboring towns, among them: ' Añasco, San Germán, and Hormigueros, which because they are contiguous form a block. They declare "that the acquisition of land by corporations in that! They declare "that the acquisition of land by corporations in that region has been highly beneficial for the economic development of the region, because it has increased the number of jobs and jobs. That it has not only benefited the large landowners, but has also improved the living conditions of the small farmers, facilitating the way to obtain high prices for their land, moreover, because those who have leased it, the tenants are responsible for paying the taxes. "We understand," they say, "that to limit to the corporations the acquisition of land would be to close to the landowners the only way they have of saving a part of the vplor of the land by not being able to pay, as is the case today, the enormous taxes that the Treasury imposes on them." "As the law limiting the possession of land by corporations has been so wise as to impose no penalty for its violation, no effort has had to be made to violate it." "We think it impossible that a law could be passed which could be evaded by various means. The li- 1 mitigation will greatly affect the 1 credit to the banking corporations, as it would make void the ga- ' rantee of the lands, by making it impossible to 1 foreclose mortgages held in their favor. Such a limitation as this would affect the Federal Farm Loan Bank, which has done so much good for the country." The Agricultural Board of Mayagüez continues to answer the interrogatory, and among other things says "EXPRESS" POULS HAVE ALREADY ARRIVED. -See our announcement in today's edition. I MENDEZ, MARTINEZ & CO. IN AIBONITO For sale due to embarkation of its owner, furnished country house, with eight spacious rooms. It has an acre of land, and a good yard planted with vegetables. Located at kilometer 77.9. Information:- Box No. 6., Aibonito, P. R. FOR SALE Plots of land for residential houses at the junction of the road from Guaynabo to Bayamón, 15 minutes from San Juan. Information in i the house of the farm on the edge of the road.
> the following: "A land limitation would destroy the sugar industry. Part of the country would be completely ruined." I "If the corporations had not acquired land, the sugar industry on the island would have led a languid life. In this district there is no desire in this district to see the existing corporations disappear, nor to limit their activities. If there were none, I would like to see them established. Right now Cabo Rojo is struggling to establish a new plant. "If a law were passed limiting the corporations to 500 acres, the creditors would take the factories for the debts, and their owners would be ruined." I The Resolution comes signed po' , don Mateo Fajardo, President df í the Agricultural Board of Mayagüez. . 11 1 " 1 On motion of Hernandez Lopez the Senate did not work yesterday The resolution was adopted because it was Lincoln Day. In the executive session of the Senate on Wednesday, a favorable report was presented by the Chairman of the Nominating Committee, Mr. Hernandez Lopez, for the confirmation of a large number of appointments made by the Governor to which no objection had been made by the members of the committee or by any senator. i Yesterday morning the session of the Senate was scheduled for ten o'clock, but had to be adjourned to resume at three o'clock in the afternoon and was opened at that time under the chairmanship of the Vice-Chairman, Sanchez Morales, because the President, Mr. Barcelo, was indisposed. At the opening of the session, Mr. Hernández Ló- ■ pez asked for the floor and, having been given the floor, said that it being the day of Lincoln, that is to say, the day of the birth of Lincoln. Lincoln's day, that is to say, the day on which his birth is commemorated, and that while Washington is the first founder of the American Union for having defended its independence on the battlefields and for having organized it later as a nation, Abraham Lincoln, modest son of the people, glorious lumberman, is the second founder of the United States of America, for having maintained the national pact and with it the union, the national unity, which was broken and damaged in the Civil War. Lincoln affirmed the nationality, restored peace and at the same time was the apostle of the American slaves from whom he freed hundreds of slaves.
CORDOVA DAVILA TACKLES LAND GRABBING PROBLEM
TOMORROW NIGHT'S DANCE AT THE KNIGHTS OF COLON M The ball to be held tomorrow night in the aristocratic halls of the sumptuous building of the Order of the Knights of Columbus promises to be a real event, judging by the prevailing excitement. The ball is sponsored by the "Council of San Juan Bautista", and is in honor of the queens of Carnival in San Juan, making it the only one of its kind. The Grand Knight, Don Rafael M. Pietrantoni spares no effort or sacrifice to make the ball of the Order break with all precedent, to make it something truly extraordinary. The royal ballroom has been decorated with great artistic taste, with true magnificence, by distinguished ladies and by the excellent gentleman Don Miguel Such. The greatest of our elegant world will meet tomorrow in the building of the Knights of Columbus. The enthusiasm is growing by the thousands, making them citizens of America. He added, that Lincoln's glory is more than ame(Continued on 2nd. p. 6a. col.)
He asked that the legal limit be extended to two thousand acres. M One year's time to Corporations.- Right of forfeiture. M The Resident Commissioner, Mr. Córdova Dávila, has introduced in the U.S. Congress an important bill, in which he fully addresses the problem of land grabbing in Puerto Rico. According to Mr. Córdova Dávila's bill, Congress is requested to authorize the Insular Legislature to extend from five hundred to two thousand acres the limit of land that a RICARDO A. GOMEZ ATTORNEY - NOTARY Civil and Criminal Matters All Courts. Building: "El Mundo'' 4th. floor. - 1 i.,,,,, ■■ -■■■■-■ ■ ■ .- -J!- ZX HAND SEWING Expert agents are needed for the manufacture of Children's Costumes, for the towns west of Ponce, Arecibo and the Arecibo to Ponce line. Address to Box 373, Mayagüez, P. R.
THE PUBLIC IS CORDIALLY INVITED TO ATTEND A FREE LECTURE ON CHRISTIAN SCIENCE . By MR JOHN RANDALL DÜÑN, C. S. BOF BOSTON, MASS. Member of the Board of Lectureship of The Mother Church, The First Chourch of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Massachusetts IN THE CHRISTIAN SCIENCE CHURCH EDIFICE. José de Diego Ave., Corner Antonsanti. One block from the Carretera, Stpp 22. TUESDAY EVENING, FEBRUARY 16TH, 1926, AT 8:30 This lecture will be broadcasted by Station W. K. A. Q. at San Juan, Porto Rico.
CASA DE ESPAÑA EN PUERTO RICO CONVOCATION In compliance with the provisions of Article 13 of the Articles of Incorporation, I hereby and on behalf of the Central Board of Directors, call the Ordinary General Meeting to be held at our registered office, in the city of San Juan, Puerto Rico, at nine o'clock in the morning of February 28, 1926. Only the Delegates of the Local Sections will be able to attend said Meeting, provided they meet the conditions required by Art. 24 of our Regulations. - Among the items to be discussed is an addition to Article 15 of the By-Laws of the Corporation. San Juan, Puerto Rico, January 13, 1926. PEDRO BOLIVAR, President.
Both senators from Ponce sustain their opposition against Acosta Quintero.
M "WE INFORMED OUR DISTRICT THAT WE WOULD HAVE OUR ATTITUDE IN THE SENATE. . M "Three months before the Diaz Cintron- case, we protested" they end up telling us. M- We were saying yesterday, that we had been informed that the appointment of Judge Acosta Quintero was being openly opposed by Senators Guerrero, Figueroa and Martinez Nadal. Yesterday morning we asked the senators for Ponce if it was true that they were opposed to this appointment, to which Mr. Guerrero replied, in the presence of Mr. José Víctor Figueroa: "Our attitude is one of opposition in this case, as a matter of principle. Now, I must clarify that three months prior to the trial against Díaz Ctntrón, I * opposed the appointment of Ácosta Quintero, whom I believe (Continued on page 6, 6th col.) Producers" would be good enough to recommend, to improve our economic situation. Other agreements were reached in the aforementioned meeting, almost all of them related to the sugar industry. ... . . j corporation and individual. on our island . . . . At the same time, it is established that the excess lands will pay additional taxes. On the other hand, the bill grants the government the right to confiscate all lands owned in violation of the Concurrent Resolution of January 5, 1900. In addition, a term of one year is granted to the persons or entities that are in such conditions, so that they may proceed to sell the excess lands. Córdova Dávila takes advantage of this opportunity and requests authorization to impose taxes on non-residents. . - I As can be seen then the Commissioner's project is very important, and it is indisputable that if it is discussed in Congress it will provoke great struggles within the respective committee. <■ - 1 - P-'- J FOR RENT First Floor, San Justo 15 large, spacious and olarc, .water constantly. Information:- ' SUCESORES DE GAMARRA Cruz 15. -'-■.■E
SUGAR GROWERS FIGHT FOR THE TRIUMPH OF THEIR PROGRAM.
GIORGETTI, BIRD ARIAS, VALDIVIESO, RU1Z SOLER AND ABOY MAKE UP A NEW COMMITTEE They will work closely with the Governor and the Legislature.
As our readers will remember, a committee of the "Asociación de Productores de Azúcar" (Sugar Producers' Association) visited the Governor lately, asking him ten very important questions related to our economic situation. The Executive promised the sugar growers to study carefully the different problems submitted to his consideration, assuring that he would put all his efforts in this matter, in order to act in accordance with the country's convenience. Yesterday the "Association of Sugar Producers" met in extraordinary session. The main purpose of this meeting was to inform the associates about the result of the conference held by the
the result of the conference held by the commissioners with Mr. Towner. Once the commission rendered its report, a new committee was appointed, composed of Giorgetti, Bird Arias, Valdivieso, Ruiz Soler and Aboy Benitez, to continue negotiating with the Legislature and the Governor for the success of the "Asociación de Productores de Azúcar" program. It was further agreed that the relations of the sugar growers with the Governor should be kept in perfect harmony, desiring first of all that the Legislature might consider any measure that the "Sugar Producers' Association" might consider.
| SNOW BALLS at $10 a thousand and 50 Cts. a box. Sacks of aPpelillos 10 lbs. at $2 Small sacks at 25 -- 50 and $1.00 Paper Garlands for decorating Floats 30 ft. long at 60c. Caps of odd and whimsical shapes at 15c. Masks - Masks - Mirrors - Chlorostylus. Streamers and other items of the day. REASONABLE PRICES. GONZALEZ PAPIN Co, Inc.
TO MEDICAL GENTLEMEN: A new assortment of CACODYLINE JAMMES, dosages "A", "B", "C", "D" and "E" (the latter containing 1g. pure cacodylate of soda combined with vital serum), have just been received and are on sale in all first class pharmacies on the island. *
"Clínica Díaz¡ García" Europa Street, corner of Asia Street, Stop 22, Santurce, P. R. DISPENSARY FOR THE POOR. Consultations every day except holidays. From 8 A. M. to 11 A. M. Dr. M. Díaz Garcia Dr. Vélez Lópee Dr. Rolenson Dr. Fernández García Dr. R. M. Suárez Dr. Octavio Jordán Dr. Ortiz Romeu Dr. Costa Mandry Dr. N. Doval Dr. V. Font Suárez Dr. V. Font Suárez.