THE WORLD
<1A PMINñSlCTVS g B ■ Semester - - - - 6-00 I C-* Vr One Year $9.50
Í1APAG/NAS3CTVS ¡ I I I Office: "Puerto Rico Hus¿g trado Bldg." -Tel. 1222
MORNING JOURNAL
Year VIII.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Published and di.febuted under permit No. 801) autorixed by the Aet. of October S. 1917. on file at the Poet Office at 1 San Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President. A. 8. Burdeson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, I February 21. 1919, at the Post Office at San Juan. Porto Bho, (United States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1871 [
Saturday, November 20, 1926.
I Number 2561 < i
"I do not believe that by merging Puerto Rico with the United States it will increase its cultural level."
"MY IMPRESSIONS OF THIS ISLAND ARE NOT EASY TO CONDENSE IN A FEW WORDS": LUIS ARAQUISTAIN M A comment on his incident with Mr. Huyke. Ideas on the fringe of the Spanish literary movement.
At half past four in the afternoon, the time at which Araquistain had arranged to meet us, we set off for the Palace Hotel. We thought, as we walked the short distance between our editorial office and the hotel, that we would have to wait another half hour to see what was announced and the illustrious journalist decided to receive us. Useless worry. Araquistain, standing at the threshold of the door of the "Palace" facing "Tetuan", was amusing himself by observing the picturesque and heterogeneous street life. No doubt, like any man of mental action, he likes to alternate work with observation, which is also the work of analysis. The old secular street is sometimes roared up by the electric streetcar. At other times, it is a "car" speeding by. All these people passing by on foot, and in vehicles of different categories, look at us curiously, sadly. Eyes of a woman, they were tying us in their escape from the windows of the "cars" and through the grill of the streetcar, while they mumble a name. -Araquistain. There is Aracuistain". We enter the interior of the hotel. We are already comfortably seated in springy leather armchairs. In the half-light of the lobby we observe this man and remember his works where he poured all the light of his complex spirit. Seen thus, in this clean environment of li. NOTICE M OVER PAYMENT OF. CONTRIBUTIONS. - FIRST HALF OF THE YEAR 1926-27. M To the owners of Commercial and Industrial establishments, Owners of lots and houses who up to date have not paid their taxes in this Collector's Office, remind them that on November 24, 1926 the 60 days to which the taxpayers have the right to pay their taxes without surcharges end and that on the 26th of this same month the collection will begin with surcharges at the rate of % until the 30th day, and that from the first day of December they will pay 1% surcharges. That according to the Law, the "List of DELAYED TAXPAYERS" will be displayed in public places for 20 days and once these 20 days have expired, that is to say on December 15, the collection of the contributions will begin by means of the APPRISAL procedure, seizing the debtor's real or personal property, a procedure that I wish to avoid for the good of the taxpayers. Lucas GIMENEZ, Collector of Internal Revenue. (Advertisement.) ALLEN 76, TEL. 1054 SAN JUAN e&ÉZHgr We repair office machines.
He has a lot to say about his work and spiritual evocations, he looks like a provincial businessman. He sucks nervously on a cigar that goes out at every instant and lights up at every instant. No one would say that behind this strong Germanic head there is such an intense ideological ebullition. Only the eyes that look imperiously through thick glasses reveal in their premature tiredness the exhausting caress of thousands of learned pages. Here we are, Mr. Araquistain, without rigid questionnaires, without premeditated intentions, exclusively guided by the purpose of chatting with you for a while and knowing your latest impressions of Puerto Rico, -we tell you. My impressions of this island,'' -he replies- "are not easy to condense in a few words. I have written and continue to write a number of articles which I send to "El Sol" of Madrid, in which I speak of the things I have seen and heard during my stay in Puerto Rico. They have already begun to be published and I believe they will soon be read here. In them are my emotions as a visitor, my observations as a writer and my criteria about what is the present# and what will be the future of this country. "It is interesting, very interesting, the evolutionary process that is verified in all aspects of Puerto Rican life. "From the slight analysis that I have been able to carry out, I deduce that you are living at the present time in a moment of indecision and complete disorientation as to the path that you must follow as a people. This disorientation, this multiplicity of criteria, I have been able to observe it in meetings I have attended. Surrounded ' sometimes by five or six people, (Continued on page 12.) c ~ 1 A N 1 ÍMW a i üJJJi R A ' ílr ~ D jOÉ L ÍjPIId ¡nN i! Sil? fggOMUNDO 5 FTRHAHQG I
ICOMPAGNIE GENERALE TRANSATLANTIQUE VAPOR FRANCES CARAIBE We expect this steamer about the 25th of the current from Ice port# of the West Indies and it will be dispatched the same day bound for Le Havre direct. She accepts cargo for the above mentioned port as well as for the various ports in Northern Europe. Take advantage of this opportunity and for further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS, tac. Agents. San Juan, P.R. Tel. 257. Tetuáh. ¡ ' ■ - ' i
IN BRIEF THE ENSANCHE OF "AVENIDA PONCE DE LEON" WILL CONTINUE -m-'■; The works to be carried out in the area of Puerta de tierra. What engineer Ortega does not* say to that effect. With reference & certain widening works which the Department of the Interior intends to carry * out on "Ponce de Leon Avenue", we interviewed Engineer Mr. ¿¿arique Ortega, who gave us the following data: ' : - For some time the Department of the Interior has been negotiating with the national authorities in Washington the acquisition of a parcel of land in Puerta de Tierra, in front of the properties of the "Military Reserve" and the "Weather Bureau", in order to continue with the work of the "Ponce de Leon Avenue", corresponding to 1# San Juan-Rio Piedras Highway. / The Honorable Calvin Coolidge, President of the United States, by means of Proclamation No. 1781, dated August 24, 1926, transferred and conveyed in favor of the People of Puerto Rico a strip, with an approximate area of 576.38 square meters, of the land of the Military Reserve, and another with an approximate area of 529.38 square meters, of the property of the Weather Bureau. > The proclamation specifies that these ceded lands will be used exclusively and finally as part of the widened avenue and the Pue | blo of Puerto Rico commits itself to build an honor wall to protect the federal lands, and a fence with as many entrances and gates as may be necessary for easy transit to the offices established there. The work to be carried out for the widening consists essentially of increasing the limits of the avenue to 10 feet. Two concrete sidewalks, each two and a half meters wide, with its eorrespoddienta speed bump and curb will be óonstruídas, leaving a space for affirming free rolling of 15 meters, which will be asphalted just as the rest that is' in use for some time. "The need for this widening is being felt more and more every day. RIVOLI í LOS SABROSOSOSOS CHURROSOS qpe will be served from 8 to 11 ,poi the morning; from 2 to 5 in the afternoon and from 8 to 11 in the evening. SAN JUSTO 4 AND 6
IODO ALEEN STREET COMMERCE AGAINST THE ALTERATION OF THE ENTRANCE AND EXIT ROADS TO SAN JOAN.
Knowing that a protest had arisen among the commerce of Alien Street against the projected alteration of the routes of entrance and exit to this capital, we visited the well-known merchant, Mr. José Andreu, member of the protest committee that has been formed, who made the following statements: -Truly, that in Puerto Rico, we have the misfortune of not studying the issues in depth, because only studying the sections of the Puerto Rico Automobile Law gives a basis for not proposing the change that the Police want. In its section 12, the automobile law clearly states that vehicles in traffic must stop on the right, and you will understand that if the traffic is diverted on San Francisco Street and the "trolley" goes up that same street, walking on the right, as the road is today, entering the street, one could not stop on the right and would necessarily have to stop on the left, which is contrary to the law. "The only way this change could be made without legal conflict would be to amend the automobile law, in the sense of stopping cars on the left. This would bring the corresponding conflict, not only in traffic, but in the manufacture of automobiles coming to Puerto Rico, which would have to come with the guides on the right. / "Besides, as you know, curves are strong enemies of automobiles and the traffic in front of the Casino would have two curves of more than 45 percent to overcome, when - today we have in the San Juan one nothing more than a deviation of 3 percent. "The protest of the merchants on Alien Street, representing more than FIVE -MIL NES OF DOLLARS- invested, is powerful, and we propose to vi because of the continued increase of traffic, and that is why the Department has taken so much interest in acquiring from the Federal Government the parcels indicated." Work will begin shortly. CHAMBER OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PUERTO RICO M - NOTICE . TO THE INTERESTED: In accordance with a resolution of the House to obtain the portrait of the Honorable César Cumpiano, Representative to the House from District No. 15, recently deceased, the Special Committee appointed hereby announces that it will admit proposals to that effect until November 25, 1926, at 2 P. M., which must be presented through the Secretariat of the House. San Juan, Puerto Rico, November 16, 1926. - (f) Germán RIECKEHOFF, Chairman of the Special Committee. (Announcement.)
Don Pedro Giusti y Ferrandini DIED IN BARCELONA, SPAIN, ON JULY 6, 1926. \ HAVING RECEIVED THE HOLY SACRAMENTS AND THE APOSTOLIC BLESSING f Q. E. P. D. His untimely death. His bereaved widow Mrs. María Giusti y Martorell, children Carman María (absent), Juan Angel, Margarita, Odette, Pierre, (absent) and Gloria María; mother-in-law Mrs. Carmen Martorell widow of Giusti, son-in-law Mr. Lula Vilá. Busquet, (absent), grandson Ignacio María Vilá Giusti (absent), brothers-in-law Mrs. Clementina Giusti y Martorell (absent), Mrs. Elena Giusti de González, Mr. José María González, his nephew Mathieu Alfonsi y Giusti, niece-in-law Belén Filippi de Alfonsi, other nephews, cousins and relatives and the company name P. Giusti and Company, ask their friends for a prayer for his soul, and the attendance to the mass that will be celebrated in the Holy Cathedral Church on Monday 22 at 9 o'clock in the morning, at the end of which the conduction of the corpse to the cemetery of this city will take place, for whose favor they will be eternally grateful to them. ' ' San Juan, Puerto Rico, November 20, 1926.
HAS CAPITAL INVESTMENT OF MORE THAN $5,000,000.000 AND CLAIMS THAT IT WOULD BE GREATLY DEPRESSED M - Submits a manifesto to the appropriate authorities.
sitar to the "Public Service Commission" ' of the Municipal Assembly and to the Mayor, to make them see the reason we are right not to implement Captain Blanco's unconsulted plan. "We have just signed a manifesto, a copy of which I give you, with all the signatures of the merchants of Alien Street, which we will submit to the Assembly, asking for a "hearing" on this problem. THE MANIFESTO: ; ' We, the undersigned property owners, merchants and neighbors of Alien Street, respectfully request a hearing on this problem.
The Governor's speech at the ceremonies held yesterday on the occasion of the dis- (Continued on page 14).
MUSICAL HEARING AT PALACE EL MIER COLES NEXT M An exquisite program will be performed. M The distinguished Miss Towner inaugurates the musical season at the Palace with an audition to take place next Wednesday, the 24th of the current month, at three o'clock in the afternoon. Bl "Club de Estudios de las Damas de Puerto Rico" has prepared an exquisite program for this first musical audition, and the directors of said "club" will assist Miss Towner in the reception of those attending the event, toe. The most distinguished of our high society, will meet at the Palace on Wednesday afternoon, to enjoy hours of intense spiritual delight, thanks to the initiative of Mrs. Towner.
"THE ATTITUDE OF MR. ARAQUISTAIN DOES NOT CORRESPOND TO THE NOBILITY OF MY WORDS" - "M 1 - Thus expresses the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Huyke.
The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Huyke, responding to the letter addressed to him by Mr. Araquistain and which appeared in our columns, expresses himself as follows: ¿_"Yes, I have read Mr. Araquistain's letter and I have very little to say. Mr. Araquistain made some statements in "Los Quijotes" that needed to be rectified. I rectified them. I wanted him to know that we taught the first four grades in Spanish. But now, it turns out from his letter, that Mr. Araquistain knew it and knowing it, he reported the opposite in his interview; that the children of Puerto Rico DO NOT PAY FOR A PLOT OF LAND IN THE FIELD THE PRICE IT WILL BE WORTH IN TEN YEARS Com ore in the most central part of the city. Stop 20-112 Carretera Nueva, where the property will soon increase in value. THE BEST URBANIZATION OF SANTURCE, COBBLESTONE STREETS, SEWER, WATER AND ELECTRICITY. CLOSE TO EVERYTHING. For more information Tel. 521, Santurce. E. D. REYES. DON'T FORGET If you ship, we have a great assortment of overcoats for ladies, men and children. All prices. DAMIAN RODRIGUEZ SACHS & CO. (Suers, from P. Schira) Salvador Brau and San Justo.
- . -.'u the first letters in a language that is not their own.... "[But] Mr. Araquistain knew more. He knew what the report of the Educational Commission says on page 52 and on other pages. I am grateful for the quotation even if it was taken by the hair. The ironic intention of Mr. Araquistain is very clear. But if the distinguished gentleman had time to learn of some of my annual reports to the. Governor and if he knew what my attitude was when the law on education in Puerto Rico was discussed, he would realize that the things said by the Commission do not make me (Continued on page 6). 6) MUNICIPAL THEATER TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY The great work of Chapí and Ramos Carrión "La Tempestad" An exquisite toilet soap at a modest price France does not manufacture it better" Suavidad-Fragancia '"Sr' Jabón de Tocador LUX DE VENTA EN LAS PRINCIPALES FARMACIAS Y COLMADOS BUY ONE TODAY AND BE CONVINCED YOU HAVE NO RIVAL.
coverage of Puerto Rica M
---IY1- --- 'the figure of Columbus will be immortal in his fame, transcendental for the service he rendered to mankind," he said.
Governor Towner delivered the following address yesterday at the ceremonies held in the Plaza *of Columbus, on the occasion of the anniversary of the discovery of Puerto Rico: "I have to speak to-day in these commemorative exercises, on the four hundred and thirty-third anniversary of the discovery of Puerto Rico, by Christopher Columbus. Under the shadow of his monument, I must speak to you of that great man who gave history a new world, perhaps the greatest and most heroic of human deeds. Under our beautiful national flag, and on the only ground sheltered by that on which the Great Discoverer never set foot, I shall recall to you some of the incidents of that momentous event and some of the characteristic features of that great figure of history. "The dark scenic background against which the mighty figures of the fifteenth century stand out is that strange, mysterious and almost unknown period called the Middle Ages. For a thousand years it seemed that the world remained stationary. Progress, education and instruction seemed lost in the fierce vortex that drew nations into incessant and devastating wars. The suffering and deprivation of the masses of the people were almost, almost REMARKABLE AT THE BARRER ON FRIDAY NOVEMBER 26, 1926, AT 2 P. M. AT THE STORE OF THE SAN JUAN MERCANTILE CORP, AT THE MALECON I will sell at Public Auction for the account of whom it may concern and in the presence of Messrs. KORBER & CO, INC, CORRESPONDENTS OF THE BOARD OF UNDERWRITERS OF NEW YORK. SEVERAL LOTS OF Slightly damaged .RICE, from the. Steamer MUNORLEANS. The analysis of these rices by the Food and Drug Department will be known by the date indicated. THERE WILL BE LOTS FOR PUBLIC CONSUMPTION AND OTHERS FOR ANIMAL BREEDING. Cond ? customary clones. Reinaldo VIZCARRONDO, Almoneden" Public. Happiness-Fortune-Health M None of this you can get without other resources than good wishes. Learn how to achieve success. Read the book The Human Radius, Price $1.00. Mrs. M. CORDERO, Expert in Psychology. San Sebastian 17, altos.
unbelievable. Piracy on the one side and, on the other, salteamientos, destroyed commerce and hindered exchange. Those centuries have been aptly called the Dark Ages, or the age of superstition and ignorance. "But a change was about to come over the world. The old things were rapidly passing away, and the great dawning of a new age, glorified and immortalized by great men and great deeds, was soon to flood the world with light and joy. Like a troubled dream, were passing, before the coming dawn, the dark days and the painful life of ten centuries. "The fall of Constantinople had sent the Greek scholars to Italy and the West, and opened anew the science and literature of the ancient world. The poetry of Homer, the dramas of Sophocles, the philosophy of Plato, the logic of Aristotle, awoke again to life. Students flocked to the classrooms. Literature revived with such grandeur in its form and such a spirit of progress and humanitarianism as it had not known since the time of Augustus. To crown all this came the invention of the printing press. The "new erudition" was thus multiplied, and its riches spread to all winds, so that for the first time in history letters and knowledge became the common property of all. "For the first time," according to Taine's apt phrase, "men opened their eyes and saw." If I were asked to mention the three greatest, most interesting, and most important eras in the history of the world, (Continued on p. 5)
RUSTIC FARMS FOR SALE.- 27 cuerdas, ab - . go broken, but fertile, 5 kilometers from Bayamón and adjoining the road to Comerío. Good and abundant running water. Ideal situation for a person who has business in San Juan or Bayamon and wants to live in the country. School and stores nearby. URBANA:- Concrete house in Hipódromo street, Santurce, with 4 bedrooms, living room, dining room, etc. t -Solar: 500 m. e. Ask for information to r ~SQUERA HNOS. Ochoa Building. San Juan, (Tel. 157) . - . . j
Lykes Bros. S|S. Co., Inc. (BEST STEAM SERVICE, ENTPi: TEXAS AND PUERTO RICO) S. S. S. STELLA. So expects 21st here. x S. S. GENEVIEVE. Leaves Houston on the 24th " " Galveston on the 26th S. S. ALMERIA " " Beaumont on the 23rd. " " LAKE CHARLES on the 26th. ORDER YOUR SHIPMENTS BY OUR COMPANY. M. BERRIOS & CO., General Agents. Phone 818 ' San Juan, P. R. P. O. Box 777
p R. I. P. Mrs. Micaela Rosa Morales Her widower, Don Manuel Mendez Dueño, her legitimate and in-law children and other relatives, beg * , inaar twte, ¿oncur . U> Honra. in the Parish of Juncos on Monday 22 of , 9:00 A . M." for whose favor they will 'remain eternam grateful . , . ¡. . - ..i . Juncos, Nov. 20, 1926.