ELMHNDO
1 0 PAGWAS3C7VS. Office : "Puerto Rico Hus. I (J irado Bldg.". -TeL 1222
|l 0 PAGES 3 CTVS. I Semester - - 1.00 I 1 U One Afio.
DAILY MORNING
I 1.00 I 1 A A M A N N I N G
YEAR VIII.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
i and distributed under permit (Me. u, um met. ¿1 > sc tv tier ♦,tltll, oa tile st -a. rust <rttie" a. i I I Ju,n ' Porto Bieo, By order of th. Fruldeet, A. 8. BurJesoa, Postasestar Qaaersi Catered as .acond elass matter I I I f.bruary 11. IMS, at the Poet Office, at San Juan, Porte Bieo. (United States of America) eeder the Art of march a. 187" I
SATURDAY, JUNE 26, 1926 ¡
í NUMBER 246$.
"I INTEND TO ACT SERENELY IN THE LEGISLATURE, TRA -* DOWN FOR WHAT I BELIEVE TO BE JUST."
'EVEN MORE, SACRIFYING NATURAL RESQUINTS OF SELF-LOVE' M This is how Don Luis Sanchez Morales defines his position. M Don Antonio R. Barceló and Don "José Tous Soto, Presidents of the Senate and the House of Representatives respectively, have expressed in our columns what their attitude will be in the Legislature regarding the announced reduction of the school year and the reduction of teachers' salaries. Both have publicly stated that there is no environment for the time being for these issues. Yesterday we visited Mr. Luis Sanchez Morales, Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. True to his last statements, when we asked him the first question of our interrogation, he refrained from commenting, repeating those phrases "I have decided to remain silent for some time. However, as we insisted, eager to know his opinion on the most debated issue of these last few days, Mr. Sanchez Morales, breaking his silence, dictated the following statements: ''We must recognize that in the Legislature there is no environment for anything that means a salary reduction for teachers. In fact, what we have is a storm. I intend to act calmly, working and voting for what I believe is right, even sacrificing the slightest resentment of my own love. "Yi course, I am sure that the same criteria will prevail in the Legislature, after all, and in spite of everything."
The Ledo. Acosta Velar de receives a new message from Pres. from the 'Bolivarian Congress' M "I am aware of the efforts made by the Nationalist Party for the independence of Puerto Rico," he says. M The "Bolivarian Congress" which is being held in Panama at this time, has been in communication with the Nationalists of Puerto Rico, represented by its President, Ledo. F. Acosta Velarde. The cablegram which we copy below, was received on the morning of Ayet, and is authorized by the President of the Bolivarian Congress, who is at the same time the author of a resolution to request from the United States on behalf of Hispanic America, the independence of our island: Panama, June 23, 1926. Ledo. Federico Acosta Velarde, San Juan. Thank you for your congratulations. I am aware of the efforts for the independence of Puerto Rico made by the Nationalist Party over which you preside. I recently read in a weekly newspaper in my homeland, Honduras, an article by you to piopósi-
1 N A X * HI ? D flfíl a d mu l Jt|L E GLíílTjfíhte Ví H'N I m iri aCotuoEnU? 04 W'EDMUMDO B FE RMANDtz * ,co - ■ I WRITING MACHINES Don't throw away your old machine. We can put a new one in for you for very little money. Call or write to the P. R. TYPEWRITER REPAIRING SHOP Cristo St 10, Teh 1853, Box 1445, San Juan, P. R.
Mayor Todd understands that his .manifestations in connection with the government by commission for San Juan have been misinterpreted, and to that effect he expresses himself thus: "I want it to be understood once and for all, that while it is true that I decidedly favor the "Government by Commission", it is on the basis of popular election, and in no other form. It would be in conflict with my democratic principles, to prefer that the Commissioners be elected in any other way". "The ideal system seems to me to provide for the election of a Commission composed of five members, to wit: SENATE OF PUERTO RICO M SECRETARY'S OFFICE M ""Notice of Auction M The Secretariat of the Senate shall admit propositions in sealed sheets for the printing of legislative documents during the First Extraordinary Legislature of the Eleventh Legislative Assembly, from this date until ten o'clock in the morning of the 28th day of the current month. Sample propositions will be provided at this office and any information that interested parties may wish to obtain will be given. José Muñoz RIVERA, Secretary of the Senate. (Announcement) STENCH WRITER Young stenographer needed with some experience in general office work. Good opportunity for advancement. Address to: "Oportunidad" cjo EL MUNDO, San Juan, P. R.
MAYOR TODD FAVORS "GOVERNMENT BY COMMITTEE" BUT IT MUST BE ON THE BASIS OF POPULAR ELECTION WANTS IT TO BE SO RECORDED M'The ideal system seems to me to be that which provides for the election of a five-member committee.'
s A Mayor, a Treasurer, a Charity Director, an Engineer, and a School Director. In some ¡, cities of the United States there are commissions of seven members, I ' but as in Puerto Rico the mu-' nicipalities do not have sani-j ' police and sanitary service, it seems to me that five q commissioners would be sufficient." "I am sure that five men sufficiently prepared could satisfactorily do all the work of any munici- ' pio. The essential thing is to get cooperation, between the different or 1 gañías that make up the government, i Once cooperation is lost, it is- - all is lost." <4. EXCHANGE MARKET M Dollars -New York 20c. Pesetas 18% Franc 85% Pounds 487% STUDENTS Summer Classes. University of Puerto Rico. We offer accommodation at a reasonable price. Address to: MIGUEL GARCIA Collector of Internal Revenue, Río Piedras, P. R.
TO BARBERIA OWNERS We are pleased to inform barbershop owners that we have received a good stock of sil.o- ' nes and other barbershop products, such as cremac, utensils, etc., which we quote at special prices. RIVERO CHAVES & CO. Salvador Brau 75, San Juan.
The Department of Instruction did not authorize the suspension of the Guayama graduation.
M TERRY AND MARTIN M The school inspector used his own discretion. M On the occasion of the incident at the "Alta Escuela" of Guayama, related to the Puerto Rican flag, which we reported in one of our last editions, we visited the offices of the Department of Instruction to find out if orders had been given to the Inspector of Schools of that district to suspend the graduation exercises. Mr. Terry and Mr. Martin made the following statements: "This Department has not given any orders to suspend the graduation exercises. Whenever we receive a complaint that may motivate the suspension of a graduation, we immediately transmit it to the inspector of the district, where the matter originates." "In the case of Guayama, we sent a telegraphic message to the Inspector of Schools, Mr. Maldonado, instructing him to do what in his judgment was most advisable. We understand that he judged it prudent to suspend the graduation, and he did so. We do not know the details of the event. We only know that the Lone Star flag was found on the flagpole of the school. That is why I have seconded them on every occasion. I will be with you. (f) Alfredo Frejo CASTILLO.
GOVERNOR TOWNER INTENDS TO EMBARK IN SEPTEMBER FOR THE UNITED STATES.
M M Governor Towner intends to embark for the United States in September on a recreational and rest trip to the United States in September. He has so informed the members of his Cabinet, by recommending to them that he would like to have in his possession, before his departure, the annual report of all the Heads of Departments. In the communication addressed by the Chief Executive to the Island Commissioners, he states that he intends to enjoy several weeks of vacation, and that he has thought of embarking for the North in the second half of September at the latest. He also states that since the financial year is coming to an end, he would be grateful if you would activate the drafting of the annual report as soon as possible. Igua'es indications, we are informed, the Governor has made to the Mayors of the island. The Chief Executive has deemed it convenient to submit his Annual Report, personally, to the national authorities. He is actively working to achieve his goals. The Island Commissioners, in response to Mr. Towner's recommendation, have addressed the Chiefs of the different divisions of their Departments so that they may submit as soon as possible a report of the Departments under their direction. * The Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Don Juan G. Gal'ardo will not be able to draw up his report until the end of the financial year, bearing in mind that it is essential to wait until the last balance sheet is closed. The candidates have been physically examined, and have received their equipment, consisting of military clothing, shoes, hats, bedding, table and eating utensils, and other things of great necessity. In the last hours of yesterday morning Colonel Estes visited the Camp, accompanied by some officers, to inspect the work of organization. At six o'clock in the evening an inaugural ceremony took place, at which several speeches were made, explaining the advantages of these camps, and exhorting the cadets to observe good discipline and respect, both for their superiors, and for their fellows. Speaking to Lieutenant Winslow on the water problem, (Ccntinúa en la 6a. pág 4ta. Col.) MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT OF LUQUILLO, PUERTO RICO. MAYOR'S OFFICE VACANCY As of the 1st day of July, 1926, there is vacant the position of Municipal Welfare Physician, with an annual salary of $2,10000. Applications from applicants must be addressed to the Warden before the 30th day of the current month of June. Luquillo, P. R. r June 24, 1926. Inocencio VAZQUEZ. Mayor.
YESTERDAY AT THE FÜERTE DE S A N CRISTOBAL THE CITIZENS' CAMP WAS SET UP.
FIVE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIVE CADETS, OF VARIOUS GRADUATIONS ENLISTED A visit from Colonel Estes.-Inauguration Ceremony.-There will be no difficulties with water. ' b
With- overflowing enthusiasm and animation, the "Citizens' Military Camp" commenced yesterday. The fort of Castillo San Cristobal was invaded by numerous young people from San Juan and the island, who came eager to receive military instruction. During the early hours of the morning 525 young men, mostly schoolboys, who aspire to obtain their commission as lieutenants in the United States Reserve Corps, entered the service. Throughout the camp there was a surprising amount of activity. Accompanied by the first lieutenant, Mr. Richard R. Winslow, we made a tour of the various parts of the fort. There is scarcely a clear strip of ground to be seen. Everything is covered with innumerable field huts, where the cadets are to be accommodated. Even in the most secluded corners of the fort, it has been necessary to install these booths, due to the large number of candidates who presented themselves. Also occupying their section in "San Cristobal" are the members of the advanced corps of the corps.
The members of the advanced corps of the cadet corps of the University of Puerto Rico, under the command of Captains Albert L. Tutle and Virgilio N. Cordero, also occupy their section at "San Cristobal". There are only 17 candidates in the Officers' Camp of the University's cadet corps. Eleven regular army men have also entered the "Citizen's Camp" for the purpose of obtaining their commissions in the Reserve Corps. The "Citizen's Camp" will be divided into four companies. It will last only one month. During that time the federal government will take care of all the cadets, providing them with all kinds of medical care and food, and everything necessary to guarantee them a completely satisfactory life. Travel expenses will be reimbursed to the cadets at the rate of five cents per mile. The different courses as follows: basic course, with 266 cadets; red course, with 148 cadets; white course, with 75 cadets; and blue course, with 36 cadets. All
Lamps! STAND - TABLE - CEILING Special Sale During These Days There are Many Different Styles New Very Nice $4/10 Also Screens ■ J and Single Pedestals 2 Prices from JL Onwards Take advantage to buy yours now Gonzalez Padin Co.
Unique Opportunity WE GIVE CHEAP A large consignment of fine men's shirts, all in beautiful colors and white, clearance is at less than cost, take advantage! Shirts from $4 - 3.50 - 3. and 2.50 Reduced to 3 for $5 Come in right away and pick yours out Gonzalez Padin Co.
CINEMA ¡UNA 26 SATURDAY
ROSA MARIA - WITH - PRISCILLA BONNER - MARY CARR KENNETH HARLAN.
SUNDAY the 27th at 10:30 A. M. BIG MATINAL with "CANGE DE MARIDOS" by LEATRICE JO AND. We will give away a beautiful box of chocolates. PRICES:-Seniors 10 Cts. Children 5 Cts.
IMMENSE REJOICE Has caused the arrival of the steamer Mariana, crowded with "New Style Lager", the UNIQUE beer in Puerto Rico, and for which people of exquisite palate and CONCIENCIA venders were clamoring and sighing. Hurrah to Cadierno. Benefactor of the people.
THE FRES. OF THE "CHAMBER OF COMMERCE" ESTABLISHES THE WAY IN WHICH A CONCILIATION COULD BE MEDIATED BETWEEN THE POLITICIANS AND THE YIYAN FORCES.
THERE ARE STILL NO DEFINmVE DRAWING UP OF THE BUDGET / M This was reported to us yesterday by Ledo. Guerra Mondragon. M "I am against the reduction of salaries," he says. M EL MUNDO has been pressing the opinion of our legislators regarding the most transcendental problems recommended by the Governor in his call for an extraordinary session of the Legislature. Every day in our columns we receive statements from senators and representatives, defining what their position will be in Ja special legislative session. There is one issue that is the topic of all discussions in our high political circles, and it is related to the attitude that the Legislature will assume in the preparation of the new budget. Yesterday we met with the Ledo. Miguel Guerra Mondragón, Chairman of the House Finance Committee. When we asked him about the plans being studied in connection with the new budget, he told us that there are no definite plans yet. However, he informed us that he would fight against the reduction of the school year, and that he would resolutely oppose the reduction of teachers' salaries. "The school year should remain as it is at present," he told us. "I am opposed to the reduction of salaries as well. If the ■ need to make economies is imposed, we will already study the best way to achieve it, without sacrificing the welfare and progress of Puerto Rico." DENTAL EXAMINATION BOARD M CALL FOR EXAMINATIONS M In accordance with the Law this Board will hold examinations for the revalidation of Dental Surgeons, in San Juan, P. R., in the room occupied by the Board No. 3 Alien Street, beginning the misníbs on the 6th day of July next, at nine o'clock in the morning. The applications and other documents will be admitted until the day 3 of July, feqha in which the admission of the same ones expires; < The applications and general information I will be provided in | the office, personally or by mail. Dr J. TORO HERNANDEZ, Secretary. June 25, 1926 (Announcement) <
CENTRAL EVENING HIGH WW HIGH SCHOOL COURSE BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INSTRUCTION P®M "RECER SECONDARY SCHOOL SUMMER COURSES; Schools students taking advantage of this opportunity, reduce the time they in school. Save time that is money. Classes will be held at the "Catholic Academy", part of which has been fi.n EVENING COURSES: R o 4, (Complete) i " * MORNING COURSES :^Buca?/7 t,istrict of San Juan (Preparatory) JT . zv . REGISTRATION: At the Academia Cat¿ >. AR 1 EAGA 12 A. M. and from 7 to lOg K, FEES: Full courses of "Wé-'N 820; two subjects, laboratory fee B Al students JBfe 1 " Il1 * cíales and the amount of half of dj.
M > It imposes as an essential condition I that the prime > ros withdraw the epithet > of traitors and unpatriotic' -M- Don Miguel Morales, President - of the Insular Chamber of Commerce, questioned yesterday by one of our editors as to his opinion on the latest manifestations of Senator Iriarte, to the effect "that the angry* discrepancy" that exists between the politicians and the living forces of the country should end, and that the "angry* discrepancy" that exists between the politicians and the living forces of the country should end. tween the politicians and the living forces, he expressed himself in these terms: "I believe that the only possible ■ conciliation has to be made on ■ the basis that the poLti- - eos who have insulted Mr. - Domenech and his fellow members of i Commission withdraw the epithets of - traitors and have - used when referring to the work of the commissioners before i the authorities in Washington. " "As to the aWagable" i allusions made to me in ' certain press, about my attitude in i, conducting the debates in the Assam- ■ blea of the Chamber d¿ Commerce, l it is untrue that I proceeded I with prejudice against anyone. All i those present were able to appreciate - my impartiality and my fairness in i all the incidents in which inter- , I came as President of the Assam- - blea." " , ' IT IS FIFTY THOUSAND DOLA1 RES AND NOT .FIVE THOUSAND MMrt-- 1 In the pleadings of the Porto - Rico Railway Light and Power - Company which we inserted yesterday on ! the sixth page of THE WORLD ■ appears a paragraph which reads as follows: "Under the ' Department of the Interior's "Base A" tariff-which, apparently, is the one chosen by the Chief of the ' Irrigation Service, as the basis for defending their rates,-the charge for that service would be at the rate of $100 per year per horsepower, or $8.33-L|3 .-meusual per horsepower, so that they would charge for" five months a total of $5,000." te;".' And we must record an important clarification. The figure that appears at the end of that paragraph was wrong when correcting the proof of that work. The exact figure written by the Porto Rico Railway Light and Power Company was 50,000. We are pleased to make this clarification to avoid any misinterpretation of the allegations made. At the Union Club, sealed bids will be accepted for the construction of a SWIMMING TANK on the grounds of said Club, from this date until 5:00 p.m. on July 6, 1926. The Secretary will furnish the plans and by means of a