ELMJNDO
j ID PAG/MS3C7VS. i I I Office: "Puerto Rico DusV trado Bldg". -Tel. 1222 il . r - - -
10 PAGES 3 CTVS. I Semester 5.00 U One Year $9 50
MORNING
MORNING JOURNAL
(Published and distributed under permit No. HOI) autorixed by the Aet. of October 6, 1917, on file ut the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. S. Bardeson, Postmaster General. Entered as second c'ass matter February 21, 1919. a t the Post Office at San Juan. Porto Rico, (United States of America) " edw the Act of march "1879 - n -~ .-fc ; : - -
| Saturday, August 21, 1926.
Year VIII. \
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
| Number 2471.
"I have accepted the battle against the sinister conspiracy of the conceited and insolent capitalist forces."
M Mr. Barceló declares in a stiff letter to Mr. Córdova Dávila "fs positive that the appraisers, while being very accommodating to the corporations, have been very intransigent with the small proprietors," adds M
Don Antonio R. Barceló, when he gave us the document that we publish below, made the following statements: I am sorry to have to publish this letter, because these are intimate documents*, of things that are discussed confidentially among the leaders of the party, and that should not be made public for fear of being misinterpreted by those who are not in the secrecy of certain situations; but I cannot and should not reserve a letter, whose reply has been published by the person to whom I addressed it, and because in that reply only one or two paragraphs of it are mentioned, which in isolation do not give an exact idea of the general thought of it." San Juan, July 7, 1926. < Hon. Felix Cordova Davila, Resident Commissioner from Porto Rico, House Office Building. Washington, D. C. My dear Córdova: I have not been able to write to you these last few days. The struggle I have been engaged in, and of which you will be aware through the press, relieves me from making my excuses to you. I have had to be day and night, collecting and returning all the rays of the "forces" that were unleashed on the Alliance and on me, especially, with the purpose of destroying it, and I have the immense satisfaction that, as always, the country has responded, allowing itself to be guided by its own instinct, as our great Muñoz said, in a similar moment. The sensitive thing is that our don ' Eduardo instead of accepting the po- i ' gition that I myself wanted to prepare him so that he would be free of j Continued on page 2 the. COL. M WILL BE GIVEN FREE TO anyone who will turn over a suitcase which was stolen from the automobile of Mr. Hugh R. i Francis on the 19th day of August, 1926. Said suitcase contains personal papers of great importance to Mr. Francis. It is promised not to divulge the name of the person who delivers the said suitcase with the papers contained therein, nor to take any legal action against the person who returns it. It must be delivered at the offices of Mr. Francis, top floor of the Gonzalez Padin Building, office No. 701, or at the offices of Ledo. Benicio F. Sanchez, Ochóa Building, Third Floor, or at the residence of L. Masson, Avenida i Cordero No. 4, Calle de Loíza. - (Advertisement) ; La Toja Soap THE WOMEN'S BEST FRIEND.
'APPOINTMENT OF BUDGET DIRECTOR DOES NOT RESTRICT FACULTA OF THE LEGISLATURE' M Says eí Chairman of the Senate 'Finance Committee'. M The Vice-President of the Insular Senate and President of the Finance Committee of said body, Mr. Sanchez Morales, when questioned yesterday by one of our editors, expressed himself in the following terms when referring to certain statements made by Mr. Iglesias, in the sense "that he (Sanchez Morales) had expressed himself in favor of amending the current Electoral Law; - "I have not had a conference on -any occasion with Mr. Iglesias with respect to this matter. Iglesias regarding this particular matter, but it is certain that we are willing to i eform the Electoral Law in all- ■ two those points that are necessary, so that the result of the next elections may be, as far as it is possible within human limitations, the true expression of public opinion." When asked for his opinion on the Executive Order just ex- ■ quired by Governor Towner, con- ¡ firing to the Island Auditor facul| tities of Director of the Budget- ! t>, Mr. Sanchez Morales told us: - "It seems to me excellent and worthy of applause what has just been done by the Governor, who has introduced an orderly and scientific system for the preparation of the preI supuestb to be submitted by him, as Chief Executive, to the Legislature. I do not believe that the step taken by the Governor detracts from the powers of the Legislature of any kind." ON TETUAN STREET NO. 35. a magnificent premises for warehouse or storage, for rent. Will inform: Francisco Freiría, Tel. 148. (Advertisement) ! Balloon Double Breasted suits in Navy Blue and co- ¡eres. Wool and cashmere pants. Brand new patterns. SPECIAL PRICES FOR TODAY J DAMIAN RODRIGUEZ SACHS & CO. (Suers, by P. Schira) i Salvador Brau and San Justo. J.. z
"THE STRIKE ITSELF TAKES US BY SURPRISE" 'MAY BE PART OF THE WORKERS' ORGANIZATION CRUSADE PROGRAM': FRESSE M 'Tobacco growers will always be received with attention and respect' M
The Vice-President of the "Porto Rican and American Tobacco Co.", Mr. Fresse, replies to the letter sent to him by the Central Committee of the Tobacco Workers' Strike: August 19, 1926. Mr. Prudencio Rivera Martínez. San Juan, P. R. Sir:- I am very pleased to send you a very attentive letter dated the 18th of this month. The position of the Company with reference to commissions, reader, etc. is exactly the same as it was five years ago. It was a resolution adopted by the Board of Directors in New York, and no officer is authorized to admit of a change in this respect. The strike itself caught us by surprise; perhaps it is part of the program of the reorganization crusades which the labor unions are carrying on. The fact is that everybody was working calmly, and we are not aware that there was the slightest displeasure over the strike of Don Pedro Gandia Corcova. M-- By absolutely involuntary omission, in publishing yesterday the opinion of the Circuit Court of Boston, in connection with the suit decided on appeal in favor of Don Pedro Gandia Cordova, did not appear - the following note, which we hasten to insert today. "The attorney for Mr. Gandía in this case was the brilliant jurist Don José A. Poventud, of Ponce."
The case has been going on for years that the taoaqueros have been working in accordance with the agreement they signed at the time. There was an atmosphere of peace and mutual trust. On the 11th of this month we received an invitation from the Honorable President of the Commission of Me- . diacicn and Conciliation, to which we replied on the 13th, a copy of which letter we are pleased to accompany you. It frankly explains the Company's resolution and we have nothing to add. We would gladly hold whatever conferences were necessary to arrive at a solution, and we would never have refused the services of the Mediation Commission if we had been in a position to submit an offer. Unfortunately the situation is against us, we see absolutely no basis on which we could negotiate. Indeed, it would be a false position to accept a conference only to insist on a refusal. It is impossible to think of wage increases as long as the capital invested has received no interest for so many years. We understand that both capital and labor are entitled to legitimate compensation, and if we should later come to the conclusion that the wages which our industry could pay for the manufacture of cigars were not sufficient, and at the same time the finished product could not find in the market a price which would assure the stockholders an adequate interest; in other words, if the industry could not guarantee legitimate compensation to either the one or the other, we should have to agree to an increase in wages which would assure the stockholders an adequate interest; in other words, if the industry could not guarantee a legitimate compensation to either the one or the other, we should have to agree to an increase in wages which would assure the stockholders an adequate interest.
.. . ■ Tabacaleros de Puerto Rico and to our favorecedo- , res in general - I" -j .We are already unloading the schooner of alfajías I 1 x 3 raw Buy now as many as you will neceI sitar, then you will pay about four dollars more per thousand Also bring the schooner 1x3 cepiI liado. -Very good quality. 1 1 Rolan & Tejedor S. en C. QUALITY - PRICE - SERVICE. I
It was said yesterday that the "Layne" had spent $25,000 on advertising alone.
WILL THE TREASURER SUSPEND EMBARGOES ON CERTAIN CEN TRALES 4--M Adopts this resolution after a conference with Bird ! Arias. M-- ¡ Extensively conferred the day before yesterday the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, I don Juan G. Gallardo, and don Jorge Bird Arias, Administrator of the - "Central Fajardo" and Vice'-PresJ- i dente of the "Asociación de Produc- ¡ tores de Azúcar de Puerto Rico." ! As we said two days ago, the Head of the Department of Housing was proposing to hold an interview with the directors of the sugar entity, in order to determine whether the sugar industry would be able to meet the needs of the sugar industry in Puerto Rico, or not.
' Yesterday, at ten o'clock a.m., began to discuss the charges made by Mayor Todd to the municipal in gen. Mr. Eduardo E.! Saldaña. The hearing was held at the Mayor's office and was open to the public. On behalf of Mr. Todd appeared the municipal attorney, Mr. Rafael Martínez Na- - "lal, as prosecutor; and Mr. Manuel Gaetán Barbosa and Mr. Luis Antonsanti, as witnesses; and on behalf of Mr. Saldaña, Mr. Manuel Tous Soto, defense attorney, and Mr. Casals, of the Layne New York Co. as witness. Witnesses were sworn in by attorney and notary, Mr. Moraza. GAETAN BARBOSA DECLARES i When the par . The hearing began and the Municipal Secretary Mr. Manuel Gaetán Barbosa was called to testify. I ' Mr. Gaetán's statement was limited to explaining the participation that Mr. Sal- ' 1 daña had had in the public hearings held by the Municipal Assembly,
! ' ACCIDENTS /V¡ EARTHQUAKE =? INSURANCE w ETC. \ ETC. IN THE OLD AND POWERFUL COMPANIES Royal Insurance Co., Ltd. North British & Mercantile, Ins. Co. LIVERPOOL, ENGLAND. LONDON, ENGLAND. ! Western Assurance Co. Hartford Fire Insurance Co. TORONTO, CANADA. HARTFORD, UNITED STATES. FOR ANY INSURANCE, PLEASE CONTACT NEPHEWS OF EZQUÍAGA, INC. P. O. BOX 987. - SAN JUAN, P. R.
This detention was made by Mayor Todd.-EI engineer Saldaña defends himself against the charges against him.- The administrative process against him was aired I - I' I ■ ■ ■ MHK ¿i ... w - ■■ i Show photograph of the caba.leros who intervened yesterday in the administrative proceeding against the engineer don Eduardo E. Saldaña. (From left to right)-The Mayor, Mr. Roberto H. Todd, Ledo. Rafael Martínez Nadal, Mr. Manuel Gaetán Barbosa. Ledo. Carlos Torres, Ledo. Manuel Tous Soto, and Don Eduardo E. Saldaña. / Z -
in connection with the bidding for* groundwater lighting by means of deep wells. ! Mr. Gaetán Barbosa stated that in the public hearings attended by Mr. Saldaña, in which the deep wells were being processed, he always said that he did so not in representation of any corporation or company, but in his capacity as a private citizen, who looks out for the interests of the community. DECLARATION BY THE "LAYNE" REPRESENTATIVE One of the most interesting declarations during the administrative proceedings was that of the representative of the "Layne New York Co.", Mr. Ulpiano Casals. After stating that he had no knowledge that Mr. Saldaña was an employee of Layne, hired by said American corporation to defend its interests and to make a claim for the purpose of being awarded the contract for the subway water supply, he answered the questions put to him by Mayor Todd in the following manner: "Todd: Have you heard, Mr. Casals, that the engineer Saldaña provides services free of charge? Casals:- "Yes, Mr. Mayor. I once heard Mr. Saldaña criticized by certain professionals for having intervened in a public hearing held by the Public Service Commission, without thinking of being paid for his professional services." lodd: Then, do these statements prove that Mr. Saldaña has worked here on behalf of the "Layne", providing free professional services? Is that not so? In house, of recent construction equipped with all the modern advances, comfortable and ventilated apartments are rented. Two rooms, living room, dining room, bathroom and kitchen for $25.00 per month. Calle del Culto, No. 20, Parada 21. -Contact ANTONIO RUIZ SOLER Tel. 1229, Santurce.
Casals: - "I would not interpret it that way, Mr. Mayor. I was referring to the fact that Mr. Saldaña, when he has considered that he can render a service to the community, he does it presto, without thinking of any remuneration." Todd:-And the "Layne" has not paid Mr. Saldaña for the services he has rendered' in.this matter? w } Casals: - "Not that I know of." $25,000 IN ADVERTISING Todd: -Do you know of any money that Layne has invested in advertising among different engineers in order to be awarded the bid in this auction? - Casals: - "I know nothing about it Mr. Mayor?'-' Todd:-Well, perhaps you will refresh your memory when I tell you that one of the directors of "Layne", who came to Puerto RiContinued on page 7 la. MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN PUERTO RICO SCHOOL DIRECTOR'S OFFICE M BY THE PP.ESENTE notice is hereby given to parents that on the 25th, 26th and 27th of the present month of August, from 9 to 12 o'clock in the morning, in all the schools of the district, registration is open for children of all grades who are to enter the same as new pupils. Registration is not open to children already enrolled in previous years. Dr. J. Gomez BRIOSO, School Director. (Announcement.) ■ NEXT SEPTEMBER THE SAN AGUSTIN ACADEMY WILL OPEN i Its students range from the first grade of elementary school to the first year of high school. We have received many applications, so make yours in time, lest you lose your place. Send your application to the Director, Apar- ■ tado 87. Rio PienYas. l
'Stutz' Automobile German style, superb condition. Other brand 'Stei-¡ gel' racing style. We sell cheap. H- V. Grosch & Co., Tel. 453, San Juan, P. R. I
FINF I ITM A L a t rem "nda dramatic tape H0RR1BlE VfRDAD SATURDAY | AGNES AYRES.
Fresh and comfortable housing for rent. La Favoritn'' Building. Río Piedras, P. R.
I PORTO RICO IRON WORKS,UNC. Informs its clients that it has opened an office in San Juan, where they can go for any business related matter. At the head of this office will be Mr. CARLOS R. ROSSITEIUAN No. 7 - SAN JUAN, P R. ||
CENTRAL EVENING HI8H SCHOOL ; ACCREDITED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INSTRUCTION This NIGHT SCHOOL offers a complete course of Secondary Education, with the services of a very competent faculty. INDIVIDUAL Instruction by teachers who know how to reach the HEART OF THE STUDENT and inspire in him ¡ ; LOVE OF STUDY. Our organization allows to do the ' i COURSE IN THREE YEARS. The new course will open on Monday, September 13, and registration will take place from September 7 to 10, from 7 to 10 p.m., at the Catholic Academy. I THE DIRECTOR. \