THE M INDO
hp PZ!GWAS3CTVS.I¡ !1g Office: "Puerto Rico Dua i | (J Bldg. -Tel. 1222. -n
1 R PAGES 3 CTVS. I Remesrts i.00 I II Un Afio I "J0
a morning newspaper
THE MORNING
AÑO VIH 'jg
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
1 Published and dlatribuied ui>d"- permit (We. 801) aat""ri*"* W "MaMr ". WIT, M Ha at tha Paat OflUa t B "n Juan, Porto Mico, 3/ ora "r uí uta P>M14aul, * - ¿ - ¿ tMirit Bitortf m "iw matter ftbruaryt f 1, 1919, at the Pen OfSce Ban Juan, Porto B ao, (unitaa MtaMe ai America) aimer the Act of baxuí B, 1979
SATURDAY, APRIL 10, 1926
NUMBER 3033
"THIS PEOPLE OF OURS HAVE NEVER OBTAINED COMPLETE JUSTICE. NEVER!"
'Our voice shall not therefore be raised to preach hatred to the brethren of the past and of the present'. M **The Kiess amendment is an unfortunate initiative," he says. M Don Juan B. Huyke, Commissioner of Public Instruction of Puerto Rico" has made the following statements, answering Mr. Perez Losada's last article - "Mr. Perez Losada does not openly answer my question. He said that Puerto Rico is part of Latin America. "But, we asked, isn't it also part of Saxon America? Of course, we did not expect a categorical answer from the journalist who seemed to be so far from the paths of reality. But now Mr. Perez Losada establishes a distinction that is an answer: He says in his article: "The duties of the United States in relation to Puerto Rico and the peoples of Latin America." ExV presed thus the concept, it is fine and it is a rectification of the previous one. - Yes; Puerto Rico is a trustworthy member of Saxon America. Without denying its race, feeling deeply proud of its Spanish origin, Puerto Rico lives its free life in the bosom of the Republic of the North. That is the reality. Within it we want to maintain the bond that assures our small, economic life and political freedom reaching the same dignity that the other united peoples have but we want to reach that height without sacrifices for our personality although willing to acquire from the American people everything that can contribute to ennoble it. With the first we assure our good friendship with the peoples of the race, a friendship that we wish to cultivate; with the second, we assure our place in the federation. Our ideal is broader than the one once accepted by Mr. Pérez Losada, (the autonomic ideal) perhaps fearful that our people would lose, with it, its characteristics as a people of the race. But Mr. Perez Losada, skillful in these journalistic contests that no longer interest me because of their manifest ineffectiveness, moves away from the many issues we dealt with the other days, to bring (Continued on page 11, 6th. col.)
FOR SALE * low prices and with conveniences for payment, USED TRUCKS in good condition makes "FEDERAL' * "CLYDESDALE", "WHITE", "GARFORD", "RI. KER", "REPUBLIC", "STERLING'' and others. New "MAOK" trucks for immediate delivery, with platform or tipper. Complete assortment of legitimate "MAOK" parts. SUOS. DE L. VILLAMIL & 00.- San Juan P. R. Exclusive agents of "MAOK" in Puerto Rico.
i n ■ Suffrages for the soul of I Don Severino Martinez Alvarez On Monday 12 of the current at 8 o'clock in the morning, ■ in the Church of Perpetuo Socorro, stop 12 in Mira- I mar, Funeral Honors will be celebrated. | gil For this pious act the Carreras family I invite their friends, anticipating thanks for their I M attendance. *' Santurce, P. R" April 8, 1926. I
Farmers and sugar growers meet again
and sugar growers A SECOND INTERVIEW HELD YESTERDAY AT GIORGETTI'S OFFICES M Scoville's return is awaited to determine whether or not he is part of the agricultural commission M Again yesterday the directors of the agricultural entity, Don Rafael María González, Don Pablo Morales Cabrera and young Manuel Quiñones González, met with Don Eduardo Giorgetti and Don Ramón Aboy, members of the sugar commission that will soon embark for Washington. The meeting lasted for an hour in the private offices of Mr. Eduardo Giorgetti, located in the building of the Bank of Nova Scotia. Since the farmers' commission will mainly raise the economic situation of the country in the North, a matter which will also be discussed by the sugar commissioners before the national authorities, it was deemed convenient to exchange impressions before embarking, in order to reach an agreement as to the program that will serve as a basis for the work of the commissions. We have been informed in the offices of the "Asociación de Agricultores" that Dr. Zeno Gandía has officially replied that he accepts the designation to be part of the commission. Landron to date has not yet expressed his willingness to embark. As for Mr. Scoville, although it is believed that he will not go North again, the directors of the agricultural organization representing the country are waiting to know his opinion definitively. A WEDDING --M For tonight is the wedding of the gentle Miss Oarmen Aponte, winner in our recent beauty contest*, with the cultured and distinguished young man Don Carlos Bossy, manager of the reputable commercial firm that operates in this square under the name of "Miguel Morales". The event will take place at the Miramar Church. > EL MUNDO", upon consigning in its columns such pleasant news, anticipates its warmest and most sincere congratulations to the bride and groom.
PHILIPPINES ASK TO BE HEARD ON THE KIESS AMENDMENT
They have made an official request to that effect. M- The bill filed in the Senate goes to the Committee on Insular Affairs. M- Our representatives in the United States sent us yesterday the following cablegram: - WASHINGTON, April 9, X United Press, Via All America Cables, Special Dispatch for EL MUNDO) - Filipino Osmena has officially requested from Senator Willis, Chairman of the Senate Insular Affairs Committee, that he be given an opportunity to present his country's views regarding the bill introduced by Edgar K'ess and granting great' powers to the Auditor of Puerto Rico and the Philippines respectively. Osmena emphasized that his country wished to be heard as soon as the public hearings on legislation that so closely affects them began. Since the bill ratified* in the Senate is identical to the Kiess bill, it has also been sent to the Committee on Insu'ares Affairs for consideration and study. PTO" KICO DELEGATES TO JOURNALIST CONGRESS WANT SEPARATE VOTE They are considering the idea of filing a motion to this effect M Yesterday afternoon we received the following cablegram: t WASHINGTON, (April 9.A-The Puerto Rican delegation to the Journalistic Congress which is being held in this city is considering the idea of requesting the approval of the other American delegates to act as a separate group in the 6th, 7th and 7th Congress. Col.)
1 t ip
SO SAYS THE SENATOR OF THE MAJORITY, LCDO. MARTINEZ DAVILA M 'There is nothing we have to hide,' he says. "PhR the contrary PODPAN ASI APPRECIATE THE DEFECTIVE S'STEMA WE SUFFER FROM" M Yesterday morning we visited the senator for the iVIayoria, Ledo. Martínez Dávila, we questioned him about the last cablegram we received, wherein an account is given of a Ccniunta >Resolution that has been proposed to the Senate to practice an investigation of the "deplorable conditions in which the Puebla de Puerto Rico is," in the opinion of Senator Pittman. Mr. Martínez Dávila responded as follows. "The first thing I read this morning was that cablegram. I confess that one thing impressed me greatly. The cable says: "the? rteulVahíos conditions in which Puerto Rico is". That is an indictment, not of the native tpenslac'ón but of the administration to which we Puerto Ricans are subjected. It is good that they begin to recognize that now .... As for the investigation, I only wish it would be completed as soon as possible. I am ready to welcome it with open arms. There is nothing we have to hide. On the contrary, it would be very desirable to bring it all out in the open so that the public can appreciate the flawed system we have in place, and its disastrous consequences. Let them sell and rummage through everything they have. In the end, the country will be the winner.
-In today's issue, Mr. Villard, we published a leaflet about a big meeting to protest the rate increase that the Telephone Company is trying to get from the Public Service Commission, a meeting that is to be held shortly at the Retailers' Center. Do you know anything about this meeting"? In these terms we addressed the head of the telephone company. "We have spoken with the Ledo de Jesús, representative of the Retailers' Center, and they are referring to the change of the meters. They had a motion that
THE FRES. THE TELEPHONE COMPANY'S PRESIDENT INSISTS ON THE RATE HIKE.
He maintains that the present capitalization of the company amounts to three and a half million dollars, although the official valuation is only one million, eight hundred and five thousand, two hundred and seventy dollars, and that this important question will be resolved within ten days at the latest.
The motion was referred to the way the accountants work, but since we explained this function to them, they decided not to present this motion. They did let us know, however, that they reserved the right to investigate on their own and then refer it to the Commission. Let's wait for that to be resolved. And, although it is another point, but (Continued on p. 16, 2nd col.) I'M SELLING BUICK SEDAN Del 25, in perfect condition, luxurious; or I'd trade it for a roadster. Address P. V. X" Box 625 Santurce. si® Altos Colmado Suáres. Inform Salvador Brau 69.
50.00 IN PRIZES - see ad "CONCURSO SISTEMA PUERTO RICO" on the 7th page.
"THE KIESS PROJECT IS THE MOST FORMIDABLE DISAVOWAL A GOVERNOR HAS EVER SUFFERED".
M " This is how the See. of the Chamber of Commerce expresses himself commenting on our yesterday's editorial. "■ M No explanation is given as to why no attempt is made to build in the country many of the articles we import from the Continent. M The Secretary of the Chamber of Commerce addresses the following most interesting letter to us on the occasion of our editorial of yesterday: - April 9, 1926. Mr. Editor of EL MUNDO, San Juan, P. R. Dear Sir: Allow me to comment briefly on your timely feature article in this morning's issue of your newspaper. I will adhere strictly to the subject you so aptly bring to the public's attention. From July 1, 1924, to June 30, 1925, the following items were imported: ITEMS VALUE Automobiles and parts thereof $3,137,000 Rubber tires and rims 840,000 Lubricating oils 477,000 Of course, figures of this kind are always approximate and not of mathematical accuracy; but in any case it is a fact that in these three little items the country spent almost as much as in public instruction, during the fiscal year 1924 to 1925. Of course I also do not count the value of gasoline, because this does not enter at all in the observation I wish to make, and that is the following: automobiles and their parts should be built, or at least assembled or assembled here; rims and tires, idem; 1 lubricants also, or at least a good part of them. Rubber articles are made (Continued on p. 16, 2nd col.).
PADIN
Great Exhibition Of Fine Fancy Silks and Fabrics FOR LADIES' SUITS We have just received the latest novelties launched on the market by the most famous couturiers of the great New York city. STAMPED SILK - PLAIN SILK - EMBROIDERED SILK, the most beautiful combinations imaginable. Also the Newest and Chic, in fine fancy fabrics in beautiful colors and prints we have a great variety, f ALL NEW - ALL NICE - ALL CHEAP - ALL CHEAP COME TODAY. Hats - Stockings - Handbags - Fans.
Gonzalez'Padin Co; Inc. FREUTE TO MAIN SQUARE
HONEYS Of high" quality are detailed by drums, at reduced prices at the V ANNINA DISTILLING CO. - Hippodrome Street, Parada 20, Santurce,
For Rent a Local, own for business in the street Tanca No. 11. -They will inform there same.
"I ONLY WISH THAT THE CONGRESSIONAL INVESTIGATION BE DONE AS SOON AS POSSIBLE.
DR. BUTTE IN HIS DOUBLE PERSONALITY OF ATTORNEYGENERAL AND GOVERNOR M From ten and inedia to twelve before meridian will be at Fortaleza, and the rest of the day at his office. M The Acting Governor, Dr. George C Butte, will be at the Governor's office from 10:30 a.m. to 12:00 noon each working day, to receive persons who wish to see him or for official business. During the other working hours, he will remain in the Attorney General's office to attend to the processing and dispatching of the affairs of the Justice Department. Among the persons who visited Dr. Butte yesterday was the Mayor of San Juan, whose visit, as he himself told us, was of a private nature, the sole purpose of which was to greet the Attorney General and congratulate him on his new appointment. Attorney and to congratulate him on the honor conferred upon him by the appointment of Acting Governor of Puerto Rico.
DAMIAN RODRIGUtZ SACHS & co. Salvador Brau and San Justo. Colossal assortment of cashmere suits from $8.48 and up. VISIT THEM
TAQUIGRAFA NEEDED with experience in buffet and notary work *in both languages. Salary $25 per week. Apartment 414. Ochoa Building. Phone 230.
"ANY GOVERNOR OTHER THAN MR. TOWNER. WOULD HAVE PRESENTED THE RESIGNATION OF HIS OFFICE WITH IRREVOCABLE CHARACTER" M IN THESE TERMS EXPRESSES THE PURE CAUDILLO, LCDO. MARTINEZ NADAL M 'It is a project of the American government to put two reyezuelos, one in the Philippines and the other in Puerto Rico', he says.
El Ledo. Rafael Martinez Nadal, Chairman of the Pure Republican Party, has made the following statements to us, answering several questions we asked him : fg "The Kiess amendment-he begins by telling us-is a product of the "Baltimore Sun" campaign, and of the pressure of corporations that only yearn for the reduction of the budget in Puerto Rico to five or six million dollars." "In this way, they would obtain substantial profits, and they would see the dream they have been cherishing for so long of paying only a miserable amount to the Treasury come true". "The legislative committee will waste its time in Washington, if it intends to protest of this measure, because whoever has introduced the
this measure, because he who has introduced the bill is a man of the administration, none other than the Chairman of the House Insular Affairs Committee, who within dq> parliamentary custom is one of the leaders of the government who has the confidence of the administration. Therefore, his legislative acts, as a rule, we must accept that they are inspired by the purpose of carrying out the plans of the administration." "Having stated this premise," the political meaning continues, "we must conclude that this is a project of the government to put two kinglets, one in the Philippines and the other in Puerto Rico. It is possible that the Puerto Ricans, or better said, those who have managed the public affairs in Puerto Rico, are greatly to blame for the reprehensible things that have occurred, but it is indisputable that the blame lies mainly with Governor Towner, the Auditor and the Heads of Departments who have been guilty, but above all, the main culprit is Governor Towner, who has in his hands the absolute power to carry out certain things". "If the bill fails. with the new Aud'toroc. will still be masters of the economic life of Puerto Rico, what they will do will be done. and even if the Immoralities, if they have existed, will not end, the administrative immoralities beneficial to the comcrations, who know how to make themselves pleasing to (Continued on p. 16, 6th col.)
¡i JrANKLIN used to say: |g "Do a thing well or II better not do it" It is no less true is- || fe said referring to streets-Do them well p or don't do them. LUIS R EX AC II i URBANllACIOMBS BUENAS ' TEL. 998 SANTURCE K
For Rent Warehouse on Calle Comercio next to Garage Casino, occupied by E. Solé & Co. Reason *n "l same premises.
HOTEL ORIENTE Comfortable and fresh rooms for passengers and families. Immediate to the Government buildings: Fortaleza- Education- Intendencia etc. Excellent meals. Servlcip for covered and subscribers. -Permanent water in the sanitary services. Calle del Cristo No. If -Tel 1092. -San Juan, Puerto Rico. Prnniemrio-- PATRICIO BLASCO DR. LOPEZ DE LA ROSA PHYSICIAN-SURGEON RAY* X - QUARTO - NEO-SALVARZAN HOURS:- 10 A. M. - 12 M. SAN JUAN, P. R.