THE WORLD
ti A PAÚ1NAS3CTVS; /II Semester - -- 5.00 V ün Year 19.50
(jñ PAGES 3 CTVS ¡ I I I Office: "Puerto Rico IIus- ¿ trado Bldg." -Tel. 1222
. DAILY DAILY OF
THE MORNING
Year VIII,
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Pabliihed and distributed under permit No. 801) autorixed by the Ack oí Octobei 6, 1017, ob file at the Post Office al San Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. 8 Burdeson. Postmaster General. Entered at second class matter, February 21, 1919, at the Post Office ai San Juan, Porte Rho. (United States of America) under the Act of march 3. 187S.
Saturday, October 16, 1926.
Number 2526.
"WE MUST AVOID STRIFE OR WE MUST BE GUIDED BY OUR LOVE FOR THE ALLIANCE."
TODD AND SEVERAL ASSEMBLIANS TO FERENCE WITH AUDITOR HOLCOMB M The best way to draft San Juan's new budget will be discussed. M As a logical consequence of the rapprochement between San Juan's legislative and executive branches, public opinion is waiting for both parties to come to an agreement to solve those problems that for some time kept them apart. Everyone expects the Mayor and the Assembly to jointly resolve, within the already established harmony, the two important issues: the appointment of the Director of Charities, and the preparation of the budget for the current fiscal year. With regard to the first of the aforementioned matters, we can say that the most absolute reserve is maintained by all the persons interested in it, and it is not yet known how it will be resolved, even though a harmonious way is being sought that satisfies everyone. However, this is not the case with the budget. We are informed that the Mayor and several Assemblymen have agreed that a joint commission from among themselves, of which Mr. Todd, and some members of the Municipal Assembly, Insular Auditor, Holcomb, will form part, to confer with him regarding the economic situation of San Juan, and to be able to determine the best way to draw up a draft of the budget.
-II í J jgn <■ HU ■ / ' -SJ I fwF / S' á' : ■ ¿ I j ® MONTE' BLUfi ,? fmfo.W. GRIFFITH*#* * ORPHANS AOE THE. ¿TOR4V
ICE NOTICE Ice Plant established in Martin Pena of 12 tons is for sale and is "guaranteed" to cover well the interests of the capital Invested, (except in cases of competition). Good opportunity for people who have capital to invest in this business. For more information, P.O. Box 838, Santurce, P. R. FOR MORE COMFORT USE WATSON STABILATORS IN YOUR CAR Santiago A. Panzardi Ltd. s Sai? Juan, P. R.
In one of our last issues, we published the statements of Mr. Barceló, referring to the upcoming primaries, where the new local Committees of the "Alianza "* will be elected. We had previously published some declarations of Mr. Lecompte, in which he alleged that he would ask for the reconsideration of the agreement of the Board of Directors taken to that effect, adding that he had powerful reasons to do so. And he added that there were "certain bad odors in the atmosphere that could constitute a danger". Mr. Barceló, when answering the question we asked him, told us on the occasion that only those who had something to lose were afraid". This gave rise to a telegram from Mr. Lecompte addressed yesterday to Mr. Barceló, which reads as follows: Antonio R. Barceló, San Juan, P. R. "I read your respectable manifestations regarding my humble opinion on general primaries now. In said contest I have nothing to gain and nothing to lose. However, I would give everything I have and could achieve to avoid a sterile fight within the Alliance. When I expressed this opinion I echoed public sentiment, nothing more. My intention was no other. Our love for the Alliance only guides us. Its policy is ours and we are of the faithful group. E. LECOMPTE. The sefior Barceló has answered form:- t Eugenio Lecompte, Ponce, P. B. "My manifestations to "EL MUNDO" did not refer at all to (Continued on page 6) supposed subject to the entries with which San Juan counts, and taking into account its debts.
THE CLANDESTINE LOTTERY AFFAIR CONTINUES TO BE INVESTIGATED.
TEATRO RIALTO presents the colossal production of D. W. GRIFFITH HUERFANAS DE u TORMENTA WITH Lillian and Dorothy Gish, Monte Blue and many other stars. SPECIAL MUSIC SUNDAY, MONDAY AND TUESDAY PROGRAM UNITED ARTISTS.
( a- ■- ■ Ml -■■■■■ B First THE WORLD leads in classified ads because it leads in practical results. Ask anyone who has used our economic section. EL MUNDO EL DJARIO DE MAS CIRCULACION ■ - -■ ■ ■ ■ ■ " ■
M One of the defendants could not yet be arrested. M The ticket selling agents are wanted to be identified. M Department of Justice "at large" Prosecutor Ledo. Flores, continues to investigate the case of the clandestine lottery conducted by the Santurce police, which we reported on in yesterday's edition. Witnesses continue to testify before Prosecutor Flores. Although this operation keeps the most absolute reserve we know that one of the declarations given yesterday morning tends to show that this business was extended to all the towns of the Island. The authorities will proceed to the arrest of codas those persons complicated in the Illicit business, and the investigations are activated in order to Identify the numerous agen(Continued on 6, 'It will receive a great impulse during the present year the school inspection in the district of San Juan'. M DECLARES SUB-COMMISSIONER VIZCA-* RRONDO M Explains the internal organization of this work. M Don Francisco Vizcarrondo, Sub-Commissioner of Public Instruction, made the following statements to us yesterday, in relation to the special inspection work that is being carried out in the district of San Juan.
ONE re&gtaBfctptptfr "ESI TODAY - SATURDAY 16- TODAY Monumental production "The Salvation of a Daughter" WITH NITA NALDI ROD LA ROCQub GRACE DARLING Sunday 17 Matinee and Evening Tremendous Artistic Success "SILENCE" WITH H, B. WARNER VERA REYNOLDS
"MR. TOÜS SOTO IS UNDER THE UNPLEASANT IMPRESSION MADE BY THE DISAPPOINTMENTS OF PUBLIC LIFE."
-M - 'A large part of the country has not understood him.' Senator Soto. M
With reference to the manifestations of Mr. Tous Soto announcing his forthcoming retirement from politics, Ledo. Juan Bautista Soto, member of the Insular Senate for the "Partido Republicano Portorriqueño Portorriqueño" authorizes the following statements: - "My opinion is that Mr. Tous Soto is under the unpleasant impression produced by the indispensable disappointments in public life. "He has worked disinterestedly and intensely, contributing to the solution of the problems of the country with his intelligence and his will, as well as with his material resources. However, a large part of the country, either has not understood him in this way or for special reasons pretends not to have understood him, and far from paying the homage of gratitude and respect that he deserves who in this way sacrifices himself for the public interests, he is sometimes criticized, not only ignoring or denying the valuable contribution of his intelligence and his will to the improvement of the conditions he is carrying out in the public schools of San Juan: "The inspection of school work in the district of San Juan will receive a great impulse during "1 present year. The Capital has a special organization in relation to the rest of the Island. One Inspector, four Assistants and twelve principals who also act in the capacity of assistants. The work of inspection has been distributed by assigning to each assistant the responsibility for a part of the work, in addition to his responsibilities in matters of general organization. The District Inspector is responsible for the general inspection of the work of the assistants and principals. This new organization will receive in its infancy the experience of the General Superintendents, who are at present making an extensive study of the working of the work in the district."
of this country, but to slander and libel him frequently. "It would have to be a superman for Mr. Tous Soto to overcome all this ingratitude without feeling his spirit weighed down by sadness and disappointment. "He is often accused of being a corporate lawyer and it is implied that his actions in public life, that is, his participation in the politics of the country, obey the selfish purpose of placing himself in such an influential position as to induce large private economic interests to grant him their representation in exchange for large material benefits for him. "However, the truth is that the corporations represented by Tous Soto are now his long-time clients, having been conferred their representation at a time when Mr. Tous Soto, as a Republican, had no influence of any kind in high governmental circles. This shows that his professional success is due to his undisputed ability and not to political combinations that always leave the reputation of those who indulge in them in a bad light. "If Tous Soto's public performances were determined by the personal egoisms that his enemies unjustly attribute to him, he would not be an Alliance Republican by now. Long ago he would be a preeminent member of! -Unionist Party which for so many years has been the party of the majority in Puerto Rico. "Men like him who stood firm in the defense of their political views during the period of the Unionist "flakes" and while Winthrop and Post governed, times when the Republicans had absolutely no influence in the country, cannot justly be accused of being claudicators or of being mean spirits whose only economic interest guides and directs them in life."
P ADIN
5 COWS FOR SALE. Newly calved. Stop 36 1/2 Hato Rey. Tel. 43 Blue, Hato Rey. SALVADOR AMADOR
Fresh and light suits FOR GENTLE MEN AND YOUNG MEN Casimir Batista and English Alpaca Without Linings - "Skeleton" We just received a large assortment of new colors, new models cut and made first class All sizes. Casimir Batista t $ 18 English Alpaca - $16 Double Breast Suits Ultimes styles for young people in light colors of great fashion. PRICES $18 and $20 Pure Yarn Suits - GUARANTEED - Top Quality Material, Style, Cut and Construction. PRICES $12 and $16 TWO PIECES Stout $1.50 Extra. To order any style you want
-Qonzalez'Padiñ Co, lnc. < THE BEST ESTABLECinUETITO OF LAS-AOVILLAS
GREAT FESTIVITIES IN THE TOWN OF QUEBRADILLAS DURING THE DAYS 14 TO 24 OCTOBER. Anyone who wants a place to install a pica or any other particular peg-icic, you can contact the Festivities Commission.
"I REGRET THAT THE COUNTRY LOSES THE COOPERATION OF A MAN AS VALUABLE AS TOUS SOTO": SANCHEZ MORALES.
M Expresses hope that the Speaker of the House will desist from his projects. M.
The Vice-President of the Insular Senate, Mr. Luis Sanchez Morales, expressed himself yesterday in the following terms when commenting on the statements authorized by the Speaker of the House, Mr. Tous Soto, and published yesterday in EL MUNDO to the effect that at the end of the current legislative period Mr. Tous Soto would retire from politics: "I regret," Mr. Sanchez Morales told us, "that the country will lose the cooperation in political life of a man of such worth as Tous Soto. It is very possible that disceptions of the kind that are almost the only reward for public men, make Mr. Tous Soto think that way today, and perhaps tomorrow he will rectify and be able to give his services to the country.
and will be giving his services to the country. "In truth, politics brings nothing but unpleasantness, it makes the public servant a constant victim of injustice, it usually ruins him economically and one has to wait to die before they say something good about him. - It is truly inexplicable that men put up with all this and continue to play the political game, but it must be recognized that politics is similar to vices in that it is very difficult, almost impossible, to shake them off. Once you start doing politics you remain attracted by its charm like those men in love with perverse women qu" they cannot abandon them even knowing their wickedness."
THE SPAIN OF THE CONOÜIST AND OF THE EPOPEYA OF DISCOVERY WAS ADMIRABLY DESCRIBED BY CAYETANO COLL Y CUCHI M HIS LECTURE AT THE 'TEATRO MUNICIPAL'WAS A SUCCESS M-He demonstrated with figures the marvelous progress of present-day Spain, enthusing the select concurrence. --M
On Thursday night the first lecture of the series "What is Spain" was given in our "Municipal Theater" by Cayetano Coll Cuchí and Luis Araquistain. The evening was given by Cayetano Coll Cuchí. A large audience, both in the balconies, as well as in the boxes and gallery, testified to the interest that the subject awakened
the subject and gave the lecturer a sympathetic tribute.
The interim Governor congratulates the constituents of the boards against illiteracy.
illiteracy. M He says that he has learned with delight of the formation of such bodies. M Acting Governor Dr. Butte, has addressed the following letter to the Presidents of the Boards against Illiteracy which have been organized to date: My dear Sir. During the last few days I have been observing through the press, that in different towns of the island, at the initiative of the Department of Instruction, Boards Against Illiteracy have been organized with the laudable purpose of teaching to read and write to those adults who for whatever circumstance cannot attend the public schools, and with singular joy I have learned of the formation there of one of those Boards, of which you are its worthy President. Allow me to congratulate you on this occasion and to wish you the most flattering success in the work, moreover meritorious, which you, with the cooperation of other persons of good will, have undertaken for the benefit not only of that community, but of the island in general. With the assurances of my most distinguished consideration, I subscribe to you, Sincerely yours, (Esq.) George C. Butte. Acting Governor. Coll Cuchí gave a historical summary of Spain up to the present day. He enumerated the vicissitudes and invasions suffered by the Spanish people until it was consolidated as a nation, making possible the flourishing and world supremacy it achieved in the 16th century. He referred to the primitive Iberians, the Spanish people, who from the very beginning were creators of civilization, since they had reached the sea with their own alphabet. From then on, Spain was the scene of successive invasions by other people and other cultures against which the Iberian people always defended their independence and their personalities!)
Special Sale CRETONAS A YARDA WIDE. THIS S' Ijimf / THURSDAY x 67 x n SATURDAY ONLY THE PRICE IS AMAZING! the unbeatable quality the unmatched assortment giusti paris-bazaar the novelties alien 27 s. brau 45.
COMPAONIE GENERALE TRANSATLANTIQUE Steamer French MACORIS We expect this beautiful steamer towards the 28th of the current coming from the ports of the West Indies, and she will be dispatched the same day bound for Le Havre, direct. She accepts passengers and cargo for the above mentioned port as well as cargo for the various ports in Northern Europe. Take advantage of this opportunity, and for further information contact ' BEHN BROTHERS, INC. Agents. San Juan, P. R. Tel. 257. Tanca,l-Tetouan.