THE A©ND°
P PAGES 5 CTVSSemester 5.00 * fl K One Year $9.50
P pages 3 ctvs 1 p Office: "Puert t Rico Ilus- ¡ : ' tr o do B'cg." -Te'. 1222'
DIARIO DE
XÁ MORNING
h Year VIII fe i
4 San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(Published and distributed under permit No. 801) eutoriied by the Art. of October ®, 161T, on file at the Post Office at Í San Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. S. Burdeson, Postmaster General. Entered as second ciass matter, I iebruary 21, 1919, at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rbo, (United States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1879 I X - - I
Saturday, September 25, 1926.
Number 2505.
2'WE MUST NEVER CEASE KNOCKING AT THE GATES OF THE CAPITOL" V?
'■ M . But we cannot confine ourselves exclusively to calling for political reforms. It is necessary to keep in mind the misery of our people' M Says the Ledo. Bolivar Pagan. M El Ledo. Bolívar Pagán, has expressed himself in the following terms to! comment on certain political aspects in our island:- "In the need to ask for reforms to our Organic Act, until we Puerto Ricans enjoy a complete ''"elf government'', within one formula or another, are necessarily in agreement all the natives of Puerto Rico who have A sense of dignity dudadafea. "We Puerto Ricans must never cease to continue knocking at the doors of the Capitol, until finally the Law that satisfies our aspirations is decreed. "But we cannot limit ourselves exclusively to requesting one or another specific reform of a political nature only; it is necessary to always keep in our minds the terrible vision of the misery of our people; we are obliged, by a high patriotic and human duty, to pay immediate attention to the vital social and economic problems confronting our Island. "Among other reforms, Congress should be requested to grant full legislative power to the Island Legislature, so that it may pass adequate legislation to openly and frankly combat the evils of the country. Already our Legislature has many powers in that direction, which it has never dared to exercise, because, it must be confessed, we have not yet had Houses that are the faithful and genuflect expression of the true sentiment and pain of the laboring multitudes who are ninety per cent. of the insular population. "And in our demands before the Congress at Washington, and in our appeals to the people of (Continued on p. 6) ' - A VISO - I For the convenience of the "NIMACA" shoe favorers ' we have opened, in our building, a department at the dek fall which will remain open every day until six o'clock in the evening and on Saturdays until nine o'clock in the evening. BUY ON CONSCIENCE DIRECTLY FROM THE MANUFACTURERS AND.... KEEP THE DIFFERENCE Nímaca Shoe Factory f Carretera Nueva Stop 22 Tel. 1181 , GOOD SHOES FOR BAD KIDS....
'THE M U N D O' HONORS US IN THE WORLD' * M Says Ledo. Enrique Lefebre eating our yesterday's edition. M El Ledo, Don Enrique Lefebre, sends us an affectionate letter, on the occasion of our yesterday's edition, and says among other things: "The journalistic editorial effort of "EL MUNDO" is admirable. I open, or rather, I pick up the enormous volume of today's edition, and it has occurred to me that it is one of the most formidable in the Spanish language, if not for its intensity and journalistic excellence, for its incredible grandeur, so in tune with the American format of these times. "It seems to go unnoticed the determination of you to glorify this island with this great newspaper that for years has been proudly named for Puerto Rico. The brilliant variety of the text and the signatures, and the issues, and the harmonious arrangement of the pages printed with invincible mastery, have exalted me to the point of wanting to co-write a new edition.
We Need Good Embroiderers, Morris E. Storryk Infanta Luisa 4 and 6 Marina, San Juan, P. R.
FOR RENT - 0 beautiful residence on Taft Avenue, corner Loiza Street. Will inform Loiza Street No. 193.
WANTED for rent, in Santurce, Condado or Pacific Place, for American couple only, furnished residence, which has two bedrooms, maid's room, double toilet, garage and other dependencies. Inquire- Tel. 759, San Juan. -The National Cash Register Co.
$8,100 PAYMENT LATEN TRAL CARMEN' RAJO PROTEST.
M The Vieques Sugar Co. is the only one that has not yet paid the sugar tax. M As we reported in one of our previous editions, the "Central Carmen" cabled its directors in the North, asking for instructions as to the manner in which it would make effective the special sugar tax. Judging by the attitude adopted at the last minute by this plant, it appears that it received orders to pay the tax in full, under protest. Yesterday a ctbqua was received at the Treasury Department for the sum of $8,100, amount owed to the Treasury by the "Central Carmen". It made payment under pro testa, as we have already reported. THE "VIEQUES SUGAR CO ", HAS NOT PAID. Of all the plants, the only one that has not made the contribution is the "Viooues Su''■■ar Comnany", which is under judicial administration. However, it has proipetido pay shortly, as soon as it is allowed 'as circumstances. municate my regociío as a native.. For "THE WORLD" honors us in the world."
VISITS THE CAPITAL A COMMISSION FROM PONCE M Gestiona the approval of two borrowings amounting to six hundred and sixty-five thousand dollars. M
A Commission from Ponce, made up of Messrs. Guillermo Vivas Valdivieso, Lecompte and Ramos Antoninl, Mayor and School Director of said city the first two, and member of the Board of Directors of the Alliance the latter, was in this capital city conferring with the Heads of the Insular Department of Auditing. The aforementioned gentlemen are trying to resolve certain questions that have arisen in the Executive Council, on the occasion of the borrowing ordinance for $650,000 that is still pending approval before said body. TALKING TO THE COMMISSION: The commissioners have told us:- "We want to continue with the sewage system of the main streets of Ponce, improve the aqueduct so that it is not a source of contagion, repair and pave streets and avenues, in short, carry out everything that we need and that cannot be delayed any longer".
A SCHOOL CONFLICT IS COMING: "There was no school conflict in Ponce at the beginning of the school year (Continued on page 14).
The bus service between San Juan, Santurce and Bio Piedras is improving greatly every day. The recent introduction of the MACK bus is the biggest step forward that has been taken to date for the benefit of the public. For its comfort, safety and luxury it is always the preferred bus.
GARAGEDUCO Stop 5 San Juan. In this workshop we use exclusively legitimate DUCO materials.
Edwards' report will contain many criticisms for the Treasury Department.
M ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS HIS CRITERION DIFFERED 10 FROM THAT OF THE CHIEFS OF THAT GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENT M He confined his work to inspecting the Treasury books. M
* The Legal Counsel to the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Edwards, who embarked on Thursday for the North, emphatically refused to furnish us with any data in connection with the report which he proposes to make to the national authorities on his work in our island. Mr. Edwards always maintained, we are informed, that last year's budget could not be covered, and up to the last moment he believed that at the close of the fiscal year there would be a deficit in the Treasury. His work in the Treasury Department was limited exclusively to inspecting the books, from which he obtained all kinds of data for his final report. We have also been informed that Mr. Edwards was never in favor of allowing the sugar mills to pay by "sextas partes", a plan proposed by Treasurer Gallardo. In many other cases, he maintained different criteria from those sustained on certain occasions by the Heads of the Treasury Department. For these reasons, it is believed that the Edwards report will contain many criticisms for the Treasury Department. Mr. Edwards declined to comment for the public on the work done by Treasurer Gallardo, in spite of our continued efforts to that effect.
TAMPOCO MANATI ASKED FOR THE RETASACION M Mayor Ramirez declares this at the request of the Local Agricultural Board. M i.u ... ' ' ' office centr ' ' ciación cte Agricultores" was received yesterday a letter addressed by the Mayor of Manatí to the Junta Agrícola Local de la referida mu nicipalidad. It reads as follows: Mr. Julio Gandía, President of the Local Board of the Farmers Association, Manatí, Puerto Rico. Sir: - "In reply to your letter dated the 17th of the present, I have the honor to inform you that in these offices there is no record that justifies that the present administration, from January 12, 1925, date on which it took possession, until the present, has asked the Hon. Treasurer of Puerto Rico for the reassessment of the property, both rural and urban". Sincerely, Clemente Ramírez, Mayor.
' nfir J \ Y * / / / r ~' \ / NEW HATS FOR LADIES AND LADIES We have just received by last steam a _ precious assortment, new shapes colors and combinations ' the most attractive models of LA QUINTA AVENIDA you can see and appreciate them in our department yenga a Verlos. Choose yours today. VERY ECONOMIC PRICES ----■'■■■■■ - - - - Many Other Novelties Fine Handbags -- Necklaces and Bracelets - New Stockings Fans - Scarves - Perfumes - Ribbons - Lace Fine and Cheap Shoes - Silk Underwear in Co' ? c Silks and Fine Fabrics just arrived. - and many other novelties. Gonzalez Co, Inc. =====- ■ " THE HOUSE THAT HATES IT ALL *.
-- TEATRO OLIMPO --. TODAY - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 25 - TODAY RODOLFO VALENTINO IN HIS LAST TAPE * "EL HIJO DEL SHEIK" LUNETA 50c. - ANFITEATRO 40c.
IGLESIAS CONDEMNS THE EMIGRATION OF "ORRIQUENOS" TO ORRIZONA.
M Makes public statements to that effect. M Alleges that the absentee rentiers are the cause of hunger in the country. M Our correspondents in the North send us the following cable dispatch:- WASHINGTON, September 24. (Uniffh Press, via All America Cables. Special dispatch for EL MUNDO.) Santiago Iglesias, Spanish secretary of the "Pan American Confederation of Labor" has made public statements in this city, condemning the emigration of Puerto Ricans to the cotton zone of Arizona. He says: "Labor leaders predict that the history of today will repeat itself in the future. Absentee rentiers have brought to Puerto Rico prosperity for the few and misery for the many. He declares that the law limiting land ownership is constantly being violated, and that small landowners are being thrown off property and turned into pawns of the cen tral.es and ma~na.' :s sugar mills. "The corporations only send to the United States and Europe 75 per cent of their profits, but refuse to pay income-tax and other contributions," Sen. Iglesas said. UNITED PRESS. -M SUGAR MARKET Cablegram to receive' from Porto Rico Internation::: le Corp. September 24, 1926. 10:35 A. M. The stock market opened. Die. 2.91 (4.59) Jan. 2.84 (4.62) March 2.76 (4.54). 3:55 P. M. The stock closed. Die. 2.80 (4.58) In-ro 2.83 (4.61) March 2.75 (4.5' ' TASAJO F- s and Blankets, class :parior, receiving, we offer it at situation prices. CADIERNO HNOS. NOTICE TO THE P UBLIC ' 1 ' ' ' 1 "A-tí In some automobile paint shops are being used under the name of "DUCO" imitations of these materials that leave much quG wishes& / .... ¿fe As representatives of "DUCO" products we warn the public NOT TO BE FOOLED and to avoid <a mistaken impression that may be produced in the public mind, since the imitations produce a different finish and their appearance, durability, etc., are entirely different from the appearance, durability, etc., of the legitimate "DUCO" and INSULAR MOTOR CORPORATION products.
Yesterday evening we received the following cablegram: NEW YORK, Sept. 24. (United Press). -Via All America Cables. Special dispatch for THE WORLD). The Herald Tribune editorially comments on the inauguration of the "School of Tropical Medicine" on that island. And it says in one of its paragraphs: "We are sure that the strong ties of friendship and sympathy that unite the United States with one of its most interesting territorial possessions will now be strengthened". And he goes on to say:-
ENGINEERS I need to make a well to get ONE HUNDRED gallons of water per minute. Ice Plant, Parada 2/2, San Juan, P. R.
Che LUNA 25 Saturday Prices Corrientes.
THE "HERALD-TRIBUNE" COMMENTS EDITORIALMNTE THE INAUGURATION OF OUR "SCHOOL OF TROPICAL MEDICINE" M Opi?ia <pe said scientific center will strengthen the friendship between Puerto Rico and the United States. M
"Some unfounded criticism has sometimes arisen to the effect that interest in Puerto Rico is neglected. That criticism will no longer have reason to be, in the face of this great initiative that has been undertaken to promote the social, physical and industrial welfare of that island." UNITED PRESS. AFTER THE BAN Dad:- What does BRANDI mean now? Son: After the ban, BRANDI stands for "Accessories for automobiles". Dad:- And why? Son:- Because the only legitimate BRANDI that you can get in American territory is Mr. José Brandi & Br. in Ponce who are in the business of automobile accessories in general with GARAGE open DAY AND NIGHT. (Announcement)
NOTICE The opening of the new Ladies Annex, of[ Auxilio Mutuo, Hato Rey, Parada 37, has been set for next 26th, Sunday at nine o'clock in the morning. We hereby invite all the members of the Institution and especially the medical corps of San Juan and the Island. Families wishing to visit him will be attended from 3 to 4 1/2 in the afternoon on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday of the present week. THE COMMISSION.
See the most sensational bullfight ever filmed in Seville El Bandolero ■-with- Pedro de Cordova - Rene Adoree.
"THE PACT WITH THE REPUBLICAN-SOCIALISTS HAS GONE DOWN IN HISTORY", SAYS F" ''ICENTE - USERA X 1
I 1 'I AM OPPOSED TO THE CONGRESS GIVING US THE ELECTIVE GOVERNOR FOR NOW' M 'It is still premature to draft our constitution-we have yet to learn fencing,' M
(From our Editor in Ponce.) We have visited the regal mansion that Don Vicen te Usera Seda owns in "El Vigia". The purpose we were pursuing was to interview this distinguished gentleman and well-known Unionist leader, who for more than two years had abandoned political activities, and since then refused to give us even one line for publication. Don Vicente Usera, who was not expecting our visit in that residential site, which according to Dr. López Nussa, will one day be known by the name of ''Pinopolis" because of the large number of pine trees that have been planted there, received us with his proverbial courtesy, and invited us to sit in the shade of an overhang from where the entire panorama of Ponce can be seen as far as the Caribbean Sea. -Tell me, Don Vicente, what
What did you think of the outcome of the last session of the Board of Directors? -That there has been a good faith agreement, both on the part of Mr. Córdova Dávila and Mr. Barceló. I also believe that there will be another arrangement between Mr. Giorgetti and Mr. Antonio Barceló. They are all good friends and comrades in struggle. The companionship and loyalty of many years cannot be forgotten, because of issues that can be solved in a satisfactory way. "Of course, there will always be differences of opinion in the way of looking at things. Some go to the right and others take the left, but this is no obstacle to complete harmony. I perfectly remember that Don José Tous Soto was a radical within his party. He was never afraid of independence. Martinez Nadal was all (Continued on page 14)