THE WORLD
íjfi PAG/MS 3CTVS, | Ill Ofici na: "Puerto Rico Ilui Ji II I U Bldg. -TeL 1222. M | n " luarssCTSsr-
wiiasi.i! ... ,■■■■- ,,b , , , , , 10 P/IG/N/ISJCTVSd III Semester _ _ *-00 I j y Un Afio - | OJO
THE MORNING
diary of
. ANO VIH
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO. ,
Published and diatributed under permit (Nu. tsin> autUerixed by tto" Act. ut October B, A "W, un Ole at tita Pont Uftica at I San Juan, Porto. Bico, By order of the President, A, 8. Bur teaoo. Postmaster General. Entered as second dues matter, I February 21, 1919, at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Riou, (United States of America; under the Aet ef starch 3, 1879. | : ... - - . ■ - "-* " -. ■ d"™*" - ■ ■ ■
SATURDAY, APRIL 24, 1926
| NUMBER 3047.
FRAZER AND R UIZ SOLER CONTEND- - KEN THAT PUERTO RICO CANNOT REDUCE ITS SUGAR PRODUCTION.
MI-
This proves that the Boricuas will support the Cuban movement to stabilize prices. M RÚIZ SOLER OPINIONS THAT THESE PLANS HAVE ALWAYS RESULTED IN A "FUROUS BLUFF" - í- í-M eí Guá1 nica's lawyer prices are not as low as is believed. 1 -M-"In Cuba, the sugar growers have - ' Jiado A movement tending jT to reduce production. In this way, they believe that they will be able to stabilize the price in the markets, thus achieving a leveling of the sugar stock with the demand, and to eliminate, as far as possible, competition, which is considered ruinous. - \t Upon learning 'this information, noff" we moved yesterday to the offici"(P>ntinued on p. 10, 3a. col.)
THE LAND IN MAYA GUEZ 1 M - Many families are leaving the land in alarm. ' -M-- ' Others choose not to take the intense shaking seriously. M For several days now the earth has been shaking again in Mayagüez. From time to time, and with more or less prolonged intermittence, small tremors alarm the neighborhood. This, which does not occur in San Juan, seems to be considered somewhat natural by the Mayagüezans, who have a sad memory of the 1918 earthquake. The latest news we have received from the Sultana del Oeste indicates that last night, at about half past three in the morning, (Continued on 6th. la. Col.)
'AT THIS TIME E LMUN1CIPIO HAS NOT OFFICIALLY SUBMITTED TO OUR CONSIDERATION THE PLANS FOR THE TERMINATION OF THE SAN JUAN AQUEDUCT.' ' In reply to certain representations of Mayor Todd, He makes this statement the Com. of the Vb Interior. I>o of the officials' of the Dept. discusses with Commissioner Montilla the project - ■■■ ■ i -M-.
In the face of Mayor Todd's categorical "náníféstari'Aes, deriaran*an to announce ¡auction n the terminac'ór, of the San Juan aqueduct, it only remained for the * rr' U tUERNO DE PUERTO RICO r -m- '" ' DEPARTAMENTO t)E hacienda. 1 -m-- - ' PROPRIETARY ' PROPRIETARY ' TAXES EGOCIATE M < ♦ AUTOMOBILES' -T NOTICE TO OWNERS | Owners" of Jtomobiles and other motor vehicles I? are hereby advised of the duty imposed by law to appear at the offices of the Collectors of Internal Revenue on the Island and at that of ' s appraisers in San Juan, Edificio González Patín, room 616, sixth floor, to declare their respective vehicles for the purpose of -coid-ibu-ibu-ing.vehicles for purposes -coid-ibuti-vt" of 192Ó-27 on or after January 15, within a period not to exceed May 15 next. Those who voluntarily cease to do so after the publication of this notice shall be denounced for "misdemeanor" and shall incur the maximum fine of one hundred ($100) prescribed in Article of the Political Code. Til trasnaae in sale of such aiwomobiles, and other vehicles, made after January 15 shall not release the owner of such vehicles on that date from the payment of the tax due for the entire year, nor shall it relieve him of the duty to wash it if he had not done so. í San Juan, P. R. April 21, 132 "J. A Juan G. GALLARDO, Treasurer of Puerto Rico.
Department of the Interior to finish considering and approving the plans and projects submitted by the municipal administration, visited yesterday the distinguished gentleman Don Guillermo Esteves, Chief, of the Department to which Don Roberto alludes. With the courtesy that characterizes him, the correct official received us, making the following statements, when the clock in the Town Hall was striking nine thirty in the morning: "At this hour, the Municipality has not yet officially submitted for our consideration the plans and projects for the completion of the San Juan aqueduct". When we became aware of these statements by Mr. Esteves, we were deeply surprised. The Commissioner of the Interior, in view of the fact that we were still waiting for a more explicit answer,
- For Pink Cheeks
Wwríimtafí UXA77VZ
ATTENTION CAFETEROS You wish to purchase a second hand bass drum in good condition with a capacity of about 15 Please address your requests to J. J. B., P. O. Box 423 Río Piedras. Puerto Rico "A-
"DE LÚXE ? (BARBERÍAS) "LA BELLE LATINE" / /f. Bruuól, Tes. 1461 - San Justo 15, Tel. 1469. Bipdemo and aseptic. Current prices. We cure dandruff * with ¡a quinine K i) X. Separate salons for ladies. ijF COMPETENT STAFF .SHOE SHINE. , ■--
SCHOOL CONTRIBUTION IN S. JUAN MUST BE INCREASED m- So says the Municipal Com. of Instruction. M "We will not be able to meet this year the /requirements of the Insular Government." -M- . The Municipal Commissioner of Instruction, Dr. Gómez Brioso, wishes to state that the school budget is insufficient, since the schools of the capital are receiving hundreds of children who, in previous years, were enrolled in other educational centers. Gómez Brioso believes that the contribution for school purposes should be increased because, comparing what San Juan spends on public education with what any other municipality spends, it should not be uniform for all municipalities. WE CANNOT FULFILL THIS YEAR "The moderate program of the Insular Commissioner of Instruction," says Dr. Gómez Brioso, "demands school constructions that are not possible this year. "We have thought of building new schools; in Condado, in Seboruco, in Hipódromo, in Monte Dores, in San Juan Moderno. We will first acquire the land and then we will think about the buildings. The two schools of the Hippodrome and Culto must be replaced immediately, because they are in unusable conditions for instruction", he requested from the different offices of his Department if they were aware that the project for the completion of the San Juan aqueduct had reached any of said offices. In the office of Municipal Works they reported that Mr. Marxuach, who has been the engineer of the Department of the Interior designated by the Commissioner for the preliminary discussions of the San Juan aqueduct project, reported that he was discussing said project (Continued eq. p. . 6, 2a. cotí CASINO D£PT0® It having been agreed by the Board of Directors to carry out certain necessary repairs to the interior décor of this Casino, persons who consider themselves competent in this special class of work are invited, subject to the reports to be furnished by this Secretary, to make such repairs as may be necessary, about the nature and importance of the said work, to present their proposals to execute them, within a period of five days, counting from the day following the publication of this announcement, it being understood that the Board of Directors reserves the right not to accept all or any of the proposals presented. San Juan, P. R., April 22, 1926. GABRIEL DE LA HABA
"Our commissioners will not return with formulas that lower our dignity".
M M NICOLAS SANTINI, THE ALLIANCE LEADER AND MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS, DON NICOLAS SANTINI M OPINIONS THAT THE LEGISLATIVE COMMISSION CANNOT HAVE ACCEPTED THE Kiess AMENDMENT IN ALL ITS PARTS IN EXCHANGE FOR THE ELECTIVE GOVERNOR.* Under such conditions not even the most humble jibaro ■ i would accept that office. . - ii i
A cablegram received eu yesterday afternoon assures us that the committee of the Puerto Rican Legislature accepts the Wil-lis-Kiess Bill, provided the law granting us the elective Governor is passed together. Immediately after having received this news, we visited in his offices the political Connotade, meaning alliance leader Mr. Nicolás Santini, wishing to know his impressions on this matter. With extreme courtesy the distinguished gentleman attended us, making the following very important declarations: "I cannot believe that the legislative commission has accepted the amendments proposed by Willis and Kiess in exchange for the elective governor, taking into account that they diminish in such a way the faculties of the Chief Executive of the Island, that they turn him into a simple decorative figure". Surely," Mr. Santiai continues, "the committee would have proposed amendments to the bills granting the Auditor all-encompassing powers, so as to enable the Governor to exercise his functions in a dignified and decorous manner. I have great confidence in the men on the committee, not only for their patriotism, which is well recognized, but for their intelligence and knowledge, and I believe that they would not, under any circumstances, represent Puerto Rico with formulas and procedures that would lower our personal and collective dignity before the world, presenting us as servants rather than as men who have an exact idea of what true liberty and honor in all its manifestations mean". "I do not believe that the cablegram 4e today is confirmed as it is written, for if it were, it is not strange that the remmcia of the Governor should be a fact. There will not be a single American, born in Kentuckey or in the humblest quarter of my town, however intelligent he may be, who will accept the office of Governor under such conditions." So much for the statements of Don Nicolas Santini, from whom we bid him farewell, thanking him for his kindness. -
Senator Zeno considers that the current educational system is cruel
--- nor __ THAT IT IS SUBMITTING ! OUR PEOPLE TO UNCALIFIABLE TORTURE BY FORCING THEM TO STUDY IN ENGLISH ' M He clarifies, however, that the administrative part of the Department of Instruction is going well -M "When it suits the Americans to grant us greater liberties it will not be necessary to send commissions to Washington," he says -■■"-'■i '-M
In the Department of Public Instruction we greeted yesterday Don Frañdsco M. Zeno, political signi©icant, Senator for the "Alianza Portorriqueña". We had an extensive conversation with the gentleman, discussing very important problems that constitute the topic of the wave in our political and administrative circles. - Are we going to say something tomorrow from our columns? -We asked him, to which he answered: "I do not want to speak for now. I wish to remain silent." We continued to exchange impressions with Senator Zeno, who made very interesting statements, asking us not to give anything to the public, since he was somewhat disoriented - when we arrived at our editorial desk, we forgot the commendation of our good friend, and today we publish the notes of that exchange of impressions. Referring to the remarks made yesterday by Representative McJones, Senator' Zeno told us among other things, that the esco'ar system even when it was being b in practice as far as .adjuration was concerned, not© rfprpMsnente uh nonsense, but an ethuéldad, for the simple reason that it was to subject to an. He added that in his "profane" concept, this was the reason why our young people, upon graduation, knew practically nothing. He added that he had always been in favor of English being considered and taught as a subject, but that studies should be conducted in Spanish. Senator Zeno was strongly opposed to any reduction in the budget, asserting that Puerto Rico could very well sustain a budget of ten million dollars, as long as everyone was forced to pay taxes. At the same time, he is opposed to any reduction in the teachers' salary. When we questioned him about the various native commissions which have embarked for the North, he said that those who have in some way contributed their money to make the commissioners' embarkation a reality were to be admired, maintaining that in Washington they would pay very little attention to the fact that they would not be able to give us all their money.
DO NOT HURT YOU The summer is coming on strong, but you need not fear it, as long as you take the precaution of ordering your runs from EL CORTE INGLES, which has the strongest, most durable, and at the same time, the lightest pure yarn driles, silks, and gabardines of any sold in Puerto Rico. Ojp al Cristo.... And don't be fooled or be fooled, these days panthers are on the loose in these worlds of God. \ San José St., No. 5 Telephone 1123.
COMPAGNIE GENERALE TRANSATLANTIQUE VAPOR FRANCES MACORIS" Expected in this port from the West Indies, around May 10 next, and will be dispatched to LA CORUÑA and HAVRE. She admits passengers and cargo for the above mentioned ports as well as for the other ports of Europe. Take advantage of this unique opportunity of the season for Europe. For further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. -Agents. SANJUAN, P. R. Tanca-Tetouan Phone 257
Iglesias has been told not to leave for Puerto Rico until the present situation is resolved ' - M Some Socialist leaders believe that the Senator should remain in Washington as long as there is a Puerto Rican Commissioner. M Socialists in Puerto Rico hope that Iglesias will be on the island in time to preside over the Workers Congress in May. However, at the last minute we have learned that some of the Federationist leaders have written to Iglesias indicating that it would be advisable for him to remain in Washington until the present situation is resolved. It seems that the Federationists do not look kindly on SanXjago Iglesias leaving for Puerto Rico while majority politicians, merchants, farmers and sugar growers are moving to the national capital. In one of these letters it was indicated to the socialist leader that in the opinion of the undersigned he should stay in Washington as long as only one of the Puerto Rican commissioners was there. In any case,. the Federationists understand that. this situation will not take more than two or three weeks to resolve, and that Iglesias will always be able to embark in time to preside over the workers' conferences planned for the end of May. kind of powers and faculties, not because of the influence of these commissions, but because of any circumstances our men. He says the special cia, when it suits the interests of the American people. "We were made American citizens when our soldiers were allowed to march to the battalion during the great world conflagration in which the people of the United States were engaged. Perhaps, due to a providential mandate another time will arise when it will become necessary to grant us greater 'ibertades, when it suits American interests. It will not be necessary to send commissions when this necessity arises." On the Kiess amendment, the Se(Continued eh the 6, 6th Col.)
(53.00 IN PRIZES . -.see announcement "CONCURSO SISTEMA PUERTO RICO" on the 7th page. g Gentlemen. Youth and Children. | g Large assortment of ca- g 5 8imir costumes from §6.98 and up. | j Damian Rodriguez I I I Sachs & Co. | (Suers, of P. áehira) t* 6 Salvador Brau and San Jnsto | FOR SALE The house at Calle del Cristo No. 18, without brokers; yields 180 pesos monthly. Will report: JUAN CUETO, Am, R. R. R. CQ. 9f P. R. R. *'. r ' K
A NEW SUGAR PLANT HAS BEEN INCORPORATED.
-M
He will be Administrator of the same Don Agustín F e r nández. member of the Board of Review. ' -,-í ■ The new company acquired by purchase the "Cayey Sugar Company." --This new corporation will acquire, by purchase, the sugar factory which the "Cayey Sugar Company" had in Cayey and which had been closed for three or four years, with the sugar cane produced in that area in the cane fields of "Defensa" and "Santa Juana" in Caguas. - The new Cayey Central Corporation, Inc. intends to reform the "Central de y mo'er ep'er ep'ellá the canes of all that fertile zone in the next harvest of 1927 and has already begun the preliminary works. He is administrator of the new (Continued on 6th 3rd. cited.
THE TRIAL AGAINST COMMANDER BAKER WILL SEVERE ON MAY 10 M N N u m e r y witnesses have been subpoenaed for that date. M Navy officers will come to testify. M The trial being pursued by the Federal Government against Commander Baker will be heard on the tenth day of May, in accordance with the resolution lately adopted by the Federal Court. The case was scheduled to be heard on the twentieth of this month, but had to be postponed, for reasons unknown to us. Our readers will remember that this litigation involves the possession of Fort San Geronimo. Commander Baker has aliContinued on p. 6, 4th col.
DIEZ DE ANDINO SUSTAINED THAT IF HE HAD NOT BEEN ANNULLED 262 PAPERS BY MERE TECHNICISM HE WOULD BE THE MAYOR OF SAN JUAN AND NOT TODD M He affirms that the people would like to know the report rendered by audit in relation to the past Administration of Don Roberto. ...... Continues to combat the conclusions reached by the official investigator M
i Commenting on the report rendered by an Accounts Examiner of the Island Audit, denouncing irregularities during the previous unionist administration of San Juan, Don Rafael Diez de Andino, former mayor of this' city has made new statements that we publish below: "We will now deal with another of the extremes that comprise the report to which we have been referring. It reads as follows: "The cost of the aqueduct works, according to a report presented by a committee of five engineers, on August 1923, and which committee was appointed by the Board of Directors to review the project of said works, was estimated at $2,453,449.88. The amount paid by the last Administration on account of the new WATER! WATER! tyoUinaris The Queen of table waters. $10.00 Case of 100 bottles. KORBER&CO, INC. § Ladies and' Ladies... § 8 Great opportunity to com* 8 8 > prar at the home of: j DAMIAN RODRIGUEZ, | SACHS & CO. (Suers, by P. Schira) 8 : i; Salvador Brau and San Justo § Suits and Hats. S .3 _ Reasonable Prices.
n 1 aqueduct amounted to $2,238,957.76, not counting $43,362.72 that the Municipality was owing the contractors when the present Administration took possession of the city. If to these figures be added the budget of $978,637.28, the final cost of the work was $3,260,957.76, or about $809,000 more than was estimated by the ItfB Committee of five engineers. The Examiner attributes this increase not only to changes made in the project, but also to the lack of a proper procedure followed by the Administration with regard to certain works". - (Continued on p. 12. 2a. Col.) A DELIGHTFUL BROADWAY WALK THROUGH 5Oc. '' See our ad érr second page.
I ' '■! TliAgaJ/ B 1 Building streets m I cheap to econé. B g money is ombs 8 i turn back the clock to 8 I save time i I LUIS REXACH * f URBAMIZACÍOMSS B g buznas.B jgj rei.ss". wnwttfrjjl
- - ' HONEYS High quality are detailed poy drums at reduced prices at the V ANNINA DISTILLING CO. Hippodrome Street, Stop 20, "■ .■■'■i -.
DR. LOPEZ DE LA ROSA MEDICO-CIRUJANÓ X-RAY - QUARZO - NEO-SALVARZAN . . . I HOURS:- 10 A. M. - 12 M- . SAN JUAN, P. R. " - '..I ' - 4 . . . . ' . "