THE WORLD
■ -__-_ 1 Q PAGES 3 CTVS I VI Semester - 5.00 1 U One Year $9.50
1 O PAGES 3 CTVS 111 Office : "Puerto Rico IlusR trado Bldg." -Tel. 1222
MORNING JOURNAL
Vil! year.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Published end distributed under permit No. 801) autorixed by the Act. of October 6, 1917, on filo at the Poet Offioe at San Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the Preiident, A. 8. Burdeson, Postmaster General. Entered aa second class matter, .ebruary 21, 1919, at the Post Offiee at San Juan, Porto Ri-.o, (United States of America) under the Act of march 8. 187!
Saturday, October 9, 1926.
Number 2519.
24,721 CLAIMS WERE FACED DURING THE LAST FISCAL YEAR BY THE "WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION COMMISSION".
OF THESE IT RESOLVED A TOTAL OF 1S,22O M It had income of $641,513.-There are 15,032 associated employers. M í
In his annual report, Governor Towner states the following regarding the work done by the "Workmen's Compensation Commission" during the last fiscal year: "During the year the Commission held 184 sessions, and 42 public hearings." "On September 2, 1925, 12,465 cases were pending before the Commission. Payment orders in the amount of $161,449 were issued, but there were scarcely any funds to make disbursements. An intensive campaign was initiated to collect the amounts due to the Commission, with the result that the funds collected exceeded those of the previous year by $121,232. The rates imposed on the various industries have been reviewed and generally reduced. The Commission intends to continue to reduce the rates further." "The Commission's budget allocation was reduced from $116,380 to $102,343. Administration expenses amounted to 18 percent of the total amount spent." "Almost all of the large employers, who at first refused to avail themselves of the law, have decided to ha-
■ cert now." "At the beginning of the fiscal year there were 9,303 claims pending, which, added to the 15,418 that were filed during the year, make a total of 24,721 cases to be considered by the Commission." "Of this number 15,220 were resolved, leaving 9,501 pending." "During the year, 3,618 employer's returns were filed, covering wages amounting to the sum of $3,324, 312." "At the end of the fiscal year there were 15,032 insured employers. Total income amounted to $641,513. Administration expenses were $112,343; compensation paid amounted to 296,875; medical assistance eos $96,177; hospital service $84,876; medicines $17,585; and general expenses were $12,836." Especially in Puerto Rico, although experiments in matters of legislation have been many, the final results of the Government insurance system, seem to justify its existence and permanence.1"
THE BASE THOUSAND WORLD SIRIE The betting so far favors the Yankees. -The Cardinals pin their hopes on Alexander's iron arm.Huggins confident of his team's triumph.-Haines will occupy the ' 'box" if the series is prolonged.
Haines will occupy the 'box' if the series is extended. Notwithstanding A result of yesterday's game, many St. Louis sympathizers accept the , bets in favor of the Yankees made by the New Yorkers, for tomorrow's (today's) game. However, when the probable winner of the Series is discussed, demands arise on the part of the St. Louis fans, who allege that because of the lead favoring the Yankees, certain advantages must be offered if the bets are to be accepted. And on the occasion of such claims, thousands of fans appeared yesterday offering 10 to 3; 3 to 1; and 4 to 1, interchangeably, in favor of New York. A bet was made yesterday of 3,000 to $2,500 that the Yankees would get the victory in tomorrow's (today's) game, to be held in New York. THE DECISIVE FIGHT: Tomorrow (today), the decisive game of the Series will be played for St. Louis, for if the Huggins boys manage to win, they will have won the World Champions award. The triumph obtained yesterday, after a huge battle that lasted ten innings, is in their favor. The most pampered of the ballplayers ame GREAT OPPORTUNITY It is véneto truck "MACK", 3% Ton., completely new. Borinquen Ave. No. 75, or Tel. 1754, Santurce.
(FRENCH CABLE SERVICE, SPECIAL TO "THE WORLD**) M SAN LUIS, September, 8. The greatest discouragement spreads among the fans of the "San Luis" team, on the occasion of the defeat it suffered, so unexpectedly, at the hands of the "New York Yankees", in the tenth inning of the fifth game of the World Series, when everything seemed to indicate that Hornsby's hosts would fly the flag of victory.... This had been the day of the bets, and such was the confidence that animated the Cardinals' supporters, that they offered great advantages to those who still trusted in the aggressiveness of the Broadway boys. The Yankee team's victory had a double consequence: to surpass the ninth St. Louis by one game, and to produce huge dividends for those who bet in their favor. Yesterday, only interesting comments were heard in St. Louis sports circles about such a hard-fought battle. The singular feat of the Huggins boys, snatching the victory from the Cardinals in the tenth episode, after having fought a spectacular battle in the ninth inning to tie the score, is the talk of the town. The low effectiveness of the Yankee battery in the initial episodes of the game seemed to indicate that the Cardinals could easily dominate it, but the fighting spirit emerged in the last moments, and when everything seemed to expect a fatal outcome for the boys from New York, the thick artillery imposed itself, which culmi- : : ricans, the colossus, the colosseum and the Yankees.
The colossal Babe Ruth, who broke the established "record" for the greatest number of "runs" in a World Series, will have one more opportunity to delight his thousands of admirers by hitting in his own New York League, the formidable slugging that so impressed the baseball fans, and which in St. Louis gave his team the victory in the fourth contest. Only the powerful arm of veteran Grover Alexander stood in the way of the Yankees' definitive victory. The hopes of St. Louis are pinned on this prodigy, notwithstanding the inimitable feat accomplished by the marvelous Haines. A new opportunity will possibly be offered to Urban Shoker to occupy the center of the "Yankee" diamond, and realize the most golden dream of his life of obtaining a victory in a World Series game, before he "snags the glove".... If he fails in his endeavor, and the Series is extended one more game, then the "Yankees" will use the services of Hoyt Jon "s Sbwkey, Ruethera and even more of Ennock, and then the Cardinals will be able to wait, even more confidently, for the victory in the Series, counting on the victory in the Series. The Cardinals, even more confident of winning the Series, counting on the sensational pitching of Jess Haines, who on Tuesday gave a fateful zero - the Huggins boys, despite the am-nazr and respect inspired by Bebe Ruth, with his Kilometric! M sugar market M Cablegram received from Porto ' Rice International Corp, Oct. 1 8, S926, - h 1:25 P. M.: 1 "I* stock market openedt Dec. 2.86 i (4.64). Jan. 2.87 (4.65). March 2 77 i (4.55). j < Received 5:10 P. M. 1 The stock closed Die. 2.80 (4.64), i Jan. 2.88 (4.66), March 8.78,1 (4.56.)"
OPTICA ALVAREZ Apartado 192 - Jimenez St... Slcardó 57 "- TeL 290. CAGUAS, P. R. Modern cabinet, attended by the competent optometrist SR. F. ALVAREZ LOPEZ, Specialist in Sight Examinations. For an examination -$1.00. Free examination for the poor.
Commissioner Chard ó n will recommend Dr. Bagué not to say a word until he confers with him . M
In that regard he will put an aerogram on him when he is near our beaches. M A few days ago the Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, Mr. Chardón, commented on one of our editorials in connection with the emigration to Arizona, and told us that his silence was due to the fact that Dr. Bagué, who embarked with the first contingent of emigrants, had not spoken specifically in regard to the state of affairs announced by the cables, as they subsist in Arizona. "I will do the same as DrBagué did, when I was returning to the country after my trip to Colombia. He put an aerogram on me, notifying me not to make any public statements until he saw me with him. And when I arrived in Puerto Rico, I found that the campaign of the active forces and the controversy with the politicians was in its most intense ardor. "Now,'' Mr. Chardón told us, ''I will send an aerogram to Dr. Bagué, making him the same recommendation: that he should not open his mouth until he confers with me. Yesterday we met with the Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor and again he made the same statements: he will recommend Dr. Bagué to remain silent until he meets with him.
"HE SHOULD COUNT ME AMONG THE NUMBER OF THOSE WHO DECIDEDLY GREASE THE RANKS OF THE NATIONALIST PARTY OF PUERTO RICO".
M This is how Dr. Trejo Castillo expresses himself in a letter addressed to the President of said party, Ledo. Acosta Velarde. M
Dr. Trejo Castillo, prestigious Honduran intellectual and author of the much commented resolution presented at the Bolivian Congress of Panama, requesting the Independence of Puerto Rico, has addressed the following letter to Mr. Federico Acosta Velarde, President of the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party: Tegucigalpa, August 31, 1926 Mr. Federico Acosta Velarde. San Juan, Puerto Rico. Very distinguished and esteemed sir: I have received your esteemed letter of last month, confirming the cablegram you were kind enough to send me to Panama, expressing your gratitude on behalf of the Nationalist Party which you preside, for the proposal I made at the Bolivarian Congress, aimed at supporting the patriotic efforts of that Party to obtain Puerto Rican independence. You also express to me in it, your desire to know the details related to such proposal, and at the same time, you announce to me, the sending of several issues of "El Nacionalista de Ponce", a weekly newspaper that fiercely fights for the freedom of that people.
- i In thanking you, Doctor Ve - larde, for your kindness, it is extremely satisfactory for me to confirm my cable reply from Panama, assuring you, moreover, that you should count me among the number of those who decidedly swell the ranks of the Nationalist Party of Puerto Rico, and who at your side fight for the liberty of their homeland. In compliance with your wishes, at the end of the printing, I will send you a copy of the report that I submitted as Delegate of this Republic to the Bolivarian Congress, by which you will know how the proposal was received and what comments the press of some countries has made about it. The noble and manly endeavor to which - you and your companions consecrate ■ your best efforts, will surely and in no distant day have the i most accomplished success. Wishing to continue to keep abreast of your courageous campaign, I hope to continue to receive the brave nationalist weekly. Please accept, dear Dr. Velarde, the protests of my sympathy and high esteem. (Fdo.) Alfredo Trejo Carrillo.
■ THE MAN WHO ACCUSED THE CHIEF , IZQUIERDO , COMMITTING PERJURY, HAS BEEN SENTENCED TO SIE- - TE ANOS DE PRESIDIO M M MADE THE DISTRICT JUDGE OF ARECIBO CONSTANT THAT IT WAS NOT MORE SEVERE BECAUSE THE JURY ASKED FOR CLEMENCY M He added that 'the prestige and dignity of our courts had to be saved'. M -
As our readers will recall, public opinion was recently shaken by the news that Mr. Manuel A. Astor, a well-known businessman, lost, by means of theft, a wallet containing ten thousand dollars, in Utuado; and that as a result of an investigation conducted by Prosecutor Pérez Casalduc, the District Chief of the Utuado Island Police, Mr. Izquierdo, was arrested and indicted for the alleged crime of grand larceny. During the last fiscal year, 1115 appeals were filed before the 'Board of Review' in the amount of $69,215,000 -M- The taxpayers obtained a reduction of $6,519,000 M In his annual report, the Governor says the following about the Board of Review - Equalization. "This Board, which is the Board of Appeals to which taxpayers may appeal for review of assessments which they consider excessive, has worked throughout the year. One hundred and ten sessions, both ordinary and extraordinary, were held during the year to hear taxpayers. One hundred and forty-three appeals were considered, on the appraisal of corporations in connection with the conI (Continued on page 5)
- sé Medina Rivera, (a) El Brujo and his ■ mother, Juana Rivera, denied having given statements before that officer inculpating Mr. Izquierdo, for which reason the latter's attorneys requested the peremptory acquittal of the accused, and the judge of the ■ District Court of Arecibo ordered it, for lack of evidence, and therefore the police officer was completely exonerated. José Medina Rivera (a) El Brujo, was immediately arrested by the prosecutor, accused of the crime of perjury. The case of this subject was heard last Monday, before a jury, in the District Court of Arecibo. The trial lasted a whole day, the defendant being defended by Ledo. I don Herminio Miranda, who before proceeding to the hearing of the case informed the Court that the defendant had not fulfilled his deal but that he, as a matter of professional ethics, would continue to act. Mr. Miranda made a brilliant oral defense. The jury found Medina guilty. On Thursday morning the sentence was read. The Judge emphasized the seriousness of the case, and in his words denoted the firm purpose of severely punishing anyone guilty of perjury, to avoid greater evils and save the prestige and dignity of the courts and the People of Puerto Rico", and announced that he would be more severe in the penalty if the jury had not asked for clemency for the defendant. He then sentenced Medida to suffer seven years of imprisonment with hard labor. FOR SALE I admit proposiclone" of purchase, until October 28 for the best barber shop in Ponce, I guarantee it is a good deal. FRANCISCO RODRIGUEZ Sol 4 - Ponce.
| NEITHER HUYKE NOR VIZCA¡RRONDO S AN CIO|NAN THE ¡OBLIGATORY UNIFORM OF , THE TEACHERS M
They accept it for the children, but only on a voluntary basis. For some time now, several school inspectors have been suggesting the idea of uniforms for female teachers, an idea that has not been well received by the Puerto Rican teaching profession. From the beginning, it was believed that such an indication had originated in the Department of Instruction, and the criticism was all focused on the directors of this government agency. Yesterday, we questioned Mr. Huyke and Mr. Vizcarrondo, Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner of Ins traction, respectively, on this issue that is taking such a stir among the country's teachers. In reply to our questions, Mr. Huyke told us that he does not favor this measure that some inspectors have tried to introduce. -And what about the uniforms required of the children," he asked him, "that, of course, is something different. For the discipline of the school, it can be accepted, but it should by no means be compulsory." - WHAT [VIZCARRONDO TELLS US: ' Don Francisco Vizcarrondo, Sub-Commissioner, told us the following referring to the same issue: "The children, uniformed, are not required to wear uniforms, but they are not obligatory.
The children in uniform, give an aspect of homogeneity and discipline. The rich, like the poor, can go to school cleanly dressed. But I am not in favor of forcing teachers to wear uniforms. Everything that tends to restrict personal freedom is hateful. , M
■ To Barran quitas meeting will go Senator Soto to defend Gov. by 'City manager' M On this matter he conferred yesterday with Mayor Todd. M Yesterday morning he was conferring extensively with the Mayor of this city, Mr. Roberto H. Todd, Senator Juan Bautista Soto, defender of the municipal government by "City Manager". Both gentlemen exchanged views on various aspects of the municipal government system. Mr. Todd invited Senator Soto to attend tomorrow's meeting in Barranquitas, where the Commission appointed in the Maricao Assembly will discuss the problem of municipal reorganization. At the end of the conference to which we refer, we asked Mr. Soto if he intended to attend the meeting in Barranquitas, and he answered in the affirmative, and also told us that he would defend there his points of view regarding the "City Manager" government plan. Soto also told us that he would insist in the Insular Senate to implement this form of government and that to that effect he had prepared a bill to be presented at the first opportunity. Senator Soto will also present another bill to reform Puerto Rico's penal institutions. SEIZE THE OPPORTUNITY By the 15th of the current month, the two floors of the house Salvador Brau 75, in front of the Baldorioty School and the Catholic Academy, will be vacated, suitable for boarding, offices or housing. We will admit proposals. Will inform: RIVERO CHAVES & CO.
"IT IS NOT NECESSARY TO APPEAL TO WORDS TO REALIZE THE INAPPROPRIATENESS OF PONCE'S BUSINESS": MORALES CABRERA.
- M To prove it, he alleges that 397 farms will be auctioned in that city because their owners cannot pay the taxes. M
Commenting on the $650,000 loan recently approved by the Executive Council at the request of the Municipality of Ponce, Mr. Pablo Morales Cabrera, Acting President of the "Farmers Association", an organization that vigorously opposed the approval of said loan, told us yesterday the following:- "It is not necessary to appeal to words to realize the inappropriateness of this loan. In order to form a criterion in this respect, it will suffice to read
It will suffice to read the latest edition of the local press of Ponce, in which 397 rural and urban properties are advertised for public auction and are to be auctioned because their owners are unable to pay the corresponding island and municipal taxes. The loan implies greater contributions and therefore the intensification of the evil of which the list of properties offered for auction of which I have just spoken eloquently speaks."
"IF THE "ASOCIACION DE AGR1CUL TORES" DECIDES TO PRESENT A SECOND MEMORIAL, THAT IS ITS RIGHT": SANCHEZ MORALES M 'But they will be very careful to do so without per judicating the fundamental aspirations of the country,' he says. M
The Vice-President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Sanchez Morales, told us the following yesterday when commenting on the possibility that the Farmers' Association may address a new Memorial to the executive authorities and the U.S. Congress: "If the Farmers' Association, together with other organizations, decides to present a second Mei morial, the Farmers' Association, together with other organizations, may decide to present a second Mei morial to the executive authorities and the U.S. Congress," said Mr. Sanchez Morales,
If the Farmers Association, along with other organizations, decides to file a second memorial, that is their right. "Now, they will be very careful, especially after what the : experience of the first Memorial will have taught them, to do so without prejudice to the fundamental aspirations of the country, which mean further progress both in the economic and political order."
D D N CONSIDERABLE BUDGET INCREASE WILL BE REQUESTED BY THE HEALTH COMMISSIONER M Dr. Butte will claim only the ac tual appropriation from the Department of Justice. M
All yesterday morning the senior staff of the Department of Justice was at work in the offices of the Attorney General, Dr. George C. Butte, drafting the budget report requested of all department heads by the Insular Auditor, Mr. Holcomb, in the exercise of his authority as Budget Director. The Attorney General will limit himself to request strictly the amount sufficient to cover the expenses of his department, that is to say, the same appropriation of the past year, plus the sum to which the Spanish style TILES, manufactured in the country and of the best material, amounted. If you are interested, please call 1362, Santurce, P. Ri. MUNSON STEAMSHIP LINE STEAM LINE "MUNORLEANS" will leave Puerto Rico at the end of the current October direct to Galveston or New Orleans and will accept first class passage. It will also accept third class tickets at $30.00. SAN JUAN MERCANTILE CORPORATION Agents. Tel. 840. P. O. Box 542 SAN JUAN, P. R.
The Department's "deficit'' at the close of operations last fiscal year, to cover which the Legislature had to make a special appropriation. The Commissioner of Health, Dr. Pedro N. Ortiz, has informed us that he has not yet forwarded his report to the Auditor, and therefore cannot specify the amount to be requested. He advances to us, however, that due to certain innovations he intends to make, he will request a considerable increase in the budget of his Department, perhaps a larger amount than that which the Commissioner of the Interior, Sefior Guillermo Esteves, intends to request, that is, six hundred thousand dollars, of budgetary increase for the next fiscal year. CHIANTI Y CALIASTI -$5.00 I guarantee the purity of the grapes and will return the amount if they do not give the desired result. CIRO MALATRASI Restaurant Angeló, - San Juan. CIÑE LUNA Today Saturday 9 Hoy WANDA HAWLEY - EN - Fuera Coqueteos SUNDAY 10 Morning and Evening Amor quo no se Ajota con VIRGINIA VALLI