ELWNDO
E
IPAGS.3 CTS"; "Puerto Bloc Ilutrado'* Bldg. T "L 122Z - Box 348
14
IPAGS.3 CTS. ■"BMtr" ta.oe
MORNING
MORNING,
ANNUAL VIII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published aud distributed under permit (No. "ux> 03 "*- 01 ucwimx " a- - Ssn Jn*". Porto Bieo, By order of the President, A. S. Burleson. Postmaster General' entered as second class matter february 21, 1819. at the Post Office st 8>n Jnan. Porto Nico, (United States of under the Act of march 3. 1879.
SATURDAY, JANUARY 23, 1926
NUMBER 4083.
EASTERN FARMERS' CLAIM THAT THEY ARE THREATENED WITH RUIN.
SO CONTEND,! BY THE MEDIATION OF ■ MARTINEZ DAVILA, ... BEFORE THE COM. I They are tenaciously opposed to the franchise requested by the Fajardo. M Our readers are already aware, in general terms, of the important matter pending before the Public Service Commission, concerning the complaint filed by the farmers of Oriente i against the franchise petition,' which to build a piece of fe- ■ aj rroviario from Mameyes to Rio Gran- ■ HL de, requested by the Central Fajardo. TW We visited yesterday the offices of , [r the Public Service Commission , í where we were told that the ' ft pleadings of the Orente farmers had been filed. j Thanks to the kindness of ' our good friend, juriscon- . sulto Martinez Davila, we can p offer our readers the extract of the various points of " view on which the farmers of ■- Oriente base their petition for dismissal against the franchise j requested by the Fajardo. The questions submitted for the consideration of the farmers by the Commission are as follows: A. - What injury would be brought to , the settlers by the (grant of the fran-, quicia requested by the "Fajardo DeJ velopment * Co.", to extend IjP* only its lines from Maq* meyes to Rio Grande? B. -What benefits would they receive if i the "Fajardo Development Co." did not extend its lines to junction with the American Railroad Co. at Carolina? C. -What benefits would the settlers derive if the present status were maintained? "To this questionnaire the farmers answered as follows: The Fajardo Sugar Co. being || ' i only Central that exists in the H jna east, from Naguabo toII Mameyes and having under its * control the only means of comuA niqation, the Fa- ' jardo Development Co. railroad, obligates in an indirect, but efecIStíve way, the immediate settlers to their canes in the HF factory of the referred sugar company. These very depressing circumstances for the farmers of ■ /* uflud littoral were what motivated the approval by our Legislature of the project of the ■ Oriente railroad. But not only are the n jtolouos harmed by being forced by lack of means of communication to mill their canes at the Fajardo Central, but the special circumstances to which we allude make it impossible to lease ¡1 'of the land at reasonable prices. First quality lands ( ||,™n have been leased at Fa. ardo í II ■>6.00 cuerda, whose value in Pon' ¡I Jes of $12.00, $16.00 and $18.00. UBCeotinued on P. 6, la. Col. *1 HATO-REY I STOP No more regrets. There is already F {.K in HATO REY a barber. a | .! very modern that gathers all |1 ,1 the indispensable elements Id V for people of taste. THE BARBER'S DELICACIES COME TO VISIT US.
IMPORTANT ISSUE RAISED BY THE MUD. MARTINEZJADAL WHO ACTS ON A BIG JURY CANNOT BE A MEMBER OF A SMALL JURY WHEN IT IS THE SAME MATTER I -M- In the morning of yesterday compa-' recio before Judge Sepulveda the Ledo. Martínez Nadal and, on behalf of the defendant José Inés Camón, whom a Jury of said Court had found guilty of the crime of perjury, announced that he proposed to present a motion requesting a new trial for his defendant, for having learned that two of the members of the Jury that convicted Carrión were also part of the Grand Jury that convicted José Inés £arrión, which was contrary to the Law and to the procedures followed in the matter. Having seen the motion of the Counsel, Judge Sepulveda appointed Saturday, January 30, for the discussion of the same. - , . The Assembly will ratify its position regarding the new pipeline, as stated by Assemblyman Pedro Juan Barbosa. The contract will be discussed definitively in the next session. M The construction of the San Juan aqueduct will be delayed for some more time, judging by the disparity that seems to exist between the municipal administrators. Some are in favor of the subway wells proposal presented by the "Layne" house, while others are in favor of continuing the work as it was begun, that is, using the waters of the Guaynabo and Bayamon Rivers. The resolution recently approved by the Municipal Assembly of the city, consenting to the "Layne" aqueduct project, has been lately branded as illegal, since, according to the allegation, said organism should only have, by auction, the construction of the public works whose cost is more than $600. Now comes the case of whether, in the (Continued on 6a. p. 6a. col.) I RENT A two-story building of concrete 18% meters in front by 28 meters in back with frontage on three ea'Ies. Another one-story building of 12 meters in front by 28 meters in the back for tobacco, cinema, or any other factory, located in § S Calle Tapia, Montef'ores. In- § formes: Telephone Í022, San- £ 5 turce.
| ELEGANCE : H GREAT PRICE REDUCTION ¡/r Great price reduction * after balance sheet. FABRICS AT HALF PRICE J¡ BALSA, TRIO & CO. . - v San Justo 35 San Juan, P. R.
THE BOARD OF REVISION CAN SOLVE ALL TAX PROBLEMS -THIS IS THE OPINION OF THE DISTINGUISHED BROWN LAWYER.
AFFIRMS THAT THE TESORE-1 RIA HAS NEVER CREATED A Fl-i JA STANDARD IN THE COLLECTION OF TAXES. M "The taxpayer never knows when he has finished paying," he says. M--It is of such magnitude the question involved in the various tax suits which have been filed in our courts of justice, and most especially those relating to the Sales Law, that the public awaits with extraordinary expectation the final decision of the Courts in all these cases. ' Yesterday we visited Ledo. Brown, attorney for powerful business houses in the city, desirous of hearing his opinion on this scare which constitutes one of the most interesting preble. . í most interesting both to the merchants and to the Government. The distinguished lawyer gave us a very affable answer, stating that most of the cases he is in charge of, related to the income tax, he has submitted to the Board of Directors. He has submitted them to the Board of Review and Equalization, which has already received the pleadings of the attorneys, as well as an explanation from the Attorney General. He assured us that these cases involve a large amount of money, more than one hundred thousand dollars; and that only one lawsuit is pending before the District Court, which will be resolved once he has filed the pleadings within the twelve-day period granted to him. I We asked* Ledo. Brown, whether in his opinion the Board of Review and Equalization had the power to resolve any legal question, to which he replied as follows: "Although its findings are not definitive of the contributors, I am of the opinion that it has the power to resolve any question. In the United States, this agency has absolute powers to intervene in all tax matters. In Puerto Rico, someone has to interpret the law, and I believe that the Board is empowered to rule in any case as it sees fit. Of course, the Cor ■ tes would be glad to see that in the event of any discrepancies arising. I the Board to discuss and resolve legal questions* *. -Do you believe that the services of a legal consultant are necessary for the Department of Ha cien da, we asked. If it is a competent lawyer," he replied, "this functionary could do a good job, beneficial to the people of Puerto Rico. Treasury has to deal with innumerable legal issues, which may well be resolved by an attorney experienced in tax matters. If the ex : parto is a competent lawyer, his services will be of great use. i -and to what are due the many difficulties that arise in connection with the collection of taxes, let's join in questioning Ledo, i Brown. It is simply that the various provisions of the laws have never been properly interpreted. If the Treasurer, whoever he was, would draw an unchangeable, firm rule, it would avoid many mishaps. But it is true that the taxpayer never knows when he has finished paying his taxes. When he thinks he has made good the amount he has (Continued on 6a. pg. 4ta. Col.) WANTED A competent shoe cutter and preparer who can cut and prepare from the cheapest and most ordinary to the finest. Apply to "La Favorita del ! Campo" of Manuel Morales Suárv", Conjerío, P. R.
ü N A N IDEA THAT PROSPERA E'llT R E THE COLONIAJRIA TODAY TFND A RECEPTION TO BE HELD AT THE PALACE M The idea is to help the sons of Mount Lebanon in des* pr í "'H. M The young Syrian, Mr. Philippe Asear, made in our columns an appeal to his compatriots, inviting them to contribute with their efforts and initiatives to alleviate the difficult situation that the children of Mount Lebanon are going through at the moment, victims of the war against the French Republic. The Christians are suffering from the f ago'. actions and tortures of the Druze, and hunger, despair and misery are rife in Syrian homes. Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, the United States and other nations have launched campaigns, the sons of Mount Lebanon eager to help their brothers, and that is why the young Asear has decided to make a campaign for the relief of the Syrian people.)
THE GOVERNOR APPOINTS A COMMITTEE TO STUDY THE APPRAISAL PLAN SUBMITTED TO HIM.
SUBMITTED TO HIM
THE SAID COMMITTEE WILL BE CHAIRED BY THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE, MR. SANCHEZ MORALES - THE PLAN SHOULD BE ALTERED OR SUBSTITUTED AT THE DISCRETION OF THE COMMITTEE - IT IS REQUESTED THAT THE REPORT TO BE RENDERED BE COMPLETE.
M The Governor has addressed the following letter to Messrs. Luis Sánchez Morales, José Manuel Muñoz, Carlos E. Chardón, Guillermo Esteves, Juan G. Gallardo, Jorge Bird Arias, Agustín Fernández, 1 Dr. Francisco Sein and Mr. Enri-. t que Landrón: San Juan, P. R., January 20, 1925 , Dear Sirs: I have received from a committee of the Economic Commission a plan for carrying into effect the taxation of the " rustic properties of Puerto RiI co. As the proposed plan is for the establishment of a permanent system of such taxation, and as the adoption of a feasible jus i. I have thought it best to submit the plan to a commission representing the various interests, and having the greatest ability to give this matter a fair and just consideration and treatment. I wish you to be a member and to serve on that Commission. I inn clude herewith a copy ■s of the plan as outlined. The Commission is not bound by the plan, but may use it as a basis for consideration and discussion. The Commission ;1 may recommend any changes it deems advisable, or may reconfirm any changes it deems necessary.
1 may recommend a substitute plan, if it thinks best. It would be desirable that the report of the Commission be made complete, so that if approved, it can be put into operation as far as possible by administrative order. The chairman of the Commission will be the Honorable Luis Sanchez Mo mies, who will convene the' Commission to organize itself and to make arrangements for the meeting and to outline the plan of proceedings of the Commission. The total number of members of the Commission is as follows: Fon Luis Sánchez Morales, " José Manuel Muñoz " Carlas E. Chardón. "Guillermo Esteves I " Juan G. Gallardo - " Jorge Bird Arias " Agustín Fernández. "Enrique Landrón. Pr. Francisco Sein i I earnestly beg you to' accept a place in this Co- 1 I mission, as I believe it will be an opportunity to render real service for the benefit of your country and I am sure you are especially qualified to render such service. | With the assurances of my highest personal consideration. I remain yours sincerely, H. M. TOWNER, Governor. i PLAN FOR VALUATION OF LAND PROPERTY It is proposed to establish a Board of Assessment to fix the rates at which each class of land as classified in Schedule No. 1 shall be assessed in each township, and to make such subdivisions as may be warranted. This Board will go through all the towns of the island and once the work is completed, it will proceed to form what will be called "zones of equal valuation". The Appraisal Board shall be composed of an agronomist from the Department of Agriculture; a technician from the Department of the Interior; an appraiser of recognized expertise; and two farmers in each town, who shall be a major and a minor landowner, who shall be appointed by the Governor from two lists submitted by the Puerto Rico Farmers Association. The forms and questionnaire forming part of this plan shall be filled out and answered by agents of the Department of Housing, under the direction of the Treasurer of Puerto Rico and with the cooperation of the Departments of Agriculture and the Interior. The Department of the Interior will fix the rules for appraising the buildings, machinery and irrigation systems pri vado. (Continued on 3a. p. 5a. Col.) ""WlCÍMl -COMPAÑ'Á LADRON DE GUE-VARA-RTVELLES Monday, January 25. ' GRAND GALA FUNCTION For the benefit of the works of the Church and School of Parada 19. Premiere of the nreriosa comedy in 3 acts, by Juan José Lorente, entitled EL MADRIGAL PE LA CUMBRE Represented 150 consecutive nights eh Teatro Lara, Je Madrid. Ask for your tickets in time at telephone 892, Santurca. GREAT SOCIAL EVENT! Favor tickets are cancelled.
THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE TWO-MILLION-DOLLAR BUSINESS VENTURE ROADS IS PROCEEDING.
THE GOVERNOR COMMENTS ON THIS EXTENSION SAYING THAT IT IS OF INDISPENSABLE NECESSITY - "WE MUST DEVELOP THE MARKETS OF ALL THE VILLAGES ON THE ISLAND".
The Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Guillermo Esteveg, has given orders to proceed with the construction of the roads and bridges included in the two million dollar loan. News received from Washington indicates that the bonds have been successfully sold. The money will, from one moment to the next, be at the disposal of Mr. Esteves, to defray the expenses incurred in carrying out all the projects approved by the Department of the Interior. \ GOVERNOR'S COMMENTS. The Governor has always been in favor of the extension of our highway system. He considers it to be of indispensa b'e necessity. He believes that 'the markets of all the towns on the Island must be developed."
The Governor has made a most interesting report of the general conditions oe our roads and bridges, from' which we extract the paragraphs of njayor importance.
"The extension and maintenance of highways in Puerto Rico is of indispensable necessity. The only railroad on the island is a narrow single track that follows the coast. The interior of the island, with its many important towns, is accessible only by public roads. For the most part, the interior is mountainous, necessitating great expense for the original construction, maintenance and repair of roads. All sites on the island are heavily populated. People build their homes and cultivate the land not only in the valleys, but also in the mountains themselves- to provide them with income and outgoings, markets and schools.
IMPORTANT TO THE TRADE. The most popular establishment in San Juan is sold with or without stock. "EL CIELO" In one of the best locations with spacious premises. We have the key to how with very little capital, you can earn 10 to 12,000 pesos annually. We sell sideboards, glass counters, stained glass windows, a fayer, a Burrogh adding machine, a good iron box, an electric motor, electric fans. NOTE:- We realize irremissible before March 1 all beds, mattresses, shirts, stockings, socks, socks, export objects, silvered, at burning prices. ARRIVi BROTHERS S. in C. Al'eft 25 Box 77 ALL ON A CASH BASIS OR WITH ABSOLUTE GUARANTEE.
W A L L ST. WANTS TO INCREASE THE PRICE OF SUGAR.
BISHOPS CARUANA AND BYRNE EMBARK FOR PUERTO RICO NEXT THURSDAY M This is the official announcement from the bishoprics of San Juan and Péhice - Preparations are being finalized for the inauguration of the new diocese. M According to the reports we have just received from the bishoprics of San Juan and Ponce, Bishops Caruana and Byrne embark for Puerto Rico next Thursday. On the following Monday they will be in this capital, where they will receive a very warm welcome. The arrival of the distinguished Prelates is expected in Pence as well as in San Juan, where they will be the object of multiple entertainments. In Pence, the inauguration of the new Bishop will give rise to a very solemn celebration in which the most distinguished Catholic elements of the country will participate. INAUGURATION OF THE DIOCESE OF PONCE The commission of knights presided over by Vicar Father Garcia, is finalizing the preparations for the inauguration of the Diocese of Ponce. The Order of the Knights of Columbus in that city has the main participation in the organization of the welcome to Mon. I Byrne. The Bishop of San Juan, Bishop Caruana, will also participate in the ceremonies that will take place. Caruana. THE GOVERNMENT HAS BEGUN INVESTIGATING WORKING CONDITIONS IN M HEAD OF LABOR BUREAU The Chief of the Labor Bureau is going inland to investigate. The Governor has requested that the inspection be thorough. M The Labor Bureau of the Department of Agriculture has decided to begin investigating the general working conditions in the plants established on the Island. Chief Carmelo Honoré, accompanied by some of the Government inspectors, will carry out a thorough investigation. It is proposed, as we were informed, 1 yesterday afternoon, to put an end at once to the infractions of the law which are being carried out in the employment of workers. Especially in the plants," Mr. Honoré told us, "we will conduct our investigation, [worker by worker. Ei em(Continued on 6. .2da. Col.) TAQUIGRAFA/ with experience in law office and notary work in both languages. Sue'do $20 per week. Apartment 4. Ochoa Building. / II Flour Mill i i i Hammer throw mill ' 1 (hammer throw mill) that i [ can be .moved by engine [ 1 of six jábalos of force. < [ .Informjí:- P. O- Box 205, [ !| °onceyP. R.
PLAN TO BE IMPLEMENTED TO AVOID VIOLENT MARKET FLUCTUATIONS -- Perhaps new corporations will be formed.-The movement which is being started should interest our sugar growers. From the January 15 edition of the New York newspaper "The Evening Post", we copy the following information which will undoubtedly be of great interest to our sugar producers: "A plan to stabilize the sugar market and put an end to the violent fluctuations in prices is being prepared by the great interests in Va. It is proposed to make vast and drastic changes in the market, so that the industry as a whole will be readjusted. The propositions are now being discussed and the bankers are considering consolidation of producers and refiners and perhaps the formation of new corporations. In the past speculators have been able to stabilize the market for some time by buying up large quantities of sugar and holding it in storage until better prices are obtained. The market, without oversupply, improves, and speculators make large profits. In the long run the market suffered from these operations and the public paid the consequences. - Any plan prepared by the bankers will leave the speculators out of the combination. It is intended to form a machine that will relieve the market of excess production, when that excess becomes dangerous. It is generally believed that the National City Bank and Dillon, Reed & Co. will constitute a block when the attempt to go into action is made. - The National City Bank has always been very interested in the sugar field, and is understood to be the manager of H. Howell Son & Co. Howell's interest in the Cuban Dominican Corporation, ja. Central Aguiroe Sugar Company; the i fajardo §ftgar Co., and the West India Finance Corporation. The National Refining Co, also Áq says it is interested in Ja new situation." NOTICE " T : M The stockholders of The Cayey industrial Corporation are hereby notified that the General Meeting of stockholders of this Corpcration will be held on February 14, 1926 at (as nu "ve in the morning at the premises qne ecu. pa the Casino Puertorriqueño calle de Muñoz Rivera No. 55, altos, de Cayey, P- R. And this being the second cenvocatoria, the gentlemen stockholders are warned that the Meeting M cele- - brará with the atunero of stockholders.
that you attend Cayey January 12, 192®. ■ *- " Lodo. M. Gusman TENIDOS, Secretary ; (Announcement) < ■' \-<.V-.* 2 ±1"
Compagnie Generale Transatlantae 1 FRENCH STEAMER "CARAVELLE" Expected February 5 from ¡the West Indies and will continue voyage bound for Le Havre, France. The French steamship "MACORIS" ■||| is expected on May 10 next, bound for La CORLÑA and Havre. Both steamers admit passage and cargo for the above v ports, as well as cargo for the other ports in northern l||| of Europe. For further information contact BEHNBROTHERS INC. AGENTS, San Juan. Tel. 257. Tanca-Tetuam ||||