THE WORLD
' 1 O 3C7VS. I| | | | I Office: "Puerto Rico Has g U trado Bldg." -Tel. 1222 - ■ -- ■<
ID PAGES 3 C7VS. I Semester _ _ _ 5.00 J U A Year 19.50 - 1
DAILY DAILY OF
a.m.
-San Juan, Puerto Rico.
. "kSFSR*"o.V F*"-. "Círrí,*-"*-""'- -- *- - "* ""■""....
: Year VIII.
Saturday, September 4, 1926.
"BARCELO AND I MEAN NOTHING TO THE SUPREME INTE- . RESES OF THE FATHERLAND".
A CHALLENGE FROM ONE TO THE OTHER WOULD RENDER NO SERVICE TO OUR PEOPLE,' says Resident Commissioner Córdova Dávila, 'I cannot turn my arms against my party,' he adds. M
The Resident Commissioner, Mr. Félix Córdova Dávila, gave us the following statement, when questioned by us yesterday about information that appeared in "La Democracia" and in which mention is made of a certain letter of his addressed to Mr. Barceló, a letter that we insert elsewhere in this same edition:- "I have just read the information published in "La Democracia" in which my name is being bandied about and attitudes are attributed to me that I am forced to explain. The title with which this information is headed is very significant. "Córdova Dávila", it says, "has addressed a letter to Mr. Barceló launching an open and definitive challenge". - It should be noted that this headline is published when Mr. Barceló is already aware of my letter and knows what it says. It seems that the distinguished Chief of the Union qualifies my attitude as an open and definitive challenge. My letter is self-explanatory. It expounds ideas and principles and keeps .... It gives Mr. Barceló all the con-.
It gives to Mr. Barceló all the considerations that ethics advises. There is not a word in it that could be considered mortifying. Mr. Córdova Dávila may not agree with the policy that Mr. Barceló wants to outline for his Party at this moment; but to qualify as a challenge the frank and noble expression of ideas is something that I am unable to explain to myself and that the country will not be able to explain either". "My purpose is not to throw down a gauntlet of defiance.... I never adopt these postures of vanity and arrogance. I am too humble and worth too little to allow myself the luxury of throwing down a gauntlet of defiance. It is far from my mind to fight Mr. Barceló. My desire is that light be shed on the interesting problems that are being debated at this time, and I contribute to the discussion with my scanty lights and the purity of my convictions." "Barceló and I signify nothing before the supreme interests of the*patria. A challenge from one to the other would not contribute an idea or render any service to our people. Continued on page 7, 2nd Col.
"THE PURE REPUBLICAN COMMITTEE OF SAN JUAN ENJOYS THE FULL CONFIDENCE OF THE PARTY": MARTINEZ NADAL ; . M 'The only ground of complaint against him has disappeared', he says. -* m
When I asked Ledo Martinez Nadal yesterday what he thought of the attitude of the Pure Republican Committee of San Juan to abide by the resolution adopted by the General Assembly of said party held recently in Santurce, he made the following statements: "The Local Committee has shown itself to be disciplined by abiding by the order dictated by the Party, and by making a public rectification of its previous actions". "The Local Committee therefore enjoys the full confidence of the party. This was the only motive of complaint against it, and having disappeared, everything returns to its original state, and the Committee is left with its original state.
It was the only complaint against it, and having disappeared, everything returns to its original state, and the Local Committee remains closely linked to the party, as it must be". "For the rest, the men who compose the Local Committee are republicans by all accounts, and excellent administrators, which is why we are very satisfied that they will continue in their posts. "The divergence that arose with the Territorial Committee was caused by a mistake made by the Local Committee, a mistake that it made perhaps out of self-love, but having rectified it, harmony has been restored."
The AMOLADOR TALLER -I warn the island that machines, razors, barber's scissors, scalpels, penknives etc. are amuelanado. I accept mail orders. Good guarantees. PEDRO RAMOS, Box 162, Ponce. I am interested in buying a limestone crusher, to use it often. Address to Tomás Rodríguez, Cayey, P., R., Cayey.
The tremendous drama premiered in San Juan. ELHURACAN | with HOUSE PETERS.
GARAGE DUCO Stop 5 San Juan. In this workshop we use only legitimate BUCO materials.
CINE LUNA Saturday
EVIAN WATER (CACHAT) Just received. Yes i-a best ipesa water Procure it at drugstores and co'mados. "
TOMORROW THE DIRECTORS OF THE ORDER OF CABALLE ROS DE COLON WILL MEET IN PONCE.
-They will determine how they will contribute to the cause of the Mexican Catholics. Tomorrow, Sunday, a meeting of the directors of the Order of the Knights of Columbus in Puerto Rico will be held in the city of I*once. The purpose of said meeting is to discuss the manner in which the quota corresponding to the Council of Puerto Rico can be collected more easily and efficiently in its proportional contribution to the fund of one million dollars that was agreed upon by the different Councils in the last Supreme Convention of said Order, with the purpose of helping by all possible means the Mexican Catholics in their campaign against the attitude of the Calles Government. The Council of Puerto Rico decreed, in a previous session, that the personal contribution of each one of its affiliates, would be voluntary and not obligatory and fixed, as it was suggested at the beginning. Mr. Rafael Maria Pietrantoni, State Deputy of the Order, has made the following statements in relation to the projected campaign to be discussed at tomorrow's meeting: - "I have no doubt that the Knights of Columbus will sustain their usual brilliant achievements, contributing generously to raise the funds that correspond to us in this campaign. I believe more; I believe that our quota will be more than covered, since in addition to the members of the Order we have the help of the sympathizers of the cause of the Mexican people, which must reach the hearts of all free men who believe in justice, and in the right of men to worship God in the manner dictated by their conscience and faith. "The situation in Mexico is worse and worse, to the extent that all those who hold the title of Knights of Columbus in that Republic have been expelled from the public offices they held in the Municipalities, States of the public Re or federal district. The same is true of those employed in the railroad companies. The Government of Mexico has sent out a questionnaire to its various subordinates, conceived in the following terms:- 1. Are you a Knight of Columbus? 2. Continued on 7th. page 3a. Col.
MIELES call 31 black Hato Rey or write to aparta do 112, Santurce and they will give you good prices. MATEO M. PASCUAL
La Toja Soap THE BEST FRIEND FOR WOMEN
Schoolgirls! Schoolgirls! WE OFFER THE BEST AND MOST COMPLETE ASSORTMENT OF SCHOOLGIRLS' SUITS FOR BOYS AND GIRLS, specifically purchased for this season. Good Quality - Good Fit - Strong Colors. $1.50 - $2.50 - $ - $3.50 - $4 - $4.50 and $5 Loose Pants and Blouses Beautiful Colors - Superior Workmanship - Premium Material. 50c - 75c - $1 - $2 and $2.50. Book Cases - Notebooks - Pencils - Pens, etc. Shoes - Socks - Hats - Umbrellas - Caps. Underwear and everything necessary for school children. Visit us right away. Very Economic Prices. GONZALEZ PADIN & CO., INC. SA NJUAN PONCE MAYACUEZ
1 SToportünidad For sale truck "MACK'', 3y 2 Ton., completely new. Berinquen Ave. No. 75, or Tel, 1794, Santurce.
"IF THAT DEPOT. IS COM PLATIENT WITH THE CENTRALS, THERE IS NO REASON TO ODE TRATE WITH ALL RIGOR TO SMALL LANDOWNERS." M-i
This is how the 'Asocia ción de Agricultores' addresses Treasurer Gallardo. M The Central Office of the "Farmers' Association" sent the following letter to the Treasurer of Puerto Rico:- San Juan, P. R., September 2, JJ¿ó. Hon. Treasurer of 'Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico. Sir:- We have the pleasure to enclose herewith a loose-leaf letter signed by the Collector of Internal Revenue of Lares, by which the taxpayers of that Municipality are required to pay immediately the taxes corresponding to the fiscal year 1925 27, and are threatened with the most rigorous application of the system of aure mió and embargo prescribed by the Political Code. Said loose leaf is sent to us through the Local Board of the Association, accompanied by the most violent and just protest of those agri cultores, who are naturally surprised and alarmed, when the attitude of the official who authorizes such an injunction, seems to make evident the Treasury's intention of not taking into account the ruinous situation in which the storm of July 23rd left those heights, but that, on the contrary, their situation will be aggravated with the heavy burden of the costly procedures of seizure. We still seem to hear the flattering public statements of His Honor and of the Honorable Governor, in the wake of the cyclone, prompted by the request of the Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, Mr. Chardon, for a 50 per cent reduction in the contributions of the farmers, statements which gave us hope that the Department would act with the prudence that circumstances dictate in requiring the farmers injured by the storm to comply with their obligations to the Treasury. Later, hearings were held at the Board of Revision and Equalization and it was announced that it would be practiced by the Department of Agriculture.
cordova da Vila WANTED TO DISCUSS HIS LETTER TO BARCELO IN THE BUREAU OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS M - Explains how it was given to the public without his authorization. M Mr. Córdova Dávila sends us the following note for publication: - "El Tiempo", upon publishing my letter to Barceló; says that it received a copy of said document signed by me, and as someone could suppose that I sent said copy to "El Tiempo", I take off to make known some details that explain to the public the truth. "The reporter of "La Democracia", Mr. Davila, came to see me to tell me that "El Tiempo" was publishing my letter, and to ask my authorization to insert it in "La Democracia"." ''I telephoned the editor of "El Tiempo" and was told that a copy had been received from Mayagüez. I asked if they had kept the envelope, and they replied that they had. I went to the editorial office of "El Tiempo" and there I could see that they had made a mistake, telling me that the letter had come from Mayagüez. Mr. Barbosa kindly explained to me the truth, and handed me the envelope containing the letter with the following note: "This sealed envelope, containing a copy of the letter from the Resident Commissioner, Mr. Córdova Dávila, was delivered to me by a young man, in my office at "El Tiempo", on the morning of September 3, 1926. He did not say who sent it". This note is signed by Mr. Francisco J. Barbosa. "It is curious the method that has been used to make my letter public. I had hoped to discuss it in the Board of Directors before giving it to the public. The copy that
THE SMALL MILLS WILL PAY THE SUGAR TAX 'BY SIXTHS'.
M The large ones will do so under protest and will then resort to the courts. M . In spite of the efforts made by Mr. Jorge Bird Arias and the promises made by the Treasury Department that the most powerful sugar mills will pay in full the amount owed to the Treasury for the sugar tax, the truth is that they will pay the debt in full, but under protest, and will then initiate legal proceedings. As for the small sugar mills, since they do not have sufficient resources to pay the tax in full, we are informed that they will do so in "sixths", in accordance with Treasurer Gallardo's plan. I do not believe that we have any reason to suppose that Mr. Córdova Dávila is in combination with the active forces'. M Don Luis Sanchez Morales says. Yesterday we had an extensive discussion on current topics with the V ice-President of the Senate, Mr. Sánchez Morales, who in the course of the conversation we had with him referred to the statements made recently by the member of the Board of Directors, Mr. Eugenio Lecompte in EL MUNDO to the effect that "Córdova Dávila was engaged with the Living Forces." Here is what Mr. Sánchez Morales told us in commenting on those statements: "I do not believe that we have reason to suppose that Mr. Córdova Dávila is in combination with le¿ fuerzas vivas. On the contrary, from the terms of a conversation we had in recent days, I deduced that he is making efforts to maintain the strictest impartiality 'in the current one Mr. Barbosa showed me is one of those that were distributed among the members of the, Direc torio in San Juan. I do not criticize that it has been published; but it does not cease to surprise me that the person who provided the copy has refrained from making his attitude public. "These details are of no importance whatsoever. I can explain perfectly what happened; but I wanted to publish this note, because I am sure that if I had published the letter, I would have been accused of having made a mistake.
AFTER THE BAN Dad:- What does BRANDI mean now? Son:- After the BRANDI ban it means.... Accessories for automobiles. Dad:- And why? Son:- Because the only legitimate BRANDI that you can get in American territory are Mr. José Brandi & Br. in Ponce who are in the business of automobile accessories in general with open GARAGE DAY and NIGHT. (Advertisement)
True Embroiderers in enhancement needed; lots of work and good pay. GLORIA RODRIGUEZ Can Jose 8, altos, San Juan.
Number 2485.
"LA CARTA DE CORDOVA ES UN CAPITULO DE C A R G 0 S QUE CORRE PAREJAS CON EL CELEBRE MEMORIAL": BARCELO.
M 'THIS IS WRITTEN IN THE TONE THAT A SUPERIOR HIERARCHY WOULD USE'; HE SAYS > e e M 'I am already feeling and thinking intensely about abandoning this struggle,' he adds. M
When we read yesterday "La Democracia", announcing that Córdova Dávila had addressed a letter to Mr. Barceló launching him "an open and definitive challenge", before knowing the text of the letter referred to by the esteemed colleague, we visited the President of the Senate, who is still confined to his residence in Condado, by prescription. We asked Mr. Barceló for an opinion on the information published by "La Democracia". Referring to Mr. Córdova Dávila's letter, he told us the following: "It is written in the tone that would be used by his hierarchical superior,
who believes he alone has a clear vision of things, and anathematizes others for their actions, describing them as< ill-advised, chaotic, revolutionary, anti-democratic, disturbing the existing order, sons of passion, hatred, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera." "It is a chapter of charges that runs couples with the famous Memorial." "After the accusations made against us by the Resident Commissioner in his letter, if that be the truth of our situation, the impression that will be left of us is that we are more than 100 years behind the times, as a people worthy of liberty, and that we deserve consequently the economic and political slavery we suffer." -Do you intend to answer Mr. Córdova Dávila," we asked him. -Yes, I am answering the letter, although my spirit at this moment feels prey to such immense setbacks, that I am taking my pencil to write a few notes, and I have to let you go; finally, what is produced in my mind, already by dint of such bitter disappointments, is the desire to abandon this place, in which it seems that, by fatal law, we are irremissibly called to succumb. I am already feeling and thinking about it intensely. It is not worth so many sacrifices." We continued to question Mr. Barcétó, who, turning to us with a certain air of uneasiness, said, "Friend, enough! I do not feel very calm at this time to hold a pleasant interview." And pleasing the President of the Senate, we left his residence, leaving him in peace..... UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO RICO Río Piedras, Puerto Rico -M September 1, 1926.
LETTERS CONTINUE BETWEEN MAYOR TODD AND SOCIALISTS M The latter again refuse to withdraw the candidacy of Dr. Moreno* -M-t- The President of the "Socialist Central Committee", Mr. Francisco Paz Gránela, yesterday answered the last letter addressed to him by Mayor Todd regarding the candidacy for Director of Municipal Welfare. In said letter Mr. Paz Gránela regrets that "the Mayor has not understood the reasons and arguments set forth in his previous letter" and reiterates, on behalf of the Socialist Central Committee "that Dr. Narciso Moreno is his candidate for the position of Director of Municipal Welfare". ( -*-*-*■ - - ■ SUGAR MARKET Cablegram received from Porto Rico International Corp. 10:35 A. M. Sept. 3, 1926. Exchange at orló December 2.59 (4.37) January 2.63 (4.41). 3:35 P. M. The stock market closed December 2.60 (4.38) January 2.63 (4.41). ORAN INAUGURATION IN CAYEY Tomorrow, Sunday at 7 P. M. Inauguration of the Gran Hotel Barcelona with a comidabaile, enlivened by one of the best bands of P. R. Covered $2.00 Ask for your ticket to: PEDRO VAZQUEZ NEGRON Owner. ]
Notice is hereby given that' registration for the next school year will be closed on Tuesday, September 7th at 4:00 p.m.. Students applying for admission for the first time must attend a meeting to be held in the auditorium of the Román Baldorioty de Cástro building on Thursday, September 2, at 2:00 p.m. The heads of the different schools of the city of Cástro will be in charge of the registration process. The heads of the various colleges of the University will be in their respective offices every day from Thursday, September 2, to receive the students of SECOND, THIRD and FOURTH year who wish to consult on any matter relating to their programs of study for the coming year.
A R gZ O N A LAND OF PROMISE! I" EMIGRANTS We have reduced our prices on LUGGAGES, BAGS, SUITS, FOOTWEAR, SHIRTS, remaining exclusively at COST PRICE. Equip yourself with us, we are the only manufacturers of suitcases and trunks in the Antilles. - VISIT - "LA IMPERIAL" "La casa que más barato Vendé''. - from - ANTONIO LEMA & CO. P. O. Box 62. Tel. 585, Sin Juan, P. R.