ELMÍNDO
h ?MINA$3CTVS.I I I Office: "Puarto Rico Ilua. V "uto Eldg ". -TeL 1223
1 0 PAGES 3 CTVS. II Semester _ __ _ _ I.OC I V One Year I9JW
THE MORNING
JOURNAL OF
HIV YEAR.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
I ?' .? r D 0rd, í,íí á- 8. BurJwm. Poitmsctcr Q "a "nl. Mntered M neona ol"". matter I ..bruary 31, 191g, "t th" Pcwt 0fff<M> >t Han Juan, forte Bien. <Üatte4 Atete* ot Amerie") ud" th. Ae" of march 3 1879
SATURDAY, JULY 17, 1926
NUMBER 2486.
THE MUD. HERRERO IS SATISFIED THAT ALL PARTIES HAVE ENDORSED HIM FOR SUPERINTENDENCE OF ELECTIONS.
HE SAYS HE HAS RECEIVED THE MOST INTENSE SATISFACTION OF HIS LIFE M 'In case of being appointed, I will know how to maintain the ( standard of my executions', he says.
In his office in Fortaleza, we interviewed yesterday with Ledo. Juan N. Herrero, whose candidacy for the presidency of the "Junta Insular de Elecciones" has been endorsed by the heads of all political parties. When questioned as to the manner in which his candidacy for that high office was initiated, he made the following statements:- "In presenting my candidacy, as I stated to the Governor in the request I made to that effect, I did it in the first place, as a means of obtaining a promotion after 20 years of service to the federal and insular administrations, and in the second place, with the desire to serve my country faithfully and honorably. The endorsement of my candidacy by all the political parties, clearly demonstrates the equality that I have observed in all my official actions, since otherwise it cannot be explained that all the political groupings, without exception, have concurred in favoring my candidacy for President of the "Insular Board of ' Elections". This community of criteria as far as my person is concerned, has given me a great satisfaction, perhaps the most intense of my life. - ' - "I assure you, that in case of being appointed, I will know how to maintain intact the standard of the executions of my life, which have always been inspired, in carrying out my duties. Overlooking the bay. -They will inform: D. DOMINGUEZ & CO. SUCRS i A Telephone 311.
All the political leaders have been invited to an Operational Assembly to be held in San Juan. -The "Free Federation" will sponsor the event. M : Next Wednesday, in the halls of the "Ecuela Román Baldotioty de Castro", will take place a great "Workers Assembly", called by the "Central Workers Union of San Juan". The celebration of this event is due to the work organization campaign that the President of the "Federación Libre", Senator* Iglesias, has been carrying out throughout the island, together with the workers' leaders and directors of the Federation. According to the data that have been supplied, the capital problems that interest the workers of Puerto Rico will be discussed, such as the defense of the workers, the work of organization, advances in the different industries, women's wages, etc. ¿ Will Mr. Iglesias, official beres, speak during the act, in a high impartiality and a strict sense of justice." TeatroMUNICIPAL Youth Company of Operettas and Zarzuelas. AMPARITO VALDIVIESO ■■■■" ... ■ .....__ Today Saturday, July 17_1926. The beautiful zarzuela IMPOSIBLE SUICIDARSE and the Operetta EL MUÑECO Gran plus de Moda. Tomorrow: The Latin Muses.
La Toja Soap THE WOMEN'S BEST FRIEND.
* "' 7 - -* - ' . v.
"NEITHER MR. BARCELO NOR I GAVE OUR CONSENT TO THE ENDORSEMENT OF THE MEMO- - - RIAL": TOUS SOTO
SAYS THAT THE LEGISLATORS WHO ATTENDED THE MAYA- ¡ GUEZ ASSEMBLY 'MANAGED TO REDUCE THE DOCUMENT TO NOTHING'. M He describes the Governor's veto prerogative as 'unfriendly'.
We requested yesterday from Mr. Tous Soto, Speaker of the House of Representatives, his opinion about the annual assembly of the "Farmers' Association", held lately in Mayagüez. Here are the statements he made to us: "I believe that the farmers will have to separate themselves from the sugar growers if they want to defend their peculiar interests with a chance of success. In many cases, the interests of both groups are at odds. The interference of sugar elements, representing the industrial side of this business, is detrimental to the farmers. Politics has been allowed to interfere in these assemblies, to please elements that are not identified with the Association, its aims, purposes and interests, and this has been truly pitiful and highly detrimental to all". "Neither Don Antonio nor I endorsed or gave our consent to the endorsement of the Memorial of the so-called living forces to the Secretary of War. We will never endorse it, not only because of its inappropriateness of place and time, but because it constitutes an indirecmité Local request in plenary, that in the first ordinary session they obtain again the custody of the political funds belonging to that Committee, which they delivered to a commission partly foreign to that political body, and Third: A circular shall be issued addressed to the pure Republican employees of the Municipality of San Juan, warning them that they should only deliver their political dues to the Treasurer of the Pure Republican Local Committee, in his capacity as such, to be deposited such funds in a Bank in the name of the Pure Republican Committee of San Juan, and to invest them exclusively in a Bank in the name of the Pure Republican Committee of San Juan, and to invest them exclusively in a Bank in the name of the Pure Republican Committee of San Juan, and to invest them exclusively in a Bank in the name of the Pure Republican Committee of San Juan. 6. Ira. col.) CHRYSLER FOUR (5 Passengers) One for sale because its owner must be absent on the next steamer for the U.S.A. See it today at the Andrew Aguilar & Co. garage, San Juan.
I have asked the Secretary of War to induce the Executive of Puerto Rico to use with greater prodigality than heretofore, the extraordinary and unpleasant prerogative of the veto". "I do not censure those members of the Legislature who agreed . to endorse the Memorial with the clarification that it did not constitute an attack on the capacity of the country and on condition that the legislative petition for full self-government, including the election by su- - fragment of Governor, was endorsed at the same time. I do not censure them because -they acted in good * faith, believing that by the assembly endorsing the aspiration of the country for complete self-government, it necessarily repudiated the unpatriotic (and now I do use the ' word) request that from Washington vetoes of the will of the country, as expressed by its Legislature, should be propelled. 'In'. other words, the Memorial from the so-called living forces, to the Secretary of War, -implicitly denies the ability of the country to govern itself. The legislative petition to full self-government, asserts this capac:ty emphatically. The endorsement <'e both petitions at once denies and affirms therefore such capacity, and those who thus contradict each other in their petitions, strip them of all prestige and ' force." "It is therefore not surprising that ior legislators who attended > the assembly, under the pressure of circumstances, agreed to act as they did, thus consi- ' guing to reduce the Memorial to nothing, because to be and not to be, to have and not to have capacity, are' ' metaphysical impossibilities."' AVISO publico""'"' To whom it may concern: I wish to make public that by deed granted before the Notary Don Gabriel de la Haba on July 14, 1926, my husband Don Pedro Juan Romanacce made total renunciation or the power of attorney that I conferred on him for all acts of administration, disposition and encumbrance of my property; and that henceforth only those acts performed by me personally will be recognized as valid. San Juan, P.R., July 14, 1926. Mercedes GARZOT.
INVITATION The film taken by Mr. Viguié at the inauguration of the CLINICA DIAZ GARCIA, and of the lunch that said institution gave to the doctors who attended the Annual Assembly of the Medical Association of Puerto Rico, will be exhibited at the TEATRO OLIMPO on Sunday night, July 18, 1926, in two showings, in addition to the great film "The Enemy Sex", with Betty Compson in the lead role. We have special pleasure in inviting to this exhibition all the doctors, authorities and public who attended the above mentioned events. (Announcement).
THE FIRST "MACK" GUAGUA Already iw , was e "e r*OR A FEW DAYS AT THE "M A C K" GARAGE IN THE MARINA (former Abarca Building) We invite all chauffeur, operators and those interested in knowing the best "bus" that is manufactured in America, to come and examine this model guagua, na German beer "White Sister" Sues, of L. VILLAMIL & Co. - MACK agents in P. R., ' _____ '- -' -
For two hours yesterday Mr. Barceló, Mr. Tous Soto and Mr. Sánchez Morales con ferenced with the Governor.
M í Andreu recommended for the Presidency of the "Civil Service Commission". M- From eleven o'clock yesterday morning until one o'clock in the afternoon, Messrs. Sanchez Morales, Barcelo and Tous Soto were conferring with Governor Towner. These gentlemen informed the Chief Executive at length about the work done by the Legislature. According to the statements made by Mr. Tous Soto, the "Governor is not satisfied, not satisfied, since he has not seen his aspirations reflected in the Message realized, but he is not aggrieved". "Mr. Towner was a legislator," the Speaker of the House tells us, "and he knows perfectly well that on many occasions, the executive branch and the legislative bodies differ on some points." Governor Towner has not yet signed the Resolution adopted by the Legislature to appoint a legislative commission to study the matters recommended by him and which demand deep consideration. He has his doubts that a single commission can cover the whole work; and to that end, if he does not decide to impart his approval to such a project, the Economic Commission of the Legislature proposes to undertake that work, soliciting the cooperation of experts and such persons as can intelligently lend their aid. If the Chief Executive signs the aforesaid Resolution, we are told that probably this commission is (Continued on 5th page. Prudencio Rivera Martinez, Francisco Paz Gránela, Rafael Alonso Torres and other directors of the "Free Federation." All the heads of the political parties of the island will also be invited to address the workers. It is almost certain that Don Luis Muñoz Marín, and Ledo. Rafael Martínez Nadal will take the floor.
C V A A L R 1 oJH i D fflO A A A Jf íf ífí B D D WK L e firtb ct <L "ULaU;-_o i" pf y ntro
fí Governor to call Gallardo to explain his attitude in re-
he will call Gallardo to explain his attitude in relation to the budget.
HE REFUSES TO COMMENT, FOR NOW, ON THE OUTCOME OF THE EXTRAORDINARY SESSION - HE HAS NOT DECIDED WHO HE WILL APPOINT TO THE SUPERINTENDENCE OF ELECTIONS.
Public questions of a very topical nature brought us yesterday morning to the Executive Mansion, for the purpose of holding an interview with Governor Towner. The Chief Executive was very busy with his official business, but this did not prevent him from interrupting his work for a few minutes to give us the audience we requested. While in his office, the Governor invited us to take a seat beside him]. We immediately gave course to* our interview, which we repro- duced as follows. -The country is very interested in hearing your impressions of the work done by the Island Legislature at its last session," we began.
We began by saying, "The country is very interested in knowing your impressions of the work done by the Island Legislature at its last session. -Would you like to express them through the columns of "EL MUNDO"? "Let me tell you," said the Governor, "that up to the present time I have not had the time necessary to study the work done by the Legislative Assembly from all its points of view. I do not wish to advance my opinions before I have become thoroughly acquainted with each and every work done. On another occasion, perhaps I will be able to be more explicit and make my impressions known. -Did you not say in your message to the Legislature that the Treasurer of Puerto Rico was recommending a reduction in the budget for the year?
COMMERCIAL BANK OF PUERTO RICO BALANCE SHEET, JUNE 30, 1926. ASSETS: CASH, Cash $ 614,138.82 CORRESPONDENTS 992,021.57 $1,606,160.39 -STOCKS AND BONDS - "- 537 424.50 CALLS LOANS IN NEW YORK 300,000.00 Loans and Discounts $4,561,124.95 Mortgage Loans 499,045.85 5,060,170.80 BILLS OF EXCHANGE -- 35 973.45 Bank Houses $ 107,379.42 Rural and Urban Properties 45,09218 Furniture 73,284.10 225,755.70 OTHER ASSETS -- 75 341.17 TOTAL $7,842,331.01 i i LIABILITIES : PAID-IN CAPITAL $1,915,500.00 ' RESERVE 232,343.82 Undivided Profits 219,818.06 Dividend Payable 3,947.67 Manager's Checks 31,998.45 To Correspondents 151,040.55 DEPOSITS: Treasurer of Puerto Rico $600,000.00 Checking Accounts 4,687,682 46 5,287,682.46 TOTAI .... .... $7,842,331.01 San Juan, P. R. June 30, 1926 S. E. VAN DERDYS, CHAS. E. LAWTON Auditor. Manager-Treasurer. i - i
ARROW SHIRTS Ó Cluett, Peabodv & Co. Inc. manufacturers. Troy, N. Y.
THE PURE REPUBLICAN COMMITTEE OF SAN JUAN IS IN CONTEMPT OF THE TERRITORIAL.
-m Approves a resolution to that effect. I M Copy of same has been sent to the Chief of the Party, Ledo. Martinez Nadal. -:m The Local Pure Republican Committee of San Juan, approved the following Resolution in its last session: Por Cuanto: the Local Committee of the Pure Republican Party of San Juan, in session held on July 2, J926 had unanimously agreed to accede to the,petition of several Republicans, employed in the Municipality of San Juan, so that the funds in the possession of the Committee be delivered to a commission for their custody and to be invested subject to the law, and especially, in the next electoral campaign; Whereas: the Territorial Committee, in meeting held on July 5 of the current year took the following resolutions: "First: The agreement of the San Juan Pure Republican Local Committee acquiescing to a petition of thirty-three municipal employees to deliver the political funds of the San Juan Pure Republican Committee into the hands of a commission composed in part of persons foreign to said Committee is declared null and void; Second: The President of the San Juan Pure Republican Committee, Mr. Antonio Bazán, is ordered, as well as the Co-
TELEGRAMME OF UTILITY San Juan, P. R., July, 1926. To the Lumber Dealers, Island of Puerto Rico. Schooner "Stamfotd" arrived with cargo of cuartonería and alfajías. We are unloading Malecon. Send your orders promptly. Take advantage of extraordinarily cheap price on dock. Market on the rise. LANDOR. ROLAN & TEJEDOR, S. EN C. . QUALITY PRICE SERVICE