THE MONDO
-y (I h ACIMAS 3 enzs. ¡ I Office: "Puerto Rico IlusV trado Bldg'. -Tel. 1222
I Semester .... 5.00 U One Year $9.50
DAILY MORNING
MORNING
San Juan, Puerto Rico-
sin'".Timn ""poft autor.zed by tb" Act. of Oetol.w 6, 1917. on file at the P "t Offieo at I February 21, 1919 at the'Post' Of Hr o R¡ P< J 8l,naster ° enPral - as second class matter. . 1 \ \ San Juan, Porto o, States of America) under the Act oí March 3, 1879. |
Saturday, August 7, 1926.
Year VIII.
| Number 2457.
THE DEPT. OF WAR, STATE AND COMMERCE, ARRANGE PROTECTION FOR P. R. COFFEE.
MCINTYRE ASSURES CORDOVA DAVILA THAT OUR INTERESTS WILL BE CONSIDERED IN CLOSING TREATIES WITH SPAIN AND CUBA ' s M The Resident Commissioner offers cooperation to the 'Farmers' Association'.
In reply to the cablegram addressed by the "Agricultural Assembly" held in Mayagüez, to Secretary of State Kellogg and the Resident Commissioner in Washington, Mr. Felix Cordova Davila, requesting protection for the coffee of Puerto Rico, the following correspondence was received yesterday at the Central office of the "Farmers' Association": July 30, 1926. Mr. Rafael Ma. Gonzalez, Pies. "Farmers Association", San Juan, Puerto Rico. My dear friend:- With regard to the increase of protection which you request for the coffee of Puerto Rico, when a new treaty of reciprocity with Cuba is carried out, I have the pleasure of informing you that I have been dealing with this matter for some time. The War Department is also interested in obtaining the greatest protection for the coffee of Puerto Rico. I have exchanged impressions with the Secretary of War and with General McIntyre and I have also addressed the State Department. I am sending you a copy of General McIntyre's letter to me. You may rest assured that at the opportune time we shall be glad to take the steps you recommend. The Catholic Church will grant twelve scholarships to as many young people. X M They will study at the "Seminario Conciliar". M Those young Puerto Ricans who wish to pursue an ecclesiastical career now have a magnificent opportunity, thanks to the special offer made to them by the Catholic Church. Father Rexach, administrator of the Bishopric, informs us that twelve scholarships of grace will be granted to as many young Puerto Ricans who are willing to consecrate their lives to the priesthood by entering the "Conciliar Seminary" of this capital, where they will take preliminary studies. In order to obtain one of these scholarships, it will be an indispensable requirement that the applicant has completed the sixth grade in an educational institution accredited by the Government. In addition, he must present to the ecclesiastical authorities his baptismal and confirmation certificates, and prove that he has always observed good conduct and that his state of health is perfect. GANGA Complete cinema almost legaiado. Power projection machine, Deleo electric plant, magnificent Pianola. Only the premises is needed. For sale all juhto or by senarado. Will report G. J. <'o THE WORLD. .
With the highest consideration, I am from you, Affmo. Friend, Felix Cordova Davila. Here is the letter on this same subject from General Me Intyre to our Resident Commissioner in Washington: July 23, 1926. Hon. Felix Cordova Davila, House of Representatives, Washington, D. C. My dear Judge Cordova: Referring to our conversation this morning, and to the interest you showed in favor of Puerto Rican coffee, I wish to inform you that the Secretary of War, at the request of the "Puerto Rican Farmers Association" has made the necessary representations to the State Department, and has requested that Department to consider the advantages to Puerto Rico of having its coffee included among the articles to be favorably treated in the negotiation of the new treaty with Cuba. "I also want to tell you, that this Department has always kept that matter very much in mind, and to! effect we have been assured by both the Department of State and the Department <k Commerce, that Jos interests of Puerto Rican coffee would be taken very much into account should the treaty be negotiated." "In like manner the same recommendations have been made in the event a treaty is concluded with Spain." "Personally, I believe that we will not fail to see that Puerto Rican coffee receives all the consideration it deserves when these negotiations take place." From you, most sincerely. FRANK MC INTYRE. Chief of the Bureau of Insular Affairs. l o scoalicionis TAS WILL TAKE POSSESSION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF FAJARDO NEXT MONDAY M So we are informed by Ledo. Bolivar Pagan. M "It will be a quiet and calm act," he tells us. M El Ledo. Bolívar Pagán, expressed himself in the following terms, referring to the upcoming inauguration of the coalition candidates for the Municipal Government of Fajardo:- "Next Monday morning we will take possession of the Municipality of Fajardo. It will be a quiet and calm act, without great stridencies. Our co-religionists will celebrate the restitution of their right to be governed by their legitimate representatives, but I do not believe that passions will alter the sanity and serenity with which the inauguration must be carried out". cálTastí Pure grapes for sacramental wines. Wholesale and retail. CIRO MALATRASi "Restorant Angelo" San Juan, P. R.
at 60 ct. Works by MARDEN, bound. Grammars of the ," Royal Academy at $1.75. Ask for list of titles to * REAV HERMANOS San Juan, P. R. /
La Toja Soap THE WOMEN'S BEST FRIEND.
'I STAY IN MY PLACE, WHERE I SHOULD ALWAYS BE'
M This is how Mr. Todd answers our question as to whether he intended to join the Alliance. M He relates a certain incident in Washington to the current situation. M -Is it true, Mr. Todd, that you intend to join the "Alliance" -we asked the Mayor yesterday morning. -That question," he replied, "reminds me of a most interesting fact. It was the month of May. The Legislative Commission was still in New York. I was also in that great city. One night I was invited to a banquet given by Dr. Goodman, from Columbia University, in honor of Messrs. Barceló, Guerra, García Méndez and González Mena. "At the time of the toast, when it was Mr. Goodman's turn, he expressed himself in very laudatory terms for the San Juan administration. He said that he had fought against us in the electoral struggles, but that after observing your first actions he had come to the conviction that the municipal administration of San Juan deserved all his confidence and offered all kinds of guarantees. "In referring to the project demanding the elective Governor, he alluded to me personally, and said that you would not hesitate to endorse my name to occupy that high post in case we were granted the reform we were asking for. "I, naturally, thanked him for his courtesy, and at the same time expressed my conviction that the first Puerto Rican Governor should be Mr. Barceló himself. I made a history of his life. I pondered his honesty and competence, and further added that Mr. Barceló had sacrificed himself for his country on more than a few occasions." -I would have done the same in similar circumstances," said Dr. Gómez Brioso, who was listening to the conversation we were having with Mr. Todd. -"I also made the caveat," continued Mr. Todd, "that in my judgment, the matter of the elective Governor would be settled in Washington, through a prudent compromise, by appointing a Puerto Rican to fill the office. "At that time I was branded an Aliancist. Many things were said about me, which I do not want to remember. "But in a short time everything has changed. And now I ask myself, where are those who attacked me then?... "I, however, remain in my place, where I hope to always be." SUGAR MARKET M Cablegram received from Porto Rico International Corporation, at 5:50 P. M., August 5, 1926: Market firm. Total sales made today 100,000 bags Pto Rico and Philippines for shipment all August at 4.21 to New York refiners. There are bids Cuba for shipment all August 2-1)2 (4.27) buyers refiners 2-7)16 (4.21). The bolSh closed. Sept. 2.46 (4.24), Die. 2.6( (4.38). Received at 11:00 A. M., August 6, 1926: Market held. Cuba offers to ship all of August 2-1 2 (4.27). Buyers refiners 2-7 16 (4.21). Exchange opened. Sept. 2.46 (4.24). Die. 2.62 (4.40).
SOBRINOS DE EZQUIAGA Inc, Plaintiff, v. MANUEL MENDIA, Defendant. CIVIL NO. 1970 INJUNCTION RESOLUTION This case is a suit for Injunction filed by Sobrinos de Ezquiega Inc, which is a Corporation of the country, incorporated on July 1, 1926, whose incorporators, according to the proof, are Messrs. José M. Arzuaga, Juan B. Arzuaga, Miguel Mocoroa, Pedro A. Arzuago and José Ramíez Santibáñez, against Manuel VIendía, acting and doing business under the name of Sobrinos le Ezquiega, to enjoin him from using the name Sobrinos Je Ezquiaga in his commercial business. * It is alleged that in this city there existed a limited partnership, which operated under the name of Sobrinos de Ezquiaga, S. en C., whose extended corporate term expired on June 30, 1926, in
In the District Court of the Judicial District of San Juan, Puerto Rico, which date was dissolved.
which date was dissolved. The partners of this partnership, according to the deeds, are Manuel Mendía Morales, Juan B. Arzuaga, Miguel Mocoroa, José M. Arzuaga, Juan J. Arzuaga, Ceferino Arzuaga and Eugenio Murua Peñagarícano. It is also alleged that the defendant, using the name of Sobrinos de Ezquiaga, knowing of the dissolution of the corporation, is doing business in Puerto Rico and among them, the representation of insurance companies, warehousing and storage, and manufacture of fertilizers, the same as those carried out by the plaintiff and that, as a consequence of these acts, he suffers the consequences of the dissolution of the corporation, as a consequence of these acts, suffers damages due to the use of the same name, originating confusion in the commerce as to the person of the plaintiff and causes that the referred businesses go or may go to the hands of the defendant, taking it for Sobrinos de Ezquiaga, which is the name that the incorporated company has. The plaintiff requests in the complaint that, while this case is being decided, a preliminary injunction be issued, prohibiting the defendant from doing business of any kind using the name Sobrinos de Ezquiaga. On July 10, 1926, it was expiContinued on p. 8-2 colm.
T Fidel Aceña Canal < HAS DIED His bereaved mother, Da. Marcela C. Vda. de Aceña, sds brothers Don Federico. Don Ciríaco (absent), Doña Margarita, brothers-in-law and the mercantile P. Millón & Co. Suers., beg ,his friends to commend his soul to God and accompany the corpse to the cemetery of San Juan, today August 7, 1926, at 11 am. Meeting point: Plaza de Colón. Please do not send artificial wreaths.
For Rent In recently built house equipped with all modern advances, comfortable and airy apartments are rented. Two bedrooms, living room, dining room, bathroom and kitchen for $25.00 per month. Calle del Culto No. 20, Parada 21. -Address to MIGUEL RUIZ SOLER Tel. 1803, Santurce.
Yesterday's session of the Municipal Assembly turned out to be stormy.
THE LCDO. FONT SUAREZ BELIEVES THAT THE COM. HIPICA IS FAILING TO ACCEPT THE SUPREME COURT M He maintains that the appeal established by several 'jockeys' should suspend the effects of the sentence. M We had the following interview yesterday with Ledo. E. Font Suarez, who has assumed the defense of several jockeys before the Courts: -What do you intend to do-we asked-in the certiorari cases decided by the District Court in connection with the expulsion of jockeys T. Benitez and F. Mesa? -Last Wednesday I filed with the Clerk of the Court the brief appealing the resolution of said Court in the case of Tomás Benítez, to the Hon. Supreme Court. -Do you have hopes of obtaining the revocation of the sentence in said case? I raised five very interesting points of law in this case, and I have well-founded hopes in the same. -What about the attitude of the Equestrian Commission in not allowing these jockeys to race while the appeal of these cases is being heard in the Supreme Court? -That this attitude is contrary to law and clearly arbitrary and abusive. -But wasn't that the resolution of the District Court? -No. The Court did not resolve that, because it could not resolve it. The (Conitnúa en la 6a. 3a. Col.)
M Dr. Martínez Reselló left the premises, due to a certain incident M Heated discussions.barrenderos invade the assembly hall M Yesterday, at two o'clock in the afternoon, the Municipal Assembly of this city met in extraordinary session, for the purpose of ' considering a draft ordinance authorizing the contracting of a loan in the amount of $75,000, to attend to certain services of an urgent nature. The Assembly meeting room was invaded by municipal employees, and especially by street sweepers. Everyone was anxiously waiting for the work to begin. Dr. López Sicardó declared the session open. The roll had not yet been called, when Mr. Pedro Juan Barbosa stood up, and addressing the municipal employees present, he recommended that they "return to their duties, since remaining in the Assembly could cause interruptions in the service, or create difficulties for the administration". He stated that the Assembly would give due consideration to all matters, always trying to act in the best possible way. Many were about to leave the hall, when suddenly a voice was heard saying: "Nobody leaves", and all returned to their respective places. The chair intervened, imposing order, and then Mr. Barbosa asked for a ten-minute recess, which was granted. In the meantime, a heated discussion arose between delegate Barbosa and Dr. López Sicardó, and the ten-minute recess elapsed. Dr. Martínez Roselló took the (Continued on 6, 4th Col.)
IF THE TOBACCO GROWERS GO BACK TO WORK, THEY WILL BE WELL REWARDED'.
M This is what the Vice-President of La Colectiva, Mr. Fresse, says M An inspector from the "Negociado del Trabajo" reports on the strike. M At the offices of the Mediation and Conciliation Bureau, we have read the report rendered by the Special Inspector of the Department of Labor, Mr. Miguel Mascaré, regarding the strike of the tobacco workers of Puerta de Tierra. REPORT OF THE STRIKERS. -The Strike Committee informed Mr. Mascaró that the day before yesterday at five o'clock in the afternoon, it had preceded to deliver to the directors of the Porto Rican American Tobacco Co. the list of demands approved at the Assembly held last Wednesday at the Cine Caribe. He also informed that the demands of the tabanueros have not suffered any modification, and that they were only waiting peacefully for the expiration of the 48 hours term that expired on August 5th at 5 PM, to take the corresponding agreements "to the situation". REPORT FROM THE FACTORY Mr. Mascaró then went to the factory, where he was informed by Mr. Costa that he had received the terms and conditions of the strikers, which he had given to the company's management; that the other work in the factory continued without interruption, and that he had not received instructions from his bosses about any agreement taken in relation to the strike". REPORT OF THE VICE-PRES. OF THE COMPANY MR. FRESSE Mr. Mascaró then had an interview with the Vice-President of the corporation, Mr. Fresse, who, after stating that he had received the terms and conditions of the strikers, said "that neither before nor after the expiration of the 48-hour pia zo, would the company take any attitude in relation to the strike." "If the tobacco workers come individually to work, they will be well received," he added. > ■■ - DISTRICT COURT OF SAN JUAN M IN RE: SPECIAL TERM. ORDER M In view of the Act authorizing the Judges of the District Courts to convene special terms during vacations, of February 25, 1911, and Article 7, as amended, of the Rules of Procedure of this court, a special term of the court is hereby convened, which will begin on August 16, 19Z5 and will end on the 31st day of the same month and year, for the purpose of reading the Civil Calendar and to set the matters for hearing in the following months of September and October; to prepare and appoint the criminal calendar which will begin on September 1, 1926; to hear and resolve civil cases in absentia, which may be included in the special Friday calendar, evictions, and urgent criminal cases, as well as to adjudicate civil suits previously submitted to the court. This order shall be published by the Secretary, at least once, in one or more of the newspapers with the largest circulation in the District, not later than 5 days prior to the beginning of the aforementioned special term. Given at San Juan, P. R_, this 4th day of August, 1926. (S.D.) PABLO BERGA. District Judge. CERTIFIED - (S.D.) Luis VERGNE ORTIZ Secretary. í v. (Announcement).
IN ORDER FOR THE SOCIALISTS TO JOIN WITH THE AL1ANCISTAS, THEY WOULD HAVE TO DO SO AS WELL.
I AM SATISFIED BY IGLESIAS, AS A FUNDAMENTAL POINT IN THE LIBERAL UNDERSTANDING M I am satisfied with the conciliatory and reasonable attitude of our opinion elements,' he says.
We have had an extensive conversation with Senator Iglesias, head of the Socialist Party, who, referring to the projected rapprochement of the liberal forces of the country, expressed himself in the following terms: "Overcome with great satisfaction at the progressive evolution that this fact represents, I have seen how, in these days, the tobacco growers will appear before the 'MEDIATION COMMISSION' ON MONDAY MThey have been officially summoned. M Don Jacinto Texidor will confer today with the Vice-President of 'La Colectiva'. M The 'Mediation and Conciliation Commission' held a meeting yesterday afternoon to determine the conduct to be followed on account of the tobacco growers' strikes which have arisen in San Juan and on the island at the workshops of the ' Porto Rican A ínerican Tobacco Co." The Secretary gave lee-uta to the communications of the company and of the Comité de Huelga de I'ucrca de Tierra, as well as to the report of the "Negociado del Trabajo" which we published elsewhere in this same issue. A motion was proposed and unanimously accepted, appointing the Chairman of the Committee, Ledo. Jacinto Texidor to visit the Vice President of the Porto Rican American Tobacco Co., Mr. Frasse, this morning, in order to learn the position of the company with respect to the strike, since the offer of intervention made by the Commission has been declined. Commissioner Ruiz, commenting on this agreement, said that the main thing was to inspire confidence in the employers, since he was aware that in previous conflicts the employers had shown a distrustful attitude towards the Commission. The Chairman, Ledo. Texidor, stated that the situation was serious and that in the two years that he has been in the organization he presides, there had never been a conflict of such seriousness and importance. Mr. Paz Gránela explained the extent to which the activities of the Commission could be carried out within the Law. It was also agreed that a communication be sent to the President of the Strike Committee, Mr. Villafañe, requesting that a house be rented at 19 Miramar Avenue, corner of Carretera Nueva. Information at Telephone 405, San Juan. EL AMOLADOR TALLER Clippers "Hair clippers" Razors, Scissors, Scalpels, Penknives, etc., etc., are put in perfect condition in EL AMOLADOR Calle Villa No. 28 Ponce P R ' PEDRO RAMOS. RENT for office use the upper floors of the Alien 43 house, inquire at the first floor. "The National Cash Register Co.
In recent days, the representative and intellectual elements of the country have been preparing the atmosphere for the advent of an era of cordial and serene reflection, in which the economic and political problems that affect us, and for whose happy solution we must all strive, will be analyzed without the blindness of partisanship clouding our spirits, and with the sole purpose of improving the people of Puerto Rico, which is, after all, the only fundamental thing. "I feel it is my duty to express what, in my opinion, would be a matter worthy of consideration with regard to the fact that the liberal groups present a united front, to give battle to the reaction that can already be glimpsed in the future. I believe that this should be a task of careful analysis, and therefore worthy of the most careful study. I am therefore preparing to set forth more fully, in a short time, 'what in my judgment will be the most convenient rule of conduct to follow. "Of one thing I am completely satisfied. The conciliatory and reasonable attitude of our elements of opinion is creating in the popular mind a splendid disposition to consider our problems in a serene, just and dispassionate manner. This is a work worthy of the warmest commendation, and its results will be invaluable to the mental and moral health of Puerto Rico. "There are two fundamental points which I wish to record, because I consider them indispensable: "1st.-We will not go to any understanding with any other political collectivity, unless the labor organizations are recognized in all their breadth as living factors in the social conglomerate. The Socialist Party is in coalition with the Pure Republican Party, and necessarily, apart from all the rebellious discrepancies which have existed and may exist, I feel it my duty to consider in combination with Martinez Nadal and the collectivity which he leads, whatever course we may determine to follow. That is, if the understanding is realized, we would have to go to it united socialists and pure republicans." that next Monday, at two o'clock in the afternoon, I send a delegation of said committee, composed of two persons, to report their views to the Commission, which will meet on the same day. ... ... . - a - . . . . 1 UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO RICO COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE AND ENGINEERING Mayagüez, P. R. ' 7 i Notice is hereby given to all students wishing to enter the courses offered by the Colleges of Agriculture and Engineering of the University of Puerto Rico established in Mayagüez, that registration for all regular courses will be held from September 7 and classes will begin on Wednesday, September 8 at 7:40 in the morning. New students must present their high school transcripts. Please note that admission, laboratory and deposit fees will be charged on the same day of registration. For information on courses beginning in September, please contact the undersigned, H. T. COWLES, Interim Dean. (Announcement.) '