ELMÜNDO
1 0 Pages 3 Ctvs. I f __ Semester - - - - - 5.00 JL VZ One Year 19-50
1 Q Pages 3 Ctvs. I f Office: "Puerto Rico Ilus JL trado Bldg." -TeL 1222
L- "L- EA MORNING NEWSPAPER
rnbliahad and distributes under permit No. dül) eutoritad by tne Act. oí Octobor 8, 1911, on filo at the Foot Office a* dan Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the President, A. 8. Bur deson, Postmaster General. Entered aa second elass matter, february 81. 1010 "♦ the Post Office st San Juan. Part Rim. (United Statue of America) under the Set of march 8. 1871.
Saturday, November 12, 1927. Number 2924.
Year IX.
San Juan. Puerto Rico.
The inauguration of the Victory Monument was a brilliant event yesterday.
The ceremonies were witnessed by a large crowd - eloquent speeches were made by Hernandez Lopez, Muñoz and Acting Governor Butte.
In the morning of yesterday and before a very numerous concurrence the monument to the Victory erected in front of the Island Capitol was unveiled with all solemnity. It was a splendid morning, and the weather conditions contributed much to the greater brilliance and brilliance of the ceremonies. The crowd filled the vicinity of the pavilion which had been erected on the south side of the road, and the steps of the Capitol building were also crowded. Numerous ladies of our high society were present at the ceremony to compliment the notable American sculptor Bonnie McLeary, who took pride of place in front of the rostrum.
"the high honor of delivering the opening address on this day which commemorates the armistice that ended the bloody war that for four years threatened to destroy civilization and the world, on this day when the belligerent nations laid down their arms after a bloody struggle that threatened to destroy democracy and freedom. It is this day of greatness and recollection, not of joy but of sadness and meditation. In these instants thousands of beings consecrate their attention in solemn attitude, saluting with the memory of those heroes who fell on the battlefield and shed their blood for the sake of the peace we enjoy today". Senator Hernandez Lopez made mention of the various acts that were celebrated yesterday in many nations in commemoration of the global day on which the Armistice was signed. "The feeling of gratitude and remembrance is the feeling of this day of immense sadness. And it is a day of I sadness this despite the fact that we commemorate a great event, because there are still many homes where the tears of mothers and wives who lost their loved ones still roll. And our remembrance must be for them, for those who offered their lives for the freedom and democracy of the world". "This is the Victory Monument. But have we, anyone, won any victory? I answer that the victory is not of any particular soldier or people who took part in the war, it is not the victory of the warlords who wore stripes on their uniforms nor of the powerful minds that drew up the strategic plans to obtain the triumph in the war, nor of the powerful minds that drew up the strategic plans to obtain the triumph in the war, nor of the powerful minds that drew up the strategic plans to obtain the triumph in the war. Hats from $4.00 to j>'2.98 See our display. Come to LA SAMARITANA
cular contention. Everyone, from the superior chief to the humble and humble soldier who lost his life on the battlefield, shares in the victory. If Puerto Ri
co had men who died for the sake of the ideals involved in the terrible conflagration, our dead soldiers, from their graves, and we in this moment of awe and meditation
of awe and meditation, proclaim that victory also cherished and belonged to Puerto Rico. This monument has alContinued on page 12 2nd. col.
The troop, (National Guard and Regiment) formed on both sides of the templete and in front of it were placed, in correct formation, the veterans of the Spanish-American war, headed by their chief, Don Angel Rivero. In the midst of a great silence, the chaplain of the Puerto Rico Regiment, Rev. Vassallo, took the floor and in an inspired speech, proclaimed the peace that the world now enjoys as the result of the Viroca that was being commemorated. His words were brief, but spoken with deep emotion.
"May this monument," he said, "symbolize not the pride of having achieved the triumph of arms but that of having conquered peace. May fraternity and good faith among men be perpetuated as much as the bronze of which this statue is made . In the tribune were the Acting Governor of Puerto Rico, Dr. George C. Butte, a group of Chief and officers of the military garrison of San Juan presided by Colonel George H. Estes, the members of the government cabinet, the entire consular body of San Juan, Mayor Todd, Don Juan Hernández López, Dr. Gómez Brioso, other distinguished personalities and representatives of the press of the capital.
Senator Juan Hernández López gave the opening speech and was interrupted several times by the applause of the crowd. "It was my turn", he said, "Gentlemen Cattlemen, we recommend that you see the ■lili when it is shown at the nearest movie theater to your residence, YOU WILL BE PROMPTLY NOTIFIED A. Vicente & Co., S. en C. San Juan, P. R. SOLAR IN THE COUNTY FOR SALE.
Facing the Laguna, near the Vanderbilt Hotel It has 1137 meters. Will report: Saldaña, TeJ. 2017.
PARIS-MADRID We wish to inform our numerous , customers and favorers that we have just received . a large assortment of driles , yarn , among which fij gura ei famous number 100; as well as i casimirs and gabardines I English provenance. San Francisco 67. (Fren| te to the "Rialto".) "LA SAMARITANA" (La Tienda de las Damas) This week, special sale of children's clothing. See our Exhibition. Come to La Samaritana. ISABEL PARSI FLORIST For any work in natural flowers call Phone 120, Hato Rey.
WE LIQUID 300 Gentlemen's Drill Suits at $2.00 one. 300 Gentlemen's Gabardine suits at $2.50 one. 500 Cashmere suits for Gentlemen, from $4.00 to $6.50 one. 500 Cashmere suits for Gentlemen, from $8.50 to $12.00 one, 300 cashmere pants of various prices. Take advantage now, if you want to buy cheap. . Come today, don't leave it for tomorrow. Visit our Ready Made Clothing Department. We ship C. O. D. "LA VILLA DE MADRID'' J. Villamil & Co., S. en C. Esq. SALVADOR BRAU - SAN JUSTO. Tel. 16" San Juan, P. R. ' Box 764
NOTICE Messrs. Sanchez Morales & Co; Inc. announce for general knowledge, that in order to give greater intensification and concentration to the "NASH" line, which has acquired so much importance in their business, they have reached an agreement with the General Motors Export Company, by virtue of which the "Cadillac" and "La Salle" lines will pass to a new corporation to be called the GENERAL WEST INDIES MOTOR COMPANY, organized and directed by Don Amadeo Barletta, of which Sanchez Morales & Co. Inc. will form a part, and Mr. Luis Sanchez Morales will be one of the incorporators and a member of the Board of Directors. Sanchez Morales & Co. Inc. will continue to sell the "Cadillac" and "La Salle" until December 31. The new corporation will begin operations on January 1, 1928. Details will be made public shortly. Sanchez Morales & Co. Inc. General Motors Export Co. Amadeo Barletta. Luis Sanchez Morales. San Juan, Puerto Rico, November 9, 1927.
THE BASEMENTS OF THE "CENTRAL HIGH SCHOOL" HAVE BEEN FLOODED.
cSjm J. Octavio Seix 5C0. San JvaH. -ÍjAuwh, - PÓNcsVE/Djr *- . . J '
TO THE SHOE DETALLISTS We have received a good assortment of LOTS all at low prices S. LEMA 6? CO. San Francisco 85 SAN JUAN, P. R.
M Commissioner Ortiz threatens to close said campus if the water is not drawn before next Monday M The Insular Commissioner of Health, Dr. Pedro N. Ortiz, has addressed a communication to the Commissioner of Instruction, Don Juan B. Huyke, and to the School Director of San Juan, Dr. J. Gómez Brioso, stating that he will proceed without delay to close, in accordance with the authority conferred by the Organic Act of Puerto Rico, the building occupied by the "Central High School" in Santurce, as long as the waters that have flooded the basements of said school building have not been extracted before Monday, the 14th of this month. The frequent rains that have lashed the city during the last week, have caused the total flooding of the basements of the Central High School building in such a way that it has made it difficult to hold classes that were being held in the gymnasium. In addition, it is not possible to gain access to the restrooms and rest rooms attached to the gymnasium, because a real lake has formed on that site. Throughout the basement, where the textbook storage rooms are also located, the water has been submerged, and if it were not for the fact that the textbooks are stored on shelves that rise about ten or twelve inches from the floor, they would have been damaged. THE RAINS HURT THE PHYSICAL CULTURE CLASSES Since Wednesday the physical culture classes at Central High School have been interrupted, which are being continued on' page 4 3rd. col. THE LUNA 33 MISCELLANY Ask for it if you want to save money, it is the cheapest selling Quincalla in San Juan.
THE REASON WHY THE INTERNATIONAL COMPANY IS LENDING TO TOBACCO GROWERS
RIVERA MARTINEZ DETAILEDLY EXPLAINS - He also argues about the suspension of the sickness benefit.
Don Prudencio Rivera Martinez I continues to report on the recent assembly of the International Tobacco Growers of America, in which he represented the tobacco growers of Puerto Rico: SUSPENSION OF MEMBERS "If the new amendments provide that the member who does not pay his dues on time every month is suspended, it is due to the change of system. Dues will be collected on a monthly basis. The International Union has to pay each month in advance to the insurance company what must be paid for each member's insurance. So if the member fails to pay by the month the International loses that money because it has already paid for it. And if the Union would tolerate the three or four month wait, the International would lose as much because it has already paid for that member. For this reason it has been foreseen that at the latest within two weeks after the expired month the member must pay his dues or he will be suspended. "Regarding loans, and the causes that have forced us to abolish them, it is not superfluous to say the following: "The International Union has never charged interest on loans granted to members. Not only did it not charge interest, but it has been mathematically proven that out of every dollar loaned by the International it never charged - when it was possible for it to charge it - ninety dollars.
Who doesn't know LLADO? The member, in taking a loan, uses a duplicate receipt which costs money; in making entries in the books, money is paid to the officer; in requiring payment, money is paid; each time the member makes a credit, a printed post card is given to him which costs money and. more money in postage, for the same member directly to send it to the President of the International notifying him that he has made a credit, so that he may rebate it to his account; if the member leaves the locality, he must be charged by mail, and with these and other details it comes to the conclusion that, in collecting the Union the dollar he has borrowed-if he collects it-he has spent ten cents, and sometimes more in collecting it. "And we might call ourselves lucky, so and so if it could be collected. But it is the case that, in some years the International Union has uncollected about $130,000. 00. This means, not only has it lost the money, but what is worse, it has lost the members who have not wanted to pay. "In view of this situation, there was no other remedy but to nip the evil in the bud, not only to save the money, but at the same time to paContinued on page 18 2nd col. Rolls of Spun Tobacco First quality $20.00; Second $16.00; Third $12.00, $10.00, and* $8.00, by mail, C. O. D. Accompany your order with $2.50 per roll Püelos in the mail. Receipt st do not please you, deducting charges. Order from ERNESTO RUBIC Arecibo, P. R. Chocolate Meunier French made. Order it everywhere.
M f ■ i ¡Km, I J ggj "d Our Clothes Manufactured by the Most Important Houses Intelligently Selected Combining--Our Tastes with Our Climate In Complete Harmony with the Prevailing Fashions of the Continent and Europe CABRER.' SAN JUAN- PONCE