THE MONDO
1 Pages 3 Ctvs. I $ ■ Semester - -- - - 5.00 * ( V One Year - 19.50
1 Pages 3 Ctys. I If Office: "Puerto Rico Ilus X trado Bldg." -TeL 1222
MORNING JOURNAL
Year IX. *
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
"ublúbed an4 diitribuUx! tndsr permit No. SOI) aatortied by ta" Act. of Octobar 6, 1017, on fila at Ute Poat Office at "San Juan, Porto Bico, By order of tha Preaidant, A. 8. Burdeion, Poatmaater General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1910 at the Post Office at San Joan. Porto Ri. (United States of America) under the Act of March 8. 1871.
Saturday, July 9, 1927.
\ Number 2789
THE "COMPAÑÍA DELA LUZ" UNDERTAKES TO REDUCE BY FIVE CENTS ITS LIGHTING RATES ON THE ISLAND.
It claims that on the basis of the "Royalty", the government could only acquire the plant to be built within twenty years - M
The "Light Company" in its letter of June 17, to the Commissioner of the Interior, which has been made part of the "record" of the "Public Service Commission," in the matter of the Rio Blanco Falls, offers the following concessions to the public and the Government, if it should be granted the franchise it requests:- - "1.- To reduce the rate of lighting from 15 cents per kilowatt-hour, in the towns of the island served by the Company, to 10 cents per kilowatt-hour. st "2.-To reduce the rate of street lighting in the towns of the island to a rate equal to that in force in San Juan. This represents a 22 percent re friction on the various sizes of light bulbs. The municipality of San Juan pays under this rate 6.9 cents per ■kflovatio-hour, estimating that the bulbs are used 4,000 hours per year. This unit cost can be easily acquired by the use of lamps of the most modern type. "Uniform rates for certain classes of service throughout the ¡system. The Company will cede to the Irrigation Service five (5) cubic feet of water per second to be diverted from the headwaters of the La Plata River to the Carite reservoir. The power that can be generated in the Carite plants by this amount of water is estimated to be between 500,000 and 1,000,000 kilowatt-hours annually. "It is understood that at any time after twenty years from the acceptance of the franchise by the Company, the Insular Government shall have the right to purchase the Rio Blanco Plant for such price as represents the fair valuation of the same at the time of purchase. In such case the Company shall have first option to purchase from this plant, at a mutually agreed price, the electric power needed to meet its service requirements. This option shall last until the termination of the franchise period. "6. - The Company would pay annually to the Insular Government a royalty of two tenths of one cent for each kilowatt-hour generated at the Rio Blanco plant.
Blanco. It is estimated that when the plant starts working at full capacity, the power generated will amount to 15,000,000 kilova-watt-hours. The Company will be glad to cooperate with the hydroelectric service of the Insular Government through the interconnection of the plants of its system and those of the Irrigation Service at Carite. This interconnection will result in better electric service on the island and will benefit the consumers with reduced rates, which will be made possible by reducing the investment necessary for emergency plants". In addition, the Company submitted the following written statements to the Public Service Commission at the public hearing held on Tuesday, July 5:- MEMORANDUM ON THE RIO BLANCO FRANCHISE. -In accordance with the conditions stipulated in this letter, the People of Puerto Rico retain the immanent right of ownership over the proposed development. After twenty years, the government would have the full right to take the plan from the concessionaire. "If the royalty to be paid annually by the concessionaire to the Island Treasury were deposited in a fund, it would be sufficient to pay the value of the plant at the end of twenty years. "The granting of this franchise would be in complete consonance with the fundamental principles of the Hydroelectric Law. The petitioner is in a position to develop this development immediately, which will be to the benefit of the consumers and the municipalities it serves by means of greatly reduced rates. If this franchise is not granted to Ja Company, much against its wishes, it will be forced to add another unit to its existing steam plant. Because of the much higher cost of production in a steam plant, it would not be able to make reductions in its rates for many years to come. In the meantime, the waters of the White River will be flowing freely to the sea. "A careful study of the situation from an economic and engineering point of view will show that the White River will not be able to make reductions in its rates for many years to come.
DELVALLE ARRANGED IN WASHINGTON TO SEND TWO COURIERS WEEKLY TO THE UNITED STATES. M- Obtained consent to use any steamship line providing this service. M- The Postmaster of San Juan, Mr. Rafael del Valle, ros has made the following statements on the convenience of sending two mails a week to the North. "On my recent trip to Washington I had occasion to discuss this matter with the Post Office, being personally accompanied in my efforts by the First Assistant Postmaster, Mr. Barttlet, who visited several offices of companies that could solve the problem. "The difficulty lies in the lack of steamers, since the lines we have leave one after the other with a very small margin of difference. Now, the government has authorized me to use any steamship line that can put us in a position to dispatch two couriers a week to the United States." SUGAR MARKET M Cablegrams received by "Porto Rico International Corp." 10:20 A. M. July 8, 1927.--Mer-cado unchanged. La. boba opened. July 2.64 (4.42), Sept. 2.78 (4.56), Die. 2.86 (4.64), Jan. 2.79 (4.57), March 2.73 (4.51), May 2.80 (4.58). 10:50 A. M.-Firm market. No sales reported. Bids from Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines for moderate quantity for July shipment at 2-13116 (4.58). Buyers bid for any position 2-3]4 (4.52). The exchange closed. July 2.72 (4.50), Sept. 2.79, (4.57) Die. 2.89 (4.67), Jan. 2.80 (4.58) March 2.75 (4.53), May2.84 (4.62). MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT ISABELA, PUERTO RICO Office of the Mayor. NOTICE Notice is hereby given to the Physicians of the Island that the position of Charity Director of this municipality has become vacant, due to the resignation of Dr. A. Vallecillo, who held said position, said resignation having been motivated by the fact that the minimum remuneration required by the Medical Association of Puerto Rico has not been assigned to this position. Those who are interested in this position should apply for it by writing to the undersigned. RAMON BANUCHI (Announcement). Mayor. A splendid premises for rent for any kind of business. Alien 83. For information: PEREZ BROTHERS Phones 1720 and 1730 Sant.
SOLARES PUNTA DE LAS MARIAS The best place in Santurce. Very low prices. Liberal terms. HENRY W. DOOLEY Tapia 9. Tel. 1295 Santurce, P. R.
PORTLAND CEMENT Brand "JOSSON" QUALITY GUARANTEED AS SUPERIOR AS THE BEST KNOWN. Price $2.25 barrel on dock J. OCHOA & HNO.
LADIES AND LADIES "LEWIS" SAMPLES at $3.98 Other Models at $3.48 and $2.98 There are BARATILLO of Single Pairs. S. LEMA & CO. San Francisco 85 (Across from the Chapel).
President Coolidge may attach the Overseas Bureau to the Department of the Interior by virtue of an executive order.
This view is supported and argued at length by the U.S. Secretary of the Interior, Dr. Work ALLEGES THAT SUCH A MEOÍdT WOULD DETERMINE A BETTER FORM OF GOVERNMENT FOR M POSSESSIONS
From the important "United States Daily" newspaper, of Washington, generally regarded as the organ of the central administration we translate the following:- .-"The Secretary of the Interior, Dr. Hubert Work, in a statement he made on the 29th of June commenting on President Coolidge's plan to attach the Govt. of the insular possessions to a single department, says that this change would bring about a better form of government for our insular possessions. "As Alaska and Hawaii isDEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OF PUERTO RICO M ■ Office of the Attorney General San Juar M , PUBLIC NOTICE FOR GENERAL INFORMATION M Pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 22, of April 23, 1927, entitled: "An Act to amend Section 1 of the Act entitled "An Act to amend the Act assigning salaries to the Registrars of Property, and for other purposes, approved on March 10, 1904" and for other purposes, approved on March 16, 1909", I hereby give notice: That the municipal districts of Río Piedras, Carolina, Río Grande, Alto and Loíza, have been segregated, as of July 1. July 1, 1927, from the demarcation of the Property Registry of San Juan, First Section, and incorporated to the Property Registry of San Juan, Second Section, and that likewise the municipalities of Barros, Barranquitas and Rincón, have been segregated, from the same date, the first two towns, of the demarcation of the Registry of the Property of Caguas, and the last one of the demarcation of the Registry of Mayagüez, and incorporated respectively, the municipal term of Barros, to the Registry of the Property of Ppnce; That of Barranquiñas, to the Property Registry of Guayama; and that of Rincón, to the Property Registry of Agua Dilla; and all titles referring to properties or corresponding rights that are located in the segregated towns, must be filed in the Property Registries to which they have been incorporated, as aforementioned. And for general knowledge, this edict is published as of this date, in three of the newspapers with the largest circulation in this city, for fifteen consecutive days, in accordance with the Law. San Juan, P. R., July 9, 1927. J. A. López ACOSTA, Acting Attorney General (Announcement).
Work says "that it would not be a bad idea to place the other six possessions under the same department" and that it appears that Congress has empowered the President to appoint the Secretary of the Interior as administrator of the executive departments of this new negotiation. The contents of the statement! of Dr. Work are as follows: BETTER FORM OF GOVERNMENT. "This change would result in a better form of government. The responsibilities of the departments having jurisdiction over some of these islands have been passed from one secretary to another by executive order. "Our government has responsibility and direction for the territories of Alaska, Hawaii, the Philippines, Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Guam, the Virgin Islands and the Panama Canal Zone. Since Alaska and Hawaii are under the Department of the Interior it would not be a bad idea if the other six possessions were also under the Department of the Interior. "Section 486 of the Code of j the Eiit "dj¡>s Iimdee ■ewn identical ' phrases as section 442 of the Revised Statutes, reads as follows: 'The Secretary of the Interior shall exercise all manner of powers and perform all duties in relation to the territories of the United States which were, prior to March 1, 1873, performed by law or by costura bre by the Secretary of State.' "By this furlough the Secretary of the Interior has exercised his jurisdiction' in the organized territories of the United States and performs his duties in the territories of Alaska and Hawaii. "President Roosevelt in an executive order dated May 11, 1907, stated as follows: 'All communications and official reports from the executive officers of our territories and possessions: Arizona, Hawaii, New Mexico Oklahoma, Puerto Rico, Alaska, Indian Territory, Samoa and Guam, and all official communications and reports relative to colonial matters, will be transmitted through the Se(Continued on page .Q, Col. l)j* Competent Employee Young man, 32 years of age, married, cori twelve years experience in a Bank lately Manager of a Branch, applies for employment as clerk or partner in San. Juan or on the Island. J. L. S., P.O. Box 126, San Juan.
Socialists submit candidates to fill vacancy on the "Junta de Urbanización y Ensanche de Cataño" M Esteves, due to certain circumstance, submits the matter to the Attorney General. M The Acting President of the Socialist Party, Mr. Rafael Alón so Torres, has submitted the names of Mr. Bartolomé Martínez and Mr. Angel Péreira, as candidates of said party to fill the vacancy that has occurred in the "Junta de Urbanización y Ensanche de Cataño". This organization is in charge of the administration of certain public lands in said municipality. The law converting Cataño into an independent municipality provides that the Bayamón representative in said Board shall cease to serve upon the organization of the new local government, and orders the Commissioner of the Interior to fill the vacancy with the person who is appointed Mayor of Cataño. Now it turns out that Mr. Alber to Dávila, appointed Mayor of the new Municipality, cannot be appointed member of the "Junta de Urbanización y Ensanche", because he already belonged to said orga■aÍMaBj eemo representing the town of Cataño. It happens, then, that there is always a vacancy in the Board and to fill it the Socialist Party has submitted its aforementioned candidates. The Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Guillermo Esteves, in view of the situation created by this circumstance and in doubt as to how to act in the case, has submitted it to the Attorney General so that he may issue a legal opinion on it. IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF MAYAGÜEZ, PUERTO RICO M IN RE: Petition of the Bar Association of Mayagüez * for the use of the toga by the attorneys before this Court. WHEREAS:-The Mayagüez Bar Association has requested this Court to establish as a Rule, that in all acts of justice that are held in open Court, attorneys shall appear wearing robes. WHEREAS:-This Court has granted said request and has issued the corresponding order. WHEREAS:-In order for the Order issued to have legal effect as one of the Rules of this Court, it is necessary that the same be approved by the Attorney General of Puerto Rico and that it be published. WHEREAS:-The Attorney General of Puerto Rico has given his approval to said Rule. NOW, THEREFORE:-And by order of ■Hon. Charles E. Foote, Judge of this Court, I hereby issue this edict to be published in a local newspaper of Mayagüez and in a newspaper of San Juan, for the term of "one month, once a week", warning the attorneys appearing before this Court, that upon expiration of the term of publication, the foregoing order of this Court approved by the Attorney General, shall have the full force and effect of one of the Rules of this Court and as such shall be complied with by the attorneys. Given under my signature and official seal of this Court, at Mayagüez, P. R. on the 23rd day of June, 1927. E. SAN MILLAN, Clerk of the District Court of Mayagüez, P. Rico. (Announcement.)
SANATORIO HATO-REY Y CLINICA NECROLOGICA For hospitalization and treatment of NERVOUS and MENTAL diseases. Modernly equipped. Moderate rate. Phones 47 and 68 Stop 29-l|2, Hato Rey FOR THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE IMITATORS . We publicly announce that "our unsurpassed SUPERFINE ROMETO OIL to beautify the hair, is protected by certificate No. 32273, certificate of registration in the Patent Office of Washington, D. C. We also advise that we are willing to have our rights respected. THE JUVENILINA CO. Ponce, P. R.
CHIANTI $4.00 CALI-ASTI $4.50 - MOSCATO $5.00 CIRO MALATRASI "Restaurant Angelo" San Jose 9 San Juan. (Beware of imitations)
Tomorrow Sunday - "THE PRICE OF GLORY" - RIALTO ■ OLIMPO
m
CONSTRUCTIONS WITH THIS MARK OF ; 5 CEMENT ARE ETERNAL. Messrs. Builders: the "ANA BE ERG" is in Port with 18,000 barrels. Take advantage of the reduced prices at which we sell during unloading. F. CAREER AND BROTHER - . -v _'V : , Z&V z * . ■ ' Telephones: San Juan, 347 and 1693.
GENUINE
Grapes for sacramental wines.
TOMORROW'S "REMIGIO" In the year 1892 San Juan celebrated the fourth centenary of the discovery of America by means of brilliant and lively festivities, in which the civil, military and ecclesiastical authorities and the people in general took part. Of these celebrations, of very pleasant memory for those who had the fortune of witnessing them, REMIGIO will make tomorrow in our Sunday edition a very interesting story that will provide our readers with moments of true recreation. REMIGIO will tell the readers of EL MUNDO, with that amenity of his, how the journalists of the time joined in the general rejoicing, and how Gordils, Daubón, Salvador Brau, Brau ZuZuarregui, Sánchez Morales, Fernández Juncos and Balbás, inspired by a delicious Clarete wine, improvised ingenious verses that were received with great applause. Interesting, isn't it? Those who want to know the outcome of this story of the very popular REMIGIO will be able to fulfill their desire by reading tomorrow in our Sunday edition the Twelfth Day of the "History of a Man".
65 POWERFUL AMERICAN COMPANIES DISCARD THE BILLBOARD AS AN ADVERTISING MEDIUM
Recognizing that it is not only ineffective but destroys the beauty of the landscape, they are opting for the newspaper as an advertising agent - among the firms adopting such a measure are Goodrich, Fisk and Kelly-Springfield.
From the leading journal "The Fourth Estate" we take the following information:- "There are sixty-five large national corporations which have decided not to post advertisement signs in rural districts, or to discontinue doing so as soon as their contracts are terminated, according to information sent to us by the "General Federation of Women's Associations." "These advertisers will post signs only in business districts which they deem convenient. "In its report, the Federation says, that the Legislature alone can pass laws on this matter, and that the best way for it to do so is to arouse the interest of the public. TAKES INTO CONSIDERATION OTHER THINGS: "The Federation alluded to classifiesTHE "QUORUM" OF THE SOCIALIST TERRITORIAL COMMITTEE WILL MEET TUESDAY --M-- Will deal with important questions connected with the political moment M Next Tuesday, at four o'clock in the afternoon, the 'Quorum of the Territorial Executive Committee of the Socialist Party will meet at the offices of the Free Federation, in (San Juan. The purpose of the meeting is to consider important matters relating to the present political moment. Also to be discussed will be the trip to the United States of the delegates for Puerto Rico to the Congress of the Pan American Confederation of Workers and to the General Convention of Tobacco Workers. Any other matter of a political nature that the gentlemen of the Territorial Executive Committee deem prudent to consider will be brought up for discussion.
b "In the meantime there are other co- * "In the meantime there are other co- "In the meantime there are other co- "In the meantime there are other co- "In the meantime there are other co- "In the meantime there are other co- "In the meantime there are other co- 1 "Meanwhile there are other co- * sas to consider; the result e of this class of advertisements does not seem to compensate the large advertising cor5 poxations and they therefore '* * seek new means of scoring. "According to a report last year, there was one large corporation which spent on poster advertisements the sum of $1,500,000. "After a detailed study of the results obtained by * this class of advertisements this same company has decided to avail itself of newspaper advertisements as more convenient and has discarded all forms of poster advertisements. "It is not to be doubted that there are certain places where a well-written * poster ad, attracts the attention of thousands of people at a minimum cost per person. * "Attractive colors, bright lights and sometimes a picture of interest can make a billboard ad productive. I "In commercial sites, there is no disputing that a good ad attracts the attention of countless people. But it must also be recognized that many times a billboard advertisement spoils the beauty of the scenery and instead of arousing the interest of the viewers it causes them to become hostile. The General Federation report says: ' "So far there are forty State Federations cooperating in this campaign. Wisconsin, New Jersey and Illinois have been the most active states during the year. There were 25 towns in Wisconsin propagandizing con- ' tracting billboards at the same time, handing out sheets Continued on page 7 6th col.
FOR-SALE House in Ciudad Nueva for farm near San Juan. Inquire: E. VAZQUEZ. Ciudad Nueva.