ELM1NDO
QPages 3 Ctvs. / I I I Semester - -- nMV Year - - . $9.50
Q/lPages 3 Ctvs. /II Office: "Puerto Rico UusfiaíVJ trado Bldg* -TeL 1222
I® NEWSPAPER
THE MORNING
Year IX.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
íubliBhed and distributed under permit No. 801) authority by tno Act. of October 0, 1917, on file at the Post Office a> dan Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the President. A. 8. Bur deson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, Feb. 21, 1919 at the Post Office at San Juan. Ri. (United States of America) wider the Act of march 8. 1871.
Saturday, September 3, 1871.
i Number 2865.
SOLUTION IS SOUGHT TO THE PROBLEM OF INFANT MORTALITY IN PUERTO RICO.
M THE INITIATIVE CORRESPONDS TO THE *INTERNATIONAL TOBACCO UNION OF AMERICA" Congress will be asked to extend to our Island the benefits of a certain federal law.
* f The problem of infant mortality, one of the most complicated and difficult that the Island Health Department has had to face, has been recently raised in all its magnitude before the Convention of the International Tobacco Union of America, held in the city of Chicago last August. Mr. Francisco Paz Franela and Mrs. Genara Pa--gán, both Puerto Rican delegates to the aforementioned Convention, drafted and obtained the approval of a resolution whose objective is to request the National Congress, through the senators and representatives of the American Federation of LaVbor bloc, the extension of a federal law to Puerto Rico, a law created to promote the improvement of maternity. The following is the solution as approved by the Convention of the "International Union of Tobacco Growers of America": I'? Resolution No. 24 # "Whereas, the average mortality rate in Puerto Rico is much higher than in any state of the Union; < "Whereas, out of every thousand children born on the island a number between 151 and 158 die before they reach the age of 18 years; < "Whereas, out of every thousand children born on the island a number between 151 and 158 die before they reach the age of 18 years.
the age of one year: "Whereas, the principal reasons to which the cause of such high average infant mortality may be attributed are that children under one year of age contract the diseases of enteritis, congenital debility, infantile tetanus, poor nutrition, rickets and acute bronchitis, most of which ailments demonstrate the lack of adequate care, comfortable shelter and sufficient nourishment; and further taking into account the conditions of poverty in which mothers find themselves to properly care for their offspring; "Therefore be it resolved by this twenty-sixth Convention of the "International Tobacco Growers Union of America" that our delegates to the next convention of the "American Federation of Labor" be instructed to submit a resolution requesting the Congress of the United States that all the provisions of the law entitled, "An Act to Promote Child and Maternity Welfare and Hygiene and for other purposes," approved November 23, 1921, be extended to the island of Puerto Rico. (Continued on p. 15, -col. 6) And that said law and any other laws for the promotion of the welfare and hygiene of children and maternity and for other purposes be extended to the island of Puerto Rico.
From success to success until climbing to the summit of triumph, EL ANCORA has managed to conquer a prominent place among all the social classes of the country. The eloquence of the numbers and the reality of the facts speak of such a gallant institution as follows: San Germán, P. R. August 5, 1927. Mr. Admor. of the "Ancora" Ponce, P. R. Dear Sir: I gladly received from Mr. Don Julio Capriles, local agent of that Society, representing
$3,755.50
4'" ANNIVERSARY of the BAZAR AHORRO FORTALEZA 2S SALES AT THE BARRER Cloth hats. Socks. Underpants. Cashmere suits. Panama hats. Paris garters. Yuntas Gabardine suits. Shoes. Handkerchiefs. n Yarn suits. Shirts. {Arrow collars. Buttons. Ties. Pants. Belts. Italian hats. Caps. T-shirts (OTIS). Bathrobes. ALL AT COST. DO NOT MISS THIS OPPORTUNITY. VISIT US AND YOU WILL BE CONVINCED. REMEMBER THAT MANOLO ALWAYS LIMITS HIMSELF. -: COME TO s- BAZAR SAVED Alien 25. - Tel. 1579. - Box 1246. - San Joan, P. R.
the José Suris Cardona Estate, a check for the sum of three thousand seven hundred and fifty-five dollars fifty cents ($3755.50), which corresponded to us for our father's accident. We give you our most expressive thanks for the attention given to our claim and grateful to that progressive society for the good benefits it brings to its policyholders, I remain with you, Atto. friend and H. H. José A. SURIS AGRAIT. Advertisement
DISTILLED WATER NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC Owing to the increase of distilled water for drinking and for the use of accumulator batteries, I have been obliged to introduce reforms to obtain greater production of distilled water. From this day forward I shall be able to sell any quantity for the whole island; and the price, in spite of being obtained of better quality, (without fat) will always be 5 CENTS FOR EACH GALLON taken in the same interior distillation in my Ice Plant, stop 3 Puerta de Tierra. T. LLAMAS-HIELO Phones 1515 and 190, San Juan.
ELEGANT HOODS WITH IMPORTED MATERIALS DIREC- . TAMENTE Painting "Dueo" with guaranteed duration. Situation prices. Service Guarantee. GARAGE José Cuebas Padilla Stop 27 - Santurce. Phone 85 - Hato Rey.
FOR SALE M-- Modern concrete house of one thousand two hundred and sixty meters (1260) located in Monte Flores. Nine rooms, balconies, gra ma, lush trees. Adjacent to three streets, there is space to build two more houses next door with street frontage. A splendid home and magnificent residence. Will inform D. P. O. Apartado 277, San Juan, telephone 1992, Santurce. (Advertisement.)
SACK AND THAT'S SEVEN! So say many people who make up the very large clientele of LA LUNA He who buys a jacket, buys seven; and buys at the same time seven pairs of pants, seven pairs of shoes, seven shirts, seven hats, and other clothing, of all kinds, in the assurance that they will last a lifetime, and that he dresses more elegantly than anyone else, and in the latest fashion. Visit us and you will always get the best, for a price that will surprise you. LA LUNA Salvador Brau, corner of Cruz. "LA VILLA DE PARIS" Cruz 23 San Juan, P. R. fcflAN HOTEL "BELGICA" PRICE RATES BEDROOMS: From $1.00 to $2.00 per day. -Rooms: Comfortable, ventilated and very clean. -MEALS: A la Carte, European Style. -Subscribers are admitted at conventional prices. Orders for specific meals are admitted, previous notice. We have a private office for commission agents, with typewriter and safe for valuables. -This hotel is located in the most central part of the city FELICIANO TORO CASALS, New Owner. Ponce, P. R. Villa St., No. 3.
EMPLOYEE Stenographer-Correspondent and Bookkeeper accepts placement in commercial house. Ms. LEBRON Te 1 . 71?, - San Juan, P. R.
Chocolate Meunier Genuinamento Francés. The best of all.
Houses for Sale Splendid doncrete residence in King's Court, and house of, masonry, No. 78 San Sebastian St. For inquiries address Nicolas M. Cartagena, King's Court. CÁLI-ASTI The only legitimate UVA that gives an exquisite yiNO (4.50 can). Beware of imitations. CIRO MALATRASI, Angelo Restaurant, San Jose 9, San Juan.
WHAT BARCE LO SAYS ABOUT THE RECENT MEETING AT FOR TALEZA M
The President of the Senate, Mr. Antonio R. Barceló, with whom we spoke yesterday, made the following statements regarding the declarations we published yesterday by the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, D.C. (Continued on page ■ 11, -col. 7).
NO CAUSE FOR ALARM IN THE FACT THAT DEAD RATS HAVE APPEARED IN PONCE
AS REPORTED BY THE HEAD OF THE "I BUBONIC PESTE I PREVENTION NEGOCIATION" i The fumigation of warehouses in San Juan will be completed next week.
The District Medical Inspector of the Sanitation Department in Ponce, Dr. Goyoyo
in Ponce, Dr. Goyco, has informed in a communication to the Chief of the "Negociado de Prevención de Peste Bubónica" in this city, Dr. Carrión, that in his district two rats have appeared dead without apparent cause. Since in San Juan there have also been findings of this kind in recent days, we spoke with Dr. Carrion, who told us that indeed, Dr. Goyco had reported the appearance of the rats, but that this should not be cause for alarm. "What happens," Dr. Carrión told us, "is that the public is a little frightened by the fact that dead rats have been found in San Juan and any insignificance puts them on notice and gives rise to fears that have no justification whatsoever. It is known that since the Legislature considerably reduced the allocation that this Bureau had, it was necessary to circumscribe the work of prevention to the city of San Juan. This was fair and reasonable since the greater number of ships that touch the island do so in this port and also because the two epidemics that we have suffered from the bubonic plague have broken out in San Juan. The work of prevention that we have been carrying out in these last days is nothing extraordinary. We are constantly carrying it out and it is part of the routine of our Bureau. Of course, we have recently intensified our efforts with the purpose of exterminating as many rats as possible from the warehouses and houses of the city. The test procedure to determine whether or not the rats collected are stinking or not, i.e., that of inoculating them with the vi-
Where crawls are long, arduous, continuous, difficult and rough, the MACK truck always predominates. Why? Because it is made to never break and to withstand the greatest abuse. Ask for prices and easy payment conditions to VILLAMIL, San Juan.
WE NEED Seamstresses to work on Singer electric machines. We also need good embroiderers. "COME SOON". MORRIS E. STORYK Isabel Segunda No.. 5 Infanta Luisa No. 4 Marina, San Juan, P. R.
EXPERIENCED INSURANCE Clerk NEEDED. Useless to apply without practice and good references. P. O. Box 958, San Juan, P. R.
EBROS' PETITION TO RECONSIDER THE AGREEMENT GRANTING THE BUS MONOPOLY TO WHITE STAR LINE WILL BE DISCUSSED ON TUESDAY.
M The Chairman of the "Public Service Commission" will report on the matter M
The "Public Service Commission" held an extraordinary session the day before yesterday, with the assistance of Chairman Muñoz, and Commissioners Dr. Figueroa, D'e Hostos, Narvaez Rivera and Sifre Ta rafa, having considered and resolved the following matters: On motion of one of the commissioners the matter of the monopoly application in Bayamón of the "Rayamón Auto Supplies, Co. Inc." was brought to the consideration of the Board."and it was agreed not to consider the referred petition in view of the fact that the same is based on a rule of conduct that has not been stated by the Commission, as it is evidenced in paragraph 3 of the petition where it is stated: "that this Commission has established the principle of eliminating all competition and establishing exclusive services"; and it is further stated as a rule of conduct of the Commission that exclusive franchises will not be considered in those localities where services exist in accordance with the Commission's regulations, unless it is convinced and satisfied that through the cooperation of those who have exclusive franchises in Bayamon, Inc.
that through the cooperation of those with established services adequate service will not be achieved. -José Ramos Rivera, Víctor M. Fra goso, Félix C. Más; for Guayama, Félix Berreteaga, Fran cisco Cividanes, and Eduardo Capó; for San Juan, Carlos F. Bahr; Adolfo Filonava Mayens; José de la Torre Muñiz; Antonio Pereira, Dr. J. Lorenzo Casalduc were appointed as Honorary Inspectors for Carolina. -The Mayor of Río Piedras was appointed Chief Inspector for Río Piedras. -ooOoo- Regarding the request of Claudio de Jesús to be granted a provisional permit authorizing him to drive school children* from the Candelaria and Gutiérrez wards to Toa Baja, it was agreed to grant the permit, and at the same time to order an investigation to deContinued page 20-col. 6.
/^m 7 /Ir w
THE "ASOCIACION ME DICA" WILL SOON BEGIN A NEW CAMPAIGN
ALLIGATOR WATERPROOF CAPES FOR MEN, WOMEN AND CHILDREN FOR STREET AND CASUAL USE. Stylish and elegant designs. In beautiful colors. Comfortable in all seasons. Useful for all weather. Made of "balloon" fabric, the strongest in proportion to its weight. Impregnated under pressure according to the famous ALLIGATOR process, which makes them absolutely waterproof and extremely durable. Guaranteed absolutely waterproof; they do not get sticky; they do not stain the finest clothes; they can withstand all weather conditions and can be washed with soap and water. A special model for every use - for street and sport use, - for Men, Women and Children. The best known in Weight, Durability and Waterproofness. Demand the ALLIGATOR label. -They are not genuine without it. '* for sale at SWIGGETT BROS store. SAN JUAN PUERTO RICO.
M It is aimed at improving public charity M So says its president, Dr. Fernandez Garcia M The "Medical Association of Puerto Rico," presided over by Dr. Eugenio Fernandez Garcia, intends to start shortly a campaign throughout the island, in its endeavor to improve more and more the conditions which should prevail in the charitable service throughout the country. Our readers know perfectly well, from the information we have received in our columns, the work carried out by the "Medical Association of Puerto Rico", to improve the referred system, and they also know the resolutions and agreements adopted by said entity, to fix the minimum salary that the titular doctors of the island should receive for their professional services, as a basis to carry out an efficient work for the benefit of the community. -We will soon begin," Dr. Eugenio Fernandez Garcia told us yesterday, "a new campaign throughout the country, which will culminate in beneficial results for our society, and especially for the indigent patients who deserve our protection and shelter. "Even though what we propose to accomplish already exists in our Association, we nevertheless want to (Continued page 5 column 4)
The fumigation of the establishments in which we work, even though we have not had any positive cases to date, continues to be put into effect. The fumigation of the establishments also continues to be implemented on a daily basis and we hope to have completed this work next week." SUGAR MARKET M Cablegrams received by the Porto Rico International Corp.: 10:15 A. M.- Sept. 2, 1927. Stock market opened. Sept. 2.95 (4.73), Die. 303 (4.81), Jan. 3.02 (4.80), March 2.92 (4.70), May 2.98 (4.76), July 3.06 (4.84), 3:25 P. M.-Stock closed. Sept. 2.92 (4.70), Die. 8.02 (4.80), Jan. 3.00 (4.78), March 2.91 (4.69), May 2.98 (4.76), July 8.06 (434). NOTICE The old Colorado picture has moved to the studio at the Pia- ' za de Colon. -Tel. 1298. BORDERS In colors are requested for home work. Parada 33-1¡2 - Casa 160. Hato Rey.
-A 1 ADE RAIS - Building materials. - Refractory bricks. -Creosoted posts at 12 lbs. - Barbed wires. * Prices without competition. COMPAÑIA INDUSTRIAL DE SANTURCE Box 250 San Juan, P. R. Tel. 425. FREE We will send a double gold plated compact, priced at $1.50, to anyone who returns 20 wrappers of Lana Oil Soap or Olive Cream Soap or an assortment of both. These soaps are sold at all drugstores and perfumeries. BEAVER REMERS GRAHAM & CO. DAYTON, OHIO. RICE AUCTION On the 7th day of September, 1927, at 2 P. M., at the "San Antonio" Dock, the Marshal of the San Juan District Court will sell at public auction 506 sacks of rice which are judicially deposited in case No. 4769 of Waterman & CO. vs. Mendez Bros. A Co. Besosa A Becosa, Attorneys for plaintiff. * - " -
Splendid premises for rent for any kind of business. Alien 83. For information: PEREZ HERMANOS Telephones 1720 and 1730 Sant.
ISABEL PARSI FLORISTA For any work in natural flowers call Phone 120, Hato Rey.