ELMUNDO
1 Q Pages 3 Ctvs. I Semester - - - - 5-00 XV One Year 59-50
1 O Pages 3 Ctvs. I Office: "Puerto Rico Hus A W trade Bldg." - TeL 1222
MORNING
THE MORNING
Year IX.
San Juan. Puerto Rico.
published and distributed andar permit No. 801) tutorized by toe Act. of October 6, 1917, on file at the Post Office dan Juan. Porto Bico, By order of the President. A. 8. Burdesnn, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 21. 1919 at the Post Office at San Juan. Porto Rno. (United States of America) under the Act of march 3. 1871.
Saturday, May 7, 1927.
Number 2727
"EXCEPT FOR A GROUP OF DEAF EGOISTS, WE ALL WANT THE COALITION TO CONTINUE".
M "That is a matter to be settled in the year 1928. Perhaps then those who form the little group of individualists will be eliminated": Iglesias M
-What is your opinion on the labor legislation recently passed by the Legislature," we asked Senator Santiago Iglesias yesterday when we greeted him in the meeting room of the Senate. -The laws passed by the Legislature at its last regular session and now at its Extraordinary session," he told us, "contain numerous measures which are directly beneficial to the working classes in many respects. It would seem that the Legislature has been inspired by the laudable purpose of doing all possible good to the working masses, and this may be seen in the laws themselves." Which of these laws are, in your opinion, of the most transcendental importance? -we asked. There are many laws of transcendental importance that have received the approval of the co-legislators. For example, the law by virtue of which the reassessment of the properties of the "Barrio Obrero" of San Juan is authorized, and others that fall under the jurisdiction of the "Safe Homes Commission", such as the one that provides for the compensation of the fanjilias of Puerta de Tierra that lost their homes due to the dredging of the port, the one that authorizes the sale of the small plots of land owned by the People of Puerto Rico that are currently occupied throughout the island by housing homes owned mostly by workers, and that may be acquired by them under the same Safe Homes Act. "The law to investigate and improve the "Workmen's Compensation Commission" is of the utmost importance also for the working classes, as well as the laws to perfect and economically consolidate the "Mediation and Conciliation Commission", to protect children and tubercular families, to make possible the reading in the work shops by means of good agreement between employers and workers, to protect !The purpose of the Commission was to protect the despalilladoras against possible fraud in the weighing operations, and to create an industrialization office in the United States to promote the establishment of industries and work in Puerto Rico. ' sheets! TWO-plaid with tru tru hem. Superior Fabric. Today Special Price at $1.15 one LA HORMIGA DE ORO " Plaza Principal, San Juan.
"Reforms in the budget deserve special mention. A fund of $25,000 has been appropriated to indemnify workmen who suffer accidents on government work; a reform has been made to authorize the Commissioner of the Interior to insure all employees and road laborers on the island. Another important reform has been made in the budget to increase the number of sewing teachers to 80 for the purpose of extending this industry; another reform to have thirty agricultural teachers; important items from $20,000 to $150,000 have been maintained to combat anemia and malaria. "All these laws help in an effective way the working classes and are a measure of protection toward those same classes. "In addition to these laws and others which are not mentioned and which are presently pending the Governor's signature, we have been able to appreciate that the administration has realized the importance of recognizing the Socialist Party representation in the "Public Service Commission", Mr. Ricardo Narvaez Rivera being appointed Associate Commissioner of said body. Our representative in the "Island Racetrack Commission" can have no other object than to protect the public interests as far as possible and to carefully study at the same time the defects of the equestrian law and to try to avoid the realization of possible frauds within the equestrian game or "sport", since in the racetracks weekly circulate large sums of money extracted from the pockets of the workers and other persons." -What can you tell us about Mr. Barceló's Electoral Law? -In my opinion, the fundamental reform it has is the prohibition it establishes according to which candidates cannot be registered in more than one candidacy, since everything it establishes about alliances or coalitions is completely voluntary, and the political parties can form coalitions or alliances by virtue of the sovereign will of their organizations. - "It is sensible that for different circumstances the deep economic problem that refers to the fundamental life of the country regarding latifundia, the colonial system of absenteeism and the violations of the Organic Charter carried out by all kinds of corporations *has not been definitely raised. But the public mood and the leaders of the majority, especially Mr. Barceló, are convinced that this great problem must be solved by the Legislature in order to be brought before the Governor first, and before Casa Continued on p. 6-col 6
DENECHAUD SYRUP Combines the original French formula of the eminent Dr. DENECHAUD for the treatment of BRCNCO-PULMONA-RES, TOS-FERINE, ASTHMA, CHRONIC CATARRHUS, etc. BALSAMIC - EXPECTORANT and CALMING. Ask for it at your Pharmacy. 75 cents bottle.
taROMULM E R R
Improves appetite and strengthens the body quickly. Recommended in cases of rickets and general weakness. For sale in all drugstores. HOUSE FOR RENT on Avenida Diez de Andino No. 60, next to Pesquera. -For information:- Tel. 1957, Santurce.
The Legislature approved the bill that creates one more District Judge position in San Juan.
M Lastra fought this measure when it was discussed in the House M The' session of the House of Representatives which was announced for last night, was suspended until yesterday at eleven o'clock in the morning, due to the urgent work that the Committee of Conferences had to carry out in the consideration of the budget bill. Said Committee met until one o'clock in the morning, and the draft budget was ready to be reported. YESTERDAY MORNING SESSION: At half past ten in the morning, President Tous Soto called the meeting to order. S. P. No. 4 to create the position of an additional Judge in the District Court of San Juan is up for discussion. Mr. Muñoz Ramos consumed a vote in favor of the bill, providing numerous arguments tending to prove that the constant intensification of work in said court requires a new magistrate to share this arduous work with the three already in existence. Mr. Lastra Chárriez consumed an opposition tumo. I know perfectly well," he said in his speech, "that my colleagues in the House are as convinced as I am that there are enough judges in the San Juan District Court. Now they want to create one more judgeship, not because there is a need for it, but because there is a prosecutor who wants to be promoted to that category and has brought all his influence into play with a member of this House, who in turn has gone from legislator to legislator, from desk to desk, preparing the ground for this bill to pass without difficulties. "I know that the bill is going to pass, as a consequence, naturally, of the commendable work of a deputy in this House, 'but I want to make it well established that no one here is going to vote for the desirability of the creation of that office, but that of a prosecutor who desires promotion, and that of a lawyer, who, being unable to do anything by practicing, aspires to be a prosecutor." The bill was approved on second and third reading successively, by majority. It will pass to the
Yesterday, the lawsuit challenging the monopoly of "guaguas" began to be aired.
M The Court ordered that the White Star Line be included in the suit M Yesterday, at 2:30 p.m., a hearing was held before the Court of Appeals. M. the hearing of the case of "Injuction" filed by Ledos, R. Martínez Nadal, M. A. Martínez Dávila and R. Tormes against the "Public Service Commission", challenging the monopoly of "guaguas" was heard before the District Court of San Juan, Civil Division, presided by Hon. Judge Berga. The commission was represented by the second Assistant to the Attorney General, Ledo. J. A. López Acosta, Special Prosecutor Ledo. T. Perez Almiroty and the abo gado of the "Public Service Commission", Mr. Beaverley. Respondents filed the following answer to the order to show cause:- - "Appears the Public Service Commission of Puerto Rico, composed of Miguel A. Muñoz, Filipo de Hostos, Ricardo Narvaez Rivera, Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa and Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa. Leopoldo Figueroa and Jaime Sifre Tarafa, defendant in this case, through the Acting Attorney General of Puerto Rico and undersigned counsel, and answering the order to show cause, respectfully alleges and submits: 1. "That the facts set forth in the petition, even accepting them as true, are insufficient to constitute a good cause of action for injuction in favor of Miguel Santiago. That there is a defect of parties defendant, since as appears from the petition for injuction, the White Star Buss Line is the real party in interest in this injuction, and has not been joined or included as a defendant in this suit. Because an injuction cannot be granted to restrain the signature of the Governor, having already the approval of the Senate, where it originated. At a quarter to one o'clock in the afternoon the session was adjourned until three o'clock P. M.
THE DELEGATION FOR TORRIQUEÑA HAS BEEN VERY PLEASANT IN SANTO DOMINGO M So reports Commissioner Chardon to the President of the House M The Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, Mr. Carlos E. Chardon, who as we duly informed our readers is in Santo Domingo representing the Chief of the Insular Executive at the Exposition in Santiago de los Caballeros, Dominican Republic, yesterday cabled the President of the House of Representatives, Mr. Tous Soto, informing him that he is in Santo Domingo in representation of the Chief of the Insular Executive at the Exposition in Santiago de los Caballeros, Dominican Republic, and has sent a cable to the President of the House of Representatives, Mr. Tous Soto. Mr. Tous Soto, informing him of the delicate entertainment that the Puerto Rican delegation had received upon its arrival to the sister island, and urging the appointment of the members of the Insular Legislature who are to visit the Exposition in Santiago during the coming week. Mr. Tous Soto has replied with another cablegram in which he informs Mr. Chardon that the Senate and the House of Representatives have already appointed their delegates to that brilliant act, and also sending him the list of legislators who will take part in the excursion. 4."-"Because the remedy of "injuction" is not the proper one: (a) - "To review the dis cretionary acts of a board or commission, when such acts are performed in accordance with law. (b) - "To determine the legality or illegality of a contract or right to grant a franchise, when the same has been granted within the precepts of law. (Continued on p. 6. Col. 7.)
"GIFTS-PADIN" A BOTTLE OF COTY PERFUME AND A ' SUMMER BEAUTY" BOOCKLET WE WILL GIVE A BOTTLE OF COTY PERFUME worth 50 c., and a booklet of * V Beauty to every person who 9 c buys for *- " V Qfic SM&k a box of ordinary size COTY THIN POWDS We have all shades of color and all perfumes in < the Powder -being of the same scent the Gift scent. COMES IN LIMITED QUANTITY - Mailed postage free, Indicate scent and color. New Products More GON7AT F7 PADIN CO~T. Vis!tenos Today ' ===== SAN JUAN PONCE MAYAGÜEZ
YOU GET THE ROSA DEL Du ROUX POWDERS ettpiWly perfumed and surprisingly effective, in Leucorrhea, women's own diseases, prophylactic showers, etc.. Ask for them in all Pharmacies in original bottles. unique g 1 IMPORTERS I (THE'SCIENTIFIC SALES CO. I I I SAN FRANCISCO S4 JUAN. P. ". j ■ Bahr . _ . -■
SOLARES PUNTA DE LAS MARIAS The best place in Santurce. Very low prices. Liberal terms. HENRY W. DOOLEY Tapia 9. Tel. 1295 Santurce, P. R.
THE GOVERNOR SIGNS SEVERAL BILLS INTO LAW.
M The Governor yesterday signed the following bills and joint resolutions: S. P. 94, entitled: "An Act to amend sections 6 and 7 of the law entitled, "An Act to amend sections 6 and 7 of the law entitled, "An Act concerning agricultural refining and cane milling contracts, and for other purposes", approved on March 10, 1910", P. C. 161. entitled: "An Act to convert the municipal road that joins the road leading to Loíza Aldea and crosses the Medianía Alta and Medianía Baja wards of the municipality of Loíza and the Herreras ward of the municipality of Río Grande and leads to the town of Río Grande into an island road; to impose a special tax of one tenth of one percent for four years on all movable and immovable property in the municipalities of Loíza and Rio Grande, and for other purposes". R. C. of C. 128, entitled: "Joint Resolution for the Treasurer of Puerto Rico to pay for devolution to Waldrop Photographic Co." "P. Gandía & Cía.", and "The Union Commercial Corporation", the sum of four thousand nine hundred and four dollars ninety-five cents ($4,904.95), and for other purposes". R. C. of the C. 88, entitled: "Joint Resolution ordering the Puerto Rico Board of Pharmacy to admit Mr. Francisco Olivera Guerra for examination, and for other purposes". "THE GRADUATES OF OUR UNIVERSITY WILL HOLD AN ASSEMBLY M This act will take effect on the 22nd day of the current month -i:- The graduates of the "University of Puerto Rico" will meet in an annual assembly on Sunday, the 22nd day of the current month, in accordance with a call being circulated by Ledo. Ramírez Pabón, president of the "Asociación de Graduados". The purpose of this meeting is to organize the celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of the "University of Puerto Rico", which will be on March 12, 1928. The meeting will be held in the assembly hall of the "University of Puerto Rico."
THE ONLY REPRESENTATIVE IN PONCE OF "EL MUNDO" AND "PUERTO RICO ILUSTRADO" M Once again, for the knowledge of our clients and relations in Ponce, we must state for the record that the only representative of EL MUNDO and "Puerto Rico Hustrado" in that city is our editor, Mr. Teófilo Maldonado. Interested parties should therefore contact him, both for information and administrative matters. Our branch office in Ponce is located at 29 Isabel Street.
SHADOW CARRIERS New Assortment. Today with Formidable Prices Visit the Great Bazaar LA HORMIGA DE ORO Plaza Principal, San Juan.
"WHEN I REQUESTED THE VOTE OF CONFIDENCE FOR CORDOVA DAVILA, THE REPRESENTATIVES WHO HAD ALLUDED TO HIM KEPT SILENT".
Ebros requests that the agreement granting the bus monopoly to White Star Line be reconsidered M The Ebros Rapid Transit Co. filed a motion in the new "Public Service Commission" yesterday in the "Public Service Commission" requesting the reconsideration of the agreement adopted by the former Commission, which grants the bus traffic monopoly to White Star Bus Line. The "Ebros" bases its motion on the fact that "the "White Star Line" was unjustifiably favored without having complied, in the procedure used for the selection of the company that was to take charge of the service, with all the formalities required by law". The petitioner also alleges that an error was committed by authorizing the favored company "White Star Line" to purchase the property of all the other "guaguas" owners at a reasonable price. For these and other reasons, which it alleges, the "Ebros" has requested the new "Public Service Commission" to hold in abeyance the agreement adopted granting the "guaguas" monopoly to "White Star L.'Xa" until a hearing is held in which the question raised can be discussed and considered, proceeding then, if the Commission deems it appropriate, to revoke the decision of its predecessor granting the monopoly of "guaguas" traffic to the "White Star Line". A MEETING OF THE "PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION". M At the meeting held by the new "Public Service Commission" last night the Motor Vehicle Regulations were reviewed, but no final agreement was reached in this regard. OPPORTUNITY IN FAJARDO We rented local consturcción modern 9m. front 16 m. background glazed main street. They will inform: SUCS. OF JUAN COMAS
Great Bazaar 'San Francisco' (The House of the Bargains) TODAY SATURDAY ITS OPENING See our great assortment of articles for the Home. LADIES' SUITS Very New - Precious - Very Cheap. Stockings, lace, handbags, and many other items. J. MARTINEZ & Co. Sucr. 63 San Francisco St. S. Brau. (In front of Blanco Pharmacy) PHONE 1189 SAN JUAN, P. R.
M "This silence implies a rectification of his accusations": Berrios M In one of our last editions we reported that House Representative José L. Berrios verbally requested from the House of Representatives a vote of confidence for the Resident Commissioner in Washington, Mr. Félix Córdova Dávila, based on certain allusions made to Mr. Córdova Dávila in recent debates. Since Mr. Berrios desisted from raising the matter verbally in order to formulate it in writing and several days have passed without this matter coming up again, as was expected in political circles, we interviewed Mr. Berrios yesterday, asking him if he was determined not to insist on his petition or if, on the contrary, he intended to formulate it again. Mr. Berrios, answering our questions, expressed himself as follows: "When I rose to request a vote of confidence in Mr. Córdova Dávila, the representatives who had alluded to him in the previous session, even going so far as to call him a traitor, were present in the House session, and when Mr. Planellas stated that the House had never doubted the integrity and correct conduct of Mr. Córdova Dávila, they kept absolute silence. "Since this silence implies a rectification of his accusations, I am convinced that the situation does not require, for the time being, that the judgment of the House with respect to our Resident Commissioner be put to the test". Rayon Silk Bedspreads - Colors - Strawberry Blue - Lilac and Yellow Size 2 seater with large pillow cover. Today Special Price. $3 99 one. LA HORMIGA DE ORO Main Plaza, San Juan.
PARK TODAY! - TO-DAY! THE BROKEN HEARTS OF HOLLYWOOD Patsy Ruth Miller - Douglas Fairbanks Jr. Louise Dresser.