ELMINDO
1 3 Cvts. f Semester 5.00 A Year - - -- - 19.50
1 £*Pagi nas 3 Cvts. E || Office: "Puerto Rico Has- . JL V trado Bldg." - Tel. 1222
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
Year IX.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
published and distributee under permit Mo. 801) tutorized by me Act. of October B, 1917, ou file at the Post Office at can Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President. A. S. Burdeeon, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 2L 1910 at the Post Office at San Juan. Porto Rno. (United States of America) under the Act of march 3. 1879.
Saturday, February 2, 1927.
Number 2644.
OUR COMMISSIONER OF HEALTH RECEIVES GREAT HONORS FROM VENEZUELA.
M HE IS APPOINTED OFFICIAL OF THE ORDER OF THE ORDER OF THE BUST OF THE LIBERTOR AND CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE "SOCIEDAD MEDI CA DE CARACAS" M Doctors Ashford and Lambert are awarded the medal of Public Instruction. M
By disposition of General Juan Vicente Gomez, President of the Republic of Venezuela, the government of that country has conferred upon our Commissioner of Health, Dr. Pedro N. Ortiz, Dr. Lambert and Dr. Bailey K. Ashford great honors, in recognition of their work. Ashford great honors, in recognition of the high intellectual capacity of these gentlemen, who are truly conscientious scientific researchers and professionals of recognized fame. Our Commissioner of Insular Health has been named Officer of the Order of the Liberator's Bust, a decoration that is only conferred abroad to those men of positive worth who have rendered important services for the good of humanity. Coincidentally, "La Sociedad Médica de Caracas" in an extraordinary session unanimously agreed to appoint Dr. Ortiz as a corresponding foreign member. In relation to this fact we will transcribe in full what the "Nuevo Diario de Caracas" says in its edition of last January 30: "Sociedad Médica de Caracas" "Foreign Corresponding Member" "In session of the "Sociedad Médica de Caracas" elected by unanimous vote, Foreign Corresponding Member, Dr. Pedro N. Ortiz, ComislonaCAMARA r'- REPRESENTAN- " TES DE PUERTO RICO. M NOTICE OF AUCTION Proposals for the printing of legislative documents of the House of Representatives, during the Second Ordinary Legislature of the Eleventh Legislative Assembly, will be admitted until nine o'clock in the morning of the 14th of the current day, at this Secretariat, where sample proposals are available to interested parties. San Juan, P. R. February 8, 1927. C. MARTINEZ ACOSTA, Secretary of the House of Representatives.
Puerto Rico's Health Department. "The Medical Society thus honors a notable man of science, (Continued on page 12) SIGNIFICANT NORTH AMERICAN BANKERS TO ARRIVE IN SAN JUAN ON MARCH 4 M Among them is the former Governor of Puerto Rico, Winthrop M On board the yacht "Miramich", owned by the President of the National City Bank of New York, Mr. Jharles E. Mitchell, outstanding banking personalities from the United States will arrive in our island on March 4. In addition to Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Beckman Winthrop, former Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. George D. Buckley, Vice-President of the National City Bank of New York, and former President of the Cromwell Publishing Company, Mr. Gury F. Gary, attorney-at-law of the Sherman Publishing Company, and Mr. Gury F. Gary, attorney-at-law of the Sherman Publishing Company, will be coming to Puerto Rico on March 4. Gary, an attorney with the firm of Shearman & Stearling, New York, Percy A. Rockefeller, nephew of billionaire John D. Rockefeller, and James A. Stillman, all directors of the above-mentioned banking firm. They are accompanied by Mr. G. B. Winston, First Assistant Secretary of the Federal Theater. On the occasion of the arrival in the country of these high personalities, the "Bankers Association of Puerto Rico", presided over by Mr. Luis Venegas Castro, yesterday agreed to offer them a banquet at the "Condado Vanderbilt Hotel", on March 5th at half past seven in the evening. In addition to the managers of all the banks of Puerto Rico, the directors of the banks will attend the event. Governor Tcwner, his Private Secretary, Captain Van Deusen, the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico, Mr. Saldaña, members of the Cabinet, members of the Legislature, and high officials of the Federal, Island and Municipal governments will be invited. Acting as "toast" director will be Mr. Luis Sánchez Morales, founder and board member of the "Puerto Rico Bankers Association of Puerto Rico."
SOLARES The best lots in Santurce (Puntas Marías) / 1OOO 75o 625 400 square meters. Low prices - Liberal terms. - Ask for information. HENRY W. DOOLEY 9 Tapia St. Tel. 1295, - Santurce.
Eat what your Land Produces Plantains, Guineos, Sweet Potatoes, Yautías, Yame, Pumpkin, Malanga, Chinas, Grapefruits. Fresh weekly. WHOLESALE Wholesale Building Gonzalez. Arsenal No. 8, Marina. CARBON
A palatable emulsion composed of pure cod liver oil, with egg yolk, cherry wine and phosphates. GENERAL NUTRITIVE TONIC High VITAMIN CONTENT IN ALL PHARMACIES.
BOARD OF EXAMINING PHYSICIANS - M CALL FOR EXAMINATIONS M This Board will hold examinations for the related practitioners during the coming month of March, and in the following order: PHYSICIANS AND OSTEOPATISTS, days 1-2-3-4 and 5. PRACTITIONERS AND OPTOMETERS, days 7 and 8. NURSES AND NURSES, days 9 and 10. Applications and other requirements will be admitted until the 21st day of the current, date on which the deadline for admission expires. Application forms and general information will be provided at the Board's office at Alien St. No. 3 or at P.O. Box 804, San Juan. Dr. D. BIASCOECHEA, Secretary. February 9, 1927 (Announcement).
For Rent The second floor of the house Alien 37. Will inform R. Fabian & Co. Telephone 755.
Don't miss the Centrillón and Chistera dances tonight and tomorrow.
The problem of workers' compensation occupied the Economic Congress all day yesterday.
M The members of the Commission took a leading part in the discussions M An incident arose when certain accusations were made - Today the municipal question will be dealt with M Under the presidency of the Speaker of the House, Mr. José L. Berrios, the session of the Economic Congress resumed at nine o'clock last night at 9 o'clock. Compulsory insurance or free concurrence. Suggestions on the current law". The first turn corresponded to the President of the "Workers' Compensation Commission", Mr. Ramón Montaner, who read an extensive report, which appears elsewhere in this same issue. After the reading of the report, Mr. Montaner was subjected to extensive questioning. The first congressman to ask him questions was Senator Hernandez Lopez. "Why is it, Mr. Montaner," asked Mr. Hernandez Lopez, "that the Commission has resolved cases corresponding to the year 1926, while there are also pending cases corresponding to previous years?" Montaner: "This is because there are contentious cases, which require a lot of time and effort.
Agronomy students of the "Colegio de Agricultura" describe as false the statements of the "rotarlos" M They allege that they are being harmed and discredited. M From Mayagüez we have received the following telegram, authorized by the second year agronomy class of the "Colegio de Agricultura" of that city: EL MUNDO, San Juan. -The sophomore class of the agronomy course protests the statements of the "Rotary Club" of Mayagüez published in their newspaper. The incompetence attributed by them to the agronomy graduates cannot be proved. This falsehood discredits us and causes us more damage than the deficiency they want to attribute to our laboratories. In one hour nothing can be appreciated. You have to study and graduate here to know the truth. SECOND YEAR CLASS. AGRONOMY COURSE.
THE "CHAMBER OF COMMERCE" PUTS A STOP TO THE DISCREDIT CAMPAIGN AGAINST OUR SEWING AND EMBROIDERY INDUSTRY.
M- Will consider the letter from the Puerto Rican Association of Women Suffragists and the editorial that EL MUNDO published on the subject. -2- m
The President of the "Insular Chamber of Commerce", Mr. Miguel Morales, told us yesterday that he intends to call a meeting of the Executive Council of the organization he presides, in order to bring up the matter denounced by the "Puerto Rican Association of Women Suffragettes", and which we have editorialized on, regarding the fact that the Puerto Rican sewing and embroidery industry is being discredited abroad. Mr. Morales proposes to demand the immediate suspension of the propaganda that certain U.S. commercial houses have begun to advertise their products, propaganda that is a discredit to the Puerto Rican sewing and fretwork industry.
discredit to the industry of our country. Mr. Morales repeated that he will convene the Executive Council of the "Chamber of Commerce" at any moment to consider the letter of the Puerto Rican Association of Women Suffragists and our editorial of Thursday, in which we dealt extensively with this matter. In connection with the phrases that Mr. Barceló uttered at the "Economic Congress" alluding to the "Chamber of Commerce", and the Sales law, Mr. Morales informed us that the association over which he presides had decided to refrain for the time being from commenting on this matter.
You/ 9 In an Assault.... ... / In a "sarao" ...... \A "sarao" .... A , WÁ / Places where the indu- 'A /¥ // I mentó stands out "a la 1 v [ sortá" a suit STEIN \ ' y? BLOCH will put you to- I -iO- ■* . / not with the occasion .... ' / I / I i / A MAN c l l l\ I short or very tall, who / is stocky or slouchy, can at a ball # /> /'N I I look very -good and not / í / / "disguised," with a / / / / í TUXEDO I / "Lord Baltimore'" I I I * with vest i . I crossed jV " 1 p° r / ' í $45.00 ' / of which for all sizes has imported 1 / CABRER STORE \ \ \ \ SAN JUAN, - PONCE \ J
GOOD LOCATION The three-story building located on Ponce de Leon Avenue, stop 7, Puerta de Tierra, where we had our Ford Department, is leased. Sanchez Morales & Co., Inc. San Juan, P.R.
When you come to San Juan for Carnival, be sure to visit the Restaurant "El Recreo Hípico", the best and cheapest place to eat. Carretera Central, Parada 24, Santurce, P. R. TeL 1544.
THE "SAN ANTONIO BRIDGE" CANNOT BE INAUGURATED ON THE TWENTIETH DAY OF THE YEAR.
M Don Guillermo Esteves advocates not to change the name that this construction has borne through the centuries. M The Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Guillermo Esteves, addressed the following letter yesterday to the Mayor of San Juan, Mr. Roberto H. Todd: Sir:- The Superintendent of Public Works informs me that it will not be possible to have the construction of the new San Antonio bridge completed by the twentieth, the date on which you wished to inaugurate it, as part of the program of the Carnival festivities, which you have been celebrating so brilliantly. The cause of the non-completion of the work, although it is only a detail, is of such a nature, that, in my opinion we must take it into consideration, since it is about certain bronze tombstones that we have commissioned that commemorate some historical facts, and others, the new construction carried out. As lately something has been said about naming this bridge after me, and you were the kind father of the idea; as later students of the history of Puerto Rico, in our University pointed out how appropriate it would be to name the bridge after Captain Serralta, I take this opportunity to propose that you join your efforts with mine to prevent the name "Puente de San Antonio" from being changed, the name with which this bridge was solemnly baptized, back in the year 1613. It would be an immense and undeserved honor for me if that bridge were to bear my name, but much more immense would be my satisfaction, as a Puerto Rican, to see that we decided to respect traditional names, bequeathed by our ancestors, after baptized with the blessed water of our faith and our beliefs. There, in the distant State of California, in Florida, the names of Saints endure, like relics, from the coasts and through its rivers, to the highest peaks of its San Francisco, San Diego, San Diego, San Luis, San Joaquin, San Bernardino, and it is admirable that another race and another people who have tenaciously defended those names, consecrated by tradition, have endured.
In the "Bridge of San Antonio", will be engraved in bronze the fact made by Serralta, will also remain my humble name as has always been customary in all our important public works, but I am sure that the name of "San Antonio" will always be the name of that bridge "although with another name is baptized, which is not easy to erase from the pages of a story, a name that has more than three hundred years of living in them. Yours affectionately, GUILLERMO ESTEVES, Commissioner. NOTICE OF AUCTION PUERTO RICO SENATE M Office of the Secretary. M This Office of the Secretary will accept bids, in sealed sheets, until nine o'clock in the morning of the fourteenth day of the current month, for the printing of legislative documents during the year 1927, and will give the interested parties the information they may request. San Juan, Puerto Rico, February 10, 1927. JOSE MUÑOZ RIVERA Secretary.
(Eliminate it f II 1 of cu mente, if VJ. thinks U I II ( to urbanize its lands. S Do not set about making costly ex" I I periments and acon, j* i s satiate yourself with that* which you are- jj I - so in a position to know. I LUIS REXACH I I I URBANIZACIONES BUENAS ju I 1 TELÍSS SANTURCE í s Ricardo A. Gomez ATTORNEY Civil and Criminal Matters. In all Courts. Offices: Edificio EL MUNDO, 1 4th. floor,
GOVERNMENT OF PTO. RICO DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF INSURANCE NOTICE TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN: Notice is hereby given that on November 12, 1926, the "Saint Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Company", of Saint Paul, Minnesota, ceased to do marine insurance business in Porto Rico; and has applied for the withdrawal of the deposit made with this Department for the protection of its policyholders in this Island, as soon as all its liabilities arising from said business have been liquidated or otherwise extinguished. In compliance with Section 147 of the Insurance Law in force, this notice will be published in En glish and in Spanish once a week for six consecutive weeks for the purpose of giving persons having any outstanding claim against the [Company ample time to notify , this Office before the securities so I deposited are released. Juan G. GALLARDO, Superintendent of Insurance. San Juan, Porto Rico December 1926. (Announcement.)
"I DISAGREE WITH THE IDEA OF POSTPONING THE STUDY OF ENGLISH UNTIL THE FOURTH GRADE".
M "PUERTO RICO WILL BE THE CENTER OF COMMUNICATION BETWEEN NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA" _M - Says Dr. Thompson, President Emeritus of Ohio University.
Dr. William O. Thompson, President Emeritus of "Ohio University'', who visited our island lately, has sent Mr. Huyke his personal observations of the visit he made to our schools. Here is how Dr/ Thompson expresses himself: - "The courtesy of Mr. Huyke, Commissioner of Instruction, gave us the opportunity of visiting some of the San Juan graded schools and the "School of Arts and Crafts,'' which are in the heart of the city and are therefore of the best condition to be observed. "I found a group of well-prepared, active teachers, with an admirable command of all school activities. They all spoke perfect English and Spanish. It was very interesting for me to observe the work of a first grade where the children do exercises in one or the other language without any difficulty. These exercises are done so naturally that the children seem to know both languages perfectly. In the second and third grades the children are very advanced. They showed me their notebooks which are really a credit to their work.
I observed a geography lesson given to me. I observed a geography lesson given by a very intelligent and knowledgeable teacher on how to present a lesson. The lesson was on the map of Arizona-Idaho. It was an admirable recitation. "In the primary grades I found the same perfection in the work and the same power of adaptation on the part of the children. When it is borne in mind that these children for the most part were poor, the result must be considered excellent. I found that one school gives meals to poor children for a penny a day. It doesn't take much work to understand that the school atmosphere is very good and that the relationships between parents, children and teachers are excellent. High-value citizens are being made, no doubt about it. "Recently a study has been made by Columbia authorities who have formulated valuable recommendations. I am in disagreement with (Continued on page 12)
IN HONOR OF LINCOLN THE MUNICIPALITY WILL CLOSE ITS DOORS TODAY M Mayor Todd has suggested this to his subordinates -M Mayor Todd has issued the following executive order, addressed to the heads of the municipal departments of San Juan: "Saturday the 12th of this month is the birthday of Lincoln, American Emancipator, and although it is not an official holiday, "e has followed the custom of closing in the departments of the Insular Government, and this is an official holiday.The custom has been followed in the departments of the Insular Government, and this year those offices, as well as the banks, will be closed. "On this occasion, I take the liberty of suggesting that we close the municipal offices, except those which for certain official circumstances have to remain open. "Sincerely, (S.D.) R. H. TODD. Mayor.
I' Su : .vJh JarabÍ~" /■■Mdekeghaud JARABg DfNtiCn.ALI) ''*** I '■"■"grar J O**"**' - iesaffláOÍWramitetfs < í .... ".i.. - ■' ■' ■■ DENECHAUD SYRUP Combines the original French formula of the eminent Dr. DENECHAUD for the treatment of BRONCHOPULMONA-RES, TOS-FERINE, ASTHMA, CHRONIC CATARRHUS, etc. BALSAMIC - EXPECTORANT and CALMING. Ask for it in your Pharmacy.