elaííndo
16
-Pages 3 Cvts. | Ofirina: "Puerto Rico Hustrado Bldg." -TeL 1222
16
i Pages 3 Ctvs. I Semester - 5.00 r One Year - -- $9.50
MORNING
THE MORNING
Year IX .
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
rablished and distributed under permit Na 801) autonzed by me Act. of October 6, 1917. on file at the Post Office a" dan Juan, Porto Rico, By order of the President, A. 8. Burdeaon, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 2L 1919. at the Post Office- at San Juan. Porto Rho. (United States of America) under the Act of march 8. 187S a
Saturday, January 8, 1927.
Number 2609.
THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE IS INVITED TO ATTEND THE CONGRESS. OF AGRICULTURE IS INVITED TO ATTEND THE INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF SUGAR TECHNICIANS.
Mr. Lopez Dominguez addresses a letter to that effect to Commissioner Chardon. M The sugar producers will also send their
The Commissioner of Agriculture' and Labor, Mr. Carlos E. Chardon, has received the following letter from the President of the "Asociación de Técnicos Azucareros", Mr. FA. López Dominguez: i Hon. Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, San Juan, Puerto Rico. Sir:- In compliance with an agreement adopted by the Association of Sugar Technicians of Puerto Rico at a special session held on December 26, last, I have the honor to address you and through you the Hon. Governor of Puerto Rico, to present to the Hon. Governor as well as before you, the convenience and even the necessity that the Department of Agriculture (Continued on page 6) DEPARTMENT OF HACIENDA 'INCOME TAX BUSINESS NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC On the 3rd day of this month, Income Tax returns for the calendar year ended December 31, 1926, were mailed to all taxpayers. Any natural or juridical person, who, having received taxable income in accordance with the law, does not receive the corresponding form to file his return, must request it directly from this Department °of °S-. These returns must be filed with the Treasurer of Puerto Rico not later than March 15, 1927, when the person filing the return is a citizen of Puerto Rico or a resident individual, a domestic or foreign corporation or partnership with an office or place of business in the island, and foreign corporations or partnerships not having an office or place of business in the island, must file their returns on or before June 15, 1927. In accordance with the law in xigor, the returns must be accompanied by at least one-half of the tax due because the date of payment coincides with the date of filing the return. The attention of taxpayers is drawn to the fact that any tax whose first installment is not paid on the due date shall be collected in a single installment, in accordance with the provisions of Section 53, Subsection (2) of the Income Tax Act No. 74, approved on August 6, 1925, and interest shall be charged at the rate of 1 percent per month from the due date. The returns filed outside the term fixed by law shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax, in accordance with the provisions of Section (b). See-, ción 70, of the aforementioned Law. January 3, 1927. Juan G. Gallardo, Treasurer of Puerto Rico, I (Anuneio.) I
The "Evening Post" of New York announces that the beautiful steamer "Doric" left New York on the 27th day of December last, the "ELKS" M ' Puerto Rico appears on the itinerary of the ship M The "Evening Post" of New York announces that the beautiful steamer "Doric" left that port on the 27th day of December last, of the "White Star" shipping company, which has been chartered by the "Elks" organization to make a voyage whose itinerary includes the Panama Canal Zone, the Dutch Indies, Venezuela, Trinidad, Martinique, Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico and Bermuda. On board the "Doric" are about five hundred American "Elks," among them gentlemen of national prominence, such as John Prince, ex-Procu-tor General of Ohio, and others. High dignitaries of the Order of the Elks are part of the expedition. The exact date on which the "Doric" is to enter the port of San Juan is not yet known. We do know that the "Elks" of Puerto Rico are preparing an enthusiastic reception for their brothers in fraternity, and that they will make them the object of all kinds of attentions while they remain on our island. PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION, SAN JUAN, P. R. M NOTICE M TO THE HOLDERS OF CERTIFICATES OF NECESSITY AND CONVENIENCE OF SAN JUAN, SANTURCE, RIO PIEDRAS. M You are hereby notified that the Public Service Commission at its meeting of Tuesday, January 4, 1927, agreed to grant you until January 15, 1927, to comply with the requirements of the Motor Vehicle Regulations in order to renew your licenses on or before said date. Otherwise, service will be suspended for those who do not comply with said order. Those interested should compa recer to these offices before the NECESITAMOS Good number of operating them on Singer Electric machines. Good embroidery and fretwork machines. Plenty of work and opportunity to make good money. MORRIS E. STORYK Infanta Luisa No. 4 & 5, Marina, San Juan, P. R.
LYKES BROS STEAMSHIP CO., INC. THE BEST STEAMSHIP SERVICE BETWEEN GULF PORTS AND PUERTO RICO WISHES ITS MANY CUSTOMERS AND FRIENDS A HAPPY 1927 AND OFFERS ITS JANUARY 1927 ITINERARY. Lake Charles Beaumont Houston Galveston SS ALMERIA LYKES January 8 January 10 January 11 SS. STELLA LYKES January 15 January 18 January 20 January 21 SS. TILLIE LYKES January 27 January 25 January 25 January 29 January 31 We would be very grateful if you would invite your shippers to ship through the LYKES LINE, confident that we will maintain the SERVICE at the level that this Trade requires. M. BERRIOS & CO., Agts. Gen. P. O. Box 777 - Telephone: Office 318-321 - Pier 1506. SAN JUAN, P. R. Roses & Co. Sues. --Acceptance. F. Carrera & Bros. - Aguadilla. Thos. Bcothby Jr. -Playa Mayagüez. Sues, Armstrong Bros. -Playa Ponce. Nieves, Calafat & Co, -Arroyo.
"CUÑIFLOR" SENTENCED TO LIFE IMPRISONMENT WITH HARD LABOR.
M That was the sentence handed down by Hon. Judge Samalea Iglesias M The Hon. Judge Samalea Iglesias, of the District Court of San Juan, handed down yesterday against Eustaquio de los Santos (a) "Cuñiflor", accused of killing his own daughter, the following sentence: - "Today, January 7, 1927, and in open court, the convict appeared. Eustaquio de los Santos (a) "Cuñiflor", to receive his sentence. "The Court informed him about the nature of the charge brought against him, about the allegations of his defense, about the verdict of the Jury and about the judgment rendered, and asked him if he had any legal reason to adduce to show that sentence should not be pronounced against him, and not having adduced any legal reason that would prevent the pronouncement of sentence, the Court pronounces its sentence in the following manner: That the defendant Eustaquio de los Santos (a) "Cuñ'flor" having been duly tried by the Jury and found guilty of the crime of Murder in the First Degree with extenuating circumstances, the Court in compliance with its judgment of the 4th day of January, 1927 itself, must convict, and hereby sentences said defendant Eustaquio de los Santos (a) "Cuñiflor" to suffer the penalty of life imprisonment for the remainder of his natural life, with hard labor. And. it is ordered that said conviction - do be taken from this Court with all possible speed to the Departmental Prison of Puerto Rico in San Juan and there that he be delivered to the Chief of said Institution to be confined therein for the remainder of his natural life with hard labor as of this date. Dated at San Juan, Puerto Rico this 7th day of January, 1927. i (s) Luis Samalea IGLESIAS District Court Judge. WANTED Stenographer, male or female, capable of taking English dictation. State qualifications and salary desired. P. O. Box 1384, San Juan. above date from 1% to 4 P. M., except Tuesdays, to obtain their licenses. Francisco del VALLE, Jr., Secretary, Public Service Commission (Announcement).
The Acting Chief of the Bureau of Labor, Mr. Ramón Lebrón, made the following statements yesterday on the problem of unemployment in Puerto Rico: - "Unemployment has been and is the concern of many peoples and of their most illustrious statesmen. Puerto Rico has this problem to solve, and to this end, several opinions have been issued that reaffirm the need to solve it.
THE INTERIM HEAD OF THE "LABOR BUREAU" SUGGESTS NEW SOLUTIONS FOR UNEMPLOYMENT M Proposes a pro-industrialization campaign in the United States for Puerto Rico.
The United States, however, has a different point of view as to the most effective way to achieve it.
"In England and in Germany, the rulers, sociologists and all men of action have studied this problem in its various aspects, and have finally become convinced of the difficulty of solving it in an intelligent way. Continued on Page 5 -
k
THERE WILL BE NO DAILY EXJRAOR ASSEMBLY OF THE "FARMERS ASSOCIATION".
THE EXECUTIVE BOARD OF THE "FARMERS' ASSOCIATION" RESOLVED THIS YESTERDAY M It will send each legislator a copy of its memorial to the chambers. M As we announced, the Executive Committee of the Puerto Rico Farmers Association met yesterday to resolve numerous internal matters of the organization and to determine whether or not an extraordinary assembly should be held before the Legislature convenes in February. After lengthy deliberations, the Executive Committee unanimously agreed not to call the aforementioned extraordinary assembly, believing it to be unnecessary and inopportune at this time. It also agreed to send to each and every one of the Puerto Rican legislators a copy of the memorial that the Farmers' Association will submit to the consideration of the Assembly.
THE PURE REPUBLICAN TERRITORIAL COMMITTEE WILL MEET NEXT MONDAY.
M The San Juan primary issue will be considered. M The "Pure Republican Territorial Committee" has been summoned for an extraordinary session to be held next Monday, to resolve, among other things, the matter of the San Juan primary. According to the statements made to us, before the Pure Republican Territorial Committee the electors of the Legislature appeared in February, making numerous and important recommendations to the Legislature. As mentioned above, other agreements of an intimate nature for the agricultural entity were adopted.
Dr. Palmira Gatell Ladies and Children. Office: 2 to 5 P. M. Taft 7, - Tel. 1144, Santurce. Santurce.
YOUR RESPONSIBILITY YOUR BABY'S HEALTH If your child is not developing normally, it may be due to inappropriate feeding. Your doctor will certainly advise you to use only the highest quality milk. z You can have absolute confidence in our milk. -It is produced by healthy cows under the best sanitary X conditions. J Ask those who use it. FINCA LAS MONJAS Tel. 155 Hato Rey, P. R.
MIGUEL MENDEZ Exclusive representative of "SOUTH PORTO RICO SUGAR CO.", to sell its "Refined" sugar, in the following towns: Guayanilla, Yauco, Sabana Grande, San Germán, Lajas, and Cabo Rojo. Exclusive representative of "CENTRAL SAN FRANCISCO", of Llubera Hnos. to sell its "RAW" sugar in the following towns:- Mayagüez, Cabo Rojo, San Germán, Lajas, Sabana Grande, Yauco, Guánica and Guayanilla. Exclusive representative of "CENTRAL EUREKA INC.", of Mr. Mateo Fajardo, to sell its "CRUDO" sugar, in the following towns:- Ponce, Peñuelas, Guayanilla, Yauco, Sabana Grande, Guánica, San Germán, Lajas and Cabo Rojo. ADDRESS: OFFICE:- MATTEI LLUBERA STREET BOX 123. TELEPHONE 62. YAUCO, PUERTO RICO.
"I left Washington with the conviction that it will be increased the canacity or swindle of the Puerto Rican Farmers.
I left Washington with the conviction that the capacity or swindle of the Puerto Rican farmers will be increased.
The Director of the Federal Bank of Puerto Rico, Mr. Ernest B. Thomas, has returned to San Juan, Puerto Rico. Thomas, has returned to San Juan, after having remained in Washington for about two months, time he spent working with Senators and Representatives, to obtain the approval of the bill that increases the borrowing capacity of our farmers, in the "Federal Agricultural Loan Bank". In talking with him yesterday, he explained to us in the following words the efforts he made in the North to that effect: "I left Washington with the intimate conviction that the bill to increase to the maximum the borrowing capacity of Puerto Rican farmers will be approved. No one has evidenced any intention of opposing it when it is brought before the Congress for discussion, and the House Banking Committee, which was charged with reporting it, favors it in all its parts. During my stay in Washington, I met with numerous persons and entities that could influence the definitive approval of this bill, and I appeared on numerous occasions before the House Banking Committee to explain its scope and inform them of the need for its definitive approval here in Puerto Rico. After these efforts, it was indicated to me that the bill would be favorably reported. "There is something special that I requested from the Banking Committee of the House, and that was granted. At the same time that this bill was presented, increasing the borrowing capacity of the farmers PUERTO RICO PHARMACY BOARD M CALL FOR EXAMINATIONS M In compliance with the provisions of the Law, this Board will hold examinations for the revalidation of pharmacists during the second half of the present month of January. The applications and other necessary reports will be supplied by Mr. T. Vera Riera, personally at the Board's office or by mail to box 804. The applications and documents required by the Law will be admitted until January 19, 1927 at two o'clock in the afternoon, when the admission of the same expires. Candidates must provide themselves with ink and pen. The examinations will take place in the room occupied by the Board, 3 Alien Street. Ledo. Carlos G. de QUEVEDO. Secretary. San Juan, P.R. January 6, 1927 (Announcement). FtRRO-MALT Powerful restorative, enriches the blood.
The House referred all these bills to the House of Representatives. The House referred all these bills to the Committee on Banking Affairs, and when it met, it was agreed to study all the referred bills separately, and then submit them together to the House. I thought that this would be detrimental to our bill, causing delays in its final approval, since the amendments that have been proposed to the current banking law will cause noisy discussions that will hinder its approval in this session of Congress. If our bill is referred to the House separately, it will be passed quickly and this I got from the Committee. "The only thing I fear is that even if the Banking Committee reports our bill favorably to the House, as it will do at any moment, it will not be considered because of the demands of some representatives, or because there are more important matters for the Nation to discuss. This is my only fear. But I am absolutely certain that as soon as our bill is submitted to the consideration of the House, it will be approved. "To see that our bill is placed as soon as possible on the calendar of the business of the House, I have commissioned Senator Jones, an old friend of mine, who will take all the interest he can in the matter. "I regret that I have not been able to remain in Washington even a month longer. My business in this capital necessitated my return, not because things are not going well in this institution; on the contrary; those who have had charge of the management of this bank during my absence have led to (Continued on ng. 6)
An exquisite toilet soap at a modest price France doesn't make the <■ * best" Jp Suavidad-Fragancia T LUX toilet soap on sale in the main drugstores and grocery stores BUY ONE TODAY AND YOU WILL BE CONVINCED YOU HAVE NO RIVAL- "
V apor "Porto Rico" This beautiful vessel will be rejoined in our service between New York and Puerto Rico next March, but if sufficient second-class passage is offered she will be dispatched from San Juan to New York on February 21. Those interested in making a ticket for February 23, please let us know and we will inform you in due course if we have enough passengers to make the trip on that date. For further information please contact THE NEW YORK & PORTO RICO STEAMSHIP CO. Pier No. 1 Telephone 671 San Juan, P. R.
$1,062,731 WAS EARNED BY THE "CENTRAL AGUI RRE" DURING THE PAST FISCAL YEAR
M Distributed dividends of $5.90 per share, compared to $9.73 the previous year. M From the authoritative financial newspaper "The Wall Street Journal" we copy the following data: - "Appreciable is considered the report of "Aguirre Central for the fiscal year ending July 31, 1926, evidencing dividends earned in a year of low prices. The company is financially strong and in a position to obtain all the benefits that the improvement in sugar prices will bring. (Continued on page 15) Three U.S. warships will soon visit the Port of Ponce. M THE GOVERNOR TO THE MAYOR OF THAT CITY M The Commander in Chief of the fleet will be on one of them. M Governor Towner addressed the following telegram yesterday to the Mayor of Ponce, Don Guillermo Vivas Valdivieso: "In reply to our joint cablegram of December 17, 1926, requesting from the Secretary of the Navy that at the conclusion this winter of the American Fleet's maneuvers at Guatanamo some ships visit the port of Ponce, }i® received today a cablegram saying that the "Seattle", carrying on board the Commander of the United States Fleet, will be at Ponce from February* 18 to 21 and that the battleships "Florida" and "Arkansas" will visit Ponce from March 21 to 26. "Most cordial congratulations to you and the people of Ponce."
PORTLAND CEMENT "FARO" Accredited Packing Cement IiIMBI WHsT 1 in O - WW Danish. HEu/ Barrels. "SALVATION OF CONTRACTORS" In December ppdo. the steamer "ABSALON left Denmark with a cargo of 17,000 barrels, for us. The only full cargo to be received during the month of January, in Puerto Rico. We can consign the ship to other ports if the desired quantity warrants it. Take advantage now by placing your order early, because it is selling fast. Write, telephone or visit us for your own convenience. VILLAR & CO., INC. TELS. 1450 y 1451. MARINA, P. O. BOX 201. SAN JAN, P- R.
JACHOS DE TABONUCO Interested in buying a good quantity of them. Address giving prices, kind and size, to P.O. Box 415, San Juan.