ELMUNDO
QQPages 3 Ctvs. X Z Semester - - - - 5-00 M W One Year - - - $9-50
QÍ)Pages 3 Ctvs. z Z Office: "Puerto Rico Ilus¿rfMtrado Bldg." -Tel. 1222
MORNING
THE MORNING
Year IX.
San Juan. Puerto Rico.
(Ublisbed and distribuutad under permit No. 801) autorizad by tne Act. ot October 8, 1911, on fila at the Post Office m dan Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the President. A. 8. Burdeson, Postmaster General. Entered aa second class matter, fabruary ¿1. 191D at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rim, (United States of America) under the Act of march 8. 1871.
Saturday, August 20, 1927. .
I Number 2857
"WITHIN THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE MOMENT THE PURELY REPUBLICAN
PURELY BRITISH, WITHOUT THE READY PARTNERS, WE ARE OF NO USE. WE ARE OF NO USE" M
M Martinez Nadal' says in announcing his determined intention to defend the Coalition. M Yesterday we talked with Mr. Rafael Martínez Nadal, President of the Pure Republican Party, questioning him on the sidelines of the extraordinary general assembly of the referred political grouping to be held tomorrow in Mayagüez. -In his opinion, what will be the result of the assembly," we asked him. -I don't know. I go to it with my hands clean, as they say vulgarly. A triumph won in a rigged assembly is a dishonor, an immorality. I am accustomed always to act with honesty, alien to all personal influence." -Will you fight the Columbus-Torruellas resolution, calling for the union of both wings of the Republican Party? Of course I will fight it," - "Of course I will." -And on the basis of what facts? - we insisted. "It is an undeniable truth that the Pure Republican Party, in the last elections, overwhelmingly defeated the Republican Party of Tous Soto. And this being true, the Tous Soto Republicans, who are in the minority, should they be subjected to the Pure Republicans, who constitute the majority. "Tous Soto and his people must rectify their error, confess their guilt, and join our party. That is the only way forward. Those who wish to swell our ranks will always find us with open arms. But that is very different from asking others to join the two wings of the Republican Party. We, the pure Republicans, maintain the truth of an ideal, an ideal which we have never abandoned and from which we will never abdicate". -Will you defend in the assembly the continuation of the Republican-Socialist Coalition? -The pure republicans in the circumstances of the moment, without the socialists, we are useless. And I say this, because I sincerely confess that we do not have enough strength to win alone in the next electoral contest. Dissociated from the Socialist Party, we will not be able to aspire to more than two senators and one by accumulation". -And on what do you base your assertion that you can count on two district senators in the next elections? *That is the truth according to the results of the last elections. Ponce has sixteen thousand Republicans and Tous Soto can barely manage with four hundred of this number. Weakened the "Alianza" by the power of the living forces in that district, we, we are sure that we will have in Ponce, at least, fourteen thousand electors." "Anyway, we will not be able to go without the Socialists to an election, without representation in the me ■sas, unless the Electoral Law is amended. And even then, we need the material assistance of the Socialists, apart from their help in the representation of the Socialists in the elections, and we will not be able to go to the elections without the Socialists, unless the Electoral Law is amended.
i ERROR IN ELECTION OF CANDIDATES THE a RSB \J- ■ 1 ■■■■ 1 ■■■ 1 111 '■ The engraving shows Governor L. G. Hardman, of Georgia, who elected J. M. Neel for "solicitor" in the Cartersville Municipal court, later coming to the conclusion that he had suffered a mistake as to the appointment, which he felt should have gone to Fred W. Neel from the start. Both J. M. and Fred are brothers. The latter is a supporter of Governor Hardman, not so J. M. Neel, who has declared himself his opponent and has been ordered by Governor Hardman to decline his appointment, which the latter has strictly refused. WEDNESDAY THE HYPODROMES ISSUE WILL BE DISCUSSED IN ITS FOUNDATION M So ruled yesterday by the Hon. Judge Llauger, of the District Court of San Juan. M ' The injunction filed by the "Porto Rico Racing Corporation" 1 against the "Comisión Hípica Insular" so that the latter, its agents, ■ officials or subordinates abstain from putting into effect the resolution fixing the turns for the 1 holding of races at the "Quintana" and "Las Mon- ■ jas" racetracks, will be heard on its merits next Wednesday, beginning the hearing at nine o'clock in the morning. i. So ruled yesterday by Honorabl - Judge Llauger, of the Dis i trict Court of San Juan, pursuant to 1¡ - motion presented to that effect by e r Acting Attorney General, Lcdc i J. A. Lopez Acosta, Ledo. Migue - Guerra Mondragón, and Ledo. Jos >, Martínez Dávila, representing the "Comisión Hí pica Insular." r Even though the Governor Tow ner, being absent from Sai . Juan had not yesterday imparted si a approval to the last resolution h (Continued on 6th. page Col 5 -- _ _ n they have by law at the mesa n 1 electoral."
FREE We will send a double gold plated compact priced at $1.50, to anyone who returns 20 wrappers of Lana Oil Soap or Olive Cream Soap or an assortment of both. These soaps are sold at all drugstores and perfumeries. BEAVER REMERS GRAHAM & CO. DAYTON, OHIO, ONE YEAR COMMERCIAL COURSE We will begin the new Course on August 29. We teach 12 subjects. We admit eighth grade graduates only. Courses are $6, $9, $10, and $15 per month. Excellent accommodations. Ask for prospectus. COLEGIO PERCY Phone 463 Calle Isabel 12 - Apartado 241 - PONCE, P. R.
THE "HIPPIC COMMISSION" AMENDS ITS RESOLUTION WITH RESPECT TO THE
M Agrees that the shifts shall be of three racing days, alternating "Quintana" and "Las Monjas" M
- n The "Comisión Hípica Insular" j in its last session held last night, approved the following resolution amending the agreement relative to the fixing of shifts for the celebration of races at the "Quintana" and "Las Monjas" racetracks. "SHIFTS FOR THE RACETRACKS. The Commission agrees to amend its Resolution dated July 26, 1927, fixing shifts for racing at the "Quintana Racing Park" and "Las Monjas Racing Club" Racetracks, so that the first rule established by said Resolution, be worded as follows: "First; As of the effective date of this Resolution, horse races at the racetracks named "Las Monjas Racing Club" and "Quintana Racing Park", or by any other name that may be designated thereafter, shall be held in alternating shifts of three (3) successive days of (races each), by their respective operating corporations, by their respective operating corporations, in order to be held on the same day of each race. The first of such shifts is hereby assigned to the said racetrack "Las Monjas Racing . Club" and the second shift, which shall commence upon the expiration of the first shift, to said "Quintana Racing Park" racetrack and so on, until otherwise provided by this Commission; PROVIDED, that if for any reason races are not held on one or more of the days indicated, such days shall be considered for the purpose of computing the number of days of the year as if the races had been held. ) * This amendment shall take effect as soon as approved by the Governor of Puerto Rico and repeals any previous agreement or resolution of this Commission which is in any way in conflict with its provisions." g Governor Towner, who was away from San Juan,
IVI-' visiting the National Guard Camp established at Yauco, had not signed this resolution at the time we obtained a copy of it. Since the injunction order issued by the District Court of San Juan remains "standing, this resolution cannot take effect until said court resolves the "injunction" filed by 'the "Portorrico Racing Corporation" against the "Comisión Hípica Insular" in the racetrack matter. ■ - - -
MOTION TO "DISSOLVE" THE "IN-
■ IV The Honorable Judge Llauger, of the San Juan District Court, yesterday declared without place the motion filed by Ledos. Feliú and La Costa, on behalf of 'Las Monjas Racing Corporation' for the annulment of the "pre i liminar injunction order" issued by the referred i court, in the case of the hipó' dromos. ( Here is the full text of Honorable Judge Llauger's resolution:- RESOLUTION The defendant intervenor with.
4' the "Public Service Commission" does not fear American or Puerto Rican corporations when acting in the performance of its duty" M 'It will never proceed to adopt agreements influenced by the origin of the Directors of such corporations":Muñoz M
IV ' We were informed yesterday by the President ( of the "Public Service Commission", Mr. Miguel A. Muñoz, that he intends to summon shortly to a meeting all the owners of "guaguas" that operate the traffic service between San Juan, Martín Peña, Río Piedras and Parque. The main purpose of this meeting is to discuss the question of the new regulators and "mileage counters" to be installed in the "guaguas", so that the brand that best suits the service can be chosen, for the benefit of the public and the owners of said vehicles. He will also summon Mr. Miguel A. Muñoz to bring before the "Public Service Commission" all the honorary members of the aforementioned organization, so that together with Mr. Blanch, Inspector of the Co ' mission, they may discuss at length the policy to be followed with respect to the powers granted to the "Public Service Commission", so that they may discuss at length the policy to be followed with respect to the powers granted to the "Public Service Commission".
I have been granted to the above-mentioned honorary inspectors. Mr. Muñoz is greatly interested in improving the "guaguas" service, as well as all those services presently operated under the supervision of the "Public Service Commission." To these meetings, Mr. Muñoz will invite the President of the "Asociación de Chóferes", Mr. Ra món H. Ortiz, as well as the Board of Directors of the aforementioned organization, to present their points of view in relation to the matters to be discussed. In the course of the conversation we had with him yesterday, Mr. Muñoz referred to a certain in formation published in a newspaper of the capital, protesting alleged deficiencies in the service offered in Ponce by the Trolley Company of that city. (Continued page 17 column S)
PRELIMINARY JUNCTION" IN THE HIPODROMOS M--- Full text of the Resolution issued to that effect by the Hon. Judge Llauger. M
! 1 dated August 15, 1927, filed a motion to annul the preliminary injunction order issued in this case, by which the Insular Commission was prevented from putting into effect its resolution of July 26, 1927, until further order of this Court, without said resolution, in any way, anticipating or deciding the resolution of the issues involved in the main lawsuit. | As grounds to support its petition, the intervening defendant argues: First, that the plaintiff Commission has a prompt, complete and effective remedy established in article 12 of Act number 40 of 1927, known as the Puerto Rico Riding Law. Second, that for the foregoing reasons, this court, as a court of equity, does not have jurisdiction in the present case, and third, that the facts set forth in the complaint filed and in the request for preliminary injunction do not constitute a cause of action on behalf of the plaintiff. Section 12 of Act No. 40 of 1927, known as the "Act No. 40 of 1927". Section 12 of Act No. 40 of 1927, known as the Puerto Rico Riding Act, provides that the Island Riding Commission, created by said Act, may for just cause and after a hearing of the parties and an opportunity to defend itself: (a) -suspend temporarily, or (b) -revoke the license of any racetrack, jockey or stable owner; and provides that any resolution of the Racetrack Commission canceling the license of any racetrack shall be appealable to the District Court of the place where the racetrack is located. Thus, according to these provisions of the law, the Commission may temporarily suspend or revoke the license of any racetrack, and the racetrack has the right to appeal the resolution canceling its license. In the present case, the resolution challenged by □ the plaintiff, is not based on Article 12 of the law, but rather on Article 12 of the law (Cont. at p. .4. Ira. col.).
Q. CABRERA /í Recent Samples Purchases. ... AND * WE OFFER YOU The last word in suits for this summer $22 - 00 $25 - 00 $3 °° f (In the fashion of Broadway) í I i | see YOU ' ONE OF THE M0DERN wonders.... ' Our current assortment of ties! I Our beautiful showcases........ festooned with all the "'i Zj novelties received from the Continent and Europe. W# k I ' ADMIRE OUR DISPLAY WINDOWS
NEW HOUSES at Comfortable Installments Urbanization LAS PALMAS Avenida Borinquen and Carretera Seboruco. Constant bus service, 20 minutes from San Juan. Embreadas Streets. 81 Built Houses. P.O. Box 90i, Santurce. Telephone 1901, Santurce.
READ THIS THAT WILL BE OF YOUR CONVICTION We are specialist in typewriters, adding machines, calculating machines. Cash registers, phonographs, etc. Call or write to P. R. TYPEWRTER REPAIRING SHOP Tel. 1853, Box 1445, Cristo 10 San Juan, P. R.
IN RIO PIEDRAS SELL THE GOMAS miller THE GARAGE OF ' Dr. Miguel A. Pastrana Jose de Diego St.
SANATORIO HATO-REY Y CLINICA NEUROLOGICA , ' For hospitalization and treatment "'?" < -NERVIOUS and MENTAL DISORDERS. Modernly equipped. i Moderate fee. Telephones -i. j <
General Grease $2.00 Washing $0.75 FREE Insoertion Become our customer for service. Spend grease and trim. SAVE MONEY. GARAGE Jose Coebas Padilla Phone 85 - Stop 27, Santurce.
NEITHER TODD NOR GOMEZ BRIOSO WANT TO ADVANCE WHAT WILL BE THEIR ATTITUDE IN THE
ATTITUDE IN TOMORROW'S PURE REPUBLICAN ASSEMBLY - M
PROBABLE ROYAL Nuptials ' 1 W Reports received lately from Sofia, indicate that King Boris, of Bulgaria, will soon marry a Swedish Princess. Recently King Boris left his country incognito and, notwithstanding the information of the official reports coming from Bulgaria and in which it was assured that it was only a recreational trip, the general impression in the European aristocratic circles, is that the King left with the purpose of visiting the referred Swedish Princess. Two of the guinea pigs inoculated with the virus from the dead rats have fallen ill. One of them was so serious that it was expected that he would die at any moment.* There is a grave suspicion that they are affected by the bubonic plague 1 - In yesterday's edition we reported on the condition of the guinea pigs that were inoculated as experimental subjects, with the virus from the rats found dead in different places in San Juan. Even though until the day before yesterday none of the guinea pigs inoculated showed any symptoms of disease, and in spite of yesterday being the seventh day of the" I understood two in the general term in which the animals perish, in case the inoculation gives positive results, yesterday, that is to say on entering the eighth day of the experiment, two guinea pigs appeared sick. In particular, the one inoculated with a rat found in the premises of 92 Alien Street was in such a serious condition that his death was expected at any moment. At four o'clock in the afternoon, we exchanged impressions with Dr. Carrion, Chief of the Bubonic Plague Prevention Bureau, who informed us that the fact that the rabbit was sick did not imply that it was a victim of the plague transmitted by the virus of an infected rat. "This can only be determined," he told us, "by performing a post-mortem examination or autopsy on the animal. However, we have grave suspicions that this is the case since the rat whose virus has been transmitted to him was suspected of being contaminated with the terrible CEMENT Constant Stocks VILLAR & CO. INC FOR SALE In Rio Piedras two-storey house, suitable for: Hotel, Housing and Boarding, Commerce or Pharmacy. Easy Payment. Price. Inform Box 465, Río Piedras.
Bazán announces that he will speak out on the Coalition issue. M-- On the eve of the Pure Republican Assembly which is to take place tomorrow in Mayagüez, we have gathered from the lips of several leaders of said political organization, general impressions in relation to the matters to be dealt with in said assembly. In this regard, we have obtained the following opinions: Robert H. Todd. (National Com meetteeman of the Republican Party). "I have been feeling ill during these last few days, but I will go to Mayagüez even if I perish in the endeavor, to expound at length my ideas in relation to the present political moment and to speak of all that I understand to be of benefit to my party, following my usual rule. As for the matters to be discussed at the Assembly, I do not want to say a word in advance". Etienne Totti (Vice-Chairman of the Pure Republican Party): "As a delegate I will be present at the Assembly of Ma The activities that I will carry out at that meeting can be resumed in the following: avoid the disintegration of the Party; defend and encourage the Coalition; attack the Torruellas-Colón resolution; have the discussion of the Llenaza resolution postponed, thus giving an opportunity to our Legislature to understand the issue. Legisla ture to understand the amendments to the Electoral Law that our party deems appropriate." Dr. José Gómez Brioso (Councilor of the Pure Republican Party) - "I will go to Mayagüez and act according to my criteria in all matters that may arise, but of Jo that I propose to do, I do not wish to speak now, but when the appropriate moment arrives. Mr. Antonio Bazán (President of the Pure Republican Committee of San Juan): "I have resolved to go to Mayagüez, trusting of course that the medical criterion in relation to the acute illness I have been suffering from will be favorable to me. Naturally, as a delegate, I will give my opinion at length in relation to the issues that may arise. I am calm, completely calm as to the resolution that the Assembly will give to the matters to be dealt with. Continued page 6-col. 7 disease and further, because the guinea pig has become ill precisely within the term generally fixed for the experiment of inoculation to produce results." The extermination of rats by fumigation in the stores continues to be carried out with all activity. All animals killed by the sulfurous gases are immediately taken to the laboratory where they are subjected to the same test of observation and transfusion of the virus. Df INTEREST > FOR CATTLE FARMERS, On August 24, the LARRO MOVIE showing the manufacturing procedure used and the Experimental Farm will be shown at the Olimpo Theater. --DON'T MISS IT- I EMPLOYEE j Competent' stenographer correspondent and bookkeeper. Suitable for di- ' rigir business office. Telfonc ' 1971, San Juan. ' 1 ' - 111 - ■ 1