elmBndo
> .arn-jBr.ifiy 1 m wn i'nni ■. 1 Pages 3 Cvts. ■ Office: "Puerto Rico IlusJL U trado Bldg." Tel. 1222
1 /* Pages 3 Ctvs. ; I ■ J Semester 5.00 I 1 V Uu Year - - - >9.50
MORNING JOURNAL.
Year IX.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
("ubliihed and diatribuUd nadar permit No. 801) eutorixed by tna Act. of Detobar ", 1917, on filo at the Post Office a* dan Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the President. A. 8. Burdeaon, Postmaster General. Entered aa second cImi matter, February 21, 191" at the Post Office at San Juan. Porto Rno. (United States of America) nnder the Act of march S. 1871.
..., Saturday, March 5, 1927.
Number 2665.
FROM PUERTO RICO TO SANTO DOMIN GO IN MAGNIFICENT FLIGHT OF THREE HOURS M
M THE INCIDENTS OF THE TRIP FRIENDLY REPORTED BY DON RAFAEL COLORADO M Messages of love and peace.-Dominican hospitality.-The glory of the airs
Don Rafael Colorado, who flew with the aviators Wade and Rowe on their magnificent flight to Santo Domingo a few days ago, relates in the following article the interesting incidents of the trip: THE ROUTES OF SPACE. Few times in my life will I have experienced a more intense joy than that felt on closing a deal with Mr. Rowe to go with them to Santo Domingo flying in one of their "Waco" airplanes. "With whom do you want to go," Rowe asked. It's all the same to me, with Wade or with Wsted. "Well, with me," she replied conically. We will leave tomorrow, at eleven o'clock in the morning, But friends of strangers proposed to spoil this plan, and in the evening they broke into Mr. Rowe's house; they robbed him of a large sum of money and also took some indispenable papers for the documentation of the airplanes. The duplicates were obtained the following day, but could not be obtained the same day, because it was an official holiday. Many people are probably unaware that an airplane needs to be registered just like any transatlantic liner. We prepared for departure again, and another delay was caused because a gas tank on Wade's plane was leaking. Finally, at three o'clock on the afternoon of the 23rd, the planes lifted off merrily, as if they were going to a party. GOVERNMENT OF PTO. RICO DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF INSURANCE NOTICE TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN: Notice is hereby given that on November 12, 1926, the "Saint Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Company", of Saint Paul, Minnesota, ceased to do marine insurance business in Porto Rico; and has applied for the withdrawal of the deposit made with this Department for the protection of its policyholders in this Island, as soon as all its liabilities arising from said business have been liquidated or otherwise extinguished. In compliance with Section 147 of the Insurance Law in force, this notice will be published in En glish and in Spanish once a week for six consecutive weeks for the purpose of giving persons having any outstanding claim against the Company ample time to notify this Office before the securities so deposited are released. Juan G. GALLARDO, Superintendent of Insurance. San Juan, Porto Rico December 1926.
Some good friends, the intimate ones, and my son Antonio, came to see us off and to wish us a happy trip. Gently the planes were gaining altitude, and we crossed the bay of San Juan, heading northwest. Seven minutes later we were leaving Dorado to starboard, 15 minutes later, Vega Baja to port, and 21 minutes later we were passing between Manatí and Barceloneta. The course veered a little to the south, leaving Arecibo to the north, and we entered the mountains through the canyon of the Arecibo River, at the far end of which, almost invisible in the distance, we could see Utuado. On this side, and in front of us, great masses of leaden clouds that the hard, timeless wind was breaking into swirls, were passing below us with dizzying speed. I noticed that the plane was rising higher, surely to dominate the Lares mountain range, and to escape a little to the strong wind attacks, and to the abrupt changes that are always noticed in the mountains. We were flying at that moment, over a very rugged region; deep depressions in some places marked the passage of tumultuous streams, which I could barely make out with my binoculars. I spotted two deep holes that I would like to know where they are to visit them someday. The mounds rise so evenly, rounded and equidistant, that they looked like fabulous bubbles of thick boiling liquid. Who knows if they were originally...! -! It charged upon us a thick turbonade that made the airplanes dance rudely, and forced the pilots to defend themselves bravaCASA ENlMIRAMÁR"" For sale house No. 31, New Street, Stop 14, modern construction with wide veranda, double sanitary service, seven bedrooms, lots of ventilation. Will inform: Tel. 225 N. Sant. NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC I beg to take note that because Mr. Adolfo Steffens has ceased to belong to this firm, the General Power of Attorney conferred on him has been cancelled. March 1st, 1927. F. A. C. HASTRUP. "HE WHO DOES NOT HEAR ADVICE DOES NOT GET OLD" Do not buy a lot or a house without consulting us first. We have them from $4,200.00 and up. FLORAL PARK The ideal place for your residence. Parada 33 Tel. 25 Hato Rey
£>$$$$$$$$$$$$$$£ ■jEÓMMIAí &$$$$$$$$$$$$$$ efe $ -J* Those who buy$ d true significance of the economy never opt for the cheapest and ¡o of mqorca- $ £ lity. \ $ LUE REXACH | jg IRBAMZAOONE5 GOOD ItLBM SANTVKX COWS For sale are six newly calved cows producing from fourteen to seventeen liters per day each. All are young and in good condition. J. H. CABRERA Finca Condado Vanderbilt, Rio Piedras, Carolina Highway, Kilometer 1, hectometer 7.
In Existence 12,000 feet more or less. "TRUSS METAL LATH in 28" x 90" sheets for concrete divisions. Exceptional price 3 cents a foot. KORBER & C0. INC. VERY CHEAP We are selling three used display cabinets-mos-counter. INFANZON & GARCIA Ground Door.
7 - PRE - INVENTORY - /HOMES I RfM FINISHED FANTASIES INFINITY OF NEW & NICE ITEMS REPRESENTING THE ULTIMATE EXPRESSION OF FASHION. POPULAR PRICES FOR BEAUTIFUL BRACELETS, SHADES AND NECKLACES. COMBS AND CUTE HEAD ORNAMENTS. HANDBAGS AND VANITIES, A GREAT VARIETY TO CHOOSE FROM. BEAUTIFUL STOCKINGS IN FASHIONABLE COLORS. VERY GOOD AND NICE BABY SOCKS AT VERY LOW PRICES Perfumes, Lotions, Powders, Soaps, Blushes and Others. Paper Boxes. New and Nice Fabrics, Silks and Ribbons and Many Other New and Nice Items. - COME TODAY TO - X GONZALEZ PADTN CO.. INC. / X. IN THE HEART OF THE CITY. /
UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO RICO Río Piedras, P. R. NOTICE Notice is hereby given that registration for examinations in Law, FREE COURSE, is open from today, March 5, until April 2. In accordance with the law, applications received after April 2 will not be considered. They should be addressed to the Registrar of the University of Puerto Rico or to the Secretary of the College of Law. J. F. MAURA, "Registrar". 1
DETALLISTAS ALERT BIG WINS Big balances on suits, stockings and socks. Weekly renewal. Only house specialized in this branch. Amazing prices. Only in cash and C. O. D. ANTONIO LEMA & CO. Box 62. *- Alien esq. San Justo.
GO TODAY to Buy Good Footwear at LAFAVORITA'S Baratillo." ""T 0
THE PUERTO RICAN ATHENAEUM ADDRESSES A CABLEGRAM TO THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES.
M Notifies you of its endorsement of Borah's policy with respect to Latin America M The Secretary of the "Ateneo Portorriqueño", Ledo. Vicente Géigel Polanco, has forwarded the following cable dispatch to the United States Senate: National Senate, Washington, D. C. The "Ateneo de Puerto Rico" adopted a resolution endorsing the suggestions of Senator Borah as the most proper for securing the friendship and confidence of the Latin American peoples toward the United States. GEIGEL, Secretary. The resolution referred to is a protest against the American intervention in Nicaragua, and was published yesterday by El Mundo. The tense wires vibrated like the tempered strings of a harp, and whistled in protest against the hard work to which they were subjected. We dominated the Lares mountain range, and passed over that town forty-three minutes after leaving San Juan. Shortly afterwards we entered the lands of Mayagüez, and passed over the city at an altitude of more than three thousand feet. Fifty-five minutes into the trip, when we took off from the coast, along the beach of Mayagüez. Only the immitigated sea before us shone like an immense silver lia nura, wounded by the blinding rays of the sun that was beginning to decline. The lapping of the waves threw towards us millions of sparkling needles of light.
"THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE IN THE APPOINTMENTS MADE BY THE GOVERNOR IS A MYTH, A MERE PALAVER" M
- i "WE SENATORS ALMOST ALWAYS SIGN WHAT THE GOVERNOR DOES AND SAYS" M Thus says Senator Jordan, commenting on the Butler bill M .
Commenting on the Butler bill, which amending our Organic Charter has been lately approved by both national legislative Chambers, Senator Dr. Octavio Jordan made the following statements yesterday:-"It is indeed to be applauded the fact that the Butler bill has been approved by Congress, which partly liberalizes our gDrganic Charter, but we must censure and courageously and energetically reject the attitude adopted by the American government, granting us some liberties, but at the same time taking away the most fundamental liberties for our people as far as the political order is concerned. "Our present regime is partly liberalized, but on the other hand, the power to elect some of the members of the "Public Service Commission" is taken away from us. It completely abolishes the representation of the people. This attitude is reprehensible and should be the object of our most vigorous protest."" Let us remember the arduous struggles waged by the tireless champion, Luis Muñoz Rivera, in his efforts to achieve that the "Splendorous Commission" be included in the "Public Service Commission". Impossible to imagine a more superbly beautiful fairy. On the (Continued on page 9) I
of Public Service" would be represented by the people. Now, with one stroke of the pen, his work is destroyed. The Governor is given the power to appoint three gentlemen to be members of said body". But, should these appointments not be made with the advice and consent of the Senate? - We note. -The advice and consent of the Senate is a myth, it is mere talk. Almost always we Senators become approvers and signers of what the Governor does and says." "According to the Butler bill, the Governor shall appoint the members of the "Public Service Commission. The Governor is appointed by the President of the United States, he has no accountability to our people. It could be the case that he would appoint three Americans to constitute the body referred to. We would already have foreign persons dominating a CojUijsión of such importance, and it would be very easy for all the franchises to be granted to American corporations, to the detriment of our people." "That is why I find the policy of Congress objectionable, because we are granted freedoms, but instead we are deprived of fundamental rights."
Caguas fourth-year class claims it has not had any disagreements with Inspector Huyke.
M Reports that they have been confronted with conflicts, but not provoked by him. M From Caguas we received yesterday the telegraphic dispatch which we insert below:- "EL MUNDO", San Juan. The fourth year class of the High School of Caguas wishes to clarify before the public opinion and before you, that it is true that Ja class had conflicts in its march, but these disagreements were not motivated by the Inspector of Schools Mr. Huyke. We make this clarification, because in our concept of justice, we cannot allow the responsibility for our conflict to fall exclusively on Mr. Huyke. Juan Velez Marcano, ... President. Gloria M. Bellavista, Secretary. Sanctioned by the Faculty Advisory Committee. The Inspector of Schools of Caguas, Mr. Bernardo Huyke, having visited this city yesterday, one of our editors gave him an extensive interview concerning the charges that the representative, Mr. Roberto Castellón, has made against the said gentleman before the Legislature. Inspector Huyke's statements will appear in our Monday edition. CHEAP HOUSES Because I am building another larger residence I am selling very cheaply my present one on Taft Ave. 3, Santurce, and two more houses recently built. Will inform: Teodoro Aguilar, Tel. 851 blue. Santurce. PU ■■' j I ■ JARABE DENECHAUD Combines the original French formula of the eminent Dr. DENECHAUD for "I treatment of diseases BRONCO-PULMONA-RES, TOS-FERINA, ASMA, CATARROS CRONICOS, etc BALSAMICO - EXPECTORANTE and CALMING. Ask for it at your Pharmacy. j I Fajardito Packard Special trip from San Juan to Ponce, Sunday, March 6 at 7 A.M. -$2.5é. M. -$2.5é fare. To take it at home. Telephone 1878, Santurce. QUARTERMASTER'S WAREHOUSE AUCTION IN FRONT OF PIER NO. 5. 5 Saturday March 5, 1927. 2:30 in the afternoon. I will sell at Public Auction: 388 sacks rice No. 532 Orm. 85 sacks rice No. 3 TVC. 79 sacks rice No. 4 TVC. 88 bags rice No. 288 BHC. ISIDORO D. DELGADO, Almonedero Púbico.
"THE SOCIALIST PARTY WILL NOT BE ABLE TO DENY ITS COOPERATION TO ANY INITIATIVE THAT TENDS TO OBTAIN GREATER FACULTIES FOR THE INSULAR LEGISLATIVE POWER" M
Says the Vice-President of said party, Ledo Bolivar Pagan M
Mr. Bolivar Pagan, Vice-President of the Socialist Party, has made the following statements on the political moment: "The current political and parliamentary moment is extremely interesting. Preceded by a movement of approximation of the political parties, the Legislature has been opened to face serious and deep problems that require urgent solution and that are of vital importance for the present and for the future of the country. Apart from the infinity of bills of relative importance, which are the routine of all Legislatures, on matters which will greatly affect the course of our collective life, other bills have been presented or are in the air of the Chambers on matters of deep transcendence, which are in the minds of all, and which, if approved and put into effect, would have fundamental effects. "As to the demands of the country before Congress and the Administration at Washington, such as the Elective Governor, and other reforms, there seems to be a natural and patriotic unanimity among the political parties represented in the legislative Houses. "The Socialist Party, which is a Puerto Rican party, which plans and faces Puerto Rican problems, has not denied and cannot deny its indispensable support for any initiative which tends to demand and achieve greater powers for the insular legislative power and which tends to place the sovereignty of Puerto Rico in the hands of the representatives of the popular will of Puerto Rico, whatever those representatives may be in the alternative logics of the internal political struggles of the country. The abso- lute adherence and unrestricted cooperation of the
The open adherence and unlimited cooperation of the Socialist Party and its men, in this particular, is assured. We Socialists could not manifest or act, in any way, against a command or attitude which expresses the idea and sentiment of giving to the people of. Puerto Rico all the prerogatives that by natural right it has to govern itself, in accordance with the dictates of the popular will, provided this is expressed in a legal and just manner. To oppose it, would be to ask for oppression and chains, and it would be an open betrayal of the redemptive ideology that animates every socialist in all parts of the world. "And we socialists who are agitating in this colony of Puerto . Rico, who are struggling in the midst of ineluctable and tremendous realities, superior to our material forces, and which are peculiar to the condition of political and economic colony which prevails in the Island, we cannot but fight and demand that which is attainable under the circumstances and which is practicable under the Constitution of the United States and under the laws which the Congress of Washington has decreed until today to govern our collective life as a people. To shout or shout stridently, gazing at the moon of platonic and unrealistic fantasies, would be to deceive ourselves" and to deceive * all of our people. The fundamental economic demands which the Socialist Party has made, and which have given this party its formidable rise, which is greater with each passing day because its voice is the cry for economic justice of all the Puerto Rican people, and which constitute the spe(Continued on page 9) cia (Continued on page 9)
GOVERNMENT OF PUERTO RICO DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC It is unbelievable that 80 percent of the taxpayers of San Juan, Santurce and its neighborhoods, composed of automobile owners, land and home owners, merchants, industrialists and professionals, have not taken advantage of the opportunity to pay their taxes, have not taken advantage of the opportunity to pay the SECOND SEMESTER of their taxes corresponding to fiscal year 1926-2J, within the 60 DAYS established by Law to pay without surcharges, and as these 60 DAYS expired on MARCH 2, in compliance with Article 334 of the Political Code of Puerto Rico, as a special courtesy. If within TWENTY DAYS from the 3rd day of this month you do not pay your taxes and surcharges at the rate of 1¡2 percent, according to the DEFAULTING LIST which will be exposed to public view in the office of the Collector and in other public places, your properties will be immediately seized with the prior authorization of the Treasurer of P. R., and announced in the press and other public places, your properties will be immediately seized, and announced in the press and public places to sell at auction to the highest bidder the part of the property sufficient to cover the payment of the aforementioned taxes, surcharges and costs. All the taxpayers who pay immediately, their names will be erased from the list of DEBTORS and the authorizations of EMBARGO will be cancelled. - a (Esq.) LUCAS GIMENEZ. I Collector of Internal Revenue. 1 San Juan, Puerto Rico. March 3, 1927. g
t FOURTH ANNIVERSARY | Suffrages for the Soul of the PERO. ARCEDIAN I D. BALDOMERO HERNANDEZ SANTIAGO I DIED MARCH 6, 1923 The" mass"" to be held on Monday, March 7 corríen- J te at 8 o'clock in the morning in the parishes" of Catedral and San Jose, in the parish of Sangrado Corazon, Parada 19, Santurce, at 7-l]2, and in the parish of San Francisco at 7, will be applied for his soul. For these hedges, the Hernandez Usera and Ojeda Martorell families invite their friends, begging them to attend any of these masses with their acknowledgment.