ELMOUNDO
"- 1 I O O O Pages 3 Ctvs. Semester -> ♦- 5.00 One A ffio - " $9.50
" "5 11 QílPages 3 Ctvs. X Z Oácin*- "Puerto Rico Hus Miami trado Bldg." -TeL 1222
DAILY DAILY OF
THE MORNING
Year IX.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
I, ■-■■■■ ■ i. i ,1 -¿-Je tublUhsd and dirtribnteS radar ""rnii "No.801) aatorised by tas Art. of October 6, 191T, "a filo at th. Port Offieo a" rían Juan, Pono Bieo. By order of the President. A. 8. Bardeeou, Postmaster General. Entered m second class matter febrnary 21. 1910 at the Post Office at Ban Juan- Pjrto Bi". (United States of America) under the Act of march 8. 1871.
i Saturday, November 26, 1927.
Number 2338.
'the grant to the puerto ricans of the right to elect their governor would involve no great sacrifice to this country,' says U.S. congressman solomon.
SAYS U.S. CONGRESSMAN SOL BLOOM - . --- ■ - "A governor who was a native of the country would have better conditions of experience and ability," he adds.
| WASHINGTON, Nov. 25. j (United Press). - Congressman Sol Bloom, representative to the lower House of Congress for New York's 19th district, which contains the largest colony of Puerto Ricans in the United States territory, believes that Puerto Rico is ready for a greater measure of self-government, and he is willing to do all he can to help the islanders realize their political aspirations. In the 70th session of Congress Mr. Bloom will introduce a bill establishing the local election of Governor by the people of Puerto Rico. Í. "The Puerto Rican people have completely embraced the spirit of American institutions," Mr. Bloom told a representative of the United Press. The Puerto Ricans have Ina deep loyalty to the United States," he said, "and the people of Puerto Rico have been completely in the spirit of American institutions.
FULL TEXT OF THE REPORT SUBMITTED TO THE "ECONOMIC COMMISSION" BY REPRESENTATIVE ALONSO
This report reports on a movement to create a Federation of Puerto Rican Associations in the United States.
The following is the full text of the Report lately submitted to the Economic Commission by Representative Alonso, who, as is well known, was a special mission of said organization at the recent convention of the American Federation of Labor: San Juan, Puerto Rico, November 14, 1927. 14, 1927. "SUBJECT: Special Commission to the Convention of the American Federation of Labor, held in Los Angeles, California, and cooperation of the Puerto Rican Clubs, to obtain from the Congress of the United States reforms to liberalize the present gobler no regime, allowing the electors of Puerto Rico the election of the Governor, powers to the Legislature to legislate, without restriction, on economic and social problems, creation of a Department of Labor and to hold, later on, a Constitutional Convention to solve the "status" of the Puerto Rican people.Constitutional Convention to resolve the definitive political "status" of the people of Puerto Rico. (Synthesis of the prepared Memorial - I "KOLA OCEANIA" M-■ K Who does not know this unsurpassable drink in San Juan and all its bordering towns? This delicious soft drink is prepared with legitimate Sevillanaís almonds and kola nut. The kola nut, as it is known, is a great stimulant for the blood circulation and that is why every sad or afflicted person who drinks the KOLA OCEANIA recovers completely his lost energies. This KOLA is the creation of none other than Oceania and that is why it bears its name, being prepared in one of the most important laboratories in the United States. This soda factory, which is one of the oldest and most accredited, does not only have this specialty and in these days will launch other products to the market without imitating anyone else. José Silvestry Vélez, Owner of the Soda Factory "LA OCEANIA". Telephone 1526, Santurce, P. R. (Announcement).
■ by the Legislative Committee to Wasji ■ ington, delivered to the President of the United States, requesting him to make mention in his next mensa- - je to Congress, of these liberal reforms demanded by the people of ! Puerto Rico). Report presented by Representative Rafael Alonso Torres on behalf of the delegation to the Convention. TO THE "ECONOMIC COMMITTEE" OF THE LEGISLATURE OF PUERTO RICO: "In order to fulfill the mission entrusted to us by YOUR Senator Santiago Iglesias and the undersigned representative, at three o'clock in the afternoon of September 29, 1927, we left the port of San Juan, Puerto Rico, aboard the "San Lorenzo". "We were bearers of a copy of the Memorial to the Preslden- - te of the United States, as finally approved 'by the representation of all the ( political sectors, credentials duly certified by the Secretary of the Economic Commission of the Legislature of Puerto Rico and constituted paying officer of the delegation. "The number of miles traveled to perform our duties is as follows: From San Juan to New York, by sea, 1380, and from New York to Los Angeles, California, by railroad, transshipping at Chicago, 3106, making a total of 4,486 miles. We thus crossed the Continent from the Atlantic to the Pacific. We took our seats in the Convention of the "American Federation of Labor", with the following representation: Senator Santiago Iglesias, for the "Free Federation of Workers of Puerto Rico"; and Representative "at large" Rafael Alonso Torres, for the Central Workers Union of San Juan, Puerto Rico. "On board the "San Lorenzo" we received an aerogram signed by Mr. Barceló, President of the Economic Commission of the Legislature of Puerto Rico, notifying us that we should add to the Memorial Armantes al PresíI (Continued on p. 8, 3rd col. ISABEL PARSI FLORISTA For any work in natural flowers call "1 Telephone 120, Hato Rey. LIVESTOCKMAN GENTLEMEN We recommend that you see PEUCULflLARRO when it is shown at the nearest movie theater to your residence YOU WILL BE PROMPTLY NOTIFIED A. Vicente & Co., S. en C.i , San Juan, P. h.
JUYKE WILL ASK FOR DISMISSAL BREATH FOR THE MAES- ' - TROS Jpina who must co- ' brar for dozava" parts ) M Yesterday we departed with the Commissioner of Public Instruction, Don hn B. Huyke, whom you questioned as to whether he proposed to make any lommendations to the next Le. natura in regard to nuei orientations of the estgr system of Puerto Rico. Mr. Huy. Wbs replied that on this point he had nothing to suggest to recommend to the legislature. But I do intend to request the Legislature to increase the appropriations of my Department. We need to intensify rural education and increase the number of schools considerably to accommodate the entire school-age population. "I will also request that teachers' salaries be increased. I am a strong supporter of the teachers' receiving their salaries in two equal parts. I will suggest to the Legislature that b the $900 allowance for graduate teachers' pay be increased to $1000 and that the appropriate amount be paid in twelfths. Orual I will suggest in regard to Wos rural and special teachers. W'ediré a relative increase over Tíos salaries they are now earning. We have in mind other suggestions which we will make to the Legislature at its next session in February."
COMPAGNIE GENERALE TRANSATLANTIQUE French steamer "CARIMARE" Is expected in this port coming from Bordeaux (France) around the 28th of the current, and will continue its voyage to Puerto Plata, Cabo Haitiano, Port-au-Prince and Santiago de Cuba. For further information please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC., Agents iSan Juan, Tel. 256 Tanca Esq. Tetuan.
(Meunier Chocolate Always the purest. Always the Richest. Always the Best. ■ i ■ ■ '■
FERRO-MALI J/ea Home Page.
PERNOS ISERN DELEGATE TO THE 5TH PAN-AMERICAN CHILD WELFARE CONGRESS.
M He has received the corresponding appointment from the Secretary of State, Dr. A. Femós Isern.
Dr. A. Femós Isern, Deputy Commissioner of Health of Puerto Rico, has been appointed by the Department of State as the United States Delegate to the Fifth Pan-American Child Welfare Congress to be held in Havana from December 8 to 15, next. His appointment, signed by the Secretary of State, Hon. Frank B. Kellogg, was received yesterday.
Dr. Femós expects to embark.* on the 29th of this month on the French steamer. 29th of this month on the French steamer "Carimaré" bound for Santiago de Cuba, or on the "Coamo" next week, via New York. "EL MUNDO" extends to Dr. Fernós Isern its most effusive congratulations for such an outstanding distinction and wishes him the greatest success in the performance of the task entrusted to him.
DA2F RAII three great challenges DnuL DnLLL (Cataño League) "Crisfield" vs. J. Athletics" SATURDAY 26 & SUNDAY 27
ANNOUNCEMENT DB AUCTION | I MUNICIPO DE SAN JUAN, i PUERTO RICO' M 1 San Juan, Puerto Rico. November 25, 1927. i On December 5, 1927, at 10:00 A.M., the auction will take effect on December 5, 1927. M. will take place in the City Hall building, and office of the Mayor, the auction for the construction of a reinforced concrete fence, < for the José Celso Barbosa School, in Puerta de Tierra, San Juan, P. R. The presentation of proposals will be closed 10 minutes after the above-mentioned time, proceeding immediately to the opening and reading in public of the proposals that have been presented. The proposal form, instructions to bidders, bidding documents and other background information related to the bid,
copies of the documents may be obtained by means of a receipt certifying that each interested party has deposited in the office of the Municipal Treasurer of San Juan, the amount of $10.00, which will be reimbursed upon return of all the documents, complete and in good condition, within twenty days after the auction has been held. The Auction Board may reject any or all the proposals submitted and reserves the right to award the contract to the proposal it deems most advantageous, even if it is not the lowest in price. J. Gómez BRIOSO Mayor p. s. (Announcement)
"SAN JUAN NEEDED AN ORDINARY BUDGET OF $3,000,000, OF SAFE ENTRANCES" M-"SINCE MANY YEARS ITS FINANCES HAVE BEEN SUFFERING AN IMBALANCE" - -M Says the Municipal Treasurer, Ledo. Bolivar Pagan, commenting on Mayor Todd's letter.
Commenting on the letter addressed to the Municipal Assembly by Mayor Todd regarding the economic situation of the Municipality of San Juan, the Municipal Treasurer, Mr. Bolívar Pagán, made the following statements yesterday:- "The Mayor's letter is based on positive data. I do not have to comment on the details of this document, which is addressed to the Municipal Assembly, and surely that body will give it the attention it deserves. "For many years the finances of the Municipality of San Juan have been suffering an imbalance. The current Republican-Socialist Administration has made extraordinary efforts to overcome the situation. "The sources of income authorized by law are very limited. The possible revenues are not materially sufficient to cover the ordinary expenses required by the needs to be met by this city. In order to reasonably attend to public services, San Juan would need a regular budget of at least three million dollars, from secure revenues. The Municipal Assembly, which is the power that determines what amount of income the Municipality can calculate per year, is bound within the restrictions of the Municipal Law. "As Municipal Treasurer of this Capital, which I have been for
As Municipal Treasurer of this Capital, which I have been for the last three years, I can affirm that the income from the various taxes imposed by the Municipal Assembly, and the collection of which derives from the activities of this Treasurer, has greatly exceeded all previous years. But this has not been enough to solve a problem whose cause lies elsewhere, and whose solution is practically beyond the control of the municipal authorities. "A large part of the municipal income is from the share that, according to the law, corresponds to the Municipality in property taxes, whose rate is fixed by the Island Government and whose collection is made directly by the Island Treasury. These property tax revenues, which may determine a crisis, are subject to the direct activities of the Island Treasury and to a few eventualities beyond the Municipality's control. "I have already extensively discussed this whole financial issue in my annual reports. It is time for the Island Legislature to cooperate more in the solution of this problem, which deserves special attention from the Island Government, since it is the seat of the Government and the beautiful city that is the pride of Puerto Rico and a mirror for the eyes of all and sundry".
"The sentiment of the people of the United States with respect to Puerto Rico is excessively friendly."
whatever we may rightly ask, and which may be granted, will be granted."-Governor T owner giving his impressions of his last trip to the North.
Governor Towner has given us the following "statement"? in which he alludes to the "sentiment of the People of the United States with respect to Puerto Rico", according to the impressions he received during his recent trip to the North: "Because of my recent visit to the United States, the Puerto Rican Press has asked me to make a statement of the present sentiment and attitude of the people of the United States toward Puerto Rico. "I am glad to do this, because the evidence of interest and friendship, Continued on page 4 Ira col. A PROJECT TO REGULATE PUBLIC AUTOMOBILES M Has been outlined by the Chief of the "Division of Automobiles," Mr. Molina M- Mr. J. M. L. Molina, Chief of the "Automobile Bureau" of the Department of the Interior, has already drafted a project, after having conferred with Commissioner Esteves and with the Chairman of the "Public Service Commission", Mr. Miguel A. Muñoz, to regulate the service of public automobiles. This project will be submitted to the consideration of the "Public Service Commission", which intends to study it and hold public hearings, in order to hear the opinions and arguments of the interested parties, before taking definite action on the same. It was suggested to Mr. Molina to prepare an outline of this project to regulate public motor vehicles, due to his long experience acquired in the "Automobile Bureau" of the Department of the Interior.
THE "TECHNICAL RESEARCH DIVISION" PROMOTES THE CELEBRATION OF A GREAT PEDAGOGICAL CONGRESS M The Director of said bureau, Dr. Vincenty, will submit the matter to Commissioner Huyke M ■ The celebration of a Pedagogical Congress will be held at the Department of the Interior.
The celebration of a Pedagogical Congress, which is to be the first in our educational history, is attracting the attention of the "Technical Research Division" headed by Dr. Nestor Vincenty. According to what we were told yesterday in that office, it is almost certain that all the necessary preparations will soon begin to be made, provided the Department of Instruction approves the idea. Only yesterday Dr. Vineenty was proposing to confer with Commissioner Huyke on this important matter. The object of a Congress of this kind would be to ascertain the views of all sections of the island, to give everyone an opportunity to express his opinion as to the ends which our school system should pursue, to get all persons of good will to cooperate with their enlightenment in clearing up the many problems with which our educational progress is now confronted. The Bureau of Technical Investigations has in mind to prepare an extensive interrogatory which will be submitted to a large number of professionals, tradesmen, farmers, teachers, etc. etc., and in addition will ask q. * The Department of the Interior hereby gives notice that the old bridge known as "Los Frailes" on the Central Highway, Km. 19, is under repair and that it has been necessary to close it completely to traffic. Traffic between the towns of Caguas and Río Piedras has been diverted by the "La Mu-da-Guaynabo-Sanatorio road." GUILLERMO ESTEVES, Commissioner of the Interior (Announcement). Doctor L Gonzalez Martinez Is pleased to announce to his numerous clientele and friends that on his return from his trip to Europe he will be again in front of his professional office from the 29th of the current month. CALL HATO REY 155. FINCA LAS MONJAS for PURE, CLEAN, RICH MILK.
If you would like to make a request to the current school program, giving the reasons that you deem convenient. In this way the opinion of the whole island would be known, what the island wants its school to be and to teach its children. This data, duly studied, would be the subject of discussion in Congress. As far as we understand, if the Congress takes place, our preeminent men will be invited to express their opinion in a series of conferences on various aspects of instruction, all of which would be of patent benefit, not only to those who are concerned with these matters from afar, but also to the school authorities, who would thus be put in contact with all those who have something useful to say. This idea of holding a Pedagogical Congress is in agreement with what was expressed, with respect to the objectives of our school system, by the Commission <le experts who recently carried out the educational "survey" of the island. What we need," Dr. Vincenty finally told us, "is that we all have a spirit of cooperation and that we all do what is in our power for the greater good of our children". An event such as the Pedagogical Congress would be of such manifest importance that its mere announcement must surely be greeted with the greatest interest throughout the island. Second floor of the house Alien No. 37 for rent. Will report: ' R. FABIAN A CIA.
I SELL 50 shares of the Rio Piedras Bread Cooperative at 50 cents each. Their nominal price is one dollar. Address to Marcelino Quiñones.
Canvas 50 - ENTERESE - 50 Sastrería Echevarría I put in knowledge of Bis clients and friends qne from the 15 of this month in adelaias, I will make a quite liberal reduction in all the works qim are entrusted to me the same to the order that to the measure. 11 nBed you have your fabric, bring it to us and we will gladly make you a nenlraje and to your entire satisfaction. We also announce that mnAtos denim clothing manufactured by us, to eervir inmeítagamente and at very low prices. We also offer shoes, shirts, hats, rubber bands and underwear. Visit me and you will save money and bad times. SATISFACTION T GJÍBANTIA is our motto, ANDRES ECHEVARRIA SASTRE TeL 4S8, S. J. Luna 50. AGUADILLA EN SAN JUAN - SE ACABO EL ABUSO Now you can buy at reasonable prices thread lace and other handmade works. Make the Christmas Gift with Handmade Works and you will be thankful. CROSS 1 IN FRONT OF STANDARD GROCERY LUIS MATOS San Juan, P. R.