THE MONDO
, Q/XPagtnas 3 Ctvs. X 1 f Semester - - - - 5.00 ? one year -- - - - - $9.50
Q/Pages 3 Ctvs. #11 Office: "Puerto Rico IlusftrfVtrado Bldg." -TeL 1222
MORNING
THE MORNING
Year IX.
San Juan. Puerto Rico.
mbUibed and distribute under permit No. 801) tutorized by tne Act. of October 6, 1917, on file at the Poet Office st dan Juan, Porto Bieo. By order of the President. Al H. Uurdenon# Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter February 21, ]91b a , the Post Office at San Juan. Porto Rno, of America) under the Act march S..187Í
-SATURDAY, APRIL 16, 1927.
NUMBER 2706
- SENATOR ZENO ALLEGES THAT THE "PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION" "HAS MADE AN ATROPE- : LLO" WITH THE MUNICIPALITY OF GUAYAMA.
- r M He refers to the franchise of public lighting in that city ■ .... -M-a ! In the session of the Senate the day before yesterday, Mr. Francisco M. Zeno, senator for the district of Guayania, requested that certain actions of the ''Public Service Commission" be investigated, which, he alleged, were detrimental to the interests of the aforementioned city. The Senate granted Mr. Zeno's request, providing for the investigation. Mr. Zeno, when questioned yesterday morning by one of our editors, explained the case as follows: i "The Municipality of Guayama had a contract with the Irrigation Service established there by virtue of which it supplied the population with electric light and power. It seems that some difficulties arose between certain customers of the municipality who used this electric power and the authorities of the same, and the Guayama Irrigation Office, in order to solve the conflict, requested the Public Service Commission to rescind the contract by virtue of which the Municipality had absolute "control" of the public lighting, and at the same time to authorize the Commissioner of the Interior to freely enter into agreements with any other particular entity. This measure was approved by the Public Service Commission - and it is against it that the Municipal Administration of Guayama protests, alleging that it seriously injures its interests, and that it did not have the courtesy to give it an opportunity to provide reasons of public interest against the adoption of said measure. Without penetrating into the merits of the facts denounced by the Municipality of Guayama," -Senator Zeno continued- "it is obvious that the measure is not in the public interest. Zeno, "it is obvious that the Public Service Commission has carried out an outrage that is clearly unjustified, which, together with its actions in the "guaguas" matter recently resolved by it, outlines a policy totally reprobated by all modern currents in the matter of public services. In other words, while (Continued on p. 14, Col. 4)
"We trust that it will be maintained-at least as is the instructional budget" M Says the President of the Rural Department of the "Asociación de Maestros" M-- Mr. Juan Rodríguez Llabrés, President of the Rural Department of the "Asociación de Maestros de Puerto Rico", sends us for publication the following article: - "The rural teachers of Puer to Rico feel at this hour completely disappointed by the fact that in the Governor's model budget the amount of sixty thousand dollars is cut from the present instructional budget. This means fewer schools and less pay. "At this time, when the rural teacher is required to have a solid preparation, far beyond what his economic resources allow him, when the struggle for daily bread becomes more difficult every minute, when the basic necessities increase considerably, it is a question of lowering his salary. What is to be gained by this? Subtracting a few thousand dollars from a budget and bringing suffering and despair to many Puerto Rican homes. The rural teaching profession today is almost entirely composed of a plethora of young people, whose academic and social preparation very few in the country have, and yet we see many other officials who have no preparation whatsoever enjoy a salary that allows them to perform well and live comfortably. The salary that the rural teacher enjoys at the present time, does not go parallel with his academic and professional preparation, he is required to carry out a plan that includes agriculture, public health and construction. To ensure that this plan is carried out in a manner that will greatly benefit the rural teacher.
DENECHAUD SYRUP ' It combines the original French formula of the eminent Dr. DENECHAUD for the treatment of BRONCHOPULMONA-RES, TOS-FERINE, ASTHMA, CHRONIC CATARRHUS, etc. BALSAMIC - EXPECTORANT and CALMING. Ask for it at your Pharmacy. 75 cents bottle.
Kiess did not find on our island the anti-American sentiment that he appreciated.
A MOCA POLICEMAN SHOT A CITIZEN TO DEATH M He fired his revolver when seriously wounded with an axe M The incident occurred while the uniform was trying to occupy a still M Our correspondent in Moca sent us the following telegram yesterday: EL MUNDO, San Juan. Yesterday at noon a terrible event occurred in the "Rocha" neighborhood of this municipality. According to the preliminary investigation carried out by the authorities, Nando Román was distilling rum in the kitchen of the residence of his nephew, Esteban Román. At that time, police officers Alejandro E. Hernández and Gregorio Cortés showed up at that place and tried to seize the still. Nando Román requested a search warrant and resisted the police entering the house. A dispute arose, followed by the country in necessary that the teacher be well paid so that he would not be forced to look in other fields for what he needed to decently support his family. "The people recognize our work, our sacrifices, our difficulties, they know that the future of Puerto Rico rests on our shoulders, they know that we are preparing the men who in the future will decide the course that the politics of the country will follow. We trust that justice will be done to us and that at least the education budget will be maintained as it is.
He told President Coolidge that the Puerto Ricans want the elective Governor M WASHINGTON, April 15. Representative Edgar R. Kiess, chairman of the House Insular Affairs Committee, had an extensive meeting with President Coolidge on the sidelines of his recent visit to the island of Puerto Rico. Kiess informed Coolidge that Puerto Rico was making remarkable progress, letting him know that nowhere did he find the anti-American sentiment that Congressman MacFadden had seen on the island. He let him know that Puerto Ricans want the elective Governor, but that they are willing to wait for some time yet as far as that is concerned. Kiess pleaded for more U.S. capital to be invested in Puerto Rico, thus helping to resolve the economic situation in that country. PRENSA UNIDA a scuffle in which Nando Román seriously wounded policeman Hernández with an axe. The latter then made use of his revolver, firing the five capsules it contained, and wounding Esteban Román, who intervened in the fight, causing his instant death. The police officer Cortés in turn made use of the roten, inflicting several wounds on Nando The District Attorney continues the investigation of the facts. M. Rodríguez ROMAN, Correspondent.
SENATE OF PUERTO RICO NOTICE The Commission in charge of the fulfillment of Senate Resolution No. 5 approved on August 18, 1925, hereby announces that it will proceed to acquire, for a sum not exceeding $400, to be placed in the assembly hall of the Senate of Puerto Rico, the best portrait of Mr. Antonio R. Barceló, President of said Senate, which in the judgment of the Commission is submitted to the contest which remains open from this date until May 15, 1927, at 12 P. M. San Juan, P. R.., March 9, 1927. LUS SANCHEZ MORALES President of the Commission (Announcement).
SEÑORITA.... If you wear Shoes size 2, 3, or 4, you can get a Model, (Sample) that no one will have equal to yours. We just received 3000 pairs. We sell them very CHEAP. LA FAVORITA José Lema & Co. San Justo 31.
■ || ñp ■■■■ I Solicit Men or Women in all-les Island towns, who quieí| g n| I t V * ran devote all or part of their time, to direct sales to the consumer, 11 || || ■■■ I I I of different lines. You don't have to make any investment. I provide you with gra<1 W is I i I I La v tis ios sample books. If your references are good, Visit me.
GREAT OPPORTUNITY! $25 "ADLER-COLLEGIAN" 2-PIECE CLOTHES FINISHED TO RECEIVE sSsDF A. MAYOL & CO. SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Dorothy Dix and the great detectives
In her intense work as a journalist, Dorothy Dix, the remarkable writer who day after day is read with such avidity, has had the opportunity to meet detectives of universal fame, men who have devoted their entire existence and all their enthusiasm to unraveling the mystery of the most atrocious crimes, crimes which, when they are later recounted in all their details by Dorothy Dix, with that mastery which characterizes her, have constituted subjects of interest to draw profitable lessons. In our Sunday edition tomorrow we will publish a very interesting interview with Dorothy Dix, in which she explains how the mists surrounding dreadful crimes, whose perpetrators themselves came to believe that they would escape without the deserved punishment, were dissipated. Dorothy Dix will tell the readers of EL MUNDO tomorrow how a little girl of ten years of age was mysteriously murdered, and how in time a clever detective succeeded in bringing the criminal to justice, doing one of the cleverest jobs in living memory. Read tomorrow EL MUNDO dominical.
Don Angel Rivero defines his position in the matter of the vacancy of a member of the Committee.
ELMAR DESTROYED SEVERAL HOUSES IN THE "AMELIA" NEIGHBORHOOD OF GUAYNABO - *M This occurred during the torrential rains on Thursday night. M 18 people were left homeless M The heavy rains registered in San Juan during Thursday night were torrential along the coast, causing violent tidal waves that caused considerable damage. * Among the inhabitants of the "La Perla" district of the city, there was great alarm on account of the furious tidal surges. However, there was no need to lament any misfortune. Where the sea did wreak unfortunate havoc, according to what we were informed yesterday at Police Headquarters, was along the coast of Guaynabo, and especially in the "Amelia" neighborhood of Guaynabo. In this neighborhood, four houses were totally destroyed by the hurricane and many others were dismantled. As a result, the neighbors Maximino Sou ffront; Micaela Rosario; José Trjnidad, Guadalupe Carmona, Felipe Maldónado, Rita Sánchez, Rogelio Rosario, Pablo García,. Petra Olivo, Justina Tapia, Domingo Peralta, Santana Rivera, Felipe Prieto, Juana Amaral, Victor, Vizcar ron do. Joaquín Rosario, Cayetano Díaz Fuentes and Petra Rodríguez López. These people were helped by the neighborhood and the police.
TOMORROW THE SPRING DANCE WILL TAKE PLACE M The election for Rema is turning out to be very close M Tomorrow night the sumptuous dance sponsored by "The Catholic Daughters of America" will take place at the "Vanderbilt County Hotel", during which the Spring Queen will be proclaimed and crowned. The enthusiasm that reigns is ex-
M In a letter to Mr. Barceló, he states that his name was requested for this candidacy M Yesterday, Mr. Angel Rivero addressed the following letter to Mr. Barceló: April 15, 1927. Hon. Antonio R. Barceló, San Juan, P. R. My very respectable and distinguished friend: When I spoke with you about the vacancy of the Insular Police Commission, I did so on the advice of Mr. Todd Soto. Mr. Todd spoke with the Governor and he told you that since he had nothing against Mr. Ginorio, he needed you to confer with him to resolve the matter. I knew that not a single senator would reject my name, even Mr. Iglesias and Mr. Martínez Nadal. "La Democracia", with a published article, broke the secrecy of this matter, making me appear on the Prtbllco as a strong candidate, to the point of being congratulated by some of its leaders.
THE PONCE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE MEETED IN ASSEMBLY YESTERDAY M Agreed to endorse Garcia Mendez's bill that raises the sales tax M Our editor in Ponce transmitted to us last night the telegram which we insert below: EL MUNDO, Sdta Juan. The Chamber of Commerce of this city met today in assembly, attended by merchants from Manatí, Aguadilla, Arroyo, Guánlca and other towns. The main agreement was to endorse the García Méndez bill on excise taxes, which eliminates the sales tax. Bill number 271, authored by Mondregón, was rejected. The bill number 271, authored by Mondregón, was rejected.
The election for Rei na is turning out to be very close, as is well evidenced by the state of the voting up to yesterday, Friday, to wit: Hortenclta Méndez 7275 Helen Santaella 3325 Margarita Martínez Alvarez 2800 Carmín Cuyar 2050 Chavín Domenech, 1000 The "Catholic Daughters of America", of San Juan have special pleasure in inviting for so suggestive party to the other Courts of the Order in the island, so that he act reviews the greatest possible splendor and lucidity. Those who have not yet received an invitation and believe they are entitled to obtain it, may call 510, or 125 in Santurce.
ColínaI O.DONELL NO. 10 I DE 2 A 4-SAN JUAN ■
HUYKE INSISTS THAT AN AGE LIMIT MUST BE SET FOR TEACHERS TO BE PENSIONED.
We met yesterday with the Commissioner of Public Instruction, Mr. Huyke, regarding the new pension law for the Puerto Rican teaching profession. To this effect, we heard the following: 'I want any initiative regarding the pension law to come from the teaching profession itself. I went, however, to assist with my experience to the event held by the Chairman of the House Committee on Public Instruction and there I presented an amendment that seems necessary to me. The current law and the one being studied in the House establishes only a limit of service for the granting of the pension (21 years). I believe that an age limit should also be established. That is, twenty-one years of service and forty-five years of age. In that way, not so many people will be entitled to the pension immediately after the law is passed. At present, according to the data given to me by the statistics officer of my department, there are 231 principal teachers, 24 rural teachers and 75 graduates entitled to the pension. It would be a real conflict if they all applied for it at the same time. "What would be the prospect, under these conditions, for young teachers, obliged to contribute? I believe that the clause establishing an aid from the Island Treasury should be approved. Now, great care must be taken to ensure that there is no shortage of funds to pay the pensions of those who are already pensioned. The age limit will also prevent a large number of teachers who are still doing good work from leaving the service. Among the pensioners there are many young people who would be better served in the ranks of the active teaching profession. This is legislation which must be very carefully done." nifestations of Guerra in the House, in which he called the protest of the tradé dp- "hysterics and pathe- 'hysterics and pathe- '. ' A motion was defeated to send Guerra a telegra- Continued on p. 5-7ma. colm.
SANTURCE SEWERAGE SYSTEM TO BE COMPLETED M The Municipal Assembly has resolved to auction said works M The Municipal Assembly of San Juan has resolved to put the works" for the completion of the sewerage system in Santurce up for auction immediately, in spite of the opposition of Dr. López Sicardó, president of said body, who stated that "in adopting this agreement they had proceeded in a frivolous manner, using a highly irregular procedure." In this regard, Dr. López Sicardó's attitude was supported by the delegates Mr. Cabrera, Mr. Toro and Mr. Bird, but the criterion of the majority, composed of delegates Mr. Angleró, Mr. Torres, Mr. William D. López, Mr. Barbosa and Mr. Totti, prevailed. In relation to this matter, Dr. López Sicardó maintained the criterion that the case should be studied before any agreement was adopted by the Public Works Committee of the Assembly. BOSTON CIRCUIT COURT UPHOLDS THE VALIDITY OF THE FLUVIAL CONTRIBUTION IN PUERTO RICO M- Resolves several more cases of a contri butive nature M The Boston Circuit Court has resolved on Monday of this week, several cases that affect the tax laws of Puerto Rico. In the case of Porto Rico Rail way, Ligh & P. Co. v. Gallardo, the Court decided, considering the merits of the lawsuit, that the law establishing the contribution for the study of the river sources of the Island is valid. Likewise, it resolved the cases followed by "Sánchez Morales 4 , "Porto Rico Automobile o." and "Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co." against the Treasurer in favor of the People of Puerto Rico, sustaining the validity of the collection of the taxes imposed on said firms.
BARB WIRE WE RECEIVE THIS WEEK SPECIAL PRICE Royos 50 and 100 pounds. VILLAR & Co. Inc. SAN JUAN, P. R.
V - - - -- "Too Good To Be True" - is a common saying among Americans. When someone offers to do a good job for a ridiculously low price, do your research first! LUIS REXACH URBANIZACIONES BUENAS TEL. 998 SANTURCE
FOR HAVING TO ABSENTEE ME I am selling two thirds of the New Fajardo Theater. Will inform: Constantino Rodriguez, Box 553, Fajardo, Puerto Rico. FRESH FISH caught the same day and at special prices for sale at Calle Marina, Parada 16, TELEPHONE 1086, Santurce.
WANTEB 15,000 to 25,000 tons cane for 1928 crop. In Rio Piedras, Trujillo or Bayamon sections. Will pay goo< prices. Address replies to Box 972. San Juan.
SOLARES PUNTA DE LAS MARIAS The best place-in Santurce. Very low prices. Liberal terms. HENRY W. DOOLEY Tapia 9. Tel. 1295 Santurce, P. R.
COMPAGNIE GENERALE TRASATLANTIQÜE VAPOR FRANCES "MACORIS" This fast and comfortable steamer, as all previous years, will leave San Juan direct for LA CORUÑA (Spain) and HAVRE, France, at the end of April or beginning of May. Book your tickets early in order to get good cabins. She will accept cargo for La Coruña and all northern European ports. For further information on passage and cargo contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. -Agents. SAN JUAN, P. R. TEL. 257. TANCA-TETUAN.
OPPORTUNITY For rent or for sale, without broker, house Tetuan 14, with a splendid and spacious warehouse, opposite the "Royal Bank of Canada." For information; V. ALONSO. Tetuán 35, Tel. 217.
DANISH PORTLAND CEMENT TEN THOUSAND BARRELS BRAND "FARO" FAMOUS! GREAT! MUV CONVENIENT PRICE WHILE THE DISCHARGE LASTS QUALITY - PRICE - SERYICiu ROLAN TEJEDOR, S. en C.
We need a good number of expert operators on SINGER sewing machines. Good salary, good treatment. MORRIS E. STORYK, Infanta Luisa No. 4 altos, Marina, San Juan, P. R.