THE WORLD
1 í? Pages 3 Ctvs. Semester - -- 5.00 JL V (Jd Year - - 19.50
1 /pages 3 Ctvs. Office: "Puerto Rico Ilus JL trado Bldg." -TeL 1222
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
Year IX. San Juan. Puerto Rico.
"ubligbcd and distributed under permit No. SOI) autorizad tne Aet. ot October 8, 1917, on filo at the Poet Office at can Joan. Porto Rico. By order of the President, A. 8. Bur de son, Postmsster General. Entered aa second clsss matter, febrnar. 31 1919 at the Poet Office at Sao Juan. Pjrto RI". (United Staten of America) under the Aet of march 3. 1871.
Saturday, September 24, 1927.
Number 2885.
"We could affirm that we are fit to govern the destinies of any great nation in the world, no longer of the little country in which we had the good fortune or misfortune to be born."
"This is the expression of the noble pride we feel in highlighting our own merits.'-This is stated in the draft of the memorial to Coolidge.
We publish below the full text of the draft memorial to be addressed to the President submitted by Mr. Barceló to the Legislative Delegation and the "Economic Commission" for their study and consideration:
It was also approved by the Senate, which passed it unanimously, with the amendment that the election of the Governor should take place in the year 1932, instead of 1928, as it originally appeared in the bill, and that of leaving in the hands of the President of the United States the power to remove said Governor if there were just cause for doing so. The bill could not pass the House of Representatives, although it had there the decided approval of the majority, and of the minority, because it was unable to overcome the difficulty of the rules adopted at the last moment, which did not permit the discussion of a bill except by unanimous consent, which could not be obtained, in view of the extreme importance of the bills of a national character still pending, which took precedence of all others.
To the Honorable Calvin Coolidge, President of the United States of America.
The Delegation from Puerto Rice, which had the honor of appearing before Your Excellency on January 23, 1924, left in your hands a memorandum containing the demands which your Legislature, interpreting the aspirations of the people, directed to be presented to Your Honor and to the Congress of the United States, for the purpose of obtaining a further extension of the powers now granted to you by the Charter, including the election of the Governor. The Delegation appeared before the committees of both Houses of Congress and set forth at length, in the hearings held there, the reasons why the people of Puerto Rico believe they are entitled to the justice they request and deserve. "The Delegation left in the minds of His Excellency, of Congress and of the Administration, the full conviction that it was time to grant to Puerto Rico what it asked, not only for its own sake, but for the good name of the United States, in whose democracy and institutions Puerto Rico has placed all its faith and confidence. The bill then prepared by our Resident Commissioner, Mr. Córdova Dávila, merited and obtained the favorable report of the Secretary of War.
Since then, Puerto Rico has not ceased for a single day to insist upon the passage of that bill which enlarges its powers of government and places it in a position to settle its local affairs, free from the thousand prejudices and contradictory reports which, with grave prejudice to the progress of its people, constantly obstruct its determination, taking moral force from the Legislature and the men of the Executive, who are involved in the serious responsibilities of government, without possessing the due authority for the exercise of the same. We would not have to make a
- Teatro Municipal - GRAN COMPAÑIA DRAMATICA ARGENTINA CAMILA QUIROGA Today Saturday, September 24 TWO GREAT PERFORMANCES At 4:30 P. M. Family Gram' matinee Una Mujer Desconocida Palco con 6 ent. $10. - Balcony $1. - Gallery 0.50 LUNETA $2. M. Grand Repremiere. THE BLIND FORCE - - LUNETA $2.50 - - - Tomorrow Sunday 25.-Two interesting performances. Matinee at 3:30 P. M. WITH BROKEN WINGS Evening at 8:30 interesting premiere LA TERNURA (by Henri Bataille).
CORRESPONDENCE FOR THE UNITED STATES M .
Last collection in Santurce, Puerta de Tie rra and Barrio Obrero will be at 12 M . M. The San Juan Corneos Administrator, Señor del Valle, authorizes the following note:- "For the purpose of benefiting the public of Santurce, Puerta de Tierra and Barrio Obrero, it has been arranged that from now on, in addition to the regular pickup of mail for the United States at 9 A. M. at the stations referred to above, the last pickup for the United States will be at 12 M. M. at the aforementioned stations, a supplementary pickup will be made at 12 M. every Thursday, at which time a truck will leave the Barrio Obrero station, and following Ponce de Leon Avenue, will pick up the mail from the mailboxes along its route, as well as the mail that is already ready at the stations at the time the truck arrives.
"In order to make this new service as efficient as possible the public is requested to deposit their mail no later than 12 M., whether deposited in the street mailboxes or taken to the stations themselves. Please be advised that mail will only be 'picked up' in the mailboxes located on "Avenida Ponce de Leon" proper. RAFAEL DEL VALLE, Postmaster.
great effort to demonstrate to H. E. the serious inconveniences arising from that anomalous situation which permits the appointment of a man to the government of a country, without the due consent of the latter; ignorant ñusually ignorant of the problems of his life, influenced generally by deep prejudices, or ill-informed as to the true conditions of the people he is to govern, so that in adopting the measures of government imposed upon him by his duty, he usually does so er. To the detriment of the interests he administers and to the detriment of the good relations that should exist between the citizens of the mainland and the island. It is not always fortunate to find for the government of the country a personality of experience and high moral and intellectual conditions (Continued on p. 6. eol. 1.).
REGENT PHARMACEUTIST A qualified and experienced one with good references is needed. Those interested should contact Dr. Ramón J. Sifre. Vega Alta, P. R.
PURE MILK! PORTO RICO DAIRY INC. has the only plant in Puerto Rico to pasteurize milk in a sanitary manner and in accordance with health regulations. Protect your health and that of your children by demanding our PATENT COVER on the containers. Do not trust imitations. Convince yourself by visiting our plant. PORTO RICO DAIRY, INC. Tel. 21 18 Stop 20 Santurce, P. R. "--> Analysis of the Biological Laboratory of Puerto Rico to our milks: BEFORE PASTEURIZING Samples of milk from several cowsheds, mixed 768,000 bacteria per C. C. After pasteurized in our plant 300 bacteria per C. C.
PURE REPUBLICANS ARE WILLING TO SIGN MEMO RIAL TO COOLIDGE
- r j Yesterday morning we were talking with the President of the Pure Republican Party, Rafael Martinez Nadal, who, in the course of the conversation we had with him, referred to the memorial of the Legislative Commission that is projected to be sent to the President of the United States. "The pure Republicans," said Mr. Martinez Nadal to us, "are willing to sign the aforesaid memorial, provided that among their demands, in addition to that of the elective Governor, there be included the concession to our Legislature of the powers that are necessary to inspect the military activities of the United States.
AFTER INSPECTING THE MILITARY ACTIVITIES ON THE ISLAND, MAJOR GENERAL MCRAE EMBARKS TODAY.
M Marches pleasantly impressed with the discipline of the troops and the efficiency of the officers.
Major General James H. Me Rae embarks today on his return to the United States, after having made a general inspection, which lasted two weeks, of all the military activities being carried on in Puer to Rico. After carefully inspecting the situation and general organization of the 65th Infantry Regiment stationed in San Juan and Cayey, Major General Me Rae visited all the towns of the island where detachments of the "National Guard" or the "Reserve Officers' Association" have been organized, and closely appreciated their activities.
In connection with the needs of the militia in Puerto Rico, Major General Me Rae conferred at length with Colonel Estes, commanding general of the American troops in Puerto Rico, and together they inspected the barracks in which the troops and officers are housed both in San Juan and Cayey, and also the camps which they use for military training and war practice. Colonel Estes took the opportunity to call the attention of Major General Me Rae to the imperative need to build new barracks, properly equipped, for the housing of the troops. (Continued on page 11, Col. 8.)
BASE - BALL "COLLECTIVA" vs "SAN JUAN ATHLETICS" (CATAÑO ATHLETIC PARK) TWO GREAT CHALLENGES. MORNING AND AFTERNOON A magnificent orchestra will entertain the games.
BABBEBIA OCHOA Installed on the third floor of the most beautiful and spacious building of LA MARINA. The best, most comfortable and coolest of all the Salons of San Juan. M. GARCIA COLON.
BUT THE DOCUMENT WILL HAVE TO REQUEST FACULTIES TO SOLVE THE ECONOMIC PROBLEMS.
This is what the Chief of said party, Ledo. Martinez Nadal
to solve its economic problems. We need the means to effectively combat the lati mios and absenteeism. As long as these evils exist, there is no redemption or happiness possible in our country. "This is a fundamental condition for us, as a party, to give our approval to the memorial that is submitted. "It is necessary to state for the record in connection with the projected memorial that although the Pure Republican Party, because the circumstances of the time demanded it, acted as it did when the probability arose that Governor Towner would have to leave office, it does not want Mr. Towner to become the ambassador of our aspirations, nor does it want him to appear in the eyes of the administration in Washington as a man who enjoys the confidence and unqualified endorsement of the Pure Republican Party." Mr. Enrique Biascoechea, national representative of the "Order of the Star of the Orient" in Puerto Rico, will give a lecture in Lares tonight at eight o'clock in the evening, in the premises of the Masonic Lodge of this town. Tomorrow, Sunday, at eleven o'clock in the morning, he will give a lecture in Lares, at the Masonic Lodge of this town.
VENDO! Houses in commercial points on the Ponce de Leon road for rent all year. One rent $2 26 Another " $300 Another " $325 I sell one of them. Inquire today. Ponce de Leon Nc. 250, Telephone 584 black, Santurce. D. Diaz Alejandro.
FRANCISCO RODRIGUEZ Barber to Domicilio Calle Maypr 64 - Telephone 478 Negro. Ponce, Puerto Rico.
CEMENTO Sobre Muelle VILLAR & CO, INC.
t DON ANTONIO PIZA Y MAS Native of Alaró, Mallorca, HAS DIED His widow, Mrs. Luz Géigel Sabat, his children Don Jaime, Don José and Doña María Piza y Géigel, his son-in-law Don Fernando H. Vendrell, his political nephews and other relatives and the mercantile of this square Pizá Hnos. S. en C., participate to his friends and related so sad news and they beg them to entrust his soul to the Almighty and to attend the act of burial that will be verified today at 4 P. M. in the Cemetery of San Juan, leaving the coffin of the residence of Don Manuel I. Saldaña, terrace of the Garage Casino, of this city. San Juan, P. R-, September 24, 1927.
FOR SALE Beautiful residence in Condado with all the modern comfort. 1,115 solar meters. Information G. Vázquez, Box 60 San Juan.
Chocolate Meunier Always the purest. Always the Richest. Always the Best.
LIVESTOCKHOLDERS WE RECOMMEND YOU TO SEE THE THOUSAND LABRO when it is exhibited in the nearest movie theater to your residence YOU WILL BE PROMPTLY NOTIFIED TO A. Vicente & Co., S. en C. San Juan, P. R.
ISABEL PARSI FLORIST For any work in natural flowers call Phone 120, Hato Rey. I I ■!■■■■■
TONIGHT THERE WILL BE NO AQUEDUCT SERVICE IN SAN JUAN '
M So reports Mayor Todd for general knowledge M Tonight we will have no aqueduct service in San Juan, in accordance with the following letter addressed to us by Mayor Todd:- Sept. 23, 1927, Mr. Editor of EL MUNDO, San Juan, Puerto Rico. Sir:- I beg you to inform the public through your reputable publication that tomorrow Saturday (today), September 24, the aqueduct service will be suspended from eight o'clock in the evening until seven o'clock Sunday morning due to certain repairs to be made to the plant and it is convenient for the residents to provide themselves with the necessary water in good time. With thanks in advance, I remain yours, Sincerely yours, R. H. TODD, Mayor.
"THE IDEA OF WHICH CAYETANO COLL AND CUCHI SPEAK IS OUR IDEA. IT IS THE IDEA OF THE COUNTRY".
"We have to make a union compatible with our status as Puerto Ricans and American Citizens": Huyke M
Yesterday we met with the Commissioner of Public Instruction, Mr. Juan B. Huyke, whom we interviewed on the sidelines of the manifesto addressed to the country by Ledo. Cayetano Coll Cuchí, a copy of which we insert in its entirety in our last edition. Mr. Huyke made the following statements: "I have read with great interest the manifesto of Cayetano Coll Cuchí. It is a very valuable document, well thought out and well written, on which the country should fix its attention. The men who direct public opinion in Puerto Rico should not close their eyes to these voices that emerge from all the h&m, of being willing to contribute also to give a good orientation to our island". "The voice of Cayetano Coll must be heard for what it represents. Cayetano Coll Cuchi has had the courage not to rectify his ideals but to embrace other ideas that other men had thought of. He does it bravely and one can see in what he says a sincere purpose to help in a work that has needed the cooperation of all". "Perhaps the definitive orientation of Puerto Rico is seen better than the men in the vanguard by the rank and file soldiers". -And about what Ledo. Cayetano Coll Cuchí regarding the ñaña, will give the same lecture in Aguadilla. The same Sunday, at eight o'clock in the evening, he will speak in Mayagüez in the halls of the Masonic Logic of that city. The topics Mr. Biascoechea intends to develop in each of these lectures, which promise to be extremely interesting, are the following: "The Constitution of Man", "Reincarnation", "The Law of Cause and Effect", "The Mission of the World Grand Instructor".
"Association with America? - "It is well said too. The time is not for discussing words that express an idea more or less eloquently. The time is for feeling an idea and working it out," continued on page 14-col. 2 THE HON. JUDGE WELLS EMBARKS TODAY ON THE TRANSPORT "ST. MIHIEL" M - He will be back by the end of next October -M- Federal Court Judge, Hon. Ira K. Wells, embarks today on the "St. Michael" M - He will be back by the end of next October. Wells, embarks today on the military transport "St. Mihiel," bound for New York, where he will spend a short vacation granted him by the National Department of Justice. Speaking of his trip to the North, Judge Wells has told us that it is purely personal, and that his only purpose is to rest with his family. Judge Wells will not return to Puerto Rico until the end of October. On that date of his return, the term granted by the Federal Court to file pleadings in the injunction filed against the Public Service Commission and the White Star Bus Line challenging the bus monopoly expires, so that upon his return, Judge Wells will resolve this matter. EL MUNDO extends to Judge Wells its most affectionate farewell, wishing him a happy voyage and very pleasant travel impressions.
NEW HOUSES at Comfortable Installments URBANIZACION LAS PALMAS Avenida Borinquen and - Carretera Seboruco. Constant bus service. 20 de San Juan. CALLES EMBREADAS. 87 Casas Cdnstruídas, Apartado 908, Santurce. Telephone 1901, Santurce.
FOR RENT Splendid premises for warehouse, in Tetuán 14, opposite the Royal Bank; or the building is for sale. They will inform:- V. Alonso, Tetuán 35, Telephone 217, San Juan.
TAMED CATTLE We offer for immediate delivery. All fine cattle selected for yoke. OPPENHEIMER HNOS. P.O. Box 104, Ponce, P. R.
S. Albanese & Sons Sucrs. Sheet Metal Works- Tinsmiths & Copersmiths Tinsmith Contractors We have just received a large quantity of "ARMCO" Plain Zinc in all thicknesses and sizes. We serve orders all over the island. We sell and work quality. We are the only distributor of ARMCO Plain Zinc in San Juan. Alien 55-Tel. 1015-San Juan, P.R.
RESOUNDING AND SPARKLING Those who know how to choose, always give preference to the rich alcoholic CEREIPINA. The quantity does not give goodness, the fine and good is not bought by quantity. What is good and fine is bought for its goodness. '