ELMUNDO
QQPages 3 Ctvs. X r Office: "Puerto Rieo üusUWtrado BIdg." r-TeL 1222
QQPages 3 Ctvs. X Z Semester - -- - 5.00 MU One Year - - 19.50
MORNING
MORNING
t Year IX.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
vublished and distributed under permit No. 801) autoriied by tn# Act. of October fl, 1917, on filo st the Post Office st San Juan. Porto Rico. By order of the President. A. 8. Burdeson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919 at the Post Office at San Juan. P it to Rito. (United States of America) under the Act of march 3. 18TH.
Saturday, August 27, 1927.
J Number 2864
"RECONCILIATION CAN ONLY HAVE AS ITS BASIS BETWEEN US THE DEPARTURE OF YOU FROM THE ALLIANCE AND YOUR ENTRY INTO THE ALLIANCE. OF THE ALLIANCE AND THE ENTRY INTO THE PURE REPUBLICAN PARTY".
MARTINEZ NADAL SAYS IN RESPONSE TO A TELEGRAMA FROM SENATOR OSCAR GUERRERO - m "Because I put my hand on your chest, the ideal that you abandoned is alive in Puerto Rico," adds M
On the occasion of the outcome of the General Assembly of the Puro Republican Party held recently in Mayagüez, Senator Oscar Guerrero addressed the following telegram to the President of said party, Ledo. R. Martínez Nadal: Ledo. Rafael Martínez Nadal, San Juan, Puerto Rico. "I sincerely congratulate the particular friend on his resounding triumph, although I am sorry to see my hopes of reconciliation forever frustrated." (S.D.) Oscar GUERRERO. The Ledo. Rafael Martínez Na-
dal has replied to Mr. Guerre ro with the following Open Letter:- San Juan, Puerto Rico. August 24, 1927. Mr. Oscar Guerrero, Barros, Puerto Rico. Dear old friend: I thank you for your congratulations for what it has of affectionate remembrance for the friend, who does not deserve it for any resounding triumph of his in the Pure Republican Assembly of Mayagüez. No person triumphed there. There the principles and procedures triumphed. (Continued on p. 19. col. 2.)
-For the Next - SCHOOL SCHOOL COURSE Great Price Reductions On Suits 'yShoes for Children Great Bargain of Socks LA IMPERIAL Allen Esq. San Justo. San Juan.
Sanitary Installation, Complete Due to the renovations we have made in our building at Parada 2*/ 2 , we have a complete sanitary installation consisting of three large sinks, ten toilets; elbows, connections and complete piping. We also have several doors and windows that we want to liquidate right away. Stop by and see them in our building at stop 2 l /f INSULAR MOTOR CORPORATION.
RICE AUCTION The Marshal of the San Juan District Court will sell at public auction, at his office, on August 30, 1927, at 2 P. M. 506 sacks of rice judicially deposited in case No. 4769 of Waterman & Co. vs. Mendez Bros. & Co. Said rice is stored at the N. Y. and P. R. Steamship Company, San Juan, P. R. jBESOSA fí EESOSA, Attorneys for plaintiff.
"It is no longer possible to doubt that the Living Forces are attempting to become a political force" M
Yesterday morning we were talking with the Vice President of the Chamber, Mr. Miguel Guerra Mondragón, about the agreements adopted by the recent Pure Republican Assembly held in Mayagüez. Mr. Guerra Mondragón told us that in his opinion, Mr. Barceló's message sent to the Assembly and the Assembly's reply had been fair and noble documents, animated by the highest desire to achieve a happy future for Puerto Rico. "There is, he told us, "in the political perspective of our island a solution that every day is becoming more and more concrete before the minds of thinking men. It is unquestionable that from this whole period of transition must emerge the alignment of our parties in two great fronts, one libertarian], that looks towards the high attainments of welfare and cooperation towards the people. The other is conservative and reactionary, which will be the fortress in which the wealthy will shelter to defend their considerable wealth from the just taxation with which the government will remind them of their obligation to contribute to the public burdens. It is no longer possible to doubt that the lords of the living forces have the determined intention of constituting themselves into a political force. "We, for our part, believing in the fulfillment of our duty and our obligations to the people who elected us, we await them on firm footing, ready to give battle and sure of the triumph of justice".
Students and Teachers Your studies will be made easier by using the "FARRINGTON" San José 3 table.
"I AM WILLING TO ACCEPT ANY INTELLIGENCE AMONG ALLIED FARMERS."
"But I will never submit to the humiliating attitude of having to succumb to men who raise the question on the basis of having to decline before our supreme principles. M This is how Barceló expresses himself in reply to the Lares Allied Committee
Don Antonio R. Barceló answers in the following terms the letter addressed to him by the President of the Local Committee of the Alliance in Lares, suggesting on behalf of said organization a joint meeting of members of the Board of Directors and the board of directors of the "Asociación de Agricultores" in the referred municipality to harmonize the relations between both entities: August 25, 1927. Mr. Juan Vivó, President of the Local Committee of the Alliance, Lares Puerto Rico. My dear friend and co-religionist :- I received your letter of the 18th of the current month, accompanied by a resolution adopted by that Local Committee of the Alliance, which has also been addressed to the principal newspapers of the island. I wanted to wait a few days for the country to know the terms of the said resolution, to answer your letter in relation to it, making clear the true state of things and at the same time making my attitude very clear. I believe that this Committee suffers a great mistake in admitting that CALI-ASTI The only legitimate grape that gives an exquisite WINE (4.50 can). Beware of imitations. CIRO MALATRASI, Angelo Restaurant, San Jose 9, San Juan. I
There can be no incompatibility between the aims pursued by the Alianza Portorriqueña and the Alianza Portorriqueña, and that there is, moreover, between these good co-religionists and the governing bodies of the Alianza. I do not recall that the question has ever been raised, either by me or by the Board of Directors, in such terms. Collectively, the farmers of Puerto Rico, and even those who are not, deserve all the respect and consideration of the governing body of the Alliance, and it is very difficult that there can be any question between them that cannot be elucidated and settled, since the interests of agriculture, generally considered, are the same interests of the Alliance. There will, therefore, be no objection on the part of the Board of Directors, as there is none on the part of the writer of this letter, to the approach of the Alliance.
ONE YEAR COMMERCIAL COURSE We will begin the new Course on August 29. We teach 12 subjects. We admit eighth grade graduates only. Courses $6, $9, $10, and $15 per month. Excellent accommodations. Ask for prospectus. COLEGIO PERCY Phone 463 Calle Isabel 12 - Apartado 241 - PONCE, P. R.
GOOD BUSINESS For sale material house San Justo No. 6, 2 floors and first floor, occupied by "The Rivoli". In the center of business, near the banks and the post office. Plot of 304.6 square meters. Rent currently $425 per month and in two years $450 per month. Proposals are accepted. Write Box 491, San Juan, P. R. Phone 418, Santurce, P. R.
MRS. DETAILERS Always ask for these items: Bertran Oil. -The purest and most complete. -Papas Romoles. -Lola Evaporated Milk in all sizes.
THE "BANCO FEDE-'THE "ECONOMIC COMMISSION" ADOPTS MEASURES TO FACE THE PROBLEM OF THE PROBLEM M
The "Banco Federal" will proceed to pledge the tobacco crop stored in the cooperatives' warehouses. This stored tobacco was refurbished by said bank, advancing the money to the tobacco growers so that they could harvest it, and now that the refurbishing contracts have expired, the bank will proceed to pledge it. The negotiations which have been going on with Mr. Doering, representative of a strong tobacco buying firm, may be said to remain "status quo". Mr. Doering has not yet returned to Puerto Rico, but as soon as the said gentleman arrives on our island very important tobacco negotiations will be made. Let us, the men of that Local Committee and of any other Allied committee on the island and the men of the Board, deal frankly and openly with all questions that may affect the Alliance in its relations with the interests of any character that may have to be considered. Whether the Assessment Law should be amended, or the Workmen's Compensation Law, or the Excise Law and with it the Sales Law, or the whole system of taxation in general, or the Election Law and the Municipal Law, or whether they should be corrected.
The "Economic Committee of the Legislature," has approved the following resolution, introduced by Senator Juan Hernández López and seconded by Senator Luis Sánchez Morales: "WHEREAS, the need to stimulate the investment of foreign capital in the exploitation of our wealth, especially of those which have been little used up to now, is felt more acutely every day with the continuous increase of the population, which is our most serious economic problem, that of unemployment; "WHEREAS, the opinion among the legislators and the people in general demands that solutions be found to this problem as soon as possible and based on the most exact knowledge of its factors, among which the most important is that the economic problem be solved as soon as possible and based on the most exact knowledge of its factors; WHEREAS, it is equally necessary, in order to incline this source of capital in favor of Puerto Rico, that, by means of publicity in the great American newspapers, as well as by personal correspondence with the organizations of the United States and the United States of America, it be made known to the public and to the people of Puerto Rico, that, in the interest of the United States and the United States of America, the United States and the United States of America, as well as to the United States of America, the United States and the United States of America, be the first to be interested in Puerto Rico.
CEMENTO Constant Stocks VILLAR & CO. INC
FOR RENT third floor of Alien 69 with seven cool rooms, nine closets, living room, dining room, kitchen, gallery and terrace. Complete sanitary service. Information; Phones 2017 and 73, San Jnan.
. MA OF UNEMPLOYMENT Muñoz Marín will try to interest American capital in the industrialization of Puerto Rico.
WHEREAS, it is equally convenient to make a direct study based on the statistics available to the Federal Government and the financial and manufacturing institutions of the United States, of the conditions under which American capital is invested in countries similar to Puerto Rico, so that our Legislature may have an exact orientation when legislating in the sense of attracting said capital to Puerto Rico; "WHEREAS, the establishment of a permanent information agency in the United States, being desirable, is not feasible with the funds which the Economic Commission can dispose of for such work; "WHEREAS, it is, however, of absolute necessity that this work be done to the fullest extent possible; (Continued at p. 6. 6. col. 6.)
IN VILLALBA SELLS THE Wilier GOMAS Mr. Manuel Santana
THE 'NEW RUBBER 32 x 6 HEAVY DUTY (REINFORCED) Rliiler FOR TRUCKS AND CAGUAS ' SPECIAL FOR HIGH SPEEDS AND HEAVY WORK. SEE IT AT ANDREU, AGUILAR & CO., INC. (In front of the Municipal Theater.) Phone 336. San Juan, P. R. La Miller Sabe de Goma.
FREE We will send a compact gold plated double block, priced at $1.50, to anyone who returns 20 wrappers of Lana Oil Soap or Olive Cream Soap or an assortment of both. These soaps are sold at all drugstores and perfumeries. BEAVER REMERS GRAHAM & CO. DAYTON, OHIO.
Where drags are long, painful, continuous, difficult and rough, the MACK truck always dominates. Why? Because it's made to never break down and withstand the most abuse. Ask for prices and easy payment conditions to VILLAMIL, San Juan.
HdsteinPfilk Lle ' or the n " va of &c&s All superior. -Come to select the suY as - -I have 60 newly Vitality f calved and P róximas ' A. A. MONTEQUIN Finca Cangrejos Arriba-P. O. Box 3, S. J.
SANATO RIO HATO-REY AND NEUROLOGICAL CLINIC For hospitalization and treatment of NERVE* SAS and MENTAL diseases. Modernly equipped. Moderate rate. Phone numbers 47 and 68 Parada 29-l]2, Hato Rey.
AGUADILLA IN SAN JUAN ENDED Et ABUSE Now, you can buy at reasonable prices YARN LACES and other handmade works. Full assortment of lace and thread applications from 5c. one and up.-Visit us and you will be convinced. Cruz No. 7, across from Standard Grocery, San Juan. -LUIS MATOS. Don't pay luxury.
SAMPLES. MANY SAMPLES The most surprising assortment ever seen in SAMPLES for LADIES and GENTLEMEN, was received yesterday by "LA FAVORITA" If you go shopping today, you would do well to visit this House. San Justo 31, - José Lema & Co.
4 t0 ANNIVERSARY of BAZAR AHORRO Fortaleza 25 Sales on sweep, fire prices, don't miss this bargain. Visit the BAZAR AHORRO Remember that Manolo always limits himself. -FORTALEZA 25- Phone 1579 Box 1246 San Juan. P. R. .
General Greasing $2.00 Washing $0.75 FREE Inspection Become our customer to get service. Spend grease and adjust. SAVE MONEY. GARAGE José Cuebas Padilla Phone 85 - Parada 27, Santurce.
A ' Doña Carolina Gomez Yda. de Toca HAS DIED After receiving the Holy* Sacrament*. Her brother Rafael (absent,) her daughters Milagros (absent) and Maria, her son-in-law Don Mariano Rodrigues Ceinos, and the firm i commercial Merino Rodriguez & Hnos. to participate to üd, so irreparable loss, beg your assistance to the burial of the body that will take effect today, leaving the coffin of the Auxilio Mutuo for the cemetery of Rio Piedras at 10:30 in the morning, and anticipating them* by so Christian favor the testimony of their gratitude.