ELMUNDO
Q/Pages 3 Ctvs. Z 1 ■ Semester - - - - 5.00 W V One Year - $9.50
Q/tPages 3 Ctvs. ,11 Office: "Puerto Rico Uastrado Bldg." -Tel. 1222
MORNING
THE MORNING
Year IX.
San Juan. Puerto Rico.
"ubliahed and distributed nadar permit No. 801) autorizad bj tne Act. of October 6, 1917, on file at the Post Office at dan Joan, Porto Rieo. By order of the President. K. 8. Bardeson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 81, 1919 at the Post Office at San Joan, Parto Rito. (United States of America) under the Act of march 8. 187."
Saturday, August 6, 1927
i Number 2816
NATIONAL AUTHORITIES THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
DIRECT THEIR ATTENTION TO 'BOOTLEGGING IN PUERTO RICO LIQUOR.
They declare that this is one of the most important problems they face in enforcing the Volstead Act.
[From the "Washington Star", July 29th edition, we translate the following information: "The attention of the federal authorities charged with enforcing the Volstead Act has been somewhat diverted in recent days from the prosecution of the liquor manufacturers to the problem arising in the waters of the Caribbean where a considerable number of ships and sailing vessels ply the seas carrying cargoes of beverages, destined for the most part for the American possessions of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. "The importance given to this question, which up to now had been considered as secondary by the authorities, arose from a dispatch received in Washington from the prohibitionist directors of Puerto Rico in which it was reported that two crew members of the Dutch sailing ship "Elena" had been killed in a shooting scuffle with federal prohibition agents stationed on that island. "The "Johanna", sister ship of the "Elena", was captured and is being held in San Juan, having been caught with a large cargo of liquor. Both the "Johanna" and the "Elena" operate in the vicinity of the Dutch Antilles, reputed to be smugglers' nests from which liquor is smuggled into the American possessions. "The Director of Prohibition in Puerto Rico, Mr. Frank Buck ley, was recently in Wash ington conferring with Commissioner Doran, even though he did not go into much detail as to the smuggling practices. "Up to the present the Federal Government had been vigilant in watching only shipments MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT OF ARROYO, P. R. M MAYOR'S OFFICE M Auction Announcement M July 39, 1927. Proposals in sealed bids for the award by public auction of the following works will be admitted at this office until two o'clock P. M. on August 15, 1927, when they will be publicly opened: 1. Construction of a defense wall around the town against the floods of the Yaurel River, Arroyo, P. R., whose approved budget amounts to the sum of $2,957.80. 2. 2. Construction of a defense wall in the Cuatro Calles neighborhood against flooding from the Yaurel River, Arroyo, P.R., whose approved budget amounts to $697.19. All the necessary information will be provided at this office where the documents to be used in the bidding process are available, and bidders may pick up the plans and bidding documents to be submitted by means of a $10.00 deposit in cash or certified check, which will be reimbursed upon the return of said documents within 20 days after the auction has been held. The Administration reserves the right to reject any or all proposals and to award the contract under considerations other than price alone. Dr. Luis M. GRAULAU, Mayor. /Announcement) LAST HOUR Great bargain sale of the latest hats and suits from $1.95 and up. Take advantage of this opportunity. From July 30 to August 10. Visit LA FANTASIA, Alien 32.
from Europe and Cana dá. Liquors destined for the Dutch West Indies had not been the subject of much attention, since their great majority is consumed in those islands. "However, Secretary Lowl man, of the Prohibition Service, after stating that the prohibition situation in Puerto Rico was improving markedly, stated that the problem of liquor smuggling in that island was one of the most important with which the Federal authorities were at present confronted." NOTE:- Regarding the case of the schooner "Johana", we already reported yesterday that its crew has been exonerated of all responsibility, since the United States Commissioner in Puerto Rico understands that the ship was seized outside the territorial limits determined by the treaty signed between the United States and Holland as a result of the Volstead Act having been put into effect. AZUCAL MERCAD ODE M Cablegram received from Porto Rico International Corp. 10:10 A. M. August 5, 1927. M. August 5, 1927. Market unchanged. Stock market opened. Sept. 2.67 (4.45) Die. 2.78 (4.56) Jan. 2.76 (4.54) March 2.73 (4.51) May 2.80 (4.58) July 2.88 4.66). 10:40 A. M. Firm market. Cuba offers for August shipment at 2% (4.52) Refiner buyers offer 2 11116 (4.46). 3:10 P. M. Market steady. Sold 25,000 sacks Cuba for first half August shipment at 2% (4.52) to Revere Sugar Ref. Co. Philippines and Puerto Rico bids to arrive second half August at 2-23'32 (449) Cuba bids at 2% (4.52). Stock closed. Sept. 2.67 (4.45) Die. 2.79 (4.57) Jan. 2.78 (4.56) March 2.74 (4.52) May 2.81 (4.59) July 2.90 (4.68).
ANNUAL SUMMER SALE VERY CHEAP FABRICS Take advantage of TODAY'S PRICES - BIG BAZAAR LA HORMIGA DE ORO Next to the Municipality, SAN JUAN. We are open on Saturdays until nine o'clock at night.
GOVERNMENT OF PUERTO RICO DE PART AMENTO DE INSTRUCTION, NEGOCIADO DE ESTUDIOS LIBRES The Negociado de Estudios Libres of the Department of Instruction announces examinations in Elementary Algebra, Plane Geometry, Physics and Chemistry to take effect August 20 in San Juan. Registration for these exams will close on August 15. Pedro GIL, Director.
HE WILL NO LONGER INTERVENE IN THE MATTER OF THE HIPPODROMES WHICH IS BEING JUDICIALLY SETTLED.
M- We have been informed by the Attorney General in terino, Ledo. López Acosta -M- Yesterday in the corridors of the District Court of San Juan, the fact that Ledo. Janer, Legal Officer of the Department of Justice, left the courtroom as soon as Lcdb. Miguel Guerra Mondragón began to act as counsel of record for the "Comisión Hípica Insular", in the preliminary injunction case filed against this organization by the "Porto Rico Racing Corporation". Ledo. Janer, as our readers know, in representation of the Department of Justice, assumed the defense of the "Comisión Hípica", together with Ledo. José Martínez Dávila, counsel for the defendant. The day before yesterday, the said legal officer of the Department of Justice requested the admission of Ledo. Miguel Guerra Mondragon as counsel of record for the "Comisión Hípica Insular", and once his petition was accepted by the Court, Ledo. Janer left the courtroom during the morning session, and did not attend the afternoon session either.
In view of this fact, we visited yesterday in his office the Acting Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Ledo. J. A. López Acosta, whom we questioned as to whether the Department of Justice had ordered Mr. Janer to withdraw from the Court. -On this matter," replied Ledo. Lopez Acosta-, "I do not want to say a word, I will not comment of any kind." -One thing we want to know," we insisted, "will Ledo. Janer when the case of "preliminary injunction" against the "Equestrian Commission" continues to be heard, that is, it presentsContinued page 6-col. 3
"THE ALLIANCE WILL NOT EXPEL ANYONE FROM ITS ROWS" M "If any member shows signs of hostility towards the Alliance, he will have conquered his own expulsion": Tous Soto M Yesterday we greeted Mr. José Tous Soto, President of the House of Representatives, in the office of the Executive Secretary of Pucr,to Rico. He was talking with Senator Juan Bautista Soto, aside from the various political issues that constitute the current topics of the day. The matter of the "elimination of Article 73 of the Regulations of the "Alianza Portorriqueña", which specifies "those who are considered outside the "Alianza", came up in the conversation. Ledo. Tous Soto expressed himself in similar terms: "It is impossible to eliminate this article from the Regulations of the alliance. Even if it were not expressly consigned in the Regulations, it would implicitly subsist, as it must subsist in all political party regulations. The "Alianza" shall not expel anyone from its ranks. If any of its members shows signs of hostility towards it, such members will have earned their own expulsion. Should such hostile members figure in any candidacy, the "Alliance" will naturally raise its objections, but will give them an opportunity to defend themselves." Speaking Ledo. Tous Soto on the Ledo document. Ernesto Ramos Antonini, calling aliancistas and members of the "Farmers' Association" to harmony, made the following ma-
nifestaciones: -"I have already said on other occasions that everything that happens between the Board of Directors and the Board of Directors of the Farmers' Association is a lack of understanding. If we, the agricultural directors and the members of the Board of Directors, would meet around a deliberation table to discuss the problems that affect the farmers, it would be very easy to agree on a constructive program, to reach an understanding beneficial to the country, leaving aside all party spirit, forgetting personalities. I have said this several times and I will always repeat it."
MAGNIFICENT OPPORTUNITY Hotel Bélgica, one of the best on the island, is for sale for $6,000. will inform its owner JESUS VAZQUEZ Villa No. 3, Ponce.
TODD, TOUS SOTO AND JUAN B. TOUS SOTO AND JUAN B. SOTO CONFERRED WITH THE GOVERNOR YESTERDAY
M They denied that the interview was of a political nature M The Herald wants to know how Todd feels about the Coolidge decision M Jose Tous Soto, Roberto H. Todd and Juan Bautista Soto conferred extensively with Governor Towner yesterday. When these gentlemen were questioned as to the reasons for the interview, they told us that they wished to deny any political character to the interview. They said, however, that they would discuss with the Chief Executive certain matters over which he has direct responsibility. Mr. Todd told Messrs. Bautista Soto and Tous Soto that he had received a cablegram from the "Herald,'' of New York, asking his opinion of the statement authorized by President Coolidge announcing that he would not run for another term, and further asking him if in his opinion a popular demand would change President Coolidge's mind. Mr. Todd further stated that he had replied to the "Herald" that he considered it premature to give a categorical opinion on the matter at this time.
Stamped Etaminas Latest novelty for ladies' suits" we have just received a large assortment in beautiful colors , very fashionable patterns Also Silks, Crepes, Chiffons, etc. New colors, all very nice - Popular Prices - We liquidate at $1.00 yard Many Silks worth $2.50 - $3.00 and $3.50, there are many colors with the most sujective combinations - see them. GONZALEZ PADIN CO., INC. Silks and Fabrics Department. '
HATO-REY SANATORIUM AND NEUROLOGICAL CLINIC For hospitalization and treatment of NERVOUS and MENTAL diseases. Modernly equipped. Moderate rate. Phones 47 and 68 Stop 29-112, Hato Rey.
I SELL For absenting me 3 wooden houses of 2 floors, well located, suitable for housing and business, and a reputable establishment of footwear and merchandise in the best place in Bayamon, in which meanwhile all stocks will be made at cost price. Will report: L. A. LLANEZA B x 173, Bayamon, P. R.
RENT The third floor of the house Alien No. 37. Will report R. Fabian A Co.
THE BEST ALCOHOLIC - - FOR 25 CTVS. - - "Tropical Dew."
Ortiz Arzeno will manage in Sto. Domingo the question of the emigra- ■! tion of Puerto Ricans.
--M Before embarking for his country, he held a conference with the Chief of the "Negociado del Trabajo" (Labor Bureau), 1. 1 M The day before yesterday, before boarding the first ship for Santo Domingo, Mr. Rafael Ortiz Arzeno, Consul General of the Dominican Republic in Puerto Rico, and Mr. Carmelo Hoj noré, Chief of the Labor Bureau of the Department of Agriculture and Labor, conferred extensively. Mr. Ortiz Arzeno will confer with the Dominican Minister of Agriculture on matters relating to Puerto Rican emigrants who embark for Santo Domingo on their own account, with letters of recommendation from the Negociado del Tra . bajo.
Although no agreement has yet been reached regarding official emigration after the letters exchanged between Mr. Honoré and the Dominican Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Espaillat, there is a firm intention that such emigration will take place. The best evidence is that the voluntary emigration has already begun of those persons who, paying the expenses of their tickets, move to the neighboring Republic after having received letters of recommendation from the Labor Bureau.
A splendid premises is rented for almaden, in Tetuan 14, opposite the Royal Bank; or the building is sold. Will inform: V. Alonso, Tetuán 35, Tel. 217, San Juan.
AVIATOR ZIMMERMAN PROPOSES THE FORMATION OF A COMMITTEE TO PROMOTE AVIATION IN PUERTO RICO.
Aviator Charles R. Zimmerman, now residing in Puerto Rico, has addressed to Governor Towner the following letter: Hon. Horace M. Towner, Governor of Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico. Sir: The geographical situation of Puerto Rico is so providential that the island is in a position to benefit greatly from the unusual development which aviation has acquired in recent months. Commercially, Puerto Rico needs to make use of fast air transportation methods to eliminate loss of time between markets. This would boost trade development and reduce unemployment on the island. A country whose life depends only on its agriculture has few opportunities for progress. A country like Puerto Rico, with an excess of arms, an excellent climate, a lush and beautiful natural environment, and an essential mission to bring the two Americas closer together, which does not take advantage of all these factors, and which is laying all its potential pros and cons at the door of the U.S. economy, has little opportunity for progress.
TONIGHT THE HOMAGE TO DON SAN BAGO NEGRONI WILL TAKE PLACE M A clarification from the President of the "Asociación de Maestros" M The President of the "Asociación de Maestros de Puerto Rico", Mr. Gerardo Sellés, in inviting us to the ceremonies to be held tonight at the University of Puerto Rico" in honor of Don Santiago Negroni, lets us know that invitations have hardly been circulated for the aforementioned homage, since they have the perfect right to join this event, which will take place at the University of Puerto Rico. all the teachers of the country, and those persons who have been characterized by their love for the school and for their defense of the cause of education, have the perfect right to join in this demonstration to Mr. Negroni. For these reasons, Mr. Sellés expects that a great number of people will attend the University tonight, eager to pay a tribute of affection and respect to Mr. Santiago Negroni.
A1 Commerce of the Island We wish to have a customer in every town to sell our accredited footwear "OVERWAY", directly from the factory. Cuétara Hermanos San Juan, P. R.
COMPAGNIE GENERALE TRASATLANTIQUE French Steamship "Virginie" - It is expected in this port coming from Havre and Bordeaux on the 13th of the present, and will continue its voyage to Puerto Plata, Cabo Haitiano, Puerto Príncipe and Santiago de Cuba. Admits cargo for the above mentioned ports in the West Indies. For further information, please contact BEHN BROTHERS INC. 1 San Juan, Tel. 255. < Tanca - Tetcán.
WE HAVE THE COMPLETE COLLECTION OF DANCES Played by the famous orchestra of - Carmelo Día? - We give away an album for every dozen 1 of records you buy from us. COME RUNNING TO EL JARDIN DEL ARTE SAN FRANCISCO 35.
ONE YEAR COMMERCIAL COURSE We will start the new Course on August 29. We teach 12 subjects. We admit eighth grade graduates only. Courses at $6, $9, $10, and $15 per month. Excellent accommodations. Ask for prospectus. . COLEGIO PERCY Telephone 463 Calle Isabel 12 - Apartado 241 - PONCE, P. R.
The world is preparing for a new era in the cultivation of sugar cane, tobacco, coffee and citrus fruits alone, and is breaking the fundamental principles of progress by limiting its capital inventions to these four products. The whole world is preparing for the vast possibilities opened up by air transport. Small towns all over the northern U.S. territory are busy setting up landing fields. New houses are being erected and invested in new
NEW HOUSES at Easy Installments . Urbanization LAS PALMAS Borinquen Avenue and Seboruco Road. Constant bus service, 20 minutes from San Juan. Embreadas Streets. 81 Built Houses. Apartado 90b, Santurce. Telephone 1901, Santurce.
A splendid local for rent for any kind of business. Alien 83. For information: PEREZ BROTHERS Phones 1720 and 1730 Sant, MERCHANDISE OF NOTABLE QUALITY - WALLETS - for very pretty ladies at 89c. - SOMBRILLAS - Superior class at $1.99 Today for balance we have special prices. BIG BAZAAR LA HORMIGA DE ORO Next to the Municipio, SAN JUAN. We are open on Saturdays until 9:00 p.m.
Wanted Small furnished house, Santurce Married couple English. Send particulars P. O. Box 1550, San Juan, P. R.