ELAWNDO
Pages 3 Ctvs. X'ZA Semester - - - - 5.00 * One Afio - - *8-50 . , , ■■ ■ >■
QJ Pages 3 Ctvs. f fcL Office; "Puerto Rico Bus W Btrado Bldg." -TeL 1222
MORNING
THE MORNING.
Year IX. I
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
"ublisíied "nd di "tribu under permit No. 801) "utortiad by tn" Aet. of October 6, 1917, on file at the Poet Office M ¿an Jean. Porto Br order of the President. 4. 8- Burdeson, Postmaster General. Entered m eecond elase mattaf, febmarr 81 1919 at the Post Office at San Juan. P.irto Brio (United Bra ten of America) nr.der the Aet of sarrh S. 1871.
Saturday, December 31, 1927.
Number 2373.
"IN EXERCISING THIS END-OF-YEAR ¿LEJ1EKCIA WE MUST DO SO ON THE BASIS OF THE GREATEST EQUALITY" .
. i. . oQoNN us the Governor says alluding to the prisoners he will pardon from one moment to another.
Af- 1 A i ■ ■ ■ I Yesterday morning we visited Governor Towner in his office at Fortaleza.* Our visit was in connection with the -recommendations which have been made by the Department of Justice to the Chief Executive concerning the prisoners who are to be released on New Year's Day. The Governor informed us that he had not yet selected from the list of inmates recommended to him those to be released, but that he would proceed to act on that recommendation at any moment. "It happens," he added, "that there are inmates whose means allow them to obtain lawyers to arrange for their pardon, and others of equal merit who lack this advantage. I sincerely believe, however, that in exercising this end-of-age clemency we must do so on the basis of the greatest equality and by adhering solely to the intrinsic merits of each of the inmates whose release is recommended." A DOG-POLICE He has lost an ash-colored anus. He goes by the name of Rin Tin Tin. Whoever hands him over to his owner will be free of charge. A. M. QUINTERO. Figueroa 7. - Phone 1555 Santurce. ~ te Zimmermann Store 50 Allen St. Received today. Elegant Ball Gowns.
"THE BING HAM BILL HUMILIATES AND DEPRIMES US" M "Congress cannot establish a fatal precedent that overrides the powers of the courts": Barceló We have been talking lately with the President of the Senate and leader of the "Alianza Portorriqueña", Don Antonio R. Barceló. on the sidelines of the bills pre , seated in the U.S. Congress on Puerto Rico. -Our Resident Commissioner, Mr. Córdova Dávila," Mr. Barceló begins, "is of the opinion that the Bingham projects related to Puerto Rico, which are being considered by the U.S. Congress, should be considered by the U.S. Congress, and that they should be considered by the U.S. Congress in the future.
\L "vW I \ - / I I I ) i i ifz \ h £ / 1 i fW // / I \ Ác-"OM .K/// - I know the number you want, sir. It is 1928 I LA PORTO RICO TELEPHONE CO. I pie has commissioned to wish you all a rjelix i full of success, health and happiness, hoping that the New Year will bring us still closer to the predilection and patronage of the Public and to us many new h opportunity**® to serve you. O i
Suits, Shirts, Shoes, Hats. Phenomenal assortment at very low prices. Don't be fooled. Look for these houses. "EL ENW" Brau 36 "U MT Cruz 12
F. CARRERA sHNQ
WHOLESALE Ladies' suits and hats from major factories in New York. We receive the latest fashion styles weekly. Factory prices. ARROYO BROTHERS fetuán 14, San Juan, P. R.
THE TRUCK "MACK" is the best and is the cheapest. We can try it. VILLAMIL. SAN JUAN
LAS MONJAS" Racetrack - "Governor" Cup One Mile " DE ENERO " Post Time-Carnation- Manhattan-Altagracia |
"Teachers will seek a 20 percent pay raise from the Legislature.
And also that their annual salaries be paid to them in twelfths-if agreed upon by the Ponce Assembly- A special committee will draft a bill creating the Teachers' Bank.
(From our Editor in Ponce, Mr. Torres Córdova). At two o'clock Wednesday afternoon the session was resumed. Professor Rafael W. Ramírez, of the University of Puerto Rico, read an interesting paper which we will publish in its entirety. When Mr. Ramirez had finished, the assembly resolved to declare a recess until the following day (Thursday) *at nine o'clock in the morning, thus giving the various committees an opportunity to finish their respective work THURSDAY MORNING SESSION The Pension Committee rendered the following report, which received the approval of the Board of Directors.
The Pension Committee, which receives the approval of the assembly: REPORT OF THE PENSION COMMITTEE ■ ' "The Pension Committee, which I have the honor after a careful study of the projects submitted for its consideration and after hearing from persons qualified in the matter, agrees by a unanimous vote: "1.-To recommend unfavorably the project presented by the Aguadilla delegation, considering it contrary to the spirit of a pension law, and for not knowing with certainty to what extent the teachers already pensioned ■ ' "2.
2. To recommend unfavorably the project presented by the delegation of Naguabó tending to believe that the suggested measure is unstable since it is based on public charity, which we know for certain is a virtue that rarely flourishes. "S. -That the Teachers' Assembly empower the Board of Directors to appoint a Standing Committee and enlist the services of qualified persons to advise this Committee, which in the interval between the close of this Assembly and the opening of the next Legislative Assembly, shall prepare a pension bill formulated on a scientific basis. "4.-To suggest to the Assembly to invite Mr. Pedro A. Cebollero, here present, to expound some of the principles on which modern pension laws are based." Francisco QMS, President M It is also approved the following- ■ 'Continued on p. 11, Col. 4).
4. . . - CV One car O Q . AbWQPAMCttO. ttt f These days moderkoó* Mad Moscas? hot The CLOSED TlCHEM W VEnitLAOÓn "mtTA. PutRTAS with LOCKS, Xrw-wLr Mi estam upholstered J COHO UOS FURNITURE DB I Tücasa. Examine
"Why does Puerto Rico not make a free passage for women with the exercise of the suffrage?"
''I recommend to this Assembly that it pronounce itself in favor of women's suffrage and put on record a categorical statement to that effect."-Said Don Gerardo Sellés Solá at the annual assembly of the magisterium.
We continue publishing today the extensive annual report of the President of the "Asociación de Maestros de Puerto Rico", Mr. Gerardo Sellés Solá":- z. "Private schools. Private schools: Government statistics reveal that nearly 10,000 students are enrolled in private schools in Puerto Rico. There is no doubt that most of these schools operate with plans that have merited official approval, their certifications being accepted for promotion in the public schools and in U.S. colleges.
Many of these schools strive to provide instruction that satisfies the parents and that receives the applause of the institutions in "which their students enroll later, use modern materials, have qualified teaching staffs and even in many cases advances that the public school is not allowed to put into practice. Some expand their activities by providing commercial or industrial instruction and even secondary education, producing a considerable relief to the public treasury, since the government does not have to pay a cent for the instruction of its students.
penny for the instruction of eeo" children and at the same time by not enrolling them in the schools so farillo the opportunity to educate as many others with public money. Calculating that each pupil costs the people of Puerto Rico approximately $¿5.00 annually, we must agree that we enjoy an economy of $250,000 with the operation of the private schools in Puerto Rico. Why not stimulate these initiatives? Why not subsidize these schools at a certain amount per pupil? If this were to be done, we would have to continue on page 22, coin. 2
1928 FLORAL PARK - -- ----- r - Wishes you a Happy and Prosperous New Year
1027 1028 t
Wish you a prosperous and happy New Year Jose Brandi & Bro. * Ponce, P. R. * .: v. .
Until 9 p.m. On Saturday, December 31 and Thursday, January 5, our establishment will remain open until 9 p.m. LOS MUCHACHOS Sucesores de A. Mayol & Co. SAN JUAN, P. R. FOR SALE Avenida de Diego No. 2, concrete house, new, four apartments. Rent $180. Telephone 465 blue, Santurce. E, Fernández Campos, Santurce.
PERFUMER/ A Of the" best" brand" . FOR CHRISTMAS GIFTS. BLANCO Pharmacy. See* new Exhibition.
PUMPS AND MOTORS We offer in good condition. See their description in the ''Classifieds''. PORTO RICAN LEAF TOBACCO COMPANY Caguas Branch.
ISABEL PARSI FLORIST For any work in natural flowers call Phone 120, Hato Rey.
FOR SALE A new box and box for 2 ton truck. For information call me phone 124 Mueblería Valldejuli, or write Box 536 Guayama.
DR. MARIO JULIA _ Back from his study trip, in his specialty of r mental illnesses and nervous system, is pleased to participate to his clientele <Júe again is at your s CLINICA NEUROLOGICA ' Parada 29-l|2 H "* 0