the fipsey-Tunney meñe
QA?Éíiü as a ctvs. a I Se mestre - 6.00 A Year 19-50 r:i
DAILY
LA MAÑA!
San Juan, Puerto Ric
a "¿" ai,^ ute< n Bnd í. 1801) .Utorisrt by U1. Aeu ot October -, "M. <m file M P ,??? 0 íct> , 1 . Br t,' ,HeT A, 0 t ! thíecident, A. 8. Bardo on, Poctatoctor General. Entered -" . rebraary 21. 191" at the Po.t Offiea iL d Pwto r¡". (United State" of America) under fi,}
"THE HrUBLICAN PUROIST TERRITORIAL COME DISPOSED 1MANTEM U DKPL1NA." , reads the LcdlMartínez hdal alluded Ao the political calo dmyamón - ' '*Ín this same ■t'n publicaxnofc the agreement akdo by the Supreme Copsejo V Coalición ReÉútílico-'ialistaWfcctc to the ' sittk.cién political pAj-iente in Baa amóp. This orgftt" resolved qurf that emK, commission nmJ-ijada 'al efectofcri session to which we refer gn case of Bayamón, will be oblig fcr for the .coalicionistas of the i fcciada'mu niHpalirlad. . departimos c®||?rcs='den Partido# Reptile;" P iro, AcooTk. Martinez 'N®ihl mar- ■ ¿"en of 'the pftic situation of Ba'JkarÁén and. the acuerdóle!?onsejo /'Supremo 1 * -¿¿If some part'Bo icatara the of the commissionisiAd ignada papa -study the I trust-, in ter¿Q5gamos- acijldasumirán the directors of o| artidos Puro and hlasta' "Of what ¿what will do thewMstas',' -nos restmnaió the licemao Mar -I cannot® ablar; but ae what will make jfeección of the Pártído RepublicanW'tro. I can afflpnate that the T?rritoríal Até ; *hsts willing ■ narif- , ner the "scirdina and to etr with /teda en3|gía. in accordance with the faculties , which I confito <1 new Regulation in case® indiscipline yí desacato." 1 I .¿&ENDC BmHoMp e J CohdaEoiron all modern jgáort i |. 1,115 meterfloar I Reports G. Vazquez, 4x60 1 .a-?"; .....I i- --i - SEED OF CEBALAS J J JDe Canary Islands of 1 s di "anea, ' yellow-finished d recil r,l $2.50 pound taken at r uestre aáacén. Ctdeáe nor C. O. D 1 - j|EWEZ MARI INE7Í &vO. r 'to®faiíta Luisa 4 and 6, lama '- San Juan P. R. I 'j , - I -4 4ISABEL PAlsT i FLORll TA B For any ti abajdBn f 4 natural res lia ne at I Phone 120, CARTER TcLeC Young clerk, in New York ciu d of: ea pe iutar with a letter carrier or the < in Puerto Rico. Pira ir rrnes go to L. ChSTlLLl, Betabees 33, Mayigüez.; in püfrtos ccjteil on carrjbra Potree, de Leon rentrdo 'all year. -'jUrrá rent w2o -Other " - |jOO ÍOtca " |$25 Uvegdo one of them Aér1 mdle today. Rice L 4feLeon Nc. 250, 'yc--¡.'''"1584 black, Sarljce" JftDiaz i
i McIntyre apresul RARA LA VEÑTA DE > THE EM- ! BONDS ! prestito of two , MILLION dola RES I M So promises in cablegram to don Antotonio R. Barceló M
$1,200,000 COLLECTED BY THE TREASURY INSULA? DURING THE YEAR ENDED YEAR M "The situation of the Treasury is brilliant, says Gallardo M The Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Don Juan G. Gallardo, questioned by one of our editors regarding the situation of the Island Treasury at the close of the September operations yesterday, has dictated to us the official note:
The President of the Economic Omission of the Legislature, Don Antonio R. Barcelo, received yesterday the cablegram which we insert below from the head of the "Insular Affairs Bureau," General Frank McIntyre, cablegram which refers to the sale of the bonds,
"Collections during Septemberjs have amounted to the sum of $1,200,000.00. 1 "The closing balance of the Island Treasury, after expenses have been met, will reach $500,000.00. "The Treasury is in full swing, confident that it will be able to beat this year's record for this department in terms of total collections and amount paid to the float debt. "The Test's situation, judging by the outlook, is very bright".
of the borrowing of $2,000,000:- Barceló, San Juan. Referring to the cablegram sent by your Office on the 28th day of the present month, I am able to inform you that I shall expedite the sale of the bonds by all possible means. I regret the delay which we were unable to avoid". (S.D.) MCINTYRE.
Teato Municipal GRAN COMÑIA DRAMATICA ARGENTINA :: CAMLA QUIROGA :: ULTIM-S FUNCTIONS TODAY, SATURDAY, OCTOBER 2ND. OF OCTOBER DOSRANDES PERFORMANCES AT 4;P. M. VESPERTINA FAMILIAR. iLOlMIRASOLES } g ÜjneTA $2.00 "
directeda: L- / Amento - ijM-t r r .1 P. O. B< 1360 . surtld ° so complete at ....-1-- JQtecas public and priva- - fV| ra use of ' as schools and 7 ; lomo el; josE Otero LOS TOLERES ME?" an JUAN Mecáni a - Talabará® Cristal! >-WASHING - k O ; PRICES OF SITU AC j Teléfoní 85 - Hato Y VAPOR
i WOOD I C LIDAD PRECIA | £ íQÚIAGA hc
■ js" O L I M M M sde ,/s " 112 Ha merit -Bst barca # jo JO! PREClig ?OJO¿ Lunettes 4 miramar
At 8:3" GRAND GOD REPRESENT' l j jl ' i ía¿ana Sunday 2. > Jo otr p " >1 nyeresantes shows jack A M. o'clock. jFor the last time! J ■0 maximum! LA MA DE LAS CAMEUA|fe e X Night a ÉcjO F, M. JGreat premiere of MI P.ÍMA ESTA . - - . de . were recubier AV n A '■ m a jOlanco and granW íl I ly|Ufllg> J 1 had been ■DU Hfjjjl y/ I A large mili - ■Utores "Kleig" inunLa and bie nsonocída firm quadrilateral. INC. (Sajf|&i)lJiasio acquired 103 ushers, Bill General aric f New YcJ^ ía to his troop of 2 300 has been cblidadj in continuous movita ultímala forr ar a comí tto, and spectators were Internatia General Electric Idos to their-seats with all razando ¡nfiatly the new t!!!. George Getz and Tex Rickard nocida pry an a( i u L and acullá, faciliINTERNTERNÍONAL GENERAL 0 task of i accommodating '" 3F lei "New York American") La >da al lethal! y o z ?° r Louella O. PARSONS) the antigilocal d" A. Ribo* dor Bratb, San Juan. A (( HICAGO, Sept. 23.We dye the existfriaien elle Ta y lor " Jack's wife full effects elécfeíbid. says "u" the Duckling. Darere atenohn a re re nto <> ue had of <í ue her husband equipment yfectos iléctrio'® ,nfaría the fight coa V.CIO do i and fuer* tico. Ofremos a le >I said that Jack would defeat well girded Soviet nn ne Tunney and in my concept lo nlerfa de H cualquie "" , , , . Tas the F~
I sounded the duel between ¡ Miñoz and Balbás.
REMIGIO has decided that each of the days of his life, those days that donlngel Rivero so amusingly relates to us, should exceed the previous one in interest. That is why the very popular REMIGIO has more and more readers and that is why it is so interesting the day that will appear tomorrow in the usual place of our Sunday edition of Jfcn. 1 Jp an REMIGIO, w in historical matters is always me documented, will reopen tomorrow to its thousands of readers cjgpstante were the antecedents and which ¡os preparations that Demel duel had inn-e Luis Muñoz Rivera and Vicente golpe pó. No one better than he to narrate this event from an eyewitness and ¡active witness, and of which he will reveal data "r. ra completely ¡Inorados. JF olpe with the [ T ' this instead "" ' " ■ J as it happens to me.
" ' "■ jJRro with Greb, I . Jo more comfortable let IT WOULD BE ESTABLISHED IN S A N X -> p""J would have been for those gol "HIG1E1 ACADEMY $£e received I am sure JK knocked out Dempsey in - - M uflBa in spite of his jaw of.
The young ladies who there i nnados to care for the¿T As1 A 'JbsiOn yesterday morning cejKK.p<¿' ¡ in the office of the Directorjgsa r . The "School's" opinion of the "School" of this city before the meeting eW the means for the Àflration on one of the colar ' where in his life aspiring nuriHfestar of a difficult task In the actualilud of the m proud of him that Of the reurflfestar of a difficult task In the actualilud of the m proud .Of him that Of the reurflF the project reurflF hundreds and hundreds Jjmas and letters urging to protest of the deci "referee", but the exII with a smile said: || defeated resigned is so || altante in the pugilíssimo sport a good triumphant".
From the beginning of the fight I tried to "knock him out" and I may have overdone it too much in my efforts. He missed from time to time blows that I aimed at him with my right, which very rarely missed the target." Someone asked Túnney, "Don't you think you should have boxed a little more in your practice?" "Yes," was the reply, "I am a good judge of my method of training. I won the fight and that's Jo enough to answer all the questions. However, the two blows I took to my eye have made it impossible for me to train any better in sharpshooting. IRATE WITH DEMPSEY. Tunney listened to the comments made about the decision of the "referee" and had not even a sign that some blow received in the ■fight. The champion was accustomed to "course no later than nine or ten o'clock at night. He seemed estai. cheerful but a little disappointed that he had not succeeded in "knocking out" the formidable and dangerous Dempsey. He went on to chat with us, "I've always tried to put in a good word for Jack but I can't venture to say that I would gladly embrace him right now. He was too aggressive with me, especially when I was trying to get up in the seventh round. However, I'm not going to make any "foul" accusations now. I have beaten him and I am confident that at this very moment, despite many saying otherwise, I dare to face him in the ring and beat him again. It seems to me that I have proven that I am an aggressive boxer and not a "conservative" one. Tunney, in our opinion, is a fighter who is very meticulous about his regimen, but he boxed too little while he was in preparation to fight Dempsey. He never boxed more than six consecutive "rounds" when he was practicing. This, the great Jeffries said, moments before the bout took place, was not enough practice. Besides, a boxer like Tunney should have had better practice partners. Chuck Wiggins was a suitable 'chata' for the champion but he was fired because he has the flaw of getting too close and hitting the top weight kings in the eyes. We can neither
and (From the "New York American") (By Gene FOWLER) CHICAGO, Sept. 23.-A second fight is now being waged in this city among the thousands of outsider firemen, experts, victors and vanquished who still remain here after the Tunney-Dempsey bout and who vociferate, shout, argue and talk on the same subject. Was the count too long? This is one of the talking points that gets everyone riled up. By the looks of it all deciding bouts between top weight champions have to have talking points. DEMPSEY'S RECKLESSNESS. There are some who say that the decision was not justified as Tunney remained down on the resin mat covering the ring floor for fourteen to fifteen seconds. Others say that Dempsey, a sensational but not very cautious boxer, stopped going to his corner in the ring, and for this reason disqualified any time that had been counted before he had walked away from the fallen champion. Tunney himself, in an interview with this correspondent, said that he would have been able to get up after the two-two gundos had been "ti-
even imagine Corbertt, Jeffries, or any of the great old boxers, boxing fewer "rounds" than are included in the decisive bout; on the contrary, they always boxed in their practice many more "rounds" than are prescribed in their next bout. It may be that Tunney's efforts to land the coup de grace on the iron jaw of his contender were exaggerated, but we must remember that it is very dangerous to miss any of the punches aimed at Dempsey. Many people have failed to notice that Dempsey, whom everyone admires as an aggressive, intelligent and formidable opponent, is at the same time a dangerous adversary, for when his opponent throws a right and misses, he immediately counters with a left jab to the face or torso. Dempsey always has a formidable fist. The legs, and it seems to me that these are what made him lose this bout, may be weak, but the fist and the courage remain the same throughout the fight. IT COULD BE THAT THEY'LL FIGHT AGAIN. About his plans, Tunney told us: "I'm going to Cleveland to spend a few days with my friend Dan R. Lanna. Then I'm going to New York; don't think I'm planning a trip around the world." Bin R. Hanna is the grandson of the pharinoid Jí#rk Hanna. It seems to me, based on what Tex Rickard said a few days ago, that this will not be the last meeting between Tunney and Dempsey. Even though Tunney has clinched the championship you have to remember that he has not "knocked out" Dempsey. This is the second time Jack has faced the smiling Tunney in a ten "round" show. Dempsey, the favorite of so many fans, is closer to Tex Rickard's sporting heart and I would like my prediction that Tex Rickard will set up another longer bout between them, probably in England, to prove true. English correspondents who attended the bout, although they did not speak with certainty, acknowledge that England would be very pleased to see a bout between the two famous American sportiest boxers take place in that country. Surely there will be another elimination bout at Madison Square Garden. In this elimination tournament Rickard will probably pit Paulino Uzcudun against Jack Sharkey, but Dempsey will undoubtedly make his appearance as a contender as well. It is very likely that a twenty round bout between him and Tunney will take place next year in the city of London. When asked if he felt that Dempsey could have held out any longer in his last bout, he said, "I'm not sure that he would have been able to hold out any longer in his last bout.
J- "Knock-Out" unless it was a misty round," says Damon Runyon!
Tunney told us: "I think he could have taken another round, but he would surely have lost in twelve rounds of fighting..." (From the "New York American"). M , (By Damon RUNYON.) - "For the first time in his entire professional boxing career, Gene Tuhney has been knocked down by a contender. In the seventh "round" of his bout with Jack Dempsey, we have seen him breathing heavily with his face pressed against the resinous surface of the "ring", while beside the fallen man stood the menacing figure of the "matador of Manassa", who awaited him with lousy intentions. In spite of everything, Tunney, the marine battler, stood up and fought desperately - until he achieved a victory. The decision awarding him the victory was signed by judges Peorge Lytton and Sheldon Clark, Chicago businessmen, and referee Dave Barry, a retired pugilist, at the end of the last of the ten desperate bouts to which the fight was limited. At the reading of this decision, the spirits of the 150,000 spectators were still agitated and boiling with the unforgettable emotions of the seventh round. It was in this memorable seventh round that Dempsey launched a veritable barrage of punches against the sailor, knocking him to the canvas, not from a single blow, but from many swiftly delivered. Tun ney fell heavily on his broad back, then sat up, disfigured with an expression of bewilderment; HE STANDS UP AT THE NINE SECOND COUNT: A man who has never been knocked down in any of his fights must naturally lose his poise and find himself at a loss as to what to do when this happens for the first time. It was probably instinct alone that made Gene Tunney drop to one knee, and stay there, while referee Dave Barry repeated the Timekeeper's count in Tunney's ear. Dempsey, for his part, remained with his dark body reddened by the blood running down his face, his eyes fiercely fixed on Tunney, and his body in flexion, like that of a tiger preparing to pounce on its prey. The count went to nine seconds. The crowd that filled Soldier's Field howled, with those wolfish howls that crowds utter when they sniff blood. Some people claim that it was not nine but twelve seconds. But this does not pertain to this commentary and will no doubt be discussed at length in many columns of the press. I can say however that those nine seconds seemed very long, even to the impartial.
TUNNEY BACKED UP:' Once he was on * his feet, Tunney began to run backwards, as only skilled boxers know how to run when they are in danger. Back, back, back, back, always chased by Dempsey, who was snarling with courage and throwing punches of all kinds, trying to catch him. Dempsey's supporters gri - tabah: " "Stand and fight." The crowd was all on its feet. The men, with their teeth clenched and their heads strained, were doing the scene of the drá - ma. The women, with their hands clasped and clasped. SAVED BY THE When the bell rang to end the seventh "round" Tunney was out of immediate danger. Thenceforth, with a calmness and methodism only com-! parable to that of a butcher who] cuts slices of ham, he began ■ to tear Demnsey to shreds with his! unerring left. As the' tenth "round" began, the fight in my judgment was tied with an ' ítnock-down" tipping the scales heavily in Dempsey's favor. t| But throughout the entire tenth and final "round" Tunney marti- ied and hammered Dempsey until the former champion's face shocked- ' rreaked blood from several open wounds over the eyes and la-j uncles. I am sure that over the next few months there will be a fierce controversy over the time keeper's count of the seconds Tunney was on the ground. It should be noted that between Dempsey's ability to reclaim his title and his failure to regain it, there was no more distance than that between the blink of an eye. He doubted however that this controversy would result in a new fight between the two contenders, since Tunney was able to prove again what he proved a year ago in Philadelphia: that is, that out of an unexpected punch he can dominate Dempsey in the sport of boxing. J Dempsey entered the "ring" alienly, wrapped in a huge flannel cape, with his initials embroidered in black letters on the back. His appearance was solemn. JACK SHARKEY ARRIVED Jack Sharkey, Boston's own man, came to the ring before the fight began and shook Dempsey's hand. Jim Jeffries, the former champion, also appeared in the vicinity wearing a cap that covered his large bald head. Tunney arrived dressed in a magnificent cape, the one given to him by the Marines the year pa- j - ¡■ado in Philadelphia. Tunney did not jfa . Continued on page 4 Ira. coL¡
BUNCO DE PONCE Ott.PONCE, P. R. jfefeUjjJ Capital and Reserves w lBb 1 $1,275,000.00 JlIHUm BRANCHES UTUADO-AIBONITO CABO ROJO SAVING is an e&orfflclo which, by virtue of growing needs, becomes more painful every day. But these needs, every day greater, oblige us to be more cautious if we are to watch over the future well-being of our own. In order to facilitate and reward more adequately the sacrifices involved in the hardships of saving, this Bank pays a remunerative rate of 6% - double that offered by other Banks - in our Investment Department. We will be happy to provide information upon request. ■ ■ ■-
S. Albanese & Son, Sucrs. Sheet Metal Works - Tinsmiths & Coppersmiths CONTRACTORS SHEETWORK We have just received a large quantity of ARMCO Plain Zinc in all thicknesses and sizes. We serve orders to all the Island. We sell and work quality. We are the only distributors of ARMCO" Plain Zinc 44 in San Juan. We provide quotations on specific specifications. Our solid reputation is based on 25 years of experience and of rendering the best service coupled with the highest quality. ALLEN 55 TEL. 1015 San Juan, P. R.