THE WORLD
1 Q Pages 3 Ctvs. I Semester - 5.00 JL V/ One Year - ~19.50
1 Q Pages 3 Gtvs. I Office: "Puerto Rico HusJL W trado Bldg." -TeL 1222
MORNING
THE MORNING
; Year IX.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
ubUzbed and dutribuUÍ andar permit No. 801) autorizad by tne Act. ut October O. 1917. ou tile at the Host Office at dan Juan, Porto Bico. By order of the President, A. 8. Bnrdezon, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, tebruary 21. 1919 at tbe Post Office at San Juan. Porto Bho. (United Sutes of America) under fte Act of march 8. 1871.
j SATURDAY, MAY 21, 1927.
NUMBER-2741
"WE MUST NOT ALLOW MALEALENT PEOPLE TO GO TO STEP ON OUR PRESTIGE IN ANY PART OF THE WORLD."
THE "SAFE HOUSEHOLD COMMISSION" TAKES OCCUPANCY OF ARECIBC M The corresponding deed was signed the day before yesterday, the day before yesterday the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Guillermo Esteves, President of the Commission, went to Arecibo, ex-officio of the "Safe Homes Commission", and Mr. Ar turo Ortlz Toro, legal officer of the Department of Justice, and before the latter, in his capacity as notary public, a deed was signed in which the Municipality of Arecibo, by re- . presentation of its Mayor, Mr. /-Ricardo Agrait Aldea, cedes to the "Comisión de Hogares Seguros" of Puerto Rico twenty-five lots that constitute the Barrio Obrero of that city. > On the same day, Mr. Eduardo Larroca and Mr. Jaime Anneiy, the first member and the second Secretary of the "Safe Homes Commission", made a trip to Arecibo, who took possession of the property and inspected the houses that had been built on said site. The property will be properly developed and provided with a good sewerage system. Other improvements will also be introduced in order to make the housing site as suitable as possible.
Upon REQUEST AND due to sold out seating will be repeated on Do- ; mingo 22, WINDMILLS AND CONTRABANDO Separate your seating. Telephone 1094.
SAYS DON JOSE L BERRIOS, ON COMEN TAR THE PROJECTED EMIGRATION TO SANTO DOMINGO M "The emigrants must go to dignify the country in the neighboring Antilles", adds M Don José L. Berrios, President of the Commission of the House of Representatives who returned the day before yesterday from his visit to the Exposition of Santiago de los Caballeros, Dominican Republic, made us yesterday the following statements related to the managements that took effect the Commission near the Dominican Government, to intensify currents of fraternity between both Antilles: - "Of the courtesy, of the delicacy of the manner in which we have been treated by our hosts in the sister island, the country already knows enough to know what to expect as regards this aspect of the noble Quisqueyan land. That is why I will limit myself to talk about the other purposes that led us there, such as creating an emigration current of Puerto Ricans to Santo Domingo. In my opinion, emigration should be encouraged on the basis of a mutual understanding between the two governments, so that the Safe Homes Commission, which is working so successfully here at present, can extend its activities to Santo Domingo. The most important thing is the quality of the Puerto Ricans who emigrate. Under no circumstances should we allow underhanded people to trample on our good name and prestige anywhere in the world. Emigrants must be people who love to work and love the land, people of good living, who are willing to work and to dignify the country in (Continued page 10 column 3)
DENECHAUD SYRUP ' It combines the original French formula of the eminent Dr. DENECHAUD for the treatment of BRONCHOPULMONA-RES, TOS-FERINE, ASTHMA, CHRONIC CATARRHUS, etc. BALSAMIC - EXPECTORANT and CALMING. Ask for it at your Pharmacy. 75 cents per bottle.
NUTR0MULSI0N1
Recommended by physicians in lung diseases. Restores lost strength and strengthens the body. Sold in all pharmacies.
GANGAS LADIES UNDERWEAR FOR TODAY Sleeping Shirts. Shirts for going out - Silk and Cotton Bloomers. Rubber Girdles, - Corsets, i Silk Girdles and Brassieres. All at Low Prices. Gran Bazar LA HORMIGA DE ORO i San Juan, P. R. Plaza Principal,
COMPAGNIE GENERALE TRANSATLANTIQUE French Steamer "CARAVELLE" IS EXPECTED IN THIS PORT FROM THE WEST INDIES around the 6th or 7th of the present and from here she will continue her voyage to HAVRE. Admits cargo and passage for ports in Northern Europe. Order your embarkations by the steamers of this Company which will leave Havre and Bordeaux direct for San Juan on the following dates: 8 8. Corzvell#. Havre July 18th Zurdeoe July 22nd San Juan August 6th 8*. 8. Caraiba " Aug. 31 -"' Sept - 4 " Sept, 19 8. 8 Macoris " Oct. 9 " Oct. " 13 " Oct 26 8. 8. 8. X " Oct- 31 " Nov. 4 " Nov. 19 ! FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT BEHN BROTHERS INC.- Agents. San Juan, P. R. Tel. 257. Tanca'Tetuan.
DR. MORENO GESTS THE CREATION OF A CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL IN SANJUAN Mi-
In his capacity as Director of Beneficence, he invites you to a meeting this afternoon M In said act, which will take place in the Municipality, the matter will be discussed M Dr. Narciso Moreno, Director of the Municipal Beneficence of San Juan, addresses the following letter to us: Mr. Director of EL MUNDO. San Juan, Puerto Rico. Sir:- I have to appeal to the benevolence, the generosity, the most tender and attractive form of charity of the influential people of this capital; to interest them in a good work, of great necessity, of inexcusable attention. The little children of the humble classes of the city, the children of those disinherited by fortune, those who came into the world entrusted by Providence to the care of people who have no other protection than work, which, by abandoning them, plunges them into misery and pain; the children who, helpless among all the children of society, when they fall sick, have no means of curing their illnesses; the children who, when they fall sick, have no means of curing their illnesses; the children who, when they fall sick, have no means of (Continued on page 13 column 4) INTERESTING LECTURE GIVEN AT THE UNIVERSITY YESTERDAY AFTERNOON BY MRS VAN DEUSEN M - She gave a wonderful description of the Tutankamen M bisto ria Yesterday afternoon, Mrs. Eli sabeth Kneen M - She gave a wonderful description of the Tutankamen M bisto ria yesterday afternoon, Mrs. Eli sabeth Kneipple de Van Deusen, gave an interesting lecture on the subject "Tutankhamen" to the students of the English Department of the University of Puerto Rico. First, Ms. Van Deusen spoke about the prominent place that the reign of this ancient monarch occupies in the history of mankind, stating that although apparently, the times of which she spoke seemed very remote (1560 B. C.), the reality was that this date, in the life of the people, was as much as yesterday in the life of individuals. She went on to relate the turbulent and short life of King Tutankhamen, describing his death and funeral in detail and mentioning the oblivion into which he later fell, an oblivion that the learned lecturer attributed to the momentous events that followed in his time. "In our own day," she said, "we have been privileged to witness the discovery of the tomb of this famous king' so long lost to mankind. This has (Continued on page 17 column 3)
M. FRAILE & CO. Allen 44 Specializing in plating, trutru and tailored suits. New assortment of suits, hats, openwork and embroidery-.
SPANISH LADY Wants housekeeper placement. Will inform: C. P. El Hot "l'Central, San Juan.
IT'S NOT BLUFF!!! 10,000 CASIMIR SUITS ARE WORTH $25.00 AND $30.00 WE SELL THEM AT $8.00 10,000 NAPPY PANTS WITH AND WITHOUT LISTS. VALUE $12.00 WE SELL THEM AT $5.00 "LA IMPERIAL" ANTONIO LEMA & CO., ALLEN ESQ. SAN JUSTO. SAN JUAN, P. R.
Furniture for sale due to absence. At Lopez Landron 3, Stop 43-114 or Tel. 709 red, Santurce.
"I was not surprised by the words of President Coolidge, no.
CUBA CELEBRATED YESTERDAY THE FIFTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF ITS INDEPENDENCE M The President of the Chamber of Commerce of Puerto Rico sent expressive messages on this occasion. -The President of the "Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce" sent the following dispatches by cable yesterday: "Gerardo Machado, President Republic, Havana, Cuba. As this Republic celebrates today twenty-five years of free and independent life, I beg your chief magistrate to receive the warmest congratulations from the Chamber of Commerce. With us the whole of Puerto Rico wishes for great eternal prosperity (Continued on Page 3, Col. 4) Celebrating the twenty-eighth anniversary of an excellent industry - r -:m Mr. Rivero gathered yesterday in his factory in Havana, Cuba, to celebrate the twenty-eighth anniversary of an excellent industry. Rivero gathered yesterday in his factory numerous friends M With a double motive a beautiful party was celebrated yesterday in the building of the popular and magnificent Factory of Sodas and soft drinks POLO NORTE, legitimate pride of its founder and boss the prestigious Industrial Inge- ' niero Don Angel Rivero Méndez, and pride at the same time of Puerto Rico, because such Factory is at the height of the best of its ' class in the world. One of the reasons was to celebrate the twenty-eighth anniversary of the founding of the factory, which through this long period has been expanding its prosperous life, conquering each day a wider market for its excellent products, which would be enough to justify yesterday's celebration, and the other reason was that Mr. Rivero Méndez, in celebrating the twenty-eighth anniversary of said industry, wanted to (Continued on page 10, Col. 3)
mortgages Available $150,000 at 9 -10 and 12% good collateral URBAN PROPERTY San Juan and Santurce. $70,000 RUSTIC PROPERTY near San Juan. BONDS AND STOCKS Purchase and sale, quotes of the day BEFORE MAKING YOUR TRANSACTIONS, CONSULT B. DEL CORRAL Box 917, -Office, San Justo 3 y 5, San Juan. Telephone 533 San Juan, 1710, Santurce.
I expected something else."
"I never attached any importance to the rumor circulating concerning myself, sincerely believing it to be false.":-Towner.
"NO ONE WILL CELEBRATE MORE THAN US THAT THE CONSPIRACY INFORMATION IS FALSE" M Says Rivera Martinez answering Fresse's statements M--_ He alleges that now it is his turn to ha? blar to Messrs. Sanders and . Silva M The general organizer of the Puerto Rican tobacco growers, Don Prudencio Rivera Martinez, sent us the following telegram yesterday afternoon: Ponce, May 20, 1927. EL MUNDO, San Juan. I have read the statements of Mr. Fresse. No one will celebrate more "Continued on page 16 Col. 5)
"I Yesterday we had an interview with Governor Towner in connection ' with the cable news which, coming from Washington, we have published, on the result of the conference held by the Committee of our Legislature with President Coolidge. In this connection the Governor made the following statements to us: "I think the result obtained from this conference held by the Legislative Committee with the Chief of the National Executive is a matter of great satisfaction to me. I must also say that I was not surprised by the words of President Coolidge; I did not expect anything else. I never attached any importance to the rumor circulating concerning myself, sincerely believing it to be false, and without foundation. "I am pleased to learn that the situation is satisfactory. For the rest, I must say that for me it is a source of intimate rejoicing to know that almost all the most significant leaders of this island have gone to Washington and have supported my administration before the national authorities, and have defended it as if it were their own."
THE SUPREME COURT ESTABLISHES AS A CAUSE FOR DIVORCE THE TEMPORARY PRISON OF ONE OF THE SPOUSES M REVERSES A SANJUAN DISTRICT COURT JUDGMENT Text of the interesting opinion issued by the Hon. Emilio del Toro Cuebas M '
The Supreme Court of Puerto Rico has just issued an opinion in the divorce case filed by Francisca Torres Archilla against Francisco Archilla Piñciro. The basis of the complaint filed before the District Court of San Juan was only that the defendant had been sentenced to five years in prison for the crime of mutilation and had begun to serve the sentence. In the District Court, the complaint was dismissed, and the plaintiff filed an appeal to the Supreme Court, whose opinion in the case is as follows: Opinion of the Court issued by the Presiding Judge, Mr. del Toro San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 18, 1927. "Francisca Torres Archilla filed a divorce suit against her husband.
She filed a complaint for divorce against her husband, Francisco Archilla Piñeiro, alleging as sole cause the fact that her husband had been sentenced to five years in prison for the crime of mutilation and had begun to serve the sentence. "The defendant, through a guardian appointed by the Court, alleged that the complaint did not allege sufficient facts to establish a cause of action. The Court ruled in conformity and considering that the claim was not susceptible of amendment, issued a judgment declaring it inadmissible. Not satisfied, the plaintiff filed the present appeal. "The only question to be studied and resolved is that of fixing the alContinued on page 13, Col. 3)
LACES SPECIAL SALE TODAY White and Cream Tull Lace at 10 and 12c. yard Wide Valencién at-.05c. yard Yont-Thread lace and other kinds at 5c. yard. Embroidery - Fine organdy appliqués. All very cheap. Great Bazaar THE GOLDEN ANT Main Square.
For Sale The residence owned in Condado el Ledo. F. Soto Gras. 1300 square meters of land and all kinds of amenities. Reasonable price. Information Tel. 230 San Juan.
Coolidge attributes the Legislative Committee's trip to the fact that "Puerto Ricans like to make trips to Washington."
He indicated that "care should be taken in the manner of raising funds for island expenses" M
Late last night we received the following cable dispatches: WASHINGTON, May 20 (United Press). -On behalf of President Coolidge, White House has made it known that the President is naturally pleased with the visit of the Puerto Rican delegation which has come to express its concurrence with the Towner administration. The President says he does not know why it was necessary for the delegation to come to Washington to let him know, and attributes the trip to the fact that just as some members of the National Government like to make trips to the island, Puerto Ricans like to make trips to Washington.
It is said that the President instructed the delegation to be careful how they raised funds for the island's expenses, since the idea was to create an extensive educational program. Coolidge also spoke of the desirability of all Puerto Ricans being proficient in English, because Puerto Rico is a territory of an English-speaking nation and mutual understanding is always enhanced through a common language. The president also said that he realized the beauty of the Spanish language and that he felt it was also necessary for Puerto Ricans, but indicated the urgency of e-tudlay inel*®. "continued on page 17 column 5)
DR. ASHFORD ADDRESSED THE MOST CHARACTERIZED SCIENTIFIC CENTERS IN NEW YORK M He had the opportunity to speak at the "Academy of Medicine" in that city / M
The "Information Office" of the University sends us the following notes: "The New York Academy of Medicine is the only one of its kind in the world; by reason of the immense pecuniary resources which support its scientific purposes. In other countries, with only a few worthy exceptions such as the illustrious Academy of France, resources do not permit the academicians to be housed in buildings adequate to the wisdom and experience represented by their members. However, in the great metropolis of the North, the same members of the Academy of Medicine had sufficient resources to build and equip what should be and is, not only the Court of last resort for the appraisal of theory and practice of the science of medicine; but also a true Temple of the Philosophy of the Art of Healing. "Situated on the corner of Fifth Avenue and 103rd Street, the Academy of Medicine building is a true Temple of the Philosophy of the Art of Healing.
Spanish Fans
Hand Painted Spanish Fans. We have received five thousand samples, all different. There are very nice ones in black and half mourning colors. From 99c. to $12.00 one See them before the most beautiful ones are sold. Gran Bazar LA HORMIGA DE ORO Plaza Principal San Juan, P. R.
New York City's Gran Bazaar, built of granite at the cost of about four million dollars, looks more like a luxurious metropolitan club than a science center. Its carved wood baseboards, its French windows with thick velvet curtains, its splendid "buffet" for members, all are luxurious details contributing to this club-like appearance. But it is, in addition, one of the orifices (Continued on 10 Col 4.)
For Sale Cheap A brand new "Troy" Laundry. Washer-squeezer-dryer-2 ironing machine - Hoffman -Kettle. Will inform: ARTURO MUÑOZ American Railroad Co San Juan.
SOLARES PUNTA DE LAS MARIAS The best place in Santurce. Very low prices. Liberal terms. HENRY W. DOOLEY Tapia 9. Tel. 1295 Santurce, P. R.
- £L BUYER OF Damian Rodriguez-Sachs & Co. has just returned on the steamer Coamo with a large assortment of ladies' and gentlemen's suits. Don't miss a chance to see what he has brought. Salvador Brau and San Justo San Juan, P. R.
GET IT WITH THE 1 1 1 ROSA DEL OR ROUX POWDS exquisitely perfumed" and of dente effectiveness, in Leucorrhea, diseases proper d^ the woman, prophylactic showers, etc. . Ask for them in all pharmacies in original bottles. fuNICOS' ■ /I | IMPORTADORES the scientific sales co. I "--a