ELASNDO
h- ■- x * Pages 3 Ctvs. f\ I Semester - 6.00 fa" V A Afio - - - - " 19.50
.smmasiBBBmMSBBmmmasramraesra^raras" I Q A^* na8 3 Ctvs. | X 1 1 1 OMna: "Puerto Rico Dar | ftatVtrado Bldg." - Tel. "22
YA MAÑANA NEWSPAPER
Ano X
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
"ablhhed and <iatribn "e< andar penan No. "W "utoased jy Me 4a et October O, 1S1T, eu fila at tka Poet Office at dan JMan. Porto Rico. By order of the FreaMrat. A. 8- Wdam, Poitaaaater G "e "r "L ántared na aeeend otean m*H*7 febmirv 2J. 1910 "t the Pott Office at Son Juan. Perto "". (United State* of America Minder the Act of winch S IS?"
Saturday, February 4, 1928. I Number 2407^
"To your people you will carry the message of Puerto Rico, not unlike the cry of Patrick Henry: "Liberty or death."
"It is the same in essence, different only by the changes of times and circumstances" Thus expresses the Legislature conferring upon Lindbergh the representation of Puerto Rico as the bearer of a message to the people of the U.S.
C.; idos and enthusiastic homage; of admiration paid again ajer the city of San Juan to! giori'i.-i' aviator Charles A. Lidbergh. At nine o'clock in the morning were already in Fortaleza the (Jorororiel Lewis, the Commissioner of the Interior. don Guillermo Esteves, Executive Secretary, don Eduardo Saldana, the Comi-uonado of Public Instruction, don Juan B. Huyke. the Secretary of the Governor. Captain Van Deussen, and Drs. Antonio R. Silva and R. Berrín* Berdecia, Colonel Lind bergh's assistant during his stay in Puerto Rico, who together with Governor Towner were to accompany the distinguished aviator to various historical sites and educational and scientific centers in the country.
bergh, who had been Mr. Lanausse's chemistry teacher at Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan, in 1925. Michigan, in 1925. He showed it to Colonel Lindbergh stating that he wished to congratulate him effusively for his glorious feats, and added that he felt immense satisfaction in extending his congratulations for the fact that he, Mr. Lanausse, is the only Puerto Rican who has been a disciple of Mrs. Lindbergh. The Colonel took in his hands the diploma on which his mother's signature was stamped. He kept his eyes firmly on that diploma for a few seconds and very expressively, with an enthusiastic smile, he shook Mr. Lanausse's right hand. The latter also showed him the album of the class to which he belonged directed by Mrs. Lindbergh. The Colonel paused for a moment leafing through its pages, and at Mr. Lanausse's request, he stamped his signature on an autograph presented to him by his distinguished mother's disciple. Mr. Lanausse told us that in 1925, Mrs. Lindbergh was in charge of the Jo Química chair at "Cass Technical High School," in Detroit, Michigan. The class was composed of thirty । students, among them were
idos Latinos: a Mexican named ¡ 1 k le la ' ,:;rza and himself. In the yearbook of his class, Lanausse ngura as one of the most successful students, - and there it is recorded that he obtained several honors in his studies. Under his photograph appear the following words: Julio Lanausse: "A man of few words are the best men". a A '-SUCCESSFUL EXCURSION": In the program of celebrations it was consigned that Colonel Lindbergh would have to visit the historical sites, the educational centers and several public buildings of our island. But it was not possible to strictly comply with this number. There was no time for it. Accompanied by Governor Towner, Commissioner Esteves, Executive Secretary Saldaña, Captain Van Deussen, Commissioner Huyke and Dr. Silva, Colonel Lindbergh left Fortaleza at five minutes past ten, with the purpose of making a quick tour from San Juan to Rio Piedras and stopping for a few seconds at some points. Governor Towner placed his automobile at the disposal of the
Governor Towner placed his automobile at the disposal of the representatives of the press so that we might also accompany Colonel Lindbergh on his short excursion. With the reporters was the Doctor. Lindbergh's assistant, Doctor Bertíos Berdecía. The retinue continued along the extension of Salva dor Brau Street, passing in front of the Capitol and heading towards the Fort of San Cristobal. Turning off through the grounds occupied by the "Service Comjfeny" of the Puerto Rico Regiment, Colonel Lindbergh and his companions took the Central Highway, leaving by the three and a half stop of Puerta de Tierra. The enthusiasm of the enormous crowd that crowded on both sides of the road was extraordinary.
The enthusiasm of the huge crowd on both sides of the road was extraordinary. From all lips there were exhortations of admiration for the hero of the air. In front of the "School of the Redemptorist Fathers", in Puerta de Tierra, Colonel Lindbergh was able to appreciate a truly sympathetic spectacle; hundreds of little children carrying flags acclaimed him and burst into "cheers" that evidenced the enthusiasm they experienced at being able to greet the distinguished message of peace and goodwill. The police had to suspend traffic completely at this point. The children were not content with cheering Colonel Lindbergh, they threw themselves on his car, forcing him to stand up and respond to that greeting.
and to respond to that enthusiastic and cordial greeting. On the way to the County followed the motorcade. Five policemen on motorcycles, under the command of Colonel Lewis, who was driving in front, kept the traffic in perfect order, and were thus able to avoid the inconveniences caused by the congestion of vehicles in extraordinary cases when the influx of vehicles, as on this occasion, is so great. Only rs: could Colonel Lindbergh make his way to Río Piedras and be back in San Juan at a time when the Legislature was holding a joint session in his honor. In front of the Luchetti School in Santurce, another immense crowd awaited Colonel Lindbergh: a crowd of children who offered him the testimony of their admiration. Placed in correct formation, the children enthusiastically greeted our illustrious guest, and threw many flowers on his car. Colonel Lindbergh replied to these greetings with his customary military salute. A few seconds paused the coGreat Opportunity House for sale in the best location in the Park. Great advantage for payment. José Navarro, Apartado 323, Río JBiftdcas. á DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR NOTICE The public is hereby informed that on Saturday, the 21st of this month, traffic will be reestablished on the bridge called "Los Frailes" on the Central Highway, Km. 19, FOR CARS AND PASSENGER BUSES ONLY. Cargo trucks will continue to travel on Guaynabo and Sanatorio roads until further notice. Guillermo ESTEVES, Commissioner.
The police officers were in front of the "Central High School" in Santurce, even though Colonel Lindbergh remained in the car, forced to do so due to the lack of time to visit said educational center. On the stairs of the "Central High School" all the students were waiting, cheering the glorious aviator. He was presented to the student crowd by the Commissioner of Public Instruction, Mr. Juan B. Huyke. Colonel Lindbergh stood up, the students all burst into cheers and applause, and invited him to get out of the car. But it was not possible. Colonel Lindbergh, very smiling, greeted Jos school children from the car, and followed the retinue on the road to Rio Piedras. At stop 26, in front of the "La Milagrosa" School, the jubilant cries of hundreds of little girls who greeted the Knight of the airs were heard again. Preciously uniformed girls threw flowers on Colonel Lindbergh and the cheers continued unceasingly until the procession disappeared. .
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO RICO: From Martin Peña to Ríi Piedras, an immense crowd crowded along the road. In front of the University grounds a compact crowd of students awaited the arrival of Colonel Lindbergh. The police had to clear the way so that the automobiles could follow their route without hindrance. The students applauded the distinguished space hero for two minutes. The President of the "University of Puerto Rico," Dr. Thomas E. Benne - , received Colonel Lindbergh and his companions, extending his congratulations on behalf of the faculty and students of said (Continued on p. 3, Col 1) "Hand sewing M Agents wanted for hand sewing in children's costumes. We have large quantities. We will not take requests due to rush. Yes - " please visit us personally. M. 8. MAGNUS & CO. INC. Santiago Veve Blvd. Mayagüez, P. R. (Announcement.)
AT TEN A.M.: At ten o'clock in the morning Colonel Jánibergh came out of his rooms and extended his greetings to Governor Towner and other personalities who were in the fort. In these momentr" *<- od imito <d Mr. Julio LaHuste, Inym.o-, electrician practicing at the "Escuela de Artes y Oficios" of Ponce, carrying in his hands a diploma and an album. It was a diploma signed by Mrs. Evangeline Lodge Lindbergh, mother of Colonel Lind-.
ZAPATOS Silver, fine, Corte Salon, -pumpsNuevos, just received in f Cabritilla imported Do not neglect: come today to: LA FAVORITA José Lema & Co. San Justo 31 " San Juan [ F. SOTO GRAS Participates his return from the United States and offers his professional services. Apartment 404 Edificio Ochoa Tel. 230
REMATE See the ad we published in 2a< piftoa. (
10 CREO. PEnf But today not st MOUNT THE THERMOMETER IN THE RADIATOR.... 5t MEASURES HEAT IN THE SAME ENGINE, AND HERE E5THE E5CALA VlSlbLE DAY AND NIGHT, ANOTHER FEATURE OF THE GOOD0W3.
Y ' 1 I p
OFFICES FOR RENT We have at the moment two unoccupied OFFICES. Good and cheap. PIETRANTONI BUILDING Phone 1275.
ISABEL PARSI ! florist - For any work in natural fio | res call 1 Phone 120, Hato Rey I
Chocolate Meunier Genulnameato French, ... The best of all.
NEW HOUSES AT COMFORTABLE TERMS Urbanization Las Palman Office corner Lutz Avenue and Seboruco Road The highest, freshest and healthiest place 'in Santurce. 105 homes built. 400 buses pass through the Urbanization daily. 20 minutes from San Juan. P.O. Box 908 Santurce. Phone 1901 Santurce
hLDíDGO rmHRITER SERVICE * 1
í ALLEN 7# TEL. 1054. SAN JOAN. We repair office machines, phonographs and other office equipment.
DO YOU WANT TO DRESS UP IN AUTHENTIC COSTUMES? We can rent you nice Mexican, cowboy, Pierrot, etc^ etc. costumes. You must be a formal person. Go to Hotel Caribe, room No. 43.
YOUTH 1BELL® UP LIKE LINDBERGH Here is the list of the famous products of the house of Hamandis: Rice Powder with its soft and delicate perfume. Concentrated extract of an unparalleled fragrance. Hamandis Beauty Lotion, a product of marvelous results to prevent and extinguish wrinkles and facial depressions, facilitating the adhesion of the powders. The Hamandis Soap that gives so much softness and freshness to the whole organism, and its Eau de Cologne to restore gray hair to its original color, without staining the skin and removing dandruff. It is hygienic, fortifies the hair roots and prevents hair loss. Only vegetable products are used in its preparation, which is why its use is so beneficial. For each purchase of these products, -whose amount is greater than $1.00, a "Puerto Rico" brand soap will be given away, which has been so popular in the market. Drug Co. of Porto Rico, Retail, Inc?
Why every mother should feed her children with DENECHAUD COD OIL 1.~ Because Denechaud Cod Oil is the purest oil extracted from fresh and selected cod livers from Lofotan. Norway, whose region, due to the immense amount of seaweed it possesses, produces the most VITAMIN-rich cod in the world. 2. - Because the Denechaud Cod Oil, presents the nutritious and nutritional part of the liver having eliminated the fatty matter and stearin and all substance scientific procedure of freezing, producing a powerful oil, rich in VITAMINS, INSIPID, TASTEFUL TO THE PALATE AND TOLERATED IN THERAPEUTIC DOSES BY THE MOST DELICATE STOMACH. 3< ~ Denechaud Cod Oil is known by the medical profession and they recommend it to their patients. 4.- Because Denechaud's Cod Oil - represents more food or nutrition than any other, being at the same time more pleasant and easily digested. Because Denechaud Cod Oil is presented in the three most pleasant forms for its administration. OIL - WINE - PHOSPHOMULS1ON
Bn 1 j. 1 g - i *as^ " |i CáX M | ".n. I ' ft wZ | ■ - I Mi >"-* --""-* ■ DB BACALAO DENECHAUD OIL Pure and palatable. -Potent. Rich in VltaminA, and tolerated by the most delicate stomach, for both children and the elderly. Price 50 cents in all pharmacies.
Él® i Igigg MW j í B A O li ■f -vx Pl y-" " nw I reSFOMUESION ■en Vitan ñas Nutritive i 112 -*. ¡i I Srwefand *S I I / atiesta a" par" ,í |- a "i*araaM> g TI IMtMHiiM* OWQCACid" J. I ahamviu "aZ-mw<i, i TT.- ■ * w | h ifMMTaÉ tf U!r i I tUrm..." crwuU.w* ! | WMWICAdélá I reí A nmhur, ne. ¡OTtit BÉa Ultait "as "* *-""**■ Wmi to cure, ut "mura 'JI F08F0MULSI0N DENECHAUD Food. - Tonic. - Medicine. Contains 50 percent át pure Denechaud Cod oil and 50 percent balsamic and medicinal plants. Sweet as honey. Children's medicine. -Price 50 cents in all farmsciss.
DENECHAUD BACALAO WINE DENECHAUD Tóniee-reeonatructive of loe worn out tissues dM orgMiism to eaosa of pulmonary or febrile diseases. -Price 75 cents in all pharmacies.