elaAndo
IA /I Atinas 3 CtvLl ~l
Q/xPages 3 Ctvs. /I ■ Ofidna: "Puerta Rico Duefcrf V trefe Bldg,*"->TW. U2k __
MARIO DE MARAÑA
-ñoX
San juan, Puerto Rico.
raiitil iM "MxWaM Mte vnMt Mb. Ml WJW Art "toan" C HIT. " rn. tw nrrv" JtaM. iwa" w" By "Mr rt A" A- ". m" 1 - - -f.t m kmi Bn ttSL Mnw n I in* rt A" Part <MBb" at Baa Jvrtu Mrt" Ble". (1MM4 ZUa "f l,in) aaMr tk" Art "C "afe K ¿¿7*^ I
Saturday, August 25, 1928.
Issue 3126,
0 Aliancista Directory resolved yesterday that Munoz should continue to chair the ''Public Service Commission."
_ M Per rtrairr qme of predmarle aukiidate to Warden of San Jua would be any difidl eacoatrarle sastitat m
DizvEtoTDO fe The "Alianza ra Por&mrj? ceata" "ri rauxafi' ♦ir session: oeranan-rate.... Diverse;? a-? micos fe <rar*.ter LneaE iras sife resolved *a la""miañes fe iseajw and yesterday. Se ífiá> e-^sr.n ran 'a enm inri ración .ie£ Pfesifente ¿e a -* Asneiiairéa die Agricultores'.", '.cfe. J >&ó L P*sírierni wmetienJ i a ia ''Alianza 5 ' sor cnnriiiiew fe fe Zas señoras Bamiiá y Tías Sn "r Las rarrJ 1 !"tatas míe rararmienfe la enriferi "gretxla para vi Senai.n. The Córran "*e írTmíw^tam: r ¿"more repf'eseirrazi'ras : mulares i" liezeó^ pn Talar. Direcrario arnirti" wvr dieras "asá i ¿araras -* La Asamijiea General ¿e La en Leer i vida t "paí iairá fe .■" r rtnrw tomorrow at ef Teatro Jta nicinaL Xznw fe la* ramiúfazaras have the ansiil'm enfes® ár! Direetrrria. Mr. Eórrmó nrfnmó soc re The steps ■^■izafes through & interviews held between the and Hieres del Partía" Xxña soloists pora qae c unEdatss na-.io Nazi be encasiiLifes in the "ríc-fer* <fe The Alliance. In é ta misira edition ; Lnírraums the letter qrxe "íirige eSr. Barrell > to L.eenciaix" Antonin Arriso. swnre this cartió-ufar. The ladies nremums fef Drrac tíTrin an" twrer.n to sir rargn the é'irwraíón fe as primaries in several nuenins Je the island rlmiíema aurpílo tirfirte Je their artnarinnes < inform m feí resolved "e the referred primara". The Díreetnsri" aeerdá fieiiotar to the canrix■tato" triunfaTt.es and express aa reewnscnniento and " ancsnss to the dx^ecoras fe iis recorded sntrtendíeii tes, both to '"w victors runo to Two vene: "me p>>r the feáflsa and eí orfen that r _ nt iviierm ?3 the ceJeirracon. fe The primaries and by the entasiaram> fe-mrmtTisfei in his off Concrete house at Carrion's Court a mriillís from the sea. $3000100. Facility for di ¡payment. Will inform: Tef 73 Santurce-
Jafia fe laLnrar pur Ha "Alianza Part TFrupB'-Ti'i r , Mr. EarjeJó ímfonra" extTXjanxenta n>br? -ta interview i -Toe soscavuera f" d Lefe. Xiguel 1 A. Minna regarding sa candóiait xra for Alralde fe San Jaaa. , f al SKBrgm >ie la "tuaeióB pwiitiea local í" "ta ¿íacEaif. Exps5<> i ras z ontns fe TÍsta tn r.r-ací¿a aaa ■ t^ze particTiíar y "üó e-jenta ran the < Liclaraciocas "pa" ha iferEuo pabí - ¡ ms sacre ' a ref.-rife ramiidanxra i fel señor Xiñaa alejpami'i qoe " sn j' nielo ¿str 'fete termanees-r " sa □ aesti fe Ptístaenra fe la Graist¿n de Serriro PñáEixra for being | EE'iísaensa^fes sos "trriitñns m di-!cfe arzani-raw' jafenranieental and rar ser nriy flEeñJ sa sastl'oeün in esees ai ■ lUTcrtos fe "r pncía- ■ na¿r" nfel tara a A'-taife per San .Jaan. i El Dñrectairfe ¿espité" ¿e hear the I feñnracfenas ¿e! ^ñnr Bárrelo i ata rió entesar and rarer sayas the ¡ mamfestacfenies fe£ Presídeme ife[ Senafe in eí sentáfe fe that the I Lefe. XÍFjel A. Mañnz. in well [fe si country, fefe remain in M ¡ raryi fe Pre**fen"" fe Ea Cnañisíítr ¿e Sent río Pafcíiki" per ser ' reresarioe in fíe®" paestw his seriufer "" and fe fe" la* wwEi.rs fe eh' rortaneia pen tients before said or- । runísmej. Xe fcfzu feeiaracióa alj arana rf Direetrjrw" regarding canI <f ¿¿aturas feeeraEÍa-"tzs for the eary" fe Alca, fe fe fe Saa Joan. The Drreetori" aeirrf- - "enaBendar al sefer Bareefe na re Ircwa fe zea □"lea official pse will be urastnitaia to Mr. MTñ>T in this sentida. ! The DirePMHrta a-irá." extend ' special nnitaeró-n for 'a Asa-r- ¡ Sien fe '.a A-ianza a los Presidente.* ¿eí Partí En SañaEsta Cmsti| tocio nal, al Presidente fe la Co- ! mission fe Se reí -a Pfelln. Lafe. ¡ A. Mint-®, to the AEealfe fe ■ Ear J ¡an. fes Piberío H. T xii a ¿on J:sé J. Etn-tex and to carias ■ £ 3t;rzrxi¿as ex-Jaferes between ! eíLiT fen Artr;r" Linderas, fea Joi fe ".'ajtülxii,. I.ctía Le^vlño FeSá 'and other .rabkZ-ras Likewise aesr Li rnvttar ai FmLfente fe La ! -'Ajccíocfea <f± A<rtmitirres'*. Led: ■ José L. Pe^^s-ra. al Presí ierre fe la ■'AsociarmíT fe Praiimctares fe ' Arfear'. fez Ramón Ahoy Befe- ¡ ten and other direct >m fe or<33¿' rations fe tapial Lniníe.
OXFORDS SHOES For school children and office workers New and great assortment. More day THOUSAND PAIRS of Moddios. (Samples) We will sell today SATURDAY, at $2.00 and $3.00 For CASE CONVENIENCE and for ECONOMY, visit LA FAVORITA SAN JUSTO 31 JOSE LEMA & CO. SAN JUAN and RIO PIEDRAS
La Escuda St John's
- Ea le Parada Adu Santurce will begin its desired on ■ use them, setienriMre 4. 1928. The teachers will be in the "seneis for enrollment the week ■ proceeding the hours of 9 A. M. to 12 M.
Yesterday, certiorari was heard in the case of Mayor Todd and the San Juan Municipal Assembly.
After hearing the parties, the Hon. Judge Ber^ $a reserved judgment.
In accordance with the writ of certiorari issued by the District Court of San Juan, yesterday morning began the hearing of the case of Mayor Todd and the Municipal Assembly of San Juan, which in extraordinary session suspended him from employment and salary based on charges filed by Mr. José Torres Silva. At ten o'clock in the morning the session began and the lawyers of the Assembly presented a motion for the Court to eliminate the order issued. The Ledo. Rafael Sancho Bonet, who assumed the representation of Assemblyman Pedro Juan Barbosa, was in charge of the presentation of said motion. The Ledo. Leopoldo Feliú, attorney for Mayor Todd, requested the Court to remove from the record the names of El Ledo. Luis A. Castro and Ledo. Sancho Bonet, considering that at that time the Municipal Assembly was appearing before the Court as a selective body and not each one of the members individually. On this point, Mr. Castro and Mr. Sancho Bonet argued, and the Court agreed that the lawyers representing any of the members of the Assembly wished to intervene in this case. The first turn was taken by Mr. Ledo. Sancho Bonet, who presented the motion for the elimination of the order issued. He stated that in the first place, it was not a matter of reviewing any legislative or administrative act of the Municipal Assembly. Secondly, even supposing that it was a legislative or administrative act of the Municipal Assembly, the plaintiff cannot avail himself of Section 83 of the Municipal Law, since he has not been injured in his constitutional rights. And third, that the complainant can in no way fall under the prescriptions of section 83 of the Municipal Law because there is a quick and effective remedy in article 29 of the Municipal Law.
and effective remedy in article 29 of the Municipal Law, which is not the "certfe. rari". Mr. Sancho Bonet stated that the writ of certiorari is premature since the Assembly has legally proceeded and this would interrupt the progress of a process in which only the first steps have been taken. He stated that charges against the Mayor may be filed by any citizen without the need to belong to the Municipal Assembly, and further alleged that the District Court lacked jurisdiction in this case because the municipal law does not name it at all when dealing with the impeachment issue. He argued that the writ of certiorari is a limited legal remedy and that nowhere in the petition for writ of certiorari is it alleged that there is no other remedy to resolve the impeachment issue. Mr. Sancho Boneí concluded by requesting the Court to vacate the preliminary injunction. The Hon. Judge Berga made it clear that he had relied on the susn^s:on of employment and salary for dícauto P reJ 'niinar de "cert:orsri ' and that he considered that e?f eu. sufficient reason. The other lawyers who represented the Municipal Assembly or some of its individual members refrained from making a report to the Juno, since Mr. Sancho Bonef had made all the points they had to argue. It was therefore the turn of Mr. Feliú, who proceeded to cite the Corpus JurUW diendo to substantiate his request for the Court to issue the writ of certiorari. He alleged that the act taken by the Assembly was out of order for having been taken in an extraordinary session in which only the matters set forth in the call should have been dealt with. I stated (Continued on page 18, Col. 2)' ^¡opiedraT Milagrosa Schools Enrollment is open from August 24 to September 4. Trade course in two years and all eight grades, approved by the Department of Education.
Municipal Theater NO EXHIBITIONS THIS WEEK The usual and enjoyable exhibitions of films and Variarte that have been given at the Municipal Theater on Saturdays and Sundays by the Lloverás Soler Company have been suspended this week because the Theater has been used for the Aliancista Convention.
Sujes Para Señoras, Casi Regalados ' We wish to liquidate all our stock, to make room, for the new assortment, which we expect $1.50, 1.98, 3.75, 4.98, 6.00 and 7.50 ALL WORTH MORE THAN DOUBLE. ALL DIFFERENT. Hats from $3 and $4 to $1.50. "MARTINEZ STORE" i Alien 66 San Juan, P. R. Telephone 382.
The Best Lot in Puerto Rico The CASA DE ESPAÑA EN PUERTO RICO Corporation is selling its magnificent lot on Baldorioty Plaza and Fortaleza and San José Streets. The purchase propositions must be sent in a sealed document until September 15 of the current year, at three o'clock in the afternoon, to our registered office. Alien 19" 2nd floor. The envelopes must be marked in a visible place with this warning: PROPOSAL FOR THE PURCHASE OF THE PLOT. For further information, please contact the office of the Corporation where they will be provided. Cecilio MORAN, President.
5 to. ANNIVERSARY of the "BAZAR AHORRO" - GRAN BARATILLO to commemorate this date, during 8 days we will sell everything AT COST Suits for cahaBeros; of cashmere, gabardma - Shoes, Hats, Caps, Cmnisas, Ties, Socks. Pajamas and Bathrobes. ALL Navy Blue Suits (4 Pieces) at $6.25; Caps thread absolutely guaranteed! Cashmere and wool pants. COST. Children's suits 4 pieces at $5.85. Navy blue, fine and cheap. taam ra iU<n tI "p I ^J'li "IiE0"0''lwtilni2$. KECUEBIK THAT MAMOLO ALWAYS UMITA. "WE GIFT MIRRORS" TeL 1579 Box 1246 SAN JUAN, P. R.
"Vesos com sflapatío las cuaMitaris ¿e
naestrus coaqnaeros, UrteporlaAEaazaco fr caalqaiera otra I colectividad M Nos Ace d Resident of the M Asociación MédKa**, Dr. Ramón M. Suárez i M ' El PZeeifente fe la "Asoesañén : Médica fe Poerto Rico", doctor Ra- ¡ mo'n M. Soárez. expressed himself in the following terms* regarding the candidates for Senators and Representatives for the "*Portoi i úpieaa Alliance": "The ■'Asociación Médica fe Paer I to Rico'', C'O "BBM> any pro-fessional entity wishes to maintain absolute collective neutrality with regard to partisan politics and everything related to the campaigns and propaganda of the parties. But it is our duty to express our deepest satisfaction and sincere congratulations for the candidacies ife professional colleagues who are emerging for Senators and Representatives for the "Alian za Porta rriejueña'*. Distinguished physicians have been selected by fes alliance committees to represent the electorate in the Island Legislature. The Gene- ■ ral Assembly of this collectivity will sanction । these canfedaturas or most of them perhaps. Ertames fe enheraboena. Puerto Rico should feel satisfied. The physicians of the country have always been ready to work for the welfare of the people, attentive to the fulfillment of their duty for the benefit of the sick and the poor in praeraL Laboriosidadpersevemnci? high spirits of cooperation and sacrifice, sacrifice, abnesacióe, nriteres sopenao in the collective happiness fe! people; that has been and will be the nezma faith unes a tía class, and that will be eí eí banner that will enarboLaráa fends the escafcs of the Legislature the doctors who are raised to the Parlamenta. We view with sympathy and with satisfaction the can !¿ ¿identities of our comrades, [so much poc the Alliance branch pac íCSjalqtijera other collectivity. We are only more anxious to work for Puerto Rico. And in speaking this way I believe that I interpret the feelings of my colleagues without any political creed.
Don Antonio R Barceló has addressed the following letter to Ledo. Antonio A yuso, in relation to the g-stiones -taken effect so that caadidatM fel Partido Nacionalista eean ^ncamüados in the ■"ticket'* ¿e la Alianza Pot:<htíqiaeña:- Saz Juan, P. R" August 24, 1228. Mr. Don Antevio A yuso. Present. Dear corajatrita:- Referring sxe to the interview you and your amibos had e-mmigo at nJ home and the proposition you handed me corno bass for -n c-*.--lion with novo tras, in e! prepósito of making fac-.
Barcdó says that he "will be glad" that some of the nationalist canádatos could be welcomed to the "ticket" of the Afianza M Así le dedan en caí¡a que £ri$e al Lcde. Ayese M
I would like to point out that, after studying and analyzing the situation more closely, I do not believe that we have come up with any ideas that could comprise the aims of our policy, which are very clear as regards limiting its action to the realization of the problems of the present or a broad government of our own that would allow us to do so according to our own free determination and the use of our sovereignty. The Committee has the right to say that, in accordance with its own will, it will be able to propose and resolve the problems of the present and of the future, in accordance with its own will.
"WE HAVE NO PREFERENCE FOR ANY CANDIDATE, THE RIGHT OF THE SECTIONS TO ELECT
THE SECTIONS' RIGHT TO ELECT CANNOT BE DISCUSSED" "BUT WHEN THE PARTY'S CENTRAL DIRECTION MAKES A COMMITMENT IT HAS TO FULFILL IT", says the Socialist Interim Chief, Rivera Martínez, replying to the Cataño Section M-
i - n The interim head of the So-I ciallsca Party, sefer Prudencio Rivera; Martine-, ros sends for your p.bli j ration the following "state raen": "The Socialist Section number 221 fe Cataño. publishes in the newspaper ¡ EL MUNDO del 24 de agento unaj resolution of protest which r^; has received the President ínieriro; of! Socialist Party, until est" moment in which we dictate these de-1 claracicnes. But abiding by' first RESOLVED, in which it is agreed to "communicate to! Acting President I of the Socialist Party that- - Section number 22 reserves' the right to vote for the candidate who, according to its cnte-l
m - I rio, best suits the party and, ■ that. according to the rules of the ' Part: fe is entitled to be non- ¡ rauraco", the Acting President without 1 waiting for that protest to arrive, i - - : is that it would have arrived after । ce had been published, and taking into account the seriousness of the newspaper ,-e publishes it, he takes himself for notifica- ■ ■ -fe and communicated at this time : and responds as follows : ¡ "In the third WHEREAS, it is stated that "Comrade Pruden I cío Rivera Martínez, President I i-terino of the Socialist Party made 1 public manifestations responding to an SUPPOSED CONI ' Continued on pig- U. Cc-L 4)
IMPORTANT NOTICE In order to carry out repairs on the electric lines next Sunday, August 26, the electric service in the towns of Bayamón, Cataño, Palo Seco, Toa Baja, Toa Alta, Bucarabones, Carretera Guaynabo, Vega Baja, Vega Alta, Manatí, Barceloneta, Guaynabo, Carretera Esfúnosa, Carretera Manatí will be suspended during the hours between six and nine o'clock in the morning. PORTO RICO RAILWAY LIGHT & POWER CO. AT YOUR ORDER
COME AND MAKE MERRY SOCIAL DANCE AT THE SWIMMING POOL i HOTEL CONDADO VANDERBILT SATURDAY EVENING THE LATEST HITS BY THE MIDNIGHT SERENADERS ORQUESTRA ! and order that famous CLICQUOT CLUB SEC Ginger [ Ale. It's for those who appreciate finer things. i CASISffS INSniUTE OF PORTO wco COMMERCIAL INSTBTCCION COMPLETE AND EFFICIENT NEW COURSES BEGIN AUGUST 27AVEN1DA BORINQL'EN NO. 2 - STOP 27 TEL lesa. SANTURCE. P. R-
| Law Books i We purchase the collections I - ompJetas of AMERICAN ' LAW REPORTS; LAWYERS । REPORTS ANNOTATED; j J CORPUS JURIS; CALIFOR- ¡ I NIA REPORTS and CALIFORNIA JURISPRUDENCE. LCDOS. DUBON A OCHOTECO 328 Ochoa Building. TeL 2021, San Juan. P. R. ISABEL PARSI rVOKISTA For any work in natural flowers, please call 120.
Our research has shown that there are injustices in the
The President of the "Asociación de Ma^steño de San Juan must unite as a bloc" |"To demand the respect it deserves," says Se íHés Solé alluding to teacher changes reaffirmed lately M The President of the "Asociación de Ma^stetros de Puerto Rico", Mr. Gerardo Selles Sola, gave us the following "statement" yesterday afternoon: * This morning I was in the offices of the Department of Instruction when several colleagues informed me that a series of last minute changes have been made in the district of San Juan which are detrimental to excellent teachers without any important reasons to justify them. After leaving the Department's offices, we have received many complaints from teachers and parents who have expressed their dissatisfaction with many of the changes. We are investigating the matter calmly and do not wish to state our final opinion until we have the necessary information, but we can say at this time that it is a great lack of consideration for the teachers to assign them with only two or three days notice to sites far from their homes, causing them financial and time loss. Many have homes near the schools in which they work and were not planning to move because until this week there had been no question of transfers and they believed that they would not be made until later this week. "X now, when the proposal comes up, perhaps discipline, public interest, loyalty and other little phrases that have been coined to be applied to teachers when they are overworked, especially that of loyalty, as if this were not also a duty of the bosses to their subordinates, will be evoked. We are very used to feudal loyalty and we can't fit in with the mutual loyalty of democracy. "If it appears from our investigation that injustices exist, the mxgirterio áe San Juan must unite as a bloc to demand the respect it deserves." UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO RICO Río Piedras, P. R. NOTICE The College of Education will offer several university extension faith courses from four to six in the afternoon, some of which will be given at the High School building in Santurce, Parada 21, and the remainder at the University of Puerto Rico at Río Piedras. Registration for these courses will take place at the University on August 30 and 31 from 8:00 to 10:00 p.m. and will be in charge of Dr. J. J. Osuna. Information will be supplied during the days indicated. J. F. MAURA, Registrar. (Advertisement.) ' NEW HOUSES ; A PIAZOS (MODES Cash payment, $200.00 to $500.00 Monthly payment, $32.00 to $45.00 Bus service. 110 cunslzuídmt homes. High, fresh and healthy. Urbanization "Las Palmas" Santurce. i i i Apartado 3391, Santurce. I Telephone 1901, Santurce.