ELMWNDO
11 g>Pi¿ines 3 Ctv".
| 'I I I" " - />Pi¿ínas 3 Cíva I Office: "Puerto Rico Roa A Virado Bldg." -TeL 1222
MORNING JOURNAL
YearX
San Juan, Puerto Rico. j
-alUiBiiM one arnnkeaaS ■oOw ptnit S®. *01" anMñraa te me Mac. of OcuOer ". 19111 en file at tee Peet Office m lesa, fiares Bien. 05- tetar et toe Ih aeiSeet. A- & BarOeon. Pasunaatar GeaeraL BOtereO re eeceM clare moMer httwy n. 1910 ok tae fret Office m fiza Jrea. P-v "e Km (UnitoS 8Mee ef Aserie*) eatar tac tat of nareh X 1S7Í
SATURDAY, JANUARY 7, 1928
NUMBER 2379.
■ DOCTORS GARCIA "BARRI, ELaUGIER AND COLON EXPLAIN WHY THEY RESIGNED THEIR POSITIONS H THE "DRICIPIO DE RIO PIEDRAS E * *
rDechraB fK km faedade in perfect harmony with k iAmbiiíi h¡¿" local and orginin- direcor "a parooo a ^ae belong k m
anaÉÜfiaficifiB nss®t*iHns tede cate ano te fes se|ten arfd&ee "pe araban die prerentar the rraimirina of their cargo" i ernm xieshns dd Serrómr de Ee' nefitesniia UfemerfgmD de Efe pfak_ drafe dacSarations cu tas cuaJies espité ata Has ransa* de su artiN'imf | KE "tortor X R- Lasgtor, dranriSe r 1 ""nanas that tus® pana renounce I yes raes" of JBmBk® <fe BsufiieretI <ñ Munfespal that teserapeñañaña in f JHisñras River in fas following ma- ► "Mete aügús 1ten?n tensa bscft® ¿k finas" prupósto de presentar Ha del cargo q." "iesenrperáitaáfi in. this town "ramo ssédñro- of I "This purpose "Bedecía. to the I "smtimia" tesnsraHnc-fas and iBs^pss1 fes ai the serron" and w is me ¿ninro .^-horai enter deteUes perenrafe* -JpAre the fi-stinini r tarpéat "Cem that sautw® was management -Tramfi" oteo post where eon more freedom of acefan pinífera "fesaanra "llar my actirófades protoñomaljes, iy BaAüÚDdado eonsmmdai. i opted per A "jn?c "RsnÉ3Bff' nz msDDBiEBn ^übí. ■RW sema snísdi in this pueMo.... noaperande> so inn The AiinriztistraBou Jftnnierpal and MjwWwn Committee of m¿ pártete to solve the £ eonflíctc' in the Bton^ficencsn Musti-["ObL cesar yltoti ufanééate in my pnOWttÜCTUmstetimendo' has meJJmen sritarámes of friendship with faith" ; í bonfanes <pxe dfaigwt the adfanrirtra|cmb and Ha poütiea goes this puebla, a J Ha ansies les pautaste rama vra plus 1 m inayur esmsdsmtnxon and afeet"-" EI Ihr_ R. T- Coüms, Mét&en Inteí rím" dril Hospital Mtznfefefpiai de Eu jPfedtas^ mis send pure his puftE- ¿ a%ii Mwi Has segurantes deetaEainnnes J reHeeñnmdas eon te mtmEÍa de su f e - cargue "3(® is me propófnfe enter | detaflés safare fas eaestásmes sargít ¿as between lee etunpatoros that ser- " vfam cunmíg?" posts <™ ef ranmo> j áe Beneficence of this puebinT ! f m yes "foseo expEeanr "xsCTitaxneó - ¡I Bmr- mntüras <pBE' nos? íwjpEilsairoii. a w pRrvnoHBtÓEir Hat motmiMsfe (fisl csgejp®"Í€3MSHpffñMBfe<aL €H d CXpE^£S3MÍ(F SSESBCT 1 ....
!"*Re réstale is this town cwe fas best fatemtimBes to practice - m? pr preteazedo my ser-i vices, cttm prefienmña to rifases - ucBres. My good prspétetas fra- - uamott pw "os "rxtensas fisguoto® ; íqce acwriaH in ri! Department . -áeí Hteetetal MuamípaL In this es- - sedó- de trosas, vente nancAiendo the * idea of rermtexar mt ear ge and ajw®- - vecüé Ha ^pnriunádaid of tens%" in ¡ I tmfon and armonfa tram my amígws and . eonrnadrirns fes ductors Garete ITbarrí and Lasigíer- Finally de- > seo- ranstar qsie in utegmtna i .'rcasfen be been disturbed in tor- ■ isa alterra by Ha Admmfatraróóe Jni by the mrgasfemw fecal polftien Lfendie (raieteo wn fas mejuces ami> ¡ ¡ ¡ rus a qia;iffn.es preffes® the utmost - f-rsStaat's®™ and respect." > "Eemiiustrijé espoteárésametee the ■raigo d" Drrertor te Bem^rensete | MnsricteaL I have coadjutted eos fas - i orranásmos admteBstratTros and po- ; liceos to reseller the "wntffirt© taten- ~ ■ te in apnel ram. My serefafas . profesfenal and poffiáras are at the ■ ¿ísposáriiúrai of "fieteis argasuiraEtDS. Pláceme tesempeñar □¡xrtaaJtax'tee . my post in fa Vtedad de Sated . PábEiraL.'' This is how Dr. A- Garem Tbarrí, former Director of Renedfi- . cencia Mu irípaT de Río Piedras, expresses himself. "oto indo ía remamete of his charge. T adds: ■-Rritíto a fas aoto& uuritauÍvwrifas that venúan melando atoe h" médiiKis de- Rewefieerefa Kumi, cppall, which sometimes bordered ^n (fiisguistos pesotsafes, were < ron such eonfusfanes and enterpeci-mtentr.-s in the serv fate "pxe was aspcsible ®¿var a caito mía fadtor fruiré íiFiwn" and efiefente. In ^to or- ¿ 4-ma/tetes and not batting any mode* of reorganizing ril service in i proper and efíoeute manner I considered that ere Énifep"?HsaMe presemI tar fa. resignation of my office, fe* "pise i as? edectuie in uzsfati of nñs compa- ■ risTws Cafan and ILangter- I have quehfad" in perfect harmony with te i .rdjmmis-'tmdíi'm mumucxpal and c®n "a díreecíwn. faca! poSSten of my partifc. Mfe sisTvíeins pitrof esíonatles and poISára® eteán a 5a disposieSám de |
Eí NLTSTSO SEGOKD0 fi A ADVERSARY II \9f 3ü*a liegait feiiidtacianes H V ¡Mincánjens of all Ids resafeu^ IB '®j damoEfeazufe' torna ordiri' ■ - Cl j^neufateón of nuestiras etóaer- ■ ms for keeping FLOEJUL H PARK being always 3a mejd [I HEfianfaaóán of Puerto-. Kami ■ 1 - - - Sute dsnmestza of ¡wa utanem 0 high elhcneute that in tete d" ■ |> years ÍTOBAIL PATEE ba esta- ■ L Utoüto a "HErófiabte repute- II I emn and te achieved- tranrfarmaor I ■ sn lena: "The sitin> idesl pana sx Jl I i-rAmmiaT- in a SOtBtHJOL | ■"w I ■ - *6 twactes and a peqoeurv ■ * --■■to nasa a sw of his nqi- II , dsd a house rúan ufa. rielaste M y taso "uuHítruiida-.
' ~ B I -r 1 "^, "**'""* ^fc, I l&A>"ilagaiHL>jE£yB Ull
FLORAL PARK pUSf -El SBtár Mal for sst ReriidenaaL - PAWdlMI SR TEXEFOXO S HATO REI I- --^ - ,- -.... - r - . ■ - . '3^
1 kpkannédna j soAm CMS ^Sü^aSUSaK a^^E^*Ebms~tuuB "to XXflHPAETEBOXHEBSCa '{ "BdS Altan St. San Jtam |
CEMENT PORTLAND UGUILA!' American Standard Specificatione a$Z25BL KORBER X CO, INC
TEOL SUGGESTS THAT FOREIGN COFFEE SHOULD FREELY ENTER PUERTO RICO.
M He has said so to the Sab-Coaité of the "Colisión Econfañca 9 * that studies the asante -m- EX Beenciado José de Jesús Tizot, member dri Sab-Ccmfaé of the "Coreisión Econócnáre'* that studies ios prefttemas pertinent to the impertacten of the foreign coffee in Puerto Efeo. has manifested in one of the recent signs of ciño "parinu partisan that the etee exmajero has entrance itere era te i "la. Mr. Tizd nsienífe^to in di. 1 cha eportumdad that "although the great "Mecheros and almacenistas of! insutar grain would suffer eon the Itere entrance of the p rodueto extrant í "o- was the certain thing that the couremidor, in general terms would come out baefirtedo eon a measure of such a nature." "Ta! "one are our agricultural e&ffii&ioüies in the aetuaHdfaf." added Signor Tízol, "and attenuSemto in the first instanria, to the general interests of the people and not to tes of fes tedoistrial and eo. moefantes. It seems to me that we would gain greatly, pr®-mnJga-doing a real measure by which the people eomsumidor not be efefigado to buy exHusivasiente coffee ireestro, which hoard some pairsas and then, -rabrabbénderse of tas proteceiamistas laws, sell at prices leouánoa. Of course, at first glance, this criterion of mine seems strange to the one that some of our peütsros have always preached. It seems to be contrary, but it is not. Those who do would oppose it with all their incl - ino gir lmgsXn mi bledo the possessed eibsslñli minie to which the coffee is to be pasted. But, in my opinion, it is the people and s" these great interests that should deserve our attention, oda. And the people's interest is in acquiring coffee at a reasonable price. -- EXCHANGE MARKET 1 * I DoSars (Mew York) 20e . Lteres 4A9 Francs SJt s Pesetas 1W j both oarganisms, for I am united by bonds of close friendship with fas * bembres who imptrisaa and direct the eaíecÉividad polStiea and adnrinmlzatra re of Rio Piedras."
"WE ARE CONFIDENT THAT BY THE 1980 CENSUS, THE LITERACY RATE WILL HAVE BEEN
10 WILL HAVE BEEN REDUCED IN POERTO RICO TO LESS THAN 25 PERCENT" ? Says the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Francisco Vucarrondo M
The following is the second and last part of the paper read before the recent magna- lte assembly of teachers by the Deputy Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Vizearrondo: ANOTATIONS ON OUR SCHOOL SYSTEM. "From the recent study of the International Teachers' Institute of the University of California, we make these very interesting annotations: "The people of Puerto Rico have imposed upon their schools the double and difficult task of preserving Spanish, their vernacular language, and at the same time of dissenting in the rising generation, the ability to use English as a second language. "The per capita wealth of Ida is only one-sixth of the per capita wealth of the eastern states, and out of these meager resources the people of Puerto Ríen have built a monumental edifice of pol- ical instruction, and all this has been accomplished in the brief course of only a quarter of a century. The history of í* education in the United States i*o gives "a qjeavio iguaL *Tam earadaa^an cteAfiMo-etm nataMa toóte the problem tol aaalfabetánao, and have raised da Kañera considerable the "standard" of citizenship of the inhabitants of ! country. "The ability to speak English.
It is interesting to see the progress made by Puerto Ricans in learning and using the English language. Probably this progress has been greater since the year 1920 than in the previous decade. One out of ten of the population, that is, 14OJ0OO people speak English and have such a command of the language that it serves them in their daily and ordinary uses. This was in 1925. The number who speak it now easily passes 160,000. "By-products of the educational testing program implemented by the Committee.-The? tests confirm the evidence that the inhabitants of Port Rice reveal the same" remarkable intellectual ability as the great mass of the population inhabiting the cities and urban centers of the continental United States. 'Improving courses of study.-Reports from many districts show that school inspectors give intelligent attention to the improvement of courses of study. "More significant is the, revelation that there is a consideraHe number of teachers and of inspectors who think about courses constructively. ^^^Mfeabajo of Agriculture and rural Imm^p visited had some school hfierte. £■ many of them pupils, na only grew plants for their own garden^ but q. also produced a surplus to be taken home (and (Continued on 12, CoL 2)
(Unique since 1865) j ÜK ZZ \\\\ //^&¡¡^ v\ H Z x I ~ Afe ° I." "Sre£¿" -Ti H O ^Awarded* p ALCOHOLATE ' BARNES. -It is not possible to improve the product and we improve sa packaging.- Steam distilled 7f% Alcohol erenooreoo oom Reves 6. Morales * smobmpm* - ""- - -
ISABEL PARSI FL08ISTA Búa any work ea florea natural Raine al TWéfouo Hato Bey.
Chocóte Nomt & best of all.
LINDBERGH RESOLVES TO VISIT PUERTO RICO
M La afama per caHe al Praüeate ie HaitL-Neti-das rae tiese d Gebmader Tewaer M , * Last night we received from our Correspondents in the North, the following cablegram: PUERTO PRINCIPE, January 6.- (Press Unity-"The President of Haiti, Louis Borno, has received a cablegram from the- famous aviator Charles A. Lindbergh, in which he informs him that he has accepted his invitation to fly to Puerto Rico. He adds that he will soon cablegram the date of his arrival." TALKING TO GOVERNOR Towner In connection with this matter we called on Governor Towner last night, who, upon our inquiry, stated that he had learned from the "New York Times" that he had learned of the plan which aviator Lindbergh had outlined at the last minute, including the itinerary. 7-coL 8 A STREET IN PONICE TO BE NAMED "JOSE DE DIEGO AVENUE" M So agreed by the City Assembly at its last session r --M ■ _(Bfe aMatre Rtetaatag. ma-tarace, - Sr. Toms Cordova) At its last session, the Municipal Assembly of this city agreed to give the name of "Avenida Jose de Diego" to street No. 3, of the Parque Residencia, "La Alhambra", located on land immediately adjacent to the "Club Deportivo". The resolution approved to that effect was presented by Assemblyman Mr. Lo renzo LoubriéL The act of labeling the "Avenida José de Diego" will be carried out shortly, on a date to be determined by the municipal authorities. The Assembly also agreed in this same session to send a message of condolence to Mr. Antonie R. Barceló, on the occasion of the death of his son Jaime. This agreement was immediately complied with by Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonin, in his capacity as Vice-President of the Assembly. For Sale or Rent. Modern villa just built in the best place of "Ciudad Nueva". Four spacious bedrooms, etc. Will inform J.' Ochoa and Bro. Ochoa and Bro. Arturo Gonzalez San Juan, P. R. FOR SALE THE ESTABLISHMENT "LAMERCEDITA". Parada 15, Carretera. Will report, Gonzalez Martinez A Co. Tanca No. 11, San Juan, P. R. XcjSKsnjJjfe Zy>saBfe<^. lo fef Mjí e3 mi X^CfMTE^ y I F. CARREPAS HNQ | FOR RENT Four-room house sita Calle Francia No. 2, Stop 43, Santurce. Will report:- Park 54 o TeL 1508 blue, Santurat -
ENRIQUE DESCHAMPS OFFERS HIS IMPRESSIONS OF PUERTO RICO TO THE DOMINICAN PRESS.
-M Of the San Juan High School he says it looks like an Austrian palace.
From our Dominican colleague "Listín Diario" we take the following interview made to the distinguished Ibero-Americanist who recently visited our island, Don Enrique Deschamps :- I At the "Palace Hotel". With his proverbial kindness the illustrious publicist comes out to receive us. His appearance is robust and healthy. In his blond hair there are numerous silver threads. The inquisitive eyes are focused, behind the glasses, with an expression of accentuated myopia. In the sanguine cheeks and in the air of a well-preserved man, one can immediately see that he has lived in other milder climates, that his well-shaven complexion is not toasted by the tropical sun. His diction also reveals his long absence from his native soil. In it there is a marked castiza accent. -Devil, don't you get old," we exclaimed at the sight of him. -Don't you believe it. It's just that I know how to hide the years.... But life is in charge of reminding us of it at every step. .. I feel, it is true, strong and agile. I live a hygienic life. I observe a good method. Although I have slept very little for several years now.... This is a thing to which I am accustomed. Insomnia is my inseparable companion. It does not spoil me, without embarge. My appetite is excellent. And for my sake I can qgftjar- ? me ... Anyway, here I am, you have me here, you- 1 l ted -te -- passing through, for South America. Always passing through. That's my life: - an eternal journey; an incessant mutation of scenery. Today here. Tomorrow there. The day after there. Then, who knows where! -I envy him. I would be very pleased with this pilgrimage of a clairvoyant and sentimental tourist. Because that's what you are, no doubt. You go around the world observing everything, tasting everything, with the distinguished gesture of a "dilettanti"... Don Enrique smiles with a fipa smile. He takes his glasses and rubs them with a silk handkerchief, placing them back on his nose. And she plays, mechanically, with the pligues of her robe, of flowery ramazones, oriental style. We are in a room of the Hotel, high and ventilated. Light pours in through the large window. On the dressing table, I can make out a portrait. I immediately guess. t -Your daughter, isn't it? -Yes, he answers, flattered in his fatherly pride.... She is an interesting young woman, with an expressive face, delicate features and large, dreamy eyes, with long, silky eyelashes. -Where is she? -In Paris. She is a teacher. She speaks five languages: English, French, German, German, Italian and Spanish, since then, although this last one, although it is hers, is the one she masters the least, due to her exotic upbringing. .... 1 -You come now from Puerto Rico? What impression do you bring from that country? -Magnificent. They have showered me with attentions.
There I have been showered with attentions. I gave two lectures at the Escuela Superior that were a brilliant success. Suppose that more than six hundred students attended. And I was granted, as the greatest honor I could aspire to, that the students would take notes on the points I developed, to then treat them, as chosen topics, in their university courses. The building of this School is something marvelous. It looks like an Austrian palace. The theater it contains can seat up to sixteen hundred people. This fact is enough to give you an idea of what is e§e teaching campus. Now, San Juan de Puerto Rico has 37 schools, and any of them is superior to our Central University .... -How did you find this city? -As it was two years ago, more or less. More like melnos... I must say it with the frankness that characterizes me: our progress is too slow, desperately slow. We have local problems that should have been solved long ago. And yet they remain stationary. For example: you have the problem of the cemetery. Do you want something more important, more serious, more serious? We are burying our dead in the heart of the city. Just like thirty years ago. E^ time has passed, desdo qt" y® ¿WC "Sma-"qptoña, in "I TIN DIARIO, asking you ® moved to a more appropriate site. Well, the cemetery is still in the same place. The city has been expanding. And still "a has not developed any initiative to get rid of this embarrassment, for nothing else means a problem of this nature, in a capital of the rank of ours. -Another issue that requires a quick solution is the market. In what country in the world is it already customary to display the articles of daily consumption on the floor? This is profoundly ungienic and wrong (Continued on 8, Col. 4.) GOVERNMENT OF PUERTO RICO M DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE M Property Tax Bureau í _M NOTICE TO TAXPAYERS M You are hereby reminded that since January 1 15 is the date set by law for closing the tax list to be in effect for the next fiscal year, the Department maintains its rule ordering that as of January 16 of said month, no applications for the transfer, reassessment or subdivision of property for tax purposes for the next fiscal year shall be accepted. San Juan, Puerto Rico, December 29, 1927. Juan G. GALLARDO, Treasurer of Puerto Rico, (Announcement).
Aboso Riera & Co, tac. Once again conveniently installed, we are pleased to inform all our clients and friends that we are at your service at Tetuán 56, next to the offices and warehouses we occupied until now; since the conflagration that occurred at the "TOBACCO PALACE" has not altered in the least the course of our business.