ELA#NDO
1 Q^^' nas $ ctv8. I I] Semester - - - - 6.00 * V One Year 19.50 - - - ■ ' -J
- ■ QPages 3 Ctvs. I Office: "Puerto Rico ílusXVZtrado Bldr" -TeL 1222 i _
DIARIO D£ lA MAÑANA
-2o X | San Juan, Puerto Rico.
PabUahed aid diitrlbaUd "sder p.rmlt No. "01 antorUed by Act of October ", 1917, on file at th* *£* Juan, Porto Rico. By order of Ue Preaident, A. S. Bnrleaon Genera. Entered aa aecond class 31 - 1916 at the Port Office at Ban Juan, Porto Blco. (United States of America) under the Act of mark 3, 187".
| Saturday, July 28, 1926. Number 3098.
"THE SPANISH COLONY OF PEER TO RICO HAS BEEN CREDITED TO OUR CHARITY.
M "A colony that possesses such high titles may well use the services of the representative of Puerto Rico in the United States": Córdova Dávila.
The following is the full text of the speech delivered by the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington. Ledo. Félix Córdova Dávila. at the banquet that was offered to him by the Spanish Colony on the occasion of his being awarded the insignia of the Order of Isabella the Catholic, (an act that took place at the "Hotel Pala-'-" last Tuesday: "I have no words to express to the Spanish Colony my deep gratitude, and the emotion that overwhelms me at this moment in which I am the object of a tribute that I am far from deserving. A higher honor and greater satisfaction can hardly be offered to a Puerto Rican. "To appreciate this tribute, one must take into account what the name of Spain represents and means in Puerto Rico. It was Spain the discoverer and colonizer. It governed our destinies for a period of four hundred years, it gave us its blood, its language, its religion, its customs, its institutions, its laws, its traditions, its defects, its virtues, and in transmitting existence to us, it shaped and created the personality of my people, fertilizing it, with the sa via of its own personality. "We are united, then, by powerful, intimate, indestructible bonds which are prolonged and will be prolonged indefinitely as our souls unfold in their mysterious course towards the bosom of eternity.
"It is not the pressure of force i marada <b l power the nexus that ' i <>v no. unites. It is not the symbol , .'<> sovereignty imposing its : ';t "rity on us; it is love, the attraction , , , :ón < -spiritual <le two peoples who . ■ ;?-e: n'r.-tn in history the identity of .-their origin and feel in their | ■ latí those of the confratcr- । ! ni dad. j "Natural it is that this homage - q^e is paid today by the Spanish Colony to a Puerto Rican has for us spec.al significance. "Nothing more beautiful and encouraging one the fraternity between the pueAt this very moment American diplomacy and the chancelleries j European carry out active gestio- . t that promise to culminate in a solemn j na-tu, in an international commitment that guarantees the peace of the universe and contributes mightily to the happiness of the human race. "No < extracted that Puerto Riincuído by these currents of human fraternity, by the memory of the high things and the forgetfulness of the small ones, by the traction and by the history, try do : encircle o=p'i i:ually to the peoples of its origin, without forgetting do that somoa a separate gajo of! tree that spread its shade from the Mediterranean to the far shores of the Atlantic and the Pacific, and that, when its branches broke off, bequeathed to democracy twenty republics, and fifteen nations to humanity. . ' "And since the Consul of í (Continued page 12 column ")
Puerto Rico's Best Lot The CASA DE ESPAÑA EN PUERTO RICO Corporation is selling its magnificent lot on Baldorioty Square and Fortaleza and San José Streets. The purchase proposals must be sent in sealed envelopes until September 15 of the current year, at three o'clock in the afternoon, to our registered office, Alien 19, 2nd floor. The envelopes must be marked in a visible place with this warning: PROPOSAL FOR THE PURCHASE OF THE PLOT. For further information, please contact the office of the Corporation where they will be sent. Cecilio MORAN, President.
"BANCO COMERCIAL DE PUERTO RICO" Ordinary General Meeting of Stockholders of 1928 CONVOCATION Appointed by the Board of Directors on July 30, 1928 at 10:00 a.m. for the holding, at the domicile of this Corporation, Tctcáa No. 3, San Juan. P. R-, of the Ordinary General Meeting corresponding to the current year, all the stockholders are hereby summoned to the same, making them aware that in addition to the matters within the competence of this Meeting, the Board will propose the amendment of clauses 7*, 8', 10*, 16*, and 17 of the Articles of Incorporation, and Articles 10, 11, 1 2, and 18 of the By-laws. The attendance, annual report and balance sheet shall be forwarded to you in due course. San Juan, P. R. May 1 1 , 1928. GABRIEL DE LA HABA, Secretary, San Juan, P. R., May 1 1, 1928,
San Juan Polyclinic BALASQUIDE - MARINA BUILDING This scientific center will be inaugurated on August 1, 1928. It has a professional service of 25 doctors, 10 nurses and the most modern hospital and clinic equipment. Two medical offices will operate from 9:00 am to 9:00 pm. The price is very reasonable both for consultations and hospitalization.
THE CANDIDACIES OF MARTINEZ NADAL AND ROSSY
IRAN INSCRITAS EN "TICKET" APARTE M Under the inscription of "Partido Histórico" (Historic Party), a key as insignia M According to a recent opinion of the Supreme Court of Pusito Rico, the Puro Republican Party may register candidates per convention. Lately, said party certified before the Executive Secretary to have changed its name from "Partido Constitucional Histórico" to "Histórico" and its insignia, the "Elephant", to a "Key". According to declarations made yesterday by Ledo. Rafael Martínez Nadal, President of the Pure Republican Party, his candidacy for Senator "at large" and the candidacy of Ledo. Manuel F. Rossy, ?parji representative & the House by accumulation will be registered in a separate "ticket" or with the inscription of "Historic Party" and under the Have as insignia. This will be communicated to the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico from one moment to the next. The new municipal regime will be governed by the traditional reservations that sustain the respect for the prevailing democracy and when more we have alleged that "the government is of the people by and for the people"; and it seems to me that the last minute innovations justify serious and grave doubts as to the success of the municipal regime. The new Municipal Law that has been approved to take effect on July 28 of the current year, when our activities are most alive and when we are most concerned about our administration, eliminates, in my opinion, the initiative and intervention of the people, reducing the Municipal Assemblies to mere bodies of consent or approval of the particular initiatives of an executive; and apart from the fact that this implies ignorance that the civic spirit that has given us the personahdad we enjoy today as (continued on page 8, Col. 5)
IBS? *EXCLUSIVE ,
SATURDAY 28th OPENING of this new establishment. NEW AND EXTENSIVE ASSORTMENT For Ladies, Gentlemen and Children. Specialty in Models for LADIES. BEAUTIFUL STOCKINGS S. LEMA & CO. SAN JUSTO 29 Next to "La Mallorquína*' San Juan, P. R.
vi ■1 l w '
AT THE CINEMA... Feeling discomfort in your eyes? See optometrist Dr. R. Nazario Delgado. Jewelry and Optical "Frank Lopez & Co." Salvador Brau 42. San Juan, Puerto Rico.
DECIDE! M ' NEW TRUCKS GRAHAM BROTHERS M ANDREU, AGUILAR 4 CO. communicate to the public that they have just received from the famous builder of the best trucks in the world, DODGE BROTHERS INC., brand new Graham Brothers Trucks, all manufactured with SIX CYLINDER engines, with FOUR BRAKES, FOUR VEHICLES and other ESSENCE IMPROVEMENTS. Brand new 1-1'4 and 1 3'4 ton mode I ios. More speed, more safety, more capacity and more economy (advertisement). I CEMENT OVER Dock VILLAR & Co, Inc. mo NKM TODAY SATURDAY GREAT SUCCESS THE EMERALDS AND REPEAT OF WILD LOVE Tomorrow Sunday-Two Shows Matinee and Noehe.
GOMAS "KELLY" - HUDSON 1928 TAC NíWF H ADF^ 31 x 6.20 - BALLOON HEAVY-DUTY L(CU 11 K7 9 l^UnVA/J (Oversize of the 31 x 6.00) -GIUSTISIf you have, a 1928 Hudson and want a stronger, more durable X/FNIT A FQPFCI AI rubber than the one you bring from fá- ▼ " luluv/l/ALi brica (31 x 6.00) put it "KELLY" 31 x 6.20, Heavy 1 - 2 - 3 - 3 - 4 - 6 AUGUST Duty Bauoon. SUITS AND HATS san juan, p. r. Prices Never Seen. Unbeatable!
MARTINEZ NADAL THINKS HE SHOULD IM
PUGNATE BEFORE THE FEDERAL COURT M Certain resolution of the Insular Board of Elections M Related to electors of the city of Mayaguez M The Supreme Court lately declared without place the "mandamus" filed by the Partido Republi cano Puro to order the Insular Board of Elections to reinstate in the electoral lists certain electors of Mayagüez who were eliminated from the same for not having voted in the elections of 1924. El Ledo. Rafael Martinez Nada!, President of the Pure Republican Party, is of the opinion that such a course should be taken before the Federal Court because in his opinion "precepts of the Organic Act and of the Constitution of the United States are violated by depriving the right to vote to voters who meet all the requirements that our laws require of citizens to be able to exercise the right of suffrage". i The lawyers who brought the matter before the Supreme Court, according to Lelo. Supreme Court. according to declarations of Lelo. Rafael Martinez >adal, have not decided what attitude they will adopt with respect to the decision issued by the Supreme Court.
THEIR BUSINESS IS IN CAGUAS Renting new houses for commerce and hotel. Buy bricks and beams from aosubo. Address to Box 503, Caguas, P. R.
ISABEL PARSI FLORISTA For any work in natural fio rea call Phone 120, Hato Rey.
"WE HAVE BEEN REDUCED TO THE SECONDARY POSITION OF MERE COM
I CANNOT ACCEPT WITHOUT PROTEST THE REFORM IMPOSED ON OUR CURRENT MUNICIPAL RE GIMEN" M Perez Marchand says as he resigns as Assemblyman of Ponce -- IV."
(From our editor in Ponce) i M The following is the full text of the resignation of R. V. Pérez Marchand as municipal assemblyman of Ponce: Ponce, July 26, 1928. Hon. Municipal Assembly of Ponce, P. R. Comrades and friends: These lines will serve to bring to you the irrevocable resignation of my position as Municipal Assemblyman of Ponce, which during the said Court, but he is of the opinion that it can and should be appealed to the Federal Court to challenge as unconstitutional the resolution of the Insular Board of Fic- tions in relation to the aforementioned electors of Mayaguez.
I have had the honor to serve with you to the best of my strength and ability during the political-administrative term of 1924-1928. The fundamental reason for this determination on my part is that I cannot accept without protest the reform which the last law of our Legislature establishing the system of local government of the municipalities of Puerto Rico imposes on our current municipal regime. It is not my purpose to make by this letter of resignation a criticism of the new legislation. But I do want to say to you with absolute frankness something about my attitude and my position in this matter. I find no general justification whatsoever in our Lia for centralizing, as has been the case with the centralization of the municipal administrative and administrative v ; da in Puerto Rice, precisely when we should have been most aware of the
THE LCDO. MIGUEL A MUÑOZ RE-ELECTED COMMANDER OF THE "AMERICAN LEGION" IN PUERTO RICO.
-. M The annual assembly agreed to arrange for the establishment of a hospital for veterans on the island.
By LEBRON ORTIZ (Special Correspondent of "EL MUNDO"). M The American Legion, Puerto Rico Chapter, held its annual assembly in Fajardo, the site designated at the previous assembly held in Guayama. Fajardo had been prepared to receive the Legionaries, having helped a lot to the interest of this assembly the popular enthusiasm on the occasion of the patron saint festivities that are currently being celebrated in that population Distinguished people attended the assembly among whom we remember Ledo. Miguel A. Muñoz, Commander of the Chapter of Puerto Rico; Dr. Garcia de Quevedo; Dr. Pereira Lea; Ledo. Porrata Doria, Francisco R. Fernán tez, Rafael Nido Jr; José A. Lambog!ia; and Mr. Noah Shepard, of the Federal Bane©. Before beginning the administrative work, the legionnaires and visitors invited by the various posts were treated to a banquet by the Fajardo Post, ably commanded by Mr. Juan M. Santiago. About r. cfos in the afternoon the administrative work began under the presidency of Comandante Ledo. Miguel A. Muñoz. In attendance were delegates from the posts
of Guayami, Fajardo, Juncos and San Juan, as well as the members" of the Executive Committee with the exception of Dr. Berrios Berdecia, First Viee-Comendante of the Puerto Rice Chapter and Commander of the Port of Guayama. Dr. Derríta Berdecia was suffering from a severe flu, which was the reason for his inability to attend. In keeping with the brevity of these notes we will not give extensive details of the assembly, limiting ourselves to say that important agreements were reached. Among these agreements were two resolutions "condemning the improper use of the name of the Legion for partisan and political matters". In addition, it was agreed to request a location for the Legion in the Capitol, as well as to request the establishment of a hospital for veterans in Puerto Rico. This last proposal was made by Dr. García de Quevedo, delegate for the Puc-to do San Juan. During the assembly, or part of the time of the same were present some persons expressly invited, as well as several Legionnaires who were not delegates. We remember Ledo. Harry Besosa; Mr. Whitford, of Washington, D. C.; Ledo. Fulgencio Piñeiro; Mr. Juan Carreras, Director (Continued on page 8, Col. 5).
------------a*--- LADIES!!! Gentlemen!!! NEVER ANOTHER EQUAL OPPORTUNITY Great clearance sale of samples for Ladies. Over two thousand pairs at $2.00 and $3.00 Sensational surprise with Gentlemen's Samples. From famous brands, such as Walk-Over, Taylor, Beacon and others, at $3.00 pair. When we advertise something, we have what we advertise "LA FAVORITA" San Justo 31. JOSE LEMA & CO.
300,000 SNOW-BALL REFRACTORY BRICKS Melting Point: (Seger Cone: 33-34) Equivalent to 1800® C - 32729 F. ASK PRICE ON SUCS SPRING. DE ABARCA - San Jaan, P. R.
Why do some rides end so soon Sorry, but I have to go home now. I seem to be chased by the worst luck. I can never have a cook for long. It was the same for me before I used EL MUNDO Classifieds to solve my domestic problems. Now I have nothing to worry about. With an ad I can choose from the many cooks who answer the ads in EL MUNDO.