* - V" ' ' ' elmindo
-I QPátinas 3 Ctea. - I íiMfcin": Tuerto Eám t "rafe SWto* -TeL 1&
1 Q Pages 3 Ctvs. I Zy Semester - - - - 5.00 * ^^Un-Afe |9.50,
WEEKDAY MORNING
AáoX
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
WktataX ana "MdbMeX "atar pactar Ka tal aata-Uta W_t*" rá af O loom S. 1917. "a fila at o" Pert Office st San . Jsaai. Parts Wtaa 9r ccSar af "te PraSHaut. a. S Variaae" Pawta" Cañera. BctereX aa aaeata elaaa mattar. february Z1 I 191" at Ta Peat OtBe" at San Jnan. Parta Bien, (tfcttta tetes af Anecies) andar te tat af a>areb S. 1879. i
Saturday, October 20, 1928. a
Number 31 7 8.
'Iglesias is manhandled in Washington and subjected to WiHiam Green's iron will."
"the feet farce is uncovered. And d Her pe faege de refalar ehrcr" ya m pede ' segar desenpñaade sa false papeT, dre Banda -. as.
The PresüÍCTrte- fel Senada and 5í- j íer dt lia "Aliaarsai PcFrtorriiqnH- ■ ■aT dnm .tome K- Earesáfe aa- ' toriza. "i signÍHife "■statement" cmnzstanrdto tas -fectarateanes' qjs? wihiírainTHff in sample edieicm te ^rer <feí Senadón - SantitaS® Ijfe®2s: - "Nátta more ráSeufe 1 ta sstíniaeümr qwe' se terivai fe those nraintfestafeones fjae for ^er ¿íchas s® Eos Es so many United,. hude w nns "mecen saífícíeHtennente tofevta.. taS vct: pndirfan cascsaor ai^úa et tt", pera mo" to be' peufrlueatóas in Puerto JEian, tstnfe "íiniroroemcs ta history,. lias ejeeurcrtas and tas pra" pastures <fe Santiago' I^esa.?- v tente we know todir fe "IW 1 Se* that branched movímíeirts ^r ¿1 "of fiteraas E&erafes*. and "ja" he presents, am^ttosanrrate. ennt" ; wpresentatrvo of tay uuritareses ú®fcstmales, agrfentar, ramenriáfe-í j $l,*00 "aviados by the Red Cross of H Salvador 3í-((NOTE ©'OCTAL* "The (Ga&ensaáor Ha retribuí® fe' ! ©ronsej® Suiprannr fe la Craz Eitfa te Ssm Audítiííct C^stóirii. fit sum <fe fÜJIGO' j "m the Aamlfcs "Tambtom Photon has rerahüí® PS'l-íW fe ( ta "UTrici Median"' C®-* y RaOiM ta "ID-mmewiiiW (T<rffee Cau. am ' ha" fe Da aíadarf fe Nuieva Teafc.' through fe their renresentaaE- 11 tas ai Port Rfatr, Messrs. Snare and. Ce-, raIT® fe la Crat aránrero 1J San Juan:""- .
ny fasta "wrporfeiTOff, and esyv jnr>Fpurpose' n"' is "tra "pse the fe'"na "trabuEir to the tanjta fe Ha ALaanra ; : in aa e^m^nÍBEnnii"' fe Eferzs fra(tasafe^ fe tefes tas ttarmpcs and caH rentes fe aeeptam to,fes tos. [pntijgraines and emartwJan: to* ' fes fej barrieras pe rqjiae ctomñltaaraE fe ttofes tas prw-graines and trai (eMiKtram all fes tanfera.?. rofenfe by ansa pástete fe fenwo "raEdfei and te perraraaeióii social | ¿anfes geosCTnaii'a "n Pnerto CT "Esa.i iitati:íesracTC'5te< fel seSo® ¡ ¡ íyiesfes jomen fe mansfíestoi tofe ; Ia rasasfe del pretetolfe hfer y j ' áescnferfflE. fe ma ^ez, la falta fe | | ransistenxEia mora!, nnteleetnal and Eraae-a-a ¿a* sentñfo wnnnas qoe ®a prevafeeiife' always em la mento | ' 'Ew.nrnSsáira fe that tarantee whose few | ' ea poEtiea has always had jara I norm, jertarfcar fe tramítela com- s ' (ñenefe fe*U pnebl t, eiptatand® fe | ¡ misery fe !®s asm", the ígnoramxrfe ll ife tos others, and the afan fe ham>> and | I medra fe tas ufe E knows "jpe 8 nothing yunfe tamer a toase fe afeas ¿ranonaita^ of <'m5en and fe peace. por- P Iijne for es® has Efferes fe so- ! ! so-tea Paerto Rico in sas prajtos j j'íñjox. .jamás sos afeas se tas em- " 1 eretsidb fe'SHiffiiemfe'' ™n ideaL m es- i r.al>leeíe®fe' sm pracrama. Sa me® , te está fiíja en to infero croe ia si- ¡' fe y es: cm ranEzassta. cm anar- í ■quisca fe- las rajas ftande-as i®- , I xas. eae sabiemfe "jae no pmefe i p-redoaEmar fescutefenfese ente- Q " jámente a la fea fe la felá y ante i Ja* Estafes Unite j cromo la on® j 'es. and sabfemfe "jn" no longer jusfeí "sustain itself ámtra fe that far-" sa. aoeía ateta a la ereacánE te [ ''ese "¿anxfemoná™'' te ínewn "irairaB | 1-fConÉñsiBa pá<ma S eroloEma
Porto Rico TAphone Company will not charge for the time its service was interrupted due to the recent hurricane. MI. Gecrges Villard. Vice President and General Mtai^ger of lia. Porto Ríe© TePephome Company. has autotriizad© the ptublliicaciám diell following statement for corro© imiiento jwuilbOica. The International TelepHncine & Telegraph Corperatjovn has sent a cablegram to our company on the 17th day of the current year, authorizing it not to charge for the time that our service has been interrupted due to the recent hurricane. Such measure obeys first of all to the desire of both companies to help in these difficult times those subscribers of the Porto Rico Telephone Company who have suffered material damages with the unfortunate event that we all call. Therefore, no subscriber of this company will be charged for the time during which our service has been interrupted, and the corresponding deduction will be made from the monthly rent discounting the days during which our subscribers have not had telephone service. With the purpose of frightening our accounts properly, this company begs to all the adbonadoo that teragon servieño at the present time that they make effective sis receipts of September and October, in the security that in our receipt of the next month of November will be made faith déduccicn in Ha rent^ by the days without service before announced. As for those persons who, for reasons beyond our control, do not yet have telephone service, a receipt will not be issued until they do not have service, so that we may make the corresponding deduction until the last day they are to be credited. We hope that the public, who have so generously paid our receipts for the last two months, will pay up to October to make it easier for us to credit the days of service to the amount of next November's rent. M. GEORGES VILLARD. CASALDUC i CASALDUC The House To the Lots Merchandise in genenJ. Visílenos. Craz No. 12 TeL 2022 Apartado 997 San Joan, P.R.
ON THE 29th OF OCTOBER IN COURSE THE SCHOOLS WILL BE CLOSED FOR ONE WEEK EXCEPT FOR THE HIGHER SCHOOLS. What we are informed by Sub-Commissioner Vizcarrondo M _ _ _ _ EI Safifr-CaHMsasaato te festra;-I-tan Pmtoltaa. señar Framcisct" Viz- j eamcffe, mas fea iafronnafe! that - eon mrotiiT© fe la later qoe "a® a | a | to | perform Iros master of tas esrae tas moral and arb-acas directed arbíáos prorí Iros nsspeetares fe "tetrit® and ©&rtaIles fel Regímtante <55 fe tefanteria ¡. to fetalize the exact E-ámer® dej pén&ías caused jmt the tarara® of the 1S fe setámsfce. will be terra-., given by ®ma gg-marat tas esemitas r® B I I rales and nrfiiajias pe-re ntortaaiente. In the sea asa of ayter. ensacas"® in ¡jes will proeetea to give tas explicacfemes pertinent to the | । peroteres te escuetas fe lia isla lj libre 'a tabor "rae feab'üán fe perform, tnrsñmros rorasió® fe nrfc.-mar-I mes cerra te' projiw" señar Vizea- ¡, rroná® croe tas esetetas se cerrarám | el 2S fe roetabre en rars®, a exrepi "rón fe- tar esraelas superior- pa- " ra poder ayudar eíírazm>nte e® es- । ta fetter "pm? has cs'roeado on the , Bmagfeteríro the Central Comüé In- : Irestigadior presidi-fe- p®r the Mayror 1 Ridjfey. This feeisíón. torated by the De- 1 partaonentro fe Instrweirós" ecn res- " 1 I perotó to the suspense® of rotases for j' iioia week, it was agreed to . have batead® extensively cms Major ELfjg^^y ta tereeroién of! Dej partamentro and have estiEdiani® a l'frondo the asmmtí". In ta remiite fe I Iayer tos rnsperotorts. inspectors' assistants and teachers of a^ricnlII tima, dásetstierron under.ro ta direcrió® of their respective efártales of dis-trít-j" ta Labor q're- are going to perform in mtinaa rorotateraeió® with e! w."^taterío" insult tasto of ta zone wb ana eonnro of the mi COMPLETE STUDY OF THE CICLON OF SAN FELIPE OF "SEPTEMBER 13, 1928. | The Revista de Obras Públi- ■ J cas de Puerto Rico, in its September issue next pa- I sado publishes interesting ar- ' ticulcs by Dr. Fass^ Director of the Office of! Weather- 11 po of the United States Department of Agri' culture in this city and others, on í detailed studies of that cyclone and of the cyclones which cross the West Indies during the j period from July to October. ■ Those wishing to purchase es-, te issue at 50 cts. the exemplar may address themselves to: REVISTA DE OBRAS PUBLICAS Apartado 1324. San Juan,' Puerto Rico. URBANIZACION LAS PALMAS Xo safrññ nothing this arbaaizacáóa coa ci cídón. New homes with easy installments. IPar" fe amtad" 52*" to $540 Paca monthly S32 to SIS Alta, seroiro and fi- CoástroeCÜM tiTMi Will serve you gqagnaw cams tanta. Anortate 3155. Santarce. Tráfems" IS"! Santnrce. ISABEL PARSI FLOKISTA Faca entatomer trabado in flowers natarstes Fit j -1 TrWte ii 13", Ente Bey LOST | In Montefiores police dog Col-lie 2 years old, res- 1 ponde the name Peggy, j It will be gratified by its owner. | DR. JOSE VICENTE '
HARUNEZ NADAL SAID IN CAGUAS THAT THE COALITION WOULD TRIUMPH IN SIX SENATORIAL DISTRICTS.
TORIALES, CONSIDERING GSAYAIA -MRivera Martinez proclaimed the importance of the work done in Washington by Senator Iglesias, responding to an allusion to the effect M
(From nraestro Correspondent in 1 Caguas) M En ta moche fe! wednesday, day. 17 fe-I corrieKte month the CronstitaroííJBal Socialists of this my ricipaMad organized and eferotoarom um political rally at the ca- ■ He "Corchado", in front of the IPalnser Patch, badly attended by a huge tí-tofo,. I During the evening of the 17th, the propaganda exerted from the Socialist-Constitutional Socialist rostrum heard arguments tending to refute what the opponents of the Constitutional Socialists had said the night before, and certain explanations that another Socialist-Constitutional Socialist leader had made to the mohe1-í^mbres for the purpose of ins- " ramming the way in which they were to vote in the coming elections. The first to speak were Messrs. Antonio Arroyo, Ledo ' Segarra. Manuel Torres Vega, -Juan Delfaus and Ramon Barrios. All these gentlemen spoke about politics in general, and for this purpose they urged their Socialist Constüucio- 1 nal co-religionists to make war on the Alianza portorriqueña through the right of suffrage, and there on the morning of the 6th of November next, which will be the fe-|| 'cha in which we will have to go to the polls.
The next morning of November 6, which will be the date on which votes will have to be deposited in the elected ballot boxes. Then succeeded in the use of the floor the Ledo. Alfonso Lastra Chárriez who in his speech de?meted, in his opinion, the policy that was developed to form the Aliancista Party and also explained the reasons that induced him to withdraw from the struggles that he sustained in harmony with Antonio R. Barceló. He also combated the present policy developed by the Aliancista leaders in this country. At the end of the Ledo. Lastra Chárriez's speech, as well as all the speakers who preceded him in the use of the word, was the object of great applause. A few moments later the labor leader Mr. Antonio Arroyo introduced Dr. - Mctor Coll Cuchí. Dr. Coll y Cuchí made a history of the development of socialism, from its beginnings in India where these ideas were introduced by Buddha whom he called the spiritual Father of Socialism, then he discussed how and in what way these ideas were retained in the hearts of the people who love humanity, until the death of Jesus in Galilee, whom he considered as the most important of all the socialists.
Red Cross to invest in the island no less than $1,000,000in reconstruction materials.
M But it is not yet able to give precise numbers in this regard M National American Red Cross delegates are not yet in a position to report the exact number of houses they propose to build in Puerto Rico for storm victims. Although they will proceed immediately with this work by sending to the interior of the island building materials to begin in the first place the reconstruction and repair of those houses of insolvent people who were destroyed, they are not yet able to state the number of houses they will build or the amount of money they will invest in this work. In response to inquiries made yesterday at the headquarters of the National American Red Cross, we were informed that they are already in the process of purchasing building material in the local market, and that from now on they will place continuous orders from all the stores in the country until all the necessary material is acquired. We were informed that they were not in a position to supply us with specific data on the amount of these purchases of construction materials, but that they could assure us that the said institution will invest no less than one million dollars in Puerto Rico for lumber, zinc and other items necessary for the construction of cases. FOOD AND HOSPITAL EQUIPMENT: The Red Cross keeps on buying
Rafael Cuevas Ze.queira sends us for publication in "EL MUNDO" the following open letter:- October 19, 1928. Mr. José Ortíz Lecodet, San Juan, P. R. Dear friend:- In spite of my firm will not to pay public attention to matters that do not have for me an essentially professional character, I am obliged to refute certain statements that you make regarding me in an article entitled "Juzgue el País" that appeared in the edition of "La Democracia" corresponding to the 19th of the present month. You say: "There is the illustrious personality of Ledo. Rafael Cuevas Zequeira who, defeated for senator for the Humacao district, remains firm as an impregnable granite rock, defending from the back of his famous law office the principles of the Alianza Puertorriqueña". He has been a strong advocate of the principles of the Alianza Puertorriqueña from his famous law firm." Putting aside the generous adjectives, which often obey the empire of the local food market to be sent to the interior of the island as well as the effects of hospitals for the different municipalities where medical attention is provided to the sick.
I WAS NOT DEFEATED FOR SENATOR FOR THE DISTRICT OF HUMACAO" M "YOU WOULD HAVE USED THE WORD 'DEFEATED' IN THE PAST," HE SAID. M "you would have used the word 'defeated' and your statements would have been more in harmony with the truth" - - ■ M says Ledo. Cuevas Zequeira commenting on an article by Mr. Ortiz Lecodet M
■ tancias, I have to inform you that I was not defeated for ■ senator for the district of HumaContinued on p. 14-col. 7 ; LACORTEDEDEDISTRI TO DE MAYAGUEZ ORDERS THE REPLACEMENT OF DOCTOR MARTY M As head physician of Cabo Rojc M From Mayagüez we received yesterday the following telegram: EL MUNDO, San Juan. "The District Court of Mayagüez has ruled in favor of Dr. Randolfo Marty, the pending case of "Certiorari'* - initiated by me against the Mayor of Cabo Rojo, Mr. Domingo Pé" ' rez. The latter dismissed me from my position as head physician because I had been engaged in political propaganda in ' favor of the Alliance, which would have harmed the service I was called to render to the residents. The Mayor acted as accuser and judge. At last, justice is finally due. This case had been pending since January of this year. The Court orders my immediate reinstatement" Dr. Randolfo MARTY.
AUTOMOBILISTAS We have already received "Gasolina Esso" (red color) which we sell exclusively at our service station, Parada 6. Try it in your car and you won't use any other WEST INDIA OIL COMPANY
PADIN| WE NEED A THOUSAND MEN "750 with a To Give you for that sum a washable suit of Genuine English Thread worth $15.00 This occasion is unique and everyone should take advantage of it There are all sizes for men and young men A LIST AND OTHER FANTASIES GONZALEZ PADIN C0. t INC. San Juan Ponce Mayaguez j
1 EL CAPRICHO] i NOW....! Come see the fabrics we have discounted to 11c., 15c~ 20c. 25c^,and three yards for $1.00. On sheets, bedspreads and mosquito nets we have prices. in stock. "EL CAPRICHO" Alien, corner to Tanca. -Opposite Luiña. II PASTILLO I The best table water. I See your wonderful analysis I Special price lOe. bottle. I PASTILLO JUNERAL SPRINGS CO. I ~ Ptaee "P. B.
Respectable family home Allen St., No. 47. San Juan, P. R. admits wards of both sexes with good references. Offers home-delivered meals at modest prices. Service is excellent. WATCHES Our large assortment from $3 to $15 all have been reduced to $3.55, strap, band and pocket watches. Examine your eyes with Felix Lopez, Brau 32. j
COMPAGME GENERALE TRANSATLANTIC}^ French Steamer "MACORIS" Expected in this port from Bordeaux about the 26th current, and will continue voyage bound for Puerto Plata, Cap Haitien, Port au Prince and Santiago de Cuba the same day. - Admits cargo and passage for the above mentioned ports in the Antilles. For further information please contact: BEHN BROTHERS INC. agents TELEPHONE 256. SANJUAN.
I need a Thousand More People (Men and Women) who suffer from DEAFNESS to bring them the happiness of hearing in clear and natural tones speeches, conferences, conversations, etc., with the ACOUSTICON. 99 percent of the hearing aids used in Puerto Rico are ACOUSTICON brand. Recommended by the most* famous spec.alists in Puerto Rico and abroad. Payment facilities if desired. Ask for information to: R. ORTIZ OLAYA, Apartado 1518, San Juan, P. R.
APOLLO Ribbed Zinc Immediate delivery all sizes. _ _ _ 4 CO. Tel. 637, San Juan, P. R".
AZUCAR GARCIA A SANCHEZ P. O. Box 322. Te! 83 Caguas, P. R.