THE WORLD
1 Q Pages 3 Ctvs. I Semester - - _ 6.00 * One Year - - 19.50
r- -a - ■'? t.tjm. 1 1 Q Pages 3 Ctvs. I z\ Office: "Puerto Rleo HmIkZ irado Bldg." ^-TeL 1222 i
MORNING JOURNAL
Year X San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Fubllihed dlitributed under permit No. 801 "tortead by **" Act of October ", 1917, on file at the Poet Office at San Juan, Porto Elco. By order of the Freaident, A. S. Burleaon Poasmaster General Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919 at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Bico (United States of America) under the Act of March 3, 1879.
| Saturday, July 21, 1928.
I Number 3091
"TO MAKE POLITICAL CAPITAL OUT OF THE WOUND INFLICTED BY AN EXTRAORDINARY
BARCELO WILL BE VERY CONVENIENT TO MR. TOILS SOTO" ''But he had better not continue to widen the deep wounds inflicted on the people by his actions as a legislator and public man": Iglesias _M
Partid-) Socia-1-ta President, Senator Santiago Iglesias, authorizes the following "stat'-m-.'T' "In Puerto Rico, as in cus: ♦everywhere where labor. '.<>res still lack a conscious and vigorous economic, agricultural and ■.''dustrial organization. ' ís elections mean for muiros leaders d P second order dd dd party ^that is seized to the p.der tomo ur.a leech to the flesh, to speak much of sacrifices ant ' the "Altar of the homeland'', to "shed the blood and give the vi la" for the ' sacrosanct love to the homeland" and above all, without forgetting that one must flatter the boss qu c c túrne the distribution of prebends in his hand. This is done at banquets at rallies, prepared expr - foso, as a theatrical exhibition or a party of incipient lite ratos is organized. "Sometimes men come to believe that they alone are the only ones entitled to manage the nation and its government, as a private property, becoming the contractors and dispensers of the furniture and the sections formerly occupied by the Santurce Post Office. For more information, please contact Miranda Hermanos, Santurce, P. R.
public posts and d' peace and social order. "We all suppose that the representative posts of the insular Parliament and of the government of the country, must be the result of the free "'lesson '■ d v cons -ntir.iLmto of the people. Much is said of the latter academically, but the '..and it is violated to the point of causing the people the double evil of corrupting or violating it. The people are no longer resigned to being the companions of a group of privileged people. The people have understood the significance of the institutions of American democracy and want to use them in the service of their country. Before election day, fireworks and bombs are used with a profusion of words, most of the time insincere, thus preparing the "great day of the holocaust to the homeland", with music, noisy demonstrations, cheers to Puerto Rico and its people, vivas to Puerto Rico and to its "liboi tadores" who always belong to the only party that has seven me public employees, that is, the most and the best", and thus the popularity of those who claim to represent the "sovereignty of the people", not the corporations and reactionary businesses, has been fabricated. "At the "Palace" banquet "fireworks and bombistics" of all kinds were set off. The master Muñoz Rivera was mentioned in poetry and prose, by those who throughout his life had been his most terrible accusers, having attacked and criticized him harshly, but now he is enjoying his inheritance of his po(Contihúa page R column 6>.
ROIG COMMERCIAL BANK HUMACAO, P. R. BALANCE SHEET AT THE CLOSE OF BUSINESS ON THE AFTERNOON OF JUNE 30, 1928. ASSETS: Cash and Banks $243,489.85 Loans and Discounts 479,725.27 Fixtures, Furniture and Printed Matter .... 8,994.63 Dividend Encro'April 1928 3,128.10 Other Assets 1,045.70 $736,383.55 LIABILITIES: Realized Capital $1 10,360.00 Undistributed Profit ... 7,210.82 Reserve Fund ... .. 3,581.41 Net Profit first half 1928 6,329.99 $127,482.22 Deposits 433,907.28 Certified Checks 4,292.78 Other liabilities 170,701.27 $736,383.55
SOCIETY DANCE TONIGHT At the VANDERBILT COUNTY SWIMMING POOL 9 P. M. to 1 A. M. Music by Midnight Serenade. M. Music by Midnight Serenaders.
ENSANTURCESE HAS REGISTERED A CASE OF INFANTILE PARALYSIS.
M And in Arecibo there is one clinically suspected M Yesterday afternoon we interviewed the epidemiologist of the Department of Health, Dr. E. Garrido Morales, so that he could inform us about the course of the investigations he has been carrying out on the outbreak of infantile paralysis that has recently arisen on the island. Dr. Garrido Morales informed us that no new cases have been reported in Vega Baja but that a case has recently been discovered in Santur ce. The clinically suspected case was later confirmed positive by lumbar puncture. "The epodemiological history of this case," said Dr. Garrido, "leads us to believe that the infection was contracted in Vega Baja and that it was part of that small epidemic outbreak. Since the infectious period in this case has expired, there is no longer room for alarm of any kind. The Department of Health has been informed of a clinically suspicious case in the town of Arecibo. Dr. Garrido Morales will make his examination today to sign the existence of the disease in the patient or to make the pertinent diagnosis. ". - Army and Navy" reports the probability that a retired military man will be appointed Governor of Puerto Rico M WASHINGTON, July 20 (Pren. ea-via "Radio Corporation of America"). The "Army and Navy" rev.sta reports that there has been discussion of the possibility of a new Governor being appointed for Puerto Rico upon the emergence of the next national administration. It adds that there is a likelihood that a military officer will be appointed and that in that event it will not be an active duty officer but a retired one. UNITED PRESS
"THE 'FARMERS' ASSOCIATION' HAS PRESENTED ITSELF BEFORE THE PUBLIC
THE PUBLIC OPINION TO BE JUDGED ACCORDING TO ITS ACTS."
--¥ - Says the Acting President of said organization, Mr. Pesquera, replying to Senator Iglesias
The Acting President of the Farmers' Association, Mr. José L. Pesquera, has delivered the following statement replying to the statements made by the President of the Socialist Party, Mr. Santiago Iglesias, to one of our editors, which appeared in Thursday's edition: "Senator Santiago Iglesias, in the statements he made to a representative of EL MUNDO and published by this newspaper in its edition of the 19th of this month, recognizes: "1st - That the movement which the Farmers' Association has been sustaining in the last few years has been a very important one, and that it is a very important one. That the movement that the Farmers' Association has been supporting aims at "the achievement of such a transformation that will make it possible for the real farmers and the many suffering people of the country to live decently under the protection of a legislation and administration inspired by the environmental welfare of our people.That our attitude is "worthy of applause"; that the program of the Farmers' Association "would do the country a great deal of good if put into practice"; and that it is "logical that the farmers should have such noble aims". "But Mr. Iglesias fears: "1st.-That our proceedings may not be sincere; and "2nd.-That our movement may culminate "in understandings and conciliations, in consequence of which we offer our "co-operation and adherence to the very men responsible for the wrongs denounced." "We thank Mr. Iglesias for the recognition he makes of the nobility of our purposes, of the plausibility of our attitude, and of the benefit of our program. "And as for the fears and doubts that he expresses, we do not really have arguments to dispel them; the Farmers' Association has presented itself before the
The Association of Agriculturalists has been before the Puerto Rican public opinion for four years now, to be judged according to its acts; and the men who have been appointed by the Association to direct it and to defend its principles, which we consider to be of the utmost importance: jstenor its principles, which we consider salvationist, in assuming the enormous responsibility that goes with this mission of trust and patriotism, we have faced all the consequences, including that of having our actions prejudged and our sincerity questioned, as the distinguished President of the Socialist Party has now done in the statements he has given to the publicity in EL MUNDO. "Per lo demás, y para que se conozca de una vez la posición en que nos encontramos con respecto a convenios o compromisos con los partidos políticos, Insert below the following statements of our Association, (Continued on p. 11 col. 7.) 0® Por PAOLI SABADO 21 DE JULIO, 8:45 NOCHE. The most immense triumph of the famous tenor who was always the only rival of Francesco Tamagno. Only performance. SUNDAY, JULY 22 Great "matinée" with the opera TRAVIATA' The greatest creation of the remarkable soprano Magddalena Elba Farewell to the Company. . PRICES: $2.Oo - $1.00 - $0.50 PHONE 912.
300,000 SNOW-BALL REFRACTORY BRICKS .'at of Fusion: (Seger Cone: 33-34) ■ Equivalent to 1800? C. - 3272° F. ASK FOR PRICE ON DOCK SUCS. DE ABARCA - San Jaan, P. R.
The Best Lot in Puerto Rico The CASA DE ESPAÑA EN PUERTO RICO Corporation is selling its magnificent lot on Baldorioty Plaza and Fortaleza and San Jose Streets. The purchase proposals must be sent in sealed envelopes until September 15th of the current year, at three o'clock in the afternoon, to our registered office, Alien 19" 2nd floor. The envelopes must be marked in a visible place with this warning: PROPOSAL FOR THE PURCHASE OF THE PLOT. For further information, please contact the office of the Corporation where they will be provided. Cecilio MORAN, President.
San Juan Polyclinic BALASQUIDE BUILDING - MARINA This scientific center will be inaugurated next August 1st. It has a professional service of 25 doctors, 10 nurses and the most modern hospital and clinic equipment. Two medical offices will operate from 9 am to 9 pm. Very reasonable prices for both consultations and hospitalization.
THE LOCAL BOARD OF DIRECTORS HAS PRO
MAYAGUEZ NOW HAS TWO NEW SERVICE STATIONS FOR GOODYEAR PRODUCTS. For the ease and greater benefit of car owners, we have a complete stock of GOODYEAR RUBBER AND TUBES, in the establishments of MIGUEL PIERECHI AND HERIBERTO ZAPATA where you will always find SERVICE AND COURTESY THE GOODYEAR TIRE & RUBBER EXPORT COMPANY LTD. Goodyear
At three o'clock in the afternoon, the day before yesterday, the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rican Alliance met to resolve various pending matters. During the day, several commissions from the interior of the island came to discuss the candidacies that were to be the object of the consideration and resolution of the Board of Directors, the allied directive body began to deliberate on each one of them, beginning by ratifying its previous agreement, to consider the conventions carried out, without a contest of groups, in those towns where only a single candidacy has been presented, and arranging that the new Local Committees thus designated be registered by the Secretariat, so that they may take charge at once of the affairs of the party in each town, and give impetus to the next campaign. The matters related to the pending candidacies, which are waiting to be finally resolved in a primary, kept the Board in constant discussion until eight o'clock in the evening, when its members got up to go to lunch, and successively thereafter until two o'clock in the morning, when the session was adjourned. The main points to be discussed were: 1.- Convenience of avoiding the formation of fractions in the towns where there is a contest of candidacies, exhorting them to follow the example given by Jayuya, where all the differences have been settled and resolved, and the alliance electorate is already united and compact to march in a single and unique action. (Continued on 11 Col. 1) Two more triumphs of the accredited "Royal Gregg" school M . Mrs. Mercedes Chiques holds the position of SECRETARY of the Psychology Department at the UNIVERSITY of Puerto Rico and Miss Consuelo Gonzalez holds the position of SECRETARY at the COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE in Mcyagúez. These ladies are graduates of the ROYAL GREGG SCHOOL, which is directed in San Juan', Mrs. MARIA T. CAMACHO DE ROBLES. (Announcement)
"KELLY" RUBBER - HUDSON 1928 31 x 6.20 - HEAVY-DUTY BALLOON (Oversize of the 31 x 6.00) If you have, a 1928 Hudson and want a stronger and more durable rubber than the factory (31 x 6.00) put "KELLY" 31 x 6.20, Heavy Dutv Ballon on it. Relatively low price. J LUCAS BLANCO & CO. SAN JUAN, P. R.
"AFTER THIRTY YEARS OF AMERICAN ADMINISTRATION THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES HAVE
THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES STILL KNOW US" M SAYS RESIDENT COMMISSIONER MR. CORDOVA DAVILA M- . He relates an interesting incident that took place within the Committee on Insular Affairs.
The following paragraph was one of the most interesting in the speech delivered by the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, Mr. Felix Córdova Dávila, at the banquet given by the Board of Directors in honor of the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Mr. José Tous Soto, and of which we gave a full report to our readers yesterday: "The truth is that after thirty years of American administration, the people of the United States hardly know us. I remember when Mr. La Guardia and I appeared before the Committee on Insular Affairs of the (Limara, to defend the elective governor, Mr. La Guardia said these words: "If we look for ten men on Pennsylvania Avenue and ask them where Puerto Rico is located, surely we will not find more than one who will not answer this question satisfactorily". "I replied, "He represents you for New York in a very modal way. If we ask members of Congress what are the relations of the people of Puerto Rico with the United States, none of those members, including those on this Committee, will be able to say what those relations are." Then said Rep. Kiess. Chairman of the Insular Affairs Committee: "But Puerto Paris Beauty Salon ALLEN 17 Every Saturday will be open until eight o'clock at night. Haircut 50 cts. NEW PIANOLA For $400 we are offering a brand new one that we have on display. Great Opportunity. "EL ARTE" Apartado 682, Caguas, P. R.
Rico is doing well under the American regime." And I replied, "The State of Pennsylvania would surely do very well governed by a man sent by the British Empire. I wanted to know, Mr. President, ■ú the citizens of Pennsylvania would be satisfied with being governed by a governor appointed by the British Empire, and Mr. Gardner, who was from Indiana, said to me, "That is quite different." I replied, "Yes, c-'Nt." one difference: q. You have over a hundred million ha, h so many and we have nothing m.,s ine million and a half; that you" H>n powerful and we are (Lb'.les but there will come a day when'.ie the small towns will also have their chance in hi^tor a and ose will be gentlemen of the committee the happiest day of mankind." "T hese statements are not recorded in the néoord; but there were present U - pren sa representatives and Genor.nl McIntyre, who will be able to say whether they are true or not." CINEMA UNIVERSAL Stop 25 Santurce ■ la ana áaa Hr ' COBARDIAS Etihihiremos also the beautiful pelicnla A KISS IN A TAXI, by Bebe Daniels A so]- tanda, at 7-T2 in punt® OPERATORS i We need them who know how to ha er "smokking"; in our workshop or at home." J. A. E I Rodriguez, L1C., Stop 11 Miramar. RENT A Chalet for rent, two floors. Diez de Andino 56. completely independent and fresh. Pesquera, Diez de Andino 54.
LADIES! Gentlemen! NEVER ANOTHER EQUAL OPPORTUNITY Great clearance of samples for Ladies. More than two thousand pairs L at $2.00 and $3.00 Sensational surprise with Samples for Gentlemen, famous brands, such as Walk-Over, Taylor, Beacon and others, at $3.00 pair. When we advertise something, we have what we advertise 'LA FAVORITA" San Justo 31. ' JOSE LEMA & CO.
CEMENTO Sobre Muelle VILLAR & Co, Inc.
ISABEL PARSI FLORIST For any work in natural flowers call Telephone 120, Hato Rey