ELAÉNDO
Ofl Pages 3 Ctvs, /.| I "Pnerte Mee DnV Blds.* -W. "2
ÓflPáginfls 3 Ctvs. y "ñ ■ Semester -> - 6.00 A Afio 89 50
MARANA DIARY
> YearX
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
nwoil tw mtirens ortar vm" so. asi MtwiMa " art "f s, imt,"■ Olo at t*o Pmt otaca at Saa . Jaaa, Twte "tea. By J* "*- A. a gatera* aa wat day waitez. feknwy Si I ISIS at me Beet Office at Sea Jaca. Berta Sica. (UaSad Matea "r >,,,40 tte Act ef marra 1, 117". |
Saturday, November 10, 1928.
Number 3198¿
U Boston Circuit Court upholds the right of the Public Service Cornisón de Servicio Público de
The Boston Circuit Court upholds the right of the Public Service Cornisón of Puerto Rico to amend or annul franchises infirma Hallo M Hon. Judge Texidor in * the case involving the Lajas-Guánica flood.
Ik CtsrOa "te Boston Circuit] to rule on the case" of ' ün jancC' brought 1 on appeal before ®- Jb púbimaL by the -Central Guájjea" against the "Comisí'n de Serví'n de Servido Ptíbüco". retaeionado con la Lmdaeióa Lajas-Gnániica. In sa tete'.n the Círwaíro Court of fton ennfima the judgment issued nnn<;nM¿ Jacinto Texidor. * 'S acted isrerfnatner.se toa" Wof the Federal Court where 2 orígÜHa&tnienre the case: IriMON OF THE COURT October 26, T92? . i I AM>EKSoV J ET 2S of tM-1 w of IOS* the Cctósi&a d" Servíle Público' of Puerto Rico issued na subpoena to the "'l EROX 10.000 THE "TU "RG" BEER BOTEXES DONATED FOR' i THE VICTIMS OF THE ; CYCLONE M One ecpirvwraeion is the transipcíon of the original cablegram ] k "tfvó that the public was informed se Ta "Tuborg Fabrfkker A- S.™.... ÍLConer bague- had d®nads" 1,000 jams of the exquisite í BORG" beer for the victims of the & in Port Ríen when in load the dematfw ira been of jfj^c tedas, at a cost aprop jflue $1JW". '"-^Wos to inf iman Messrs. .mias of Izquierdo' Ine.", exclusive dísJJ^Res in Puerto [do such a famed product. 'Tub^rg" beer, which enjoys so much credit in our ^do. possesses not only lite nutritive qualities but is at ^the same time a magnificent tonic ^la.s nervous perdonas.
11 appellants to appear on June 4, 1926, and indicate the reasons why the Commission should not cancel a franchise granted on March 19, 1929, to the predecessors of the appellants by the Executive Council. -native <fe Puerto Rico, authorizing them to use daily 2" million gallons of the waters of! I.ago Gnáníca for irrigation purposes, for the construction and operation of a private railroad passing over land subject to public rights and to build and support a wharf in the Bay of Gnánlca. Without break- . f cer in the face of the <'omission, the ajelantes . filed on June 2, 192S. a , I! appeal in equity seeking to "b~ . r have an "injuncti- n" to prevent j the Commission from intervening in me Lto some" ron the prirftegts that they . | c.r-needed franchise tab and to im í request the Commissionan to exercise i jurisdiction over the appellants in connection with that franchise. The Court sustained tuna moeioni to dis- - - ■-arrange said injunction-", filed by the Attorney General of Fío Rico, and declaraE-fr" in tm opinion i logical and hiera reasoned that the pro1*5" was premature and that 'a Cotní- ! -nóm de Servicio Ptíbtico had P>deres de JurisdicriAr. This opinion was correct fa both points. Courts have no powers of intervention over courts of the jurisdiction of a Pftblicu Service Commission. Judicial intervention, outside of the express delegation of statutes, must be based on the legal basis of the court's jurisdiction. PAVIA FERNANDEZ Advises his friends and clients that upon his return from vacation he is once again at your service. San Francisco Office 51.
i NOTICE l - ■* With the departure of the steamer Lake Giltedge from Lake Charles, November 11 we will terminate our service of the Western Gulf ports. 8^ We wish to take this opportunity to thank all our customers and friends who helped us to maintain this service from Lake Charles, 'Houston and Beaumont. j For the time being we will exciu- i .sitely service the Eastern Gulf ports, and our next departures will be as follows: Lake Charles- Mobile Tampa 5. Lake Giltedge Nov. 11 'S. S. Lake Fairport Nov. 5 - S. Lake Treba Nov. 1Q Nov. 15 -i Gulfport-Mobile Tampa 5. Lake Benton Nov. 26 Nov. 29 I S- Lake Fairport Nov. 30 Nov. 26 . ¿floWe, Nñrí & GdfSteauskji Ca, be. Waterman Line Í STEBBINS & CO., INC. General Agents for the West Indies. IBox 1014 phone 301 / SAN JUAN, P. R.
MUNSON - McCORMICK UNE intercostal Service. SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA. ' * J V aP<>r ! Sidney H Hasptaan Vg? ¡ j anneeded to leave San Francisco direct for I Puerto Rico on the 29th of the present. Agents: í SAN JUAN MERCANTILE CORP. [Tel. 840 SAN JUAN P.O. Box 542. i Ramon Cortada A C®. Sorra. Hiram Gómez Ponce Beach. Mayaguez Beach.
THREE UNITS OF THE N0R1EAMERICAN NAVY ARRIVED YESTERDAY IN SAN JUAN They are on a research trip to the island. Yesterday, at eleven o'clock in the morning, the U.S. Navy submarine S-21, of the same type as the S-l, a unit of war* that served as a grave for its crew when it sank a few months ago, arrived in our port escorted by the torpedo boats 35 and S3 of the U.S. Navy. These units of war bring on board the scientific expedition that our cable-; cío reported a few months ago came on a mission of research and study. The expedition comes from the naval base of Guantanamo, island of Cuba, having traveled the tropical seas in a radius of 1,000 miles with 2,000 miles still to go. The sub- ¡ marine is being used for the reconnaissance of the relief of the depths of the sea, sounding works, volcanic formations and all kinds of data of scientific interest in which the seas of the tropical zones are so rich. The ships and the submarine will leave today for St. Thomas on their research and survey work. GOVERNMENT OF PORTO RICO DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF INSURANCE i NOTICE TO WHOM IT M/xT CONCERN: Notice is hereby given that from June 30, 1924, the Phoenix Insur-j anee Company, of Hartford, Connecticut, ceased to do business of । fire insurance in Porto Rico and I have now applied for the withdrawal of the deposit made with this department for the protection of its policy holders in this island, as soon as all its liabilities, arising i from said business have been liquidated or otherwise extinguished. * In compi ance with Section 147! of the Insurance Law in force, this * notice will be published in English | and Spanish once a week for six - consecutive weeks for the purpose of giving persons having any outstanding claim against the Company, ample time to notify this office before the securities so deposited are released. Augusto R. SOLTERO, Superintendent of Insurance. San Juan. P. R. Nov. 3, 1928 (Announcement) ZINC Y PUNTAS Ferretería. Plumbing and Glassware, Constant Importation. Service and Quality. . A. MENDEZ A HNO. I Puerta de Tierra. | Tel. 383, to J. American Profesóla Requests full board in Puerto Rican family home, in San Juan or San turre. Write giving particulars and price PO Box 3604, Santurce, as sole guest H triumph of h Cale Carra Has succeeded completely with his new pharmacy establishment. FARMACIA CERRA, Tel. 857 FOR SALE The furniture J sections that were in the old post office in Santurce. For more information please contact Miranda Hermanos, Santurce, P. R.
(Announcement)
"PUERTO RICO GAVE THE NATION DURING THE GREAT CONFLICT THE MOST BRILLIANT TESTIMONY OF ITS LOYALTY TO THE AMERICAN FLAG".
M Says Governor Towner in proclaiming the celebration of Armistice Day M
Governor Towner issued the following proclamation yesterday: "WHEREAS, the President of the United States has proclaimed Armistice Day, November 11 of each year, to honor and remember the glorious victory of the? WHEREAS, it is especially fitting and proper that American citizens, wherever they may be, should remember and extol the achievements of all the men and women who marched to the front under the American flag, to face the dangers of the most terrible war the civilized world has ever witnessed, and "WHEREAS, Puerto Rico gave to the Nation during the great conflict, the most brilliant testimony of its loyalty to the American flag and to the principles which IGLESIAS VISITED GOVERNOR. TOWNER TO CONGRATULATE HIM M "For the high spirit of impartiality" which he displayed in the elections M The President of the Socialist Party, Senator Santiago Iglesias, has visited Governor Towner to congratulate him on behalf of the coalition which he leads "for the high spirit of impartiality which he displayed in his proclamations and actions during the general election." Senator Iglesias stated to us yesterday that for the first time in his political history he had congratulated a Chief of! Executive for the correct and impartial conduct^ observed in (Continued on p. 15, Col. 7)
it sustains and by which we went to war, "NOW, THEREFORE, I, HORACE MANN TOWNER, Governor of Puerto Rico, do hereby proclaim November 11, 1928, to be Armistice Day, on which the people of Puerto Rico shall properly and appropriately celebrate the day in their churches and otherwise, as they think best, and on such day elevate their thoughts in honor and respect to their common land, and to those who suffered and died so that this nation could continue to admire and love them, and I order that the flag of our country be flown on said day on all public buildings, in celebration of the victory of our just and righteous cause." IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have signed this proclamation and caused the Great Seal of Puerto Rico to be affixed thereto, in the City of San Juan, this ninth day of November, nine hundred and twenty-eight. H. M. TOWNER, Governor. Promulgated according to law, this 9th day of November, 1928. E. J. SALDAÑA Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico. Tomorrow will take effect a tribute to Mayor Todd M On the occasion of the triumph obtained by Mayor Todd when he was nominated in the alliance candidacy to occupy again the office of Mayor of San Juan, a tribute has been organized by several of his friends to take effect before his departure for the United States, which will be next Thursday. Tomorrow, Sunday, at eight o'clock in the evening, a sumptuous banquet will be held at the Palace Hotel.
"When the general canvass is verified, the Alliance will have lost 38 municipalities.
Mayor Todd stated yesterday at the Administrative Board that it was necessary to acquire rolling stock in any way M To provide San Juan with the proper public cleaning service M Yesterday, at ten o'clock in the morning, the San Juan Administrative Board met, all the members of the same being in attendance. First, the Secretary, Ledo, Manuel Gaetán Barbosa, gave the minutes of the last session, which, on motion of Mr. Asenjo, were read and approved unanimously. In the second term, the Director of Public Works, Mr. Fernando Montilla, reported that on the 6th, at about two o'clock in the afternoon, there had been a breakdown in the aqueduct pipe in Puerta de Tierra. Upon being notified he immediately left for Puerta de Tierra and upon inspecting the damage he saw that the leak had not occurred in the main pipeline but in a junction, but this damage occurred so close to the main pipeline that in order to make the repair it was necessary to suspend the aqueduct service. Mr. Montilla informed the Board that the repair to which he referred had already been completed and that he had not yet received the list of expenses for said work to be charged as an emergency, but that as soon as the lists are ready he will submit them to the consideration of the Board. He also informed Mr. Montilla of certain obstructions that (Continued on p. 16, Col. 3) he has been facing, for which invitations are being circulated and which is expected to be attended by a large number of friends and supporters of Mr. Todd.
The President of the Socialist Party, Senator Santiago Iglesias, made the following statements yesterday: "As the official and confidential reports containing the electoral results become known, it is clearly proven that the Constitutional Socialist Party has defeated the Alianza Portorriqueña and that it must prepare itself to assume the responsibility of the government of Puerto Rica when the new Island Legislature is organized and constituted. The same collation sheets that are not definitive and the confidential reports that reach us state incontrovertibly that the majority of the country has voted for the Coalition. The small margins of votes that appear in numerous municipalities won by the "Alianza" and the Coalition and especially in the senatorial district of Mayagüez indicate that the Coalition has triumphed. "In order to take charge of the victory of the Constitutional Socialist Party it is indispensable to appreciate an indisputable fact. The Alliance had at its service an important part of the judicial and police system in more than twenty localities and nevertheless, in spite of this difficulty for the Coalition, it triumphed in many of them. Judges and police officers considered that it was more convenient and safer for them to unconditionally favor their party, perhaps humanly thinking that it was the most appropriate way to keep their posts, and therefore they carried out reprehensible and criminal acts by not fulfilling their duties as public officials, without any respect for the orders and instructions issued by the Governor, the
M "Four senatorial districts and twenty re* preséntateos", says Senator Iglesias M 'The Constitutional Socialist Party must prepare itself to assume the responsibility of the Government", adds M
Attorney General, the Supériri^ tendent of Elections and of the Chief of Police. Fortunately these cases were not numerous, and the majority of the country was satisfied with the attitude assumed both by the higher central authorities of Puerto Rico, beginning with the Governor, and with the willingness and de* seo of impartiality put into practice by the majority of the judicial and police officials on the island. "It cannot be denied that there have been outrages and serious violations of the law, such as those that occurred in the "Cacao" neighborhood of Barros, where more than eight hundred coalitionist voters were abruptly prevented from voting, with the police and caciques closing the schools. In Ucares Beach, using parties armed with revolvers to prevent the voting of more than three hundred voters. Continued on page 18 col. 4 "EXPRESS IT WITH FLOWERS" For the birthday, the baptism or the baptism at your friends' house, express your friendship with a beautiful bouquet of flowers. When it is necessary to pay a last tribute to a loved one, we can decorate beautiful wreaths, crosses, etc. Twice a week, we receive from New York, chrysanthemums, roses, carnations and other flowers. DOROTHY M. SNEDICOR Plaza Provision, San Juan.
Only one is Legitimate (Do not accept imitations) THE KNOWN PUBLIC HAS GIVEN IT A NAME 'TURGANT VICHY SUPREME" It is packaged in a new sterilized bottle. This in itself is a guarantee. Vtonr
Triumph Complete... IN THE SEVEN DISTRICTS''' With our great Sale of Yarn and Batiste Suits, for Gentlemen and Young Men, at the advantageous prices of.... ^50 and |0Op, we have been a hit all over the island. Now to keep that triumph standing, we have renewed the assortment in colors and styles. COME RIGHT AWAY GONZALEZ PADIN CO., INC. San Juan Ponce Mayaguez.
-I El CaprichoL-YOU ARE VERY INTERESTED ... to see the tolas we have discounted. FUESE: Celanese silk, worth 75c. today 60c. Mucelin and brocades, worth 50 and 60c. today 40c. Flowered tisue at yards for 89c. Pongee and flowered suasets at 25c. Sheets, bedspreads and mosquito nets. We have warehouse prices. EL CAPRICHO Allen Esq. Tanca. San Juan.
GOVERNMENT OF PUERTO RICO DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF INSURANCE - NOTICE - To whom it may concern: I hereby give notice that the "Phoenix Insurance Company," of Hartford, Connecticut, ceased as of June 30, 1924, its fire insurance business in Puerto Rico, and now desires to withdraw the deposit it made with this department for the protection of its policyholders in this Island, upon liquidation or otherwise extinguishment of all obligations.
JOYERIA FELIX LOPEZ Our large assortment of watches. from $8.00 to $1,5.00, has been reduced to $3.55, strap, band and pocket watches. Examine your eyesight with Felix Lopez.
Subscribe to MUSICA-MAGAZINE Magazine with 48 pages of music monthly. Ask for information to: JOSE A. FLORES. Rpt. Corton St. 11, Teh 1913 Sant.
P ASTILLO THE BEST TABLE WATER See its wonderful analysis. 10c. bottle. RASTILLO MINERAL SPRINGS CO.. Ponce, P. R.
resulting from said business. Which in compliance with Section 147 of the Insurance Law in force, will be published in English and Spanish for six consecutive weeks, once each week, in order to give all those who may have claims against said company, an opportunity to present them to this office before returning the securities deposited herein. Augusto R. SOLTERO, Superintendent of Insurance. San Juan, P.R. Nov. 3, 1928. I (Announcement).
URBANIZACION LAS PALMAS This development suffered nothing from the cyclone. New houses at easy terms. Cash payment $200 to $500 Monthly payment $32 to $45 High, dry and healthy. Solid construction. Constant bus service. P.O. Box 3155, Santurce. Phone 1901, Santurce.