THE WORLD
20 pages
20 pages in
DAILY MORNING
MORNING
Year XI.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
distributed "ndw permit No. SOI authorized by '.ha Art of October o 19)7. ub fila at the Post Offiee at San Juan, Porto Bieo By order of the President. A. 8 Burleeon. Postmaster General. Entered aa second ci*U matter, febmary 31. 1919 at the Post Office at Sen Juan. Porto Ihro (United States of America) nnder the Art of march 8. 1878.
Saturday, November 30, 1929.
. / Number 3577.
"THE POLITICAL AND PARLIAMENTARY SITUATION CALLS FOR A REOR-.
GANIZATION OF OUR GOVERNMENT" M "We do not believe in the theory of irreplaceable men." says the Ledo. Bolivar Pagan M
Ledo Bolivar Pagan, Vice President of the Socialist Party, sends us for publication the following article: THE GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC OPINION In Thursday's edition of "La Democracia" appeared an editorial that deserves serious comments, due to the political philosophy that it entrap, in the peculiar political and governmental situation that the country is going through. Said editorial is a brilliant literary piece drawn on the occasion of the resignation of the Treasurer Mr. Gallardo. The gesture of "La Democracia", as an authorized organ of public opinion, is plausible at the moment when such a distinguished official abandons his official duties.
It is always noble that we do justice to the Treasurer Mr. Gallardo. It is always noble that we do justice to men who, like Mr. Gallardo, have dedicated valuable years of their lives to public service. I believe that Mr. Gallardo always justly deserved the trust and recognition of the government and the people of Puerto Rico. But, the referred editorial goes into other considerations of a public nature that, in our humble judgment, are not wise enough in matters of public law and the government of the people. La Democracia" affirms that Mr. Gallardo is irreplaceable. Although we personally would be pleased to see the continuation of the seContinued on p. 15, col. 3
Tribute to the memory of the illustrious Dr. Stahl
Yesterday's ceremonies at the "Parque Muñoz Rivera ' ' were a beautiful civic demonstration.
The ceremonies held yesterday in the "Parque Muñoz Rivera", on the occasion of the celebration of the Day of the Tree, constituted a very nice act. At nine o'clock in the morning the beautiful park under construction was invaded by the school children of San Juan, who in commemorating the festivity of the day paid a tribute of fervent memory to the illustrious Puerto Rican naturalist, Dr. Agustín StahL The Band of the Asilo de Niños enlivened the interesting festival. At half past nine o'clock, the Deputy Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Francisco Vízcarrondo, read, amidst the applause of the student crowd, the Governor's proclamation related to the celebration of the Day of the Tree. The school children sang songs alluding to the day's festivity. The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Juan B. Huyke, spoke about the importance of the event that was taking place and alluded in glowing terms to the honor that the eminent scientist, Dr. Britton, was bestowing on our island by joining us in the celebration.
Britton, to our island by joining in the tribute paid to Dr. Stahl. "It is this," he said, "a charming and suggestive feast that fills our spirits with wise teachings. We plant a tree and we shall entrust it to our care. Every work that is the product of effort aimed at good must yield good results. In this effort that we make, the religious idea arises as a natural logic. We find the work of God. For thirty years it is true that public schools have been celebrating Arbor Day, promoting among students the love of trees, of nature. But we do not yet know if we are reaping the fruits of our labor. Inspired by the best of wishes, we have been asking our children to plant at least one tree a year. But if we are going to fulfill a duty merely to our teachers, and to achieve this end we pluck from our fields the tree that we will have to take to the schools, without Franceschi Caballero transferred to another prison M SANLUCAR DE BARRAMEDA, November 29. (United Press.)-Dr. Franceschi Caballero has been transferred to the prison of San Fernando, where the court of the navy that is to try him has its offices. - HONEY - VANNINA DISTILLING COMPANY . Parada 20, Santurce. Honey for sale. SELL Building six apartments, Avenida José de Diego No. 2. Rent $300.00. E. FERNANDEZ CAMPOS Tel. 1943 Rojo, Santurce. OPPORTUNITY RENT A residence near the sea, furniture for sale at very reasonable prices and a Buick Sedan, 5 passengers, brand new. Information:- Pacific Place 12, Tel. 946 red Sant.
If we take care to make this tree grow out of our own efforts and in the heat of our enthusiasm and good wishes, we will have turned "Arbor Day" into "Arbor Die" and as a consequence of this we will have sacrificed the lives of thousands of trees instead of contributing to their promotion and development." "The tree that we plant today signifies the work that the school is always doing, that it is willing to do at all times, for the welfare and progress of Puerto Rico. The tree is man's most valuable collaborator. So we can notice it in all activities. Even in the crucifixion of Christ we saw the tree converted into a cross as a symbol of human redemption. (Great applause.) Dr. Nathaniel L. Britton, whose biography is given to us by Commissioner Chardón in a note published in this same review, gave this beautiful speech
MICHABLS STB8N CLOTHES A NEW ONE!!! 521 $2oo Some hat, I tell you! CABRER STORES SANJUAN-PONCE
NEW THINGS-' RECEIVED Lately ALREADY PRESENTED IN ALL DEPARTMENTS "AT PRICES NEVER SEEN" Elegant Handbags and Purses Cute Fans - Flowers - Light Stockings Silk Underwear - New Hats Gorgeous Necklaces-Bracelets-Fancy Shawls Silks and Fabrics in the Latest Colors And many other new items just received. FIXED PRICES! EVERYTHING CHEAP! GONZALEZ PADIN CO. Inc.
Apartments for Rent at Alien 85-87. Will inform: - Tel. 1 900, San Juan. USE ZIODINE DENTAL CREAM
We have real bargains on car tires VISIT US Smallwood Brothers SAN JUAN PONCE, MAYAGÜEZ, ARECIBO
Oatmeal H-0 The tastiest and most nutritious Oatmeal Cooks in 2 to 3 minutes Packaged in 26 oz. cans TASTE IT. Sacra de L. ViUamii " Ce. San Juan, P. R. Exclusive Agents.
Young & Griffin Coffee Company INCORPORATED 97 Water Street, New York City. FORMER LARGE SCALE IMPORTERS OF COFFEE FN UNITED STATES. Are pleased to inform purchasers of roasted coffee on the Island that they have designated box 1413 Nitrate/to&Asencifr office. I "¡. ' o , ~~~ Parada Sanjuan . Exclusive representatives for Puerto Rico. FOR YOUR BENEFIT DO NOT PLACE YOUR NEXT COFFEE ORDER WITHOUT FIRST SEEING OUR SAMPLES AND PRICES.
Swimming Pool Dances Saturday Night Dances Resume at The Condado Vanderbilt Swimming Pool Beginning Saturday, November 30, 1929. Midnight Serenaders Orchestra.
Aguadilla in San Juan THE ABUSE IS OVER Now you can make the Christmas gift with handmade works and you will be thanked. We have a new and splendid souvenir at reasonable prices. Come here and you will be satisfied. LUIS MATOS. Alien 32 (Next to "Los Muchachos") Tel. 306 S. J. San Juan ATLAS LINE AUTOMOBILES BETWEEN SAN JUAN -PONCE 2 New Hudson Cars 2 We will pick you up and take you home - Departures-7:30 A. M. - OFFICES Tel - 78 S. J. - Ponce " 1936 Sánt. Teresa Bird de Texidor Resting in the peace of the Lord on November 2, 1929. inon L L t V? a T of Requiem will be said on December 2, 1929 in the Church of St. George, Santurce, at 7:45 a.m.; and at the same time the following thirty days of Gregorian Masses. The widower Jacinto Texidor, sons Marte P. Texidor, and Santos Viscasillas. brothers, and other relatives, deny his friends their attendance at the Masses and a prayer for his soul.
A TRIBUTE TO SENATOR MATTA
It will take place tomorrow in the Municipality of Fajardo * M The Municipality of Fajardo will pay homage tomorrow to Dr. Enrique Matta, coalitionist Senator for the district of Humacao. A portrait of Dr. Matta will be placed in the City Hall's meeting room, "in recognition of his efforts for the benefit of that town as a legislator, and as Mayor and Director of 'Beneficencia' that he was of the population". The ceremony will begin at two o'clock in the afternoon, and will be enlivened by the school band. Rafael Martínez Nadal, the Vice-President of the Socialist Party, Mr. Boívar Pagán; the Mayor of Fajardo, Mr. Bolívar Ochart, and lastly the honoree himself, Senator Matta, who was interpreted by the Deputy Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, Dr. Jaime Bagué: The Planting of a STAHLIA (Black Lobster) on Arbor Day. "Dr. Agustín Stahl, whose valuable life we commemorate here today, was born in Aguadilla in 1842, re(Continued on Page 3 Col. 4>
'IT IS NECESSARY TO FIND A SOLUTION'"
The Governor had confidentially informed the Press that on his visit to Cataño (which he made yesterday) he intended to surprise the school authorities, requesting that he be allowed to have lunch in the school dining room, to see what meals the poor children received in that institution. The Press kept absolute reserve, as the Chief Executive of the Island had requested, but the authorities of Cataño surprised Governor Roosevelt with a nice act that produced a very pleasant impression on our governor: they invited him to have lunch with the poor children to whom a splendid lunch was offered by the students of better economic position on the occasion of the festivity of the day (of the Tree) and in commemoration of the Thanksgiving Day that was celebrated the day before yesterday. Cataño annually offers this lunch to the poor children of the town on Thanksgiving Day, and this time it coincided with the visit of Governor Roosevelt to that municipality. At noon yesterday, the Governor arrived in Cataño, accompanied by his Secretary Pai.icula.
GIUSTI IN PONCE!
CASALS BUILDING (Atocha and Plaza Muñoz Rivera) Special Sale of Miller Shoes TWO DAYS ONLY MONDAY - TUESDAY DEC. 2 DEC. 3
CASALS BUILDING Corner of Atocha St. & Muñoz Rivera Pl. Special Sale of I. Miller Shoes TWO DAYS ONLY MONDAY - TUESDAY DEC. 2, 3. Miller Shoes TWO DAYS ONLY . MONDAY - --. TUESDAY DEC. 2 DEC. 3
"To the state of affairs which burdens us," said yesterday Gov. M
Terry, and representatives of the San Juan Press who have been accompanying him on all his excursions. The head of the Executive was the object of a warm and enthusiastic reception. From the entrance of the town to the Mayor's office, the crowd applauded and cheered him enthusiastically. On Thursday next Thursday Mrs. Roosevelt will embark on a cruise M Yesterday, because the headline had not been corrected, an error appeared in the news item about Mrs. Roosevelt's upcoming trip to the United States. And although from the reading of the text s" informed correctly, in case some reader had limited himself only to the impression of the heading, we want to state for the record that it was wrong. Mrs. Roosevelt will leave next Thursday, bound for New York, and will be back in Puerto Rico by Christmas.
On air routes or overland - for work or play - Goodyear is world-renowned for its excellence. Don't forget this when you need a tire.
' 2-2V-1V