THE WORLD
ISPagin
18 pá gú>
DAILY
MORNING
Year XI.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
"A REORGANIZATION OF THE MUNICIPAL COURTS COULD WELL BE MADE" M
1 11 ■ A 1 " - Consolidating certain courts," says , , Attorney General Beverley M
We begin publication today of the full text of the latest Annual Report to the Governor by Attorney General Beverley: San Juan, Puerto Rico, August 15, 1929. 1 HIS Excellency, Governor of Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico. Sir:- In accordance with the provisions of section 13 of the Organic Law of Puerto Rico, and section 77 of the Political Code of Puerto Rico, I have the honor to submit the report of the activities of the Department of Justice for the fiscal year July !- 1928 to June 30, 1929. I FIELD OF THE DEPARTMENT'S ACTIVITIES: The work of the Department of Justice of Puerto Rico is divided into three groups, namely: general administrative work, civil litigation and the direction and administration of penal institutions. The Act of Congress approved on March 2, 1917, known as the Organic Law of Puerto Rico, and the statutes of the territory, impose various duties on the Attorney General. He represents the interests of the People of Puerto Rico before the courts of justice in all civil and criminal cases; acts as legal advisor to the Governor of Puerto Rico and to all heads of departments and agencies of the Government; examines and qualifies a wide variety of bonds, as provided by various laws; examines and qualifies a wide variety of bonds; examines and qualifies a wide variety of bonds, as provided by various laws
various laws, examines and qualifies titles to land acquired by the Government, and studies all ex parte proceedings brought by private parties in declarations of ownership to determine the interest the Government may have in the land; exercises administrative supervision of all courts, civil registries and land registries, has the duty to formulate rules for the registration of conditional sales in compliance with Act No. "1, approved April 13, 2001, and the provisions of Act No. "1, approved April 13, 2001, and the regulations for the registration of conditional sales in compliance with Act No. "1, approved April 13, 2001. "1, approved April 13, 1916, as amended in Act No. 40, approved June 27, 1925, and Act No. 88. approved August 22, 1925, and under its di rect authority are all penal institutions of the Insular Government and the inspection of municipal jails. By section 76 of the Political Code the Attorney General investigates and reports to the Governor all cases of requests for pardon. In addition, the Department of Justice often issues opinions at the request of municipalities when they lack attorneys employed by those agencies. To attend to the legal affairs of the Department, the Attorney General has the Prosecutor of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, the district court prosecutors, an Attorney General for the district courts, an Attorney General for the municipal courts, a Judge General Muiücipal for inspection work and substitution of municipal judges when for any cause they fail to act, and a Judge General Muiücipal for inspection work and substitution of municipal judges when for any cause they fail to act, and a Judge General Muiücipal for the municipal courts when for any cause they fail to act, and a Judge General Muiücipal for inspection work and substitution of municipal judges when for any cause they fail to act.
CARDS FOR CONGRATULATIONS AT EASTER AND NEW YEAR We have them for all tastes, surprising prices. REAL HERMANOS TANCA NO. 1 ' SAN JUAN, P. R.
Dr. J. H. FONT back from his trip to Europe, is pleased to inform his clientele that he will again be at your service in his clinic in Cayey.
WANTED Young man for refrigerator salesman. Salary and commission. Apply only between 5 and 5:30 at 53 Salvador Brau, San Juan.
FANTASIAS Y MAS FANTASIAS r We just received a colossal assortment of ladies shoe samples. THE IMPERIAL "ffig
Great Special Sale LADIES' SHOES d¡noo <P " PAR Something Extraordinary - All New EL POPULAR Parada 15 Los Diablos Parada 17
$6-$7-$8 I. Miller Shoes $6-$7-$8 WE HAVE ADDED | HAVE ADDED new |GIUST1|new STYLES | LAST DAY LAST DAY S A fTj R D A Y SABADO
Government of Puerto Rico, Department of Health INSULAR HEALTH BOARD NOTICE TO THE FARMERS OF PUERTO RICO The INSULAR HEALTH BOARD, in the extraordinary session held on Tuesday, November 12, agreed to grant a "hearing" to the Cattlemen's Association and the cattlemen of Puerto Rico in general, on November 26 at 4:30 p.m. in the Board Room, Alien No. 3, San Juan, P. R. R., San Juan, Puerto Rico, on November 26 at 4:30 p.m. in the Board Room, Alien No. 3, San Juan, P. R. R., San Juan, Puerto Rico. 3, San Juan, P.R. The subject matter of the hearing is the consideration of amendments to the current Cattle Raising Regulations. San Juan, P. R. November 19, 1929 (Announcement) Oatmeal H-0 The most tasty and nutritious. It cooks from 2 to 3 minutes. Packed in cans of 26 OUNCES PRUEBELA. Sucre. by L. VillamU & Co. San Juan. P. R. Exclusive Agents.
Tomorrow RAQUEL MELLER sings at the RIALTO Theater "Flor del Mal" - "Corpus Christi".
FOR SALE: Country wood sleepers for sale. Chosen. In any quantity. P.O. Box 106, Camuy, P. R.
SELL Building six apartments, Avenida José de Diego No. 2. Rent $300.00. E. FERNANDEZ CAMPOS TeL 1943 Rojo, Santurce.
P pennit "io. 801 authorivd bj íh" Act of Uvluber 8. I Vil un file at Iba Hutt Of fita at Saa J nan. Porta Rico By order of the Preaideot. A. 8 Burleeon. PoatmaMer General. Ebterrd aa aerond claaa matter, fehruary I 181" at the Peat Office at San Juan Porto Rico (United Statee of America) nhder the A-1 of march 8. 1879
THE DEADLINE FOR SOLDIER'S BONUS CLAIMS IS THE SECOND DAY OF JANUARY NEXT.
The deadline for claims for the soldier's bonus is the second day of January next. -A Red Cross offer M "The deadline for establishing bonus claims for soldiers who served in the Army of the United States of America is January 2, 1930. "The veterans or their relatives who have not filed their application, must do so before this date, otherwise they will lose the right they have to make the claim. "The Puerto Rico Chapter of the American National Red Cross will gladly assist in filling out the corresponding blanks and sending them to the offices of the U. S. Adjusted Compensation Branch. Adjusted Compensation Branch in Washington for proper processing." MATTERS'LISTED FOR DISCUSSION M At the December second meeting of Municipal Judges M (Official Information) M * Program for the meeting of Municipal Judges to be held in the library room of the Department of Justice on Tuesday, December 2, 1929, at 9 A. M. 1- Opening of the proceedings by Hon. James R. Beverley, Attorney General. 2 - Oral report of the Municipal Judge General as a result of his inspection tours of the Courts. 3- How to achieve uniformity in the drafting of judgments and orders in criminal matters and adoption of models for the same. 4- Short reports from the Municipal Judges on the difficulties they have encountered or deficiencies noted in civil and criminal proceedings. Each judge will have three minutes for this matter. 5- Discussion and adoption of measures to correct these deficiencies (Cont. on page 17 column 5).
SPEAKING WITH THE TECHNICAL DIRECTOR OF THE "UNION PANAMERICANA".
Who intervenes in the matter of the Columbus Lighthouse in Santo Domingo M--.
The day before yesterday Mr. Albert Kelsey, Technical Director of the Pan American Union, embarked on board the steamship "San Lorenzo" on his way back to Washington. Technical Director of the Pan American Union, who is involved in the construction of the Columbus Lighthouse in the Republic Mr. Kelsey recently returned from a trip through several South American republics. Spain and Italy, where he was taken on matters directly related to the monumental lighthouse to be built in the next few years to honor the memory of the Great Navigator. in the sister antilles. Mr. Kelsey arrived last Wednesday from Santo Domingo, where he was discussing with the Acting President of the Republic and members of the Dominican Cabinet the most suitable site for the construction of the lighthouse. While Mr. Kelsey was on his way to the Dominican Republic aboard the "Buenos Aires" plane, which visited us in recent days, President Vasquez was being taken ill to a hospital in Baltimore aboard a Panamerican Airways plane. So these two gentlemen met in space without being able to celebrate the exchange of impressions that they both intended to have about the grandiose work of the monumental lighthouse. Mr. Kelsey, with whom we had the opportunity to talk for a few moments at the Vanderbilt County Hotel, where he was staying, told us that after studying and examining several sites in the company of the most distinguished members of the Dominican Presidential Cabinet, they decided on the Punta de Torrecillas, due to its magnificent geographical position, and also because it is one of the most historic sites. "This gigantic work," said Mr. Kelsey, "will be something more than a mere and possible juncture for future transit, both by sea and by air; it will be the work of a glorious Ideal. In that monument will be represented the sentiment
In the site where the lighthouse is to be built there are several ruined buildings, which will be rebuilt to imbue them as much as possible with all the historical and legendary flavor of the time of Christopher Columbus". "It would be superfluous to say, as "EL MUNDO" has already reported, that the first contest of projects for the Lighthouse was recently held in Madrid and that forty countries were represented. Ten projects were awarded in the competition: one English, three French, one Italian, three American, one Spanish and one German. These winning projects will be presented in the final competition to be held in the city of Rio de Janeiro in a year's time. The project selected in this competition will be the one to be used for the construction of the gigantic work. The monument will be 500 feet high. The monument to Christopher Columbus, which is currently located in the Santo Domingo Cathedral, will be transferred to it. In addition, the monument will have an immense library and prehistoric museum with all those relics from the time of Christopher Columbus, and allegories of all his glorious deeds. The bookstore will have about thirty departments, each one dedicated to a different country. The lighting will be a real novelty. A very powerful beacon of light will be installed to guide air and maritime traffic. In addition the monument will be fitted with a lighting system, for special occasions, which will be the most stupendous in the world." "After we hold the final competition in Rio de Janeiro it will take another year to start the monument, so that in two years we will begin the glorious and gigantic fiber." The name of the great discoverer obsesses. It is our actuality Continued on p. 5, col. 1
THE BEST MUSIC ON THE BEST RECORDS We just received another shipment of records with music and lyrics from the movie "RIO RITA" 1987 D- You are always in my Arms- Vocal 1987 D-Sweetheart, we need each other -Vocal. 893 D-Rio Rita, Fox Trot. 893 D-The Kinkajou, -Fox Trot. Other new discs we received today: 1692 D- A Gay Caballero, -Vocal Duet. 3794 X-Caridad, -Plena de actualidad. 3794 X-La Coquetera, -Plena Rabiosa. 3795 X- Team "Ponce", -Plena. 3795 X-Gusto Cubano, -Plena. Buy Columbia records, the record without Needle Noise. Gonzalez Padín Co., Inc. SAN JUAN PONCE MAYAGÜEZ
Saturday, November 23, 1929./ Number 3570.
"It is necessary to direct the instruction by practical ways".
"It is in vain to prepare the youth for that which will not be useful to them", said yesterday Governor M- Yesterday Governor Roosevelt continued his tour of the island, about which we received these telegrams from our editor Maldonado: Maricao, Puerto Rico, November 22, 1929. EL MUNDO, San Juan, P. R. Moments before resuming his trip to Maricao, the Governor visited the "Asenjo" school in Mayagüez, where a group of children were having school breakfast. It is alleged that Mayagüez is the first town on the island that has put this altruistic idea into practice. In his general inspection of the school, which is directed by Mrs. Cristina Curt, the Chief Executive made a visit to a classroom where an English class was being taught, the students gave proof of their progress in the study of the language. The Governor was very pleased with his visit to the school. On Thursday at 10:00 P. M., the poor neighborhood of "Dulces Labios" of Mayagüez, was visited by the Governor, who toured the streets of said neighborhood in a Ford automobile accompanied by his private secretary, Mr. Terry. The sight of so much misery produced in the Chief Executive the same impression as the one he experienced in his visit to the lower parts of Puerta de Tierra. At 9:15 A. M. of today, Friday, we arrived at Maricao, where the Mayor, Mr. Joaquin Oms, who is at the same time Captain of the National Guard, received the Governor at the entrance of the town at the head of a company that rendered military honors to the Chief Executive, who effusively congratulated the National Guard, informing him that he would attend the next encampment not as Governor of the island but as Colonel of the United States Army. A crowd that gathered in front of the Mayor's Office of. Maricao gave an affectionate welcome to the Governor. The children of the schools joined in this welcome while groups of men surrounded the Chief Executive with large placards on which the following inscriptions could be read: "We need doctor and light"; "See La Cuchilla"; "Misery and much tuberculosis"; "Stay tonight to see the Jubilee of Darkness". After listening to several expressive messages, the Governor took the floor and reiterated his intention to work for the welfare of the people. At the end, his listeners (Continued on Page 13 Col. 5)
The President of the San Juan Carnival Executive Committee, Dr. R. López Sicardó, received from the Governor of San Juan, Dr. R. López Sicardó. López Sicardó, received from the Governor, Hon. Theodore Roosevelt, dated at the Santa Catalina Palace on the 20th of the current month, the following letter: My dear sir: I am happy to accept the honor that has been bestowed upon me by naming me Honorary President of the San Juan Carnival Committee. I sympathize highly with the Carnival and will be glad to do anything that may contribute to its greater success. It is a splendid thing, for it gives pleasure and amusement to a large portion of our people who in the ordinary course of their lives have very little. Mrs. Roosevelt and I would be glad to have the Fortress used as a starting point for the Queen on the night of her Coronation. In addition Mrs. Roosevelt tells me, that she would also be glad to be able to give a reception at the Fortaleza in honor of the Carnival Queen.
- HONEY - VANNINA DISTILLING COMPANY Parada 20, Santurce. Honey for sale.
THE MRS. DE ROOSEVELT OFRE" CEN QUE LA REINA DE CARNAVAL
To leave Fortaleza this time on the night of her coronation.
Wishing her every success, believe me sincerely yours. THEODORE ROOSEVELT. This was the letter which the Governor personally promised to the gentlemen of the Commission who visited him to notify him of his appointment as Honorary Chairman of the Carnival Committee. It contains gallant offers for two acts that will be truly new in the Program. One: the departure of the Queen from the Governor's Palace, on the occasion of attending the ceremony of her Coronation which, as usual, will be held at the Municipal Theater. The other: the special reception that will be given in honor of the Queen and her Court, in the same Governor's Palace, by the distinguished lady Mrs. Roosevelt, and which she intends to be a truly "elect and original act. The distinction of the Roosevelts in favor of our society and their true interest in the success of a traditional celebration in our island, such as Carnival, does not need much comment, and in order that it may be seen how much the Committee has esteemed this distinction, we will soon give publicity to the reply of Dr. Lopez Sicardó to the Hon. Theodore Roosevelt, and the intentions that the Committee has in relation to these two acts. PROPAGANDA COMMITTEE.
PORTO RICO AIRWAYS * * * ■ Is pleased to announce that next Monday, November 25, the new airline between San Juan and Ponce will be established with the following itinerary: Departure from San Juan 8:30 A. M. Departure from Ponce 9:15 A.M. Departure from San Juan 4:00 A.M. Departure from Ponce 4:00 A.M. M. Departure from San Juan 4:00 P. M. Departure from Ponce 4:45 P. M. Price per ticket $8.00 and $15 round trip. Tickets for sale at our office, Alien corner San Justo. Swiggett Building. Box 3667 Santurce SAFETY - SPEED COMFORT
mlhabi rrstN cloths THE TRUE SPORTMAN WILL FIND SATISFACTION IN WEARING MICHAELS-STERN SUITS BECAUSE OF THEIR QUALITY, THEIR MADE AND THEIR PAINTING Cabrer Stores PONCE SAN JUAN
Brand new Guagua FOR SALE - Federal "delivery". ALVAREZ & PORTELA Crux No. 10, San Juan, P. R.
ATLAS LINE AUTOMOBILES BETWEEN SAN JUAN-PONCE 2 New Hudson Cars 2 We will pick you up and take you home - Departures-7:30 A. M. - t OFFICES Tel* 78 S. J. - Ponce " 1936 Sánt. Tel. 675
We are retiring from the industry. THAT'S WHY WE LIQUIDATE ALL OUR CLOTHING-PANTS SHIRTS for GENTLEMEN AT LESS THAN THE COST LA IMPERIAL Alien corner to San Justo
LADY! "Want to Dress Elegant? Visit "ESILDA'S STORE . Our Shopper was just arriving and J" s timos styles v colors in Suits, Hats, Kimonos, etc" etc. All at Situation Price. ESILDA'S STORE In San Francisco 32, Box 693, Tel. 382, San Juan, P. R.