ELM&NDO "ANANA" DIARY
22 |
22 Pages 2 Ctvs.
MORNING
THE MORNING
Year XI
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Published .at distributed endet permit Ho 801 tuto tied b" the *ct ot i> Ui<t 8, 1"17, on til" m the Post Office at 8an Juan. Porto R'co Bj order at the President. A. B. Bnrleson Poeimactst Genera. Entered as second class matter fe'jruars 21 191S at ths Pimt Office at Ban Jtaan. Porto Blco. (Onsted States of America) under the Act of march 's 1872.
Saturday, March 30, 1929. I Number 3334.
THE COMMISSION OF INQUIRY REPORTS FAVORABLY
r r M ton concerning the embroidery industry in Mayagüez M
The special Commission appointed a few days ago to investigate the embroidery and garment making industries in Mayagüez, after taking the corresponding steps to that effect, has rendered the following report to the House of Representatives: "The Commission appointed to study and investigate the embroidery industry in the city of Mayagüez, after having practiced the corresponding investigation in said city, has the honor to report to this honorable House of Representatives: "Qpe on Friday, 22 of the present, the Commission in full proceeded to turn an inspection to all the workshops in the city of Mayagüez, visiting especially the embroidery workshops belonging to Mrs. Gloria Domenech, Miss Maria Luisa Arcelay, Mamary Trading Co, John Vidal, Daniel Nadal, Equitable Embroidery Qom' Pany. and Mrs. Gustavo Saliva, b employing in this inspection desr from nine in the morning, until twelve of the day, hour in which the workshops were closed because it was a holiday. . "With the visit to said workshops, this Commission was in a position to be able to appreciate the kind of work that was being done in the workshops.
With the visit made to said workshops, this Commission was able to appreciate the type of work that is carried out in the city of Mayagüez, and the organization of said workshops, not finding it necessary to continue inspecting in detail each and every one of the rest of the 47 workshops that exist in said city, since they are all similar to these, and are organized on identical bases and in equal conditions, as far as their work and operation are concerned. "From said visit it was demonstrated that the embroidery industry in Mayagüez employs a large part of the female population, who work, as a rule, for 8 hours a day, attending said workshops. Almost all of them are organized in such a way that the women work quite comfortably, and even when small irregularities are noted in some, which are susceptible of prompt remedy through sanitary supervision, they are in strict compliance with sanitary regulations and labor laws. "About 3,000 women work in the Mayagüez workshops, which they deliver weekly.
Today at Esquina Famosa Raw denim suits that don't shrink $5.98 Cashmere suits in all colors $7.50 Great assortment of more expensive suits. Damián Rodríguez - Sachs & Co. IA ESQUINA FAMOSA Salvador Brau y San Justo.
Revista .Comercial' de Puerto Rico 0, (Porto Rico Commercial Review) SEMANARIO - Under the auspices of the Ponce Chamber of Commerce 10,000 Copies 36 Pages Will circulate in the first fifteen-; na of April I ■=- Merchants! More benefits for you ♦, ' Buying Shoes Directly from "Los Guardeses" Melon Hnos. & Co. 79 Allen St., San Juan.
FREE -HOY-Paris-Bazar One jar essence with each box of THREE FLOWERS powder 75'i PUERTO RICO HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES NOTICE San Juan, P. R., March 27, 1929The Treasury Committee of the House of Representatives will hold a public hearing at the Capitol on Wednesday, April 3, at 9:00 A. M., regarding R. C. of C. 50 "To encourage and distribute the tobacco stemming industry in Puerto Rico, abolishing patents on said industry, and for other purposes. E. LANDRON * Chairman of the Treasury Committee
* 4* i R. ! P. Carmen Eugenia Barreiro HAS DIED | Her parents, Don Leoncio Barreiro and Doña Carmen Eugenia Barreiro; her brothers. Gabriel. Manolo (absent), Carmen, Víctor. Paco and Mercedes, and his or her or his or her or her other relatives fefe ai to participate so unfortunate news invite to the burial that t will take place today at 11:00 A. M. at the Caguas Cemetery, leaving the funeral procession from the residence of the parents of the deceased. Coguas, ?0 March 1929.
" -GIFTING- I I I I SAMPLES and more SAMPLES of shoes for Ladies, Gentlemen and Children. PRICES TO THE SWEEP.
THE INSULAR CHAMBER OF COMMERCE ALSO OPPOSES
M The Insular Chamber of Commerce formulated its opposition to the bill that taxes the use of electric current in Puerto Rico through the following document, which was authorized by Mr. F. Soto Grás as president of the legislation committee of that organization: March 26, 1929. Mr. Don Enrique Landrón, Chairman of the Treasury Committee of the House of Representatives, San Juan, P. R. Sir: The Chamber of Commerce of Puerto Rico, through its Legislation Committee, which I chair, has the honor to appear before the Treasury Committee of the House of Representatives, over which you are presiding, to oppose the approval of H. B. 119, on the taxation of the use of electric current in this island. The proposed contribution affects (Continued on p. 21, CoL 4) $50,000 to $60,000 among such women workers and women who work at home. In order to realize the generalization of this industry, it is well to note that people from all walks of life are working in the workshops, earning reasonable weekly wages. "All the workshops visited have their own buildings, with the exception of the Equitable Embroidery Company, which works on its own account to sell directly to the United States market. These buildings have been specially constructed for the industry, and therefore offer spaciousness and comfort to the workers. (Continued on page 4, Col. 3).
AT THE CHAMBER OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PUERTO RICO . NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC The Committee on Welfare and Sanitation of the House of Representatives will hold a public hearing at its office in the Capitol Insular Capitol on P. of C. 155 and R. C. of C. 69 and 70, on Monday, April 1, 1929, at 8 P. M. Dr. Eugenio Fernández García. President (Announcement)
1
Don't be in a hurry because of the bad appearance of your car. René renovates it from the wheels to the hood for little money and in installments if you wish. WORKSHOP RENE THE WELDER Martin Peña Crossing.
FREE
If you have a hobby to sell and need to make money, write to us today to send you a free sample of a much needed new product that should be very well received. We need both male and female agents in San Juan. Santnree, Ponce and all the towns of the island. THE POETO HIGO NEWS CO, San Germin, P. R. DR. ROBERT Former director of the Maternity and Children's Hospital, advises that she is already installed in her office at the Santurce Clinic, Highway 111, second floor; morning and afternoon.
Enrique Martinez Coppersmith Tinsmith Canales, cumbleras, conizas y tubos de hierro galvanizado o cobre. Ave. Ponce de León, Stop 26H, Tel. 1356, Santurce.
Frederick G. Holcomb, who has tendered his resignation as Auditor of Puerto Rico. the next fiscal year. I deeply regret to be absent from the straw feeling closely connected to this town by ties of deep affection and deep sympathies." -What reasons prompted you to resign your position? "Before accepting the position of Auditor of Puerto Rico, I was serving in the United Fruit Company of Boston, a powerful corporation doing business in the Tropics, in Central and South American countries. The Government of Washington approached this corporation asking them to recommend a man for the position of Chief Auditor of Puerto Rico and I had the honor of being recommended by the directors of the injured corporation. We may say that I came to the island on loan. And once my resignation as Auditor of Puerto Rico is accepted, I will return to my activities in the United Fruit Company. -What salary did you receive at the United Fruit Company? -Let me not answer that question," Mr. Holcomb replied, and then added: "To please you, I will tell you that my salary was higher than the one I receive at the United Fruit Company.
Spanish Veils and Mantillas
OCCASION l Machetes Crocodile Painted to box of 10 doc. Martinez Hnos. SC Co. 276, Marina, San Juan. WE BUY RABBITS We buy 60 large rabbits weighing over 4 lbs. and not white. Also squirrels (manguí) 3 males and 12 females. Delivered to Escuda de Medicina Tropical, Parada 3.
Batches of Towels Batches of Sheets j General Interest AP of ■
We have just received the Best Assortment of Fabrics you can get in San Juan. Fancy Silks, Embroidered, Printed and Plain Colors, at Totally Low Prices. At Telas Barates we need to liquidate at rock bottom prices, due to the large quantity we have received. Don't miss this opportunity that we offer in our Stores. "El Sol" and "El Capricho".
ALLEN 62. ALLEN 56. BY J. MENENDEZ
Legitimate Panama Hats
Doña Lucila Colón HAS DIED Her husband don Eufemio Rolón, her mother doña Dolores R. widow of Colón, her little daughter Luz María, her siblings Mayitu. Lolita, Vidita, Ricardo Práxedes (absent), Valentín. and other relatives upon hearing such unfortunate news, beg to commend her soul to the Almighty and invite to the burial that will take place today at nine o'clock in the Cemetery of Santurce. leaving the coffin from the residence of the deceased, De Diego Esq. Barbosa St., Monteflores. Santurce.
AT ANY PRICE We need to realize HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS IN SUITS AND UNDERWEAR FOR MEN, at QUEMAZON prices.
AUDITOR HOLCOMB WILL RETURN TO UNlTED FRUIT COMPANY".
M He explains why he resigned from his position.
In his office yesterday we visited the Auditor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Frederick G. Holcomb, whom we questioned regarding his attitude in resigning from his position to take effect on June 30 of this year. Mr. Holcomb expressed himself in the following terms: - "On the fourth of Ma zo. upon the inauguration of the P. i mer Magistrate of the States.' 1 United States, Hon. Herbert Hoo see as a matter of ethics I resigned as Auditor of Puerto Rico to leave him free to choose the man of his confidence for the position he occupies and also because of my intention to resume my duties in the position I held with the United Fruit Company before coming to Puerto Rico. I would naturally state my desire to remain in Puerto Rico until June 30 of the current year when the fiscal term ends, in view of the work we are doing in the preparation of the financial program which is to govern during the next fiscal year, and in view of the work we are doing in the preparation of the financial program which is to govern during the next fiscal year, the Senate agreed to allow Mr. CHARDON to appear before it to answer the questioning of Senator Zeno M At eleven o'clock in the morning the Senate resumed its sessions on Thursday under the presidency of Mr. Barceló. A communication from the Governor withdrawing from the Senate the appointment of Dr. Pedro Perea Fajardo as Member of the Board of Trustees of the University was presented to the Senate The chair reported that Dr. Perea Fajardo had submitted his resignation from his position to the Board of Trustees, which the Governor nevertheless sent his appointment to the Senate, perhaps due to the fact that said resignation did not appear to have been accepted by the Board of Trustees.
HOY!!!Í Í sa ®1 do ||hOY!!! Unica <Jv Sale Opportunity!!! MARCH Special!!! A CASIMIR SUIT FOR MEN Lightweight 1 AOO Variety value I II in colors $18 " new GONZALEZ PADIN CO.
PUERTO RICO HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. The Committee on Insular and Municipal Government will hold a public hearing next Tuesday, April 2, at 2 o'clock in the afternoon in the halls of this House to hear all persons interested in the Resolution introduced by Representative Reyes Delgado, related to the chauffeurs drivers of motor vehicles engaged in the transportation of passengers, with respect to the bonds and rules determined by the Public Service Commission. JORGE ROMANI Chairman. of the Island and Municipal Government Commission. .
WE WILL GIVE A NEW TOILET SOAP to everyone who buys 50c. and upwards at the WHITE PHARMACY for the whole of this week.
- LIQUIDATING - LA IMPERIAL ANTONIO LEMA A CO. Alien corner San Justo The Cheapest Selling House in San Juan
ESTEVES EXPLAINS AT LENGTH TO THE SENATE
M The land swap with the firm "Luce & Co." M The Commissioner of the Interior, Don Guillermo Esteves addresses in the following terms to the President of the* Senate Don Antonio R. Barceló:- GOVERNMENT OF PUERTO RICO COMMISSION OF HOMES INSURANCE SAN JUAN, i' R. March 12, 1929 Hon. Antonio R. Barceló President of the Senate San Juan Puerto Ríce. Sir: On March 7 of the current date, received by me on the 9th, the Secretary of that high Body transmitted to me his order to make known to me the request presented by Senator. Santiago Iglesias, requesting the antecedents in relation "-to certain denunciations made by families living on lands of the Insular Government which are being turned over to the Central Aguirre, and in attention to said request I comply with the duty of informing the following: (Continued on page 19, Col. 3) ÍOS "lGWfÜLTORÉS DE UTUADO ABOGAN M For the creation of the Tobacco Protection Commission M At the offices of the Farmers Association we have been handed the following note authorized by the President of the Local Board of the Association in Utoa do, Mr. Eduardo Marín Marién: "The farmers of Utuado, being aware of the Tobacco Bill, creating a Commission to protect it and authorizing it for the issuance of bonds, presented by Messrs. Fernández García, Anglade, Piñe'ro and Landrón, trust that this bill will be approved by the Legislature. They consider it a just and due vindication for the e< - Continued on page 11 7th col. as Auditor." Mr. Holcomb tells us in response to questions from us that he is encariContinued Page 11, Col. 6)
THE LOWER HOUSE APPROVED NUMEROUS BILLS
M which were endowed on third reading,
passing to the Senate
The House of Representatives resumed its sessions on Thursday at half past ten o'clock in the morning. The following bills and resolutions were approved by majority vote on third reading:- P. of Ja C. 97,- To amend section 1 of Act No. 83, entitled "An Act to incorporate in the lists of the Classified Civil Service of Puerto Rico certain persons who do not have professional titles. and for other purposes", approved on July 23, 1921, and for other purposes. To authorize the Municipality of Hatillo to pay certain debt incurred in the last fiscal year, and for other purposes. To condone to the municipality of Ceiba a debt of seven hundred forty-two dollars sixty-seven cents ($742.66) contracted with the Pueblo of Puerto Rico for unpaid state insurance premiums from the fiscal year 1923-24 to the fiscal year 1926-27, and for other purposes. To authorize and order the Treasurer of Puerto Rico to declare null and void the auction of an estate auctioned to Mr. Francisco Angel Paralitici and the certificate of sale and null and void the cancellation of a mortgage in favor of The Union Central Life Insurance Co. and for other purposes. P. S. 152.- To amend Section 175 of Act 66 entitled "An Act to provide for the incorporation of insurance companies in the country, to regulate the insurance business in Puerto Rico, and for other purposes," approved on July 16, 2001.
purposes," approved on July 16, 1921, and for other purposes. P. S. 117.- Appropriating the amount of three thousand (3,000) dollars, or such part thereof as may be necessary, to increase the Contingencies of the House of Representatives, and for other purposes. P. 43.- To designate the municipal road leading from Cabo Rojo to the town of Joyuda as an island road, and for other purposes. P. of the C. 74- To repeal Joint Resolution number 57 of 1928 of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico, entitled "Joint Resolution to organize in the Department of Public Instruction of Puerto Rico a Division of Technical Investigations that would be responsible for the technical research of the Department of Public Instruction of Puerto Rico, and for other purposes. Rico a Technical Research Division to be devoted to the scientific study of pedagogical problems, and for other purposes." approved on May 9, 1928; so that the Faculty of the University of Puerto Rico shall be in charge of such technical research, and for other purposes. P. S. 209.- To amend section 4 of Act number 66 entitled "An Act providing ♦© ncessary for the incorporation of Insurance Companies in the country, to regulate the insurance business in Puerto Rico, approved July 16, 1921, and for "other purposes." M . P. of the C. 194.- To amend section 5 of an act entitled "An Act to amend sections 94, 152, 234, 295 and 80? of the Code of Civil Procedure. and to repeal sections 259 to 266,. j all others thereof *eh how much as I refer to the (Continued on p. 20, Col. 7)
Today at Famous Corner Navy blue slang suits finest quality - - - -15.98 Guaranteed English thread denim suits, no shrinkage. -12.50 Great assortment in suits of more price. Damian Rodriguez - Sachs & Co. THE FAMOUS CORNER Salvador Brau and San Justo.