ELM0NDO
24 pages
j 24 pagi J
MORNING
MORNING
Year XL
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Published and diatriboted under permit No. 801 authorized by the Act of October 6, 1911. on filo at the Foot Office at Ban Juan. Porto Kieo. By order of the Preaident. A. 8 Bnrleeon, Poetmaater General. Entered "" eocond class matter, febrnary 21. 1919 ti the Poet Office at Ban Juan. Porto Rico (United States of America) under the A-t of march 8, 1879.
Saturday, December 14, 1929. Number 3591 j
the central board in the hands of mr. barcelo.
M The matter of the letter from the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico M Last Thursday night the members of the Central Board of the Puerto Rican Union, residing in San Juan, met to consider the question related to the communication which the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico addressed to the "President of the Central Steering Committee of the Puerto Rican Alliance, requesting a candidate to fill the vacancy in the Mayagüez Municipal Assembly. Also present at said meeting was Ledo. José Sabater, President of the Local Board of the Union in Mayagüez was also present at the meeting. The Resolution adopted there was left in the hands of the President of the Party, Mr. Barceló, to be carried out in the places and at the time he deems convenient. When Mr. Barceló was asked about the mission entrusted to him, he replied that until he was determined to carry it out in all its terms and within the conditions to which he and his other fellow lawyers of the Central Board were subject, he would not make anything public.
THE SLUDGE. CERVONI GELY WILL ALSO INTERVENE M For having appeared yesterday erroneously transcribed the note authorized by Ledo. Cuevas Zequeira regarding the impeachment suit against the Mayor of Caguas, the name of one of the lawyers of the Alliance, that of Ledo. Cervoni Gely. Therefore, Mr. Cervoni Gely, Mr. Aponte and Mr. González Fagundo will intervene as attorneys for the Alliance". Oatmeal H-0 The most tasty and nutritious It is cooked for 3 minutes Packaged in 26 oz. tins TEST IT. Sacra de L. VUiamU * Ce. San Juan, P. R. Exclusive Agents. -ToYS See GERMANS, Alien 82, FREESE & CO., INC. ' Dr. D. Biascoechea Diseases of the Stomach and Intestines. Cross 1 3, Hours: 2 to 5 P. M. Tel. 684, S. J.
Loans in the amount of $3,650,002 -
BEAUTY PARLOR In Mayagüez, Calle de la Rosa No. 26 a Beauty Parlor has opened and offers its services to the public by Mrs. Uva Barletta de Anaya.
For 15c. You can store your car when you go to Olimpo, at the Sacred Heart Academy Park.
- HONEY - VANNINA DISTILLING COMPANY Parada 20, Santurce. Honey for sale.
Apartments for Rent at Alien 85-87. Will inform: - Tel. 1900, San Juan.
M ' ' - -i They had been granted in November 30 last by the Rehabilitating Commission M
The Rehabilitating Commission authorizes the following official information: "The work being done by the Board of Substitutes of the Rehabilitating Commission was in this condition on the first day of December in progress; "LOANS: "The Board had received 3,484 eligible applications, which may or may not be approved. The extension of the coffee lands included in these applications amounted to 129,416 cuerdas. "As of last November 30, the Board had approved 2,026 loans in the amount of $3,650,002. These loans were made on farms totaling 170,620 cuerdas with 84,756 cuerdas under cultivation. "As of November 30, $921,283.00 had been deposited in the banks to the credit of the debtors, which is sufficient for the rehabilitation of 62,19 cuerdas of land under cultivation.
This is sufficient for the rehabilitation of 62'19 hectares of land under cultivation. Total deposits are expected to reach $1 million on December 30. On January 1, an additional sum of $840,000 will be deposited to the credit of the debtors covering the installments from January to June, 1930. "SCHOOLS: "The repair and reconstruction of schools is done by the Commissioner of the Interior. Repair work is done by administration and new schools per auction. "A total of 389 schools will be repaired. As of December 1, 176 of these schools had been completed, and work will be continued on 52 others. It is expected that this repair work will be completed by March 1. "A total of 321 new school buildings will be constructed by auction and extensive repairs will be carried out on 25 additional buildings. This work will be included in approximately 25 contracts. By the first of December 16 of these contracts had been awarded to$Continued on page 23, col. 4
STIM-U-PLANT Chemical fertilizer for plants. Morel Campos 21, Tel. 1067 green, Santurce. Agents solicited.
' CXODOi Why Sofiar with each item separately? Say: "A Wilson Brothen mosaic blend* and that brings it all together! - FOR RENT A store at Tetuán 51. Information: Tel. 280 blue Santurce.
REALIZED THE EMPRESTITO OF $7501)00
M (Official Information) The Treasurer of Puerto Rico has been informed by the Bureau of Insular Affairs of Washington that the loan of $750,000.00 for the Irrigation of Isabela was awarded on the 12th of the current month to the firm "M. M. Freeman and Company", "M. M. Freeman and Company". M. Freeman and Company, of New York, for its bid of 102.139 and accrued interest to the date of the operation. SUGAR MARKET M Cablegram received from New York yesterday, December 13, 1929, afternoon: "Market firm. Moderate quantities of Philippines to arrive in January sold at 3.80 and 3.83. At market close there were more buyers at 3.83. Futures: January 2.02, March 2.10, May 2.16. FARP, SUGAR SALE.
Gonzalez Padin Co. ' .... OPPORTUNITY... just a few days Starting on the 13th until the 22nd of this month.... BEFORE CHRISTMAS! We have marked down for a few days these suits, in order to make room for the new assortment we are now receiving,,,,! English Thread suits to These, of light cashmere with and Lightweight suits of the famous J unlined, very nice colors, Keep-Kool brand in white and ecru colors; what* you see- they had been marked down to and new styles that their true we were marked down to $7.50. Hov $10.00. - Today's price is $18. - Today $ ¡ 50 $IJ50 1 " 1 """"I - - I. II "I I" White Pants GONZALEZ PADIN Co. Straw Hats SPECIAL $1.35 San Juan - Ponce - Mayagüez Canutillo-Especial $1.00
See advertisement on Page 22 "LA OPERA".
IPANA Greetings to the attendees of the DENTAL ASSEMBLY and especially to the dentists. A test tube of PANA will be offered as a free gift to the attendees. . Lykes Bros. Steamship Co., Inc. (The Best Steamship Service between Gulf Ports and Puerto Rico.) Steamship "MARGARET LYKES" leaves Ponce for Santo Domingo, Houston and Galveston (Tex) directly on the 19th of the present; admitting passengers and cargo Save time and money traveling in this fast and comfortable steamship. Lykes Bros. Steamship Co., Inc. Tel. 318, Office - Pier 319 - Box 777 SAN JUAN, P. R.
H SHIRTS / arrow ' ? / NECK T ARROW l A II glued Of broadcloth fabric in colors Blue, Cream, Green and Lilac in very Delicate Dyes For sale in the most important stores Manufacturers Cluett, Peabody & Co.
Aguadilla in San Juan THE ABUSE IS OVER Now you can make your Christmas gift with handmade works and you will be grateful. We have a new and splendid souvenir at reasonable prices. Come here and you will be satisfied LUIS MATOS. Alien 32 (Next to "Los Muchachos") Tel. 306 S. J. San Juan LATEST CREATIONS Exclusive to 'El Popular' SAN JUSTO 14 We have just received them in V x. colors, Pink, Cabritilla ■ ' White, Beige, Glacé Brown J j Black Satin and Patent Leather. Cubano and High Heels. PRICES $6.°° THE PAIR. See them and you'll buy yours for Easter and New Year. \ For mail orders please contact C ividanes. Sobrino & Co. Box 849, San Juan, P.R. J
Annual Assembly of the Puerto Rico Dental Association - At the "Román Baldorioty de Castro" School in San Juan, P. R. on December 14 and 15 (Saturday and Sunday). The event will begin on Saturday at 9 P. M. and will continue all day Sunday. All dentists in Puerto Rico are invited J. R. HERNANDEZ GONZALEZ, Secretary. JOSE VICENTE, President. ATLAS LINE AUTOMOBILES BETWEEN SAN JUAN - PONCE 2 New Hudson Cars 2 We will pick you up and take you home _ Departures-7:30 A. M. - OFFICES Tel* 78 S. J. - Ponce " 1936 Sánt. Tel 675
SANITATION INSTRUCTS THAT WHILE A NEW ANALYSIS IS BEING MADE
"The ice from Utuado should be used exclusively for refrigeration" M ~"(From our Mayagüez Correspondent) M Dr. Francisco J Casalduc, Inspector. Francisco J Casalduc, Health Inspector in this city, gives us for publicity the following statement on the matter of the contamination of the ice brought to Mayagüez from Utuado: "The analysis practiced by the Laboratory of the Health Department shows that the ice that is distributed in this city from Utuado, is contaminated with Bacillus Coll, a germ that lives in the animal intestine and whose presence indicates the possibility that on any occasion other germs capable of producing diseases in man could appear in said ice. "To date, the Local Health Office has not been able to trace (Continued on 4, Col. 6)
A TRIBUTE TO DON MANUEL V. DOMENECH
M It will be sponsored by the "National Republican Club of Puerto Rico" M From the offices of the National Republican Club of Puerto Rico the following note is sent to us: "No effort is lost when a gesture of the spirit animates the struggle. The eagerness to pour oneself into good, is like a mighty river that imprisons; it will break the dam or over the dam it will pour the crystalline waves of its waters.... The ideal, like light, pierces the mountains and probes the abysses. The ideal? Yes, the ideal, which is the essence of thought, never suffers the fatigue associated with the clumsy rivalry of the muscles: it neither yields nor falsifies: it neither dodges nor gives up: it lives and revives, it advances and becomes encased: it attacks and resists.... It is like the faith of the Christians: a continual kindling of hopes, or like the death of heroes: a rebirth in the psalm of immortality.... "Those who have been men of ideals, enjoy the asuterity of the Continued on page 21. col. 5.
"DR. ORTIZ, TRIES TO IMPEDE THE INVESTIGATION OVE INTERESAMOS".
M "With an article full of fallacious arguments and misleading statistics", says Pesquera M
The President of the Puerto Rico Farmers Association, Mr. José L. Pesquera, sends us the following article for publication: "Wishing to contribute in some way to the solution of the dreadful problem of milk adulteration, the Puerto Rico Farmers Association approved a Resolution to "Request the Hon. Governor of Puerto Rico to appoint a special Committee whose exclusive mission is to investigate, in the most thorough manner possible, what are the causes for the fact that milk adulteration is occurring in Puerto Rico.
To request the Hon. Governor of Puerto Rico to appoint a special Committee whose exclusive mission shall be to investigate, in the most thorough manner possible, the reasons for the failure to prevent the adulteration of milk in Puerto Rico and to submit to the honorable Commissioner of Health a practical plan to put an end, once and for all, to this evil that affects so much the interests of livestock and public health. "We believed that the Commissioner of Health would show more interest than ourselves in having the actions of his Department purged to the last limit; we hoped that he would be the first to open the way to all the scrutiny that might be suggested in connection with his administrative functions; we felt almost certain that he would be the first to open the way to all the scrutiny that might be suggested in connection with his administrative functions; we felt almost certain that he would be the first to open the way to all the scrutiny that might be suggested in connection with his administrative functions." continued on page 23, col. 2