elmIndo
Pages 1
18 p^nas 3 ctvs -
MORNING
MORNING
Year XI.
San Juan, Puerto Rico
I Published and distributed under permit No. 801 authorized by the Act of October 6, 1917. on file st the Post Office at San , Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the President, A. S. Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919 at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rico (United States of America) under the Act of March 3, 1879.
| Saturday, September 28, 1929.
| Number 3514.
"YOUR AMENDMENT, IF SUGGESTED BY ME, I MAKE IT MY OWN".
"Because it is inspired by the public good", says Toas Solo to Sabater.
Don Jose Tous Soto addressed us yesterday from Ponce this telegram: "EL MUNDO", San Juan. "I have just sent the following teilegram: Ledo. José Sabater, Ma'yagüez, P. R. "You say in your "statement": "I must add that I have never had corporate equals, nor do I have them and therefore I could not have any interest whatsoever in this project or in the amendment." The logical inference from these and other words of yours is that the bill and the amendment favored corporations, that it was sponsored by me because I had equals with corporations, and that I abused my friendship with you and surprised your good faith by inducing you to file an amendment favoring corporations. I beg you, invoking the love of truth which you proclaim, to state publicly: 1st. whether the bill authorizing a loan of half a million payable out of irrigation funds favored corporations and why. 2nd.
Whether the amendment left standing the provision of Section 7 declaring that the title to the works constructed with the loan and the increase of water and power obtained therewith belonged to the People of Puerto Rico. 3rd.- Whether the amendment favored corporations or favored the people by allowing them to acquire, if it suited them, with funds from river sources the Toro Negro works, before the time when these were to be delivered to the people, in accordance with the proviso of article 7, that is, after the principal and interest of the loan of half a million had been paid, returning to the irrigation service what had been invested in the works. In fairness to your fellow member of the Legislature, you cannot refuse to diaphanize this uniquely important aspect of the matter. Your amendment, whether or not it was suggested by me, as I said yesterday in "EL MUNDO", I make it my own because it is inspired by the public good. José TOUS SOTO."
ROOSEVELT'S INAUGURAL PROGRAM.
A word of caution in connection with the inaugural speech.
Inaugural Speech
* We opportunely published the details of the meeting held in Fortaleza to agree on the arrangements connected with the inauguration of the new Governor Roosevelt. The Program, as finally drawn up, is as follows: ' 1-October 7, 1929, will be declared a holiday.
2-The ship will dock at the pier at 9:00 A. M. The Governor will be saluted. M. The Governor will be saluted. The Executive and Reception Committee, and the wives of the gentlemen on it, will receive the Governor and Mrs. Roosevelt aboard ship. 3-Immediately after disembarkation, the Governor's party and the Committee will proceed to the Capitol, and will be received by the members of the Insular Parliament and Judges of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico in the premises of the House of Representatives. 4- At 10:00 A. M., the Governor will be inaugurated. A platform will be built on the Capitol steps facing the highway. 5- At 11:00 A. M., or as soon as the inauguration is completed, the parade will be formed and reviewed. After the parade, the Governor's entourage and the Executive Committee will proceed to the Fortress. The Governor and his entourage will ride in open carriages, with the carriage thrown back, weather permitting. He will be followed by delegations from the Island and the public. Upon his arrival at La Fortaleza, the Governor will receive the different commissions of the Island. 6- At 3:00 P. M. Special races at one of the racetracks. 7- At 8:00 P. M. retreta at the Baldorioty Plaza. 8- At 9:00 P. M. a dance and reception will be held at the most appropriate place to be determined by the executive program sub-committee. The names of the gentlemen who make up the Organizing Committee and the various sub-committees were already published by "EL MUNDO" in our Thursday edition. Yesterday we were also supplied with this note: "The ceremonies in connection with the Inauguration of Governor Theodore Roosevelt, Jr. on October 7, 1929, will include an Inaugural Parade. "The Committee in charge of the ceremony is anxious to have a large representation of organizations in Puerto Rico at the Parade, and requests, through the Press, that the directors of the (continued on 13, Col. 5)
THE TOBACCO COMMISSION INSISTS THAT THE PRODUCTION OF THE AROMATIC LEAF NOT BE INCREASED-CALLS ATTENTION TO THE HARVESTERS M The Board to Protect the Tobacco of Puerto Rico agreed yesterday to publicize the following note: "Reports are reaching this Commission from almost all the towns of the Island where tobacco is grown, that the preparations for the next planting are really alarming, and it can be calculated as of now that the coming harvest, if such preparations are not limited, will exceed 400,000 quintals. The Commission considers that this represents a serious threat to the harvesters and to the country in general, since an excessive harvest will result in higher production costs and will ensure a low selling price. We once again call the attention of all persons engaged in the tobacco business in Puerto Rico, both harvesters and refineries, to avoid, by all means, the serious danger which we have previously pointed out and which we wish to insist upon today. The Commission feels that it must make this new appeal to the reason and common sense of the people to whom it is addressed, and in the event that its warnings are not heeded, it will have the satisfaction of having fulfilled its duty".
When it comes to making a cliché you know that the best ones are made by the Puerto Rico Ilustrado print shop but we are pleased to remind you that they make them at the lowest prices.
HOOVERCEDEALPUE BLO DE PUERTO RICO
M The federal lands including Fort San Jeronimo M The President of the United States, Herbert Hoover, has issued a proclamation ceding to the People of Puerto Rico the federal lands including Fort San Jeronimo held under lease by Commander Baker, and all adjacent land held by the Federal Government, excepting five cuerdas described in the proclamation for the use of the Navy Department in the development of the naval communications service. Here is the operative part of the Proclamation: "Therefore, in compliance with the authority conferred upon me by the Act of March 2, 1917, aforesaid, all right, title and interest of the United States in the tract of land hereinafter described is hereby transferred and vested in the People of Puerto Rico, viz. "Beginning at point number 84 on the Military Road, as shown on the Military Map of the Military Reservation of San Juan, Puerto Rico, and extending in a straight line N. 23' 29' E., through point number 63 seaward; then eastward along the coast and off Fort San Jeronimo to La Laguna; then southward and off the coast of Fort San Jeronimo, and westward and southward along the coast of La Laguna to the San Antonio Battery; then along the San Antonio Channel to a point where the line through points numbers 83 and 84 intercepts the channel; then along the lines N. 23' 29' E. to point number 84, together with all right, title, and interest of the United States in all shores and submerged lands lying in a line drawn from points numbers 90, 91, 92, and 93, as shown on the military map of the San Juan Military Reservation, Puerto Rico. Except, and excepting, and governed from the above-described property hereinbefore conferred. five (5) acres, more or less, granted for the use of the Department of the Navy for the development of the naval communications service and for other purposes of the United States, southerly and contiguous to the property once leased to Virgil Baker, and bounded on the north by the southerly line of the Virgil Baker estate, being a straight line drawn from the point known as Point 85 at the southwest corner of the Virgil Baker estate, easterly along the southerly line of said Virgil Baker estate through Point 86 to the Lagoon; on the west by a straight line drawn southward from said Point 85 along the westerly line of the estate herein granted; on the east along the shore of the Lagoon; and on the south by the southerly line of a projected road, the direction and layout of which will be fixed at a later date. The United States retains title and jurisdiction over the five-acre tract last mentioned.
"IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the great seal of the United States to be affixed hereto." (S.D.) HERBERT HOOVER. For the President, H. L. STIMSON Secretary of State. THE PAPERS OF THE LAST ELECTIONS M They will remain untouched indefinitely M Yesterday morning the Insular Board of Elections met with Chairman Terry and Commissioners Messrs. Frank A. Martinez and Bolivar Pagan in attendance. Several matters of internal order were discussed, and finally it was agreed to keep the ballots corresponding to the last elections untouched indefinitely. As our readers know, the practice up to now had been to destroy the ballots one year after the election was held. ■ * ■ - ? '■'.. ' ' ' ' MISSING from "Miramontes", Cidra, police dog, old, dark gray, ear down, collar with name on it. Whoever finds her will be rewarded. Phone 880.
"WE WILL HAVE TO MAKE AN EFFORT SO THAT THE COMMISSIONER OF INSTRUCTION".
M * "Do not hyperbolize the powers granted to him by the Charter," says the President of the Association of School Directors M .
Ledo. R. Arjona Slaca, president of the Insular Association of School Principals, replies with this article statements by Commissioner Huyke: "The Commissioner of Instruction is right in proclaiming that he will maintain with all energy the rights granted to him by the present Charter. And he is also right to maintain them. I know that the Commissioner is one of the most energetic men among the responsible intellectuals of our Island, and that is precisely one of the qualities that makes him more worthy of appreciation and admiration by men like him who are also energetic and dynamic. With energy on his part, and equal energy on ours, we will have to sustain a singular civic struggle, exemplary for the country, which will finally benefit from our mutual efforts. "Of course, the country can be absolutely certain that with the same energy as him, with an energy, better said, worthy of him, we, the School Principals, will strive to ensure that the Commissioner does not overstep the powers granted to him by the Organic Charter in force, does not exceed his attributions, and limits himself exclusively to the framework - defined and clear - that said law outlines for him. And we must also strive to convince the Island Legislature and the Governor of the need to amend the School Law in force, which still prevails from the times when the Foraker Charter governed Puerto Rico, and which gives the Commissioner certain powers that the current Organic Charter does not grant him, powers that the Commissioner also overstretches and violates at his discretion, contrary to the same Law. "The Organic Law, in its Section 17, does not give the Commissioner many of the powers he currently arrogates to himself. It gives him power only to be a "Superintendent" of public instruction, to approve disbursements in connection therewith, to prepare all courses of study, subject to the approval of the Governor if he should desire to intervene, and to prepare regulations for the selection of teachers, the appointments of these teachers being subject to the approval of the Governor.
The appointments of these teachers are subject to his approval. "There is nothing prescribed in said Charter which gives power to the Commissioner to fix the minimum enrollment of a school; to divide the attendance of schools into single and double enrollment; to determine the days of absence allowed, with pay, during each month, to teachers; to assign the number of rural, graded and special schools"" to be operated in each Municipality and each year; to give leave of absence to teachers only for the duration of the school year; to give leave of absence to teachers only for the duration of the school year; to give leave of absence to teachers only for the duration of the school year; to give leave of absence to teachers only for the duration of the school year; and to give leave of absence to teachers only for the duration of the school year; to license teachers only for a specified period of years; to cancel such licenses or to give them as lapsed and thereafter refuse to renew them; to select textbooks ad libitum, to make direct appointments on his own account in an inconceivably autocratic manner, nor for a host of other powers and attributions which, with all pardon and respect, Mr. Commissioner, has truly usurped in the exercise of his office. "None of this can be done by the Commissioner under the Charter. Some of these things he does only under the protection of the School Laws that have emanated from the insular Legislatures of the times of "la Retranca", Foraker Law, and others, the most, he does them outside the Organic Charter, outside the insular laws, by his own will, by the long manifest passivity of the municipal authorities in matters of instruction... and by the long inactivity, in the same sense, of our insular Legislative Assembly. "But... we will energetically fight to remedy the evil. From the clash of his conservative energy and our relvindicating energy, the country will receive the fruits of good. The Commissioner is a good Puerto Rican. We know that he is inspired by the best wishes for his people. And we hope that he will also think of us as good Puerto Ricans like him and like him also inspired by right, justice and the good of our people." R. ARJONA SIACA, President School Principals Association of Puerto Rico.
198 M-W SPECIAL FOR ==-4 GENTLEMEN SHIRTS with the collar attached, last type received, the shirt that everyone wears now. ULTIMATE FASHION i Beautiful colors - Made of fine Broadcloth and madras fabrics, great new assortment in whole new colors, striped, striped, and white, comfortable and cool. 'WORTH THE DOUBLE "" --fc APROVECHE fifi I now ■ JJQ
Cuevas Zequeira, Córdova Dávila and Carbia confer with
C 0 NCONTINUES TO ORGANIZE THE INAUGURATION OF ROOSEVELT
M The reception-dance will be held at the Municipal Theater.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 27-(United Press-Exclusive dispatch to "EL MUNDO")-El Ledo. Rafael Cuevas Zequeira, and the engineer Don Ramon Carbia, president and secretary respectively of the Alianza Portorriqueña, visited yesterday afternoon the Secretary of War, Good, accompanied by the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico, Mr. Cordova Davila. The conference lasted for a long time. On leaving we questioned Mr. Cuevas Zequeira, who stated the following: "We went to pay our respects to the Secretary of War, who, among other things, told us that he considered his responsibilities and obligations to Puerto Rico, as such Secretary, even more important than those he has contracted with the states of the Union. He further expressed to us that it was his purpose to do all in his power to aid the people of the island, and to cooperate with the Resident Commissioner, inasmuch as the latter is the representative of the island in Congress and the official who is presumed to understand the problems of Puerto Rico. "I suggested to him the advisability of smoothing the work of the Commission.
In the office of the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico, Don Eduardo J Saldaña, a meeting was held yesterday attended by the chairmen of the various sub-committees appointed to prepare the ceremonies to be performed at the inauguration of the new Governor of the island, Colonel Theodore Roosevelt. The Hon. Emilio del Toro Cuebas, Chairman of the Executive Reception Committee, presided over the meeting. There was a general exchange of views aimed at facilitating all the means for the sub-committees to carry out their work without delays or difficulties. The general lines of the work to be carried out were adopted. It was agreed in principle that the reception-dance to be held on the evening of the day of Colonel Roosevelt's inauguration as Governor of the Island would be held at the Municipal Theater of San Juan under the auspices of the social centers Casino de Puerto Rico, Casino Español and "Union Club". Governor Roosevelt's inaugural speech will be transmitted by radio and in front of the Capitol, where the tribune will be erected, amplifiers will be placed so that the entire audience may hear the Chief Executive without difficulty.
THE ALLIANCE IS READY TO TAKE TO THE COURTS M Several legal proceedings -The Caguas matter M At its Inaugural session, the Legal Committee appointed by the Island Committee of the Alliance agreed to take to the courts the matter of the appointment of the Mayor of Caguas, which recently went to Mr. Ildefonso Solá Morales. The procedure to be followed in the Courts has not yet been resolved, but it is reported that the lawsuit will be filed at any moment. It was also agreed to file a legal proceeding against the Local Unionist Committee to deliver the property allegedly owned by the Local Committee of the San Juan Alliance. Consideration was given to all matters related to the minute books of the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rican Alliance. As our readers know, Mr. Barceló addressed a letter to Mr. Tous Soto stating that such minute books were in his possession, but that considering that the Alliance was broken and that he was the President of the Union Party, the main party that formed said coalition, he considered that such books should not be returned by him. The Legal Committee agreed to appeal to the courts for the purpose of recovering said minute books. NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC
The Speaker of the House of Representatives, Mr. Tous Soto, sends us the following statement, number seven of the series he has been publishing: THE INCOME TAX "Mr. Barceló confesses:- "The matter of the retroactive effect to which Mr. Tous Soto also refers, that was certainly the opinion expressed by me when we met in caucus to determine our attitude on the matter; but I joined my vote to the general vote of all, voting for the reteroactive effect of the law, although I still believe that this being a principle consigned in the fundamental bases of our civil code, as a guarantee for any acquired right to be respected, it was not a very wise policy on our part, to so openly violate that principle... I have not had time, however, to examine what the results of such a provision have really been, and I will try to do so in order to know what to expect on future occasions, as well as whether such a provision, as I believe, did more harm to the small businesses of Puerto Rico than to the large ' "Words and words. The principle of non-retroactivity of civil laws has nothing to do with the provision that income accrued in a certain year be taxed according to a law subsequent to the accrual of such income. Income Tax is always levied on the income or profits of the preceding year. There is no retroactive effect in this way of applying the Income Tax, which is the one that has always prevailed in the United States and which is perfectly constitutional, according to the statements of the most important tax authorities in the United States.
At the request of an interested party, it is hereby made known that according to the law and jurisprudence, a broker represents the interests of the insured and the payment of a policy shall not be considered received by the Company that underwrites a policy until it is made to an authorized representative of the company that underwrites said policy. San Juan, P. R." September 27, 1929. AUGUSTO R. SOLTERO Superintendent of Insurance (Announcement)
THE IDEAL 8ITIO FOR YOUR WEEKEND "THE COAMO BATHS" Medicinal Waters, Sulphurous Baths Callentes, magnificent for the treatment of rheumatism, Neuralgias and diseases of) stomach. Do not waste time Visit us. Special prices for weeks.
Hoover and Good
The Head of the Puerto Rican Alliance informs us some details of the interview.
Rehabilitator so that she can activate him and successfully perform his duties. The Secretary showed himself very interested, and promised to give the matter his full consideration and study, in order to avoid unnecessary delays in the work of the Commission. "Speaking of Governor Roosevelt, I told the Secretary that our Party was willing to cooperate with the new Chief Island Executive in bringing about a sound administration which would restore public confidence in the government. The Secretary then gave me the gre" cies and added that he is sure <& that Roosevelt is animated by the best wishes and determined to make his administration a success, to the benefit oc ra island and credit of the nation." M WASHINGTON, Sept. 27, (United Press)-Mr. Cuevas Zequeira, Mr. Córdova Dávila and Mr. Carbia paid a visit this morning at the White House to President Hoover, to whom they paid their respects. On leaving the interview they informed us that the conference with the President was cordial and satisfactory. UNITED PRESS.
I UPHELD THE INTERESTS OF THE TREASURY AGAINST THE "BIG INTERESTS"," SAYS TOUS SOTO.
Says Tous Soto addressing the issue of the retroactivity of the "Income-Tax" M
The tax was not retroactively applied by the state and federal courts. Proof of this is that no suit could be and was not brought against the application of the 1927 revenue law to benefits derived in the preceding year. "If Mr. Barceló's criteria had prevailed in the caucus, the People of Puerto Rico would have lost close to one million dollars in revenues during that fiscal year and we would have had a deficit. To benefit small businesses? No. Small businesses are not affected by the Income Tax. "Small profits are not taxed or are taxed on a small scale. The interests affected by the so-called retroactive effect were the "big interests" (Corporations or not), mainly the sugar interests, the big power plants, the powerful colonists. Those were the ones that Mr. Barceló tried to favor, in spite of not having equals. And Mr. Tous Soto, who has no legislative equals, even if he has them to render his services outside the Legislature, supported the interests of the Treasury against the "big interests" (Corporations or not) defended tenaciously by Mr. Barceló, who now shields himself with "the small ones", knowing that he was an unequal advocate of "the big ones". It is the same tactic as in the case of the "sugar tax", the "Orlente railroad", and the "railroad tax exemption". The game is already seen and nobody believes in altruism, nor in the other "isms" of Mr. Barceló. José Tous SOTO. EXCHANGE MARKET M September 27, 1929. Franco 3.98 Pesetas 14.86 E. Pounds 4.88 Italian Liras 5.29
ATLAS LINE AUTOMOBILES BETWEEN SAN JUAN -PONCE 2 New Hudson cars 2 We will pick you up and take you home - Departures-7:30 A. M. - OFFICES Tel- 78 S. J. - Pone® " 1936 Sánt. Tel. 675