elmQndo
20 Pg!n
20 pá 8* n
MORNING
MORNING
Year XI.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
"a" * 01 b" u. Aci " □ s. iwii. ou tu. M Ui. p<mk orne "t "an £ B Z A 8 Barbón Po.tBmrUi Oecart. Entered u second elees matter. feJmary 81 J 919 ** th * Onto, at San Jnaa. Porte Ble." (Onlted gtates a" amerlea) "nde" th" Act ot marcb 3. 187".
Saturday, July 6, 1929.
Number 3431.
GALLARDO HAS RECOMMENDED AN EXTRA-ORDINARY LEGISLATIVE SESSION.
To fully address the graceful problem of the municipalities of Puerto Rico.
The Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Juan G. Gallardo, was summoned by the Insular Senate to expose the economic situation of the municipalities, in view of the numerous communications that were received daily in the Legislative Assembly highlighting the difficulties that many municipal administrations were encountering and the lack of resources to attend to necessary and indispensable services. "EL MUNDO" published an extensive report describing the description made by Mr. Gallardo of the situation of the municipal governments and the recommendations he made to remedy the situation that was denounced.
Mr. Gallardo recommended as a saving measure for the municipalities in crisis the consolidation of services as the only way to introduce economies until the critical economic situation of the municipalities was normalized. And he suggested the approval of the Senate bill reorganizing the municipal government on the basis of an optional provisional legislation for those municipalities that wished to avail themselves of it. Treasurer Gallardo maintains that the measure adopted by the Board of Revision and Equalization by virtue of which the assessment was reduced to one dollar per string (Continued on p. 5, Col. 4)
i Uí > u ®
HIGH DIGNITARIES OF THE ORDER OF KNIGHTS OF COLUMBUS
M To meet tomorrow at the Baños de Coamo M Tomorrow, Sunday, the State Officers of the Knights of Columbus will meet at the Baños de Coamo, with the nn to study and resolve important questions relating to the institution. The State Deputy has summoned the State Officers to settle several important matters, among them, the appointment of the State Chaplain; the appointment of the Councils which are to elect the Trustees for the Insurance Committee; consideration and approval of the draft of the minutes of the State Convention, prepared by the Secretary and to be published in printed pamphlets; and other important questions which the State Deputy is to submit to the said Officers. The Deputy of State has also to
pjlHEÜ W W WG.U.l.PAT. OFE TRADI TRADI MARK Tonícosin rival for people of all ages because they unite in their composition the nourishing properties of RICE, and BARLEY with those invigorating ones of SUGAR SUGAR. It is of inestimable value for nursing mothers. Our brand contains only 1-10 of 1% alcohol. The lower the proportion of alcohol, the greater the benefits to the nursing child. Manufacturer": ANHEUSER-BUSCH. St. Loui", Mo. Atente" for Pumo Rico KÓRBER COMPANY. D®. SAN fUAN, PORTO RICO
"Línea Borinquen" -' "* " If you plan to travel don't forget that LINEA BORINQUEN has reduced the fare between San Juan and Ponce. 1.25 round trip $2.25 Elegant and comfortable buses. Knowledgeable and courteous staff. Office: San José No. 19, Tel. 1692. GREAT PRICE REDUCTION AT La Esperanza DE PHILIP EL KOURY 5 - 10 - 25 - 50c. and $1.00 Underwear for ladies, children and gentlemen. All kinds of groceries 5 and 10c. Hardware - Glassware - Toys. Jewelry and Perfumery in general. Many novelties. See our showcases and you will be convinced of our prices. FORTRESS 58 FORTRESS 60
B ¡w FPtBri F'-'l £ I
You would not buy fermented milk.
/□Pure milk S? OF PASTEURIZED COW gte tP \V&LUriE5 -/////
And yet, you expose yourself to acquiring it when you don't buy pasteurized milk.
TAKE PASTEURIZED MILK is the healthiest, ' the freshest, you don't" have to boil it. Call 2150 Santurce. DELIVERY TWICE DAILY The Porto Rico Dairy, Inc. STOP 20, SANTURCE. - DIAZ GARCIA CLINIC - Dr. M. B. Caballero will consult at the Dispensario de Pobres, specializing in eye, nose, ear and throat every Wednesday and Friday from 8 to 9:30 A M.
FOR RENT One apartment for living and one for office, on Alien Street, central location. Will inform: Tel. 2017, San Juan.
BLUE-LINE LINEA-AZUL GREAT FARE REDUCTION From San Juan to Ponce or Vice-versa $1.25 Roundtrip $2.25 OFFICE MOVED TO OCHOA BUILDING Across from Cataño boat launch.
THE LABOR BUSINESS HAS BEEN REORGANIZED.
What the interim chief says about the daily working hours of the labor force
Don Ramón Lebrón, Acting Chief of the Labor Bureau, authorizes the following statement in which he reports on the reorganization of said government agency: "In agreement with the Acting Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, we have made a reorganization of this Business for its better operation. "Having been eliminated from the budget the item destined to consult the State Officers on the appointment of District Deputies, and other matters, which, although they are within the exclusive competence of the State Deputy, nevertheless, he wishes to submit them to the consideration of his fellow officers.
- To pay the salary of the Director of the - General Employment Agency, in order i to prevent this service, which is necessary, from ceasing, we have assigned competent peri Fonal to attend to it, and at the same time to take charge of the archives > of the office, owing to the fact that the archivist is rendering services of i cooperation to the Rehabili. tating Commission. "The Inspector in charge of the Cayey district is going to provide services in San Juan, where there is a need for more personnel, and this district is left in charge of one of the two inspectors of the Caguas district. "It is our desire, and we will endeavor to put it into practice, to communicate with the Federal Department of Labor to learn the address of the Federal and State employment agencies, as a means of establishing exchange relations with them (Continued on p. 20, Col. 1) -- Reserve Officers' Party Postponed The reserve officers' party announced to take place this evening at Camp Buchanan, Bayamon, has been postponed to next Wednesday, at nine o'clock in the evening. The officers to whom the invitation which appeared yesterday in "El Mundo", superitated by Mr. Pedro J. Brás, should take note of this. TRIBUTE TO HON. FREDERICK G. gQLCOMB "PORTO RICO INSTITUTE OF ACCOUNTANTS" M The Board of Directors of the "Porto Rico Institute of Accountants" has decided to pay a farewell tribute to the Auditor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Holcomb, which will be held at the Cerro Gordo de Toa Baja farm on Sunday, July 7. The invitation is extended to all Certified Public Accountants who are not members of the Institute. Members of the Institute, as well as Certified Public Accountants who are not members of said Association, who wish to join this tribute should immediately contact the Treasurer of the Institute, Mr. Peña Reyes, and be ready for the tour in the courtyard of the Intendancy at 8% in the morning of next Sunday. For the special committee in charge of the tour. J. Peña REYES, Chairman of the Committee. (Announcement.) JOVIBA The best tobacco smoked today in San Juan made with pure tobacco of the country. Order them at the "RIVOLI" We serve orders C. O. D. Box 604 Telephone 1755 SANJUAN TODAY NOTICE See our ad on page 8. "EL COMBATE" Cruz 21, San Juan, P.R.
Travel Fast and Safe on the ATLAS LINE Brand new 1929 Hudson cars 7:30 A.M. San Juan and Ponce. M. San Juan and Ponce. Tel. San Juan 78 Santurce 1936 Ponce 675
In Washington has desisted from attacking the nomination of
Roosevelt M For Governor of Puerto Rico.The prospect in ia national capital i US.
■ - " p WASHINGTON, July 5. (United Press.-Special Dispatch for THE WORLD.) ' It is understood that the nomination of Theodore Roosevelt Jr. for Governor of Puerto Rice will not be sent to the Senate probably until October of this year. The circulating reports which attempt to attach importance and significance to the delay in extending the appointment are not given any credence here since it was always said that Towner would continue on the island until the date indicated. "The United Press has been able to ascertain that a group of senators who were trying to fight the appointment have desisted from their intentions. The attacks were to be based on Roosevelt's said involvement in the Teapot Dome scandal, but after an act which will be of great value in view of the enthusiasm of the nation's medical establishment, which will see the long-cherished idea of raising the Medical Hogn'-Hogn'-Hogn'-Hogn'-Hogn'-Hogn'-Hogn'-Hogn'-Hogn'-Medical become a reality.
A close examination of government records has found no basis for solid opposition in this field. The fact that some leaders (Continued on p. 11 col. 5" To the teachers of San Juan M To all the teachers of San Juan who may have received letters W from the School Director of this city demanding an X-ray film obtained from the Sanitation Department, I invite you to a meeting to be held at eight o'clock tonight at my residence, 68 Park Street, Santurce. It is my purpose that we seriously consider the issue under the multiple and delicate aspects it presents and that we agree on the common action to follow, whatever it may be. Our motto must be a united front, for our dignity and our right. Estrella Marina del Toro de Lópea San Juan, P. R., July 6, 1929.
TOMORROW WE WILL BE THE FIRST CORNERSTONE OF THE MEDICAL HOME OF THE
i M ; Of the Medical Home of ; Puerto Rico-The ceremony is expected to be very lucid M / For tomorrow is announced the ceremony of the laying of the first cornerstone of the building that will be the Medical Home of Puerto Rico. There will be an interesting program prepared for this purpose by the worthy President of the Medical Association of Puerto Rico, Dr. Ramón M. Suá. Dr. Ramón M. Suárez, and his fellow members of the Board of Directors of the prestigious organization. The members of the Legislative Assembly who offered their help to the project related to the donation made by the People of Puerto Rico of a plot of land to erect this building, to the medical shareholders, to all the doctors of San Juan and the island, to the Press and to those people who always encouraged those who propelled with their activity such a happy Idea, are invited to such a nice event. The ceremony of the laying of the cornerstone will take place at eleven o'clock in the morning. Afterwards, a lunch will be offered to the concurrence in Punta Las Marías. The
GENTLEMAN... WHAT A HEAT...'...'. This Summer has presented itself very rigorous' and with such, motive we have increased our assortment in suits of English Thread well wet and well made. NEW IN ALL COLORS $ J SIZES GONZALEZ PADIN CO., INC. SAN JUAN PONCE MAYAGÜEZ
BANCO DE PONCE Offices in Ponce, Aibonito, Utuado and Cabo Rojo. Condensed Statement of Condition on the Afternoon of June 29, 1929.
ASSETS. Cash ¿375,013.97 Banks and Bankers 407,988.91 Puerto Rico Bonds 750,545.72 Other Bonds" 274,500.00 ¿1,808,048.60 Loans and Discounts 5,451,350.12 Bank Building and Other Property 180,000.00 Furniture 20,359.56 Dividends Paid 40,000.00 Interest' Due 49,652.05 Customer Drafts in our favor 1,033,393.25 TOTAL ¿8,582,803.58 LIABILITIES " Capital ¿1,000,000.00 Reserve Fund 355,000.00 Special Reserve 25,000.00 Profit First Semester 1929 91,830.62 ¿1,471,830.62 Deposits ' 5,107,048.85 Branches 81,635.92 Mortgage Bonds on Building k 80,000.00 Bonds on account of Customers 274,500.00 Interest to Maturity 39,894.94 Liability as Endorser in Rediscounts 494,500.00 Acceptances in favor of Customers 1,033,393.25 Vouchers Payable NADA TOTAL . 8,582,803.58 Assistant Manager. J.R. PERALTA, £ P. J. ROSALY, £ P. J. ROSALY, £ P. J. ROSALY, £ P. J. ROSALY