ELMBNDO
22 Pages 3 tv8-
22 Pages 3 tvs *
DAILY MORNING
MORNING
Year XI.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
kobUiiM aisuibutec "adar petmit Me 801 antattoo o* ib. act oí - ifíí. ou "le -" tju PeM Office at San Juan. Porto Ri co gy order ai ths President. A. - Burleson PettwaUei Ornara, Enterad as second class matter, farrnarj 8; f 1* at the Post ornee at San Juan Pone Bleo. (ünít.d Surer of a .r er lea) andar th* of" oí aurt ", 1878.
| Saturday, July 20, 1929.
Number 3445.
DR. RIVERA OIAN CONTINUES TO PERFORM AMAZING CURES.
Yesterday morning he restored the sight of an old woman of sixty years old -M
Our correspondent in Mayagüez sent us the following telegram yesterday: EL MUNDO, San Juan. Dr. Rivera Olán, assisted by Dr. Arrarás, continues to obtain flattering successes in the application of asuerotherapy. Yesterday Manuel Ortiz was treated. He was suffering from a neuralgia that prevented him from moving his neck, producing at the same time sharp pains. Jesús Gil, who suffered from hemiplegiaMUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN M M NOTICE M TO MUNICIPAL PATENT TAXPAYERS M Section 12 of the Patent Law approved by the Legislative Assembly of P. R. reads as follows Any person, association, corporation or any other form of commercial and industrial organization that undertakes business without the corresponding certificate issued by the Municipal Treasurer, or that fails to pay the amount of the tax imposed in accordance with this Act within the first fifteen days of each quarter, shall be considered guilty of a misdemeanor and shall incur a maximum fine of fifty dollars as provided by the Municipal Councils in their Ordinances. As the first quarter of the fiscal year 1929-30 began on the first day of the present month of July and most of the persons or entities representing businesses subject to the payment of this tax have not yet gone to these offices to pay their dues in order to obtain the corresponding certificate, we hereby warn you that if they do not do so within ten days from this date, we will be obliged to report the pending cases to the Courts. San Juan. Puerto Rico, July 20, 1929. Antonio BAZAN, Municipal Treasurer. (Announcement.) "WHITE BEAR" CEMENT FOR IMMEDIATE DELIVERY FROM WAREHOUSE. KORBER & CO., INC.
A patient who had a right leg injury and who had a useless arm after the operation lifts a chair with it and is walking remarkably improved. He resides near the offices of EL MUNDO and is personally known to this correspondent. Jose Cruz, a resident of Santo Tomas Street 1, who had been suffering from paralysis of the right leg for four years, having been recognized by several doctors, came out of the operation with perfect movement in that limb. This morning Emilia Mangual, 60 years old, who several months ago had lost her sight, noticing only <a presence of people known by voice, once treated distinguished and distance the colors of a tie and knew all his friends without them talking to her. By the office of Dr. Rivera '>lán parade daily crowd. The aforementioned processional selflessly rehearses the procedure. F. PAGAN MEDINA - NOTICE - We wish to state for the record that Mr. Jose S. Garcia ceased as Manager d-> our Branch rt" Arecibo, from date July 15 in rimso. and cue so t "n + n dirh" reñof not "■stá w a authorized to art "ar or intervene in nero-iou of n'r'mna species on behalf déeitr "A NCHEZ MORALES & CO. INC TORREFACCION DE CAFE Owners of grocery stores. See Auction, pg. 1 1 FOR SALE A black horse, seven quarters in height, joyen. It has overtrot step and is tame and young. Suitable for cen trales. Information: J. Hernández. Trujillo Alto, P. R. Read - CONN - ad on Page 6.
La Sin Rival COLUMBIA No. 603
CLOSED |
Columbia "comolamisma-vida'.
Special Installment Offer through the end of August
This is the peerless Viva-Tonal Columbia designed to please both the eye and the ear of music lovers. - COME AND HEAR IT -
Order yours TODAY Save $37.50 off our special offer. TAKE ADVANTAGE
For $10 a month for six months and $30.00 up front you will get a beautiful and perfect Columbia instrument.
OPEN
DON'T MISS THIS OPPORTUNITY GONZALEZ PAD1N CO., INC. "[ * I SAN JUAN PONCE MAYAGÜEZ U I
AGUADILLA IN SAN JUAN THE ABUSE IS OVER Now you can buy at reasonable prices thread lace and other handmade works. Full assortment of lace by the yard and thread applications from 3 cents and up. We have opened a NEW STORE at ALLEN 32, next door to Los Muchachos. Don't pay luxury. Visit us and you will be convinced. Phone 386 LUIS MATOS g an J u8 n.
ANNOUNCEMENT OF AUCTION MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JUAN, P. R. San Juan, P. R., July 15, 1929. On July 29, 1929, at 10 o'clock in the morning, at the City Hall Building, in the Mayor's Office, in a public act, the auction for the works of "Construction of a siphon passage for the 30" pipeline in the Guaynabo River". The bid model, instructions to the bidders, bidding documents and other information related to the works are available at the Office of the Director of Municipal Public Works, and copies of the documents may be obtained by means of a receipt that certifies that each interested party has deposited in the Office of the Municipal Treasurer of San Juan, the amount of $10.00, which will be reimbursed upon return of the deposit.The Auction Board may reject any or all of the proposals submitted and reserves the right to award the contract to the bidder it deems most advantageous, even if it is not the lowest in price. R. H. TODD Mayor (Announcement)
HOTEL CAPITOL LOCATED IN THE ARISTOCRATIC BARRIO DE MIRAMAR- PARADA 12, CARRETERA This Hotel has just inaugurated a number of apartments composed of two and three rooms, with bath and special sanitary service for families at economical prices. Spanish style food. Absolute morality. S. ALONSO, Manager.
Notice to Physicians The Medical Association of Puerto Rico, in the interest of public health in general and for the prestige and seriousness of the class, wishes to call the attention of its members, that it will not tolerate practices that have not been sanctioned by previous investigation and scientific verification of methods whose technique is still unknown and of doubtful results and that could be used to mislead public opinion, thus discrediting us. The Association wishes to remind its members that it is before the medical assemblies where cases of public and professional interest should be reported * so that their true scientific merit can be appraised. Dr. RAMON M. SUAREZ, President. Dr. M. PAVIA FERNANDEZ, Secretary. MELAO DE CAÑA "CIBÜ C O " Registered Trademark Contains 5 Gallons. GENARO BOU GALI Owners: BOU & CIA. Corozal Puerto Rico
SELLES CONFERRED YESTERDAY WITH FERNANDEZ YANGA
M Yesterday we met at the Municipality, with the President of the Teachers Association, Mr. Gerardo Selles Solá, who told us the following when asked about the purpose of his visit to the City Hall: "El Ledo. Fernandez Vanga granted me the honor of an extensive interview to express to him our points of view regarding the criteria of the Association and of the Teachers of the San Juan Local regarding the examinations of the teachers of the San Juan Local. r M A t the end of next week-The problem -M As our readers will recall the appointments of nrnes- ■ ros for the next school year were postponed until the return of Messrs. Huyke and Vhcarrondo, who were out of the country. The This was announced publicly by the heads of the Department of Public Instruction. Messrs. 'luyke and Vizcamm do have been in these last J-as very busy due to the numerous assurances that awaited their attention after their absence from the iria. Hundreds of teachers have paraded the day before yesterday and yesterday through the Department in negotiations for new appointments. These will be made starting next week. It is alleged that the problem to be faced by the Department of Instruction this year will be made very difficult by the reductions which have been made in various items of the pre ■mnuesto. v due also to the increased number of applications from new teachers recently graduated from the University and colleges in the United States and also from teachers who had no opportunity of securing contracts to practice last year."
Very soon, on the evening of the 24th of the current and in the Art Room of Messrs. A. Mesorana & Co . -preferred site of the artists - we will have the pleasure of hearing ROSITA ESCALONA, this young Puerto Rican pianist, another of those favored in its origin by the brilliant teachings of our magician Elisa. Her recital will be a true ex-
FANS OF GOOD MUSIC CAN ADMIRE THE ART OF ROSITA ESCALONA ON THE NIGHT OF 24 M Our young pianist, who has been the object of great honors at the Boston Conservatory, will perform a beautiful program M
I speaker of the advances made during an absence of fifty years, in the city of Boston, the ■ Athens of North America. ' We must clarify that this se- ■ rita studied for four years i at the "New England Conservatory - of Boston", / then, this last ■ year, she was the protegee of the American philanthropist, Mrs. Henry L. MaContinued on p. 12 ,coL 4
FAJARDO POWER PLANT TO CLOSE OPERATIONS WITH A DEFICIT THIS YEAR
M The Wall Street Journal reports. The consequences of the cyclone and the low price of sugar - M
From the "Wall Street Journal", July 6th edition, we translate: "It is expected that due to the prevailing low price and the losses incurred because of the cyclone in the fall of 1928, the "Fajardo Sugar Company" at the end of the fiscal year at the end of the month will report a considerable "deficit". "The production because of the ravages caused by the cyclone will indicate a considerable decrease and will probably only reach 58,000 tons while in the fiscal year ended July 31, 1928, production totaled 77,230 tons and in the previous year 65,739 tons. The cost of sugar production at the Fajardo Sugar Company is slightly higher than the current selling price.
"From the general point of view, however, the outlook is promising, since next year, given favorable weather conditions for planting, the company will have one of the largest crops in its history. Any increase in the sugar tariff will be beneficial to this company, as well as to other Puerto Rican sugar producers, since its product is tax-free and the difference is added to the price of sugar, thus increasing net profits. "Like other companies, the Fajardo Sugar Company during the last few years has suffered the consequences of the ratable condition of the sugar industry, although not with such intensity".
LESUE A. MacLEOD NEW INSULAR AUDITOR
M President Hootier announces his appointment --M Yesterday afternoon we received from our correspondents in the North the following cable dispatch: WASHINGTON, July 19 (Pren. sa Un'da) - President Hoover officially announces the appointment of Leslie A. MacLeod as Auditor of Puerto Rico. MacLeod for Auditor of Puerto Rico. As our readers know, the said office was vacant by the resignation of Mr. F. G. Holcomb, who returns to the high position he held before coming to Puerto Rico in the United Fruit Company. ALIAN CISTA ASSEMBLY TO BE HELD IN PONCE 0 MAYAGÜEZ - M Tous Soto offers his Doto to the Sultana del Oeste M Several Allied leaders of Mavagiiez have addressed the Board of Directors requesting that that city be selected to hold the assembly of the aforementioned collective The Board of Directors will agree at its meeting today on the site where the aforementioned event should be held. A few days ago, Mr. Barceló expressed in our columns his desire for the assembly to be held in Ponce, but he has told us that he will not oppose its being held in Mayagüez. The President of the House of Representatives, Mr. José Tous Soto, has sent a telegram to several allied leaders of Mayagüez, replying that he will not oppose its being held in Ponce.
- TODAY AT THE FAMOUS ESQUINA Wool pants, with lists at - - - - - $2.98 Balloon pants, cashmere at $1.98 and $2.48 APROVECHESE DAMIAN RODRIGUEZ, SACHS & CO. sues. DE P. SCHIRA BRAU ESQ. SAN JUSTO
TOUS SOTO WILL OPPOSE TODAY'S MEETING OF THE ALIANCISTA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
The assembly to be held before the arrival of Roosevelt M
The Speaker of the House of Representatives, Ledo. José Tous Soto, will appear today at the meeting of the Board of Directors of the Alliance and will maintain the same points of view that he has been maintaining lately in the columns of "EL MUNDO" with respect to the celebration of the assembly of the referred collectivity. The fundamental question to be resolved in today's meeting is the date on which said assembly should be held. Mr. Barceló is of the opinion that it should be held no later than the second week of next August. Mr. Tons Seto believes that it should not be held until the next Governor of the island, Colonel Theoro Roosevelt, has taken office. -Under normal circumstances," says Mr. Tous Soto, "the assembly can be held at any time, the date means little. It is the same on one day as on another. Under the present circumstances it is counterproductive to hold such an assembly for the time being. Nothing good derives from it and without SE ALQUILAN Los altos de Sol No. 74. A splendid apartment, clear and fresh, with ten apartments and double sanitary service. Will report: Brau No. 46, Tel. 991, San Juan. another addressed to him informing that Ko has inconvenience in that the assembly is carried out in Mavagiiez and promising to the effect that "his vote will be favorable to Mayagüez if that matter is raised in the Board of Directors. Everything indicates that the Board will have to decide for Ponce or Mayagüez.
However, many evils could result. "There are no fundamental issues, leg to resolve other than the reorganization of the District Committees and the Board of Directors. And that is not a matter that demands such urgent attention" At ten o'clock this morning the Board of Directors meets. All members of said body are requested to attend the meeting. ANNOUNCEMENT OF AUCTION M On July 29, 1929, at 10 o'clock in the morning will take place in the Town Hall building, Mayor's Office, in a public act, the auction for the purchase, for the San Juan School, of 240 No. 3 desks and 30 front desks and 40 back desks, also No. 3. Bidders shall request from the Office of the Director of Schools of San Juan the report on the general conditions for the holding of this auction. San Juan, P. R., July 19, 1929. R. H. TODD. Mayor. (Advertisement) BARATISIMOUS By -uBentarma I sell very cheap library "elect, more than 600 tomes, English and Spanish, fiction and works of merit. Electric fan. Spacious and comfortable dirán and wicker armchair. Very modern barometer "Stormoguide", exact forecaster of storms and cyclones. Corn, weed and bone grinding machine for poultry houses. Electric machine for making "Hot Dogs". Machine for printing 14* pikes, wallets, belts, etc. Gymnastic apparatus, etc. Ask for details and price specifying what you are interested in. - Apartado F, San Germán.
- CLINICA DIAZ GARCIA - Dr. M. B. Caballero will give consultation at the Dispensary for the Poor, in his specialty of eyes, nose, ears and throat every Wednesday and Friday from 8 to 9:30 A. M. 1 / - Madam, it will be well for you to VISIT TODAY The Golden Ant| Great Sale of Summer Silks and Fabrics at Reduced Prices _ ' . ■■■■"', ' " -- ATLAS LINE - - *- - Passenger service between San Juan and Ponce and vice versa completely reorganized. NEW ORGANIZATION. NEW CARS Tel. San Juan 78 Santurce 1936 Ponce 675.