THE WORLD
18 Pages 3 tv8.
18 Pá gin
DAILY
THE MORNING
Year XI.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Published and distributed under permit No. SOI authorized by the Act ef October 0, 1917, on file at the Post Offies at San Juan. Porto Rico By order of ths Presidents A. 8 Burleson, Post ma at or General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919 at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rico (United States of America) under the Act of March 8, 1879.
Saturday, October 26, 1929.
| Number 3542.
i "ALVER ABARCELO DEDICARSARSUS ENERGIAS Y SU TALENTO AREVI' VIR UN PASADO" (To dedicate his energies and his talents to the past).
M "That we all wanted to forget, I feel l ' ,/ ana deep sadness," says Senator Juan B. Soto M
Coming from Europe, via the United States, Senator Juan B. Soto recently returned to our island. Our compatriot returns after having achieved beautiful and honorable triumphs in the Central University of Madrid, where he was invested with the title of Doctor in Law and Philosophy, doctorate that won him very eloquent praises in the press of the capital of Spain and of the kingdom in general. The echo of Senator Soto's triumph also reached us. "El determinlsmo y la responsabilidad ante el derecho" is the title of the book presented by Ledo. Juan B. Soto as a thesis before the
Faculty of Law, and "Las leyes mecanicistas del aprendizaje y la nueva psicología alemana" is the title of the book that he also presented as a thesis to the Faculty of Philosophy and Letters of the Central University of Madrid. These two books, which earned our compatriot many congratulations, will be published in Spain. Yesterday afternoon, immersed in a tangle of books, documents and writings, we surprised Dr. Juan B. Soto working in his office. And after exchanging a few sentences of greeting we asked: What impression did Spain make on you? Continued on page 14, col. 3.
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE CLAIMS THAT THE FEDERAL COURT HAS NO JURISDICTION M In a tax case involving more than half a million dollars fe M
IE1 Attorney General, Mr. James R. Beverley, went to the Federal Courtroom yesterday morning to intervene in a very important case of El Pueblo de PuerJ to Rico against the Fajardo Sugar Co. involving a sum of more than half a million dollars, an amount collected by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico for contributions to said corporation. Several months ago, Mr. BéVcrley and Mr. Ortiz Toro,-Pro.* -dor and Deputy Attorney General respectively, filed an amended complaint in that case and the defendant requested the transfer of the same to the Federal Court. The Attorney General objected to such transfer and the District Court of San Juan opposed it.
the District Court of San Juan denied it. The defendant then filed the transcript of the case in the Federal Court and the Attorney General appeared yesterday morning and argued at length a motion to dismiss the case, alleging that the Federal Court does not have jurisdiction over it. In the meantime, the case has continued its proceedings in the local Court and for the 4th day of next November, a preliminary objection has been filed by the defendant, that is, the "Fajardo Sugar Co.", whose dismissal will be requested by the First Assistant District Attorney.
EMBARKING ANTEAYER MONSEÑOR BYRNE " M To take part in the consecration of Bishop Willinger -a- On board the steamer "Coamo" which left the day before yesterday, Thursday, bound for New York, travels His Illustrious Monsignor Edwin V. Byrne, Bishop of the Diocese of San Juan. To bid farewell to the illustrious Prelate, the high ecclesiastical authorities of the island and representatives of the different Catholic institutions of the capital came to the dock. Bishop Byrne is going to the United States with the purpose of attending the episcopal consecration of the new Bishop of the Diocese of the South, Monsignor Luis Willinger, an act that will take place on Monday, the 28th of this month in New York City. EL MUNDO wishes the illustrious vta.
A warning regarding invitations M From the headquarters of the American Legion, Insulin Chapter, the following note is sent to us for publicity purposes: "Notice is hereby given to all Legionnaires, veterans of the war, and to myself and others of the Legion who have not received their invitations to the banquet in honor of Colonel Theodore R ecvelt, Governor of Puerto Rico. of Puerto Rico, and ''. se-en or incur the r ism that they should request them -1 Comandante Miguel A. Muñoz, from Treasurer Sal' 'or Antonetti, telephone 1752 or crl aide Rar.-'i C. Juliá, telephone 331, San Juan." jero a happy voyage and a pleasant stay in New York City.
AMERICAN LEGION POST NO. 1 Cordially invite all Legionnaires of San Juan, to a meeting to be held by this Post next Monday, October 28 at eight o'clock in the evening in the building occupied by the National Guard at Martin Peña, to transact business of the utmost importance. I beg your attendance to all comrades as well as to all those entitled to join the American Legion who have not yet done so. Miguel GANDIA, Post Comder. ATLAS LINE AUTOMOBILES BETWEEN SAN JUAN -PONCE 2 New Hudson Cars 2 We will pick you up and take you home - Departures-7:30 A. M. - OFFICES Teb 78 S. J. - Ponce " 1936 Sánt. Tel. 675
PUBLIC HEALTH UNIT RE DUCTIONS DISCUSSED
M (Official information from the Department of Health). Last Friday, October 18, an important meeting was held in Caguas at the office of the Public Health Unit of that Municipality, under the presidency of Dr. Fernós Isern, Deputy Commissioner of Health, and with the attendance of Dr. Payne, representative of the Rockefeller Foundation in Puerto Rico; Dr. Rodríguez Pastor, Chief of the Tuberculosis, Social Medicine and Sanitary Education Bureau; Dr. Bou, Chief of the General Inspection Bureau; Dr. Garrido, Epidemiologist and Epidemiologist of the Department of Public Health; Dr. Garrido, Epidemiologist of the Department of Public Health; and the Chief of the General Inspection Bureau of the Department of Public Health. Garrido, Epidemiologist; Dr. Silva, Medical Officer of the San Juan Public Health Unit; Dr. Ruiz Soler, Medical Officer of the Caguas Public Health Unit; Dr. Montalvo Guenard, Medical Officer of the Cataño Public Health Unit, currently in charge of the Río Piedras Public Health Unit by substitution; Dr. Barreras, Medical Officer of Juncos and Dr. Rivera Aponte, Medical Officer of the Cayey Public Health Unit. The purpose of the meeting was to discuss work procedures and reports, as well as the relationship of the Units with the Departments, within the plan drawn up by the Department. It was agreed, once the discussion was advanced, as time permitted, to resume the discussion of the various topics in a subsequent session to be convened shortly. GOVERNMENT OF PUERTO RICO DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS Automobile Division. San Juan, P. R. October 24, 1929, NOTICE TO ALL HEAVY MOTOR VEHICLE CHAUFFEUR, CONDUCTOR AND DRIVER OF HEAVY MOTOR VEHICLES APPLICANTS You are hereby informed that as of October 28, 1929, written examinations will be held in San Juan every working day at eight o'clock in the morning, thus discontinuing the established practice of taking examinations every other day, Persons wishing to take oral examinations must appear at this office on Saturday mornings. Guillermo ESTEVES Commissioner (Announcement) PANADERIA Magnificent building for rent. Excellent location in Santurce, modern construction and we will equip it to your liking. Telephone 1871, Santurce, Avenida de Diego No. 3.
Oatmeal H-0 The most tasty and nutritious. Cooks in 2 to 3 minutes. Packed in cans of 26 OUNCES PRUEBELA. Suers. by L. ViilanU * Ce. San Juan, P. R. Exclusive Agents. House for rent two floors Condado, Avenida Cervantes, Parada 48. Garage and separate service room and magnificent garden. Reasonable price. Information Gonzalez, Tel. 202 San Juan or 596 Blue Santurce.
P A D I N ========= TRUE i 'Mr. TRIUMPH!!! W I of THE "COLUMBIA-KOLSTER" MODEL 920 L" University of Cotumbia in New York has-<r-i-=.r..!=. having realized the value of these I 'xMoi | 1I machines has purchased a "Columbia-Kolster" I model 920 to devote to teaching vocal and instrumental music - I 1 Also the American Express Co. of the Pacific í I I Coast, bearing in mindI s¿* 4 ta its superiority, over other machines, has fflJ Hill 881118 18installed Colum- ► bia Kolster model 902 Radios in A w B i all its tum nsmo cars. All this only reveals "yw - - - ir the jmportnjjcta i os apa -, JK Uj ratos Columbia-Kolster q over others. WE CORDIALLY INVITE YOU TO EXAMINE THESE AND THE OTHER MODELS RECENTLY PRODUCED. Gonzalez Padin Co ( *"jJBW * San Juan - Ponce '"''(■EÍh Mayagüez.
Lykes Bros. Steamship Co., Inc. "LYKES LINE" Steamer MARGARET LYKES will leave Puerto Rico for HOUSTON and GALVESTON, DIRECT, about Nov. 2. (The Best Steamship Service between Gulf Ports and Puerto Rico.) Telephone Office, 318 - Dock, 1506. Box 777 SAN JUAN, P. R.
Read - CONN - announcement on Page 8.
TODAY SATURDAY - Big Baratillo Day at "LA PARISIEN'' Ladies' shoes in all sizes and many samples. The cheap price scandal of 1929.(Take advantage of them). A. LAGO & Co. -Brau 41, San Juan. -J. de Diego, 9, Arecibo.
! FOR RENT A 6 room apartment in "Tobacco Palace". Will inform: Herminio Madera & Hnos, Tel. 527, San Juan.
FOR SALE Good business in production 35 crossbred and American cows in production mostly, 4 oxen, one wagon, six crossbred calves and Ford wagon for milk transportation; stable for rent with license of the Sazudad; water, electric light, yerba mate machine, 40 or more ropes of land with yerba de Elefante in abundance. For information please call Tel. 57 or Box 471, Río Piedras, P. R. For Rent Furnished For four to sirf months, residence of Arturo Rodríguez, Nereidas Avenue, Condado. Phone 1014, Santurce. WORKING Natural Flowers Miramar Avenue No. 6 Stop 11, Tel. 840 green, Santurce. Magnificent Local For rent part of the second floor of the Garage Casino, suitable for repair shop, warehouse etc.. Inform: phone 1900 San Juan. Use ' ZIODINE DENTAL CREAM
NAME CHANGE OF "HISTORIC PARTY" DENIED M On the basis of a legal opinion to that effect from Attorney General BeVerleq M
The Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico, Mr. Eduardo J. Saldaña, has addressed the following communication to Senator Rafael Martínez Nadal, President of the Historical Party, in response to the request made by the latter for the change and registration of the name of the party over which he presides, accompanied by a copy of the opinion rendered by the Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Mr. James R. Beverley, to whom the case was submitted for his study and consideration: San Juan, Puerto Rico,
October 24, 1929. Mr. Rafael Martínez Nadal, President, Partido Histórico, San Juan, P. R. Sir: I have the honor to refer to the certification dated October 11, 1929, rad. October 11, 1929, you filed with this Secretary, of a resolution adopted by the Board of Directors of the "Partido Histórico", requesting that the name of "Partido Histórico" be changed to "Partido Republicano Nacional," in accordance with the "Partido Republicano Nacional," continued on p. 18, col. 5.
CHILDREN LISTENERS WILL CELEBRATE "THEODORE ROOSEVELT DAY" TODAY.
M-- The Governor will be named Honorary Chairman of the Executive Council of the Organization -M-- The Governor will be named Honorary Chairman of the Executive Council of the Organization -M
The Niños Escuchas will celebrate today, Saturday, the seventy-first anniversary of the birth of President Theodore Roosevelt. The event will take place at the former Borinquen Park, Santurce, where Governor Roosevelt will be named Honorary Chairman of the Board of the Niños Escuchas of Puerto Rico. Governor Roosevelt has belonged for several years to the National Executive Council of the Niños Escuchas. His father's birthday is tomorrow, Sunday, October 27. Listeners throughout the nation are celebrating this anniversary with appropriate ceremonies. The Governor of New York State has issued a proclamation designating October 27 as Theodore Roosevelt Day. The ceremonies of the Puerto Rican Squires will take all day, beginning at ten o'clock in the morning and ending with a fire fight in the evening. Each patrol has been instructed to equip itself with provisions for two meals to be prepared at the camp. Each patrol will form its own camp and for this purpose several tournaments will be held.
tions will be held for this purpose. Representatives from all the camps on the island are expected, as well as members of the Council of Listeners. Governor Roosevelt's visit will be at four o'clock in the afternoon, and to solemnize his honorary appointment to the Council of Squires various and appropriate ceremonies will be performed. The proclamation addressed by the Governor of New York requesting the observance of Roosevelt Day reads as follows:- "Inasmuch as Theodore Roosevelt, as President of the United States, as Governor of this State, as a leader of the people, as a private citizen, and in times of war and peace demonstrated his ideal Americanism; and inasmuch as this great American combined with this ideal a practical Americanism which has served as an inspiration to his generation and those to come; and inasmuch as he offered in his life and career proofs of that traditional belief that every American boy has before him the opportunity to rise to the highest positions of public service and honor, they stimulate and stimulate the American people, and inasmuch as he was a man of the highest standards of public service and honor, they stimulate and stimulate the American people, and inasmuch as they stimulate and stimulate the American people. col.
"I AM SURE THAT THE JUST YEARNINGS OF THE SONS OF BORINQUEN".
M "You will not be disappointed," said Don Manuel González addressing Governor M We publish below the speech delivered by the distinguished financier Don Manuel González at the luncheon he offered at his residence in Salinas to Governor Roosevelt: "Hons. Mr. and Mrs. Roosevelt, distinguished ladies and gentlemen; it is a source of intimate satisfaction for me to be able to offer you this house and to contribute in this way to the noble and wise endeavor of our Governor to become intimate with the people whose destiny he is about to lead. Much has been done by previous governors, but it is also true that much remains to be done, which very well encompassed the clear vision of Mr. Roosevelt since this government was entrusted to him in these moments of great economic crisis, in these moments in which the workers, as well as the small farmer and the merchant are in need of support, some to be able to carry out their initiatives and others to be able to develop within the work that the development of these initiatives offers them. Both need the financial assistance that could be offered by banking institutions, not directly by the first class banks, but at least by the banks established in the country, those that are in closer contact with small farmers and traders. But it is also true that these same Institutions, in order to be able to provide at this time the required facilities and with the necessary guarantees, apparently need support to be able to develop within this field of action, and this support, if the government and the first class banks could provide it on a larger scale, would be a great step forward to remedy the economic situation of Puerto Rico by being able to develop with greater intensity its sources of wealth. "(Continued on page 6, Col. 3) PARKING PLACE FOR AUTOMOBILES IN SANTURCE M Since last Saturday, on the grounds of the Sacred Heart Church, stop 19, Santurce, a "Parking Place" has been established for the automobiles of people attending the Olimpo Theater. The proceeds of this service are for the funds for the construction of the new Sacred Heart Church. FOR RENT Half of the premises occupied by Gillies & Woodward. Will report Telephone 234 S. J. or the same premises.
THE GOVERNOR, HONORARY PRESIDENT OF THE ISLAND CHAPTER OF THE RED CROSS.
M Mrs. Roosevelt will chair the Home Service Committee.
(Official Red Cross information). M At the session held on October 8, 1929, by the Executive Committee of the Puerto Rico Chapter of the American Red Cross, it was agreed to appoint the Hon. Governor Theodore Roosevelt as Honorary President of said Chapter. A commission of said committee that was designated for the purpose of presenting the respects of the Red Cross to the Hon. Governor was in charge of visiting the Chief of the Executive, who showed his complacency for the designation of which he was the object. At the same meeting of the Executive Committee it was agreed to elect Mrs. Roosevelt as Chairman of the Home Service Committee and as such a member of the Executive Committee of the Chapter, thus replacing Mrs. Township in that position.
Mrs. Roosevelt, who replaces Mrs. Towner. A commission appointed for the purpose of visiting Mrs. Roosevelt and presenting her with her appointment was received at the Palace on the 21st of the current month. The commission was composed of the President of the Chapter, Dr. A. Fernós Isern, the Vice-President, Mr. Andrés Gandía, the president of the Voluntary Service Committee, Mrs. Inés H. de Cabrera, the Manager of the Chapter, Captain Antonio R. Silva, and the director of the Home Service, Miss Joaquina Rodríguez. The commission spent some time with Mrs. Roosevelt informing her of the workings of the Red Cross in Puerto Rico and of the functions of the Committee which she is to preside, leaving highly pleased with the kindness dispensed by Mrs. Roosevelt.
Just received... SUITS FOR $25 - $30 $35 - $40 Hart Schaffner & Marx -The most colorful and elegantSee our shop windows Swiggett Brothers SAN JUAN
Deafness ■uJ The JublIeo de la Luz is over and the most important thing ■" now is the 25th Anniversary of the ACOUSTICON (the most perfected and ■ ' ' most efficient hearing aid in the world). Where others fail, the ACOUSTICON succeeds. We are in the most determined CRUSADE AGAINST DEAFNESS. Be one of our soldiers. Avoid being laughed at by answering one thing for another. Come and try ACOUSTICON without any obligation. The test is FREE, and you will feel again the delights of hearing. Payment facilities are given. Exclusive Agent for Puerto Rico, Santo Domingo and Virgin Islands: R. ORTIZ OLAYA Calle San José No. 3. (In front of "El Mundo"). Phone 535. Box 1518. San Juan, P. R. A tube of ZI-O-DINE Toothpaste will be given to any person who sends me the name and complete address of four deaf people.