THE WORLD
I O Pages 4 Ctvs.
18 Pages J Ctvs.
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
Year XI.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
I Published and distributed under permit No. 801 authorized by the Ac" of October 6. 1917, on file at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rieo. By order of the President, A. 8. Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, . 1919 at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rico (United States of America) under the Act of March 3, 1879.
Saturday, August 1 0, 1 929.
Number 3466.
FOR THE EXTENSION TO PUER TO RICO OF THE MATERNITY AND CHILDREN'S LAW
Advocates President of the "Liberal Action of Women Voters"-A commendation to Dr. Robert M
The president of the "Acción Liberal de Mujeres Votantes", Mrs. Milagros Benet, widow of Mewton, addressed the following letter to Dr. Robert de Romeu moments before she embarked as part of the pure publican commission to Washington: Mrs. Dr. Martha Robert de Romeu. Coamo" steamship, San Juan, P. R. Dear friend: May these lines serve as an affectionate farewell and to express my wish for your good success in the matters that motivate your trip to the North. As you have a good representation and will see persons of high political position, I beg you to interpose your influence with them so that the Maternity and Children's Act may be extended to Puer to Rico, under the same conditions as it has been extended to Hawaii. Since the Governor of
Puerto Rico in 1922, conferred upon me the honor of officially representing Puerto Rico, I have been working for the extension of that law to our country. In 1924 the Pan-American Women's Association of Puerto Rico sent petitions to the Senate and National House, requesting that the Maternity and Children and Vocational Education laws be extended to Puerto Rico; and on my last trip to the United States last year, I spoke to Mrs. Catt about this matter, and she offered to present it to the Congressional Committee of the League of Women Voters, who were the inspirers of this law, to work on it in Congress next December. We also plan to work before the U.S. Congress to amend our charter to make the women's suffrage law in Puerto Rico constitutional. Continued on p. 11, col. 8
TWO CIRCULARS OF INTEREST TO TAXPAYERS M The only cases in which the Island Treasury will proceed to immediate shipment
Below we publish the letter that the Farmers Association has addressed to the presidents of the local boards in connection with a circular from the Treasurer of Puerto Rico to the internal revenue collectors. We also publish the circular sent by this official which prompted the farmers' letter: August 7, 1929. Mr. President Local Board of the Farmers' Association of Puerto Rico, Dear Friend After conferring with the Treasurer of Puerto Rico about NEEDED Seamstresses skilled in ! electric machines -Singer. MORRIS E. STORYK Infanta Luisa 4-6, Marina, San Juan, P. R.
In view of the latest circulars sent by the said official to the Collectors of Internal Revenue, giving them instructions for the collection of overdue assessments, we deem it advisable to address the present communication to our Local Boards for the purpose of giving them proper guidance. Although it is true that in Circular No. 1,350 of last July 19, the Treasurer gave instructions to proceed with the collection of the tax, this refers only to those taxpayers who are able and unwilling to pay, alleging in their favor an economic crisis that does not exist for them. This means that the Treasury's order only covers those who want to take advantage, in bad faith, of the benefits to which only those who are really and effectively unable to pay their taxes are entitled. Such an attitude on the part of the Treasurer deserves our most determined cooperation, since our purpose can in no way be to hinder the collection of contributions or to require the Treasurer to Continued on p. 16, col. 6
LADIES' TOGGERY SHOP - SPECIAL SALE - 23 SUITS at $15.00 Before $30.00 and $25.00 1 I 7 SUITS at $10.00 Before $22.50 and $20.00 41 SUITS at $8.50 ' Before $ 1 5.00 16 COATS at $10.00 Before $20.00 21 ALLEN ST. SANJUAN RAPIDITY AND GUARANTEE Those who travel on the Fajardito Line have it. With chauffeurs with 25 years of experience. Passengers are insured. LINEA FAJARDITO Tel. 1878 Sant. 675, Ponce.
"I PERSO NALLY FEEL OBLIGATED TO DON ANTONIO R. BARCELO," SAYS MAYOR TODD ALUDIENDO ALUDIENDO.
M Says Mayor Todd alluding to statements made by Union Chief M - Have you read the manifestations of Don Antonio R. Barceló published in today's EL MUNDO, in relation to the municipal bodies and especially that of San Juan, within the current political situation, we asked Mayor Todd yesterday. -Yes, I have read them; and I have deeply appreciated the expression of fraternal affection that these manifestations involve. I have appreciated them and have been honored by them. I personally feel obliged to Don Antonio R. Barceló and I will always feel obliged-no matter what the ups and downs of public life may be-to experience for him the gratitude of the brotherhood". TOUS SOTO REFRAINS FROM COMMENTING M The Unionist Central Board agreement M In his Capitol In. sular office yesterday we visited the Speaker of the House of Representatives and leader of the "Alianza Portorriqueña," Ledo. José Tous Soto, whom we questioned in relation to the agreement adopted by the Central Board of the Unionist Party calling an assembly of this collectivity to take place in San Juan on the 24th of the current month. Mr. Tous Soto does not wish to comment for now in relation to the referred agreement. He says that the most appropriate thing to do at this time is not to comment on the resolution of the Central Board of the Unionist Party. -I said what I felt obliged to say in a telegram that I addressed to the members of the Central Board of Unionist affiliation before the meeting was held. And that is all. I do not wish to make any further comment for the time being". LOST CHECK M Having lost certified check No. 215 for 54,000 issued by R. Robert in favor of Camilo Miguel and against the Commercial Bank of San Juan, it is hereby communicated that the same has been cancelled, which is made known to the public for the consequent purposes. R. ROBERT. Camilo MIGUEL. (Announcement.) AUCTOBER 10 AND MONDAY AUGUST 12, 1929 AT 10 A. M. Last days of Auction. M. Last days of Auction at "The Rivoli" including the lease of the house for 5 years. Francisco Font MANZANO, Receiver. Reinaldo VIZCARRONDO Almonedero Público. "SEE" our advertisement on the last page. "Los Diablos de la Plaza". PAPAS ISLEÑAS Arrived steam "Marqués de Comillas". Sold by: CADIERNOS HNOS. Tetuán No. 51, Tel. 2043 San Juan. Agents Needed to introduce the beautiful novel by delivery "THE UNKNOWN SOLDIER" from Editorial Albero. Good commission. Pre. fi. persons of expe. rience and good repute. Write to Jacinto Of re, Cabo Rojo.
Onion Seed De Canarias and yellow kind just received and sold, MENDEZ. MARTINEZ & CO. Infanta Luisa 4 & 6, Marina. San Juan, P. R.
CONVOCATION FOR THE PUERTO RICO UNION ASSEMBLY
M Persons entitled to participate in said act m
The following is the text of the call for the assembly of the Union Party of Puerto Rico, which was approved by the Central Board of that party last Wednesday: UNION PARTY OF PUERTO RICO. CONVOCATION: "I hereby and in compliance with an agreement of the Central Board of the Union Party of Puerto Rico, meeting in session on August 7, 1929, I have the honor to summon a General Assembly of the Union Party of Puerto Rico, which shall have the character of sovereign, so that all the issues that in the judgment of the Assembly itself must be dealt with, and especially those mentioned in the Resolution adopted by the Central Board in relation to the present political moment, may be dealt with therein. "The Assembly shall be composed of the members of the Central Board, proprietary and alternate members, including the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington; of the Unionist members of the Legislative Assembly, of the Unionist members of any insular organism, who have been elected by popular suffrage, and of two representatives (proprietary and alternate) of each of the Local Boards of Puerto Rico, and of two representatives (proprietary and alternate) of each of the Local Boards of Puerto Rico.
of each of the Local Boards that were acting in the different municipalities at the time the Alliance of the Puerto Rico Union and Puerto Rican Republican parties took place. A copy of each of the minutes certifying the designation of the representatives of each Local Board to the Assembly must be sent to the provisional Secretary of the Central Board of the Union of Puerto Rico Party before August 16, 1929. "The Assembly shall be held at the Municipal Theater of San Juan on August 24, 1929 at eight o'clock in the evening and successive days until its termination. Access to the Assembly will only be granted to those persons who provide themselves in advance with a special card signed by the Provisional Secretary of the Central Board, with the approval of the President, and which will be requested at the entrance of the Municipal Theater by a commission designated for that purpose." Antonio R. BARCELO, President of the Union Party of Puerto Rico. José Enrique GELPI, Provisional Secretary of the Central Board of the Union Party of Puerto Rico. San Juan, P. R., August 8, 1929.
PADIN ' NEW ' Cheap Electric Refrigerators III H ■j --gggp I W - "i r 1 " . V '"ÉtH ~ *♦ HFB B ü I B ■"**"'" *' ii '" >i ' 1 M B< I B - ' 1 __ J.... ¿ < H ■< -TÜÜÜ ■ ■ ■ ; ' ALL PORCELAIN OR SO MUCH MORE ICE $ I S = MONTHLY INSTALLMENTS * TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS OPPORTUNITY GONZALEZ PAPIN CO., INC. Miller Bros. Hat Co. Inc. communicates to its many customers and relations that its representative has returned from the United States with the new assortment of hats and caps in general, being at the orders of its customers on the fifth floor, No. 519, Gonzalez Padin Building. JOSE MELENDEZ LOPEZ Telephone No. 1279.
DR. JORDAN ACHIEVES SURPRISING SUCCESS WITH ASUEROTHERAPY
Juan García, from Naranjito, achieves a relief after 14 years of paralysis - Dr. Cintrón's enthuasms M
Dr. Torres Cintron, Naranjito's regular doctor, interested in the method used by Dr. Asuero, and wanting his inquisitive spirit to look for the scientific reality through facts, went to San Juan, with Juan Garcia, (a) Don Pipe, 18 years old and with 14 years of paralysis in the lower extremities and atrophy in the muscles; and after Dr. Jordan had practiced the procedure already mentioned, the most flattering success was consigned. Fourteen years ago that the poor boy - because although he is 18 years old, his height is no more than that of a 6 year old boy - had been crawling through the streets of the town, dragging along a sad and miserable life. Today at about two o'clock in the afternoon, when Dr. Cintron returned from San Juan, and told the people, who were anxiously awaiting the result of the patient, that Don Pipe could walk normally, the admiration was great and the popular joy greater. Then the poor boy got out of the Dr.'s cart, took a cane and continued walking with ease, satisfied, in the midst of the people who looked at him overflowing with joy. As soon as we saw Don Pipe in his new posture, we went to the office of the competent Dr. Cintron and talked with him about the success achieved with this boy. With delight we were able to hear from his own lips that before this happy event, he had held with his colleague Dr. Jordan an extensive scientific discussion on Reflexotherapy, and although his companion abounded in solid reasoning to deny the advantages of this procedure, he, like St. Thomas, asked to see something to be able to say words of truth. And what was not his admiration, like that of his companion, when they saw the
of his companion, when they saw their arguments demolished before the plain truth with the quick cure of Don Pipe! For those who have ears and do not hear, and eyes and do not see, and try to ridicule Dr. Asuero's work of huuoanity, this faithful testimony witnessed by a pue. Continued on p. 16, col. 2 THE ATENEO WILL RENDER A TRIBUTE TO POET FABIO FIALLC M A BANQUET AT THE Condado Vanderbilt Hotel M Tomorrow Sunday, at eight o'clock in the evening, the Ateneo de Puerto Rico will offer a banquet to the great West Indian poet Fabio Fiallo, currently visiting Puerto Rico. Fabio Fiallo enjoys general sympathy among the intellectual elements of our country for his literary work and his civic gestures. Since his arrival on our shores, he has been the object of a kind welcome as the worthy son of Quisqueya deserves. Last week a group of intellectuals paid him a tribute of admiration and sympathy on the poetic beaches of Dorado, and now the Ateneo de Puerto Rico that always knew how to honor * the illustrious sons of the race will pay the Poet the tribute of their adhesion and affection. Great enthusiasm reigns for this banquet that given the intellectual prestige of the honoree will culminate in a splendid cultural event. It will be a demonstration of intellectual brotherhood and Antillean fraternity.
Toáo* '"L SORPRENDENT BARATILLO WBF El Gallo de Oro psia 0TRA - VEZ - 0TRA We are ready to liquidate at prices that truly surprise our suits and our stock of merchandise for which we open for a few days this huge BARATILLO 1000 Suits from $5.99 to $2.99 II Pongee Ecru the best 1000 Suit, from 86.99 to - - $ 3.99 d ' *' 10 ° * 50c - 1000 Suits from $9.99 to § 4.99 2 seater sheets 1500 Suit, from 810.50 to - $ 5.99 ? ' 2 °° ' ~ 89C ' 7 " C ' 1000 Evening Suits Pure Silk Stockings Guaranteed worth $20.00 to - - $4.99 from $L50 to 59c. EL GALLO DE ORO ALLEN 25, SAN JUAN.
- IMPORTANT - BIG SPECIAL SALE During the month of August. - Prices never seen before. - Visit: LA BAYAMONESA R. Fabian & Co. Sucre. ALLEN 37 SAN JUAN
NOTICE All persons over thirty-five years of age should carefully read Dr. Apellániz's article on high blood pressure in this week's SUNDAY EDITION.
PUERTO RICO JS Hotel
YOUTH RED CROSS CHAPTER MET.
M The Puerto Rico Chapter of the Youth Red Cross held a regular meeting on Thursday, the 8th of this month, in the office of the President, Mr. Francisco Vizcarrondo, Deputy Commissioner of Instruction of Puerto Rico. The following members attended: Dr. A. Fernós Isem, President of! "Senior" Chapter; Dr. A. R. Silva, Administrator of the Red Cross in Puerto Rico; Dr. Jaime Bagué, Deputy Commissioner of Agriculture; Dr. J. Rodríguez Pastor, Chief of the Division of Communicable Diseases of the Department of Health; Don Manuel G. Nin, Inspector of Schools of the district of San Juan; and Miss Serbiá, Secretary of the Chapter. Absent were Senor Teodoro Aguilar, Miss Margaret D. Continued on p. 16, col. 7 A WARNING TO PAISANAJE M The danger of venturing into Camp Buchanan -M From Ballajá Barracks we are requested to announce to the general public that target practice for the 65th Infantry Regiment has begun at Camp Buchanan, making it extremely dangerous to venture into that area. - The military authorities warn the civilians not to enter those grounds at this time of the year, in order to avoid having to regret any misfortune later on. The shooting season will last until October of the current year.