THE WORLD
ISPagin
18 3
DAILY MORNING
MORNING
Year XI.
San" Juan, Puerto Rico.
I Published and diatributéd under permit No. 801 authorized by the Act of October o I" 17, on tile at the Poet Office at Ban Juan, Porto Bico. By order of the President, A. 8. Burleeon, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919 at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rieo (United States of America) nndrr the Aet of March 8, 1879.
| Saturday, September 21, 1929. |
Number 3507.
"■WHO IS FALSE, HE WHO CONCEALS THE TRUTH WHEN IT DOES NOT SUIT HIM.
* who accepts a controversy on the basis of historical facts?", says i Toas Soto
jkm José Tous Soto sends us the following "statement": ""I want to overlook the unscrupulous falsehood, since the Injuen in this case turns against the one who launches it. I have never said that I took office as Speaker of the House before or after Don Antonio R. Barceló. That question was not at issue. The question raised was whether I "had accepted the presidency before or after Mr. Barceló, and more importantly, whether Mr. Barceló had asked me to accept the presidency. "The minutes of the Senate and of the House relevant to the matter under discussion would have shown that Barceló was elected President of the Senate on the ninth and that he took office on the eighteenth, and that Tous Soto was elected on the ninth and accepted two days after he was elected President of the Senate, that is to say, on the eleventh. This is what the minutes of the Senate and the House say. As usual, Barceló shuffles matters in such a way that he never answers what he
way, that he never answers what he is asked, nor concretizes, nor adjusts himself to the subject under discussion; he plays the fool on what does not suit him, does not publish what is prejudicial to him, and unleashes himself in words, words, and more words. "The minutes of the Senate, those same ones that Don Antonio R. Barceló says are unaltered, say on pages three to four: (Minutes of the Senate of Puerto Rico, of 1925). "Minutes corresponding to February 9, 1925. "The Secretary acting as President, states that there is a quorum and that the inaugural session of the first Legislature of the eleventh Legislative Assembly continues at this time, and that the election of the President of the Senate must proceed. Mr. Hernández López nominated Mr. Antonio R. Barceló. The Secretary, acting as Chairman, asks if there are any other nominations. At this point, Mr. Martínez Nadal raised the following point of order: "Mr. Barceló cannot be elected President of the Senate.
It is very easy to say that the police IS NEGLIGENT".
1 "Without pointing out any specific case", says Colonel Letois replying to ? Mr. Pietrantoni M
On the occasion of an interview W appeared in our Thursday edition with the Vice-President of the Municipal Assembly of San Juan, Mr. Rafael M. Pietrantoni, the Chief of the Insular Police, Colonel George W. Lewis, has made the following statements and at the same time has given us for publication a copy of a translation of the translation of the Spanish version of the article. I " I " I A reception in lionoi i to Governor Rooseüelt -w-r Among the directors of the Casino of Puerto Rico, of this capital, the idea is stirred up of holding a sumptuous reception and black tie ball in honor of the new Governor Roosevelt, shortly after his arrival on the island in the first fortnight of October. The purpose of the directors of the Casino is to give the new Chief Executive an opportunity to become acquainted with Puerto Rican society, and to be introduced to its representatives.
"With surprise I have read in EL MUNDO an interview given by Mr. Rafael M. Pietrantoni in which this distinguished friend and member of the Municipal Assembly of San Juan, complains of the manner in which the traffic is directed by the police, and of certain orders given concerning the same by this humble servant. "I am not only surprised at this complaint but really astonished at it, because from its chief down to the last recruit on duty in San Juan, this Department was supposed to be working in the most cordial cooperation with all the officers of our Municipality. At least this has always been, and is, the desire of our officers and wardens. "Mr. Pietrantoni quotes in the ordinance in effect Section 7 as follows: "At any time when public traffic is interrupted, the police may give orders for the use of the public highways in such directions as they may deem appropriate to normalize the same." Continued on p. 9, col. 1
If every dentist uses IODINE to combat pyorrhea and other diseases of the gums and teeth, it is a rare enough reason that ZI-O-DINE contains the necessary IODINE to properly protect the gums and teeth, leaving them clean and white and the mouth pleasantly perfumed. It also contains MAGNESIA, menthol and other important ingredients. Try ZI-O-DINE and you will use it every time. Available in all drugstores, drugstores, department stores, etc. Tubes of 10c, 25c. and 50c. Exclusive agent: R. ORTIZ OLAYA Box 1518, San Juan, P. R- - Phone 871 blue, Santurce. Fiestas de San Miguel Naranjito will celebrate its patron saint festivities from the 26th to the 9th of the current month. Owners of picas and other public spectacles are invited to purchase tickets in a timely manner. THE COMMISSION.
THE GOVERNMENT DEMANDS THE "WH1TESTAR UNE" IN THE COLLECTION OF THE REGALIA M
M. On Thursday the following lawsuit was filed in the District Court of San Juan against the company monopolizing the "guaguas" traffic between San Juan, Santurce and Río Piedras, for the collection of royalties and interest since January 15, 1928:- IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE DIS'T'RITO JUDICIAL DE SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO THE PEOPLE OF PUERTO RICO and on their behalf Juan G. Gallardo, Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Plaintiff, VS. WHITE STAR BUS LINE, INC., Defendant. Civil No. 10548. Collection of Money. COMPLAINT "The above named plaintiff, represented by the undersigned Attorney General of Puerto Rico and Assistant Attorney General, appears and as a cause of action against said defendant respectfully alleges and sets forth: I. "The plaintiff, El Pueblo de Puerto Rico, appears under the representation of Juan G. Gallardo, (Continued on .6, Col. 3) TÓÜSSOTOGESñÓNA QUE NO SE PERMIT M The introduction of Dominican cattle into Puerto Rico M-- The Speaker of the House of Representatives, Mr. Tous Soto, has addressed this cablegram dispatch to the Resident Commissioner Mr. Córdova Dávila: September 20, 1929. Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico, House Office Building, Washington, D. C. Suggest that the Santo Domingo Government oppose efforts by the Department of Agriculture to allow the introduction of Dominican cattle into Puerto Rico. Permission would seriously harm our cattle ranchers. TOUS SOTO (Speaker of the House).
LINDBERGH AND HIS WIFE ARRIVE TODAY ASAN JUAN
M El ation will land on Isla Grande at five o'clock this afternoon.-Guests of Fortaleza M
EL - y uMB Mi/- & JSM ■ _ mi i BWorw" ; - -
E? Colonel Lindbergh and his young wife, who will arrive in San Juan this afternoon. (This photograph was taken as the couple watched the national air race at Cleveland a few days ago). -(Central Press photo.) . -
A few days ago it was announced in our columns the trip of Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh to this island for the inauguration of a new air race in Cleveland. Lindbergh to this island to inaugurate the new air route that Pan American Airways Inc. proposes to establish to Paramaribo." According to details supplied to us at the offices of this company, yesterday morning, Colonel Lindbergh left Miami in the plane that provides regular service to Puerto Rico, accompanied by his wife, Mrs. Ann Morrow de Lindbergh, the President of the Corporation, Mr. Juan J. Trlppe, the Director of the company, Mr. Juan J. Trlppe, and the President of the Corporation, Mr. Juan J. Trlppe. Trlppe, the Traffic Director, J. M. Eaton, a photographer from "Paramount News" and two reporters, one from the "United Press" and the other from the "Associated Press".
The plane will follow the Ordinary route and arrive in San Juan at the usual time today, Saturday at five o'clock in the afternoon. In this flight the transatlantic aviator comes as an employee of the corporation and will only remain on the island until Sunday morning when he will leave for Trinidad in a brand new "Sikorsky" plane that is located at the Isla Grande airport. To facilitate the public's entry Pan American Airways will open the road that has been built to the airfield and which joins Fernandez Juncos Avenue at stop 10. We are begged however to let the public know that this will not be allowed (Continued on page 4, Col. 5).
PADIN
SUITS & HATS FOR LADIES & LADIES GREAT ASSORTMENT - JUST ARRIVED
SUITS In gingham, voile, crepe and other fine fabrics with exquisite trimmings at: $2.75 one and 2 for $4.98; at $5.00 one and $6.00 one. In printed, ensemble and other whimsical shapes with very pretty trimmings and all the latest fashions at: $7.98; $10.50; $12.00 and $15.00 one.
HATS True models, black fashionable straw and __ fine silk hats at $3.50 UHO. Felt hats in beautiful colors and in black in beautiful shapes at $4.00 one. Whimsical black silk styles with metallic touches, _ __ all very pretty at- JpO.00 one.
GONZALEZ PADIN CO., INC.
Great Price Discounts ON "THE HOPE" PHILIP EL KOURY - 5 - 10 - 25 - 50 - "1.00 - We have just received a phenomenal assortment of Pots, Pans, and many enameled items at One-Fourth of their Value, and in items for Ladies, Gentlemen and Children. We have received this week a large assortment at extremely low prices of Garments, Perfumery, Earthenware and Glassware. Mechanics . and Carpenters own tools. < Great Opportunity to buy cheap items and a new assortment. VISIT US AND YOU WILL BE PLEASED. Fortaleza 58 - Fortaleza 60 j ... :
TONIGHT THE LABOR UNION WILL BE INSTALLED IN PONCE.
M From San Juan, officials of the Free Federation of Puerto Rico will attend the cough M From Ponce we receive the following information: "The Board of Directors of the Union Protectora del Trabajo No. 18093 of Ponce, Puerto Rico hereby invites the working people and other social classes of the city of Ponce to the great workers' party that will take place on the night of Saturday, September 21 (today) in the assembly hall of the Escuela Superior, at eight o'clock, on the occasion of the official installation of the Union Protectora del Trabajo No. 18,098, recently constituted in this city. "The Union will be installed by the Volunteer Organizer of the "Ame rican Federation of Labor" and Vice President of the Federación Libre de los Trabajadores de Puerto Rico, comrade Francisco Paz Gránela, and will also be present at said act, the Acting President of the Federation, comrade P. Rivera Martínez and an official Commission of the Unión Obrera Federada de San Juan, presided over by comrade William D. López. "The act will be held according to Continued on p. 5, col. 5 "TERM MR. BAR CEDO PARA YO EMPEZAR M Dice el Presidente de la Cámara, Sr. Tous Soto M Don José Tous Soto sent us yesterday the two notes that follow: "Mr. Tous Soto has not sent any emissary to Mr. Martinez Nadir 'the Presidency of the Senate. Mr. Tous Soto does not know who is the person who spoke to Mr. Martínez Nadal on this matter. He has not authorized anyone to speak to Mr. Martinez Nadal on his behalf". - ♦ * "I hope that Mr. Barceló finishes his attacks against Mr. Córdova Dávila and myself to answer him on behalf of both, in Córdova's absence. There are already two articles by Mr. Barceló. "Come to the arena all the values to appreciate them," (Democracia, Wednesday 18) and "I want to make present before the country the difference that exists between Aguirre's defender and me" (Democracia, Friday 20). The latter concludes thus: "and I have not finished yet." "Let Mr. Barceló finish, then, so that I may begin". José TOUS SOTO, I NEED A PERSON TO PROVIDE BLOOD FOR TRANSFUSION TO A PATIENT. Will receive remuneration. Presbyterian Hospital. Telephone 701-2 Santurce. - FOR SALE - Three story concrete house, 8 apartments, Avenida de Diego No. 2. Rent $300.00. / E. FERNANDEZ CAMPOS Phone 1268 blue, Santurce. WANTED Person willing to give blood for transfusion to patient. Will be remunerated. Presbyterian Hospital Tel. 701-2 Santurce. Missing Police Dog Good reward will be given to anyone who delivers police dog, gray back with black ribbon and the rest gray to white. Particular sign, a small hole in one ear. He goes by the name of RIN TIN TIN TIN. Farm L. CANTERO, Kilometer 7M, Guaynabo, or in San Juan to R. Cantero & Cía.
From Socialist Senator Moisés Echevarría, we published yesterday an article in which he criticized the poor conditions in which he allegedly found the vehicles that provide passenger service between the city and Ponce Beach, and appealed to the Public Service Commission to proceed immediately to correct the deficiency in the traffic. Yesterday we went to meet with the President of the Public Service Commission, Ledo. Miguel A. Muñoz, and this official immediately attended to us and proceeded to explain the development of the situation. Mr. Muñoz spoke to us as follows:- "At the end of last April, the Accountant of the Commission, Mr. Salvador Antonetti, rendered a report on the manner in which the "guaguas" service was being rendered in the city of Ponce and the condition of the vehicles of the "Ponce Bus Line". "Mr. Antonetti's report stated that the service provided by the Ponce Bus Line was deficient and listed the poor condition of the vehicles.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION WILL GO TO PONCE TOMORROW.
He will remove any "guagua" that is unacceptable.
The promises that Mr. Brenes has made to him, most of the "guaguas" of this company and also pointed out amendments that should be followed for the good of the public service. Mr. Antonetti recommended that 4 new "guaguas" be acquired for the service and that two that were completely unserviceable be retired; extensive repairs to two other "guaguas" and light repairs to three more vehicles. By virtue of the report rendered by the Accountant, the Public Service Commission issued an order for the removal from service of the Ponce Bus Line of 2 "guaguas" that were unserviceable, and the removal of 2 "guaguas" that were completely unserviceable; extensive repairs to two other "guaguas" and light repairs to three more vehicles.
"For the ladies who ship" Provi's Store is pleased to offer a varied assortment of travel suits. No two are alike. Also in street suits and fine hats. Latest styles. jNo batches. Our assortment is personally selected by our buyer in New York-Alien 23, in front of Padin.
To Santo Domingo! Our departures are MONDAY at noon and WEDNESDAY at 4 P. M. sharp. This makes it easier for you to make the trip you have long thought of making to the Republic. You leave Monday from San Juan and can return Wednesday morning or on the second trip arriving in San Juan Friday afternoon. -LOADING AND PASSAGE ONLY BISEMANNUAL SERVICE FROM QUAY TO QUAY SAN JUAN-SANTO DOMINGO (City) SS. "CATHERINE" ECONOMY SAFETY COURTESY Bull Insular Line, Inc. Dock No. 2 Te! 2100 San Juan.
"IF MR. TOUS SOTO HAS SOMETHING TO ACCUSE ME OF, LET HIM DO IT."
"Clearly and explicitly, pointing out facts and proving them"' says Barceló.
The President of the Senate, Mr. Antonio R. Barceló, supplied us yesterday afternoon with the following "statement": "I thought it would be a longer matter to answer what remains of the insidious accusations contained in the rest of Mr. Tous Soto's statements published in the newspaper EL MUNDO and profusely distributed throughout the island in loose sheets with the purpose of answering other statements by Mr. Benigno Fernández García. "In reality it was not even worth answering them, because there is nothing conclusive in these accusations. "Regarding what Mr. Tous Soto says, in relation to the tax of four cents on sugar, although in this he does not mention me especially, unless it is his intention to involve me among the number of those who he says attack him in the shadows; I must say that I did not oppose said tax, and for that reason I did not oppose it.
I must say that I did not oppose said contribution, and on the contrary, I recognized that it was absolutely necessary to cover the deficit of the island treasury, and I indicated the convenience of dividing it, imposing only two cents on the first fifty or sixty thousand sacks of sugar manufactured, and successively one more cent on each fifty thousand sacks progressively, so that the small mills would pay less and the larger mills would pay the difference, some thus paying six and even eight cents. And I did this having in my mind the need to protect the small industry against the large ones, whose expenses, due to the volume of their production, are lower. And in this sense I want to be told by someone if in thinking Mt I was thinking to the detriment of my country, imposing justly the contribution to some and to others, and sf Continued on p. 2, col. 7
RAPIDITY AND GUARANTEE Those who travel on the Fajardito Line have it, with chauffeurs with 25 years of experience. Passengers are insured. LINEA FAJARDITO Tel. 1878 Sant. 675, Ponce.