___ w w _
I d 20 Puna's 3 Ct¥S I I I I
iT
MORNING
I T T A.M.
Year XI.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
IPubliihed "ia diitrfbated andar permit Mo. 801 auto.Izad by te" Act or O-tet-er ", líl?, on fila st the Poet Office at Sea Juan. Forte B'co. By order ot the President, a. & Burleson Postejarter Genera, Bntered m seeond elaaa matter, febnary Si 191" at the Poet Office at San Juan. Porte Bleo. (United States of America) under the Act of march S, 1879.
I I . - Saturday, January 26, 1929.
| Number 3273:
In half a second, Cumaná, the martyr city, fell to the ground like a house of cards.
And amidst so much ruin, a small chapel, before whose altar sixty little girls received the Eucharist, was unscathed.
From one of the last editions of our colleague "El Universal" of Caracas, which arrived yesterday, we take the following information about the dreadful earthquake that has destroyed the city of Cumaná: "In our eagerness to offer the readers of "El Universal" detailed and timely information about the terrible catastrophe that has turned Cumaná into a heap of ruins, and in spite of the number of victims, the workers' organizations of Ponce rendered a detailed and timely report of the terrible catastrophe that has turned the city of Cumaná into a heap of ruins, and in spite of the number of victims, we take the following information about the terrible earthquake that has destroyed the city of Cumaná.
THE WORKERS' ORGANIZATIONS OF PONCE WILL RENDER TOMORROW A FERVENT- . SO HOMAGE TO THE MEMORY OF THE FOUNDER OF THE "AMERICAN FEDERATION OF LABOR" * From Ponce we received yesterday the following telegram: "EL MUNDO," San Juan. The Central Labor Union of fence prepares a tribute to the memory of Samuel Gompers on the occasion of the anniversary of the birth of the great leader, which falls on Sunday (tomorrow). The civic act will take place in the Town Hall. fe 5 Distinguished speakers of the locality will take part, besides the labor leaders. The municipal band will liven up the solemn festivity. At the same time the Administrative Board of the Ponce government adopted a resolution associating itself with the tribute. There is an intense enthusiasm that predicts that the act will be at the height of the egregious founder of the "American Federation of Labor", a great friend of Puerto Rico, and will serve as a stimulus to the dignity and labor organization in Ponce. * TOMAS MAZTIMEL (President of the Central Labor Union).
As soon as we learned yesterday that the Dutch steamship "Commewjne", which rendered such useful services to the homeland in the dreadful moments of the earthquake, was arriving at La Guaira, we went to the neighboring port with the purpose of collecting the impressions of the passengers and the captain of the ship. The impression we gathered is absolutely in agreement with the information we have given to the public: the disaster was complete. As soon as we saw ourselves on deck, we went to Captain Smit, who received us kindly and lent himself to our interrogation, telling us the deep impression he was deeply impressed by being an eyewitness of the disaster. He modestly made us see that his services were only what he could humanly render. We were able to locate on board three persons known as Mr. Salim Abouhamad, Mr. Juan Almandoz and Mr. Rogelio Rodriguez Garcia. These three passengers of the "Com mwjnef', coming from Cumaná, supplied us with the news with which we will try to reconstruct the facts. Cumaná, with its always limpid sky, its inhabitants oblivious to the catastrophe that should unleash its fury at dawn, had on the eve of the tragic 17th a splendorous night, one of its serene nights, full of ineffable poetry. That night, following the typical eos tumbre of the towns of the East, the families cumaneses were given without a doubt to their cordial romerías through parks and avenues, toward the rumoroso port, where the sea lulls with the pe renne madrigal of its foams to the glorious and martyred city. A TRAGIC DAWN In the faces of our interviewees we could see the traces left by the horror of the catastrophe. Cumaná was just waking up to its daily chores. At 7:30 a.m., suddenly, a trepidation that only lasted 30 seconds turned into rubble (Continued on page 6. Col. 1)
M Muñoz and Narváez Rivera go out to inspect the works M. Miguel A. Muñoz, President of the "Public Service Commission", and R. Narváez Rivera, Commissioner, went to the region of the Lajas Valley flooded by the Guánica Lagoon the morning before yesterday to inspect the works. The trip was in response to an invitation to see the drainage works being carried out in the flooded region in order to lower the water level. These works, whose project was discussed with the Commission's engineer, Mr. Romero, had to undergo an alteration with respect to the suggestions made by the Commission's technician, due to inconveniences encountered in the work. In order for the Commission to understand why this alteration had to be made, the members of the Public Service Commission were invited by the engineer Mr. Latham, Mr. Muñoz and Mr. Narvaez Rivera having gone to study said work in the field. TOMORROW THE FRENCHMEN OF PTO. RICO p . --M To be presented to the new Consul, Baron de Camas M The most worthy French Colony of Puerto Rico will meet tomorrow in Yauco to be presented to the new Consul General of the glorious Gallic Republic, Baron de Camas. On this occasion there is an extraordinary enthusiasm that augurs for tomorrow's event the greatest splendor and splendor. The meeting will take place in the sumptuous mansion that the French gentleman Chalí Franceschi owns in Yauco. The presentation of Mr. Bartín de Camas will be at ten o'clock in the morning, followed by a friendly exchange of impressions that will continue until two o'clock in the afternoon, at which time a royal banquet will be served. "EL MUNDO" offers its respects to the gentlemanly and distinguished representative of the French nation, to whom it wishes a very pleasant stay in our country.
Now is the time.... We offer for ladies, hats, silk stockings, underwear, underwear, novelties of ornaments and many other good articles. For men we have a varied assortment of shirts, socks, ties, hats and many more items. EVERYTHING -" to sell with very little PROFITWe want to help you enjoy the CARNAVAL festivities and we can only do that by giving you the opportunity to buy what you need with the money you have. Visit us today; we appreciate your visit. CASALDUC & CASALDUC General Merchandise CRUZ 12, SAN JUAN.
OPPORTUNITY FOR SALE Sideboards, set of lamps and reflectors proper for a store of Merchandise and Costumes, for the third part of its value. For more information:- Alien 70.
EXPERT WATCHES Any repair: $1.00. All guaranteed. they compose your watch, for only $1.00 at JOYERIA FELIX LOPEZ
Carlos Armstrong & Sons, Suers. S. en C. PLAYA DE PONCE, P. R. - CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS: Florida pichipen wood. Cement, sacks and barrels. Corrugated iron, current and ARMCO. Concrete reinforcing rods. Sheetrock cardboard for ceilings, etc. Ordinary cardboard for shelter. Legitimate Hyrib. CERTAIN-TEED paints of all kinds. Barbed wire. Nails of all kinds. Monel wire mesh. And other items more WE CONTRACT PAINTING WORKS AT ALL COSTS. ASK US FOR PRICES AND CONDITIONS FOR EVERYTHING. -
THERE IS A NOTABLE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE WAY BUS PUBLI CATION IS TREATED NOWADAYS" - "AND THE WAY IT USED TO BE".
M-"AND THE TREATMENT IT RECEIVED DURING THE PREVIOUS SITUATION".
Says the President of the "Public Service Commission" alluding to the bus service in the city.
We continue publishing the last annual report of the President of the "Public Service Commission", Ledo. Miguel A. Muñoz: "And we expressly leave for last, to dedicate a special division to it, our considerations on the service of, OMNIBUS IN SAN JUAN "During the first half of the fiscal year 1927-28, to which we have been referring, and which is the first that falls within the organization of this new Public Service Commission as reorganized by the Butler Act, the service of buses in San Juan was rendered by individual vehicles, covered by 157 different certificates of necessity and convenience, granted by the Commission to some 73 different owners. At the beginning, most of the time of the officials of this Commission was dedicated to the attempt to organize, regulate and have control of the operation of these buses in San Juan. It was necessary to establish a procedure by virtue of which to provide for the solution of the cases that were presented to us in this respect, and, during those first six months mentioned, as of July 1 to December 31, 1927, 463 cases of this nature (querellas) were filed, heard and resolved by the Commission. About a thousand witnesses appeared before the Special Examiners of this Agency to testify in cases of this nature. "With the idea of offering the public greater protection, the Commission decided to extend appointments of Special Examiners to the public.
With the idea of offering greater protection to the public, the Commission decided to extend appointments of "Honorary Inspectors", i.e., private citizens specially authorized by the Commission to report on deficiencies in the service in general. We made 125 appointments of Honorary Inspectors, appointments which fell of course to citizens of good repute, who offered their services free of charge to this Commission, devoting themselves to the task of enforcing compliance with the laws and regulations relating to the chauffeurs and conductors of these vehicles. "The system in operation, with so many different owners of the vehicles in service, was difficult, cumbersome and annoying. Consequently, this Commission could not in this respect achieve uniformity of action; and, as a further consequence, the results could not be uniform either. "The previous Commission had granted an exclusive franchise to the White Star Bus Line, Inc. which gave it the right to conduct passenger bus service between San Juan and Rio Podras (and points from January 1, 1928). On this date, the concessionary Company took over the service in question. "The aforementioned Company had to purchase 131 second-hand omnibuses, which were in operation at the time of the initiation of the service under exclusive franchise; and, after assuming the duties and rights granted by the franchise, the Company acquired
GIUSTI ENCAJES® Lace Lace - Valenciennes Blondas de Seda |||ha and KOII Broderies of all colors We have the most |||| | complete assortment of ffii | high novelty laces ffii | Paris Bazaar M ?£? Novelties
FOR RENT San Justo Building 18. 4 . * Strategic commercial point for any business, large premises on the first floor, with glass to the street, and two upper floors, prepared for warehouses and offices. IT HAS ELEVATOR Will inform: JOSE GONZALEZ PAWN Telephone 860, ■ Santurce. 11,11 ' 1 ~ ;
The Governor is of the opinion that the budget should be reduced to $9,500,000.
Even if the school year has to be reduced M The leaders of the Alianza Portorriqueña have publicly expressed their opinion that the general expense budget for the next fiscal year should be reduced, based on the decrease that the revenues of the island government will necessarily suffer due to the losses caused to property and businesses by the San Felipe storm. This same criterion is supported by the Island Treasurer, Mr. Juan G. Gallardo, and Auditor Holcomb, in statements they have made to representatives of the Press. Governor Towner holds the same opinion: he believes that "it will be necessary to reduce the expense budget for the next fiscal year, given the situation that the Island Treasury will have to face in terms of income. Governor Towner is of the opinion that the budget should not exceed nine and a half million dollars. The Chief Island Executive has made no judgment as to the savings to be made or the discontinuance of services to be agreed upon; however, he is of the opinion that the budget should be reduced to nine and one-half million dollars even if the school year has to be shortened. *7 additional vehicles; second hand vehicles, thus making a total of 158 vehicles in such condition. The cost of these 158 vehicles was, for the Company, $641,264.65. Later, the Company purchased 20 new vehicles, at a cost of $110,059.49. From January 1 to the end of this fiscal year (June 30, 1928), the Company had rebuilt 75 buses. It thus had 160 vehicles available, and about 10 which were considered in- ¡ serviceable. "This Company has encountered difficulties in its operation*, but chief among them, in the opinion of the President, is the fact that the Company has been able to meet its own needs.
Before embarking for the United States, Messrs. Ernest J. Swift, ' Director <iel Bureau of Insular and Foreign Affairs of the American Red Cross, and Howard J, Simons, Director of Statistics, who have been on the island on an inspection tour sent by the Red Cross headquarters in Washington, had a conference with Mr. Reckordrwho has charge of the direction of the relief work in the country, and with the directors of the five areas into which the island has been divided for the purpose of carrying on the work. At this conference they made extensive statements as to the state of the island and the change between the appearance immediately after the cyclone and the present appearance, expressing their opinion that the change is a surprising thing. Mr. Simons embarked the day before yesterday on the steamer which left for the United States and Mr. Swift left yesterday by airplane for Port-au-Prince, Haiti, where he is about to make an inspection of the work of the Red Cross. Mr. Swift said that in his visits to the interior of the island he had noted the great interest shown by all the people in charge of the work, including the directors and committees and all the personnel in charge of cleaning the coffee plantations. He stated that General Drum, upon his return to the United States after his visit to the island, and Governor Towner himself, while in Washington attending the public hearings held when the pro-Puerto Rico project came before Congress, expressed themselves in the highest possible terms.
RED CROSS REHABILITATION WORK IN THE COUNTRY WILL BE COMPLETED BY THE END OF FEBRUARY.
Directors Swift and Si-mons returned to the North.
The impression they have of the work of Mr. Reckord and the staff under him, both in terms of efficiency and the friendly rapport he has established with the people of Puerto Rico, is very satisfactory. "The contrast between the situation immediately after the San Felipe cyclone and the situation today is enormous," Mr. Simons said. "Instead of a lot of wrecked houses scattered all over the island, we now have a number of houses of modern construction, and on the roads you see people carrying materials that are distributed by the Red Cross to repair those that were badly damaged. In places where thousands of people were seen begging for food, today we see a people working with enthusiasm. In places where only the problem of sheltering the victims was considered, this task is coming to an end and attention is now being given to the problem of unemployment and at the same time assistance is being given to farm owners who do not have funds for rehabilitation. This work has involved the formation of a corporation with a capital of $600,000 which has been drawing $45,000 a week for * Continued on page 5-col 5.
Liquidation Of Slightly Damaged Shoes, Hats and Suits. Only five days, at LA LUNA in front of the Porto Rico Drug.
FOR RENT For Hotel or other business - second floor of Luna 50. 16 fresh bedrooms. Will report: Box 1189 S. J., triphone 131 N. Santurce.
EXAMINE YOUR SIGHT In Felix Lopez Jewelry just received you a large assortment of crystals and frames, top quality. FELIX LOPEZ JEWELRY
Important Dunlop rubber is distributed in Ponce by Don Eugenia Rodríguez López, Calle Estrella No. 3, 1 f / Ponce, Puerto Rico. VISIT IT.
PURCHASE an im. prenta workshop. Address your proposition before February 1, 1929, to EUGENIO CORNIER P. O. Box 546, Ponce, P. R.
ZINC ACANALADO "APOLLO" All sizes. SAQUERO <& CO. Warehouse 4 San Juan.
MUNSON-MC.CORMICK LINE ' ' V (Intercostal Service) ® an Francisco, - California. > Upcoming departures announced Ki from San Francisco to Puerta Pico d : straight: Steamship MUNDELTA February 7,1929 Steamship MYSTIC February 21, 1929 - ' For further information request their Agents: 8ANJU4N MERCANTILE CORPORATION Telephone 340, San Juan. P.O. Box 542 Ramon Cortada & Co. Suers. -■ Hiram Gómez Ponce Beach. Mayagüez Beach.
FIGHTERS! We are pleased to inform you that we have just received $100,000. - (ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND PESOS) in fabrics, all from lot, which we are making at rajatabla prices. . * ALLEN 37 R. FABIAN & CO. m. ■ 1 ' ■' " " " '■ ' ' .1.1.-I--I , ... -J ' 1 * " ' ■ . 1 '* ' ' T' ' ' ■ - - - ■ ■ ■ , . .J.... .■I..I.LL..LL..UI- I...,. fl" J| if you prove there is anything better than ''lillin GLICOIQDIN III FOR AFFECTIONS of the throat, tonsils, bad breath I JL and in general for all diseases of the mouth. EFFECTIVE for Um* r piar loa teeth and decongest the gums. V ' 11