elaondo
20 nasjctvs.
2Q Ctvs
MORNING
THE MORNING
Year XI. | San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Publiahed and distributed under permit No. 801 euthoriied bj the Act of October ", 1#17. on file at the Poet Office at San Jusn, Porto Rico By order of the President, A. S. Burleson, Postmaster GeneraL Entered as second class matter, february 21, ' 1919 nt the Post Offlio at 8>n Juan, Porto Rico (United States of America) under the Act of march 2. 1872.
Saturday, October 19, 1929.
| Number 3535.
I ™ INTERESTING OPINION ON THE INTERPRETATION OF PA- ! GJtESSÜSCWrOSJUORDfíV  !
; t t M | Has been rendered by Hon. Judge T odd Jr. in the case of the Franceschi Estate vs. fosé Pilar González wt, '- M
► * We insert below a .(tersant opinion delivered by the' .on. Judge Todd Jr. of the -.atrito Court of Ponce: IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF PONCE, PUERTO RICO gt Estate of Francisco María JPranceschi, composed of his sole and universal heirs named: José María and Juan Franceschi, Domingo Leandri, Agostini and the minors Salvador and Estrella Margarita Leandri Agostini, represented by their mother with parental rights etc. X Plaintiffs. VS. José Pilar González. r, "- Civil No. 2887 On F Collection of money. Attorneys for plaintiffs: F. Parra Capó, López de Tord & Zayas Pizarro. for defendant: Ernesto Ramos Antonini. RESOLUTION. After the plaintiff finished presenting her evidence on the day of the trial, the defendant formulated the following
The Court then expressed itself as follows; as recorded in the stenographic record:- "The Court believes that there is a question of law which merits consideration and resolution; the question which has been raised by the defendant and contested by the other side, namely, whether the Court is precluded from taking into consideration the fact of the statute of limitations because it was not pleaded as a special defense in the answer, or whether in any case where a case of a promissory note which is presumed to be commercial is brought before the Court and that presumption is not, in the opinion of the Court, destroyed by the evidence, the Court is not bound, as a matter of law, to say that the complaint does not allege sufficient facts and to dismiss it because there is no cause of action, because it is barred by the statute of limitations: that is, if the plaintiff has been negligent out of consideration for Mr. Gonzalez or for any other reason, in the exercise of his right, that is, of not having charged him within the three years and he now shields himself in that for not paying, whether he has cause of action or not, or whether it is necessary for that to be alleged as a matter of special defense or whether he hasContinued on pg. 20, col. 5
THE ALLIANCE COMMITTEE OF SAN JUAN EXPRESSES ITS SOLIDARITY M >4/ Ledo. E. Fernandez Yanga, Honorary President M >4/ Ledo.
The Local Committee of the Alliance in San Juan adopted the resolution that f "WHEREAS: El Ledo. E. Fer/nández Vanga, Municipal Commissioner of Instruction of this city, is a worthy and illustrious Puerto Rican who has exalted the name of our city in every act of his life as a citizen and as a public servant. I "WHEREAS: Epifanio Fernán j. dez Vanga is one of those who know how to worship the Sworn íe and the honor ' of the cause we defend in the heart of the Alianza Portorriqueña, f "WHEREAS: its consequence with the principles that gave life to the Alliance, has earned it a series of injustices and outrages on the part of Mr. Antonio Pavía, Acting Mayor of San Juan, and of the feleístas Mr. Pletrantonl, Portilla, Ledesma, Cruzado Silva, Colón and Lamadrid, dissident unionists of the Alliance to which they owe the positions they occupy today.
"WHEREAS: Epifanio Fernandez Vanga, has been able to respond in a gallant and correct manner to all these unjustified attacks and outrages. "THEREFORE: It is unanimously resolved by this Committee, to give him our greatest appreciation, solidarity and sympathy for his correct and noble behavior, and it is further resolved that he be appointed Honorary President of this organization. "I CERTIFY: that the foregoing is a copy of the Resolution adopted by the Local Committee of San Juan in its session of the 16th day of the present, and to deliver to the Hon. Municipal Commissioner of Instruction Epifanio Fernandez Vanga, I hereby issue the present in San Juan, Puerto Ri co on the eighteenth day of the month of October, 1929." Agustin SANTANA, Accidental Secretary. Jesús BENITEZ CASTAÑO, President.
/TRUE FANTASIES/ 1 HAVE JUST RECEIVED IN OUR FABRIC AND LACES DEPARTMENT I The finest chiffons in the latest colors, flat crepe and georgette crepe printed with very pretty and very attractive drawings. A large assortment of fine lace and silk doilies. Our prices are always so low that there is no competition at all. VISIT US AND YOU WILL BE CONVINCED. GONZALEZ PADIN CO., INC -
ATLAS LINE AUTOMOBILES BETWEEN . SAN JUAN -PONCE 2 New Hudson Cars 2 We will pick you up and take you to your home - Departures - 7:30 A. M. - OFFICES Tel" 78 S. J. - Ponce ' " 1936 Sánt. Tel. 675
r Notice r Our signature is being forged on checks and orders for merchandise. We suggest not to accept them without our report on authenticity. LUCAS BLANCO & CO. San Juan, P. R. English and Spanish Stenographer NEEDED with law firm experience. Will report to A. A. EL MUNDO. RENT Spacious house for rent, Ponce de Leon Avenue, Parada 21, second floor, completely renovated. Suitable for school, doctor's office, hotel or large family. Will inform: Tel. 391 Rojo, Santurce.
FOR SALE Good business in production 35 crossbred and American cows in production mostly, 4 oxen, a wagon, six crossbred calves and Ford wagon for milk transportation; it is rented stable with license of the Health; water, electric light, machine for chopping yerba, 40 or more ropes of land with yerba de Elefante in abundance. For information please call Tel. 57 or Box 471, Río Piedras, P. R.
2,200 WITHOUT CORREDOR I sell modern villa in Catano next to the Horace Mann School. Four bedrooms, living room, etc. For information: Phone 528 and 529 San Juan, P. R.
A gazebo for rent in Alien 87: Telephone 1900 San Juan. WORKS Natural Flowers Miramar Avenue No. 6 Stop 11, Tel. 840 green, Santurce.
TODAY SATURDAY - Big Baratillo Day at "LA PARISIEN'' Ladies shoes in all sizes and many samples. The cheap price scandal of 1929 (Take advantage of them). A. LAGO & Co. -Brau 41, San Juan. -J. de Diego, 9, Arecibo.
THE "BROOKINGS INSTITUTE" REPORT.
' -M- Will be sent to the presses next December M Mr. J. B. Flnlster of the Military Academy of St. Augustine, Rio Piedras, received in yesterday's mail a letter from his friend, Dr. Victor S. Clark, who, as our readers know, directed the economic-industrial "survey" made in Puerto Rico by the Brookings Institution. Dr. Clark tells Mr. Finister that the commission's report on the survey will be sent to the presses next December and will be ready to be circulated that same month. The Brookings Institution report is awaited with great interest in Puerto Rico. THE MUNICIPALITY OF SN. JUAN HAS ALREADY RECEIVED M The fifteen trucks for the cleaning service M As our readers know, some time ago the San Juan Municipal Assembly approved an appropriation for the acquisition of 15 trucks for the public cleaning service. In order to find out how the cleaning service is going at the present time, we interviewed Dr. Pavía Fernández, Director of Beneficencia and currently acting Mayor. Dr. Pavia has informed us the following:- "The Municipality <Je San Juan has already received the 15 trucks that are to be dedicated to the cleaning service and for the purchase of which the corresponding allocation was made by the Assembly. Of the 15 trucks, eight are already providing service and for this we are using the personnel we had previously. "Regarding ordinance number 35, which provided for the contracting of a loan for the operation of the aforementioned trucks, it was not approved by the Executive Council." Mr. Rafael M. Pietrantonl, President of the Assembly, with whom we were able to speak on the matter has informed us that in adjusting the budget for the year 1929-30, the classification of the daily wages of the cleaning department has been eliminated and in this way it will be possible to dedicate this item for the payment of "chauffeurs" for the cleaning service, in order to be able to use the trucks acquired until such time as another allocation can be made in the budget. "This has eliminated the idea of borrowing money for this service and everything possible will be done to address the situation with the existing budget allocation," he told us.
Federal Judge Charles H. Moorman, (right), of Louisville, Kentucky, warmly greeting Paul V. McNutt, National Commander of the American Legion, on the eve of the big convention held there. (Photo. Central Press.)
The delegates from Puerto Rico recently returned to our island, after having fulfilled the important mission assigned them by their institution, to the National Convention of the American Legion, which was held in the city of Louisville, Kentucky, from September 30 to September 3 of this month. The delegates of the Legion, Chapter of Puerto Rico, Judge José Soto Soto, of Caguas, and Dr. Juan Lastra Chárriez, are very satisfied and grateful for the many attentions they received during their pleasant stay in the United States.
their pleasant stay in the United States. We had the opportunity to interview Ledo. José Soto Soto while he was visiting in the office of the Commander of the Legion on this island, Ledo. Miguel A. Munoz. "When we arrived in Louisville to attend the Convention," Ledo Soto Soto tells us, "we had no exact idea of all the grandeur and significance of that event, so much so that we did not take the precaution of reserving a room in a hotel in the city. But we had no idea of all the grandeur and significance of the event, so much so that we did not have the foresight to reserve a hotel in the city.
IS IN THE PROCESS OF BEING ESTABLISHED.
M The "Hogar del Soldado" in Puerto Rico. Impressions of the delegates to the American Legion Assembly -M
- IMPORTANT NOTICE - On Monday, the 21st of this month, our SHELL Gasoline Station will be open to the public of Puerto Rico, on Carretera Nueva, Parada 7, Puerta de Tierra. This Station has been built and equipped according to the latest modern advances to offer the best service to our customers since we serve the best products. The Shell Co. of Porto Rico Ltd. SAN JUAN, P. R.
"THIS WARM RECEPTION FROM THE PEOPLE MAKES ME FEEL MORE INTENSELY".
THE ISSUE OF THE CHANGE OF NAME OF THE 'HISTORIC PARTY' M It has passed to the study of the Attorney General Mr. Beverley M Senator Rafael Martinez Nadal wrote on Tuesday, October 8 of this month a letter to the Executive Secretary, Mr. Eduardo J. Saldaña, informing him that, in his capacity as President of the "Partido Histórico", formerly called the "Partido Constitucional Histórico" and popularly known as the "Partido Republicano Puro", and in compliance with an agreement adopted by said political organization, in which it was resolved that at the first opportunity it be officially registered in the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico under the name of "Partido Republicano Nacional", requests the annotation of the change of name and that the name of "Partido Republicano Nacional" be registered in the Executive Secretary, for all legal purposes, as the name that the "Partido Histórico" shall officially have from now on. Mr. Saldaña acknowledged receipt to Mr. Martínez Nadal of the aforementioned letter and the same has been submitted to Attorney General Beverley for study and consideration. -The last amendment introduced by our Legislative Assembly to the electoral law, which grants the vote to women who can read and write, requires that the registration of women who are going to make use of the electoral franchise be started as soon as possible, and the registration of women who can read and write be started as soon as possible.
Rio Piedras, Caguas and Cayey yesterday gave Governor Roosevelt a warm welcome on his first trip through the interior of the island. At half past eight in the morning the Chief Island Executive left Fortaleza accompanied by his distinguished wife and Attorney General Beverley. He was followed by the Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor Mr. Carlos E. Chardon and his wife, Miss Margaret Hensey, Mr. Charles H. Terry, the Commissioner of Instruction Mr. Juan B. Huyke, the Commissioner of Health Dr. Pedro N. Ortiz, the Chief of Police Mr. Carlos E. Chardon and his wife, Mrs. Margaret Hensey. Ortiz, Chief of the Insular Police Lewis, Captain Berreteaga, of the Insular Police, Professor O'Reilly, of the University of Puerto Rico; representing the Press were Messrs. Harwood'Hull, for the "Porto Rico Progress", J. Córdova Chirino, for "El Imparcial", Augusto Pietri, for "La Democracia" and our colleague Mr. T* Maídonado, and for the graphic press. Case ship of "Gráfico de Puerto Rico" and to this effect the Insular Board of Elections would have begun no later than January of next year to carry out this work. But it will not be possible to deal with the problem for now because the Legislative Assembly did not make any appropriation in the budget for this work. It will be necessary to wait until the Legislature convenes in February and provides the necessary amount for this work. The Insular Board of Elections shall make the pertinent recommendations to the Legislature to see if it is possible to begin immediately after the appropriation is approved the work of registering and enrolling women who can read and write and who meet the other requirements to vote in the next elections.
M-- "The obligation I have to serve you," the Governor told us yesterday. -He was acclaimed with great enthusiasm in his first tour of the island M
Lebró of "PUERTO RICO ILLUSTRADO". At stop 15 in Santurce the Governor stopped briefly to greet the girls of the Colegio Portorriqueño who were carrying bouquets of flowers as a gift to Mrs. Roosevelt. Along the road from Santurce to Rio Pie dras hundreds of children waited waving the national emblems and bouquets of flowers that they offered to the retinue. For children and teachers and for the people who applaud(Contlnúa en la Página 6 Col. 1) IN UTUADO THE IDEA OF CONSTITUTING M An agricultural cooperative is being discussed M At the central offices of the Farmers Association we were supplied yesterday with the following note authorized by the Local Board of Utuado: t "Our Board held its regular session yesterday, with the usual enthusiasm and cordiality. One of its members surprised the Board by presenting it with some canes made from the coffee bush and the tobacco plant, a gift made to the Board of the Association by the aforementioned member, who is Mr. Avelino Aviles, from the Tetuan neighborhood, a determined defender of the farmer's cause. "In an informal manner the matter relating to the importation of cattle into the island was discussed, and in the discussion expressions of sympathy were made for the conduct of the Deputy Commissioner of Agriculture in opposing the importation of cattle and for the very timely suggestions he makes to the farmer and to the country to make the purchase of the article as food available to all. "In reality in ütuado there is no livestock industry; the farmer has very few cattle which he takes to market in his time of trouble to supply his needs, and notwithstanding the fact that the farmer in this jurisdiction is not engaged in the raising of livestock in this jurisdiction, he is not engaged in the raising of cattle.The farmer in this jurisdiction is dedicated to cattle raising especially, with pastures in excess, the cattle for slaughter is quoted at derisory prices, disadvantageous for the owner, and given the resources of those who exploit the business, protected by the abundance of the article, the arroba is sold at two dollars fifty cents and yet the meat is sold to the public at ten and eight and up to twenty-two cents a pound. As is generally the case, the farmer sells his article cheap and consumes it dearly, if he can consume it at all. This is the protection he has always had, of which he is becoming aware. By some members the idea of founding an agricultural Cooperative and of the convenience for producer and consumer of making an active propaganda in this direction so that the thought can be carried into reaUty was externalized."
g Will I and b Ii i? Distinguished by the novelty of their beauty Try them! All Buick Agencies