ELM1NDO
20 pá s " ina8 3 ctvs '
20 pá s in
MORNING
MORNING
Year XI.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Published and distributed under permit No. 801 authorized by the Act of October B. 1917. on file at th* Post Office at San Joan. Porto Rico By order of the President A 8 Burleson, Poetmsster General. Entered ss second class matter, Febmary 21. 1919 at the Post Office at 8an Juan Porto Itieo (ünfted States of America) nndei the A-t of march S. 1879 ■
Saturday, December 28, 1929.
| Number 3605.
'Teachers will always find me ready to stand up for the schools'."
A RECEPTION IS PREPARED FOR SEN ADOR IGLESIAS M Who will arrive in San Luán on Monday.-A call from the Coalitionist Committee M
From the office of the Joint Territorial Committee of the Coalition, the following note is sent to us: "On Thursday of this week, Senator Santiago Iglesias, President of the Socialist Party, embarked on the steamer "San Lorenzo", and will arrive in San Juan in the early hours of the morning of next Monday, the 30th. "Both the labor movement and the parties that make up the Socialist-Constitutional Coalition, as well as the whole country in general, await the arrival of the leader with lively interest. The economic and political situation prevailing in the country, together with recent events of public interest, call for the presence and cooperation of President Iglesias on the island. His long experience as a fighter in the labor and political fields, and his powerful influence as a leader in the public conscience, always give him the opportunity to be present in the island.
We convey to Mr. Iglesias' friends, co-religionists and sympathizers the news of his arrival, in order to comply with the insistent requests that have been made to us for this purpose, hoping that a large representation will come to the dock to welcome him. "The Joint Territorial Committee of the Constitutional Socialist Party intends to offer a reception to the labor leader Santiago Iglesias, and for this purpose all persons who wish to attend his reception at the wharf are cordially invited." From the offices of the local coalitionist committee we are also sent the following note: "On Monday, at <5 a.m., (Continued on Page 16 Col 5)
\ 1 p AD1N l / New Things/ . Expressly Brought FOR THESE DAYS AT POPULAR PRICES Pretty Hats - Suits - Underwear Handkerchief Boxes - Garter Sets Necklaces - Screens - Bracelets - Vanities Wallets and Purses - Fine Perfumes Stockings - Shoes - Umbrellas - Flowers Sweaters and Coats - Children's Suits Paper Boxes, Pretty Silks, Children's Socks and many other new items just received. See our window displays and compare our prices. Something New Every Day. Fixed Prices. GONZALEZ PADIN CO./ SAN JUAN - PONCE - MAYAGÜEZ.
M The Governor said before the Teachers' Assembly M The General Assembly of the Puerto Rico Teachers' Association began its work Thursday evening at 8:30 p.m. under the presidency of Mr. Gerardo Sellés Solé. The assembly hall of the Baldorioty de Castro School, the place where the brilliant act took place, was elegantly decorated and in the very numerous concurrence, a true enthusiasm was perceived. An orchestra conducted by Maestro Figueroa interpreted a beautiful musical composition that was very applauded, constituting the first number of the program. Then Mr. Juan N. Leon, President of the Local Board of San Juan, proceeded to give an eloquent speech of welcome to the assembly teachers, receiving a warm ovation. Mr. Leon's speech appeared in its entirety in yesterday's edition. The third issue of the program consisted of a musical selection, and, (Continued on 2 Col. 4)
Oatmeal H-0 The tastiest and most nutritious It cooks in 2 to 3 minutes Packed in 26 oz. cans TEST IT. Sacra de L. Villamil * Co. San Juan, P. R. Exclusive Agents. i
LLOMPART BROTHERS COMPANY El Hogar de los Médicos de Puerto Rico - - . makes the most fervent wishes for the health and prosperity of its clientele in the year 1930 and once more offers you its good services
si- PAR *T" Fine silk shoes, same design, wide toe jp Taco Spike. Sizes 3 to 6 Cream - Pink - Blue. / Same with one loop, in: Orange - Blue and Cream. / Served by mail, C. O. D. They are a real bargain. til Los Diablos de la Plaza San Juan, P. R.
Dr. JAIME VILA MORALES After several months of absence dedicated ex- . elusively to the study of the latest methods of diagnosis and treatment used in his specialty, is pleased to offer again his professional services. X-rays and diseases of the Stomach, Liver and Intestines. Parada 25, Santurce, P. R. - Tel. 1980 and 2073. I i i i R. I. P. Don Juan B. Blanco y Guzman ■ HAS DIED His widow Doña Teresa Lopez Cepero de Blanco, his children 9 9f Jesus, Lucia. Juan, Aurora, Teresa, Pío, Galo and Carmen, his K children-in-law Doña Leah Bebeau de Blanco and Don Joaquín 9 Pujáis Santana v his nieces and nephews, beg your attendance at the burial 9 today the 28th at four o'clock in the afternoon, for 1 > which you will be | K eternally grateful. * ■ Mortuary House. No. 2 Main St., Stop 2614. i 9 K No obituary will be delivered . ■ ■ Please do not send artificial wreaths. 9 Funeral director. Dr. Ramón Fournier. ■ Santurce. P. R., December 28, 1929. 9
W L4 BELL THAT IS WAGING 'THE WORLD' IN THE GASOLINE AFFAIR."
M "It deserves everyone's ablause u cooperation," says Don Vicente Usera Ir. M
Our editor in Ponce, Mr. J. Norat Rodríguez, sent us the following telegram yesterday:- Ponce, Puerto Rico, December 27, 1929. EL MUNDO, San Juan de Puerto Rico. Mr. Vicente üsera (son) has commented in the following way on the campaign against the exorbitant price of gasoline:- "The campaign being waged by "EL MUNDO" in the matter of gasoline deserves applause and DURING THE HOLIDAYS SPECIAL PRICES IN Perfumery of the best French and Spanish houses. Pharmacy BLANCO BRAU 54 URGENT! I need single-phase electric motor, alternating current, five horsepower, first or second hand. Address: P.O. Box 115 or telephone 20, Isabela, P. R.
cooperation from all. A little over a month ago. for a whole day. gasoline sold in this city at 15 and 17 cents a gallon. "I bought 15 gallons at the price of IT cents per gallon in a garage located in front of the Plaza Degeteau. I asked the owner about it and he informed me that it was simply a competition "between garages" backed by the gasoline companies and that they (the garage owners) had nothing to lose because they were assured of a profit of 3 cents per gallon regardless of the price of the sale. "EL MUNDO" will know how to comment on this fact as it sees fit." J. NORAT RODRIGUEZ. El Dorado - - - Wishes its numerous clientele a Happy Easter and a Prosperous New Year. We have for those pleasant evenings: - Roast Piglet. Turkey Baked in the Oven Stuffed, Turkey Truffled, Chicken Baked in the Oven. Baked Chicken, Pickled Guinea Fowl. Paella Rice, Cakes and Hallacas, Ham, Mofongo with Chicharron. Roasted suckling pigs from 6 to 25 pounds. Call to phone No. 9S0, San Juan,* P. R. Send us your orders at any time. WE SERVE HOME VEINTIDOS & TORRES San Jose No. 15.
Congratulating your friends on Easter and New Year's Day shows faithful friendship and a higher degree of culture. We have a card for every taste. Order yours today. R. CANTERO & CO. S Brau 57, San Juan, P. R. FURNISHED HOUSE Wanted in central and cool location in Santurce. Call 1010 San Juan.
AUDITOR'S MANUAL' By MANUEL E. LUJAN, Municipal Auditor. This "MANUAL" deals with the different points of municipal administrative order, scientific accounting, organization, economy and all these fundamental questions to the good exercise of the Auditor. Section 74 Manatí.
Dr. D. Biascoechea Diseases of the Stomach and Intestines. Hours: 2 to 5 P. M. Cruz 13, Tel. 684, S. J.
INCOMING VISITING PROFESSORS
M To the Puerto Rico School of Tropical Medicine M (Dispatch from the School of Tropical Medicine). M Professor Ernest L. Scott, of the Department of Physiology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, arrived in San Juan on Tuesday, December 24, to devote several weeks to special research at the School of Tropical Medicine. Professor Scott is the first visiting professor to arrive at the School this year. Several other men of science will be arriving within the next few weeks, among them Professor Edwin O. Jordan, of the University of Chicago, who was at the School of Tropical Medicine for two months last year, and who now comes with the purpose of carrying out a series of investigations that will last for a period of three to four months. Professor William Taliaferro, also of the University of Chicago, will arrive with Dr. Jordan to carry on research he began at the School of Tropical Medicine two years ago. Professor George W. Bachman, of John Hopkins University, will be arriving early in the year to carry out research he began at the School of Tropical Medicine two years ago.
THE "INSULAR SOCIETY OF ENGINEERS" IDEA.A MEANS
M To cooperate in solving the problems of the bais M
The "Sociedad Insular de Ingenieros", presided over by Commissioner to the Interior Mr. Guillermo Esteves, wishes to cooperate with Governor Roosevelt and with the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico in the solution of the vital problems confronting the country. To this effect, it has decided to distribute important topics to be discussed and treated by members of the society, and other engineers who do not belong to the association have been invited to also study some topics and submit them to the aforementioned organization for presentation to Governor Roosevelt and the Legislative Assembly. The topics were distributed as follows: Engineer Rafael Gonzalez: Investigations and study of natural resources as a basis for the establishment of new industries. Engineer Carlos del Valle: Within the previous topic, to study the possibilities of establishing in Puerto Rico the manufacture of products derived from sisal and the manufacture of paints. Engineer Ramón Gandía Córdova: Study of a plan for the exploitation of our commercially valuable mineral resources.
resources that have commercial value. Study of the current organization of the internal and external trade of the island. Influence of the high customs tariff and the "Coastwise Service". Their advantages and disadvantages. Most convenient organization taking into account the geographical situation of the island and its relations with the United States." Engineer Antonio Lucchetti: Waterfalls, large reservoirs for irrigation and motive power, utilization and distribution of electric power. Engineer Rafael del Valle Zeno: Study of the construction materials of Puerto Rico and the areas of the island where they are located. Engineer Ettienne Tottl: Appraisal of rural and urban property. Methods used and plan to make it uniform. Engineer Rafael Nones: The insular and municipal public debt. Its consolidation and the way to pay it. Necessity and importance of the Cadastre for the equitable and just imposition of the contribution. Engineer A. Nin Martínez: Study of an oían for the construction of a new building.
B kl \ ■ BANK OF PONCE The Board of Directors and Officers of the Bank of Ponce wish the extensive clientele of the institution and the public in general many happy returns and prosperity in the New Year. * F ) \ I * 1 /V* / I J114WÍId\ -L. Vur ■-[
Apartments for Rent at Alien 85-87. Will inform: - Tel. 1900, San Juan.
- HONEY - VANNINA DISTILLING COMPANY Parada 20, Santurce. Honey for sale.
Drive Your Car Yours to ah appearances. Brand new models. Reasonable rates by hour, mileage or day. Phone 1883, Santurce or call A. Iturrondo ma* nager Rent-a-Car Co, San Jorge and Poincaré Sts, Santurce.
EXTRAORDINARY GIFTS AT MODEST PRICES - FOR WEDDINGS AND NA VITY THE WONDER ■' ?. * ■ ' "■ \ -'ó. " / ■ Salvador Brau 34 side of Pasaje Matienzo