THE WORLD
20 pg 'J/'W O " - -.2 ■>
20 pá e ina8 3 ctv8
MORNING
MORNING
Year XI.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
PabUakad"<" aiitrlb.ud "adet a "aü" JBa. SOI Mta/tMS 0" Mm Oot "f OjUms a, 1011. "o Ole M tha Paet Otftaa M 8 "a Juaa. Porto B>e". B" erd" at th. FnMnt á. S. Barlaoaa Paauuctac Oeearaj Bnterad as tt-aÉ elaas suttee, teUraary 81 1010 at th. Peat Offle" at 8aa Jnaa. Parta Bies. (United State. af Aeariea) aad" tBa a "t ef marrt 8. 1ST"
Saturday, July 27, 1929.
I Number 3452. ®
THREE PEOPLE WERE SEEN NEAR DROWNING.
M At Hatillo beach.Providential rescue M According to reports obtained from the offices of the Police Headquarters, on the 22nd of the current month two men had a terrible struggle with the waves at Hatillo beach trying to save the life of a teacher who was swept away by the sea while she was taking a bath at that beach. Miss Josefa González Vélez, a native of Lares and neighbor of Hatillo, where she is a teacher, was on the verge of drowning while taking a bath in the sea. Manuel Vargas and Pedro Alcaide, who were in that place, went to the aid of Miss González and were also caught by the strong waves. Several people, among them Ernesto Cabán, Antonio Lugo, Juan Martínez, and the Mayor of Hatillo, Mr. Antonio González, crowded to the cries for help. These gentlemen were able to rescue the three people who were struggling to save themselves using a dinghy they found nearby. J 0 V E N SUSANA RIOS HURTS HER OWN FATHER M Her mental faculties are disturbed M On the 22nd of this month an unfortunate event occurred in the place known as "Los Coléricos", in Areeibo, where Mr. Ramon Rios was the victim of an attack by his own daughter. The fact, according to the report of the Chief of Police of that district, was motivated by a violent access of madness given to Miss Susana Rios, who lives in the Hato Abajo neighborhood with her father. This young woman has disturbed her mental faculties and attacked and assaulted her father with a knife producing three wounds. The case was submitted to the consideration of the Municipal Judge who ordered the confinement of the young woman in the hospital for the insane. -Will continuation schools be eliminated? -Practically the same continuation schools will operate as last year. The Department," he says, "will have to wait for replies from all the teachers who served last year to consider the eliminations which will be forced by the cuts in our budget, we can hardly consider appointing new teachers for the coming school year. Young graduate students in education should be prepared to make arrangements to work in the United States where the teaching of Spanish is on the rise. In Latin America, young graduates in Commerce, Agriculture and other vocational fields have greater opportunities than graduates in academic subjects. "The Department will make every effort to seek opportunities for our graduates with the competent authorities in the North. WHITE BEAR" CEMENT FOR IMMEDIATE WAREHOUSE DELIVERY. KORBER ft CO., ING INSURANCE IN GENERAL M. Y. Saldaña &Co.
- PIZA & MARTINEZ INC. - - - - - --- . . . :
THE ASSOCIATION OF MAES TROS LLE LflU TO THE COURTS.
The case of the medical examination demanded by the San Juan School Director
Yesterday afternoon one of our editors visited the offices of the Insular Association of Teachers and spoke with the President, Mr. Gerardo Selles Solí, about the debated issue of the appointment of teachers to work in San Juan during the next school year. Mr. Selles made the following statements regarding the resolution of the School Director with respect to the x-rays of teachers who have not yet been included in the lists of appointees: "We propose to bring before the Courts of Justice the resolution of Mr. Fernandez Yanga with respect to the x-rays, and the Courts will decide whether or not the School Director is right to demand that the teachers be included in the lists of appointees, and whether or not the School Director is right to demand that they be included in the lists of appointees.
School Director is right or wrong to demand this requirement. Therefore we have to address ourselves and we wish that you make it public to all the teachers who have been harmed so that as soon as possible they can come to this office to report their difficulties. As soon as we have all the cases prepared we will file the lawsuit before the corresponding court." Mr. Selles has asked us to let the teachers know that the office of the Association is at 37 San Justo Street and that those teachers who cannot go personally to the office can call 1427 San Juan, so as not to lose the right to file the lawsuit.
"EFFORTS WILL BE MADE TO ENSURE THAT THE TEACHERS" M "Who worked on a permanent basis last year will continue in their positions".'Vizcarrondo
As we reported in yesterday's edition, the Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner of Instruction Juan B. Huyke and Francisco Vizcarrondo, respectively, are considering and approving the appointments of teachers to the school. Deputy Commissioner Vizcarrondo informs us that due to certain reductions in the island's budget for the next fiscal year, as well as the elimination by various municipalities of positions that were budgeted for during the previous year, the Department is facing a difficult situation. Nevertheless," adds Mr. Vizcarrondo, "every effort will be made to ensure that all possible efforts will be made to ensure that Tos
Nevertheless," adds Mr. Vizcarrondo, "every effort will be made so that those teachers who worked on a permanent basis last school year will be able to continue in their positions during the next school year. -With the elimination of the item for travel expenses for continental teachers, has the Department had any difficulty in hiring teachers from the North? -The elimination of this item will reduce the number of Continental teachers who have been serving in our school organization, as the salaries we are able to offer are not sufficient to interest teachers of experience in the Conti
Munson - McCormick Line (Intercostal Service) SAN FRANCISCO CALIFORNIA Calls at Portland, Seattle, V Tacoma, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Ponce and San Juan. Upcoming departures announced: S. S. WEST CAPE 2nd week of August. S. S. ABSAROKA 4th week of August. S. S. MUNAIRES Ira. week of September. S. S. MUNDELTA 3rd. week of September. Request your shipments by this way which is the fastest and most economical. Agents: San Juan Mercantile Corporation San Juan, P. R. Ramon Cortada 8C Co, Suers. Hiram Gomez, Ponce Beach. Playa-Mayagüez Nieves Calafat ft Co. J or S e Silva, Inc. Arroyo. Aguadilla. Marques 8C. Areeibo Co. Arrive early in Ponce and travel in comfort on the Fajardito Line, which leaves San Juan at 2:00 a.m. LINEA FAJARDITO Tel. !936Sant. 675, Ponce.
DR. FIGUEREDO CONTINUES TO APPLY THE ASSUERO M METHOD A patient who enters the office itaralytic and leaves cured.
Yesterday morning we went to take our usual look around the office of Dr. Fernando Figueredo, when, upon entering the entrance hall of the building, we saw that an old lady, blind and paralyzed, was being carried upstairs, to be subjected to the Asuero method, -by a lady and a gentleman. As the three were blocking the way, a gentleman who was about to descend the stairs stepped aside very graciously, and without ceasing to smile, placed his cane under his arm and politely uncovered himself. It was remarkable the degree of satisfaction that the man portrayed in his face. When we saw his teary eyes we immediately realized: UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO RICC Ría Piedras and Mayagüez, P. R. July 24. 1929 NOTICE Enrollment at the University of Puerto Rico will begin on August 19, 1929 and will be carried out in the following manner: IN THE DEPARTMENTS OF RIO PIEDRAS Freshmen-August 19, 20 and 21. Sophomores and juniors-August 22 and 23 until 12 00 M. Seniors-August 23 and 21 Evening Classes-August 21, 22 and 23, from 8:00 to 9:30 P. M. IN THE DEPARTMENTS OF MAYAGÜEZ Students residing in Ma yagüe" and neighboring towns-August 19 and 20. Students from other towns on the island-August 21 to 24, both <' inclusive. The Admissions Committee is considering applications from first-time applicants from both Rio Piedras and Mayagüez. Those who wish to enter the University and have not applied should do so immediately by means of forms provided by this office. It is suggested to applicants that they seek their correspondence at the post office to avoid disruptions and loss of time. Lodging at the 'Cariota Matlenzo' Residence is rapidly being arranged and ladies interested in living in the residence should apply as soon as possible. J. F MAURA "Registrar" (Announcement)
"This man has certainly just had a trigeminal operation and it has given him a good result " How are you feeling, how do you feel, we asked him. "Magnificently; very well," he answered without stopping smiling. Have you had a trigeminal surgery, we insisted. -Yes, sir, yes, that's why I'm so happy. -What were you suffering from? -Well, paralysis, man," he said, raising his hands as if he was already annoyed by so many questions. -Do you want to tell me your name? I belong to the Press. -Yes, man, of course. Francisco Bujoza. Goodbye. And so Don Francisco ended the interrogation and went down the stairs, amidst the expectation of the public that invaded Dr. Figueredo's office. Then the doctor (Continued on 6, Col. 6)
AD SOLICITOR Young man needed with good references. Good proposition. Write giving details to: G. R. e|o "EL MUNDO."
THE INVESTIGATING COMMITTEE OF THE "MEDICAL ASSOCIATION".
Reply to Dr. Figueredo in the matter of asuerotherapy.
The Investigating Committee of the Medical Association, constituted to consider the matter of asuerotherapy, authorizes the following statement: "In "La Democracia" which was published on the 24th of this month, a reporter asks Dr. Figueredo the following: "Doctor: Have you read the report of the Commission of the Medical Association of Puerto Rico?" "Dr. Figueredo: 'Yes, I have read it. The investigating committee of Physicians that went to the Auxilio Mutuo, had the purpose of knowing the technique, the application procedure and the instruments, which I could not see on that occasion. "The report adds: "Dr. Figueredo could not recall with any accuracy the names of several persons.
Dr. Figueredo could not recall with any accuracy the names of several persons who had been treated by him." "The undersigned Committee has to say that Dr. Figueredo failed to give a concrete answer to the reporter's question. We had dieno that the en. ferraos who were taken personally by us, had not, up to the time we were writing, received any benefit from the treatment. "Dr. Figueredo. answering this question seriously, must have confined himself s d' tir whether or not what we asserted was true. "We can tell the public and Dr. Figueredo that the (Continued on 3, Col 6)
THE ISLAND HAS BEEN DIVIDED INTO SEVEN ZONES
-M For the purpose of reconstructing schools M All the plans for the school buildings to be rebuilt under the direction of the Rehabilitation Commission have already been approved. About three hundred buildings will be completely rebuilt and more than four hundred repaired. The repair work will be completed by the opening of the next school year, but the reconstruction work will continue until the end of the first semester. These works are distributed in seven groups. The first group corresponds to the coffee region, which suffered the most from the effects of the cyclone, and comprises 42 buildings. The second group corresponds to the central section of the island, the third to the eastern part, the fourth to the northwestern part, the fifth to the northern part, the sixth to the southern part and the seventh to the southeastern part. The auctions of the works corresponding to these sections will take place from one moment to the next in the order indicated. We are informed by Deputy Commissioner Vizcarrondo that the municipal authorities of the island must cooperate with the Department of the Interior and the Rehabilitation Commission so that these works may be carried out without interruption as soon as possible and that, in the interim, buildings must be provided that meet acceptable conditions for school work while the other reconstruction works last. CEIBA EMPLOYERS HAVE PROMISED TO PAY TODAY M Negociado del Trabajo M Last Thursday Inspector Ramón Vélez, of the Negociado del Trabajo, was in Ceiba investigating the situation complained of by several agricultural workers who allege that certain employers have not paid their wages for some weeks, and informed the interim of said Negociado, Don Ramón Lebrón, that the employers who owed wages had promised him that today, Saturday, they would pay them. "The Inspector has instructions to communicate to me immediately.
"I CONSIDER IT OF PARAMOUNT IMPORTANCE TO CONTINUE TO MANAGE".
M "That the land of the Baker concession revert to the people of Puerto Rico", says Mr. Esteces.
Yesterday morning we questioned the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Guillermo Esteves, regarding the fence erected by the Department under his direction on the western boundary of the Federal Government land leased to Commander Baker. Here are the statements made to that effect by Mr. Esteves: "In answering your question concerning the fence erected by the Department of the Interior on the western boundary of the lands ceded by the Federal Government to Major Virgil Baker, I will permit myself to give you the history of certain matters which are intimately connected with the fence case. "The parcel of land which is separated by the said fence from the land which was ceded to Mr. Baker, does not belong to the Island Government, but to the Federal Government. This has been designated by said Federal Government for the construction of a Marine Hospital. "Back in the year 1908, under the administration of Governor Colten, the use of this parcel of land was ceded to the People of Puerto Rico exclusively for park purposes, the Department of Ijarina reserving the right to revoke the permission granted at any time necessary, with the right also to have removed from the land comprised in the aforementioned parcel any work that the Insular Government had erected on the site. We will be informed of what happens in relation to this matter so that if the workers are not paid we will then proceed according to the circumstances", Mr. Lebrón informs us. NOTICE See the advertisement in "La Revista Hípica" on page 8.
"In 1925, when the architect Mr. Parsons proceeded to prepare the plans for the Muñox Rivera Park, he found that when he placed the extension of San Francisco Street within those plans, he was forced to draw said San Francisco Avenue in the direction of the Condado Bay, passing through the land that today is purchased by the People of Puerto Rico, and that it did not belong to the People of Puerto Rico.To the workers and employers M We are requested to publish the following official notice: as of July 26, 1929. "The Bureau of Labor has again moved its offices, to the premises formerly occupied by it in the Department of Agriculture and Labor and which had been ceded to Ja Comisión-R "u bilitadora. "Having eliminated the allowance with which the salary of the Director of the General Employment Agency was paid, this division has been transferred to the Chief of the Bureau of Labor, who has designated, to attend to it, one of his most competent officers in that field, under the direction of the Chief Clerk. "As of this date the laborers who wish to register their names with the General Employment Agency, and the employers who had need of laborers or employees may make their application to the Negociado del Trabajo, where they will be duly attended to." Ramon LEBRON. J Acting Chief, Bureau of Labor.
I SELL For having to be absent from the country, my houses, newly built, San Sebastian No. 3 and 3%. I would leave 3|4 parts in mortgage. Would yield over 2 per cent clean monthly. Will report: FERNANDO FOSSAS, Alien 12,112.
AGENTS IN TRUJILLO ALTO, CANOVANAS, DORADO, COLOCO AND CEIBA. We need in every pue. blo to represent PUERTO RICO ILUSTRADO Write giving references to "Puerto Rico Ilustrado, Inc." Box 345, San Juan, P. R.
Compagnie Generale Transatlantique French Steamship "ANTILLES" ATTACKS AT THE MOUNTS OF SAN JUAN AND SANTO DOMINGO It will leave San Juan on August 3 bound for Santo Domingo and Jacmel (Haiti). Return on August 9th to San Juan and continue on to Guadeloupe and Martinique. Roundtrip ticket to Santo Domingo $35.00 Roundtrip ticket to Jacmel (Haiti) $65.00 Admits cargo and passage to the mentioned ports of the Antilles, as well as to Europe via Martinique. For further information, please contact: BERN BROTHERS INC, Agents SAN JUAN, P. R. TELEPHONE 256 Superior Cement "ATLAS" FOR IMMEDIATE DELIVERY ORDER IN TIME REQUEST IT TO SOBRINOS DE EZQUIAGA, INC. Tel. 1927-1928 San Juan, P. R. P. O. Box 987
To persons who have undergone the Asuero treatment. SUPLICATION July 26, 1929. The Investigating Committee of the Medical Association of Puerto Rico, for the better fulfillment of its functions, wishes to contact those persons who have been treated by the Asuero method, in order to know the result of the treatment. To this effect, please contact this Committee at 1306 San Juan, P. R. / ASOCIACION GRADUADOS Universidad de Puerto Rico. GENERAL ASSEMBLY University Assembly Hall - August 4, 8:80 A.M. M. Julio GARCIA DIAZ, Secretary. Treasurer.
The most modern hardware store in San Juan offers a complete, selected and new assortment of hardware, paints, sanitary appliances and their derivatives at situation prices. The managers of the company greet their associates and the general public. JUAN PIZA. BALTASAR MARTINEZ VELA. SALVADOR BRAU NO. 79 - TEL. 268 - SAN JUAN, P. W. |