elmündo
18 Pages Civs.
i 18 pá 8* na9 3 Ctvs.
DAILY
THE MORNING
Year XI.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
| I'ublwhed and distributed aadar permit "o. SOI authorized by .ba Art of October ", 1917. " o file at the Poet Offiee at Ban Porto Rieo By order of the President. A 8 Burleson. Pnotmasfer General. Entered ae second class matter,. febmary 1 1819 at Offire al Bail Jnan Port.... Kirn (UnilH Ufatee of Amrriral onde" the A-4 of mareh 1. 1879.
Saturday, November 16, 1929.
I Number 3563.
CONGRESS OF MUNICIPAL ASSEMBLIES BEGINS TODAY.
Report q draft resolution of the delegates of San luan M
4 At the Congress of the Municipal Assemblies of the Island, which is to be held today, Saturday, at the Municipal Theater, the delegation of San Juan proposes to present the following report and draft resolution to be submitted to the Governor if approved by the Assembly: TO THE HONORABLE CONGRESS OF THE MUNICIPAL ASSEMBLIES OF PUERTO RICO OF 1929. FRATERNALLY. Comrades :- ¿i The Delegation of San Juan has the honor to submit for your consideration an exposition of the problems confronting our municipalities, and suggestions as to suitable remedies. r We all realize the present situation of our country and feel the need to translate constructive ideas into reality. The ideas outlined here are not exclusively those of the San Juan Delegation. We submit them as the product of the experience of the whole island, transmitted by you through years of service in the work we have done, and by virtue of the difficulties we have encountered. It has not been the purpose to include -details either as to the problems outlined, or as to the remedies suggested.
suggested remedies. We have confined ourselves to setting forth principles in general outline which concern all municipalities without distinguishing between those of the first, second and third class. If this resolution merits your approval, your representatives on the committee which is to execute it will set forth in detail those needs characteristic of the categories of municipalities they represent, and there will undoubtedly be no objection on the part of the representatives of municipalities of other categories, but cooperation, so that the bills may be formalized to the satisfaction of all municipalities in general and of the authorities of the Island Government. The basic thought that we understand must guide us in facing these problems, must be that of a patriotism based essentially on the principles of a citizenship without qualifications of sects or parties. Each one, from his own place, acting on these principles, can better give prestige to his party in this way, than in any other way, cooperating to the success of a constructive work which will result in practical benefits for our municipal corporations We consider that the preservation of our municipal life and the success of its management, based on democratic principles, depends (Continued on 4, Col. 5)
HEALTH, ENERGY, NORMAL WEIGHT, GOOD TEMPERAMENT That represents the daily use of Ja "double malted" THOMPSON'S milk ' START USING IT TODAY - Ask for it in your Colmado -
STARTING SATURDAY NOV. 16
I. MILLER SHOES
ONE WEEK ONLY Sport and Street Styles
ALL COLORS SIZES UP TO 8 ALL WIDTHS
"THE CELEBRATION OF DANCES IN THE SCHOOLS" M
$6 -$7 -$8 GIUSTI * L "
Starting SATURDAY NOV. 16
One Week Only Sport and Street Styles
ALL COLORS Sizes 2 to 8 ALL WIDTHS
"It is strictly forbidden," says Huyke M The Commissioner of Public Instruction, Don Juan B. Huyke. has issued the following circular letter: Messieurs Inspectors and Principals of Schools, Gentlemen: We call attention once more to the fact e q'-- the holding of dances in * 3 schools is strictly forbidden by our regulations. We will not consider, henceforth, any request that we authorize these acts. JOHN B. HUYKE. THE SECOND ANNUAL ASSEMBLY OF THE DRIVERS' FEDERATION M To take effect at Guaya ma on the 4th day of the month of di cember next M The Island Federation of Chauffeurs requests us to publish the following notice. Comrades: We comply with one of the provisions set forth in our constitution, having the honor to invite and summon all the unions duly organized under the auspices of the Federation, to urge them to select the delegates to which they are entitled, to attend the second annual Congress, which will open its work at ten o'clock in the morning of the fourth of next December in the city of Guayama, Puerto Rico. It is needless to point out to you the importance that this Congress will have, where matters of vital importance and merit for our Federation and for the interests of all our comrades of the island, and especially for those who are organized under the auspices of the Island Federation through the local unions, will have to be resolved. Therefore, we feel it unnecessary to insist that the unions show interest in sending their duly appointed delegates and re(Continued on Page 11 Col. 2)
NOTICE To all Insurance Companies operating in Puerto Pico, their General Agencies, Brokers, Sub-Agents, Selectmen and Employees transacting insurance business by virtue of authorization granted by this Office, it is hereby made known: That by virtue of the provisions of Section 146 of the General Insurance Act of Puerto Rico approved on July 16, 1921, the Superintendent of Insurance shall consider any person or entity authorized to make insurance in Puerto Rico who grants "Rebates" to an insured as a person unfit to act as such and shall cancel his certificate for a term not to exceed five (5) years. Dated at San Juan, P. R., on the fourteenth day of the month of November, 1929. AUGUSTO R. SOLTERO, Superintendent of Insurance.
FANTASIAS Y MAS FANTASIAS We have just received a colossal assortment of samples of ladies' shoes. The Imperial
i\r ? WA MA O? o -It may be prose or whatever you want! -But with this INDUMENT I can even enter the FORTALEZA!!! Thanks to Cabrer Stores SAN JUAN - PONCE
"I AM PERFECTLY AWARE OF MR. CORDOVA DAVILA'S INTENTIONS".
But I am sure that there is no propitious ground for his poisonous seeds to germinate", says the Ledo. L. A. Rosario M
Luis Antonio Rosario, member of the Pure Republican Territorial Committee, sends us the following article: "Last week a friend told me that Mr. Córdova Dávila was going around this District trying to reorganize several alliance committees that were still pending. Later, several Pure Republicans told me what the real mission of Mr. Córdova Dávila and the friends* who accompanied him was. "The wanderings of the Alianclsta Commission were not very sympathetic. Its purpose was to coerce the Pure Republican Committees so that they would endorse a resolution prepared by Mr. Córdova Dávila, in which the Committees favored an understanding with the Alliance. The worst part of the case is that Mr. Córdova Dávila and his friends made several members of the Committees they tried to coerce believe that the resolution they were carrying had been previously endorsed by the Aguadilla Local Committee. Fortunately, almost all the Committees of this District, who know well the balances of Mr. Córdova Dávila, refrained from acting unconsultedly, in spite of having sufficient authority to make any agreement. "I want it to be known that the Puro de Aguadilla Local Republican Committee, of which I am a member, has not endorsed, nor will it endorse for the time being, any resolution that favors legislative or political understandings with other parties, because it is understood that these understandings, if they
I am perfectly aware of the true nature of the Coalition's position, and I will not endorse it for the time being. "I realize perfectly well the true intention of Mr. Córdova Dávila, but I am sure that there is no propitious ground for his poisonous seeds to germinate. "Those of us whose duty it is to watch over the rights of the Coalition have taken charge of the present situation, and we will not compromise, with festal actions, the prospects of a cheerful and promising future. "There is no need to despair, gentlemen Alliancists and Unionists. When the occasion arises, if necessary and convenient, we shall consider what is most convenient as far as the 'understanding' is concerned, and we shall certainly take into account the advantages that the Coalition may derive from them, and above all, the harm or benefit that they may cause to Puerto Rico. "Remember, Mr. Resident Commissioner, that you are one of the main causes of the deep crisis your party is going through. Be satisfied with being a participant in this work and do not try to extend your radius of action to the Socialist-Constitutional House. You are wasting your time, because fortunately peace reigns in our house, and besides, the 30 years of painful struggle we have endured, have brightened our spirits and there is no possibility of believing that after having reached by dint of great sacrifices the advantageous position we have conquered, we are going to make room in our house for the receptions that will take place today.
RECEPTIONS TO BE HELD TODAY
M In honor of the Municipal Assemblies M We are informed by the President of the San Juan Municipal Assembly, Mr. Pletrantonl, that Governor Rosevelt has been kind enough to invite the delegates to the Congress of Municipal Assemblies which begins this morning. At the same time the Municipal Assembly of San Juan has reciprocated by inviting the Governor to attend the reception that the San Juan Municipal Assembly will offer to the representatives of the municipal assemblies of the island at the Municipal Palace at half past eight this evening. The letter received by Mr. Pietrantoni from the Chief Executive reads as follows: San Juan, Puerto Rico, November 14, 1929 Mr. Rafael M. Pietrantoni, President Municipal Assembly, San Juan, F. R. Dear Mr. Pietrantoni: My wife and I are pleased to invite you, and through you the Delegates to the General Assembly of Municipal Assemblies to be held at the Municipal Theater on the 16th and 17th of the present, to an informal reception at La Fortaleza, on Saturday, November 16, from 3:30 to 4:30 P. M., at which we will have an informal reception at La Fortaleza, on Saturday, November 16, from 3:30 to 4:30 P. M., at which we will have a special reception. M., in which we will have special pleasure in meeting and greeting the distinguished representatives of the municipal governments of the island. Convention, I remain cordially yours, (Fdó.) Teodoro ROOSEVELT Governor.
GREAT OPPORTUNITY/ To obtain first quality merchandise just received from Europe and the United States at prices that will surprise you with their low prices. We always have the latest novelties in leather handbags and ladies handbags, silk parasols, silk chiffon stockings, French perfumery, very beautiful necklaces, bracelets and screens of precious stones, silks, chiffons and voiles of great attraction, and a million other items all new and that you will appreciate by paying us a visit, which we anticipate will be very profitable. OUR PRICES DO NOT ADMIT COMPETITION. GONZALEZ PADIN COMPANY
- HONEY - VANNINA DISTILLING COMPANY Parada 20, Santurce. Honey for sale.
CEMENT ON DOCK VILLAR & CO.
ATLAS LINE AUTOMOBILES BETWEEN SAN JUAN - PON£E 2 New Hudson cars 2 We will pick you up and take you home - Departures-7:30 A. M. - OFFICES Teb 78 S. J. - Ponce " 1936 Sánt. Te! 675
Read - CONN - ad on Page 8. FOR RENT On Ponce de Leon Avenue No. 245, magnificent residence, large and cool and several houses in San Juan and Santurce. Will inform José Fernán dez. Phone 991, San Juan, P. R Avena H-0 The most tasty and nutritious. Cooks in 2 to 3 minutes. Packed in cans of 26 OUNCES " PRUEBELA. Sacra de L VlUamil A O. San Juan, P. R-
AT THE END OF THE SECOND MONTH OF THE SCHOOL YEAR
DEAFNESS The Jubilee of Light is over and the most important thing now is the 25th Anniversary of the ACOUSTICON (the most perfected and efficient hearing aid in the world). Where others fail, the ACOUSTICON succeeds. We are in the most determined CRUSADE AGAINST HEARING.
DERA. Be one of our soldiers. Avoid being laughed at by answering one thing for another. Come and try ACOUSTICON without any obligation. The test is FREE, and you will feel again the delights of hearing. Payment facilities are given. Exclusive Agent for Puerto Rico, Santo Domingo and Virgin Islands: R. ORTIZ OLAYA Calle San José No. 3. (In front of "El Mundo';. Phone 535. Box 1518. San Juan, P. R. A tube of ZI-O-DINE Toothpaste will be given to any person who sends me the name and complete address of four deaf people.
We are retiring from the industry AND THEREFORE LIQUIDATING ALL OUR CLOTHING - GENTLEMEN'S SHIRTS PANTS AT LESS THAN THE COST LA IMPERIAL Alien corner San Justo
M There was an enrollment of 217,286 pupils in the public schools M The enrollment of the public schools at the close of the second school month was as follows: high schools 6,908 pupils; elementary schools 86,113, and rural schools 124,259, making a total enrollment of 217,280 pupils. The number of students enrolled at the end of the second school month represents an increase of 3440 in relation to the first month", says the Deputy Commissioner of Instruction Vizcarrondo; and he adds: "Enrollment in general is excellent in spite of the economic crisis we are suffering, especially in the rural zone. The private schools accredited by this Department also have an enrollment of about 10,000 students, which contributes effectively in the development of our school problems. - M The Insular Association of Women Voters" M From the offices of the Insular Association of Women Voters we receive this note for publicity purposes: "The Insular Association of Women Voters informs all its members and the general public that it has moved its offices to Ponce de Leon Avenue, corner of 'Jose de Diego, No. 214, second floor, right. 1 "Office hours: Monday, Wednesday and Friday, from five to seven in the afternoon. Telephone 631 neg'.o." Angela Negrón MUÑOZ. Secretary General ' of those which at the date of the election have not been constituted for six months, no person who has not been a member in good standing of the Party for at least six months may appear as a candidate or be elected to occupy positions on the Committee. Any election made in violation of this constitutional provision shall be null and void. The Financial Secretary of each Section shall prepare, one week in advance, a list containing (Continued on Page 11 Col. 4) MAGNIFICENT LOCAL Part of the second floor of the Garage Casino for rent, suitable for repair shop, warehouse, printing, etc., etc., etc. Will inform: phone 1900 San Juan. USE ZI-O-DIhIE DENTAL CREAM
WHAT COMMISSIONER HUYKE M PROMISES.
On the overwork of teachers M The Commissioner of Public Instruction, Don Juan B. Huyke, commenting on the letter addressed to him by the President of the Teachers' Association, Mr. Gerardo Sellés So 'a, and the one we published in our yesterday's ¿cyclone, stated to one of our editors these palar'Ls: "It is true that I have some complaints from some teachers that too much work is demanded of them. I have been investigating this matter for some time, and in the recent visits made by Sub-Commissioner Vizcarrondo to the island he has been dealing with this issue as well. I think there is a lot of work being done, it is true, everywhere at the present time. Anyway if I can improve the situation I will gladly try to do so." SOCIALIST SECTIONS CALLED TO ELECT OFFICERS M Within the first fortnight of next December M The General Secretary of the Socialist Party addresses this circular to all members and officers of the local sections: Dear Comrades: The purpose of this circular is to officially notify all the. The purpose of this circular is to officially notify all the members and officers of the local socialist sections that make up the Party, that in accordance with section 77 of our constitution, within the first fortnight of next December, the election of the officers of the Directing Committees of each section must be held. The election must be held by means of special assemblies of red letter members by majority vote. With the exception of the newly created Sections, or TO THE PRINTING OWNERS Because we have resolved to devote ourselves exclusively to the printing of the newspaper "EL TIEMPO", we sell all our machinery belonging to the workshops of the "DEPARTAMENTO DE REMIENDOS": "Pony Optimus" press, four pedals, 36-inch "OSWEGO" cutting machine, sewing machine, etc. with their corresponding motors. In addition all the stationery. The machine is brand new. It can be inspected in our" workshop. We will accept proposals en bloc or for separate machinery. Please contact the Administrator of THE TIMES PUBLISHING COMPANY P.O. Box 208 - Calle Cristo 7 Telephone 359. San Juan, P. R.