THE jM®NDO X'WaAaiJm dr.
■ 20 Pági
■y ¿ V20 nas 3^ tvs
DAILY MORNING
MORNING
Year XI.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
I P K erm j t 8 . 01 1 , a th0 n ril > d by o* Act et J? ctub#r "- u " -* ">- f*" " 8""" Jnaa. Porte Rieo By order of the Present. A. 8. Burleton. Postme.ter General. Entered ae aerood claea matter, february Zi. 1 i "I9 at the Poet Office at Seo Jnan. Porto Rico (United States of America) nnder the Aet of march 3. 1879 "
I Saturday, November 2, 1929. | Number 3549.
"WE WILL DEVOTE OUR EFFORTS TO WORK FOR THE WELFARE OF ALL THE PEOPLE.
THE WHOLE PEOPLE" 'i M j "And not of one group only," said the Governor yesterday. -- Consecrates a remembrance to the memory of our dead M
Our editor Maldonado, who is part of Goy bernator Roosevelt's entourage on his third excursion on the island, sent us in yesterday's ■a telegrams that slSan Sebastian, November 1, 1929 X MUNDO, San Juan. Jen Adjuntas the Governor attended at the residence of Don Antonio, terré the showing of the film Obre las actividades del Departamento de Agricultura y Trabajo. /A distinguished group of coffee farmers also attended and both the Governor and the farmers showed great satisfaction on learning of the many works of said department, especially in the industrial coffee rehabilitation. At the last minute the Governor accepted an invitation made by Mr. Salvador Mandry to spend the night at his residence. At seven o'clock in the morning the Governor was ready to leave Adjuntas for Lares. Six kilometers from this town, a commission composed of Mayor Aurelio Bernal, School Director Dr. Sein, and other local authorities was waiting for him. There was an affectionate exchange of greetings. The Governor expressed his desire to visit the consolidated schools run by the teachers Francisca Moren and Concepción Ber- nal.
nal. The school children made a magnificent demonstration and were congratulated by Roosevelt. Amidst the cheers of the people the Governor arrived in Lares. He stopped at the Plaza Revolución and made a floral offering next to the monument commemorating the heroes of the "grito de Lares". The people gave him a standing ovation. He then spoke to the high school students, introduced by Huyke. His speech was a series of beautiful advice for the youth. Before addressing the public he inspected the Market Square. In his speech to the people he spoke about the need to protect small farmers and peasants and asked for the cooperation of all for the improvement of the conditions of the island. A group of workers carried this banner: "Governor, we need your help. Our children are suffering from hunger. The Governor alluded to this and said: "I know that a large part of the people are suffering from hunger. It is a situation that moves us and we will work to alleviate this state of affairs, but nothing can be done in one day". We left Lares at 10 A M. MALDONADO Aguadilla, Puerto Rico, November 1, 1929. EL MUNDO, San Juan. Continued on p. 6, col. 1
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES MOVE TO REPEAL ORDER ■ K . - .-.tj---- M ' Which prevents automobile traffic on "Barbosa" street at certain hours M
Last night continued to meet in extraordinary session the Assembly I ' Municipal of San Juap. Mr. Pietrantoni presided. The first matter dealt with was that concerning a letter from Mr. Garparini, "Manager" of the Hotel Central", addressing the Assembly and protesting against the measure that pro 1 'be the transit of automc. - i After the matter was studied by the Public Service Committee, this organization rendered the following report to the Municipal Assembly: "The Traffic Ordinance in its 5th lesson. We have just received a large stock of the well-known pills of Dr. Andreu, of Barcelona, ■ of whom we are agents and depositaries in Puerto Rico, which we advise to be in a position to fill any order on the spot or to pass them on to the house directly. J. M. BLANCO, INC. BLANCO PHARMACY - BARBOSA ST. FROM
Barbosa Street from Salvador Brau Street to Tetuan Street without limitation." "Section 7ma. Chapter n of the same ordinance provides that, "At any time when public traffic is interrupted, the police may give orders for the use of the public streets in such directions as they may deem proper to normalize "T; and hastily provides that in other cases the traffic sé'* may be altered by express order of the Mayor." "It is seen, then, that the police have no power,to divert traffic along Barbosa Street, except in cases where it is interrupted, and if, as Mr. Gasparini says, it does so continually and without those reasons existing, it does so on its own initiative." "Whereas it is the Mayor alone who can grant authorization for it, and feeling per(Continued on Page 4 Col. 71 GOOD COMMISSION Earn serious and related agents by selling for cash our extensive line of Greeting Cards. Send $1.50 for samples, which we will return upon receipt of your orders of $20.00 or more. NOVELTY CARD CO. CAYEY, P. R. ÜSÉ Zl-O-DINE DENTAL CREAM
THE ODFELIC ORDER SEND A MEMORIAL TO THE GOVERNOR M The District Grand Lodge Number 41 of the Oddfelic Order has addressed the following memorial to the Governor of Puerto Rico: San Juan, P. R. October 14, 1929. Hon. Theodore Roosevelt. Governor of Puerto Rico, San Juan, P. R. Sir: In the name and on behalf of the District Grand Lodge No. 41, Grand Order of Odd Fellows in America, which governs the 55 lodges scattered throughout the territory of this Island of Puerto Rico, we have the high honor to bring to your attention the present MEMORIAL which contains a synthesis of the public activities of our Institution on the Island and which also reflects the distressing situation of the middle class, undoubtedly the most suffering of all. Perhaps it is convenient to clarify that your invitation to send suggestions from all sectors that offer a remedy to a great part of the evils that afflict us, has motivated the present writing, which has no other purpose than to offer Your Honor the highest spirit of cooperation in the work to be carried out shoulder to shoulder. > Our Order, in addition to its ritual institutions, maintains several public libraries, of which the one in Aguadilla is the most notable. In some localities and to ward off the evil of unemployment, it maintains a fund of aid to the sick, which has to alleviate many of those depressed by misfortune. UNEMPLOYMENT As V. H. has so well pointed out in the Inaugural Message, the (Continued on page 12, Col. 2)
HOOVER PLANS TO COME TO PTO. RICO AT THE BEGINNING OF THE YEAR ■ M .
"To learn for himself the situation."-Thus Iglesias records in a letter ; ■ . ---~ M - - -
The following letter was sent from the United States to Mr. Prudencio Rivera Martinez by Senator Santiago Iglesias: October 23, 1929. Mr. Prudencio Rivera Martinez, President Free Federation, San Juan, P. R. Dear Colleague: I arrived from Toronto, Canada, yesterday, after having attended the Convention of the American Federation of Labor, which was undoubtedly one of the most enthusiastic and lively that had been held for many years. Representatives of the Central Government of Canada, of the Province of Ontario and especially of the Municipality of Toronto along with other personages took a very active part in the accomplishment of the grandiose program which was carried out during the nine days of sessions that the Convention was in session.* Speeches were delivered, besides the President of the Toronto Labour Council, by the Mayor, the Minister of Labour, the Speaker of the Legislature, the President of the National Railways of Canada, the Commander of the American Legion, the Fraternal Delegates from England and many other labour notabilities, who, without being representatives of the convention or of labour, affirmed their full sympathies and agreements with the principles and doctrines of the "American Federation of La-
bor". The high points of the Convention were, among others, the discussion of the problems of organizing the workers of the Southern States, the discussion of the application of "injunctions" in strikes, the speech delivered by the Premier of the Southern States, the speech of the President of the United States, the speech of the President of the United States, the speech of the President of the United States, the speech of the President of the United States, and the speech of the President of the United States. If speech delivered by the English Labor Premier McDonald, the causes of unemployment, the introduction of new machinery and its consequences. It is impossible to deal in this letter with the various and momentous matters that came before the consideration of the Convention. This I will do with some time, since it will serve to enlighten the conscience of the workers of Puerto Rico. I will now speak more directly of the island. I received your letters of September 30, October 3 and 10 accompanying me with clippings from the newspapers EL MUNDO and the "Porto Rico Progress" containing the program and inaugural address delivered by Governor Roosevelt upon his arrival and the opinions which were made public by responsible labor leaders and political directors of all shades. The exposition you make of Governor Roosevelt's speech, of its words, significance and substance has the value of a very accurate and comprehensive critical judgment, with which I am in complete agreement. You enter the Ccntinued on p. 6, coL C
"REPRESEN s TANT GARCIA MENDEZ WASTES HIS TIME" ■ ' By employing redundant arguments and phraseology," says Mr. Barceló L M -
1 Mr. Barceló delivered yesterday to ■ the press the following "statement" - which refers to the manifestations made in EL MUNDO by the Representative to the House Mr. Miguel A. García Méndez: "I repeat, although Representative García Méndez does not like it, and I do not wish to enter into an endless controversy with any person, especially when dealing with a matter that has already been so much debated, as Mr. Vizcarrondo stated that the appointment was made after having officially communicated to the School Director the reasons why his recommendation was not approved, and that it was made directly in view of the fact that no new recommendation or proposal was made in favor of another can- n Alidato. As to the other case, Mr. Vizcarrondo alleged that the Department has not made any appointments, limiting itself so far to disapproving the School Director's proposal. HOUSE RENTALS I wish to take houses for rent. Houses, apartments and rooms of all prices for rent. San Juan, Puerta de Tierra. Santurce. Inquire with Rafael Rojas Lozano, telephone 673 green, Santurce.
I am referring to the pretension that the Republicans of Tous Soto and their new allies have of keeping the name and the symbols of the "Union of Puerto Rico" Party and thus destroying the personality of the same. And I repeat and maintain that the opinion that the Attorney General has recently issued in relation to this, is limited exclusively to the only question that was presented to him, that is, the substitution of the name of a Party for the name that another Party has been using; and from this point of view, I admit and repeat that the opinion is correct and in accordance with the law, and reaches, of course, the Union Party of Puerto Rico, whatever position it has occupied before and occupies in the present, "To which the opinion ■of the Attorney General does not reach, we repeat (Continued at 20 Col 3) AUCTION On Wednesday, the 8th day of November at two o'clock in the afternoon, the auction of the pledges due and not renewed by their owners will take place at the Loan House of F. Burgos & Co, Allen No.55. This will serve as notice to Interested Persons and to those who wish to purchase, for their use or business, garments for less than half their prices.
PHILIP EL KOURY'S "THE HOPE" GREAT PRICE REDUCTION 5c. ■ 10c. - 25c. - 50c. - $1.00 - - . Next to our move to San Francisco St., corner San Justo, (former site of La Cafetera) we have made a GREAT PRICE REDUCTION, in all our items for Ladies, Gentlemen and Children, and in Perfumery, Garments, Earthenware, Glassware, Hardware, Kitchen Utensils, Toys and our own items for Christmas gifts; and thousands more items at prices never seen before. DON'T MISS THIS OPPORTUNITY. BUY TODAY AT "LA ESPERANZA" FORTALEZA 58 FORTALEZA 60 San Juan, P. R.
Oatmeal H-0 The most tasty and nutritious. Cooks in 2 to 3 minutes. Packed in cans of 26 OUNces PRUEBELA. Suers, by L. VUlamil & (Jo. San Juan, P. R. Exclusive Agents. FOR SALE Good business in production 35 crossbred and American cows in production mostly, 4 oxen, one wagon, six crossbred heifers and Ford wagon for milk transportation; leases stable with Health license; water, electric light, yerba mate machine, 40 or more ropes of land with yerba de Elefante in abundance. For information please call Tel. 57 or Box 471, Río Piedras, P.R.
DEAFNESS The Jubilee of Light is over and the most important thing now is the 25th Anniversary of the */J5i ACOUSTICON (the most perfected and efficient hearing aid that exists in the world). Where others fail, the ACOUSTICON succeeds. We are in the most determined CRUSADE AGAINST DEAFNESS. Be one of our soldiers. Avoid being laughed at by answering one thing for another. Come and try the ACOU8TI- i. CON without any obligation. It is FREE to try, and you will feel again the delights of hearing. Payment facilities are given. Exclusive Agent for Puerto Rico, Santo Domingo and Virgin Islands: R. ORTIZ OLAYA Calle San José No. 3. (In front of "El Mundo"). Telephone 535. Box 1518. San Juan, P. R. A tube of Denial Cream ZI-O-DINE will be given to any person who sends me the name and complete address of four deaf persons. J
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC As of this date the amount of the play of a combination in tickets in the pool of our racetrack, will be distributed as follows: Value of a combination $0.25 Value of the printed ballot 0.02 Island tax 0.01 Total $0.28 Hato Rey, P. R., Nov. 1, 1929 LAS MONJAS RACING CORPORATIONF. E. ARANDES Manager. DR. D. BIASCOECHEA DISEASES OF THE STOMACH AND INTESTINES. CROSS 13 HOURS: 2 to 5 ■ TELEPHONE 684
We retire from the branch: ™ AJ a S M enos S del P costo ONES La rm P (>rial l A Mr/INUo DEL LOMO - allen esq. san justo.
"WE WOULD BE VERY PROUD IF WE COULD GET CLOSE" M
"To the pure Republicans, as Mr. Barceló approached the pro cedent elements of the same party," says Córdoüa Dáüila M
The Resident Commissioner in Washington, Don Félix Córc'.ova Dávila. authorizes the following "statement": "I have read the article dedicated to me by "La Democracia" with the title "VIVIR PARA VER". "For that newspaper, inspired and supported by Mr. Barceló, the citizens who have remained faithful to the Alianza Portorriqueña, we are the men of betrayals, apostasies, Machiavellianism, conspiracies, living forces and so many other things created by the hot and atrabiliary imagination of the Supreme Pontiff of the unionist dissidence. "And adds "La Democracia", that is to say, Mr. Barceló, that the men of the Alliance "by dint of rolling down the slope of their ridiculous actions have already reached the last rung of the ladder of moral degradation in a policy that only obeys the threatening solitude of the dollar and that is inspired by the hatreds and ill-compressed grudges that are stirred up in the narrow circle of a personalism directed almost exclusively against the President of the Union". "We must agree, if we are to be impartial, that this language is recommended for its delicacy, elevation and culture. Moral degradation, threatening insolence, idiosyncrasy, conjulosity, rancor, here is an excellent sample of the discredited and worn-out vocabulary of "La Democracia" and Mr. Barceló. "In the chosen lexicon of these two entities that are confused into one, there is no personalism, no passions, no rehcotes, no prejudices against the men of the Alliance who were yesterday Mr. Barceló's co-religionists. These are phrases of love, harmony, and fraternity, aimed at the union of the Puerto Rican family, which the Supreme Pontiff of the desidency preached with so much fervor in past days and which he continues to defend today, in his character as the only apostle, by means of the evangelical phrases that we have had the bad taste of transcribing. "In truth we must be pious to overlook the '-'erzas vivas and insolences 'ú dollar, since ectas sew not fsbieran be written without blushing in the periodical that inspires Cr.
the newspaper that inspires Mr. Barceló. It would be legitimate to say that the Unionist dissidence made every possible effort to attract Eduardo Giorgetti, Jenaro Cau H .ño and other financiers who militate in the Alliance. But the fact is that Jenaro " niño, and Giorgetti and Ruiz Soler, when they follow Barceló, turn out to be disinterested, patriotic and even radical men, and when they move away from their former boss, they become selfish, reactionary, enemies of Puerto Rico and representatives of the living forces. The logic of "La Democracia" and of Mr. Barceló, serves to convince the foolish, but not the men who know how to judge the acts that take place in our public life and come to the knowledge of the truth. "The article of "La Democracia", that is to say of Mr. Barceló, constitutes, a catilinaria with 1 . the republicans in general. "La Democracia" is alarmed because, according to it, sj has held in Mayaguez a meeting, for the purpose of fostering an understanding with the men of the Pure Republican Party, "La Democracia" takes for true a version which was published in a Mayaguez paper, and, assuming that we favor an understanding with the distinguished compatriots who figure in the Historical Constitutional Party, tells us that we have lost all notion of truth and justice. "Do not be alarmed "Democracy". Nosotr-: if we nourish the hope of extending our fraternal hand to members of other parties, we do nothing more than follow the pattern set by Mr. Barceló, when he preached fraternity and concord among all Puerto Ricans. "In the assembly of San Germán, Mr. Barceló joined the Puerto Rican Republicans, called them brothers and co-religionists, opened his arms and his heart to them and maintained with them the most cordial relations until the unfortunate moment when they raised the flag of a dissidence that has no possible justification, that lacks precedents in the annals of our political history, that does not challenge a healthy criticism and that has left the basic principles of our political history in tatters.
F PADIN - //EXTRAORDINARY.''.'' All Existence Discounted - // TRUE WINS!!! - VISIT US BEFORE YOU BUY ¡I _ GONZALEZ PADIN COMPANY
BEGAN TO VENTILATE THE "INJUNCTION".
. Ponce School Director's injunction against the Commissioner of Instruction. M The hearing of the injunction case filed by the School Director of Ponce, Ledo. Rafael Arjona Siaca, against the Insular Commissioner of Public Instruction, Mr. Juan B Huyke As our readers know, since the lawsuit has been published in its entirety, this lawsuit is about resolving the scope of the Commissioner's authority to disapprove proposals for teacher appointments, and to directly make such appointments. The plaintiff alleges that in two specific cases, to which the lawsuit refers, the Commissioner has exceeded his powers. On the day set for the hearing of the motion for preliminary injunction, Ledo. Arjona Siaca, plaintiff, and on behalf of the Commissioner, Assistant Attorney Ledo. Manuel Rodríguez Serra, who filed a preliminary objection, answer and a brief stating the reasons why, in his opinion, it was not appropriate to issue the preliminary or final injunction. The preliminary objection gave rise to a long debate between both counsel, which was very interesting due to the issues raised. Mr. Rodriguez Serra stated, at the beginning of his response to the oral arguments of the plaintiff, that although it was already a custom of the Court to submit by written pleadings the questions of law because of the overwhelming number of matters pending before the Court, he was very pleased to contend orally. it was very pleasing to him to contend orally, even at the risk of occupying too much of the Honorable Judge's time, with a Young lawyer who has ceased to be a beautiful promise and is now a brilliant reality, who, in the present case, moved only by civic interest, was promoting, at his own expense, this litigation involving questions of public law. The debates continued until 1 about seven o'clock in the evening and the ' case remained pending the presentation- ' certain evidence to be offered by the de' mandante. The Deputy Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Francisco Vizcarrondo was present during the hearing, and in the afternoon hours was called to testify as a witness, expounding in detail the official acts of the Department relating to the two appointments on which the cause of action is based. In the case of the teacher seño-