ELMlNDO
22 p¿ g ín
22 Pages Ctvs.
DAILY
THE MORNING
Year XI.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
PuldiaUod "me tlitriboUd .ndet potan No SOI sstaisad U" 4" " S, 1817, on füa at the Poet Office at 8an Juan Porto Rico By arSet of the President, a. S. Bur Jasen Fostmortet Genera, Enterad m second el*"" matter, fe'jruary SI ISlft at the Poet Offtee *t Ban Juan Porto Blco. (United States of "north*) under the det at march s. 187".
Saturday, April 1 3, 1929.
Number 3348,
BILLS SIGNED BY THE GOVERNOR
M Two of them related to the Insurance Law M The Governor has signed the following bills: P. of C. 63, entitled: "An Act to amend Section 11 of the 'Act establishing the procedure for eviction suits and fixing rules for appeals in this class of suits,' approved March 9, 1395, and for other purposes". P. S. 131, entitled: "An Act to amend Sections 61 and 62 of Act No. 66, entitled 'An Act providing for the incorporation of insurance companies in the country, to regulate the insurance business in Puerto Rico, and for other purposes', approved on March 13, 1395, and for other purposes. and for other purposes', approved on July 16, 1921, as said provisions were amended by Section 1 of Act No. 14, entitled 'An Act to amend Act No. 66 approved on July 16, 1921, known as the 'Puerto Rico Insurance Act', approved on August 29, 1923, and for other purposes". P. S. 209, entitled: "An Act to amend section 4 of Act No. 6, entitled 'An Act providing for the necessary for the regulation of the insurance business in Puerto Rico, approved July 16, 1921, and for other purposes".
CHEVERE SPECIAL SATURDAY Lechón Asado - Pollos al Oven Baked Chicken Menudos de Pollo. SUNDAY Lcchón Asado - Caldo Gallego Caldo Gallego - Pollos Dorados al natural. Tel. 1955 -Santurce.
Representatives Garcia Mendez. ?lnglade to Gonzalez explain Why they gave their Doto to the budget.
And why they have resigned as members of the House Finance Committee.
When the House of Representatives voted last night on the P. of C. 70 'Budget) Mr. Miguel Angel García Méndez, ra. dictated in the Secretariat the following explanatory vote, to which Mr. Pedro E. Anglade and Mr. Angel González, members co. I have voted in favor of the proposed Budget as it was finally submitted to the House for consideration, and I made the effort to obtain the vetoes of the resigning members of the Finance Committee of this Body, for two fundamental reasons: "it.- Because, as a member of said Finance Committee, I understood and understand that my vote should not be an obstacle to the approval of the bill, in order to avoid the argument that my vote was a true reflection of my disagreement with the practical disavowal of our opinion, informed by the attitude of the Committee's members, and that my vote should not be an obstacle to the approval of the bill.I was informed by the attitude of the House through several members of the majority who, on a continuous basis, were in intimate marriages with the minority to make amendments in a festinale way even in the smallest details in the consideration of the same. I never expected a full ratification of our report by a group of such a heterogeneous context and such diverse tendencies, as well as by such a large number of people.
I never aspired to a full ratification of our report by a body of such a heterogeneous context and such diverse tendencies, so difficult to be united and therefore harmonized in the realization of a law coldly and serenely conceived to avert the economic crisis of the most alarming proportions that this suffering people of Puerto Rico has had to face in its history as a people. "2o.-Because, above and beyond my personal desire to comply with the previously established rule of helping with my work and with my vote to stabilize the finances of our Government, and above and beyond my personal ambition to present to our country the example of a serious and conscientious work and to show to the people of Puerto Rico a serious and conscientious work. I understood that it was, and always will be, my duty as an equanimous and serene legislator who knows how to surrender his own principles before the categorical imperative of a situation that implied the alternative of: embracing the reasonably amended opinion and its rationality. The country would be left without a budget oblL gár.dolo to be governed by the one of the year.
RENT Alien No. 69. first half floor high. own rare office of dentist, lawyer or conüsion'sta. Has full balcony to the street- Will inform : Saldaña, Garage Casino, Tel. 2017. WILL BE FREE The person who returns a 11a-vei-o i>erd : do with three large keys des brand "Corbin", two current size keys of the same brand and several more keys. Alien No. 81, 2nd floor, San Juan. P. R.
News LAST DAY "OF THE 98c Grand Sale. Important Notice I am pleased to advise my friends, customers and the general public that I have sold the Home Supplies Co. and have established myself in installment furniture at Ponce de Leon Avenue No. 239, Stop 24-l¡2, telephone 1918 where you will find the furniture you desire at limited prices and with convenience. Cash sales. Special price. ALL NEW - ALL NEW Visit me and you will be convinced. SANTURCE'S HOME FURNITURE by F. A. VELEZ. Why do some rides end so soon I'm sorry, but I have to go home now. I seem to be pursued by the worst luck. I can never have a cook for long. It was the same for me before I used EL MUNDO Classifieds to solve my domestic problems. Now I have nothing to worry about. With one ad I can choose from the many cooks who answer the ads in EL MUNDO.
N INTERESTING CONTEST OF THE NATION
M On Monday evening, April 15, at eight o'clock, there will be a great English speaking contest among the children studying from the fifth to the eighth grade in the various schools of the San Juan district, the auditorium of the Central High School, stop 21, having been selected to hold this event, which I promise will be very interesting. The Parents and Teachers Association of the "Baldorioty da Castro" school is pleased to invite * all parents and the general public to attend this event which will be of great interest since our children will demonstrate their knowledge and skills in their studies of the English language. As we expressed before, the con- ' course will be held next Monday evening at the Central High School and it is expected that the largest possible number of people will attend. Mr. Tomes says, from his desk: "Here are the resContinued on page 12 Col. 7
- TODAY - In the Corner Famous Gentlemen's Cashmere Suits - - - - - ' "7.50 Very Fine Gentlemen's Poplin Suits "15.98 DAMIAN RODRIGUEZ-SACHS&Co. -Suers, by P. SchiraLa ESQUINA FAMOSA Brau corner San Justo
SALDAÑA 78- Allen St. San Juan All kinds of paints and articles of the branch. DOORS - SHUTTERS Paints for automobiles
HOTEL CAPITOL STOP 12-TEL. 1620, SANTURCE. 48 Furnished apartments with private baths. Hot water heater in every apartment. ¿25 - ¿30 - ¿35 - ¿40 - ¿45 - ¿50 per month. HENRY AXTMAYER, Proprietor
FOR SALE A tractor brand RuTñely Oil Pull year and a half use. It is in good es. condition. Brake H. P. 30. Draw Bar H. P. 16 R. P. M. 530. For in. formes: Box "1", Guayama, P. R.
t Fernando Montilla Jiménez INGEN1EF.0 OF THE CITY OF SAN JUAN Died April 12, 1929. His widow Mercedes Montilla Marquez; his children Garita, Olimpia, Miguel Angel and Vinicio; his son-in-law Enrique Collado; The Municipality of San Juan; his brothers, brothers-in-law, cousins and other relatives ask his friends to commend him to God in their prayers and to attend the burial that will depart from the Plaza de Colon at 5 pm today Saturday to the cemetery of San Juan, for which act they will be eternally grateful. Mortuary: 31 Park Street. Meeting place, at Colon Square.
The People's Store. LA IMPERIAL breaks the record for the lowest prices. ANTONIO LEMA & CO. Suits, Shoes, Underwear, Shirts, Socks. - Save money and time shopping at this House. M Alien corner to San Justo
LAC AM ARADEREPRESEM ANTES APPROVED BY A MAJORITY VOTE A BUDGET IN EXCESS OF $10,000.000.
The first matter which was brought to the floor when the House of Representatives resumed its session last night at nine o'clock was the request made telegraphically to all the Heads of Departments of the Island Administration to reply immediately in writing, giving details of all the items included in their respective budgets which had been reported favorably by the House Finance Committee. This request of the House had been agreed upon in the morning session the day before yesterday on a motion by Mr. Eugenio Fernández García. The Chairman instructed the Secretary to report on the replies received. The Secretary explains that neither the Executive Secretary, Mr. Saldaña, nor the Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, Mr. Chardón, nor the Commissioner of Public Instruction, Mr. Huy Ke. have answered the request of the House. He also announces that he has response telegrams from the Audit, the Department of Justice, the Department of the Interior, the Treasury and the Department of Health. As he wishes to
| W REG.U.S.FAT. OFE TMAOt MARK > > L / i Unrivaled tonic for people of all ages ■ i * iMB P° r< l ueunen 01 sucom P° s i c ión Im alunen- I ■ ticias properties of RICE, and BARLEY with those vígori- I ( I I zantes of LUPULE. It is of inestimable value to 1 W ' U|L J | V l, "¡il 1 UiM,yU ■BErroBÍ nursing mothers. Our brand contains only 1-10 of 1% alcohol. X icíu°dprepa The lower the proportion of alcohol, mayoI res ene^c^os the child receives in its breastfeeding. Manufacturers: ANHEUSER-BUSCH. St. Louis, Mo. V . Atente" for Puerto Rico KÓRBER COMPANY, INC. SAN JUAN, PORTO RICO
94 ALL items we expose to the public during the American Mattress Pads _ . "GOLD STRIPE" 2.00 to 94C. Above 94C. Ladies' Stockings. DIAS Frisas amer ¡ canas SEDA SUPERIOR 2 pa- SABADO 12 Superiores a 94C" .... MONDAY 14 Men's Shirts" Ladies' Stockings _ . good at M4C COTTON 7 pairs at 94C. TUESDAY 15 Calldad bUeM ' COMBINATION WEDNESDAY 16 ban ° 94c. of 1 Khaki shirt _ . , ... i . . Q4r" will be made to and 1 flannel shirt, a C. , nt ai ***- 94c. no matter Vest and Bloomers to Q4c Suitcases from ¿1.50 to 94C price " , , , , , * current. Fine handkerchiefs 1-1¡2 twelveFine handkerchiefs 2 dozen naJ po r 94C ALCOHOLATE PORTO RICO, 3 BOTTLES PER 94c. Briefcases of ¿2.00 per 94c. Floor Scrubbers. 3 po" 94c. BAY RUM BIG 60, 7 bottles for 94c. i, CALCE 1 INES SUPERIO 'ES One dozen for 94c. Endless more items - SEIZE IT DON'T FORGET TO VISIT US DO IT NOW - CRUZ 12 - CASALDUC & CASALDUC SAN JUAN, P. R.
Atlas Line Car Service between San Juan and Ponce, has moved its office to San José No. 14, in front of the Cathedral. Tel. 78, San Juan, Tel. 1936 Santurce. FOR SALE Packard Roadster, late model, with only a thousand miles driven in San Juan. Brand new. Box 98, Hato Rey, P. R. Lost Mouthpiece . A "Dunlip" brand nozzle has been lost. The front part is black, and the back part is silver. Will be rewarded to whoever delivers it to the "Industry Company" of Santurce, Marina. We have TODAY on dock Danish Portland Cement 'White Bear' at limited price KORBER & CO., Inc San Juan, P. R.
M This motiüa the resignation of Several of the members of the majority of the Treasury Committee and of Mr. Rossy of the minority M
In the House there is a few minutes of agitation because none of these telegrams explain the details requested, but only express the need for some items to be included, due to the needs and alternatives of the service. Several representatives rise simultaneously to ask to speak and the President has to use his gavel. Mr. Dones proposed that the Commissioners be summoned to appear in person, under contempt of court. (The Commissioners of Finance and Agriculture and Labor attend the session). Mr. Fernández García explains that this does not belong to the practices of representative government and that it is only in use in other European countries where the parliamentary system is in force and where the cabinet is a direct product of the Parliament. Mr. Dones cites the precedent of the appearance of the Commissioner of Agriculture before the Island Senate and that of another civil servant.
2 and 8 bedroom apartments for rent, rivers. Living room, dining room, kitchen, and bathroom, from $15 to $25. In the Rora building, Borinquen Avenue, William corner, Loíza Street No. 247 and Bolívar Avenue, in front of Plaza Muñoz Rivera. Information: Rafael Rojas Lozano. Avenue B No. 9 Hipódromo Vie. jo. Phone 673 green, Santurce.
COFFEE ROASTING EQUIPMENT I sell roaster and grinder of the best brand and other equipment. All is like new. Inform Box 336 Río Piedras.
THEGOVERNOR CALLS THE LEGISLATURE'S ATTENTION TO THE
M Toward the revision of the Puerto Rico Codes M The Governor of Puerto Rico sent the following special message to the Legislature yesterday: ' Gentlemen of the Legislature: "You have before you to act and approve the report of the Committee on the revision of the Puerto Rico Codes. The matter is of such importance that I trust that all the Codes ready for action at this time will be acted upon. "If any of the Codes require more extensive preparation, it would be better that a special committee be appointed to complete the work and submit those not now acted upon, either to a special session, if one is called, or & the next regular session of the Legislature." H. M. TOWNER, Governor. fiscal above, or pass over the disallowance received in order to spare the Legislature of which I tormo part the ridicule of appearing before the People who dele, gated their powers by expressing to them their de. derisory de. rrota in not being able to pass a budget, whatever may be the character and cantfa of it. The dictates of my conscience in the face of duty thus made a difficult compromise with the mandate for
MORE TELEGRAMS ON THE PROBLEM OF INSTRUCTION
M Raised within the new island budget M We continue to receive telegraphic dispatches on the problem of instruction raised in the Legislature within the budget: Lajas. EL MUNDO, For the Legislature, San Juan. The students of sixth, seventh and eighth grades respectfully ask our legislators not to approve the bill that suppresses Manual Arts and Domestic Science because they understand that these subjects benefit the Puerto Rican home. 150 STUDENTS. Lajas. Continued on pg. 13 -col. 3 ni's principles and desires, and the latter surrendered to the former' in genuflection accepting the good name and dignity of our Cá. niara. "However, it should not be understood that the vote, which was essential to diluc'dar the situation before constitutes a rectification of rules or even a remote consent of the unconsulted attitude of some other comrades of the majority that we have already said joined the nrnoria po. níendo in serious danger the series (Continued on page 5, col 5.