zJJBSkv elmíndo
- 20® 3*-
2O !,,, " 3 fe. J
DAILY
THE MORNING
Year XI.
i Pnbliahed iu diitribaud aad.t peralt ■". 891 wta.di "d Art of O.lobor ", 1*17, a ffl, u Ifa Fort Office rt San . Juan, Porto E'co. By order of the Preaident, A. 8. Bnrlrt "n Porta "*" O*"*" Bntorod aa second olaea matter, fetenary Si I 1919 at the Port Office at San Juan, Porto Rico. (United State, o f America) under the Art of march >, 1879. -
| Saturday, January 19, 1929. )
■ ■ ■ | Number 3266<
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
THE "UNION OBRERA CENTRAL" DEFINES ITS ATTITUDE WITH RESPECT TO THE NEXT ISLAND BUDGET
AND AGREES TO OPPOSE AFFECTING THE SANITARY SERVICE AND INSTRUCTION _M Offers its good offices to the owners of small farms near the Rehabilitating Industrial Commission.
The following official information has been delivered to us at the offices of the Free Federation concerning the last meeting of the Central Labor Union: "At half past eight o'clock in the evening, January 16, 1929, the Assembly of officers and delegates of Unions affiliated to the Central Labor Union of San Juan was held. The table was constituted as follows: President, Rafael Alonso Torres;. Recording Secretary, Fran cigco Paz Gránela; Financial Secretary, José Ma. Torres; Marshal, R&endo C. Santiago. - The organizations were represented as follows: SAN JUAN "Union de Carpinteros number 1450," by Jose C. Menendez, Rosendo C. Santiago and Manuel Garcia Santiago.
"Unión d" Tipógrafos número 478", by Rafael Alonso. "Union of Barbers number 602", by José J. Monclova and Rufino Andino Pilliche. "Unión de Pintores número 550", by José Ma. Torres. "Unión de Empleados Federales número 222", by Alejandro Rubio; "Unión de Empleados de Correos | número 1070", by Rafael V. Cin-j trón. "Unión de Carteros No. 869", by Nicolás Ortiz. PUERTA DE TIERRA "Unión de Tabaqueros No. 460", by Francisco Paz Gránela, José Rodríguez Piñeiro, Florencio Cabe lio and Manuel Ortega. Continued on page 5-col. 6 EXPERT WATCHMAKERS will repair your watch, for only $1.00 at FELIX LOPEZ JEWELRY , All guaranteed. Any repair: $1.00.
Messenger One needed who knows shorthand in English and Spanish. Contact ALONSO RIERA & CO. Tetuan 60 San Juan
PURCHASE an im. pr. shop. Address your proposition before Feb. 1, 1929, to EUGENIO CORNIER P. O. Box 546, Ponce, P, R.
Strategic commercial point for any business, spacious premises on the first floor, with windows to the street, and two upper floors, prepared for warehouses and offices. IT HAS ELEVATOR Inform: JOSE GONZALEZ PADIN Telephone 860, Santurce.
NOTICE We communicate to our supporters and the general public that we are definitely installed in our new location, Alien 74 ?♦ Million &Co" Sacs,
The new HUDSON has arrived!!! The new 1929 HUDSON * is the most genuine exponent of the new ideal in automobiles. It represents in all its greatness the legitimate aspiration of the motorists; Comfort - Smoothness - Power - Economy and all at a price that does not allow comparisons. SEE IT - TEST IT SlNIll CO1. PIIZODIUMIIED SAN JUAN.
CONGRESSIONAL REHABILITATION COMMISSION CONSULTS WITH RED CROSS DIRECTORS.
M This employed during the past week 35, 957 workers M At the headquarters of the Red Cross we have been informed of the 1 following in relation to the work being carried on in the coffee regions. During the past week the number of employees in the cleaning of the coffee farms has increased considerably. The increase has surpassed the estimates of the directors of this work since it was expected that only 25,000 men would be employed weekly. The number of checks issued however indicates that 35,957 men were employed. The number of checks issued reached the sum of $123,000, which considerably improved the precarious state of our campesino. We were further informed that an extensive conference had been held at the Red Cross offices between the committee sent to distribute the funds appropriated by Congress and the officers of the Red Cross. This conference took effect the day before yesterday morning and Messrs. Ridley, Warburton, and Redpath, representing the Secretaries of War, Agriculture, and Treasury, respectively, were present. They were exchanging impressions with Mr. Reckord, Director of the Red Cross works, Assistant Director T. J. McCarty, and Messrs. Ernest J. Swift, Director of the Department of Insular and Foreign Relations, and Howard J. Simons, Director of the
Important Dunlop rubber is distributed in Ponce by Don Eugenio Rodríguez López, Calle Estrella No. 3, Ponce, Puerto Rico. VISIT.
Girls NEEDED as student nurses' Miramar Santurce Clinic.
Spacious offices for rent at Tobacco Palace. Will inform: ALONSO, RIERA ¿ CO. San Juan.
Office clerk needed with experience and general knowledge of railroad operation, operation and maintenance. The Fajardo Development Co., Fajardo, Puerto Rico.
"IT IS NOT TRUE THAT THERE ARE CONFLICTS BETWEEN THE MAYOR AND THE LOCAL ALLIANCISTA COMMITTEE" Í
M "I joined the Alliance in good faith and I am not going to put myself in front of the local body of our Collective": Todd.
To interview yesterday the Mayor of San Juan, Mr. Roberto H. Todd, we had to wait in the reception room of the Municipal House for no more than two hours, because in spite of the fact that the Chief Executive of the city kindly agreed to receive us, it was not possible to spend a few moments alone with him because of the enormous avalanche of aspirants to public offices that still continues to invade the Municipality, and who wish to be heard by the Mayor. What impression do you have for the press regarding the first days of your administration as Mayor for the Alianza Portorriqueña," we asked him. "I am in glory," answered Mr. Todd, "I feel I am in the Department of Statistics and Accounts of the American Red Cross. The latter two are in Puerto Rico on an inspection trip and as such attended the meeting held. The representatives of the aforementioned members of the Cabinet were informed about the work that has been carried out by the Red Cross and at the same time took information about the reasons why the Red Cross considers the aid to the coffee growers as an emergency. The purpose of this conference was to orient themselves as to the plan to be followed, since these officials must have information from those sources that have been in close contact with the farmers in the areas most affected by the storm.
happy and content. It is not true that there are conflicts between the Mayor and the Local Allied Committee as has been commented by someone. The only thing that happens is that the Mayor cannot do as the son of God who multiplied the loaves and fishes and turned water into wine. I would like to take this opportunity of your visit to tell you that I have no animosity, hatred or rancor towards Mr. Eduardo López Tizol, who was listed as a candidate for Municipal Secretary. It is true that the Local Allied Committee recommended him only for the aforementioned position, but the Municipal Assembly, with perfect right, recommended two more candidates. You know that the Municipal Secretary is at the same time Secretary of the Municipal Assembly, a position of absolute trust that must be filled by the candidate who has the endorsement of the Municipal Assembly to whose body he is intimately linked. When I received the letter from the Local Committee dated January 13 recommending Mr. López Tizó! for said position, I submitted it to the Municipal Assembly on the 14th in an informal meeting I held with it to discuss various matters. I asked him for his opinion regarding the aforementioned election. I said that if the Assembly endorsed and endorsed said candidate, I would have no objection to appointing him. members of the Municipal Assembly, and that I would have no objection to appointing him.
Chamber of Commerce of Ponce CONVOCATION All associates and friends, commerce, industry, agriculture, banking and businessmen in general of this city and towns of the South are hereby summoned to the General Assembly that has been set for Sunday, January 20, 1929 at NINE IN THE MORNING. ORDER OF BUSINESS:- 1- Reading of the Minutes of the Constituent. 2- Approval of By-Laws. 3- General Business. 4r-Election of the Board of Directors. Antonio Vicens Rios. Jesús Ma'. Benítez, President. Secretary.
Dr. M. Pujadas Díaz sends us for publication the following article: MY ACTITUDE IN THE ISSUE OF THE BENEFICIAL DIRECTION OF BENEFICENCIA DE SAN JUAN "At no time did I request said post. Neither before nor after the elections did the idea of abandoning the high island post that I currently hold in the Health Department to occupy another municipal post ever cross my mind. Simply because I am doing well there, working with great interest under the competent direction of my esteemed colleagues and worthy Chiefs, Doctors Ortiz and Fernós, and perhaps relatively better remunerated than in any other municipal post that could be offered to me. "The city of San Juan in the representation of its diverse political or ganisms launched my candidacy to the people at an almost unexpected moment for me. And when I was firmly convinced that it had a good atmosphere, that is to say, that the people accepted me, since otherwise I would not be interested in or desire municipal posts, I consulted my political bosses; first Don José Tous Soto and then Don Antonio R. Barceló, on the matter.
- PADIN - For 10 Billetes/ You can buy today a magnificent suit of fine cashmere, worth at least - '20 - It is a batch of a thousand suits that we have just received and we wish to sell them immediately. There are very nice colors in all sizes for Gentlemen and Youths Come Right Away GONZALEZ PAD/N CO., /NC. SAN JUAN PONCE MAYAGÜEZ
"I NEVER APPLIED FOR THE POSITION OF SAN JOAN WELFARE DIRECTOR".
Says Dr. M. Pujadas Díaz, explaining "1 intervention in this matter M
"Don Pepe immediately made my candidacy his own and endorsed it to Don Antonio as his only wish in the municipality of San Juan. Thus "e ex presó don Pepe in letter to don An tonio: - "Dear don Antonio; -I recommend to you with true encarecimiento Dr. Pujadas, whom you know, for the difficult position of Director of Beneficence of San Juan. Pujadas has the endorsement of the committee, of the assembly and, what is better still, the backing of opinion. He fought well in the campaign, he is experienced, prepared and tactful, and I am fully confident that he will be a real success in the job at hand. Thus, it is with genuine interest and out of pure formula that I present Dr. Pujadas as the ideal candidate. Your most affectionate friend, J. Tous Soto". "In my interview with Don Antonio, certainly very cordial, received with that sympathy so common in the man we all admire and love so much, among other impressions that we exchanged mutually, he told me: "Dr. Feznós wishes to remain where he is; Dr. Quevedo Báez will be in charge of school hygiene, which I believe could interest him, and Dr. Pavía only wants his specialty, that is, the position of Urologist". There are four candidates for the position, and the other four are the candidates for the position of Urologist".
$j_50 SHOO OLIMPIC ROYAL THE FACT THAT these two elegant shombre* ros are manufactured by THE ROYAL HAT MFG. C0. Stop 16-112 Santurcs and are offered for sale by us, is the best guarantee that when you buy them, you will receive the fairest value for your money. Swiggett Brothers SAN JUAN
DANISH PORTLAND CEMENT . Special price during your unloading, on the side. Place your order now. ROLAN & TEJEDOR, S. EN C. Telephone: 395-200 P.O. Box! 1356 SAN JUAN.'' ' r \
The repair and reconstruction of public works damaged by the
storm -M
The Congressional Rehabilitation Commission has conferred extensively with the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Guillermo Esteves, regarding the work to be undertaken by virtue of the Bingham-Kiess Resolution for the reconstruction and repair of schools, roads and highways damaged by the San Felipe storm" and for which the Federal Government has already donated the sum of two million dollars to the Island Government. The Congressional Rehabilitation Commission is not authorized to reimburse the Insular Government any amount of money invested by the latter in the repair or reconstruction of schools, highways, bridges or roads damaged by the cyclone. And the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Gui Uermo Esteves, has been extraordinarily active in seeking to have the Congressional Rehabilitation Commission take charge of the work of road maintenance during the period from the date on which said Commission begins its work in Puerto Rico until the end of the current fiscal year, charged to the appropriation made by Congress for the repair of the public works damaged by the hurricane. And we understand that the federal commission will agree to this, in order to avoid that (Continued on page 2 colum '.5)
We need Representatives in each and every town of the Island. Good OPPORTUNITY for the Treasurers, Auditors and Municipal Collectors who have been out of work. Write to M. S. A Co. f Apartado 624, San Juan, P, R.
MEDICAL SURGICAL INSTITUTE INC. CRUZ 28 SAN JUAN TELEPHONE 88 Modern hospital with complete equipment for medical-surgical treatments, including gynecology and childbirth. Laboratory -- X-rays " - Physiotherapy. Very reasonable prices. Dispensary and Office Hours 9 A. M, to 6 P. M. t Doctors Barbosa, Martinez Alvarez and Biascoechea notify the public that they have installed their offices at the INSTITUTO MEDICO QUIRURGICO CRUZ 28 SAN JUAN where they will attend their clients and the public in general, from 9 A. M. to 6 P. M.
> ri proof rated that there is something better than infill GLYCOIODIN f I || | FOR AFFECTIONS of the throat, tonsils, bad breath and in general all diseases of the mouth. EFFECTIVE for cleaning teeth and decongesting gums.