ELMUNDO
20- s 3 ctvs -
DAILY
THE MORNING
Year XI.
San Juan, Puerto Rico.
PubUibed dlrtrfbated ander pemil No. 801 entoeixed bj the act of October 8, 1917, on filo M the Port Office at San Juan. Porto K'eo. By order of the President. Burleson Postmaster Genera, Entered ae second class matter, February SI 1919 at the Poet Office at San Juan, Porto Bico. (United States of America) under the Act of march 3, 1879.
Saturday, January 5, 1929.
| Number 3252.
COLONEL ESTES, WHO COMMANDED THE 65TH INFANTRY REGIMENT IN PDERTO RICO, PROMOTED TO BRIGADIER GENERAL.
He was promoted simultaneously with the new chief of the "Bureau of Insular Affairs".
From the "New York Herald Tribune" we translate the following interesting information concerning Colonel Estes, so beloved in Puer to Rico, and the new head of the Bureau of Insular Affairs, Colonel Parker: WASHINGTON, December 22- Two army colonels were nominated by President Coolid ge for promotion to brigadier general. They were formerly Colonels George H. Estes who will succeed Brigadier General Henry C. Smither and Francis Le J Par ker, who will succeed Major General Frank Me Intyre as Brigadier General and Chief of the Bureau of Insular Affairs. General Smither retires on 1 Jan <-> and General Me Intyre on 5 Jan. Colonel Estes was born at ByPala. Alabama, the year of 1873. He was appointed to the United States Military Academy in 1890. At his graduation in 1894 he was commissioned second lieutenant in the 20th U. S. Infantry Regiment. With this regiment he participated in the campaign of Santiago de Cuba in 1898 and went to the Philippine Islands in January 1899. From December 1914 to August 1917 he was again on duty at the United States Mortar Academy as Treasurer and administrator of the cadets. Temporarily elevated to the rank of Colonel in August 1917 he took command of the National Army's EHgtantfl- Dimition trains at Camp Devens, Massachusetts, where he remained until January 1918 when he was detailed to headquarters and sent to Washington. He organized the headquarters statistics rabe and served as chief and as representative of the War Department in the division of requisitioning.
? *"o ,K ; T * * * * AM i r ,|JLl' í Colonel George H. Estes, promoted to Brigadier General. war sites and industries until August, 1918, when he was temporarily appointed Brigadier General. He then took command of the 35th Brigade of the 18th Division, 7th Division, at Camp Travis, Texas, and commanded that brigade until February 1919, when the Division was demobilized at Camp Upton, New York. "Colonel Estes then took command of the 65th Puerto Rican Infantry Regiment in San Juan, where he remained until April 1928. He was then area chief of staff of the 9th Corps with headquarters at San Francisco, where he is now located. Colonel Estes was awarded a silver star for "heroism in war action against the Spanish forces at El Caney, Santiago de Cuba, cl July 1, 1898". "Colonel Parker was born in Abbeville, South Carolina, on the 24th of Continued on p. 18-col. 3
"I sympathize more than anyone else with the Puerto Rican cause and want it to be aided".
"THE FACT THAT A WOMAN CANNOT READ AND WRITE IS NOT A REASON FOR DENYING HER THE VOTE.
i "Suffrage should be universal and not a privilege of a group or a caste": Iglesias M In answering letters from the island, Senator Santiago Iglesias discusses general problems of a diverse nature. E" the following paragraphs the President of the Socialist Party ex. p< ne his criteria on the debated issue of women's suffrage: "I received your recent letter in which you ask me to provide you with some arguments in favor of the right of women to participate in the responsibility and selfContinued on p. 4-col. 4 "Russell & Co." has already submitted the requested project for the drainage of the Guánica lagoon M The matter was left pending at the last meeting of the "Public Service Commission"'. ■ M The Public Service Commission held an extraordinary meeting on Wednesday, January 2 of the present year, at four o'clock in the afternoon, with the Chairman Mr. Muñoz and Commissioners Messrs. de Hostos, Figueroa, Narváez and Sifre Tarafa in attendance, having considered and resolved the following matters: The minutes pending approval that appeared on this day's calendar were approved. The communication from the (Continued on p. 16, Col. 4) was placed on file.
LAST DAY Ap royeche! Take advantage! GREAT PRICE REDUCTION ON PARIS BAZAR TOYS - THE NEWS
I Government of Puerto Rico j * DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE Property Taxes Bureau. NOTICE TO OWNERS OF AUTOMOBILES Owners of automobiles and other motor vehicles are hereby notified of the duty imposed by law to appear at the offices of the Collectors of Internal Revenue on the Island and at that of the appraisers of " San Juan, Edificio Noa, second floor, to declare their* respective vehicles for 1929-30 tax purposes on or after January 15, within a period not to exceed May 15 next. Those who voluntarily fail to do so after the publication of this notice, shall be denounced for "misdemeanor" and shall incur the maximum fine of one hundred ($100) dollars prescribed in Article 299 of the Political Code. The transfer for sale of such automobiles and other motor vehicles, carried out after January 15, shall not release the person who is present on such date from the payment of the corresponding tax.
EXPRESS IT WITH FLOWERS For the Feast of the Three Kings The most exquisite gift for this day is a box of flowers - mMF. yf Chrysanthemums, carnations, roses, etc. imported from the United States. / ¿gryfágíffá Specialty in Wreaths. Dorothy M. Snedicor PVKLk PROVISION San Juan Hato Rey - Tel. 52 Tel. 72
I cordially wish all my tenants and friends a prosperous and happy New Year. DIOSCOR1DE RIVERA San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., San Juan, P. R., San Juan, Puerto Rico, on January 2, 1929. San Juan, Puerto Rico, ene-J (Announcement).
to that devastated island."
M "But our duty to Puerto Rico in no way threatens the obligation we owe to our fellow citizens."
Said Senator Smith as the Bingham-Kiess resolution was being debated.
We continue to translate from the 'Congressional Record' the debate that occurred in the United States Senate on the fringe of the Bingham-Kiess resolution: "Senator Smith:- Mr. President: other Senators who have spoken on the subject want to imply that my attitude toward the Puerto Rican people is less sympathetic than theirs. I have reason to believe that I sympathize more than anyone else with the Puerto Rican cause because the same misfortune afflicts us both and I want relief to be given to that devastated island. But our duty to Puerto Rico in no way diminishes the obligation we have to our fellow citizens. "I will make the following proposition: If this joint resolution is considered and disposed of, in whatever sense it is done, without the amendment I have proposed, I ask unanimous consent that whatever action the Agricultural Committee takes on the measure I propose to introduce, it will be discussed before the full Senate tomorrow morning at the morning hour. "Senator Watson: How would a parliamentary inquiry affect the regular program of the Se- - * "The Vice-Chairman: If an agreement is reached it will not affect the regular program of the Senate at all. "Senator McNary: It will undoubtedly not affect the regular order if we have an hour off in the morning but no one has yet assured us that we will have that hour during the morning. "Senator Smith: I mean that will be the first matter to be discussed tomorrow; it is entirely immaterial to me whether or not there will be an hour during the morning. "Senator McNary: -In the event of there not being an hour available and another matter being considered was ra ra of this one which we have not yet finished undoubtedly would be an obstacle to the completion of it. I wish to suggest to the Senator that he add in his agreement that we will be in recess from today until 12:00 noon tomorrow.
I would like to suggest to the Senator that he add in his agreement that we will be in recess from today until 12:00 noon tomorrow so that we will have an hour available in the morning. This would also avoid an interruption of the pending business. "The Vice-Chairman:-The reports of the committees would not be in order if a recess were not declared; therefore this convention would interrupt the regular order of the program. "Senator Smith:-I have not understood the orders of the chair. I ask for a repetition of the words which I have not been able to com prise. "The Vice-President:-If the Senate, were declared in recess, what the Senator proposes would interrupt the regular order. The report of a committee would not be in order if the Senate were to recess until tomorrow. If the Senate adjourned until tomorrow then it would not interrupt pending business or regular order in the event of a compromise. "Senator Jones:-Mr. President, I have no objection to the report being received to-morrow and to its going on the Calendar, but I am of opinion that the Senate should have an opportunity to see what the committee reports and recommends, I do not object to its being pre-sessed the day after tomorrow after it has been on the calendar for a day in order that the Senators may have an opportunity to study the report and the decision of the committee. But I am opposed to that unanimous feeling of discussing a measure immediately after it has been reported and before anyone has had an opportunity to study the report and the provisions of the measure. I do not object to the measure being tabled tomorrow, whether or not we adjourn our session, and the report being moved to the calendar. Then I would have no objection to putting it to a vote the day after tomorrow. If the Senator makes his request in these terms I withdraw all my opposition. "Senator Smith:-Perfectly, Mr. Chairman. Then I ask unanimous consent P" Continued on page 19 2nd col.
THE OFFICIAL RESULT OF THE ELECTION IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF OROCOVIS M Challenged before the Cor te of Distritp of San Juan M On the second of the current month Ledo. Bolívar Pagán proceeded to file in the District Court of San Juan a writ of certiorari on behalf of Mr. Manuel Eugenio Betances and others as candidates for Mayor and Municipal Assemblymen of Orocovis, against the Insular Board of Elections. The procedure is based on the fact that elections were not held in the "Cacao" neighborhood of that municipality, where 822 voters were registered to exercise their right to vote. The aforementioned appeal challenges the final tally officially reported by the Insular Board of Elections with respect to the Municipality of Orocovis. TOMORROW THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL OF THE FEDERA CION LIBRE M The workers' problems to be addressed in the next Legislature will be discussed - M-L - Tomorrow the Executive Council of the Federación Libre de los Trabajadores de Puerto Rico will meet, at the invitation of the President, Senator Santiago Iglesias, at the offices of the aforementioned organization in San Juan. At said meeting, numerous questions related to the program to be developed by the Free Federation during the coming year will be discussed and preparations will be made for the campaign to be initiated shortly to intensify the constitution of federations of workers in accordance with their respective professions. Special consideration will be given in tomorrow's meeting to the program that will govern during the Workers' Congress to be held in a few weeks and which will be attended by representatives of all the existing Unions in the country. See ------- . A THOUSAND gifts for gentlemen. A THOUSAND gifts for ladies. A THOUSAND gifts for children. A THOUSAND gifts for babies. All just received and for the most limited oréelos. FELIX LOPEZ JEWELRY
NORTH AMERICAN SCHOOLS SEND DONATIONS FOR PUERTO RICO SCHOOLS M Commissioner Huyke received yesterday from West Virginia $1.421.73 M The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Juan B. Huyke, has received a donation from students of the higher schools of the United States, who on this occasion of misfortune for Puerto Rico have also been able to demonstrate the humanitarian sentiments that the nation has put of rélffevé. Mr. Huyke informs us that he had received through various channels to help the work of the schools some donations. Yesterday, through the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, he received a check for $1,421.73 donated by the students of the West Virginia schools. In addition, donations of small amounts have been received directly to the Department of Instruction and through the President of the Puerto Rico Teachers Association. The Huyke is grateful for this beautiful gesture of the children of the United States who have once again demonstrated the spirit of compa. The Huyke is grateful for this beautiful gesture by the children of the United States who have once again demonstrated the spirit of compa< nerismo and enthusiasm to give to their friends in Puerto Rico, our school children. Government of Puerto Rico DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE Property Tax Bureau. NOTICE TO TAXPAYERS You are hereby reminded that since January 15, 1929, is the date set by law for closing the list of assessments to be used to levy the taxes corresponding to the fiscal year 1929-30, the Department maintains its rule of not considering requests for transfer, reassessment or subdivision of property, for tax purposes for said fiscal year, which are filed after that date. San Juan, Puerto Rico, Jan. 2, 1929. Juan G. GALLARDO, Treasurer of Puerto Rico (Announcement)! For Sale One praótically new Dodge Sedan quick sale $550.00 Party leaving for States Tuesday. Tel. S. J. 932, P. 0. Box 1403 San Juan.
We are going out of business. We liquidated the stock of "LA HIJA DE * BORINQUEN" in our warehouse next door, entering from Calle de la Cruz. Everything cheaper than at cost. A. M. SOMOZA INC.
$J50 $000 OLIMPIC ROYAL THE FACT THAT these two elegant hats are manufactured by THE ROYAL HAT MFG. CO. Stop 16-1J2 Santurce and are offered for sale by us- . others, is the best guarantee that when you buy them, you will receive the fairest value for your money. Swiggett Brothers SAN JUAN
SOCIEDAD ESPAÑOLA DE AUXILIO MUTUO Y BENEFICENCIA DE PUERTO RICO NOTICE Finding vacancies in this Institution for two positions of Medical In- tectioners, we hereby advise those interested, that applications to fill the same may be addressed to the undersigned for his opor- : tuna consideration. M, SOTO, Vice-President.
ATTORNEY GENERAL BEVERLEY INSTRUCTS MUNICIPAL AND; JUSTICES OF THE PEACE AND CLERKS AND MARSHALS OF DISTRICT AND MUNICIPAL COURTS.
To cooperate in certain work of the "Industrial Commission" M
The Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Mr. James R. Reverley, addresses the following circular to the Municipal Judges, Justices of the Peace and Clerks and Marshals of the District and Municipal Courts "Sirs:- Sections 8 and 9 of Act No. 86 of 1928, entitled "Workmen's Compensation Act", provide, in part, as follows: See. 8.-In the exercise of its duties and powers the Commission is hereby authorized to subpoena witnesses.... and may further avail itself for its investigations "the services of justices of the peace and municipal judges, district attorneys, marshals of the municipal and district courts, etc...." "See. 9.-Upon the written request of the Industrial Commission or any Commissioner thereof, accompanied by the interrogatory and cross-examination, if any, filed in the office of the clerk of the district or municipal court of any district, the court shall make appropriate orders for taking the depositions of witnesses residing in the Island, or abroad, and shall issue subpoenas to any court of another state or of a foreign country, as in any other case pending before such court; and upon the return of said depositions or writs of exhortation, they shall be opened by the clerk of the court which sent the Commission or writ, and said clerk shall place on the back or at the foot of the date on which said depositions or answers to the respondents were received, and the same shall be immediately forwarded to the Industrial Commission." "The Industrial Commission has prepared forms so that the municipal and justices of the peace may assist in carrying out investigations in certain cases. The Industrial Commission will consider all the matters to be discussed in said act and those points to which preference should be given will be lightly discussed. Special attention will be given tomorrow to those workers' problems which should be the subject of consideration at the next session of the Legislative Assembly. For this reason, the Directors of the Free Federation recommend and request the attendance of all the members of the Board of Directors of said organization at tomorrow's meeting. WE BUY RABBITS AND GUYS In large quantities. For immediate delivery 25 rabbits; must be healthy and weigh not less than 3 pounds. Also 50 güiros. School of Tropical Medicine, Stop 3.
"It is the purpose of this center to cooperate in the most efficient manner possible in order that these investigations may be made promptly and in due form. "For the foregoing reasons I direct you, as soon as you receive the above interrogatories, to render as soon as possible the service determined by the above-mentioned articles of the above-mentioned law." Sincerely, James R. BEVERLEY. Attorney General.
THE THEATER BANQUET In Honor of the Allied Candidates Tickets for this event must be obtained in advance, upon payment of the $5.00 fee. After 3 P.M. on Monday, the day of the banquet, the sale of these tickets will be closed. Those persons residing on the island, who intend to attend, should communicate their agreement, preferably by telegraph, to reserve a seat for them. Spectator tickets must also be obtained in advance, although on the same night of the banquet they will be on sale at the box office at the prices of $5 box, $0.50 balcony and $0.25 bleachers. Those interested may contact Mr. Luis Garratón, Alien 77 and telephone 1169, San Juan, or any of the members of the organizing committee. "VICTORY CLUB".
IRON ACANALADO Apollo Just arrived sold at limited prices. MARTINEZ HNOS. & C0. Warehouse No. 8, Marina, SAN JUAN.