THE
34 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
34 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
' DAILY
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVII
Ño liquidate the bonds bought, if I want to liquidate Hitler.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 10, 1945.
Entered u second wave matter. Poet Office, San Juan, Y. B.
NUMBER 10276
RUSSIANS 27 MILES FROM STETTIN - ' MONTGOMERY ENTERS THE SIGFREDO.
"Strike began yesterday in the cane area.
Numerous colonies and central v a r la s are affected CGT and FLT assemblies tomorrow Labor union leaders and Producers express their criteria The general strike agreed upon by the Sugar Union of the CCíT I at the alambica held at the Tea* tro La Perla de Poncé'cm began yesterday, affecting, for the moment, several -central** sugar factories and a large number of charter colonies. The stoppage has not been officially declared aúm but, according to Reports Tedbldo" by the Union and the Aeociación*^^Productores de Azúcar the strike has i spreading throughout the sugar area of the Island. ~~ Tomorrow, Sunday, at ten o'clock in the morning, a conTZVendóir of the unions that make up the Union will be held to hear the report on the negotiations between the Labor Committee of the Sugar Producers' Association and the Sugar Workers' Federation. In this assembly to be held at the Casa Alcaldía, in Caguas, it will be decided whether or not to officially declare said general strike. u , " The Assembly of Pohce agreed that the workers of the Union would go on strike if within ten days from the date on which the CGT is certified as a contracting unit in the plants and colonies which are members of the Association a collective bargaining agreement has not been signed. Discussions between the APA and the Union were abruptly suspended last Thursday* when the producers stated that they were not in a position to accede to the wage increase demands made by the workers "since the industry is losing money". The foregoing, in addition to the opinions expressed by union leaders in the course of the day's meetings, seem to indicate that tomorrow's meeting will approve the strike declaration to take immediate effect. 1 While in Caguas the Union is deciding its course to follow, in San Juan is meeting, jointly, the Insular Council of the Agricultural and Factory Unions of the Free Federation of the Workers of Puerto Rico and the Executive Committee of the FLT. The president of the Council and general secretary of the Federation, Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera, said last night he had called this joint meeting, in which "the situation of the sugar industry will be considered in the light of recent events. Union Communiqué - The Union yesterday authorized the publication of a communiqué which in Jarte says: "In accordance with the inorma*ons we are constantly receiving from different lo* calities, the indignation of the workers upon learning of the refusal of, the- Sugar Produclo- * res Association alleging that they cannot feed a single cent 'in joTnate." has led the great masses of workers to declare a fulminant strike in all the cane fields of Puerto Rico, as a result of which a considerable number of the mills have already been paralyzed." The communiqué refers to several telegrams received yesterday afternoon. From Water(Continued on page 15.)
' Island economy - Coffee industry demands revolutionary change in cultivation.
lot is the third by tefeeor Sol Luis Descartea antlguo professor of economics at te University of Puerto Rko and former aseeor , economteüdet Governor of 1 te lela. In this work he analyzes the author's perspective of the coffee industry, ci- - t* *its possibilities after the war and suggests mo' r - difidaciones in "u operation. The fourth article, "The Commercial and Industrial Outlook" will be published next Monday, by SOL LUIS DESCARTES - The island coffee industry has produced less than what is necessary to supply the domestic market for the last two years. This has been due primarily to weather conditions.
to the weather conditions. But it is good to point out another factor, just mentioned, which even to a lesser degree, has contributed substantially to the coffee shortage: the increase in the demand for coffee beans in the domestic market. The greater economic prosperity during the war years explains the higher consumption on the island. It is to be expected, as I have already said, that this prosperity will continue during the first post-war years. And if we add to this the increase in population we can predict for the next few years a higher consumption of coffee than that calculated to date of 150,000 quintals per annum.
the years preceding it. The large surpluses anticipated, among others by the author of this paper, have not materialized. This does not mean that production in any given year cannot exceed island consumption. This is most likely to occur in this year of 1944-45. But in general the surpluses appear to be of proportions which the industry and the government, given the economic position of the latter, will be able to manipulate effectively. The frequency of crops below consumption and the consequent need to import caté from Santo Domingo during recent years indicate the desirability of creating a public entity to store the surpluses in anticipation of deficiencies in future crops. In synthesis, it is (Continued on page 18)
American soldiers take up positions in Colmar
U.S. infantrymen take up positions in flat trenches outside Colmar in France, shortly before the final advance on the besieged city. An American tank, manned by French soldiers, waits in the background for the attack to begin (Photo Communications Corps, PA distribution).
Muñoz Santaella resigned from the San Juan mayor's office.
Irrevocable resignation he presented it yesterday to Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín Sánchez Vilella is indicated for position Text of the letters that the resigner and the Popular chief crossed The gentleman Carlos Muñoz Santaella will not be the new Administrator of the Capital. Yesterday he addressed a communication to the President of the Popular Democratic Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, resigning the position for which he was appointed on the occasion of the November elections. In his letter to the Popular leader, Mr. Muñoz Santaella informs "that the events that have developed lately in the heart of the Party in San Juan prevent me from assuming the leadership of the Capital Government". Mr. Muñoz Marín, in acknowledging receipt to Mr. Muñoz Santaella, informs him that "your attitude is a source of pride for me, both for the Party to which we both belong and for the surname we both bear." And Mr. Muñoz Marín adds in his reply: "Indeed, the 170,000 inhabitants of San Juan deserve the best possible government from us. Under these circumstances and based on your disinterested motivation, I accept the decision you have made," It was reported yesterday that the determination of Mr. Muñoz Santa "11" is due to his purpose that the inhabitants of the Capital enjoy the benefit of the best government Rosibie without any difficulties of any kind. In the' political circles it was commented yesterday, once the resolution of Mr. Muñoz Santaella was known, that among* other candidates, Mr. Ro(Contlnua on page 15.) has the greatest probabilities of being appointed Administrator of the Capital.
The Treasurer explains that he has not withheld any municipal funds. He says that the Government of the Capital has received to date $250,965.
Expressing that *1 Treasurer ( $622,535 from the Capital Government, c rendered by the Municipal Auditor, Sr. The Union of Workers of the Glass Industry and the workers belonging to the Unified Union of Construction Workers, who work in the Glass Factory of the Development Company, in Guaynabo, will meet jointly on Wednesday of next week to settle the existing differences between both groups and, as we were informed last night, "to form a single union". This agreement was reached, according to information supplied by the Federal Conciliator, Mr. Charles Goldsmith, at a meeting held yesterday afternoon at his offices at La Fortaleza, which was attended by representatives of the two labor unions which have been involved in this jurisdictional controversy. On Thursday night a meeting was held at the offices of Mr. Goldsmith, which continued until the early hours of yesterday morning, and at which it was agreed to hold an election "by consent" among the workers of the Glass Works. At this meeting qstu(Continued on page 18)
of Puerto Rico is not withholding as could be inferred from a Report . Rafael Cabrera Torres, made yesterday dede Hacienda, Ledo. Rafael Buscaglia. According to Mr. Buschglia, "the financial table described is not accurate, since it implies that said amount is in the possession of the Treasurer," "That amount," he said, "represents the balance of some numbers included in the letter-report of Mr. Cabrera Torres to the Capital Administrator, and constitute estimated calculations of what will correspond to the Government of the Capital for the tax receipts already collected, and at no time do they indicate that the Treasurer of Puerto Rico is withholding said amount in cash. Analyzing the numbers contained in Mr. Cabrera Torres' letter," said Treasurer Buscaglia, "we find that up to the month of January 1945, the Island Treasury has collected property taxes for a total of $149,234.36, a figure which breaks down as follows: $100,987.00 from the current fiscal year; and $48,247.86 from previous years. Of this total of $149,234.86, and in order to meet the December 31, 1344 maturities of the public debt of the Government of the Capital, there was no need to apply the amount of $105,597.59, for which the Treasurer of the Capital received only the amount of $42,805.40. To this amount," added Treasurer Buscaglia, "must be added the amount of the check from the loan contracted by the Government of the Capital in December 1944, amounting to $207,328.23, as an advance of contributions. This clearly shows that the Government of the Capital has received to date the sum of $250,965.50, and not $42,805.40 as alleged by Mr. Cabrera Torres. On the other hand, upon receiving the proceeds of the aforementioned advance, it reduces by $147,000.00 what is pending collection because the sum of $60,328.23 has already been applied to account, since said advance will have to be paid from the future income of the Municipality of San Juan; that is, the amount of $622,535.94 which it is alleged "the Treasurer withholds", is reduced to $475,535.94, which is the remaining margin to be collected for the Government of the Capital, by way of property taxes". Unemployment is on the rise on the Island That unemployment is increasing in large proportions in Puerto Rico, is the report rendered upon his arrival in Miami by Mr. Russel Sturgis, territorial representative of the U.S. Department of Labor's Hours and Wages Division, ** who left Puerto Rico a few days ago. Mr. Sturgis informed that "the government is studying plans to place workers in industries and farms". Mr. Sturgis is currently in Washington, where he will remain for a week conferring with officials of the Department of Labor on matters related to the unemployment conditions prevailing on the island.
More units launched into combat
Germans expect Ninth Army to join offensive Move reserves northward First Army is close to overpowering Roer River dams By JAMÍsTmcGLINCY PARIS, 9. (PU) - British and Canadian forces, under the command of'Marshal Montgomery, have penetrated five miles more. The Allied offensive launched yesterday on the northern end of the western front, which German commentators "fear" will be joined "at any moment" by the American Ninth Army, is in full swing. General Montgomery launched into combat new Canadian units in his offensive, which is so far concentrated on a seven-mile front, facing the German Ruhr and the Rhineland, where at least five towns have been occupied. The Anglo-Canadian forces are advancing steadily through the Relchswald forests, southeast of Nlmega, in direct threat on Clava and Goch, sevtenutenal anchorages of the defensive arc of the Sigfredo Line in this sector. Dispatches from the front say that Nazi resistance, though still weak, is increasing by the moment and there are indications that the Germans are moving troops from the south into this sector to contain the threat. Spokesmen for General Mont gomerv say that operations are proceeding satisfactorily and that 1,800 prisoners have been taken so far, among them two Nazi battalion commanders. A German military commentator stated that an attack by the American Ninth Army * along the Roer front can be expected "at any moment"; but added that "the real objective of Montgomery's operations is as yet unknown." The Germans also report that the Canadians are employing artificial fog to cover their movements. Military observers are puzzled by the fact that 24 hours into the operations the Germans have not yet reacted. However, there are reports of feverish movements of Nazi motorized units on the roads leading to Venlo, and it is believed that the Germans are trying to strengthen - at the expense of the Roer front further south - their defenses around Goch and Cleve. Dispatches from the front say that advanced units of Canadians are already less than one (Continued on page 18) One hundred million cigarettes to be distributed January shipment delay allows February quota increase One hundred million cigarettes will be distributed on the Island during the present month by the firms of R. Santaella and Brother, of San Juan, and A. J. Trlstanl. of Ponce, according to official Information authorized yesterday by the Office of Price Administration. Mr. Gilstrap, Territorial Director of said war agency, announced that said firms have been authorized to sell to the trade an additional quota of 200,000 cartons of cigarettes of ten packs each, which corresponded to the January distribution. This distribution could not be made because the shipment did not arrive on time, which deprived the merchants of the Island of receiving the amount that corresponded to each one of them. With the arrival of the shipment, for the present month of February it has increased considerably, since the shipment of 200,000 cartons received by both firms represents 45 percent of the total permissible quota in accordance with the rationing order viKnte that went into effect on January 2 of the current year. In view of the authorization decreed yesterday by the Office of Price Administration, smokers on the island will have available the rationed quota for the month of February, which amounts to 3,000 cartons of cigarettes, plus the 200,000 cartons that were not distributed during the month of January, for a grand total.
The organization of the Sanitation Department is also explained at these meetings and details are given on how to admit patients to the district hospitals, the insane asylum, the anti-tuberculosis sanatorium and other institutions of the Department. So far, according to information supplied yesterday by Dr. A. M. Marchand, Director of the Public Health Division, meetings have been held in Aguadilla, attended by all the mayors except the mayor of Cabo Rojo; and in Fajardo, attended by all the mayors plus the senators and representatives of the District of Humacao. Next Monday, at 2:00 p.m., another meeting will be held at the District Hospital,Arecibo, which is expected to be attended by the mayors of the entire district. On Sunday, the 18th, another meeting will be held at the Ponce District Hospital and on Tuesday, the 20th, at the Ponce District Hospital.
The Sugar Producers Association, through its secretary, Mr. J. M. Rio", has stated its views on the recent strikes in the sugar industry, while" the CGT Sugar Union Convention Committee and the APA Labor Committee held talks on a collective bargaining agreement for the 1945 harvest. As we reported yesterday, the talks between the APA and the Union were "broken off" when the producers stated that they could not agree to the workers' demands for increases in the wage scale. Here is the text of the statements authorized by the secretary of the Association, Mr. Ríos: "The Insular Labor Relations Board, presided over by Mr. Enrique Campos del Toro, decided on September 23, 1944, that an election should be held among the workers of the sugar industry to determine which labor organization had the right to negotiate an Insular collective bargaining agreement with the Puerto Rico Sugar Producers Association. "The Board ordered elections to be held, and the same were held on January 30, 1945, and on the first of February 1, 1945, the Board certified that it was with the General Confederation of Workers that the Sugar Producers Association was called upon to negotiate a collective bargaining agreement with the Sugar Producers Association of Puerto Rico.
Health Department meets Monday with Aguadilla district mayors The Department uses these" meetings to inform the municipal chiefs about the services that the Government can provide them.
The Department of Health has been holding a series of meetings with the island's mayors to explain the Department's plans for the coming year regarding medical assistance and the help offered to the municipalities in terms of medicines, ambulances, doctors and other services.
GENERAL WAINRIGHT TRANSFERRED WASHINGTON, 9. (PU) - Lieutenant General Jonathan "W. Walnrlght, commander of 1 the American" force" when Corregidor surrendered, and 178 Army and Navy officers, have been transferred" by the" Japanese Formo"" to Manchukuo. Bayamon District Hospital. These meetings have been attended by the Commissioner of Shnidld, Dr. Antonio Fernós Iscrn, who has been accompanied by the directors of three divisions namely: Dr. Acosta Velarde, Director of the Medical Service (Contlnued on page 15.)
The APA condemns the outbreaks of strikes that have arisen in the plants.
The secretary of the entity says that they are detrimental to workers and employers. - He points out that faith in the labor agreement can be lost.
to negotiate a collective bargaining agreement. "On February 2, at the invitation of the Sugar Union, the Association's Labor Committee agreed to begin talks with the Union's Committee on the morning of June 5, February. Since then, the representatives of the two parties have been holding consecutive meetings on the draft agreement to be submitted to the Sugar Producers' Association by the CGT Sugar Union. On Thursday, February 8, negotiations continued. "The Committee of the Sugar Union and the Labor Committee of the Association agreed that the peace (Continued on page 15.)
EASTERN FRONT: Russian troops" moved closer to Stettin, while" they began the siege of Frankfurt, Arnswalde and Elbing. Unconfirmed reports" last night said that the Russians had begun a major offensive - against Breslau. WESTERN FRONT: British and Canadian lines have penetrated five miles or so inside the defenses of the Siegfried Line, between the Mom and Bin rivers. There are reports
7 important cities surrounded Nazis believe Russian frontal assault on Berlin city imminent Marshal Zhukov continues preparations The fall of Breslau, capital of Silesia, is expected very soon By MEYER HANDLER MOSCOW, 9. (PU) - The Lusitanian armies moved still closer to Stettin, the vital German Baltic port, while the siege of Frankfurt-on-the-Oder began. ArnSwaldc and Elbing, and unofficial reports last night claimed that they had begun a major offensive against Breslau, which is also almost completely encircled. The Russians advanced nine miles" on Stettin, from which they are separated by only 27 and a half miles, and seized Brallenteln, which is less than nine miles to the southeast of the important railroad center of Stargard. The Soviet high command announced the encirclement of Arnswalde. where 800 prisoners were taken. In East Prussia the Russians* also encircled the port of E.bing, southeast of Danzig, despite cannon fire from German warships. With Arnswalde and Elbing there are seven German towns whose encirclement is announced by the Russian high command. In Budapest, long since completely isolated, the fighting continued in the Buda sector to wipe out the German garrison, which, although it has been terribly damaged, continues to offer a useless leSis- ¡ tenda. In the area of Breslau, the German city, which is almost completely encircled, the troops of the First Ukrainian Army, commanded by Marshal Konev, are patented to have launched a" great offensive from the bridgeheads on the western bank of the Oder river, northwest of the city, whose fall is expected at any moment, or at least to be isolated and overrun, as happened with Posen and Thorn. Frankfurt, which lies about 33 miles east of Berlin, is also besieged by the forces of Marshal Zhukov's First Army of Good Russia, who employs enormous reserves of infantry and artillery, whose fire is turning the fortress into a heap of ruins. Moreover, everything indicates that Zhukov is concentrating forces there for the frontal attack on Berlin, which should not be long in coming. Judging from the position of Zhukov's troops, they would have reached the "edge" of Dammvorst, which is one of the suburbs of Frankfurt on the eastern bank of the Oder River. The Russians are attacking with huge armored, infantry and artillery forces from both sides of Steinau, a town they seized days ago, and are moving west and south. After advancing 11 and a half miles from the Oder, these forces reached the great communication center of Liegnitz, 34 miles west of Breslau, which means that they cut off there the railway line from Berlin to Breslau, by which the Germans sent reinforcements to the front. Konev's "troops", according to unofficial "unofficial formations", penetrated into Lueben, north of Llegnitz. The town was overrun, which means that the Soviets cut the Llegnttz-Glogau railway line. South of Breslau, the southern arm of the Russian encircling movement advanced into the suburbs of the city, and is now about to link up with the northern arm, which operates in the Parchwitz area. Dispatches in the Moscow "daily" say that every town or village on the western bank of the Oder has become a foitaleza. In every window there is a machine gun and the streets are covered with casemates" and cement emplairmlentos pan la arU- ¡ Hería, In front of the" dudarte" Important, cough alemnr.es have built large anti-tank ditches" and minefields. Meanwhile, Berlin radio hinted that an imminent war was imminent.
THE WAR IN A NUTSHELL
that the Nazis are moving strong toward Vento. PHILIPPINES: The Americans are still fighting in the Rar part of Manila, while in other battle sectors they continue to advance. AERIAL WAR: More than two thousand one hundred and fifty American bombers attacked yesterday factories of synthetic oil, arms and railroads in Atomante.
The Berlin National Guard
- ' Fp F # A A ñ aAka. 1 T > f * * * According to the caption of this German photograph, it shows the Berlin National Guard at parade during the "ceremony" of the taking of the oath by its members. The caption also indicated that the man shown with a strange device on his shoulder is carrying "the latest German weapon for infantry against tanks: The horror of tanks. - (Photo by Associated Front.)