EL NÍUNDO
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections".
DIARIO DE
THE MACANA
YEAR XXVII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY OCTOBER 13, 1945
Entered a" second claee matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10374
Interest in Isla grows
Bell is very active in local Puerto Rican affairs Surprising Travieso meeting. Gallardo ... i Creen Truman asked Bell for "the truth*' on Puerto Rico situation By CHARLEN MH ABE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON. 12. (PU>-The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, Martin Travleaj, and' the President of the Puerto Rico Supreme Court, Martin Travleaj, and' the President of the Puerto Rico Supreme Court, Martin Travleaj. .Martin Travleaj and' former Commissioner of Education. Dr. Jose M. Gallardo conferred for over" an hour and a half with Congressman C. J'"per Bell, chairman of the House Committee on In "utare" Affairs. "As Pren" United reported to EL MUNDO yesterday. This conference will be significant among personnel well acquainted with island affairs in view of the fact that Representative Bell will soon visit President Truman to discuss with him Puerto Rican questions." Sources close to Bell recently reported that the chairman of the Insular Affairs Committee is taking a more active interest in Puerto Rican affairs than at any time since the Bell Subcommittee visited Puerto Rico in early 1943. Some believe that the purpose of his most lively interest at this date is the request of his old friend Truman to tell him the "real truth" about the Puerto Rican situation. It is understood that the President has heard different stories about Puerto Rican status from such widely divergent personalities as Tugweil Tydings and Balmiro. Sources claiming that this is the cause of the President's indecision on Puerto Rico point to the fact that the "decisive action" on status, "within five or twenty days," which Muño" Marin promised at the American Legion convention in San Juan at the end of August, has not yet been taken. It has been generally believed by sources close to Tngwell that the "decisive action" on the part of Trumsn to take the form of a presidential message to the Congress urging that Puerto Ricans be offered the plebiscite, counting on the alternatives of E". tadity, Independence and improved Home Rule under the present Charter. There is considerable disappointment among the Popular Democratic party circles in this capital -and according to reports also in San Juan- that this message has not been a reality, as was expected; and it is understood that Muñes Marin sent Ramos Antonlnl to Parla, in an attempt to get pressure from the world labor organization gathered there in support of the popular demands, to support the presidential action. Since the death of Roo"" veil, who was always a good friend of Muño"" Marin and Tugwell, it has become increasingly evident to observers in this capital that members of the opposition, who do not represent any electoral majority, have gained access to the high circuits of the Government here, and are causing considerable hardship to the popular"". An example of this is the recent almost triumphant movement to get Jorge Luis Cordova Dias appointed (continued on page 22).
The road to victory Assault on the island of Sicily and the Italian Peninsula
General George O. Marthan. Chief of the Major Boat of the BMÑtto do Betadoo Caldea, balayo oa au informo ana deoertpdóa of the operan autumns qao led to the Meterla m Italy. As he ■litan explains, oota deeerlpoída Reno by baso loo meneajee and satraoflclsles dispatches, motas oficíalos and otees doenmontoe relevant, since the complete loo tnformee of ta" eporaetossos or leo last two afleo ro have been received Sedarte in the Departa- . amount of the Goerra. Not counting such reports from commanders in each theater of operations, General Marshall explains that he is therefore describing in particular the irtwinnM of American units, as a way of getting a general picture of the situation.
- Sicily was on July 10, 1943. - For weeks, airfields, railroads and enemy fortifications on the mainland and in Cer- ■ defla and on Italy's own land had been reduced by aerial bombardment. Pant "ll "ría has surrendered on June 11 after an intense air and naval fire. - The small islands of Lampedusa and ■ Llnoaa fell a few days later. The attacking force - the Decamoqulnto Army group - was under the command of General Sir Harold R. L. G. Alexander, General Eisenhower's aide to the Allied land forces. It consisted of the American Seventh Army, under the command of Lieutenant General George Patton, Jr. Jr. on the left flank and the British Eighth Army under the command of Lieutenant General Sir Barnard L. Montgomery on the right. The Seventh Army was composed of the Second Corps, commanded by Lieutenant General Omar Bradley, and a strong "ei parade under the command of Commander General Ludan K. Truman.
General Ludan K. Truscott. The Second Corps consisted mainly of the First and Forty-fifth Divisions and a parachute force. The task force was composed of the third division, with combatant equipment from the second armored division. In the British Eighth Army there were two corps, including four infantry divisions; two brigades and an airborne division. These troops were embarked from Algiers, Tunis, the Midwest, the United Kingdom and Jos United States. The senior naval commander under Elsenhower was Fleet Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham. Vice Admiral Henry K. Hewitt is the senior naval officer of the United States. A strong wind which began the night before D-Day, took on greater proportions as our convoys were entering the place aslgnádolos. The wind diminished a little before H-hour, but the conditions remained unfavorable,
Patton surrenders command of his Army i J
I - - - ■ - - - - - - - - B | I fB o S "S £ " w i B 1/ / * * 4 STL ¿ e. General George R Patton hands over the handers of the American Third Army to Lieutenant General Lucian Tnwott, in ceremony held at Toel". Germany, on the occasion of Truscott's assumption of command of that Army. As already reported, General Elsenhower transferred General Patton to the command of the Fifteenth Army in France. - (Associated Press Photo). . New system for distributing rice, butter and soap As of November 1, every wholesaler and retailer will have to obtain a certificate from the local OAP meeting A new system for the distribution of rationed products in Puerto Rico - rice, butter and soap - will be implemented on the island on November 1 of this year, according to information supplied yesterday to EL MUNDO by the Rationing Executive of the Price Administration Office, Mr. Roberto Muño" Mar.
Citarán para el 22 a Asamblea tie Mayagüez Ledo, Ruiz recibió los cargos" contra Bárrelo; concedió r éste ó días I MAYAGUEZ <Pnr Ricardo VIllsmll" - El licenciado Eduardo A Ruis. President" of the Municipal Assembly of this city, announced yesterday that it is proposed to convene for the day 22 d "l me" in course to the Assembly, for the new hearing of the.charges folmulados against "l Mayor Manuel A. Barreto. The "folds of charges, which were returned" by the Governor to the Procurator Campos del Toro, were sent yesterday to Mr. Rui". The President of the Municipal Assembly procecló to immediately notify Mayor Barreto, granting him rimo days to answer. and s" proposed to convene the Assembly for the day 22 to hold the new hearing, Begun we reported yesterday, Mayor Barreto spoke announced that he has no Inconveniente in that "r ventien again the charges against him and invited Mr. Muño" Marín and Pro. He invited Mr. Muño" Marín and the Procurator General "to make sure that there was no "crabbing" in the hearing in which he was exonerated by the Municipal Assembly, and that the procedure was "correct and legal". Mr. Rute will request the Attorney General to send a special prosecutor for the new hearing.
■ Cormlck. Although Mr. MacCormlck declined to give extensive details of this new plan which he has submitted to the Washington authorities for final approval, we can be assured that under the new plan, both wholesalers and retailers will have to provide"" rertiBcadoj which ""will be authorized by the" Board" Locates d" Price"" and Rationing of" the OAP, in order to obtain the quota which will"" be given for this" product"". Although the "tire" also remains rationed" in Puerto Rico, this item will not be "subject to change in the new flan, maintaining the current system to obtain tires for automobiles. In view of the information advanced " yesterday exclusively by EL Mt'Ni "Continued "on page 22.)
Teachers' Association in favor of English being taught, regardless of the solution to the status problem.
Officer deí 65 highlights the work of the Regiment Revela tahivo in charge of monitoring lo* ('.liártele" Genérale" 7" Army Prevented the Nazi reinvasion of France - Covered a 12 mile front" Alpe" Maritime" with the famous "442" Tj" following chronicle has been prepared by Major Alberto Arrlllaga, son, aqtJguo Chief of Intelligence of the K "k'lmiento ññ of Infantry, who i । has recently returned to the Island. Eata is a hlatorla dr- ' carved of the service the island unit has rendered overseas since its departure for Panama in the comlensos of 194S. By Major Alberto Arrlllaga The history of our regiment, "Puerto Rico's Own," as the mainlanders have called it on, -multiple occasions," is so vast,! । so extensive and so colorful that it is an Injustice to its members, and to the families of its members, j' to Puerto Rico in general, to attempt to relate it in one article. Colonel Roig. has appointed one of his most capable* officers, Lieutenant Rlgau, to write the truth about us, making use of all the official records we possess. This article is intended to "clear up so many doubts that have arisen in Puerto Rico due to false or erroneous information and to make clear the pres- . tlge of the first Puerto Rican unit to shed its blood face to face with the enemy on the" J first" advanced" line. Do not interpret this as an attempt to belittle the work of other new units who did not see the enemy's "death" not for lack of right or preparation, but merely because it was not their turn to do so, or because i# le" used in other missions, also of va- 1 lor, to achieve the fii nal triumph of the* democracies, i The Rñ Regiment left Puer-| to Rico on January 7, 1943. We passed through Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and arrived in Panama on the 14th. Our main work in Panama consisted in guarding the Canal from possible attack by air or sea, and in preparing for the war of independence.
: No prospect of a : settlement in national strikes * There are about half a million mena unemployed in ■' lax mines, automobile factories, docks " and U.S. movie studios.
By UNITED PRESS ' WASHINGTON, 12. (PU)- Do<- * pué" of the latest conference, ano' che. of an aerle which has lasted 5 ■ ■¡day", between mine owners v representatives of trabsjadjees. With the intervention of Secretary of Labor Schwellembach, he reported that no progress has yet been made on a settlement proposal submitted by him, the nature of which has not been made public; while the New York harbor strike continues unchanged, while the New York harbor strike continues unchanged, while the New York harbor strike continues unchanged, while the New York harbor strike continues unchanged, while the New York harbor strike continues unchanged.
The strike of motion picture studio employees in Hollywood is spreading to the Imperial city. Describing the increasing severity of the strike in the coal mines, the Combus- ' tibies Administration has reported that 183,757 miners are on strike in 831 mines, with a loss of 1,013,751 barrels, equivalent to nearly half of the national output. 1 Other descriptive aspects of the general situation in the confllv'o" 1 and work stoppages are as follows: Additional stoppages in the coal mines have increased the number of workers on strike to 4')6oOU, i The strike of the lumbermen has diminished somewhat in intensity. In this strike, one hundred thousand workers are affected; The Administration's e "o. nomic stabilization rules are confronted with the acid test, which the United Automobile Workers, affiliated with the CIO? seek to have their demands for - a 30 per cent increase in ' their wages considered; 'i From one moment to the next, it is expected 'i the stoppage of some 1.800 streetcar and bus employees on Ma' sise h usotts; - i Temporarily, the threat of another strike by motel and boiler workers in the Gulf Coast area, from Te- . jas to Florida, has been averted after labor delegates to a labor-management conference left a motion to strike on the table. -The hope for an immediate end to the longshoremen's strike in the port of New York was dissipated last night, when a vote by more than 30,000 longshoremen on whether or not to return to work ended in tremendous confusion; .i At the same time, a large rally of 8 local unions of the Longshoremen's Association of the FAT, of .(Continued on page 2. i
The National Commander of the American Legion, Mr. Edward N. Bchelberllng, will arrive today morning in Puerto Rico and will make a tour of the island and meet with the veterans of the island. Sche iberling will visit several towns The National Commander of the Aincricaiia Legion will be honored" Today the National Commander of the American Legion, Edward N. Schelberllng, will arrive on the Island between ten and eleven o'clock in the morning, and will be received by the American Legion Department in Puerto Rico. After the greetings and introductions of the Commander, he will hold a meeting with the members of the Executive Committee and with the directors of the clinics where there are hospitalized vetarians. Tomorrow, Sunday, he will make a tour of the I"'a. using the route d" Caguas, Cayay, Aibonito, Ponce, i Mayagüez, Aguadilla, Arecibo San I Juan. The departure from San Juan to the towns to be traveled will be at ¡seven o'clock in the morning, returning to the Capital at midnight. The prograniH prepared by the De. parliament t!" Puerto Rico of the American Legion "s the "igui "nte for today and muñan": SATURDAY, OCTOBER I". in;00 H:0(i A. M. Arrival of the National Commander at Isla Grande. | 11:00- 12:00 A M. Visit to the Ba- , re Naval v to Vice Admiral William R. Munrc". Break. 3:00 p. M. Press Conference. 4:10 P. M. Greeting of the National Commander to the Legionnaires of the Post* of Sen Juan, Rio Piedra", Cataño and the" bordering wehlos" in the building of the Knights" of Columbus, stop J2, Santurce. Greetings and message from the National Commander to the Ladies Auxiliary. ! 7:00 P. M. Interview of the National Commander of the Ame- . tlcan Legion and the Members" of the Executive Committee of the Department with the Directors of Clinics where veterans are hospitalized. SUNDAY, OCTOBER 14. 7:00 A.M. MEETING OF THE NATIONAL COMMANDER OF THE AME- . M. National Commander's Viada to the Island. Departure point of the Com 1 nu: Condado Hotel. 8 (X) A. M. Visit to Camp O'Reilly, where he greets. A to Past Commander, Miguel A. M iftoz and other Legionnaires and persoi-a, of the Camp, 8:45 A. M. Gift from Legionnaire. Manuel A del Valle, i 9:30 A. M. 1 legada a Cagua". Greeting to Legionauos, municipal authorities and people in general gathered in the plaza. 10:00 A. M. Snllda pata Cayey. 1 10:30 A. Arrival to Cayey. Greetings to Legionaries, Ladies Auxiliary (Continued on page 22.)
In the morning, the local importers* claimed notice that the federal Department of Agriculture had received a memorial objecting to the terms of the trust and that the federal agency was willing to continue negotiations on the basis of that memorial. As further evidence of the willingness of the federal agencies to cooperate in solving the local supply problem, two importers received word that officials of the Department of Agriculture would come to the island to continue negotiations if the importers thought it impractical to send a committee of them to Washington. | At the close of the meeting of the Impor- tadoreMs at ten o'clock yesterday morning, it was agreed to accept the government's offer to send a representative to Puerto Rico. It was thought that the Washington officials could get a broader picture of the local food situation by coming to the island. The meeting .le Importers of codfish was rilated by Mr. ElUpo de lloxlos, president of the Chamber of Commerce, after receiving the Report on the decision <|e| government. J, Gus Lallande, San Juan businessman, who has been representing the Chamber of Commerce 'ten Wáihlngton. telephoned De Hos- ' toa to inform him of the" latest" ' I event*. Lallande reported * that the Department of Agricultu1 ra spoke rtelbtdo the memorial of the" Importer*" that he was dl "set to continue the negotia- ' nes and that he would send representatives ' to San Juan if the lm- . carriers wanted it. Earlier this week reports from Washington quoted a spokesman for the Department of Agriculture as saying that Puerto Rican importers would have to accept the conditions of the contract signed between the United States and the supplying nations (continued on page 22).
i "t will be one of the largest celebrations in the Island's history. v Because the soldiers quo reI grown dehen "egulate the Army's Itinerary for several hours after their arrival, while arrangements are made to pass them on, the Itinerary for the public can't be made known immediately. However, lo" oficíale" in lo" Cuartele" Generate" said that their s plans in the p*o>ente include re■¡(■¡bir the ship ruando se "cerque Ja the bay of Son Juan and send <-omn<te of political lldoirs and soda- '. !le" on board, to aduar in the capacity of, - reception committees. Since the bai >o will dock at mue- ' lie at the Army terminal, where there is great congestion, even in ' normal times, the public will not po : ' drá a "lstlr to the disembarkation of the ' troop. However, special welcoming committees will be pro- . "ente," again, and each shoulder ■ returning to the motherland from the "Continued on page 22). ,
House approves first ; drop in taxes in 16 years ¡ By overwhelming majority, bill was passed that j । reduces lo" individual" and business taxes by i 85,350,000,000. - 15 organizations objected to '
J - and - - - - | WASHINGTON. 12.' (PU).-'The' House of Representatives last night overwhelmingly passed a bill by which taxes for next year are reduced by about $5,350,000,000,000. This is the first general reduction in taxes in the last few years. Individual taxes will be reduced by about $2,627 million, by virtue of the increase in the normal 3 percent tax extensions and the 4 percent reduction in the additional tax. The tax is to be paid by the commercial companies,
The law provides for a reduction of 1,888 million dollars over the 1946 tax. ' the House speaks aldo Hamada a i """lón, yesterday afternoon, with a "ntlcl- < pation of do" hour" to debate l and vote "on the bill i of the Committee on Means" and Arbitration" i by which "e reduce lo" Impuei- i to" on Individuals and business" in the¡| aforementioned amount. The proposed bill was sent to l" l tala with the usual rule on tax projects which eliminates the amendments*. t This bill, while discerning some relief to the taxpayers*,c .(Continued on page 22.) 1
The report came from Washington to the effect that Puerto Rican importers of codfish would be obliged to accept the contracts made by the United States government with Canada and Newfoundland, or run out of the product, have taken it upon themselves to accept the offer of the Department of Agriculture, which was made in response to the island objection as to codfish contracts, or run out of the product, have taken a new turn following an investigation by the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce, in a meeting cited by the CA.
- FARRELL IS REPORTED TO HAVE RESIGNED RUENOS AIRES, 12. (PU) Gt-neral Avalo returned from Campo de Mayn at 6:30 P M, and announced that he was coming to i entrevtatarac with loa leadera of the Democratic Union party at 7:30 P. M., to discuss the negotiations to form a new Cabinet. It is presumed that if the news of Farrell's resignation is confirmed, the formation of a new Cabinet will be rushed. "La Critica" announces that Farrell resigned the Presidency and has handed over the Government to the Supreme Court of Justice. No export of 4 million pounds of sugar. This is due to the stoppage at the New York wharf. 1 " 1 1 * I Delay shipments , According to Information su- , ministered yesterday by Mr. Má- , xlmo Vázquez, representative in । Puerto Rico of the Corporación de , Crédito Agrícola, due to the strike of the dock workers , in New York, in the last two । weeks less than 31,000 tons of i sugar have been exported from ta > Island. As of September 29 last, according to Mr. Vazquez, there were in Puerto Rico 231,000 tons of sugar, of which only 1,000 tons had been exported from the island.
Army prepares reception : to 65th Infantry Regiment . The "procedure" for granting leave of absence to all men will be completed. -- The public will not be able to go to the ' wharf to witness the landing of troops Ln* Headquarters of the Military Department of the West Indies, with the roI operation of several organizations in Puerto Rico, are preparing -, a warm reception for when the men of the Regiment - of Infantry return from Marseilles. France, next month. i. Tentative plans" discussed" yesterday afternoon jtue 1" afternoon.
Rice situation is good according to Lallande " ... . He states rthe grain is plentiful in the North. - Urge use of another kind of bean" By RUTH BROOM 1NS Correspondent WASHINGTON, 12. (INS)-Gus Lallande, Puerto Rico's manufacturing representative, said today that importers on the island will be able to count on an adequate supply of rice during the year, since the plentiful supply of rice in the United States is "good," Mr. Lallande has just returned from a visit to the rice region of the State of Louisiana, and said that "Puerto Rico need not worry about acquiring enough rice. Lo" mill" in; all 1* nation ae iltnlen optimli-i ta" as to 1* co""ch" of this "ño, and are anxious" to iumlnl "tr "rle " J" Isl" all "1 qu "n "cesite." As for the return of the program to increase the 1" I "l""1 private trade, L "ll "nde e" of opinion that "not dgniflc* eito a change "n 1" standard of living in general", because the aituaclon of supplies in the" United" State" -" good at e "to" time", so he believes that the" f "ffice" of the" item" will remain reasonably firm". His belief is that there will be no dramatic change in the price of food items, with the exception of cod. "The price of this important item may go down," Lallande continued, "because the merchants in Puerto Rico will have to take charge of their needs.
Independence would not diminish their needs And Ir EstRíliriad not Ir* Alimentaría* states in exposition principles Language and the present school Argues that the other niRlerÍRs be taught in the Spanish language By TEÓFÍLO'mAUJONADO Reducer of EL MUNDO L" Asociación de Maestro" d" Puerto Rico declare that from the point of view of 1a ml "ma teaching of English", the otr"" mat "rlaa should be taught in nueatraa escudes in the Spanish idíome. He argues that Puerto Rican teachers who are not fluent in English give constant practice in the incorrect use of English to those who have to use this language in their classrooms. He adds that even those teachers who speak good English do not have time in the other courses to correct their mistakes, and therefore most of the students are constantly speaking English badly and listening to their classmates who also speak it badly, In a Statement of Principle" 'robre the teaching of English in Puerto Rico, the Board of Directors" of the Teachers Association sn "itene that "we all recognize that I whatever M*" the political future of Puerto Rico ealadldad, ln- * Jcpendencta or proficiency - English" ¡must be taught as dicaciously as possible. It declares that no - । people possessing a common language - adequate, in no conceivable port ituaclón itlca adopts a "egun- - da language as a general means d" . The following is the text of the "Expoalclon of Principle" i adopted at its last meeting by the Board of Directors of the Magl "terio, a copy of which has been transmitted to the federal authorities, to the members of the United States Congress, to the National Association of Teachers, to the National Association of Teachers, to the United States Congress, to the United States Congress, to the National Association of Teachers, to the United States Congress, to the National Association of Teachers, to the United States Congress and to the National Association of Teachers. | The teaching of English as a foreign language is a key element of the Puerto Rican education system, and it has been transmitted to federal authorities, members of the U.S. Congress, the National Association of Teachers, the leaders of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico and numerous civic and cultural entities on the island and the mainland: The Teaching of English in Puerto Rico Principled Exposition by the Teachers' Association in Puerto Rico Introduction Since its founding in 1911, the Teachers' Association of Puerto Rico has been vitally interested in the problem of the teaching of English in Puerto Rico. We have consistently recommended an educational policy which would intensify the teaching of English as a special language and support the use of Spanish in the other subjects of the curriculum. At the present time, we have the services of a teacher who dedicates part of his time to collaborate in the "lnve "tlgaclonea > carried out by the University of Puerto Rico's English Language Institute. This organization, with which the Department of Instruction cooperates, is involved in a program that has two aspects: 1 Research"" and "xp "rfm "nlos related" to lo" problem" of ta teaching of Inglé""n Puerto Rico, ¡ (Continued "n page 12) "7 - Correct information i| of EL MUNDO The information published by EL MUNDO on the agreements "dop- । sides by the Board of Governors riel Colegio de Abogados in "u ultima ■reunion is completely correcI ta, Rafael Rivera Zayas, President" of the Bar Association, declared yesterday, "Aor Rivera Zaya" said to "l: "Manlteíté to the reporter of "El Imparcial" by telephone, qu" -- ln "xacto that the Junte tomar* an agreement in the lentido of q'u" loa lawyer* should not poatular in the a*J" da Municipal Court praaldlda by Judge Cario" rl "l Toro Fernándta. This information appeared in >- column" "En Torno a la Fortalaza" and was not "umliü "tr*d by "1 who" speaks. The information appeared in EL MUNDO under the title: "Colegio de Abogado" convened for an extraordinary meeting. Con "ld "rará 'a acceptance of the Jueg cafgo by the licensed Del Toro Fernandez. Inviten e *bogedo" " no poatular ante éste hasta tomar acuerdo,** fue aumlnittrad* por mi al Redactor de EL MUNDO, Carlea Rivera Hernández y e" completamente corréete.'* H""ta aquí laa manifeatatat clone" del licenciado Rivera Zayaa.