THE WORLD
7=sssssssssssssas=ssssssssssss9s 32 Pages 5 Ctw. 2 Sections
32 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DIARIO DE i.a MAÑANA
YEAR XXVII
I don't liquidate the" bonds bought, ao who wants to liquidate Hitler.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 24, 1945
tlntered a" second class matter. Post Office. San Juan, Y. B,
NUMBER 10290
Allied armies charge toward Cologne - A - * Soviets occupied Posen fortress On Iwo Jima they are fighting hand to hand.
The battle is considered the fiercest
Yankees seized a volcano from which the island is overlooked The position cost dreadful fighting Increasing American casualties. - Nipponese fight with suicidal fury By FRANK TRKMAINK GUAM, 23rd (PU). - I* bloody, bloody, hand-to-hand fighting continues on Iwo Jima between the U.S. Marines and the Japanese. The Americans" have seized the extinct volcano of Surlbachl. at the southern tip of the island, from which "the whole of Iwo Jima is dominated, where the fiercest battle of all the United States" Marines" is being fought. The United Pr "n "a "n "a" corpsman, Mao Johnson, who has. "Mao Johnson, who has been an eyewitness to the fighting, reports that the battle for possession of Surlbachl was "fantastic'' as the Japanese threw grenades down the mountainside at the North American Marines who were about to climb the steep and dangerous slopes of the volcano. I would add that the soldiers, entrenched in caves and open tunnels, in the interior of the mountain, are in the most urgent situation, because, judging by the constant fire they make, they must still be provided with plenty of supplies. Marine officers stated that the fighting has assumed such a character that the Japanese officers are throwing themselves from the heights on the eastern side of the volcano rather than be caught or killed by the Americans. The main U.S. strike force is actually fighting to the north, around airfield number two. The terrain has been trenched and is covered by concrete casemates and other fortifications. The Marines are using artillery, tanks and flamethrowers against the Japanese. The American warships surrounding the island are unloading a deluge of shrapnel on the enemy positions, in support of the three infantry divisions fighting on land. Last night, under cover of darkness, Japanese sharpshooters flanked the western end of the American line and penetrated the Rila rear. At dawn, the Marines totally annihilated the Japanese, after heavy fighting. The naval communique put the American casualties at 5,372 in the last 58 hours of fighting for Iwo Ima. During the night, when the American lines had been stabilized, they launched a frontal attack on the Japanese fortifications and advanced slowly to the airfield in the central part of the island. 4 Attacking to the south of the airfield, the Americans have made only small gains. American casualties continue to mount. The very intense Japanese fire clears their lines. In the last hours of the afternoon, the Japanese mounted strong counterattacks against both American flanks, but were promptly repulsed.
Foreign Policy 'Russian opinion prevails over world security'.
By LEON PEARSON -WASHINGTON. 23. (IN*)-The diplomatic circles of this capital are interpreting the speech delivered last night by Edward R. Stottlnlus at the Inter-American conference of foreign ministers in Mexico City as the first official revelation that the Russian view on the veto in the world security council has prevailed. It is the most important news on the Stottlnlus speech in which the Secretary of State set out the scope of U.S. foreign policy and gave the agenda of the issues to be discussed at the Inter-American conference with respect to the problems of war and peace. The revelation about the Fetus
The revelation of the Fetus' procedure in the world security council was revealed when he stated that one of the essential prerequisites for the success of a world organization is "the unity of action of the great powers, which alone possess the industrial and military power to prevent aggression. Such a statement is taken to mean that the formula adopted at Yalta provides that the great powers, which will be permanent members of the Security Council, will have to approve unanimously the application of sanctions against the aggressor. In such circumstances, if one of the powers does not accept such sanctions, it may exercise its right to vote.
Ststtinlus stated at the same time that a second essential element of the new organization was "the equal sovereignty of all nations large and small, which must act together to create the essential conditions for a lasting peace. The precise terms used in the formula adopted at the Crimean conference concerning the voting procedure will not be revealed until the process has been accepted by France and China and these two countries join the "Big Three" in extending invitations to the San Francisco conference of the United Nations, which will begin its work next year. (Continued on page 16)
On the road to Berlin
IF Jr . . m US 1 This photograph of Field Marshal Tván R. Konev, commander of Soviet troops on the first Ukrainian front, was received in New York by radio from Moscow. The troops commanded by Konev, whose strategy has been outstanding, advance on the German capital. (Photo distributed by the Associated Press.) z Members of the APA met with Susoni and presented their case in connection with the sugar strike. Campos del Toro in a cooperative attitude. Committee of colonists
¡1 ' j|Í * l W-W
A commission of the Association of Sugar Producers, composed of Messrs. Antonio A. Roig, president of that entity: Fernando A. Villamll and Manuel A. del Vallo, conferred yesterday with the president of the House of Representatives", Dr. Francltco M. Susoni. The "producers" explained to Dr. Susoni the whole situation with respect to the Insular sugar industry and expressed their points of view in relation to the sugar problem. A spokesman for the sugar producers said that the visit to Dr. Susoni was motivated by an invitation from him to that effect, stating that the president of the Chamber was very interested in the problem confronting our basic industry, and that he wished to know everything related to it. According to reports, Dr. Susoni was "sympathetic" when the sugar producers raised the issue with him and explained the situation. However, the "Speaker" did not say what he would do, after the sugar growers presented their ca-
so. The aforementioned spokesman stated that Dr. Susoni expressed to the committee his opinion that the "situation could not go on like this". Mr. Antonio A. Rn<g told Dr. Susoni that "the idea was being propagated among the sugar cane workers that the current state of strike had been decreed by the Popular Party and the Government," adding that because of this "the workers, who want to work, are not going to do so." On the other hand we have learned that the president of the Insular Board of Labor Relations, Mr. Enrique Campos del Toro, held a conference yesterday with *1 president of the Farmers Association, Mr. José Ramón Quiñones. Mr. Campos del Toro, when questioned, said that Mr. Quiñones had gone to visit him, but that they did not discuss anything related to the strike in the sugar industry. Meanwhile, the Farmers Association continues to organize settlers' committees in all of the sugar mills.
Stronghold cost Nazis 48,000 casualties
The city was an obstacle to supplying the Soviet front Konev has already broken through in Guben and Forst These cities are part of the external defenses of the Reich capital By MEYER HANDLER MOSCOW, 23, (PU)-The Soviet armies added another great victory to those already achieved in their winter offensive by seizing the fortress of Posen (Poznan), after several weeks of fighting during which 48,000 Germans were killed or captured. At the same time, "e received reports from the front that Russian troops have already broken into the strongholds" of Guben and Fom. on the Nelsse River, located 50 and 54 miles southeast of Berlin, respectively. The Soviets" also seized the railway center of Arnswalde in Pomerania. Arnswalde is located 42 and a half miles southeast of Setettln, and was seized by the Russians norWM* 1 1 days ago. In another encircling operation, Marlícal Stalin's forces intensified the battle for the posetttm of Brealau and seized five suburbs and twenty blocks of buildings of that capital of Lower Silesia, already almost totally destroyed by Soviet artillery. The conquest of Posen put an end to "German efforts to prevent the delivery of Russian reinforcements and supplies" to the front in front of Berlin, where huge Soviet forces are massing for the final assault on the German capital. During the siege of Posen, the Russians killed 250,000 Germans and took 23,000 prisoners. The siege of Posen began on January 27 and among the prisoners were the commander of the city, Major General Mattern, and his staff. The conquest of that city, which before the war had a population of 272,000, has left troops of the White Russian First Army, commanded by Marshal Zhukov, free for action, which they will now be able to use in the final onslaught against Berlla. Meanwhile, the Russian high command is throwing huge contingents of forces into the battalion of East Prussia, the Polish corridor and Pomerania, in an effort to liquidate the pockets of reslstencis nasis and thus make more troops available for the attack on the capital of the Reich. The German radio said that fierce fighting continues in the streets of Graudenz (Grudzladz.) The Moscow radio broadcast an article by the well-known Russian commentator Ilya Ehrenburg, in which he says that in East Prussia elements of at least 34 Nazi divisions, which are well equipped, have been overrun. The German commentator says that the German "people's army" there has proved to be of very poor quality. -
-- ¿ - - - ; ~ 3 other Puerto Ricans were wounded in action in the west They are George M. Sanchez, Eladio Mercado and Agustin Ramos. - Seven Purple Heart recipients in the 65th Regiment.
Three additional Puerto Rican casualties on the western front were announced by the Headquarters of the Military Department of the West Indies, according to a report received from the War Department in Washington. m Private First Class George M. Sanchez, son of Mrs. Atalina M. Sanchez, of Ponce, was slightly wounded in action in Germany on February 3. Private First Class Eladía Mercado, brother of Miss Ana Mercado, of Ponce, was slightly wounded in action in Germany on February 4. Private First Class Agustin Ramos, son of Manuel Ramos, of Isabela, was slightly wounded in action in France on February 5. The War Department also reports that Private First Class Antonio Marraro Villalobos, husband of Mrs. Mérlda A, de Marrero, of Guánka, died in France on February 4 as a result of wounds received in an automobile accident,
Seven Puerto Rican soldiers" distilled in Europe have received the Purple Heart Medal, after having recovered from wounds received in action in Europe, according to reports published by "Xa Cruz de Malta", newspaper of the 65th Regiment of the Inrantoria. This report was given to the public yesterday by the General Headquarters of the West Indies Department. The Purple Heart decoration - which is awarded to men who have been wounded in combat action - was conferred on the following soldiers: technical sergeant Pedro A. Prats, from Cataño; sergeant Pedro Serrano Bonet, Mayagüez; technician fifth class Rafael Gracia Núñez, Caguas; private first class Félix Alloea, Villalba: private first class Cesáreo Abréu, Juncos; private first class Isabel Rosa, from VeCBaja: and private Germán Ntlago, from Corozal. Members of the 85th Infantry Regiment have also begun a Pro-Station campaign.(Continued on page 16)
The Seventh Air Force bombs Corregidor
i ünaédumnade smoke m levanúi da la tsld de Corregidor, euando las bomba" iansada" from planes of the Seventh Air Fuma Fuma begin to explode, al haeer Manco. The bombing was carried out as part of the coordinated action of U.S. sea, land and air forces before the Americans landed troops on the island. Parachute troops were the first to recapture the tower guarding the entrance to Manila Bay. On the right a group of thousand-pound bombs explode amidst enemy artillery emplasamlentoe (Air Corps photograph, distributed by the Associated Press).
THEY ARE NERVOUS NEW YORK, 28. (PU)- Ixi Tokyo radio and the" Janone "en newspapers say that 'the war situation is indeed grave" and add that "to hesitate now would mean defeat." Lm high authorities manineotan that the Japanese people, since the capture of Raipen, "are quite nervous, especially because "1 effect of the air raids Irrita "us nerve." Rucio swims butter from 7 A. M. today According to order of the OAP touches a quarter pound a week per person The Office of Price Administration decreed yesterday the rationing order on lard, an order which will go into effect today, Saturday, at seven o'clock in the morning. establishing in the same that "no retailer shall transfer to his customer more than one pound of lard per person).
The national head of the Federal Housing Administration, impressed with the poor shantytowns he has seen on the island, has been in Port-au-Prince since the day before yesterday, Thursday.
Since the day before yesterday, Thursday, the General Commissioner for the United States of the Federal Public Housing Administration, Mr. Phillip M. Klutsnlck, has been in Puerto Rico on a trip to study the environment. Mr. Klutsnlck is the supreme head of the organization throughout the continent and its territories and possessions. There are 800,000 households administered by him, eight hundred thousand families, with a total integration of about four million people. The agenda, which was created several years before the outbreak of the war, had authority, until the events of Pearl Harbor, to make loans for the purpose of cleaning up the slums and providing their occupants with "decent" housing and sanitation.
decent" and hygienic" housing. As soon as the United States became involved in the conflict, the agenda redirected its activities almost exclusively to the construction of housing for war industry workers, in order to avoid congestion in those cities that became centers of war material. In Puerto Rico, since no war industries were established, the agency continued to make pre-war loans, although not in the previous amount, due to the new obligations brought about by the conflict. The Home Island Authority and the local authorities of San Juan. Ponce and (Continued on page t6)
Government to acquire Guánica land in June It will use part of the appropriation pending approval by the Legislature. - The agricultural properties of the plant are already being appraised.
The Executive Director of the Puerto Rico Land Authority announced yesterday to EL MUNDO that he expects the land owned by the Guánica power plant to be transferred to the government by June. These lands have an extension of approximately 20,000 acres and will be divided into "finca" of proportional benefit, and to fulfill other purposes" of the Land Law. Mr. Acosta Velarde also informed that the Authority does not currently have the funds available for the purchase of these lands, but that the total amount to be paid will be allocated from the $23,500,000 expected to be approved by the Legislature of Puerto Rico from one moment to the next, in accordance with a bill that has already been considered. The appraisal of the Guanica plant's land and all the equipment at its disposal has been underway for some time. The officials of the Lands Authority did not want to reveal to him how much the total cost of these lands and of the equipment of the Guanica plant will be, alleging that it will be necessary to wait for the report of the appraisers of this government branch. The acquisition of the land will represent the largest purchase made so far by the Land Authority to implement the provisions of the
The acquisition of the land will represent the largest purchase made so far by the Land Authority to implement the provisions of the Law. We are certain that most of the land will be dedicated to the cultivation of sugar cane, as has been done by the plant, and that the land that is not appropriate for this crop will be used for other purposes. Mr. Acosta Velarde informed that he does not expect any obstacle to close the negodaclone". once the cane fields are completed.
Berlin Says Roer River Crossed Asserts that Infantry and Partition Battles Are Being Waged May Decide War in East German High Command Confesses Nazis Retreating By JAMKS~MCGLINCV t "AR<S, 23 (PU)-Officially it is ln,.>rmated that the First and Ninth Armies or United States" launched this morning "over the Roer River toward the Renanla. American assault units waded across the stream in the face of light opposition and little German artillery fire. The American infantry crossed the stream after the assault units had opened fire. The onslaught occurred at 3:30 a.m., in bright moonlight, supported by tremendous artillery barrages from 400 medium bombers and '00 bombers. The first "c.:p> cho" report that the advance is proceeding satisfactorily. Berlin speaks informed previ,- ' mind that do" - and perhaps tro" - army" allied" ae speak lauca" to a general offensive in the portion of the western front that cu - da in front of Colonl", wading ol Roer in ae!" or more Jugare" in a stretch <' 39 mile" and giving beginning to violent combats" "that can reiuPar to decisive battle in the western Europe" According to the German radio, the offensive was preceded by discharges artillery emplaced along the Roe, in a battle line that at its closest point is only 19 miles from Cologne. In its Information prior to the official notice from the Supreme Allied Command, the German high command said that the U.S. Ninth Army and "part" of the First Army attacked this maf' .a on a broad front, east of Aachen. Other Nazi commentators indicated that the offensive of the British Second Army, sltúado on the left flank of the Ninth, was also incorporated v. the offensive. The German reports said that battles of infantry and infantry forts were being fought over a 39-mile stretch from Roermond to the sources of the Roer, with 1 particularly violent" at all" crossing points" of the Roer, near Duren and Linnich. i Nazi spokesmen Reported that the ■ Ninth Army crossed the Roer at ■ Niederau and Kreuzrau. south of Du- . ren. They added that other Allied spearheads crossed the same . river five miles" northwest of i Duren, at Blrkeidorf and Selgsdort. t A fifth crossing was made at Genevich, 14 and a half miles north of Duren and z do" to the Linnich cite 1 The German high command admitted that "in some places the" Allied force" forced a slight retreat of Nazi forces," adding that the stakes in the area between Cleve and S "rreburg can be regarded as a single coordinated operation, with the largest number of men and troops so far employed by the Germans on this front. The Germans call these operations "the long-awaited Anglo-American offensive in coordination with the Russian operations in the east. A transmission from 1a Nazi agenda "DÑB" said, "That is probably the signal for the resumption of the Soviet offensive on a large scale. The German high command is on standby and is not surprised by this combined general attack on two fronts against the Reich." In the meantime, the twin attacks north and east of the Cologne plain have greatly weakened the sector where the Nazis claim the Allies have launched an offensive. To the north, the csnadlei.ses continue to slowly push the elements of the ten divisions (Continued on page 16).
| WESTERN FRONT: Further south, the First and Ninth Armies of Guban and Foret, powerful forts to the United States, began a major offensive in the early morning PACIFIC: The nortsamsrleaas aysr, crossing the Bosr river in occupied us if amount Suribavarios points, over a wide chl, from which dominate abofrente. It seems that the objective re large portage of ia Island gives Iwo Immediate is Cologne, the fourth Jims. In its advance toward the north German city. alconsaron you yesterday ganancteo 11RUSSIAN-GERMAN FRONT: The halves, with a maximum ds 806 Nazi stronghold of Posen was to- n J? tr 2J¡. . . . . ". . . by the Russians after several Roman sieges. The Soviet JKE also occupied the & da tan He?naMtao. 4 Slgu?te communications center of external fighting south of Arnawalds, on the Pomeranian, Manila.