THE WORLD
40 Pages 5 Ctvs" 2 Sections
40 Pages 5 Ctvs. í l2 Sections
DAILY BE
THE MORNING
[YEAR XXVII
NUMBER 10423
Let's support the men" who made the Victory Loan possible.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, DECEMBER 1, 1945
Entered as second class matt Poet Office, San Juan, F. R.
Eastern would include Pto.
It is proposed to apply today to the JAC for a franchise for air service here. It is proposed that the Island endorse request Jfa Juan would be a point of jjpexión with American and African lines of the Eastern AirUnW Mr. Eddie Rickenbacker, informed yesterday the Administrator of San Juan, Mr. Roberto Sanchez Vitalia, that said company will apply today before the Civil Aeronautics Board, in Washington, for a new transcontinental air route which would include Puerto Rico. No fewer than SO major cities will be covered by the new air transportation service planned to be established by this agency. - The aeAot Rlókenhack "r, in a cablegram addressed yesterday to Mr. Ránche" Vllella, requests the latter's cooperation in spreading the news to the and other island organizations, / The message from the president of Eastern Airlines states the following: I "The Eastern Air Linea Tnc" ra-:: dlcará tomorrow before k .tunta de Aeronáutiu. Civil Aeronautics Board in Washington tomorrow, an application for a new transcontinental airline in the South, serving approximately five cities between San Francisco, Oakland, Lo. Oakland, Lo" Angele", and San Plegó; and New Orleans, Tampa,-Miami and San Juan Puerto Rico. "I would appreciate your bringing the matter to the attention of the editors of the newspapers, the director of the Chamber of Commerce, and the administrator of the corridor service. Please be so kind as to send me their names so that I may send them a copy of the request, in addition to the letter of the su- 1 already" I | Mr. Sanchez Vllella jrasml-, tló immediately to the literatades (a nctfcta relinda dente of said compañte , The purpose that is persist-" that of conectai in direct form te" main cities of the Gnlb of Mexico and Florida, The purpose is to create the most direct air route through the United States, between the West Coast and Puerto Rico, and to serve as a point of connection for the South American, African and Mediterranean lines. Africa and the Mediterranean countries. Captain Rickenbacker, in f*ta authorized by the company made it clear that "the new Southern transcontinental line will supply the southeastern tetates, such as North and South Orollna; Ged--gla: Florida. Alabama and Lulslam, with a total potation of quino million, gives a direct tran" portation served, interlinking all: da' industrial, agri* cola and recreational organization of all areas of the South and West." The cities which will serve 1" com- i t ting.' of being granted Ir tranqui.l da requested, are mentioned below : San Juan. Puerto Rico; Miami, Sampa, Florida; New Orleans, Baton Rouge, Lafayette-New Alberta. Lake Charles, Louisiana: B "auI tont-Port Arthur. Houston. AusBan, San Antonio. Uvalde, bel Rio, Hprt Stockton. Fort Davis. AlplI M, Marfa. El Paso. Palestine. DaI m, Fort Worth, Lubbock, Teja";. I Lis Cruces, Mesilla, Stiver City. 1 I Tyrone, Clovis. Portales. Tucumearri. Las Vegas. Santa Fe. AlbuquerI que, Gallup. New Mexico: DouI fias, Nogales, Tucson, Phoenix, YuI tn*, Winslow, Flagstaff Grand CanI yon, Kingman, Arizona; Boulder City, Las Vegas. Nevada; El Centro, Brawley, Calexico San Diego. Coronado, Palm Spring. San Bernardino, Riverside, Redlands, Long Beach, Long Beach, Oceanside, Santa Ana, Los Angelas Santa Barbara, Santa Marla, San Lula Obispo, Monterey, (Continued on page 24.)
"F * 11 " ' ' J ■ 11,1 ' - ■ 11 I I I III- - - -l-S The Marshall Report How to sustain needed military power U.S.
■n this delivery of ra final report i *1 Secretary of the Gue- 1 m, "1 General George C. i Marshail, Chief of Staff Mover of the U.S. Army, explains the raso- i nee why the United States i United States should maintain permanent military for- i sao and - why 00 requires universal military adías- 1 tremíante, i during the term of an alio. < r GEORGE C. MARSHALL t< * lía General Staff |nn which are to be í J negotiations ti- ' I peace, the" proportions I "Ma" military permanen- ■ Star in tune with the" ne| maximum security; ■ I provisions -which are ' I effect should ostar ds j
I In accordance oon the cost in human resources, in materials, and in maintenance. So far as it is possible to foresee world conditions ten years from now, the War Department experts, taking into consideration all the factors that can be thought of,' estimate that our position will be well secured by machinery which will permit the mobilization of an army of four million men within a period of one year from the beginning of any international action which will promote an emergency for the United States. A regular army should be composed primarily of a strategic force: it should be especially strong in air power; and a part of this force should be oriented to the Pacific and the Pacific.
deployed in the Pacific and the Caribbean, ready to protect the nation against any hoatll attempt, and prepared for emergency action wherever such action is required. It is obvious that a new war in which it would be desired to involve our people would have to begin with a surprise attack. Such an attack would depend on gun-cohe-te, fantastic speeds, followed by a fighting force that would try to exploit to the enemy's advantage in the critical initial stage. Against urt plan of this nature we must be "at all times sufficiently prepared", so as to be able to keep the enemy away from our beaches, while we, with (Continued on page 19)
। Entities give backing to the Victory Campaign.
T - - - -- USSe 9V- 'A- S j j j JIM i nMKv l In the meeting room of the Board of Directors of the Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, a meeting of representatives of various entities took place yesterday morning to discuss matters related to the current Victory Campaign. The event was hosted by Judge Martin Travieso, chairman of the Puerto Rican War Finances Committee. Pictured are some of the attendees. Seated, from left to right: Luí" F, Cuchi, commander of the American Legion; Jean S. Whittemore, Collector of Customs; Judge Travieso, and Ralph O'Malley, executive director of the Puerto Rican War Finances Committee, standing, in the same order: Jo "é Gorhea, for the Railroad company: "afflora de Reynolds Ramirez; Charle" R. Hartsell, Chief of the Port Defense Volunteer Corps; Fllino L. de HoMoa, President of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce; Manuel Pujada" Día", for the Knights" of Columbus; Francisco Rodrigues, Superintendent of Schools": Clyde V. Fisher, for the Department of Instruction,' and Frank I" Dorathy, for the Rum Institute, (Photo EL MUNDO).
Planning reviews rules on buildings Pasalacqua believes there are prospects for increasing the number of stories The rules to be adapted by the Planning Board "do not specifically limit the number of stories a building may have," said yesterday the head of the Planning Board's Engineering Division, Mr. Carlos M. Paaatacqua. He added that Via reglamentación lowered consideration pernMte different heights in different zones, í and that "in zones of apartments, and commercial and Industria-1 les. will be allowed greater number of i piaos provided that, a 1 ives finished 1" structure, sgrantfe the snlar on the minimum [ originally required. Mr. Paulacqua reported that the height of the erfUMm-"he <uard "r proportionate to "l size of the "o-! nr. "The regulation* aometida to public view comes sléndn révlsada", - he said, - "and we consider the potabilidad of qu" the number of plant" is increased in the zone" of apart", Industrial and commercial". Mr. Pasalacqua added that, 1 "even without increasing the space of the aolar. can be built a greater number of plants to the" prescribed" by the reglarñento- For this, the building should be done in a - staggered form, using the area left to subtract the first plants" to add new" plsofeésl" structure". The "Dispoaictane". said Mr. Pasalacqua, are covered by Article 34 of the draft regulations, which provides as follows : (1) Any building permitted for any use other than as a residence in any R4, R-2, R-3 or R-4 District, may exceed the proposed maximum height proposed for any such district," providing that for each additional square meter of floor area above two stories, the lot shall be increased by three meters in addition to the area that would otherwise be required. V'(2> In any R-5 District uh multi-family or hotel building, the maximum height proposed for that District may be exceeded, provided that the proposed floor area in relation to the lot area does not exceed that required for a four (4) story building"; Provided, That each square meter of floor area over two stories shall be added to the area of the lot. Provided, that each square meter of floor area above said four (4) stories permitted shall be added one (1) square meter of floor area to the area originally required. In any C-3, 1-1 1-2 District, a building may exceed the proposed height limit for the district, provided that (Continued on page 24.) -■" " - - - - - -
More than a million dollars worth of work will be done in Rio Piedras; the construction of the Municipal Palace and the marketplace is announced for the next four years. - Plans completed
Within the next four months, the Municipality of Rio Piedras will undertake several works in the amount of not even one million dollars, according to a report made yesterday to one of our editors at the City Hall of that city. Among the projects to be built, he told us, are the Municipal Palace, at a cost of $550,000, and the marketplace, at a cost of $750,000. For several months the engineers of the municipality have been working on the plans for these works, which are almost completed. The site where the market square is to be built will not be disclosed until the buildings are to be constructed in order to "avoid speculation by some property owners," according to what was said yesterday. The Kbinlripal Palace, as it was designed, will be built in the same way. "The five-story building, as designed in the same building, will house all the offices of the Municipality and of the Insular and Federal Government in the City.
deral Government offices in the University City. According to the plans of the municipal authorities of Rio Piedra, the projects for both the Plaza del Marque and the Municipal Palace would be self-supporting. The money for these constructions is likely to be obtained from the Banco de Fomento or from federal funds. The municipal government has not yet made up its mind as to which entity it will take the money from, but has held talks with both. Among the projects of the Mayor of Rio Piedras, Mr. Augusto P. ¡ Alvarez, is also the construction of a modern hospital, but this construction will be later than those mentioned above, "since the Municipal Government has made the "regina y h" enlarged the old municipal hospital, where medical assistance is provided to the poor people of the City UnlverI sitarigu** ' ' ' ' '.
No agreement reached yesterday on Guaynabo crisis Neighborhood committee presidents insist that the people want the administration they had until last Wednesday.
CSP to authorize 30 more buses at certain hours An official communiqué on the addition is expected at any moment. i In order to face the prevailing "crisis" in the transportation of passengers in the metropolitan area, the Public Service Commission will grant permission to thirty independent buses, which will circulate freely during the hours of peak demand for transportation. I i Although the Commission yesterday has not yet authorized official note (in relation to this step it is to be expected that In will do so at any moment, since gyqr were cited"' [ pira consultation owners of transport companies and these said to be in a position to provide the indicated number of gua' gua". J At the meeting held yesterday morning at loa Balones de la Coi (continued on page 24.)
The Popular Municipal Committee of ■ Guaynabo met yesterday at the CaipitoUo jointly with the presidents of barrios, but no agreement was reached to solve the admlnlttatlva crisis in that municipality. The meeting discussed the reasons for the resignations of the Administrative Board and the full Municipal Assembly and it was agreed that as many times as the Municipal Committee meets, it will have to summon the presidents of the neighborhoods, since they allege that since before the elections only one meeting has been held by this body, to which they were invited. I It was recommended to the president of the neighborhoods" that they continue working with the existing Municipal Committee, alleging that from January to February the same will be reorganized in a public meeting that will be summoned for that purpose. It was agreed to call another meeting to continue discussing the administrative crisis, but no date was set for it. The ward presidents reported that the people of Guaynabn, in general, want the same administration they had until last Wednesday. They were informed that the¡ Mayor "has given the eappproval to the ' people by resigning" answering loa' ward" president" that ae vló! competed to> it "by actions of the Municipal Committee." It was announced during the meeting that they will proceed to prepare a terna for the dealgnactón of the new Mayor, which will have to eometer the Municipal Committee.' The presidents of the barrios proceeded to challenge the Municipal Committee, invoking the rules of procedure, but they were answered that the Committee of Conciliation and Arbitration of the Party had recognized this body as the genuine and legal one. Loa preI (Continued on page 18)
The Status Commission urges Tydings to hold hearings and endorses Bell's purpose to correct the system.
Campos to correct the penal system > He intends to adapt methods he has seen in the U.S. He attended assembly of prison chiefs He will make internal readjustment in Justice to achieve efficiency of service Pnr JEAN VAN VR AN KEN INS Correspondent I WASHINGTON, 30. (INS) - The Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Enrique Campas del Toro, declared today that he intends to achieve the renewal of the penal system upon his return to the island at the beginning of next week. The renovation of Puerto Rico's penal system is the most urgent problem facing the Department of Justice," said Campas del Toro, "and in view of this I have in mind to introduce in our correctional institutions as many of the advanced methods I have known in the Nation as can be adapted to island conditions. At the beginning of November, Campos del Toro attended a conference of penitentiary chiefs, held in New York, and visited the federal penitentiary of Danhury, located in Connecticut, of which he said that it "is a model of progressive correctional institutions". The Attorney General of Puerto Rico added that he was pleased with the progress made in the reorganization of the island's Department of the Treasury. "Our main problem," he said, "has been the lack of personnel, but since the end of the war we have been able to acquire the appropriate personnel. The plans for the reorganization to be pursued are not based on the replacement of personnel, but on the readjustment of offices, with a view" to greater efficiency." Campps del Toro conferred this week in Washington with Irwin W. Silverman, chief counsel of the Territories and Positions Division of the Department of the Interior, in connection with a Puerto Rican lawsuit now pending before the Boston Circuit Court. The head of the Department of Justice said that the Puerto Rican cases are fully prepared and will be the first to be heard next year. Extension for Barreto's plea 1 The Supreme Court yesterday granted । an extension to Rafael Enrique Gelp, attorney of the Mayor of Mayagüez, Mr. Manuel A. Barreto, to file until December 3 his plea in the appeal case filed by the Department of Justice on behalf of the Governor. As is known, the Governor has appealed to the Supreme Court the decision of the Municipal Assembly, ruling that the (Continued on page 24.)
By FRANCES MUSIC Correspondent of the Inter- |< national News Service 1 WASHINGTON, 30. (INS - Ofi- 1 cialea of the Department of Gue- 1 rra revealed today that preparations have ul- [ timed to begin returning to the homeland, early" next spring, the heroes"" who"" sueumbi "rd in the ' past world war who" "atan : buried on foreign soil.
I BOLE T I N Effe I:
l - i WASHINGTON, 80. (FU) - The ' House of Repreeentantea deecarted I; today the recommendation of cu Committee - of Appropriations, on three measure" of - economy, and passed viva vos the > appropriation bill"" detiI science of "1,04,792,812. The House action added approximately $808,792,000 to the bill, as reported by the Committee. The measure now goes to the Senate. The added appropriations included 8122,278,000 for the flood control and river and harbor project; 9188,820,000 to build a new river and harbor; and 9188,820,000 to build a new river and harbor project; 9188,820,000 to build a new river and harbor project; 9188,820,000 to build a new river and harbor project; and 9188,820,000 to build a new river and harbor project.
- ■ , ¡i i hospital facilities for ve- 1 J terans, and for veterans' housing- i í¡dea." The House ln- - troduced also tree small" dls- < I minuelnne" amount"" aalgnadaa ! ■ I in the Informed draft, in a te- 1 i tel of 81.78M00. I H - * - - 1 i NEW YORK. 80. (FU) - Nicho- i . laa Fomkln, 18 aflea da age, was ; . Reports that he stated to the Police, i ■ an Mobile, Alabama, that he had i i i shot and killed Susan 8can- t r xa. student da "Muela auparlor, ; H (Continued on page 24.) t
"It is great and complicated"-he told us yesterday-"1" work that I have the I obligation -mientra" the people, I want- to direct in Puerto Rico; I but no part of that work is greater, nb more necessary, nor more fundamental, than that of keeping the doors open for the votes of the people, so that in no matter of basic importance can decisions be made that are not the decisions of the entire people of Puerto Rico." I Mr. Muñoz Marín made the following statements to EL MUNJDO yesterday: % * "I believe it is necessary to emphasize to the entire people what the commitment made by ¡forty-four legislators of the Popular Democratic Party the day before yesterday in lata Verde means. It constitutes one of the most important steps in the public life of Puerto Rico and, therefore, must be clearly understood by the people. "As President of the party that obtained the majority of the votes in the elections, I have been working for the rapid solution of the problem of the political status, in fulfillment of the commitment made to the people. In this work I have received the cooperation and support of the great majority of the legislators in fulfillment of my commitment. To undermine this work before Washington there is a continuous propaganda that neither I in directing the work, nor the legislators "1 lend me their valuable assistance and sincere support, we are representing the true wishes of the people. Fren-
that all challenges to these tariffs will be referred to the affected agency early next week. "In accordance with procedure, we will transmit to the SIA all protests received by the Commission concerning its tariffs. If the agency does not accede to the customers' demands, the Commission will set a public hearing at which the parties involved will appear," said the CSP Chairman. One of the last to challenge the rates was Dr. Manuel Morales Muñoz, of Santurce. He bases his complaint on the fact that "the current tariff is unjust, unreasonable and has been arbitrarily imposed by the SIA," without having been previously (Contlnued on page 24).
Transfers to the homeland of dead soldier remains begins 1946 The necessary legislation has not yet been passed, but the War Department is confident that it will then be able to initiate it.
। Quartermaster Corps sources reported that the arduous task of returning the bodies of those who gave their lives on the battlefields overseas will be organized as soon as pending legislation to that effect is enacted. A measure directing the Secretary of War and prescribing the means of shipping to the United States the remains of more than 274,000 servicemen who died overseas is likely to be passed by the House of Representatives on December 10 next. Of the estimated number of casualties, some 28,658 names appear on the lost list, some of whom may have died. The cost of this enormous operation has been estimated at $700 or $800 per corpse. After i the first world war the "m- i barque of 46,700 bodies to the United States amounted to the sum of 1 twenty million dollars. The program was not completed until 1921. The objections made to the project by Representative Col-", re-| published by New York. "The objections made to the project by Representative Col.
Muñoz explains the commitment made the day before yesterday by legislators He says that his main mission on the Island consists of "keeping the doors wide open to the votes of the people" The president of the Popular Democratic Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin, considers that his main mission in Puerto Rico is to "keep the doors wide open" to the votes of the entire people, in an orderly, verified manner, and under strict legal procedures."
■MMk 'JI r J® ®vi\ ¿ I® Bn fin \ Mgalw v' ■ t K H t Luis Muftnz Marin te " tes elections of November stele such propaganda is abwda. But it may serve to enable us to effectively defend the people before the authorities in Washington and public opinion in the United States, who are unaware of the unequivocal realities of Puerto Rico. A minority wants to pass itself off, far from Puerto Rico, as "na me* orla. A minority wants to make believe, far from Puerto Rico, that the majority does not represent (Continued on page 24).
CSP is ready to intervene with rates for Aqueduct Service Lie. Barceló informed yesterday that from Monday to Tuesday he will send to the SIA the complaints received and that if the latter does not comply he will call for hearings The Public Service Commission will hear from Monday to Tuesday the complaints formulated by neighbors of Santurce about the water rates recently promulgated by the Aqueduct and Sewer Service, which is directed by Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante. The President of the Commission, Mr. Antonio Barceló, Jr., reported yesterday
i Exclusa urges action in case ' of Aguadilla I Denounces crisis due to dispute with Milán. Muñoz will receive commission The representative to the House for the district of Aguadilla and Isabela, Mr. Rafael G. Exclusa, said yesterday that in Aguadilla there is a crisis in the Municipal Administration "and urges immediate action by the leadership of the Popular Party. Exclusa added that the crisis in the Municipality of Aguadilla is due to the discrepancies between the Municipal Assembly, the Popular Committee and the Mayor of that town, Fernando Milán Jr." and that he has had an exchange of impressions"! yesterday morning with the President of the Popular Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, who will receive next Monday at 4:00 p.m. a commission composed of members of the Municipal Assembly and the Popular Committee. It is the purpose of said commission to raise with Mr. Muñoz Marín the existing conflict between the first executive Milán, the Municipal Assembly and (several Popular leaders. "I can say," said Exclusa, "that I am convinced that with the people of Aguadilla, the electoral promises are not being fulfilled and that this is only due to the existing controversy between Mayor Milán, the Municipal Assembly and the People's Committee of the people. He also informed that the political and administrative controversy of Aguadilla has not been referred to the Popular Party Arbitration Court, but "we hope that Mr. Lula Muñoz Marín will be able to help resolve it. " bus merits, postponed for two se- ! mana" qu" "1 bill was appro- ' hado yesterday. The Representative from * New York said he will have * no objection to the legislation when it goes to the House for the second time. Unanimous consent is required for 1* measure. > Outlining the new preprogram of the ( War Department, a poto r (Continued "n page 34.) | |
So agreed at yesterday's meeting Calls for inclusion of the various alternatives with island environment __- Text of messages to legislators Party Presidents to also send cable to chambers of Congress The Joint Committee of the Puerto Rico Legislature on political status, meeting last night at the Capitol under the chairmanship of Senator Luis Muñoz Marín, unanimously agreed to address the Chairman of the House InBular Affairs Committee, Mr. C. Jasper Bell, endorsing his announcement to the Chairman of the House InBular Affairs Committee, Mr. C. Jasper Bell, and to the President of the House of Representatives. Jasper Bell, endorsing his announced purpose of holding hearings on all alternative" political "tatú" for Puerto Rico and "on the feasible economic conditions" that must accompany any political status." On this matter and also requesting round-table conferences, the Delegation agreed to address itself to Senator Millard E. Tydings, Chairman of the Senate Committee on Territories. Present at the meeting were Senators Muñoz Marín, Vicente Géigel Polanco, Leopoldo Figueroa, Samuel R. Quiñones and Bolívar Pagán, and Representatives Ernesto Ramos Antonlni, Celestino Iriarte, Antonio Pacheco Padró, Benjamín Ortlz, Alfonso Bujosa, Rafael Arrillaga Torrén," Ernesto Cádiz and Esteban Susoni. The text of the message approved and which will be sent today to Representative Jasper Bell reads as follows: "The Permanent Delegation of the Legislature of Puerto Rico on Political Status, created by law of said Legislature and in which all political parties are represented, met today and unanimously agreed to address you endorsing and supporting your purpose, as reported by the latter, that the Committee that you honorably preside, the Committee on Political Status, which you have the right to chair, should be elected by the Legislature. the Committee which you are presiding over to take into consideration the different alternatives of permanent political status which have support in the public opinion of Puerto Rico and to request that in any plebiscite project to be carried out, all the alternatives which would put Puerto Rico on a permanent political status be included. - We request that in any plebiscite project to be made, all alternatives be included which would put an end to the colonial alaterna, a solution which is as desirable for the United States as it is for Puerto Rico. We also wish to call your attention to the feasible economic conditions that must accompany any political status to give it permanence as we stated at the May 18th public hearing before the U.S. Senate Committee on Territories. We would appreciate the careful attention which we are sure you and the members of the Committee will give to this request of the people of Puerto Rico expressed unanimously through your Legislature. Greetings." The message to Senator Tydings reads as follows: "The Permanent Delegation of the Legislature of Puerto Rico on Political Status, created by law of said Legislature and in which all political parties are represented, meeting today unanimously agreed to address you in request that, in keeping with your previous purpose, which is the most democratic procedure, the public hearings originally announced by you be held, so that the different political status alternatives submitted by this delegation, to end the colonial system, a solution which is as desirable for the United States as it is for Puerto Rico, may be discussed at length. We believe that the data and arguments that may be presented in these public hearings could guide the criteria of a number of Senators or have the necessary information available in the record. We also unanimously requested the opportunity for round-table discussions in which the economic conditions that must prevail for any political status to be permanent could be discussed with the depth that the importance of the case demands. Another of the agreements of the delegation was to send a message to Congress, signed by the presidents of the different political parties of the Island, urging action on the Puerto Rico problem, and requesting that it be channeled through a democratic consultation of the Puerto Rican people. The message will be sent directly and personally to each member of the U.S. House and Senate, with the signatures of the presidents of the political parties. It was also agreed to send a message to Commissioner Roaldento (Continued on page 34).