THE N "N DO
38 Pages 5 Ctvs *
38 Hita" 5 Ctv". 2 Seccione" 2 Seccione" 2 Seccione" 2 Seccione" 2 Seccione" 2 Seccione"
2 Sections
n ario 1)E THE MORNING
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 6, 1945
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R
NUMBER 10367
YEAR XXVII
New York Harbor Strike to End Next Monday
The International Longshoremen's Association agreed last night that 500,000 on strike < nationwide i Automobile industry ( has a balance of one hundred thousand unemployed NEW YORkTs. CFU).- Member* of the 791st Committee of the International Association of Eltibodoroo, which was hollo on I strike, decided through , vote to return to work next Monday, on the moÁon, hostof the n*gocloations on the new con- ' trot with the colts are completed. WASHINGTON, 8. (FU)- * Joseph t. Devla. director of !- Caribbean Division of the ' Shipping Administration" 1 of War told Prenaa ( Cnlda today that the ootl- ' badoroa strike prevailing in the 1 port of New York will not ' adversely affect shipments* of aUmentoo for Port Ileo, as caoi all" k eiloo are shipped by *1 c Gulf. It is understood, however, that the said " Mielga aerd arranged for the end of this week, so that those shipments which have been made from the port of New York will not be delayed too long. c Regarding the passenger traffic issue, Davies said that the "George Washington" will remain "in more or less regular service" between Puerto Rico and the mainland; * v but that he could not predict how soon the lines would be able to resume passenger service. x WASRINOTON.'S (INS)- Coa- j rent and three thousand workers of the t Oil industry affiliated c ai American union CIO , agreed today to return to work- ( Jo, The pal* labor problem. ( which improved with the termination ( of the strike, worsened again ( when it was announced that three thousand employees of the oil company had quit their jobs, thus ending the nationwide strike which will affect 200,000 people. This' hue I- , ga will last only a few hours and is ( carried out as a "demonstration of forces." WASHINGTON. 5-<PU)-In his order last night to Secretary of the Navy James V. Forrestal, for the Manna to occupy the 27 oil refineries paralyzed by strikes, President Truman said "there is no other way to prevent the armed forces from running out of oil". It is recalled that for the last fifteen days 35,000 oil industry workers have been on strike. (The International News Service reports that the daily production capacity of the paralyzed refineries amounts to 1,875,000 barrels, or one third of the total capacity of the North American refineries). The following is a breakdown of the strike movements that have broken out across the nation: It is estimated that all of the strike outbreaks make up approximately 500,000 workers. A total of 120,000 workers, belonging to 450 closed mines, are unemployed, registering a loss of 661,000 tons in daily coal production. The next largest strike is in New York harbor, where 30,000 to 60,000 workers have been locked out. The Bureau of Labor will meet with union members to try to prevent the longshoremen's strike from spreading to other ports. Spokesmen for the shipping companies Bull Insular Linen and Porto Mee Linen said the longshoremen's strike is affecting shipments from Puerto Rico. While the strike continues, the activities of these companies are halted. The* spokesmen* on the matter declined to comment further. * According to Joseph Ryan, president of the National Longshoremen's Association, 80 striking longshoremen will return to work on Monday, pending negotiations with shipowners. Today 250,000 to 400,000 workers of telephone companies will meet to decide whether to strike. More than 70,000 lumber workers in the northwest are still out of work, despite efforts to resolve them. The automobile industry reports more than 100,000 workers on strike, while the automobile industry is on strike in the northwest.
The strike in N. Y. holds up sugar in Puerto Rico Forty thousand tons* await shipment at the* I*la 4iin dock* no fear of food shortages hint* of settlement. - An estimated 40,000 tons of sugar from Puerto Rico have not been able to be shipped to the United States because of the longshoremen's strike in New York. This was revealed yesterday by shipping authorities on the island. It is expected that this could greatly affect sugar shipments to the Continent and that the shipment of production could not be completed by November 15, as reported in EL MUNDO last Wednesday. The shipping lines that ship to the northern ports of the United States, where the refineries that receive sugar from Puerto Rico are located, were operating until yesterday under orders not to ship sugar or other cargoes that could be damaged. This measure was intended to prevent damage to the cargo. When sugar remains aboard a ship for a long time, the part at the bottom begins to get wet. There is hope, however, that the crisis has passed. Although the departure to New York of seven ships coming to load sugar was cancelled, two of the ships have been reassigned to this flh. At present there are 180 ships parked in the ports of New York due to the huolgary conflict. The Cape Chalmers, which was prepared to return from Ponce to New York without cargo, was ordered yesterday to proceed to the port of San Juan and take on sugar and general cargo. The reassignment of these two ships and the orders received by the Cape Chalmers are regarded as indications that the strike is nearing a settlement, although there were no official reports of a settlement as of last night. The shipping lines consider that, considering the war difficulties in which they have been operating, the present disturbance has not, so far, had any alarming overtones. Not a single ship has returned to the United States without taking (Continued on page 16).
Director of the Land Authority says it will not buy any more power plants Explains the* clarification* of that agency on the purchase of the Cambalache power plant. * Denies that the Authority has acted "feverishly*''.
The Director of the Land Authority, Mr. José Acosta Velarde, has written to our Director in response to certain statements of his published and commented on by EL MUNDO. Mr. Acosta Velarde indicates that he has not been quoted correctly, stating that his statement was that: "The acquisition of other factories is not in our plans". Likewise, Mr. Acosta Velarde explains the actions of the Auiorldad in the business of the purchase of the Central Cambalacho, alleging that he does not consider that it has acted feverishly in the same. In today's editorial columns, we refer to the communi-
the communication from the Director of the Land Authority. The following is the full text of the letter: "I refer to the editorial of EL MUNDO d" today entitled "Now we will buy Centrale"?" "In the first paragraph of said editorial reference is made to some statements by an official of the Land Authority to the effect that the program of the ■ Authority "-" the acquisition of land to comply with the provisions of the Law. It does not enter into । eete program ¡the acquisition of fac- ■ cakes." "First of all we wish to place on record quo 'm manifestations that (Continued on page 8).
By ol genera! Edward P. Ring, ir. dol Army of the United States, CHAPTER II ATLANTA. - When we were in Tarlac, we pooled our money and bought some meager supplies to establish an officers' mess. The food was bad, cqjpo always has been; but we got through. I guess thinking we would not be in prison long, we adopted a mental attitude that saved us. Those of us who had some extra money went to the village and bought provisions or radon. I was able to get some things-I needed any coaa I could get. The Japanese talked to me quludo all my luggage in Bataan, but they let me keep my pants and shoes. When I look back on my prison days in the Philippines, I realize that the prisoners were treated more leniently than in any other of the camps. We didn't have to work, and we all read everything we could get our hands on. In fact, we read almost to the point of learning by heart what we read. Several times I read an algebra textbook, and on occasion, when I indulged in a little mental entertainment, I would reminisce about my college days - a la Atlanta Superior School, when I struggled mb the ulgnatu-
ra. Had I known that I would have to spend many days at an algebra camp with an algebra book to pass the time, I would not have worried much or studied late at night when I wanted to go out with the other boys in my class. Being a native of Atlanta, I was naturally thrilled to find a copy of "Gone With the Wind," which I read and reread six times. I can now say that I am an authority on all things Rhett Butler and Scarlett O'Hara, not to mention life in the South at the time described in the novel. I reread Shakespeare many times, too: but the book I spent the most time really studying and enjoying was David Grayson's Adventures in Contentment. Sometimes I played solitaire -which I always considered a refuge for* Idiots. But this made me take my mind off the men, those men I had had to surrender and who suffered and died. Many of us in the camp who still had strength or humor left for it had exercised, but most of us were so weak that we could not do anything that required physical energy. I suppose if there can be any days" of prison f*Uc*s, those were for me the ones on which for coughing I felt that I could not do anything that required physical energy.
- threw* 100,000
The story of the Bataan Wainwright "man" brutally beaten by the Japanese during the period of horror at Camp Karenko.
I could escape from everything around me, because I did not know that before long I would be living in the reign of terror in Karenko. We were transferred by rail from Tarlac to Manila and from there by ship to Takao and later to Karenko. The conditions of the trip were not too bad considering the circumstances. The railroad transportation was good, as we were traveling with Japanese soldiers, and we were therefore a little better off. General Wainwright and I shared a cabin on the haita ship Takao, but from Takao to Karenco all the prisoners in our party were shipped in the hold. It was like stowaway travel: but worse; for we were so cramped that we could not move about and had to follow the Asiatic custom of sleeping on the floor. When one man wanted to go back, we all had to go back. Now that it is all over, I remember sleeping in that way at school, but of course under entirely different circumstances. On that ship, however, my memory was not carried away by fantasy. We were given three meals a day - if you can call them meals - "rice, more rice, and a little more rice, but for us they were meals, and we were not allowed to sleep on the ship.
PRESIDING JAPANESE CHAMBER
* . To Toshio Shimada, chairman of the House of Representatives" of the Japanese Diet. Shima da, who was Minister of Agriculture and Trade in the Cabinet of General Kuniaki Kolao, was appointed chairman of the House on June 6. (Aneciada Press Photo) They will fight Ledo's appointment. Del Toro Fonfría* announced that he would "oppose it in the Senate. He spoke with Attorney By Carló~Rlvera Hernándeo Editor of EL MUNDO "Not only will I not vote in the next meeting of the Legislative Assembly in favor of the appointment of Carlos del Toro Fernández for San Juan Municipal Judge, but I will fight said appointment," said yesterday the senator for San Juan, Ernesto Juan Fonfrias, Esq. adding that "I can assure that my colleagues, Lic. Eugenio Font Suárez and José Portilla, representatives to the House for the district of San Juan, are in the same irrevocable position". When asked by Senator Fonfrías if he would raise his opposition to the appointment of Mr. Dsl Toro Fernández to the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, he stated that "this is not a matter to discuss with Muñoz", adding that he had already conferred with the Attorney General, Mr. Enrique Campos del Toro, about the particulsr. In the different chambers of the District Courts of San Juan and the offices frequented by the lawyers, there was great interest yesterday in "1 appointment extended by Governor Tugwell to Del Toro Fernandez, which was reported by EL MUNDO in yesterday's edition. - Several" San Juan lawyers offered different opinions" about the appointment and when a group was discussing in the "hallway" of the San Juan District Court the possibility of a "piquetrar" the Court (Continued on page 22.)
Bell and Marcantonio intend to discuss Puerto Rico's situation with the President; Cordero will be in San Francisco on the 12th.
Difficulties in the importation of codfish The trade objects to the* (term* of contract* signed by the Government Addresses memorial to the agencies Proposes agreement* in connection with pe*ca rate* and .*Noting their reasons for not being able to import codfish into Puerto Rico under the terms of existing contracts, the importers have addressed a memorial to federal officials in Washington, in which they also point out alleged injustices which, in their opinion, are contained in the contract signed by the federal government. The memorial was addressed to the All-Income Tax Corporation and the Federal Economic Administration. These were the agencies which signed the contracts with Canada and Newfoundland covering the purchase of about 20,000,000 pounds of dry, semi-dry and wet cod during the current fishery. The original contracts were signed by the federal agencies and the Canadian and Newfoundland suppliers. In preparation for the private importation of food into Puerto Rico after October 15, Wáshlngton asked the local cod importers to "take over those contracts," The memorial states that the conditions "will be too strict and rigid to be negotiated within the ordinary practices of trade and commerce. The Puerto Rican importers" - who handled before the war most of the ha- 1 calao business - have made known three main objec- ( Jeclones to the signed contracts: that the form of payment is unfair to the importers: that the inspection requirements are detrimental to the importers, and that the prices accepted by the United States Government" a) M signing the contracts" are too high. Under the "ordinary practices" of pre-war times, the ha- , calan was shipped to the Puerto Rican impor- (adores on the ha-|, the draft was drawn at sight against shipping documents, and the "invoices were payable upon receipt of the goods in San Juan. Within the terms of the contracts signed by the Government and which are those which would be imposed upon the private Importers the Newfoundland pro- 1 veers require! an Irrevocable letter of credit, covering the Amount of the entire catch, before "c a single shipment is made. This involves the fixing of a credit of 54,O<X),OOO before a single shipment is made. The customary practices in past relations between Canadian suppliers and local importers required the ins- । pecclon and acceptance of the codfish conslg- ( nacionei upon arrival at the Island's ports. The current contra' toa require a final inspection of the suppliers at the point of shipment. The importers point out that this would force them to bear the losses due to damaged cod in transit, since there is no provision for reimbursement of any product which the local Health or Customs Inspectors determine is not in good condition for sale after arrival on the Island. Regarding prices, the memo- . i rial says that the average price of the (continued on page 22.)
Quiñones issues warning on 5% payment Insists farmers send the notification received as soon as possible The president of the 1a Aioclaclón de Agricultor**, Lic. Jo*é Ramón Qulñonei, is of the opinion that any farmer who pays the five percent tax *ohre compensation*" received" from the government, even if he does so h". The Government, even if he protests, runs the risk of losing the money paid in case it is decided that, in accordance with the Law, no such tax can be levied on the said income. In referring yesterday to the cessation of a farmer who paid the five percent, as required by the Island Treasury, the president of the farmers stated: "It has come to my knowledge that a farmer, a member of the Farmers' Association, has paid the Victory Tax, as required by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, with the corresponding surcharge, and with the intention of doing so under protest. Examining the documentation, we have great doubts as to whether this has been done in accordance with the requirements of the law, and this farmer is exposed to the risk that in case it is concluded that, according to the law, the Treasurer is not authorized to charge the farmers 5% of the Victory Tax, he will lose the amount already paid, It is the desire" of the Association to protect the rights of all its" associates and this can only be done by handling the cases in accordance with the" procedures established by law, for which* reason* we* once again* emphasize that every farmer associated with this Association must, as soon as possible, send us the notice and request for collection from the Treasurer of Puerto Rico. We must also warn our associate" that the extension requests being submitted by taxpayers, members of the Farmers' Association, are being processed directly by the taxpayer, represented by his or her stiffer, in accordance with :1o previously reported in the Press by us. I
The Authority, if the funds it is requesting are made available to it, expects to invest approximately sixty-five million dollars of which it expects to receive from the Federal Government. According to the data submitted to the Planning Board, $7,423,000 has already been allocated for this program from the lnsulmer funds. The Authority is now requesting in this plan an annual legislative appropriation of $3,700,000 for six years, beginning in 1046-47, or $22,2000,000; which, together with the funds currently being used, would add approximately thirty million dollars, to arrive at a total cost of approximately $65 million, with the addition of the federal funds expected to be received. It is considered that, even though this program for the construction of homes for low-income families" ln- । ' (Continued on page 16.)
PONCE-(By A. Jorge Montal-, vo)-After an interview in which an attempt was made to conciliate the seflore" Manuel A. Barreto, mayor of Mayagüez, and Eudaldo Báez García. representative to the House, it was not possible to reach * an understanding. The Popular Committee of Arbítrale then began the hearing of the charges mutually formulated by the two officials involved. The first witness at the hearing, which began at five o'clock in the afternoon at the Hotel Melia, was Mr. Baudilio Vega, the legal manager of the Railroad Company. He testified for an hour and a half, and was followed by Mr. Augusto Valentín Valentín Vlzcarrondo, Auditor Mu- 1
Intervention in the oil workers' strike
On the occasion of the strike* in the United Eatadnai Oil Industry, President Herry "- transmitted last night an order to the Secretary of the Navy. James the Navy will seize the 27 refineries affected by the work stoppage. Labor Secretary Schwellenbach (right) made a proposal for a "return" of the strike wave, which in the last 1" days has paralyzed the work of thousands of workers in the oil industry. - (Associated Press Photos)-
The Puerto Rico Homes Authority submitted to the Planning Board a program for the development of a homes project in each of the seventy-five municipalities of the island. The program "will be carried out during the next six years.
Measure provides appropriations to schools was approved by the U.S. Senate. -- The bill (number S-1316) has been introduced in the U.S. Senate, "promoting the teaching of languages in the higher education system of the United States and its territories, including Puerto Rico". According to our Reporter, said measure provides for the allocation of four million dollars (Continued on page 12).
The Arbitration Committee tries to conciliate Barreto and Baez A preliminary review was held with Dr. Susoni, but Mr. Barreto did not yield. "The hearing had not yet begun yesterday afternoon.
inlclpal. This" will be followed by Senator Santiago R. Palmer. The procedure was changed, allowing the defendants to be represented by lawyers. Mr. José R. Gelpf represents Mr. Barreto; and Mr. Báez García is represented by his brother Mario Enrique, and the latter is in charge of the examination of the witnesses. Mr. Baudilio Vega testified about the incident with Dr. Arana Soto in the previous administration. At three o'clock in the afternoon the hearing of the Mayagüez political lawsuit had not begun. Since yesterday at eight o'clock at night, the Court of ¡ (Continued on page 16).
The second one will raise the Independence case U*ará resolution that ** approved in Paris* against domination in 1" T*l" It is written in energetic tones Colonel Cordero *e is bicn'y opina not need to be confined By Charle" McCabe United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 5. (PU) - Repruacntanto Vito Marcantonio told the United Press today that he will see President Truman on the 15th of this month ■ to present to him, for the first time, the case for Puerto Rico's independence. At the same time, it has been learned that Representative C. Jaip'er Bell, Chairman of the House Insular Affairs Committee, also intends to discuss with the President the general Puerto Rican political situation. Maicantonio made the above statement when he was informed by the United Pennsylvania of the demand made by the labor delegation in Paris from seven Latin American countries that Puerto Rico be granted the right to vote for its own independence by plebiscite or by national assembly. Marcantonio said he was delighted with this news, and that he would "make it a strong point" in his conversation "on the problem of independence with the President. He added that he would "discuss it much" with Truman, but that the issue of Puerto Rican independence would be "at the head of the calendar." Meanwhile, it has been learned that the pronouncement by "enator Tydings on Puerto Rican Independence, which was expected "■- this week, "was probably postponed until next week, because - the Senator, *his office reported, is "awaiting additional information." (In connection with correspondent McCabe's allusion to a motion by Latin American labor delegates to the Labor Union Congress in Faris, correspondent F. Hardesty, of the United Press. Hardesty, .of the United Press, reports tonight from the capital of France that, in addition to other resolutions "near Spain and Argentina, the congress passed ntra, radactada in term* energetic", against United States domination in Puerto Rico). ... Tydings' office will probably make no statement until the Senate Territories Committee meets next "emana. The primary purpose of this meeting, which "will be held behind closed doors, will be to hear President Sergio Osmefla of the Philippines on the problems" determined by the Congressional intent to recognize Philippine Independence" on July 4, 1946, but it is more than likely that Puerto Rican affairs will also be lightly considered. Informed reports indicate that Tydings will make every effort to have the Independence bill favorably recommended to him before the end of 1945 and to have the Senate take favorable action on the measure in the course of 1946. In Insular circles here, the projected visit of Marcantonio and Bell to discuss the problems of Puetio Rico is considered significant, if only for the fact that both are considered to be opposed to the idea of the plan sustained by Muñoz Marin, containing three alternatives: Independence, statehood and some form of dominion. It is believed that Bell and Marcantonio are opposed to the inclusion of statehood in the plebiscite, and may recommend to the President that it not be included. Although Bal! has served on the Insular Affairs Committee for some time, at no time did he make a public statement regarding Puerto Rico's political status. However, sources close to Bell indicate that he will try to avoid the conflict with the President, but that if pressed, he will probably side with Tydings, proposing that all that can be offered to the Puerto Ricans in any congressionally sponsored plebiscite is the alternative of complete independence under the terms of the Tydlng Project. and the "status quo" with some* modifications toward" more" extensive" home rule. The same source speculates that Bell is likely to acquaint the President with the contents of the Bell Subcommittee's report, which was issued earlier this year and which was severely criticized by 1* alaga (continued on page 22).