THE WORLD'S DAILY MORNING NEWSPAPER
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Seccioni
I 38 Pininas 5 Ctv". 2 Sections
YEAR XXVII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 8, 1945
0493
Enterad as second class matter, Post Office, Ban Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 1
Private trade may import from today without restriction; Official plan ends October 15.
l Major General William C. Chase (above) is commanding the U.S. First Division of Intent which was selected to enter and occupy Tokyo, the capital of Japan, at the same time as the supreme Allied commander, Army General Douglas MacArthur. (Fofo PA) Control over beverages will be eliminated on October 17 and-- The action was approved by Washington. Whiskey not included On September 17, prisoner control of rums and alcoholic beverages on the island will be lifted, with the exception of whiskey. This action, which was recommended by the Office of Price Administration of Puerto Rico and which was reported by EL MUNDO in its August 25 edition, has been approved by the national offices of the OAP, according to an official dispatch received this morning by its terrltotaj administrator, Mr. Sam P. Gilstrap. He raised the control that existed before the war in the local market. By lévahtaroe the control on the prices of alcoholic beverages, the action will be applicable also to those which are Imported * the Island, with the sole exception of American whiskies. It has been reported that the reason for the exemption of whiskey from this order is due to the great shortage of this product at present, but that once production increases and stocks are sufficient to meet the demand, it will also proceed to lift the price control imposed on this beverage. In the local offices of the OAP, work was in progress on the preparation of the order for the lifting of price controls on alcoholic beverages, which will be made public during the course of the next sen.Upon receipt of Wáshlngton's notification approving the OAP's recommendation in connection with this matter, Gilstrap Ma , told THE WORLD that "I am delighted with this message, as we are implementing the policy of lifting price controls and restrictions on the purchase * and sale of various articles. In the face of the war, it is our mission to liberalize our resources for the benefit of the people, provided we can safeguard and guarantee to them that they will not be deprived by shortages of the articles which are considered to be of primary importance." c Appears Lun Shen t LONDON, 7? (PU) - Moscow In- j form the Red Army found the well known Chinese doctor, ( Lun Shen, discoverer of the cure < for berlbori, in a comatose state, " on a stone dungeon, at Hoboe, 1 where he had been held by his 2 Japanese captors. d
The school director of San Juan, Mr. Miguel Meléndez Muñoz, in a letter that he addressed to the commissioner of the Government of the Capital, Mr. Luis V. Pino, expressed that he finds "uncontrollable the attitude of some teachers who are waiting for the beginning of classes to resolve! some, if they continue working in their respective schools that they exercise on property and other new ones, if they accept the appointments". He also informs him that by August 23rd, there were 40 unfilled teaching positions, and that, "after having increased the enrollment in many schools from 50 to 60, there are 12,000 children without a school in San Juan this year," adding that "to accommodate this surplus population, 300 classrooms would have to be built, and to discontinue 1 interlocking and double the enrollment, 288 would have to be built as well. He also indicates that according to the calculations of the engineer
T - f - 4 ugucuioH nei in*enivrc My twenty years with Mussolini Hitler did not fulfill pact that postponed the conflict
By Condo DINO GRAND! (Fascist Bx-Minister of Foreign Affairs and Former Ambassador of Italy in the Great-Bretafta). ARTICLE V (N. of the B.I- On May 23 do 1939, 1* military alliance was made between Hltlor and Mussolini, and ol "Pact of Acoro" was signed." Shortly thereafter, from his Italian embassy in London, Count Dino Grandi made a rare and enormous speech, stating that a new cycle of major triumphs for the two Fascist nations had begun.) My position in London is already painful. The French newspapers have embarrassed me by referring to me as the sole opponent of Mussolini and the Axis pact. London reported a rumor circulated in Rome that I was to replace Glano in the Italian Foreign Ministry and break the alliance with Germany. Hano communicated with me by telephone somewhat uncomfortably, becoming
uncomfortable, becoming the vehicle of Mussolini's orders for me to make public in a ■speech the unbreakable policy of the dictator and that I would have to justify it. To which I flatly refused. The next day arrived here from Rome, a letter of a speech accompanied by a threatening note warning me that I would become Count Sforza No. 2, if I refused to deliver it. That is, it would make me an exile by force of law. I refused for the second time. I could not sleep that night. My English friends, whom I had informed of this matter, advised me that the most appropriate thing to do, in this difficult period, was to remain in office in London. Finally, I resolved to obey orders against my will, answering "yes," when the next day the delivery was again received from MuMollnl. (Continued on page 22.)
I - üavis assures lisia there will be price control i OAP will strive to | maintain present basic prices, says ; Studies probable । I change program ' Proposed revision will make control more difficult, stated yesterday By RUTH BROOM IN8 Correspondent. WASHINGTON. 7. (TN8) - The' Director of the Office of Price Administration's Ninth Department, Mr. James Davls, assured the people of Puerto Rico today that if the emergency food program is modified, his office will make every effort to maintain the current maximum prices on basic commodities, and will fight to lower those prices in the future. "If the program is altered, so that many products return to the book market," said Davls, "there will have to be a re-adjustment in the price controls. So, we are making a.careful study of this plan in order to keep prices as low as possible." According to his belief, the proposed revision will make it more difficult to control prices, since the commercial cost will have to be included in the new maximum prices. "We will have to make a readjustment in the maximum prices, so that the merchants will be convinced that a fair and equitable price is assured," said Davls, "but this cannot be done at the expense of the consumer. However, I want the people of the island to know that OAP is doing all it can to deal with these problems, as we are anxious to assist both the merchant and the consumer to return to normality with the end of the war. '
Meléndez Muñoz reports on San Juan school problem
He expresses that with the allocation of $50,000 only sixteen more classrooms can be built. - He complains about the doubtful attitude of the teachers, the municipality, the proi
He complains about the hesitant attitude of the teachers, the municipality, the allocation of $50,000 provided by the Board of Education, for new classrooms, only giving it for 16. - We publish below the following text of the communication from Mr. Meléndez Muñoz to Commissioner Luis V. Pino, who had denounced to the School Director that there were classrooms without students in several schools: "In response to the indications and suggestions you made to me by telephone a moment ago, I immediately called Mr. Rodríguez López, Superintendent of Schools in this district, to tell him about the case of the Gautier Benitez School. On all the matters you discussed on the telephone, I want to give you some information for your government, not only as a member of the Honorable Board of Commissioners of the Government of the Capital and a person intimately interested in school affairs, but as a private friend. (1) At this date, according to reports from the Superintendent of Schools of San Juan, there are about 40 unfilled teaching positions. All of the teachers to work in this school district were appointed in the month of July, so that they would begin work on the opening day of classes, which was the 6th of the current school year. Of these teachers, the vast majority are direct appointees of the Department of Instruction and 56 municipal teachers. All teachers appointed were notified by telegraph (continued on page 8):
For many soldiers the term!- ' nation of the serra means tre- . gua in their military duties, but as the caftans have ceased j f-ego, there is one unit of the Army Jen Puerto Rico which has begun a mission which will extend many months into the post-war period-the Licensing Center of the Military Department of thea Antilles. Commander Hugo D. Storer is in charge of the Licensing Center and is carrying out one of the missions of the Department. Winston, Field Director of the Federal Housing Agency, today praised Puerto Rico's home construction and slum clearance programs, and pledged that the Federal Housing Administration will cooperate fully in securing through local authorities all needed building materials for the island. "Puerto Rico has several plans for postwar construction," Winston said, "and we are anxious to assist them* in getting that important work started." Mr. Winston further stated that federal agency officials were pleased to meet with Senator Juan Fonfrlaz, Chairman of the San Juan Municipal Homes Authority during his recent visit to San Juan, and added: "Senator Fonfrlaz gave us an overview of the Board's plans for the Island, and I believe he came back with some first-rate ideas on home construction methods that may be applicable to his projects for San Juan.
Change announced in Federal Bank agricultural loans
Due to recently* passed legislation, the Federal Land Tank of Baltimore, Puerto Rico branch, can make loans to farmers on a different basis than before. According to statements made by Mr. J. William Miller, Vice President and General Manager, the loans will be made as follows: "The borrowing margin now ranges from $190.00 to $150.00.
The borrowing margin now ranges from $190.00 to $50,000.00; the basis on which the Bank conducts its business has also been liberalized and loans are now being made on a first mortgage basis on farms up to 65 percent of their normal farm value. The collateral required to secure loans is on farms (Continued on page 8).
Congressional Leaders Confer with Truman M 3 Ti/ President Truman Confer with Congressional Leaders in his White House office moments before the IckísIs tlvss. Congressmen are (Isqulerds s dewhiñ " CPI Leadership Acts Against Popular Party, Muñoz Says
í¡ 50,000 Puerto Rican soldiers discharged from the Army the Hita - civilian, the number í of points required having been reduced to 80.-The work at Buchanan
- The work at Buchanan is the Army's most important at the present time, watching over the Center's responsibility to channel the soldiers into their new life as civilians. ) "Just as an efficient recruiting system was organized at Fort Ru- ■ chanan in the early days" of the war to prepare as many men as quickly as possible for active service, "says the commander, "it is now the mission of the L- , cenclamlent Center to return as quickly as possible these individuals to their companies in civilian life. More than 50,000 Puerto Rican "soldiers" are to be discharged, and the 1,100 men already discharged with only the beginning of a great task ahead. With yesterday's news that the maximum score has been reduced to 80 points and the maximum age is 35, and with the prospect that the requirements for discharge will soon be lowered, the commander hopes that his unit will be augmented to meet the increased requirements in the future. As the 65th and 296th Regiments begin their invasion of the Department, returning from their respective overseas posts, Maj. Storer expects the Licensing Center to be ready to function at full capacity. Personal advice and warnings concerning future work to the men who are about to embark on their new countrymen's life, and their responsibility as an individual of the community, with the important workings of the Licensing Center, in which they take real pride. These warnings and consultations are ba- । jo the direction of Lt. Slech- । ta, who heads a group of sol- 1 (Continued on nAalna 29 1
Urges demarcation of the camps before accusation made by Concepcion Speaks of maneuver against his party Cites actions of his in relation to 'status' and presidential action Cor Teofilo Maldonado Editor of EL MUNDO The president of the Popular Democratic Party, dnn Luis Muñoz Ma- , rln, commenting Ir" statements , of the president of the Pro ! Independence said yesterday that "the. camps must be demarcated as of today." He stated that "the executive directors of the Pro Independence Congress are in a frank campaign against the ' Popular Democratic Party and against the way in which our party has been fulfilling with the people its , Unequivocal commitment on the political status." Questioned yesterday about the statements made by the President of the Pro-Independence Congress, Mr. Gilberto Concepción do Gracia, in which he accuses him of "hindering the achievement of Independence and of having sabotaged in the capital of the United States the solution by giving his support to a measure of a colonial character", Mr. Muñoz Marin made the following statements to us: "It is clearly necessary to demarcate the camps. This has been increasingly clear for some time now. The executive directors of the Pro-Independence Congress are in an open campaign against the Popular Democratic Party and against the way in which our party has been fulfilling with the people its unequivocal commitment on the political status - a commitment that the political status will be resolved by the people themselves in a direct vote, separate from the elections; and a commitment to work for that direct vote to be held at the end of the war. ( In Affecto, the day after the war ended, the Legislative Commission on Status met, at my summons, and I send you a cable (Continued on page 13).
|~WASHINGTON. 7. (PU)- The State Department declared today that Puerto Ricans will not need to carry passports when Pan American Airways" starts a new route next winter, calling at Bermuda on its trips from Miami to San Juan and vice versa, a^^ HIN .... T ° N ' ' The Acting Interior. Abo Fortes, said that department had not yet recommended any candidate for the position of Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico. The two previous recommended candidates of the Department of the Interior, namely, Mr. Bosch and Mr. Ortis, are not considered suitable. Fortes said, moreover, that, as to the department's other recommended candidate, Dr. Picó, any steps in connection with his nomination for Commissioner of Instruction have been taken by Case Blsnca, WASHINGTON, 7, (FU)- Congressman Vito Marcantonio told the United Press today that he is preparing to see President Tramen to "give him a proper perspective on the Puerto Rican political situation." He added that the President "has been hearing too much from advocates of the "counterfeit" Tydlngs-PUtero project, such as MuAos Marin, Tugwell and PiAero." I
So announced . yesterday Secretary I of the Interior The OS continues to sell I until the date the official plan ceases . I Prices will remain subject to OAP Ickea hopes that the trade will be careful of its responsibility By CHARLES MC CABE | United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 7. (PU) - Secretary Harold L. Ickes announced today that the Department of the Interior, after consultation with the Department of Agriculture and the Office of Price Administration, has decided to terminate the food program in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands on October 15, 1945. On that date, said Tckes, the Supply Bureau in San Juan will stop selling to wholesalers cheese, evaporated milk, refrigerated meats and pork, bacon, hams, pigs' feet, lard, salted and smoked fish, canned sardines, laundry soap, rice, corn flour, corn ' grain, soca beans, and garlic banzos. After this, the aforementioned foods will be handled entirely by private commerce. Secretary Tckes added that, * although sales of these essential items will not be discontinued until October 15, Importers and wholesalers may purchase and sell any or all of the above items to their Virgin Island and Puerto Rican customers prior to that date, subject to the current maximum prices established by OAP. This, according to business circles, means an immediate green light to Importers, who have been very concerned as to their precise status since reports originated that the Government's food program will end on December 1. > Ickes stated that the green light applies to both U.S. and non-U.S. importers. He added that, from October 15 onward, any changes in maximum prices will be a matter for OAP. B The Secretary further said that the time has *" come to return the J food program to the private channels," and that "it is the firmest hope of all agencies of the Government that the trade will be able to take care of its responsibilities ' fully by seeing to it that the Island । is adequately supplied with its essential foods, beginning ' October 15,' j The Secretary also disclosed that; . . since the day before the announcement of Japan's surrender, the Departments of the Interior and Agriculture and OAP have been working on the possibility of discontinuing the ' food program in the ' Islands. He said that "a complete review" had been made by the Department of Agriculture of the current and future stocks of staple foods, and it was concluded that the present and prospective situation in this respect is oueHB .*4 Ickes reiterated his oft-expressed view that it has always been the desire of the Department of the Interior to get out of the projections business, as soon as possible, "consistent with its obligation and responsibility during the war emergency to see that the Islands received sufficient quantities of food for their people." Upon learning of the announcement 'i<o|i i Secretary Ickes, trade circles in this capital showed astonishment, and said that they had been given to understand definitely by the Department of Agriculture and other high Government officials that the food program would be terminated on December 1, not before. The news came as a surprise to many sources, although all agreed that they were delighted with the news. Some expressed doubts that tes would be possible to purchase and distribute, as entallo, by ol October 15. ">""" Ickes' announcement came after the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce had informed its representative in Washington: J. Gus Lallando. that Vlcéns Ríos had stated that the food program would be terminated by the government on October 18. In making his announcement, Ickes ' tribute to those who operated ol #ro>." grama of food, since s|Mk iJK beginnings, in loe early days t*' the war.
Yankees are already in Tokyo
In a simple ceremony, the U.S. flag of Joe U.S.A. was presented at the Embassy. MacArthur The supreme allied chief paraded through the streets unescorted TOKYO, 8, (FU)-(Friday, 7, New Urk* time)The long road to. "d. Bataan and Corregidor, ended today at one o'clock in the morning for General MacArthur, as he raised the American flag at the United States embassy in the Japanese capital. In a simple ceremony, to which he arrived without escort through the streets of the city, where the Japanese public was concentrated in silence, MacArthur pronounced only a few words.In his speech, he asked General Eichelbergh, in his capacity as Commander of the Eighth Army, to raise the flag at the top of the Niistll co loca Mu yesterday in the Chancellery building. As Eichelbergh saluted Mac Arthur said to him, "General Etchelbergh, unfurl the flag of our country, and let it wave in the sun in Tokyo in all its glory, as a symbol of hope*, for the oppressed and a harbinger of triumph for "justice." General MacArthur, the troops and correspondents stood at attention and "moved as the flag was hoisted and the band of the 'Prlmqra Cavalry Division sang the national anthem. A chaplain heard the benediction and MacArthur and his entourage made their way to the waiting automobiles to visit other embassy quarters and return to Yokohama. - The American troops had entered Tokyo more than three hours earlier, although in smaller numbers than projected. The. First Cavalry Division and the Uaxaraa band in front of the TOO WÜfan aiMRhdiWitVr at eight o'clock in the morning. Earlier, it had been planned that the ■optimum and the Fifth Regiments of the First Cavalry Division would assemble at the railroad station and parade for two blocks to the embassy. MacArthur was expected to "nlorvlnlora in the parade, but the plan was modified at the request of the Supreme Commander, who said that the dignity resided in the simple. MacArthur left Yokohama for the ceremony at 2:00 a.m., accompanied by Generals Sutherland and Elche Bergh and other chiefs, and proceeded to the embassy by automobile along the Tokyo highway. During the journey, there were no military police, no guards of any kind. The Japanese had requested permission to station civilian police in Tokyo and along the route, as they would do with the Emperor, but MacArthur declined. The flag hoisted, as has been Jn- 1 prav- 1 formed, was the same 1 that flew over the Capitol do - Wáshlngton, the die do Poari Harbor 7 do diele more do 1941- the -usl was posterlombnlo Isada on Berlin, Rome and on a. The United States embassy in Tokyo suffered some damage । oh the North American air raids on the Japanese capital, and its mast was burned down; but yesterday another one was put up, The other buildings, including the residence where MacArthur will live, were not damaged. For several days, however, Mac Arthur will not reside in olla, as he has nabldo difficulties pa. to find offices and lodg- 1 too for his staff. The Fourth! General MacArthur 1 officially announced today that the (Allied occupation forces will consist of eighteen army divisions, plus the personnel of the 1 (Continued on page 23.) '
----1r~~ He entered the Japanese capital with his troops.
Health warns OS chief
De Hostos complains to Washington Nogueras protests the passivity with which the people view the problem De Hostos complains to Washington Nogueras protests the passivity with which the people view the problem De Hostos insists the Bureau of Supply put contaminated wheat flour on sale and, once the contamination is established by the Health Department, "The person responsible in this specific case will be Roy Schroeder, director of the OS, or the person in charge of the agency in the absence of Mr. Schroeder. This was reported to EL MUNDO by the Deputy Secretary of Health, Dr. Angel M. Marchand. When it was announced that the Bureau of Supply had received nudges to proceed to sift the flour once it had been fumigated, we asked Dr. Marchand what the attitude of the Health Department would be in this matter. It has been reported," he told us, "that the Bureau of Supply intends to offer the wheat flour for sale. The Sanitation Department has informed the Bureau of Supply that the sale of flour with any unclean substance is prohibited by the Federal Food and Drug Act and by the Insular Food and Drug Act. I refuse to believe," Dr. Marchand continued, "that Supply Bureau officials can insist on selling this flour when it is prohibited by these laws. If I put to* the voucher orota flour, I will examine it to see if it is in accordance with the requirements set forth by the laws. If it is not, we will proceed against the person responsible, which in this case will be either Roy Schroeder or the person in charge of the agency at the time the sale is made. i "The evidence we collect will be (Continued on page 13.)