THE WORLD
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. . 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 C tv ". 2 Sections
DIARIO DE la MARANA
YEAR XXVII
No Uqoldá loe bonoa oompradoa, M -" qus quien liquida" a Btlar.
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, APRIL 14, 1945.
Entered as second class matter. Poet Office, Sao Juan, P. B.
NUMBER 1043
ROOSEVELT BURIAL TO TAKE PLACE TOMORROW Truman to address Congress Monday MORE U.S. TROOPS CROSS ELBA.
- Fans fan out in front of Nazi capital A security blanket covers Ninth Army operations Hodges approaches city of Leipzig All indications are that Nazi resistance is collapsing in Berlin By BRUCE W. MUNN 13 (PU) - While the armored forces of the Ninth Army, already crossing the obstacle of the Elbe, are fanning out over the vast plain west of Berlin, under a secret military cloak, for security reasons, news comes from the front itself that the German resistance seems to have collapsed, even after the last assault on the capital of the Reich. Another" doapachoa of the front They report that another" tro" divisions of Lieutenant General Slmpaon arrived also at the river Elbe, in a front of 75 mile" that describes an arc to mono" of 45 mile" to the west" of the doatrulda and "entonelada lln.  The great military base of Leipzig is already within reach of the Allied artillery. Forces" of the First Army reached the" suburb" of Halle, baitlón of L'elpzlg, and it is possible already entered the square. News" omitted" by the Berlin radio, captured" in Paris", dlpen quo the" troop" of Eatado" United" o "tán to ten mile" to oeate and audoeite of Leipzig, in Merioburgo and Pegau. Officially, it was announced that the Second Armored Division of the Ninth Army marched to the front of the Simpton offensive, heading for Berlin, after crossing the Elbe River from Magdoburg and advancing five miles to the east, had taken up positions this morning less than 50 miles from the Nazi capital. At the same time, the Vermillion Correaponial reported that all the defenders on the Elbe River were not fighting more fiercely than those who defended the river banks and where the realatency on the last day had been virtually unnoticeable. Another" three" Slmpaon" divisions reached the Elbe at various points" between Harby, - ten miles to the Magdoburg county, and Wlttemberge, 55 miles to the north, in a straight line. Between these divisions an unidentified one reached the Elbe at Tangermuende, less than 45 miles to the west of Berlin, but it is not confirmed that the Nazla flew the bridge over the Elbe at Tangermuende and Wlttenberge. First Army of the offensive towards Leipzig in the face of sporadic realatoncia. Column" armored" of Hodges passed Welmnfer", 14 mlllaa to the southwest of Leipzig, mlentraa towards the ho.'te another column arrived at Halle, to the noroeato of Leipzig and to little mé" of píen mlllaa of liaison with lo" moa. In the course of these operations, numerous infantry forces following in the footsteps of the armored column were occupied and 26,000 prisoners were taken. South of the First Army, Patton's Third Army continued to advance on an 87-mile front between the Naumburg and Coburg lines, 43 miles from the Czecho-Slovak border. ! A column of Patton advanced ■ola mlllaa from" the right bank of the Saale River, entering Droyalg. On the other side of Patton's front, another "element" of the Third Army entered the town of -jena, "obro ol Saaio itself. At the far end, another Patton force entered Kronach. In the meantime, the Seventh Army's forces limited their operation, consolidating their position before resuming their offensive in Nuremberg. Me" al "ur, the First Army fiancé", after do occupy Raatadt v Baden, "egula advancing toward the mr. in operation apparently (Continued on page 3UJ . a- ' - .... X ... . ni
> A ■ nBK Ab- W ' fe _ _ r ar ' ' '' ''X" /' ■ & ■ z ; t
THE NEW PRESIDENT AND HIS FAMILY- President Harry S. Truman is shown here accompanied by au "aflora capona (a laqulerda) and au daughter Margaret. The photograph was taken in Call City, Missouri, when "it was officially announced that Truman would accompany FDR on the ballot as a candidate for the United States Vice-Presidency".
Muñiz comments on the Instruction Portfolio
Insists that an educator be appointed to the post of Commissioner Questioned yesterday by an editor of EL MUNDO as to whether he had taken any steps regarding the appointment of the new Commissioner of Education, on behalf of the Puerto Rico Theater Association, the president of this entity, "eflor Luí"'Mufilz Souffront, declared that "I* have taken some steps" and I continue to pay attention to the matter".
Soltero will leave tomorrow for San Francisco He will be an observer at the Conference that will begin on April 25 Dr. R "f "el Soltero Peralta, member of the Executive Committee of the Pro Independence Congress of Puerto Rico, will leave tomorrow, Sunday, for San Francisco. Dr. Soltero Peralta was appointed yesterday by the President of the Pro-Independence Congress, Dr. Gilberto Concepción de Gracia, to represent the organization as an observer at the conference to be held in San Francisco starting April 25, on problems of war and peace. Mr. Soltero Peralta, as reported yesterday by the CPI, constitutes the advance guard of the Congressional Delegation: "a olroa mlembroa Iran probably the "emana next deapuéa that ae receive a report aobr" the advisability that" elloa aalgan (Continued "n page 20.)
By LVLK C. WILSOhP WASHINGTON, 13. S. Truman ae taken charge of 1oa deaUnos of the Nation, which is still under the effects of the profound grief caused by ct sudden death of President Roo"-' -velt. While the mortal remains of Roo "evelt are on their way to this capital for his countrymen to pay him their last respects tomorrow, Truman occupied the White House and shortly thereafter conferred with the military leaders to reaffirm his pledge to continue the war in the East and West to a victorious conclusion. The new President occupied the official office at 9:00 a.m. and two hours later the Secretary of War, Henry L. Stlmion, the Secretary of the Navy, James Forreatal, and three members of the Joint Chiefs, Admiral Leahy and General King, were conferring with him. It is certain that Truman told the chief that he would not modify the air policy pursued by the late President Rooaevelt, and that he had obtained the latest report on the development of Allied operations on the various battle fronts.
The "efflor Muflí" Souffront "1 was asked by four editors if the Maeitro" Aioclaclón had any preferential candidate for Ja portfolio of Inatrucclón. "No," was his immediate response, adding: "There are plenty of good candidates in our queue. Lo" that "e" have mentioned during eato" last" mein" in the Press "on all"' member" of the Aaoclaclón de Maeitro". New "1ra recommendation e" that "e" make a good "choice. I will have new cooperation for the good of the public in "trucclon and of the new pal",
As reported exclusively by EL MUNDO, the "office" of the "A "ocladón de Maeatro" "e have received by the "eflor Mufilz Souffront telegram"" of board" lócale", of (Continued on page 11)
Senate and House join in mourning Roosevelt's death
They approved resolutions of condolence and devoted three minutes of concentration to pray for his soul. - At eleven o'clock last Thursday night, the Senate and House of Representatives held a "funeral service in honor of the late President of the United States, Franklin D. Roosevelt. A "deep rooom prevailed throughout the ceremony, which was attended by a large audience in the gallery.
It is expected that Truman's meeting with a military and political advisor will precede a joint meeting of the Senate and House of Representatives at which Truman will probably address a speech to the nation and the world. Turnan is certain to reaffirm and repeat last night's pledge to devote the entire aealong aa
English officer praises the work of the Puerto Ricans Stokes sees them in Panama in combat action and congratulates the troops GENERAL HEADQUARTERS. PANAMA CANAL DEPARTMENT.-The 'Insular' troops in charge of the 'anti-aircraft defense' of the Panama Coast Artillery Command, received a commendation from Brigadier A. E. Stoke"-Rohert", commander of the British Southern Caribbean Aroa. x z " (Continued on page 30)
In the House, the Speaker, Dr. Franclaco M. Suaonl, addressed the House, Immediately after calling the House to order to inform the House of the death of Prealdente Rooaevelt. "A friend of Puerto Rico has died," he said- "Upon hearing of the death of Prealdente Rooaevelt, I received a great shock. Forgive me that my words have been cut short tonight." Dr. Su "onl was visibly moved and "sorry" he could speak. Once he had finished, the aubaecretarlo of the House, Herminio Concepción do Gracia, read a letter from the Speaker to the Governor of Puerto Rico, Dr. Rexford Guy Tugwell, on the occasion of the infauato auceao. The text of this communication was published in yesterday's edition. The Speaker, at the request of Mr. Erneato Ramoa Antoninl and aecundadn n "r el licenelado Eudal(Continued on page 30)
THE* WAR IN WESTERN FRZNTK SYNTHESIS! While the "armored" Ninth Army "bu out" that crossed the Elbe River is advancing across the "plain" west of Berlin, under strict military reserve for security reasons, news from the front indicates that the German "army" has "de "plmn "d even in front of the "last" access" to the capital of the Reich. Be Reports that Patton's forces "rutted the Mulde River, west of Dresden, which means that they have flanked Lelpaig to the south. R U I O-ALKHIM AN FRONT : Moscow officially announced the
Instead of calling the leaders to the White House he went out to lunch with them.
Republicans offer cooperation to the new President
He will faithfully follow President Roosevelt's program toward the achievement of victory and the establishment of permanent world peace.
energy""1 Roosevelt's program for winning war and securing peace. As Truman began his presidential duties, Secretary of State Edward Stettinlus. visited the diplomatic representatives of Great Britain, Russia, and China to confirm the new President's wishes that the San Francisco Conference be held in accordance with the prepared plans. Likewise, the flags throughout the pala and its possessions" will be at half-staff, in "eflal d" mourning for the death of Rob "evelt, for thirty days." The President's remains left Warm Springs today and are expected to arrive in Washington at 10:00 a.m. tomorrow morning. They will be laid to rest in the East Room of the White House, where a brief funeral service will be held in the afternoon. The body will not be veiled: officially and no photography" of the funeral will be permitted on Saturday. The "eftora J|oo "evelt requested that no flowers be sent to the White House. It is expected that the son of the deceased, Elliot Roosevelt, will return from London in time to attend the funeral ceremony, but it is doubtful that Jamea, another son, will arrive in time for the funeral. Two other sons will not be present. President" Truman expressed (Continued on page 20.)
Governor Tugwell yesterday returned to the Senate, without his signature, S. P. 4, by Senator Vicente Gétgel Polanco, known as the Tenancy Act, regulating rental rates and freezing them at those prevailing in October, 1942. The Governor offered two amendments to said bill. One of them is to the effect that the bill should be amended to facilitate or guarantee that a landlord may evict a tenant when he legitimately demonstrates that he wants his house for himself to live in. The other objection of the Island executive is that the Administrator created in the Act should be given broader powers to fix rents (continued on page 20).
Yesterday Governor Tugwell requested the people of Puer-; to Rico, through a proclamation, to suspend all activity until the burial of the remains of President Roosevelt in the United States. The proclamation extols the person-1 lldad of the illustrious statesman, stating that "he was particularly kind to the Puerto Rican people, having exerted all his influence for the strengthening of the pro-1 pious government and the establishment of better conditions of life for all the people of the Island. In its dispo-1 haughty part the proclamation reads: "I, R. G. Tugwell, Governor, of Puerto *Rlco, request that" the People of Puerto Rico iuipenda, loda j activity that can confllglr with the expression of mourning and reverence Via which we must, all dedicate ourselves, until his burial; "I ask the Churches to hold memorial services for parishioners on the occasion of the funerals; ' "I extend to "u Reflora widow and of- i má" mourners, in the name of the Governor of the people of Puerto Rico, the expression of our most" heartfelt I
THE WAR IN SYNTHESIS
conquest of Viene and reported that other" Soviet forces" occupied Hodonln, the bastion nasl aobre the Morava river, very close to the Brunn (Brno) battalion. Everything indicates that the final battle for the capital al "maim, on the Oder aector, is in full swing. PACIFIC FRONT! Thousands of tons of bombs" have caused a large fire" in the Tokyo arsenal, which still burned for many hours after" the withdrawal of the" > Allied planes". In Okinawa, the" Americans repulsed the" Japanese" counterattack" in the south of the island.
W Vi' ' " A, IR" - ' ; A i? 1L. t fP&w i i i
FDR AND TRUMAN DURING THE PRKSID ENCIA!- This historic photograph shows the late President Franklin D. Roosevelt meeting with his running mate in the 1844 presidential election, now President Truman. It was at this meeting that the Democratic candidates planned the campaign that culminated in Roosevelt's third reelection to the presidency.
The slum freeze project has already been approved by the Authority. - Funds are expected from the U.S. or P.R. The Puerto Rico Homes Authority approved plans to prevent the expansion of slums in those municipalities under its jurisdiction. The project was conceived and drafted by *1 president of said organization, Dr. A. Fernós Isern, "with the purpose of freezing the development of suburbs". The plan adopted consists, as reported yesterday, in providing for the development of appropriate land, which will be divided into lots of not less than 300 square meters, The plots will be provided with the indispensable public facilities and services to ensure good standards of sanitation, including streets, electricity, water, sewerage, etc.. The plan also provides for the lease of plots of land of this nature, at a low annual fee, to low-income families interested in building their homes on these plots and who, in the absence of this service, would resort to the slums or would create new unhealthy housing areas in open violation of the Law. It is provided in the plan that the dwellings to be built in these te- ? (Continued on page 20)
Demonstration of deep mourning in the Island for the death of FDR Paralyzed" all activities as a sign of condolence. - Religious services for the soul of the President. - Messages sent
Remains will arrive today Saturday in Washington Ocena" touching occurred at "aiir yesterday from Warm Spring" Mrs. Roosevelt goes with retinue In the Senate session yesterday several" senators wept unconcealed WARM SPRÍÑG8?~13. íPU>-The body of Roosevelt was removed today from the small White House, at Warm Springs, with the sound of muffled drums, the cortege moving slowly toward the railroad station, a mile distant, Hundreds of people crowded along the road, with their heads uncovered, The train left for Waihlngton at 11:13 a.m., eastern war time. On the way to the station, senior naval officers had stood guard of honor behind the catafalque. They were followed by Mrs. Roosevelt's widow, ve", tlda d" black, ron fur coat. "She sat stiffly, in absolute posture. Behind her, went "ente- । do "Pala," the Pre- ; "ideute's favorite dog. The sick of patAHsi" Infantile patAHsi" of! Warm Springs sanitarium had come out of their" dormitories to see the funeral cortege pay. Graham Jackson, a non-commissioned black officer, who had been a favorite of Hoogevelt's, broke away from the circle of mourners on the accordion which he played many times for the President, and, as the cortege approached, played the pieces "T, Dvorak" and "Homeward" by the New York Symphony Orchestra, and later, "More Land of You, My God". Next to him was the gray-haired black Tom Logan, who, fourteen years ago, served as Rooaevelt's guest at Warm Springs, his beard trembling with emotion, his shoulders shaking in nervous shock, and the faithful servant said: "Lord God, take care of him now. Tribute in the Senate Numerous" senators wept, slnxoculting their" tears," when the leader of the Senate Democratic bloc, Alben Barkley, said at the funeral service of the high body today: "We do not honor him" because history allowed him to rise to the position of world leader. We honor him I for his personal qualities"", for । his moral and intellectual stature. We honor him as an American and as a citizen of the world, in the true sense of the word. I Whenever'men love 1* ! freedom, whenever they shed "u I I blood for high Ideals of humanity, his name e" and will be loved in i all the world, now and forever." Republican Senator Vanden| berg said that "a triumphant voice must be his monument," The Seriate was filled with publicl' co, in the galleries; an atmosphere of deep emotion and recollection being observed. Funeral at White House White House announced early this morning a memorial service for Roosevelt, to be held in the White House Orwellian Hall, Saturday, at 4 o'clock in the afternoon, officiated by the Rt. Rev. Angus Dunn, Episcopal Bishop of Washington, Howard S. Wilkinson, of St. Thomas Church, and John G. McGee, of St. John's Church, both of Washington. The time of burial, to be held Sunday at Hyde Park Cemetery, with the Rev. Anthony of St. James Church officiating, has not yet been announced. White House Secretary Jonathan Daniels announced that there will be no wake for the remains and that the number of people attending Saturday's service will be limited, since the White House's Orangethorpean Hall can only accommodate two hundred people. In this religious service, members of the Rooaevelt family, personal friends, senior government officials, the heads of foreign diplomatic representations and the senators and representatives designated by Congress will be present. Daniela also informed that the train with Roosevelt's remains will arrive in Washington in the first hours of Saturday. When asked if flowers could be sent, she said, "The President does not want flowers," adding that many have been received at Hvdo Park, Mrs. Roosevelt's widow, and Roosevelt's secretary, Stephen (Continued on page 30).
- i condolences at this time of grief, at this general loss. i "But to the other peoples of the world I extend on your behalf, in conjunction with our condolences at the general bereavement, the glorification of the perfect consummation of a conflagra-! The office of Governor Tugwell was invaded by representatives of foreign pal- ( tantea de pal""a foreign pal", Inaular Government functionaries and citizen "promínente" who "expíes" ron au condolencia con moti- ¡ vo de I" mui-te del Prealdente Roo-evelt Entr" los qu" vlillaron La Fortaleza con "at" propósito -- encuentran los siguientes: the judges of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico: *1 Executive Council, in pl "I no; Manuel Morillo. Consul of the Dominican Republic; Artuno No- ¡ ble, Consul of England; Gustavo j I (Continued on 1" pg. 13)