the daily morning newspaper
40 PAGES 5 Ctv". 2 Sections
40 PAGES 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
YEAR XXVII
Let's support the men who made
NUMBER 10452
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 29, 1945
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. B
$11,785475 recommended for construction work
Planning suggests such investment for fiscal year 194647 Major appropriation for roads Followed by appropriation for construction of school classrooms $11,785,475 is the fund" recommended" by the Board of Fia* nlflcaclón, which" pr**lds Dr. Rafael Pled, par* l "gl "l*tlva action, - to invest"" during the "fio flaca! 1946-47 "n the public works" program" of the Government of Puerto Rico. For "this program, the Government has already "proved expenditure" to "c "nd "nd "n- 1 te" to $21.94?,019, aalgnar "o * a "lgnar "e before" June 30, 1046. I In regard to the Ilohal program of the Board's "wool" ' "a "llow", this organization has "xpr" "xpr""d to the Governor and *1 Praaupüeato Bureau that "the grand total of the estimated costs" for all "the" work, whether or not it is to be carried out during "t" period of "the" "a "llow", exceeds $800.000,000 at present, and may be considered as the best official estimate currently available of Puerto Rico's "permanent" need for improvement. Sata figure exceeds the total estimate made last year for the" we estimate at $160,000,000." This entire increase is for public" -mpreaaa, since the total estimate for the agencies supported by tax revenues"" has remained virtually unchanged."" The program for* permanent improvements" of the tax-supported agencies, "abosed by the Planning Board for the next six fiscal afto" amounts * $54,885,700. In addition" to the $11,785,475 indicated for fiscal year 104847, the Board proposes" to provide $15,363,350 in 1947-48; $9,550,150 in 1948-49: $7,469,60 in 1949-50; $4,864,850 in 19MW1; $5,852,175 in 195182 The following is a list of the distribution of the $11,785,475 recommended by the Board for the next fiscal year, by specific projects! Capitol Insular! no additional funds are provided for its completion. Insular Government Center, -125,000. Insular Government Centers, $80,000. Department of Justice: No additional funds are provided * the" $200,000 approved" for expansion of the Insular Penitentiary. Five prisoner camps, $100,000. No increases are recommended to the above appropriations for district jails, reformatory jail and laundry for governmental institutions. Planning Board: Official map of major thoroughfares -100,000. Insular Police: Barracks in Rlo ( Piedras, $40,000; Caguas, $50,000:1 Bayamón, $50,000. Insular Fire Service: New pump stations, $40,000, Department of In Interior: Insular roads: first class. $635,000; second class, $840.Department of Agriculture and Commerce: Construction of 65 milling centers, $35,300; watershed protection for hydroelectric projects, $200,000; fumigation plant, $82,000. Veterinary Laboratory, $35,000. Inventory and management plan of forest resources, $18,000. Island Agricultural Experiment Station: Establishment, extension and improvement of substations for experimentation and soybean production, $18,000.
dón, ! rio, -
such, Est
Cordero's "Memories" The Japanese killed those who could not keep up
Bor Colonel Virgilio N. Cordero Bol United States Army At eight o'clock in the evening of that April 18 (1942) we arrived at the town of Oranl, where we talked about stopping for the night. Since two o'clock in the afternoon we had traveled sixteen miles: a considerable distance, considering the conditions in which we found ourselves. The place where we were stationed was too small for the number of shoulders we were there. We barely had enough space to sit. However, we were glad to be able to sit down and rest for a while. Even when we were packed in like sardines in a can, we got some rest by leaning against each other. We talked in hope that some food would be provided for us there. Those hopes, however, did not materialize. Not only were we not given any hearing, we were not even given any water! -
To one side of the space we occupied that night, there was a huge pig pen. So, barbs, that to the candida- i nes that remain described, we speak ¡ i of joining the aspiration of that "aroma" during the whole night. At dawn the next day, we renewed our hopes of getting some food and water; but once again our hopes were frustrated. I was able to get for a couple of pe- . sos, from a Filipino, a fairly large piece of reed, and I was able to consider myself very lucky to get it. That was all I could get to sustain my strength during the next day's march. At seven o'clock in the morning we were taken out of the place, in the direction of the road. Before resuming the march, we were obliged to stay for more than an hour. Luck was with me again that morning. While we were
While we were standing" on the road, my place happened to be next to a pipe: and I had a chance to quench my thirst, as well as to fill my water bottle. For trying to do the same thing I did, Colonel Alexander Campbell received a bayonet wound in the neck. The march was broken up at eight o'clock in the morning. We left Oranl at about noon, without knowing the altitude of the new destination. All indications were that the day was going to be extremely hot. We had not walked more than a couple of miles, when we began to find on the road signs of what had happened to the columns of prisoners who had marched ahead of us. Signs of what was going to happen to members of our own column. Dead soldiers, North Americans and Filipinos. Brutally murdered by the depraved and savage Japanese soldiers. When we arrived at the break of the day (see page 24).
Restriction on rubber I ends on 1 Q!
| OAP prepares official I order although it has not I received instructions I There are plenty of tires here । After January 1$ there will be no rationed items on the Island - । Even though" Isa office" d" the OAF in Wá "hlngton have not yet communicated * the"" local"" authority"" | qu"""l tire" rationing will end "n Puerto Rico "l j day 1ro. d" "n "ro - di* "eftaladn । to* end "n E "t*do" United States-i yesterday ae eitab" preparing the official or- - den decreeing that the i clonaml "nto will end on the!" "Jen said date. The Office of" Ad-;mlnlnl "traclon of" Pr "cloa "n San ' Juan announced yesterday that" a" d "cr "cr "ta ' the termination of tire rationing" for* the di* January 1, ' 1946, hahid* account that" the" "xl "tencla" in Pu "rto Ríen "on "on sufficient" to meet I" demand" do lo" *ulomovi-ii líala". It will be recalled that dead" some time ago aeftor Sam Gitalrsp i had asked the oflclnaa re- < glonalea in Wáahlngton to" a" i i permit the lifting of the restriction < on I* lala. the" authorl- ' ! dad"" in 1a Federal Capital refusing to ac- i yield to thelb, so long as the terml- l nation of rationing fusra 1 t efeotlva in Eitadoa United States. The rsclonsmlento of tires 1 . was in effect at the lala dead" beginning" of 1942, the reatrlcclon having been * ' Imposed for ""a * date by the Inaular Government, * mlentraa acted as director of ■ rationing Lic. Benlg- 1 * no Fernandez Garcia. The order to authorize rationing was received from Wahlngton by the Governor of Puerto Rico. Sel" me- 1 " íes later the Office of Ad- > mlnlstraclón da Precio" 'so hitó ' charge of the ' rationing of lo" ma* 1 i terlale" considered critical" by ' the" authority"" correspondlontqs. c Upon lifting the r""trlqelon so- - on the use- of pneumatic" H di* I r 1ro. do ensro. no rationed product or item will remain in J Puerto Rico.
Pan American resumes passage < ; continuous San Juan to New York ' । - , ( New arrangement facilitates connection with Eastern's ¡ aircraft as soon as one arrives in Miami and eliminates the need for an overnight stay in Florida '
With the nomalization of air operations, Pan American World Airways has resumed continuous passenger sales between San Juan and New York, which means that air travel between this Capital and the Iron Babel is considerably facilitated by eliminating the need to spend the night in Miami. This is reported in a Pan American Airways press release, which adds the following:- "Under this new arrangement, passengers from Puerto Rico make immediate connections in Miami with Easter Alt Lines aircraft for onward travel to New York. This operation was in effect before the war but military priorities necessitated its elimination. Reservations"" for the trips are made in San Juan by the PAA and can be taken on any of the Clipper" of the daily "alen d" Puerto Rico, Currently the Clipper" depart daily or" San Juan at 9:30 a.m" 4:30 p.m" 8:00 p.m. (10:30 p.m., and at 12:20 p.m.). There are also flights to Miami on Mondays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, departing at 11:15 p.m. A! make these connections at
Miami with the Eaa-" "i ii । । । plane, passengers are spared the expense of lodging in the city, and consequently the cost of travel is reduced. Pan American World Airways currently operates 92 Clipper flights between Puerto Rico and the United States, in addition to four weekly flights for the exclusive transportation of air cargo. The Clippers that have been flying the island for the past few years have been carrying three million kilos of cargo annually between Puerto Rico and foreign countries. Passenger arrivals for the nine months of 1945 exceeded the total number of passengers carried in the year 1944. Still pending before the United States Civil Aeronautics Board is Pan American's application to operate a direct San Juan-New York air route. This fast service will be implemented as soon as authorization is obtained from the highest aeronautical authority. । Pan American has turned > San Juan into one of the" prlnoipai lo" air" hub" of Hlapano-America. linking the Island with north i (Continued on page 24.)
l ' Found dead |
Democratic Representative Joe W" Krvln, of Charlotte, North Carolina, who, according to information from the Wahlngton district's modest forana", A. Magruder MacDopsld, was found dead in the kitchen of his Wahlngton apartment. kitchen was flooded with gas from the stove, euyaa faucets were ablertaa. (PA Photo). Sanitation alleges nothing was told of tenants Explained how ne acted in closing of neighborhood cana in Juncos In "1 case of the closing of a* cas* owned by the municipality of Juncos, I* Division d" Public Health* of the Sanitation Department, authored* the" following" manifestations: "On August 25, 1945 "l Impactor do Sanidad, Francisco Delgado Sanabria, notified the Municipal Mayor of Junco" about "tete existing major deficiencies" in a tenement house owned by said municipality, among laa cuele" descuellan laa alguiente"; 1-Lack of aervlclo of water for domestic uaoa. 2-Absolute lack of sanitary installation. 3-The house is not rat-proof. (Continued on page 18).
Labor leadership in the Joint Consultative Committee of the Sugar Industry did not reach agreements in yesterday's meeting.
Repudiation for' Dr. Tugwell's speech Chamber of Commerce has passed resolution condemning his phrases." i . -~.. . It alleges it departs from the whole truth Cites data on the progress made in the Island since 1897 As a repudiation of the speech made on the 17th of this month by Governor Tugwell on the radio of the United States. 1* Chamber of Commerce of Puerto Rico approved the following resolution: "WHEREAS, the speech given by the Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Rexford G. Tugwell, broadcast on the radio on the 17th of this month by the Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Rexford G. Tugwell, was a repudiation of the speech broadcast by Governor Tugwell on the radio of the United States on the 17th of this month. Tugwell, transmitted by radio from New York on the night of the 17th of the present contains a serious aquRRrione" against the people of Puerto Rico as well as a pilgrim" aflrmaclone" lacking" any basis and manifestly contrary" to the" facts" and to the historical truth: WHEREAS, the fact that the Governor tries to shield"" behind an accommodating praise " interested of the party of the majority cannot justify or condone in the eyes of the conscience and dignity of the citizens"" the spirit of arrogance, intolerance and disdainful disregard for the truth, which inspires the aforementioned speech; WHEREAS, representative institutions such as ours are obliged to contribute to the honest orientation of public opinion and, in the face of a case such as the one before us, to leave the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce: (T)'To make public repudiation of! speech of the Governor of Puerto Rico mentioned above and severely protest the unusual way in which the Governor expresses himself about the community. (2) To state the following facts as irrefutable proof of the lack of truth of the statement made in the aforementioned speech: (a) A community that in the course of A3 aftns and from the change of sovereignty in 1898 reduces the mortality rate from 38.4 to 16.6 per thousand; increases average life expectancy from 43 to 55 aftns"; reduces Infant mortality from 262.3 in 1901 to 42.3 per thousand in 1940; reduces analf*betl "mo from 70 per dent to 29.8 percent; increases "u production from $50,000,000 annuale" in 1897 to about $400,000,000,000 in 1941; raises its foreign trade from $21,881,582 in 1897 to $268,311,517 (Continued on 1* page 17> ¡ Nine 1946 model Ford I units arrive They will be displayed at the dealer's house. - No price has been set. The first "'Ford" models of the new 1948 model have just arrived for their general distributors in Puerto Rico, the Smallwood Brothers firm. Only nine units were received: one four-door, one "coupe-Se-dan" and seven "Tudor-Sedan". The importing company has not yet received the prices, and according to statements made by Mr. Lopez, of the distributing company, the exhibition of the new Ford, 1948 model, will probably be verified at the beginning of the year. "The most notable features of this new car are: a more powerful engine, better performance, longer life, more economical, easier handling and greater comfort," explained Mr. Lopez, adding: "The new V-8 engine develops * 100 horsepower, making it the most powerful Ford in the Company's history. Fords before the war were equipped with V-8 engines that developed 90 horsepower. . The most important change is a newly designed radiator grille. The grilles are ( meto" in number, but more grsn- । des. They extend horizontally । from fender to fender giving the vehicle a more basic and wider appearance . The new 1946 model has a new hood trim and more ornate ornamentation on the rear. In addition, a full range of colors is offered in Ford synthetic enamels. Inside, the luxury and attractiveness (Continued on page My
At a meeting held by the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce, they took cognizance of the petition made by the shipping companies, requesting an increase in some of the maritime rates, and it was unanimously agreed - as we were informed by the president, Mr. Flllpo de Ho "tos - to address the United States Maritime Commission, requesting authorization for an increase in the maritime rate; do" requesting authorization to In- , tervenlr and "er heard in connection with said request. The "eftor of Hostn" Informed i our reporter that as understood by the House, the request of the Companies" abare* dns point": first, to give permanence to the surcharge of 25cf, "over the rate in force at the e "tall*r of the war, a surcharge e "tahlecido and put in force by the War Shipping Board; and second, "1 increase over the said surcharge, of the rate" corresponding" to a number of articles" of large volume. -It was agreed to "itself to undertake a study to determine the extent and consequences of the increase in the" tlpn". In connection with the same matter, the aeftor of Mosto" gave an account of the ge "tlón realizad* near the Board of Navigation of War, will make coaa of four meaea, par* to obtain the elimination or rebaj" of the surcharge of 25%, having ennteatado said organlamo that ae towards (Continued on page 17J
see the bait and switch investigation"" "obre de"-T litation. Recently, the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Lic. Rnfael Rusceglie. made statements to the effect that he will seek legislation to place absolute control of rum production methods in the hands of the Treasury Department. In this connection, plans are being studied to establish "ñor-, m*s uniform fermentation, distillation and aging in all-j da I* tyidustrl* of| Insular rum," F.l. Treasury Department has ve-, ¡nce sponsored a small experimental tabo-, ratory 'in order to ' determine what levels can "be advantageously applied " throughout the industry." The Planning Board is par-' tldnris, and has so communicated 1 to the Governor, "of ""tahleclmlen- , to a long-range, well-considered ntan of action, prepared by , the Government in close -cooperation with 1the Liquor Industry, which will 1eJgure to the latter a reasonable and secure share of the American market for hard liquor." t Lo" Income" "nbro rede" buy- , give one-third of the total . The Board's estimates for the next six years are based on the Board's estimates. In the opinion of . e "t" agency, "it will never be able to consldei rarae excessive ta import "net (Continued on page 17)
Department of the Interior prepares plans for works between Cayey and Caguas; Río Piedras and La Muda; Cataño and Hatp Rey.-Urban detour i
The" first c*rre- । tero projects of first* elase submitted I by the Department of the Interior । to the Federal Highway Administration, are being dlseftadoe "n such a way that the distance "ntr" several towns in whose jurisdiction these projects are to be developed will be shortened". In his report to the federal authorities, the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Orlando R. Méndez, indicated that "once approved, complete and detailed plans, specifications and cost estimates will be sent". The" federal authorl- ¡ dades" study the first- । , ros drafts submitted by the De- , , , parliament of the Interior, will await- , dnie their final approval in one mo- , ment * another. The works to mllzarao in lea cer- , canias of Caéyy, s which Include the ¡ , construction of a modern bridge- ; no over" the La Plata river, will shorten'; the Ciyey-Caguas distance by one,,, kilometer. A 145-mile-long direct road to Cagua" will be built, eliminating traffic over the old bridge from Ciyey to Caguas.
---- , I over the old steel bridge, which h* been in use for one" 30 nftoa, ' (Continued on page 24.) *1
WASHINGTON, 28~(PU)- 13 President Truman today signed legislation which greatly liberalizes theq préatamoe and education provisions of the Vetersnoe Bill of Rights. The measure, passed by Congress before the Christmas recess, will enable hundreds of thousands of additional veterans to take advantage of the Government's loan guarantee and free education facilities provided by the law. The bill increases the returning veterans' pension by $15 per month and eliminates the provision of the Veterans' Bill of Rights, as previously in effect, which read beno-| ■ ■ ■ ' -
I - Christmas Ceremonies at the White House lurll " 11 1 mA ' ' ' Giving romlenao * the" Christmas ceremnnlaa at 1* da na White House, President Truman (right) presses the switch that turned on the lights" that adorned the beautiful Christmas Tree installed in the" Gardens of the presidential realtlcncl*. E. J. Kelly, assistant superintendent of parks at the national Capital, holds in his hands the electric box. 1* photographed above gives a general view of the surrounding area, with the crowd of people gathered for the celebration in the background. In front of the chamber, under the "'I enter, I can see" the prealdonte Truman.
I No plan has been submitted in connection with rum industry Only petition for a pilot plant is before Board of Plans. - The Board of Plans is in favor of a far-reaching plan of action by the Government - ■■ " lf No "- h* "nmetldo yet * the competent authorities, any plan releeionadtvcon 1* pals liquor industry, There is only before the Board of Plena" a* substantive petition" radicad* by the Agricultural Experimental station, per* "1 estehleclmtento of a* small pilot plant for llo-.
Sector Barreto appoints Knilan delegate to E.U. F.L.T. appointed Rivera Martinez. Muñoz did not invite sector Colón Responding * a* request of Sensdo President, seftor Luis Muflo" Marín, the sector cegetlsta i presided over by Senator Ramón Barreto Pérez, appointed *1 seftor Sergio Kullan Báez its delegate to , Go * Washington with 1* Commission , Legislative Status. On December 19 , seftor Muftoz Marín addressed "I seftor Rs- , rreto Pérez requesting designation of a delegate, When the Executive Committee of said sector of ta CGT met yesterday, it was given account with 1a communication ' from seftdr Muflo" Marín, agreeing to designate seftor Kullan Báez , as delegate. The "eftor Muñoz Marín spoke in the same sense to the Federación Libre de los Trabajadores de Puerto Rico.
denclo Rivera Martínez. | Francisco Colón Gordlany that no letter has been received from Mr. Muftoz Marín, "nor from any other person, asking us to designate a delegate so that together with the Legislative Commission he may go to Washington to negotiate the political status of the Island in the manner proposed to the other workers' organizations.
BULLETINS i
In the provisions "on loans, Congress deleted the word "normal" from the requirement that the property on which a loan is to be made must be of "a reasonable noripal value": and, in addition, increased the maximum guarantee on Nenes raicee from two thousand to 'four thousand dollars. - - - - WASHINGTON, 3A-(PU)~ In a Press statement, Secretary of the Interior, Harold L. fiches said today that the outstanding debts on relief loans do I (Continued on page IB.)
The Joint Consultative Committee of the 1* Sugar Industry met yesterday afternoon in the Capitol, with the assistance of the Sugar Union, the CGT, the Independent Union of Barcelona and the Free Federation. A draft collective bargaining agreement submitted by the Sugar Producers' Association to the Sugar Union was discussed and the procedure to be followed in the negotiations and signing of the agreement jointly was considered for some time. While this aspect was being discussed, an incident arose. Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonini asked the Chairman, Mr. Alberto E. Sanchez, and Mr. Pedro Vega Berrios, what were the powers and jurisdiction of the Committee assembled there, arguing that it was the convention of the Sindicato Azucarero which should act, having as it has the exclusive right in the negotiations in view of the elections held in January. He said that, if they were to negotiate jointly, the Sugar Union convention would have to decide whether to rescind its right or agree to negotiate jointly. He reported that "1 "ftn pwedo I the Amcararo Union had negotiated the collective bargaining agreement with the participation of the tedrpendant unions, with the absence of the Libra Federation. That on this occasion it could have done the same. At the end of his speech he excused himself because he had an urgent matter to attend to. Mr. Francisco Paz Granóla. - who represented the FLT, asked about the agreements adopted by the Joint Committee. 11 "eftor Nicolás Nogueras Rlve1 ra requested the floor, asking that, if possible, aeftor Ramos Antonini be called, as he intended to respond to the statements. He said that he regretted that the matter was brought up and that he knew that the exclusivism in the contracting and the elections was not inappropriate or inopportune, since he had spoken to join together to present a draft agreement, taking the best of all the existing ones, and he added that the "elocclo1 ne" spoke "illegally and therefore was challenged. He stated that os ■ necessary that "there is no jaibería"- *. If you want to negotiate an agreement ' by a rector alone, I should tell you frankly." He clarified that the Federa- - clone Book not Irla "as rabiza" - aftadlendo that they cataban diapueatoa - to continue in the form that ae speech agreed, which was "all jun- - toa in signing the agreement." The aeftor Prudencio Rivera Mar1 tinez made mondon do the olecclo' nos, saying that twenty thousand are not 8 nor Ja quinta parto of the workers that the Industry has. At the end he made a motion that a communication be sent to the sugar producers telling them that the Committee had been referred to the agreement they had signed and that an agreement was being drafted which would be submitted in due course for the consideration of the workers. He requested that the Sub-Committee on . He asked that the Sub-Committee on Agreements and Standards prepare the agreement, procedure and standards to be studied and submitted to the Sugar Producers. The motion was seconded by Mr. Nogueras Rivera. t When Mr. Rivera Martl- ' noz excused himself on the grounds that it was an urgent matter, the delegates in attendance began to leave the meeting, and the motion was not heard. 8" argued that they did not agree with the motion. Truman to speak next Thursday WASHINGTON, 28-(PU)- X! - President Truman will speak on I radio to the nation on" his legislative i program, at god o'clock in the evening ! next Thursday, January 8. His , speech will last about i half hour. The President," who i returns to Wáshlngton today from his home in MIsurL will board "i presidential yacht, this noi che. on a pleasure trip, although pa- ■ will be the greater part of the time on board devoted to the study of state affairs, as he will be joined by nine of the members of his (Continued on page 18.)