THE WORLD
40 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
40 Pages 5 Ctvs.
2 Sections
DAILY MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVII
Properly celebrate the fall of Berlin by buying war bonds.
SAN JUAN, E R. - SATURDAY, MAY 5, 1945
Entered as second elm biyHm, Post Office. Sab Juan. P. B.
NUMBER 10460
NAZI SURRENDER IS ALMOST COMPLETE AND YANKS OCCUPY BERCHTESGADEN.
They will only give independence, says Géigel
He expressed yesterday upon his arrival from Washington that "they will not submit an alternative" to the statesmen. He explained that Congress only wants to know if independence is desired. Upon his "return from Washington in the afternoon" yesterday, Senator Vicenta authorized the following statement: "I have read the information published in the national press concerning the hearings held before the Senate Committee on Territories and Insular Affairs on the Independence bill for Puerto Rico, presented by Senator Millard E. Tydlng," and I can assure you that I have read the information published in the national press concerning the hearings held before the Senate Committee on Territories and Insular Affairs, regarding the Independence bill for Puerto Rico presented by Senator Millard E. Tydlng," and I can assure you that the Congress will not submit an alternative. Tydlng", and I can assure you that the press agencies have not accurately reflected what happened in those hearings. In their reports they have given extraordinary prominence to the testimony in favor of e "ta'didad and have relegated to its minimum expression the testimony offered in support of Independence. The truth is that in the hearings Jos. supporters of annexation had the worst time of their lives. They were moved to pity, pleading for the lngteao of our people in the American Union. Senator Tydings replied that there is not the remotest possibility of statehood being granted. They insisted with pathetic appeals to their status as one hundred percent citizens. This servile attitude outraged the chairman of the Territorial Committee to the point that he could not conceal his disgust, which at times turned to contempt. I confess that as a Puerto Rican, I was sorry that my compatriots, obfuscated by the concept of a false Americanism, were exposed to a treatment that we both had to endure. The painful thing was that after one of these unpleasant incidents, the next supporter of statehood would again make dramatic and unnecessary protestations of loyalty to the nation which Senator Tydlngs would counter with a categorical assertion that what was before the Committee for consideration was a bill structuring Puerto Rico's Independence. "Until the day I left Washington, only three members of the Legislative Committee appeared at the hearings: Dr. Arrillaga Yorréns, Mr. Esteban Sumnl and myself. In my testimony I stated the official position of the Legislative Assembly, as it results from the concurrent resolutions approved in 1943 and 1945. I also pointed out the commitment of the Popular Democratic Party to submit the question of the final political status to the people for their final decision. "It must be clearly understood, ■ I said, ■ that the Legislature as such does not favor or request any specific solution. The Legislature is asking for the passage of a law implementing alternative permanent political status solutions for Puerto Rico, which Congress is willing to grant' for the people to finally decide. Is Congress willing to submit to a vote of the people of Puerto Rico alternative forms of permanent political status7 Under the tradition and structure of government in the United States, there are only two conceivable alternatives: statehood and Independence. Is Congress willing to submit both solutions to a vote of the people? Is there any opportunity for statehood? Speaker Tydlngs has made it clear in previous hearings and in this one that there is no statehood environment. However, it is up to Congress to make the big decision. The Tydlngs bill offers an excellent opportunity for that decision. The passage of the bill by both Houses would settle the question for good. I can assure you that if Congress makes the decision to implement Independence under mutual economic relations, public opinion in Puerto Rico will be almost unanimously in favor of such legislation. "I further added that the Tydlngs Bill is not a perfect measure: that it can be subject to important improvements in several respects; that Senator Tydlngs himself has admitted as much; that changes should be made to it to the effect of recognizing relations of economic mutuality between the United States and Puerto Rico. Forty-seven years of close relations have structured an economy of mutuality between the United States and Puerto Rico.
The minority report filed in the House of Representatives
Qualifies the one submitted by Bell and approved by the Committee on Insular Affairs - Defends Insular Government
Qualifying as "Inept, inaccurate and totally without foundation'' the comparison made of Puerto Rico with Fascist Italy in the report submitted by the Bell Committee to the U.S. House of Representatives, a Minority Report was filed in the same House authorized by Representatives Fernández, of New Mexico; Miller, of California; Groas, of Pennsylvania; Miller, of Nebraska; and the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico, Jesús T. Plftero.
The Minority Report makes a defense of the land program in Puerto Rico and cites in its favor the decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court in cases involving violation of the statute on tenure in excess of 500 acres. The Report, however, states that it agrees with some of the specific recommendations contained in the majority report, such as, for example, the one referring to the study of economic relations between Puerto Rico and the United States, as well as the one concerning a study on the political status of Puerto Rico. The following is the full minority report: Minority Views Pursuant to House Resolution 159, the Ranking Members of the Committee on Insular Affairs are unable to agree to the views expressed in the majority report of the committee, and hereby offer their objections (Continued on page 31).
HISTORY OF THE WAR Having already achieved the almost total surrender of the German armies and consummated the Victory for which Humanity has fought, THE WORLD adds to its Sunday edition this week eight pages devoted in their entirety to the history of the bloody conflict. In addition to the usual Sunday sections and material, the edition includes a broad and complete account of the war in "Europe from 1939 to date.
Executive will study in. roundtable discussion, appropriations laws.
Will cite " various* official*.-It is left to* Acting Governor Ruscaglia to decide on bills reported to him.
No major appropriation bill shall be approved until the general picture of the financial condition of the Treasury and the primary needs of the people, and the scope of each such appropriation bill in relation to the Six-Year Plan, shall be discussed at a meeting to be called at a later date by the Executive Insular. - i.
The members of the Planning Board, the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, the Treasurer and the Auditor shall attend the said meeting. The same attitude will be assumed by the Governor with respect to the proposed budget for the next fiscal year. It will be discussed at a round table, which will be attended by the aforementioned government officials. Free hand id Acting Governor Yesterday it was reported that Governor Tugwell has given a free hand to the Acting Governor, Rafael Husi.glia, to take action on which reports are received in Paiaclo of the various heads of departments, authorities and agencies iltl Government to which they have been referred, It is known, however, that Mr. Buscaglla will not consider any bill that has atrio studied by Governor Tugweil and on which cus! may have formed opinion the latter, among olrua that of teaching in the Spanish 'dloma eh public schools and that legalizing games (Continued on page 17).
War production is being reduced This will make it possible to free up resources, materials, facilities, and personnel for the manufacture of articles for the civilian population, the War Production Board announced yesterday upon receiving a message from the national director of this federal agency, Mr. J. A. Krug. Mr. Krug adds that these (Continued on page 3)
Rosaly declares against 1 bill Tydings He said the majority has been indolent, believing separation to be impossible.
Repeating words spoken in his lifetime by the late President Theodore Roosevelt in defining that "Americanism is a matter of principle, of purpose, of idealism, of character, not a matter of birthplace, of creed or genealogical line," Pedro J. Rosaly, president of the Bank of Ponce, stated his opposition to the Tydlings bill granting Independence to Puerto Rico. Claiming to be speaking on his own behalf and as president of the Ponce River Bank, the Ponce Chamber of Commerce, the Damas Hospital and its subsidiary, the Ponce Orphan Asylum, Mr. Rosaly said that, although he was not a lawyer and therefore could not argue the legality of the measure which placed the American citizenship of Puerto Ricans in jeopardy, he seriously doubted that the United States Congress, through the Ponce Chamber of Commerce, would not have the right to grant independence to Puerto Rico.
Four more Puerto Ricans fell in Europe One who had been reported missing returned to the Allied line
Four more names were added to the list of Puerto Rican soldiers killed on the battlefield, when the Headquarters, Generals of the Military Department of the West Indies yesterday released the latest casualties reported by the War Department. Another man, long missing in action, has been found. Private First Class Donald M. McCoy Jr., whose wife Mrs. Ramonlta V. McCoy lives at 38 Cross Street, San Juan, was killed in action in Italy on April 15. Private Andres Mangual, son of Mrs. Carmen Mosquer Antanaclo, of Humacao, was killed in Germany on 21 April. Private Francisco del Pilar Jr., whose wife Mrs. Juana P. del Pilar lives in Quebradillas, was killed in action on April 17 in Germany. Private First Class Del Pilar speaks (continued on page 24).
Adolf Hitler's old refuge is located there.
Seventh Army made contact in Italy with troops" of the 5th" Army Crossed the famous Breñero Loa Pass The only* point* where fighting is still going on. Next end of the redoubt By RKUCE W. MUNN FAULT 4. (PU)-A dispatch received arfa night from correspondent Eleanor Fn. kairi. accompanying the American Seventh Army, I report that trona* of Lieutenant ganara' Pn f ch. occupied Berchtesgaden, Ip temosa Bavarian town in whose jurisdiction is located the retreat do Pillm. Berchtesgaden was de*nr|"da of Germans. The communiqué does not make clear *1 1n" notreamericans already occupied Hitler's "eagle's nest" on the rime of the Kehlesteln Mountain, two" miles east of Berchtesgaden. The Seventh Army, which took ca "I 50,000 prisoners, occupied the Rcichenal area, miles to the east of Kmchtosgaden. Meanwhile, other Seventh Army forces crossed the Alpaa Pustvlacos and entered Italy, linking up with the Qulntn Army on Vipltno, less than 10 miles from the Rreooro Pass. while the forces of Lieutenant General Patton's Terear Army were making deep penetrations into both Czechoslovakia and A.1st ry. Salzhmpo fut also occupied by Patch's forces. In its official communiqué today, Allied Supreme Headquarters denies the information circulated last night that British troops had crossed the Kiel Canal, reporting instead that the British had established their lines in the northern part of the operations between Hamburg and Lübeck. Earlier dispatches broadcast" by Danish and Swedish radio stations had reported that the" British, "after crossing the Kiel Canal, crossed the German-Danish border, advancing 15 miles into Denmark." According to the official reports, the following operations took place in the areas where the fighting is still going on: U.S. Seventh Army: In the left sector, forces advancing south of Fussen are encountering resistance to the Austrian-Austrian border across the rugged, snow-covered Alpine plains. In the central sector, armored* and Infantry forces, in dizzying advance from the Mittenwald areas, on the valley of the Lsn, occupied Innsbruck, rilvldlénnose there in rio" columns: a lomó towards the route, occupying Jenriach. v the nhr descended directly towards the south, through the pass of Brenno, occupying the city of Breñero and finally the population of Vipltno, to' south of which it established connection with the forces of the Fifth American Army. In the left sector, forces of Patch's cavalry arrived at the gates of the station at Salzburg, whose garrison, with its chief at the head, surrendered the city without making a single shot, From Salzburg, that column continued towards Berchtesgaden, occupying it soon after. Third U.S. Army: Patton's forces involved in the clearing and reduction (Continued on page 18.)
OAP considers petition to raise milk prices
Representatives of the Milk Industry are making representations to the Office of Price Administration to increase the price of this item, claiming that since the Minimum Wage Board has fixed the wages to be paid to the workers in this industry, the cost of production is increasing and that, if a higher price for milk is not authorized, they will suffer losses in the business. What will be the attitude of the OAP to the demands of the producers is kept in the strictest confidence, although we can assure you that there are different opinions, some maintaining that the increase should be authorized, while others say that it should not, arguing that it should not be done.
The argument is that "when the ISWB authorized the minimum wages for the workers, it was after investigating the industry in all its aspects, and came to the conclusion that the industry could pay the fixed wages without causing losses to the industry". Regarding the minimum wage rate approved by the ISWB for the milk industry, the Acting Director of the Office of Price Administration, Raimundo García Cintrón, made the following statements yesterday: "On February 28, a meeting was held at La Fortaleza between representatives of the Minimum Wage Board and the Office of Price Administration, and the Office of Price Administration, Raimundo García Cintrón.
Military leaders of the great victory
y?; MO||" - i WP. HL .w . 1 V ' * A l '* . * s ' * i
f-- WRwc'iWJ 1 -¿wjaeev. - ■ Hl v á x
At left: General Dwight Eisenhower, commander-in-chief of the Allied armies in Europe, under whose formidable military leadership the great Victory which Christendom celebrates today has been achieved. On the right: the great British strategist Marshal Bernard Montgomery, who chased the Nazis from El Alamain until he received the unconditional surrender yesterday of a large part of the German armies that once threatened to dominate and enslave the world to establish the dominance of a race.
The plebiscite will be called for by the Legislative Commission.
There i<> "cordó aver ira. Determined prices for tina 3 hour meeting* - * in the office <ip Pinero sugar. CU 1(1 Z(lfra (le 1942-43
Deliberation was behind closed doors The ('ongrene will be asked to include in eon*ulla diverse* alternative* By UHArTÍFmc TARE WASHINGTON, 4. (PU)-Luis Muñoz Marín, after a two-hour conference with the members of the delegation of the Legislature, at closed door: Torrican, behind" closed doors, in Ja office riel enmisionadn rrsléOiile Plftero, announced that 1> official position of the delegation 4<yá Li not to ask for a plebiscite in which *e lonlengen, in detailed form, all 1 ,s alternatives on the "status" that the Ins State" UniqtM Congress is willing to grant the Puerto Rican puebio. (Continued on page 18)
A'ripie A reminds that rentrali*ta*s wishing to take advantage of payment* conditions* must sell to settlers at prices no lower than those fixed.
A note authorized yesterday by the Agricultural Adjustment Agency, states that "under the" provisions of Ja Sugar Act of 1937, those pro* duclores-elnboradore" (centralists), who wish to avail themselves of the conditional payments prescribed by said Act, must liquidate deliveries of cane from colono" at prices" not less than that" resulting on the basis of ln determined by the War" Food" Administrator for the harvest
the corresponding harvest". "Said bases - it explains - are established annually in accordance with evidence furnished at the public hearings" held for that purpose and in accordance with the" results of investigations carried out for that purpose. *The Agricultural Adjustment Agency announces that in accordance with the pertinent Determination of the War Food Administrator, the prices in question for the 1942-43 crop are as follows; for the 1942-43 crop. "(Continued on page 24).
OAP investigates vehicles with coupon S-l , S-2 Demands documetilo" before coneeder Ih requested gasoline ration ¡ On Monday, shell 30, the ¡ new rationing period ps- ¡ rationing for public automobiles" and heavy trucks began, the Rationing Division of the Office of Price Administration announced yesterday. Before issuing the new S-l (public) and S-2 (heavy truck) rations, the Local Price and Rationing Boards are investigating whether the vehicles for which rationing is requested are in a condition to be operated by owners or drivers. This is due to a report" received" by the agenda that many* vehicles are unable to be operated due to lack of tires, engine damage and other reasons. (Continued on page 24.)
Such urges celebration of victory by helping Seventh Borrowing
Urging his fellow citizens to purchase in Seventh Loan bonds ten percent of their assets and to cover the required amount (twelve million dollars) on the first day of the campaign, in celebration of the victory in Europe, Mr. Miguel Such, president of the San Juan Committee of the Seventh Loan, urged them to buy ten percent of their assets in Seventh Loan bonds and to cover the required amount (twelve million dollars) on the first day of the campaign, in celebration of the victory in Europe, Mr. Miguel Such, president of the San Juan Committee of the Seventh Loan.
of San Juan of the Seventh Borrowing, addresses the people of Puerto Rico as follows: "For some months, and day after day, we have been waiting for the longed-for victory of our armies in Europe, for which the sons of Puesto Rico have offered their lives and we have also contributed money - I do not doubt that we would have offered all the capital we possess if with this we could have saved our loved ones and prevented more blood being spilled on the fields of Europe. "In the old days, when great battles were fought, walls were often built with human flesh to stop the enemy. Today, however, with modern weapons, thanks to the intelligence of man and the immense production of industry, we have been able to avoid further bloodshed. Naturally, in the production of war material, the capital contributed by the people - those people who knew that they had to fulfill the sacred duty of offering their help to those who, exposing their lives, were fighting to defend the freedom of the world and to protect their own interests - played an important role. "We must, however, bear in mind the fact that this di(Continued on page 24.)
. .WESTERN FIM6NTB: Hitler's European famor* fortress" was practically redoubled last night to Norway, the Bohemian stronghold and some* isolated holaonea* at other* points on the continent since **this morning was elective the surrender of the* German fuenaa in the northwest 'of the Reich, Holland and, Denmark. Including the Frlsia* and Heligoland islands. General Eisenhower <HJo yesterday that the German army has disintegrated and -abe qua e "fá defeated, He can affirm** that *"tá about to occur the end of the European war des-.
The fighting on the Montgomery front has ceased.
More" than a million Alcmane*"r soldiers surrendered nor Maríacal Oirás surrenders are already imminent The" Nazi* could only give a suicidal battle in Norwegian territory By PHIL AVI r i LONDON. 4. iPl'> - Lo" alomane" exercises of the German notocsie dr. t. ninaiuana and Holnnria "r surrendered Incondlrionalmenir to marshal Montgomery. The rcnriiHon >ni '->*"n vigor tomorrow "Ahadn, at '.a* 8 -*' a.m., British hma. In rtianin n lo" only" hnlxnn"" of i euÍMicm ia left" to lo" Nazi" mi Norway v Checncjlmanuln. loa dispatch" nothing say, even that there is Indicio" rir that its dm-rum* he may produce "* d"- one mamenlo to another. * In London they said that Russia had been fully informed about the "surrender on the battlefield" of the Nazi forces to the Twenty-first Army Corps of Marshal Montgomery. The correspondent of the Columbia Broadcasting System. Rill Downs, announced that Montgomery, pono "n i"' of the ranrih-lon, said " lo" cnrre "pon "ales: "This -* e| e| moment". It is reported that more than a million Germans have surrendered to Montgomery's forces. On the other hand, the correspondent of the British Broadcasting Corporation in Lucnehurg said that Admiral Von Frledehei'E., with Admiral Doenltz in command of the German navy, and his chief of staff, were the ones who negotiated the surrender with the British. Reports from Moscow give the war as almost over, saying, according to the commentator Yermashot, that "all that remains to be done or" to eliminate the" Hitler clique", adding: "Its fearful end is near". - The Nazi capitulation was announced after dramatic negotiations between Marshal Montgomery and high-ranking Nazi leaders, among whom it was thought possible that Dnenitz, who only 72 hours ago replaced Hitler as the new "fuehrer" of the Reich, might be one of them. Montgomery informed Eisenhower's supreme command in Paris that he would be "in the Reich. Eisenhower in Paris that the surrender also encompassed the German divisions captured on the island of Heligoland and on "Frisins Island", off the Dutch coast. More than l'ñn.iXN) soldiers that corla- ! titled the last effective Nazi force to fight on the etitopen continent, outside Norway and Czechoslovakia.'are included' in the mass surrender, d" । half a million Germans who laid down their" weapon* on the British front* during the last two" riles. There are still several small pockets of remnants on the Continent, including areas around the French ports of St. Nazaire, Lorlent and Dunkirk. The brief announcement of the surrender at the northern end of the battle front, made by Elsenhower's headquarters, emphasized that "it is a surrender in the battlefield" to the First Army Corps commanded by Marshal Montgomery and not to the Allied government. F! advertisement read as follows: "Field Marshal Montgomery has informed the Supreme Allied Commander that all" enemy" forces" in the Hnlands, northwest Germany and Denmark, including Heligoland and the Frisian Isles, have surrendered "I Vigéalmop: Imer Army Corps (Continued on page 17.)
THE WAR IN BRIEF
After five years*, eight months* and four days of fighting, the most violent in recorded history, the Germans* and the French have surrendered. While* German* Ins* surrender to the* Western Allies* on the battlefield itself, the* Soviet* armies* continue to easily occupy the few* remaining points on the tona north of Berlin ...PACIFIC FRONT: Australian* troops* entered Tarakan, an important oil center in Dutch* Borneo, and* seized the Japanese barracks and important water supply installations. '