THE WORLD
40 Pages 5 Ctvs.
40 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
2 Sections
TANGLE DIARY
YEAR
XXVII
The best way to win victory in Europe: buy more war bonds.
SAN JUAN, P. R. -
SATURDAY, MAY 12, 1945
Entered aa oocond claoa matter. Fort Office, San Juan, ? B.
NUMBER 10467
Governor signed 76 bills yesterday
Among these is one reorganizing the San Juan Municipal Court Approved road aid Many municipal works appropriations. - Signed P. of C. 1434 Among the seventy-six bills signed yesterday by "1 Governor Tugwell was one providing for the abolition of the present three sections of the San Juan Municipal Court, creating in lieu thereof a new short five-section court for the judicial district of the Capital. Another bill signed yesterday by the Governor was House Bill 1434, which authorizes the Lottery Bureau to hold an extraordinary raffle for the benefit of the Society for the Protection and Defense of Children. Also among the measures signed yesterday was Senate Bill 216, which became Act No. 133. This new Act accepts the benefits of the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1944, and allocates the amount of 64,072,390 Island funds to authorize the Commissioner of the Interior to acquire land and carry out activities in collaboration with the Federal Works Agency and the Public Highways Administration: Act No. 134, amending Act 143 of May 1, 1937, which dictates the manner in which the money obtained from the Gasoline Tax shall be used. (P. of the C. 21) Act No. 135, to exempt from the payment of excise or municipal taxes, with the exception of the tax on taxes and policies for workers' compensation, those entities engaged in air transportation services. (P. of the C. 498) Act No. 136, appropriating 130,000 island funds to the Commissioner of Education for the purchase of equipment and materials for the industrial arts workshops of the second rural units and of the intermediate and high schools. (P. del 8. 568) Act No. 137, to amend the Act creating the Puerto Rico Tax Appeals Tribunal. (P. de la C. 557) Act No. 138, to amend Sections* 337, 339, 343 and 348 of the Puerto Rico Political Code, to authorize the sale of personal property for the payment of taxes owed. (P. L. 1199) House Bills 339 and 140, to further amend the Internal Revenue Law of Puerto Rico (House Bills 1065 and 1063, respectively). Act No. 141, to allocate 82,000 - The Department of Agriculture and for the preparation of plans for forest guardhouses. Act No. 142, appropriating 8390,745 of island funds to the Puerto Rico Communications Authority to carry out capital improvements, including radio facilities. (P. of S. 249) Act No. 143, appropriating 8140,000 to the Superior Council of Education of the University to build and equip a school for nurses. (P. of S. 307) Act No. 143, appropriating 8140,000 to the Superior Council of Education of the University to build and equip a school for nurses. (P. of S. 307) Act No. 143, appropriating 8,000,000 to the Superior Council of Education of the University to build and equip a school for nurses. S. 307) Act No. 144, appropriating $876,000 for the Commissioner of the Interior to prepare plans and specifications for the construction and improvement of municipal roads. (P deis. 217) - Act No. 145, appropriating $8150,000 for the Commissioner of the Interior to continue the construction of the L (Continued on page 17.)
(Continued on page 17.): 5% bill objected to by Governor i He is not inclined to sign it due to the .The Governor was not inclined to approve the bill that repeals the Victory tax, alleging that he was not fulfilled the commitment to give it the same effect as the one that "proved the millage to increase the basic rate of the income tax and that imposes "an" additional tax*! on excessive profits". The latter will take effect on July 1. We have been assured that if the Governor vetoes the bill repealing the Victory Tax, -and all indications are that "if he does so at the last minute he does not change his mind,- he will request the Legislature in a special session which he will probably convene in July, to "try the bill again, effective "July 1, As has already been reported, the special session of the Legislature will consider the bill to legalize gambling and several other appropriations which, although many of them have already been signed by the Governor and others will be signed by next Tuesday, it is alleged that they suffer from certain defects which must be corrected as soon as possible.
RevokedMore Orders on Sales Control JPG Includes Those Prohibiting Electric and Gas Extensions l< War Production Board announced yesterday the revocation of - more orders controlling the production, purchase and sale of various > articles, and which will become effective today " Saturday, Among the orders revoked* given to* are those prohibiting the installation of electric, water or gas extenslo- ' nee and " the production, purchase and sale of . According to the "nuncio made "yer by i loa Messrs. Gordon W, Foote and HaI rold Lockhelmer of the JPG, the óri denea revoked are as follows; Gula I to Order U-I, restricting the delivery n distribution of transformers; Rule 3 to Order I U-l, restricting 1* delivery of electric meters; U-l (a) on permits for the installation of certain electric, water or gas extensions for governmental agencies. This order specified that such extensions could not be made if the cost exceeded 810,000. Now they may be made without * permission of the JPG. Order U-l (c) on extensions of electrical ) facilities to permit agricultural neo operator including water pumps, milking machines, milking machines, more (Continued on page 24.)
Hitler did not believe in defeat until the last day of April 22, Goering alleges; Nazi submarines are surrendering.
The glass strike is close to being settled.
Yesterday, the factory management submitted a seven-point statement to the Union as a basis for an immediate solution.
The administration of the Fábrica de Crletal de la Compañía do Fomento submitted yesterday to the leaders of the Union of Crystal Workers seven points on the basis of which could be solved immediately the controversy strike that has had paralyzed the work of the industry for seventy-four days. The points included in said pliego have been either submitted by the Union or by the ad* mlnhtraclón of said factory, almost all having been approved by the parties in talks held* during the past two weeks. The management of the Glass Factory in one of the paragraphs of the document sent late yesterday afternoon to the leaders of the union, says that it "hopes that the workers will meet" during the week-end and "approve the specifications" submitted to them. The statement, delivered yesterday afternoon to the press by Mr. Teodoro Moscoso, director of the Development Company, reads as follows: "In order to end the strike that has lasted 74 days in the glass factory of the Development Company, it has submitted to the leaders of the union - after two weeks of talks - Jos following terms: "1. So recognizes Is union of Empleaocs de la Indu "trla del Cristal in Guaynebo- F. R- paiw-Jar--feo-tes of airing grievances and ag: avíos,
wages, hours and conditions of employment. Judging 1* individual efficiency of employees shall be the sole province of the Superintendent of 1* the factory; provided, that dismissals for deficiency made by said Superintendent within three months from the date of the commencement of work of employees who have been on strike, shall be appealable" to the Grievance and Grievances Committee. This provision shall apply to foremen as well as to other workers. "2. Once the work has been resumed, people will be called as needed as soon as possible, and in every case that it is possible before the factory begins to operate completely, an attempt will be made to establish short shifts* in the week so that all personnel have the opportunity to work. "The Complaints and Grievance Committee shall be composed of two persons representing the Company and two personnel representing the workers, and shall meet at the initiative of either party, The Complaints and Grievance Committee shall promulgate its rules of procedure. In the event of a tie, the fifth member shall be the Chief of the local office of the National Labor Relations Board or his designee. "For the purpose of discussing a collective bargaining agreement a year is fixed after January 10 4" 1844- 0 when (Continued on page 15.)
The present telephone system in the metropolitan area will be improved.
f - The Public Service Commission authorizes the Company to establish the two-number method for calls from Río Piedras.
Simultaneously with the conversion of the telephone service, the Telephone Company shall improve the communication system between Rio Piedras, San Juan and Santurce, when telephones in Rio Piedras are used to call San Juan. The order was authorized yesterday by the Public Service Commission. The Commission's authorization on the matter reads as follows: "The Public Service Commission hereby agrees as follows: "(1) To authorize * 1* Telephone Company* to adopt and put into service, at 1* Rio Piedras central station, the system known as the "Two Number Method" for all calls originating from 'telephone to telephone' in Rio Piedras to San Juan-Santurce. "(2) To authorize him to discontinue Ja regular "ticket" form he now uses to record the detail of "telephone-to-phone" calls originating at the Rio Piedras central station, for San Juan-Santurce, and to replace it with form no. 376 "Two Number Toll Method" for all calls originating at the Rio Piedras central station for San Juan-Santurce.
(2) To deny the request, and to replace it with form number 376 "Two Number Toll Ticket", according to the model that accompanies " the request. "(3) To deny the petition to discontinue the "person-to-person" and "appointment by courier" services, since these services shall continue to be provided on a regular basis in accordance with the tariff currently in effect. "(4) Deny the petition to be authorized to "Introduce time intervals of 3 minutes at a time when circumstances make it advisable", for the "telephone to telephone" service, to be provided from the central station of Rio Piedras to the central station of San Juan-Santurce, through the adaptation of the "Two Number Method" system, considering that the five (5) minute period, as specified in the tariff currently in effect, should subsist, and that no change implying modification to said tariff should be authorized without the corresponding formal procedure". The investigation practiced by the CSP on this matter reveals the following: "The average daily calls (Continued on page £4.)
Appear at far distant points Surface under black flag to surrender to Nazi Allies Nazis in Bohemia still resist 400,000 Nazi soldiers await repatriation order in Denmark By BOYd" LEWIS PARIS, 11. (PU) - Five more German submarines surrendered today on the high seas and are "expected to arrive tonight " ports in northern Ireland, bringing to eleven the number of submarines which have surrendered in the last 24 hours. A dispatch from Belfast reports that four of them are sailing for the U.S. naval base at Londonderry and that the fifth is headed for Belfast. It adds that they surfaced in the North Sea and, flying a black flag, handed themselves over to British naval units patrolling those waters. Meanwhile, a dense fog has prevented the surrender of the flotilla of German torpedo boats which was expected to enter the British port of Felixstowe this afternoon, coming from Rotterdam or Ijmulden, via the North Sea. A flotilla of nine English torpedo boats left Felixstowe this morning to meet and escort back the German flotilla; but fog has made the operation impossible. A dispatch from Londonderry announced, moreover, that "German submersibles have surfaced in widely separated areas from the northern Atlantic to the Azores Islands and to the Canadian coast, awaiting Allied naval units to surrender or to receive instructions as to which port they should proceed. ( Meanwhile, according to dispatches re- , cibited today, in. Paris, the situation , on the Continent is as follows: Czecho-Slovakia. - The commander- । te of. Prague, General Kuttelwas- , cher, He reported over the radio of the । Czech capital that the situation in , Prague "has calmed down," but added- , he added: "Only a few madmen make , shot* oc*sionale* from their ea- , condites but they will soon be anlqul- , sides." He went on to say that he pro- , gresses quickly the liberation of . Bohemia, from where the Germans are I retreating in the direction of Plisen, or- 1 , damagingly. The Soviet high command accused German Marshal Fer- - dinand Schoerner, commander-in-chief of the still resisting parties, of being to blame for the fact that these forces have not surrendered according to the peace terms signed by the German high command. Yugoealavla - A communiqué from the Yugoslav high command reports that troops of Marshal Tito with (Continued on page 24.)
Three Puerto Ricans belonging to the air forces - veterans of campaigns in Italy, Sicily and Saipan - yesterday visited the Headquarters of the Military Department of the Antilles to relate their experiences on local battle fronts in opposite corners of the universe. Captain Mihiel Gilormini of Yauco, Staff Sergeant Andres F. Ramirez of Cíales and Staff Sergeant Angel Ginard of Utuado are the three Borleuas who have been flying and fighting in enemy territory from Europe to the Pacific. Captain Gilormini, who was formerly a member of the Royal Air Force of Great Britain, is a fighter-bomber pilot and holds various decorations for having participated in numerous missions in North Africa, Sicily and Italy. In addition to the ribbon
1- --- ---■ - ■ --■ Heroes meet on the Island ' / Wwla' 7 * I MMPm ■ < ■ t \ ' ' 5 ' I " Mr . . ara , . \ $ ifcí ■ J ; 11 i ' '''' K. -B . Do" Puerto Rican" member" of" the" Army Air" Fort" -veteran" of the" campaign" in Germany, Italy, North Africa and Sicily-vlalted lo" quartet" generate" of the Military Department of the West Indies, relating some of "u" experiences on the hstalla fronts. Pictured are Staff Sergeant Andres F. Ramirez, (left), of Dale, a gunner on a Flying Fortress (B-17) in England; and Captain Mhlhlel Gllorminl, of Yauco, a light plane pilot, who has returned from Italy. (U.S. Army Communications Corps photo). * .1
They relate events in which they participated
Captain Mihiel Gilormini, Sergeant Andres Ramirez and Sergeant A. Ginard fought in aviation in Europe.
The European Theater Service Citation, which bears four bronze stars, also holds the Silver Star, the Distinguished Flying Cross and the Air Medal, with four oak leaf bouquets. Also belonging to him is a presidential citation awarded to the unit with which he served. After joining the FRG in 1941, Captain Gilormini was transferred to the US Air Force shortly after the United States declared war on the Axis. The most exciting early war experience he remembers was flying a group of P-39s from England to North Africa when General Elsenhower's troops invaded Oran. After the North African campaign, Gilormini was transferred to the Fuehrer's wing, and he was transferred to the U.S.A. (Continued on page 24).
Claims Fuehrer is dead But insists death occurred before Berlin admits it Nazi Marshal receives Press Cree Germany lost the war shortly after Normandy invasion By MIGUEL 8ANTIN War Correspondent of EL MUNDO AUGSBURG. Germany 11.-Admitting that Germany lost the war soon after the Allied invasion of Normandy and when the Russians were able to break through the German center on the Russian front, Reich Marshal Hermann Goering told Allied war correspondents today that the German people must live, and that if means are not found to help Germany, he foresees a very black future for Germany and for the world. Dressed in gray uniform, with the eagle of the "Luftwaffe" on the right of his chest, but without "his famous string of medals, Goering added that, from the date of the invasion and the Russian invasion, things got so bad that the German rulers realized that the war could be lost, but, nevertheless, they were confident that they would get back on their feet. According to Goering, on the night of April 22 last, Hitler, under pressure from the people around him, realized that the war was lost. Before that, the military had told Hitler that the war was lost, advising him to seek diplomatic means of arranging peace. However, Hitler became violent, forbidding further discussion of these matters, refusing to accept the defeatist views. Gotrlng is certain that Hitler is dead, although he says that he died long before the Nazis would admit it; adding that the Nazis arranged his corpse in such a way that the Russians could not lay their hands on it. While the correspondents were roasting in the burning sun of Augsburg, Goering, played by Major Paul G. Kubala, of Elizabeth, Kentucky, spoke of how he had communicated with Hitler for the last time on April 20 in Berlin before heading for the southern frontiers. On the night of April 22 some things happened," said Goering, "which convinced Hitler that the war was lost and that it was useless to continue the fight in the south and in the Ruhr area. Goering then telegraphed Hitler that, since he - Goering - was second in command, he should take immediate steps to consult with the Allied powers. Hitler's clone answer came three hours later, when storm troopers placed Goering, his family and his closest associates under arrest in Berchtesgaden. Two days later, they were moved to a small village in the Alps, and, the next day, they were taken to a small village in the Alps, and, the next day, they were taken to a small village in the Alps.
- S -C'' I ' * I B U B v-, B I1 I H t BOTA:- General Rana Juargan Stumpf, (Left), Chief of the Luftwaffe: Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel Me of the German High Command, and Admiral Rans Georg Friedehurf (right, background), Commander-in-Chief of the German Navy are pictured after signing the ratification of the terms of unconditional surrender at the Russian general quartet in Berlin. (Associated Press photo).
THE VICTORS DELIBERATE- The Chief of Aviation, mariaca! Sir Arthur William Tedder, aide to the supreme allied commander, and Field Marshal Gregory X. Zhukov, aide to the supreme allied commander. Zhukov, aide to the commander-in-chief of the entire Soviet Air Force, examine the terms of unconditional surrender, ratified at Berlin headquarters, after they had been signed by the German "high" officials. ' (Associated Press photo) * (Associated Press photo) * (Associated Press photo) * (Associated Press photo) * (Associated Press photo)