THE MÜNDO
32 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
32 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DIARY OF THE TANGLE
YEAR XXVII
I don't liquidate the bonds bought, I want to liquidate Hitler.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 6, 1945
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R. '
NUMBER 10239
MONTGOMERY ADVANCES IN ARDENAS
Moore anticipates food supply crisis.
Believes some of the items on the market will not be available Shipments will 'get tougher 9 Government is likely to resume handling of certain items Why CHARLES MC CABE Associated Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 5. George Moore, Director of the Caribbean Area Supply Office, has painted a bleak picture for Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands as far as supplies are concerned "for some time in the future," and predicted the possibility that islanders may not be able to get some items on the market today in the future. At the same time, other sources confirmed the maritime and food crisis version, noting the possibility that the procurement and movement of supplies may become so difficult that the Government may have to resume handling certain items already returned to private commerce. Moore stated that his conversation with Agriculture Department officials has convinced him that the overall picture is not "rosy" and that both the shipping and supply factors will become "tougher". - Moore added: "I think it is proper for me to call the attention of the Puerto Rican people to the fact that they may not be as fortunate as in the past, when they have had an abundance of the most needed foodstuffs. He also said that the maritime situation is really bad, having heavy demands from the Army and Navy on the world battle fronts; adding that: "Although there will be times when certain items will not be obtained, I wish to emphasize the assurance, however, that there is no need to fear that the people will not be well served. Finally, he stated that the tornporal shortages will be tightened as the situation of shipments and supplies becomes clearer. (PU)- Be Reports that forces of the First Army occupied Malembre, tree miles southeast of Grandmenil, and Amonines, five miles southwest of the town. - - - - PABIS, é. (PA)- Bata night m Report that Lieutenant General Patton's Third Army has recaptured the initiative after coming under violent German counterattacks, and is now separated from the First Army by only 1S miles. . / PARIS, 5. (PU)- Tonight it is reported that the First and Second Armies are encountering increasing Nazi resistance in their offensive for the German northern salient, while lousy winter weather is forcing the Allies to measure their advances by the yard. PARIS, 5th (PU) - St. Vith, through which the Allied route passes to reinforce their salient, is tonight under heavy artillery fire from Lieutenant General Hodrs, whose troops are closing in on Altare, where the 8t. Vlth-Larotno and Bastogne-Lleja.
Abe Fortas will come from the 20th to the 25th and will be in the Island for two weeks One of the purposes of his visit is to have an interview about the candidates for Attorney General and Associate Justice of the Supreme Court Governor Tugwell will not go to Washington at present. Neither will Senate President Luis Muñoz Marín. This is mainly because the federal Undersecretary of the Interior, Mr. Abe Fortas, has announced that he will be coming to Puerto Rico from the 20th to the 25th of this month.
It has been reported by an authorized source that Mr. Fortas will be in Puerto Rico for at least fifteen days. He will take advantage of his stay on the Island to become acquainted with the situation prevailing here in all respects and to study the fundamental problems confronting the country. It is understood, although it is not settled, that the pending appointments for Attorney General and Associate Justice of the Supreme Court will not be extended until after the return to Washington of the Assistant Secretary of the Interior. It is a certainty that in Puerto Rico the said official will hold interviews of candidates for the said positions and make final recommendations to the appropriate authorities. Mr. Fortas has been dealing for some time now with the
INDEPENDENCE PARTIES WASHINGTON, 5. (PU) - Representative Joseph Clark Baldwin, Republican, of New York, who favors "immediate and unconditional independence for Puerto Rico," told the United Press. Baldwin hails from the Cato side of New York, where many Puerto Rican candidates for the aforementioned positions live. It is reported that Messrs. Tugwell and Muñoz Marín will visit Washington after the regular session of the Legislature, which will end in mid-April.
It is believed that the purchase of the Telephone Company will soon be completed. The International Telephone & Telegraph has not yet been informed of the visit of Je Márquez and Curry, - They are already in Washington.
NEW YORK, 5. (PU)-A spokesman for the International Telephone & Telegraph Telephone Company said that so far the negotiations over the telephone company in Puerto Rico have had to do only with the advisability of a sale and not with the price. He added that the original contract provides for the government to buy it if it so desires. The company has not yet been officially notified of the purpose of the visit by Rafael Delgado Márquez, director of the Communications Authority, and James Curry, legal advisor to the Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority, who were not expected until at least the next fortnight. A Washington dispatch reports that Delgado" and Curry arrived in that capital to discuss Cole Bill to be introduced shortly By CHARLES MC CABE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 5. (PU) - A bill to place the civil affairs of Hawaii, Alaska, the Canal Zone, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands and the other mandates and possessions of the United States under the jurisdiction of the Navy Department will be introduced in Congress early next week by Representative W. Sterling Cole, of New York, longtime member of the House Insular Affairs and Naval Affairs Committees. The bill, which has been prepared in cooperation with (o) technical staff of the Navy Department, proposes the creation in that department of an "Office of Foreign Possessions," which could take over the functions of the Department of Naval Affairs, and which would be responsible for the purchase of the Navy's telecoms equipment and the purchase of the Navy's telecoms equipment.)
The Department of the Navy proposes the creation of an "Office of Foreign Possessions" in that department, which could be in charge of the functions of the Department of the Navy and could be the first priority for the installation of the automatic system in the Caguas area. Delgado and Curry said they would discuss with Department of the Interior officials the reasonable valuation of the property before making a final offer to International Telegraph and Telephone. They indicated that an agreement on the amount may be reached after conferring with Thoron, Fortas and other Interior officials. Informed persons say there is a possibility that the sale may be finalized before Delgado and Curry return to Puerto Rico, most likely directly from New York. Admiral Beatty was here for a few days Rear Admiral Frank E. Beatty, commander of the Aruba-Curaçao Forces, recently visited San Juan. The distinguished American sailor spent several days in the city, according to an official communiqué from the Tenth Naval District. Rear Admiral Beatty acted as Acting Chief of the Tenth District and Commander of the Caribbean Sea Frontier while Admiral Robert C. Giffen was in Washington on special assignment, attending a series of conferences held at the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations. Prior to assuming the duties he now performs, Admiral Leatty served in the Pacific as commanding officer of the cruiser USS-Columbia. His unit was part of a force of (Continued on page 16.)
A letter from the front . Expressing the spirit that animates the 65th Regiment.
From the theater of war in Europe, three corporals of the 65th Infantry Regiment, Carlos Collazo Aponte, Horacio Ortiz and Antonio Rodriguez, have addressed to our comrade Eliseo Combas Guerra the letter that we insert below: FROM FRANCE 38 of 1934.-From this theater of war we write to you to tell you some details of life in these new experiences. Really interesting the development of the events on this site. All our boys are possessed of an admirable military spirit and in carrying out the mission that has been entrusted to each one of them, they are trying to do their best and to put the name of Puerto Rico very high. It will surely be known to you by now that we are on the battlefields, facing the enemy forums that in the past tried to imprison in its criminal claws the destinies of humanity. Fortunately, it did not ask for such a solution and the armies of freedom have
the armies of freedom have stopped in time the odious plan that threatened to destroy forever all the rights of mankind. We are aware of how the will of the people has been expressed lately in "Cierto Rico. Here too the will of the absent Puerto Rico is to contribute by all means at its disposal to the forging of a glorious future for our Island, at the same time that we contribute to the construction of a better world and of Íustlcla for all shoulders. We are still in the middle of the road and we do not know the sacrifices we will have to make. Time will decide with marked eloquence. We only know that we will respond to the dictates of our conscience and that at no time will we allow our history of so many years of civilization and progress to be tarnished. Our soldiers, in the midst of the thundering of cannons, feel the deep breath of being face to face with the enemy to attack and destroy him overwhelmingly.
Still our enemy, in the throes of agony, wants to inflict some damage on us and appeals to all the means at his disposal to do so, but we have the absolute conviction that the day will not be long in coming when he will fall forever and will never rise again. We do not know, the concept that our people will have of their youth currently fighting outside our beloved island. We are completely ignorant of the projects that are in mind to reward the sacrifices of our boys. We only know of the satisfaction of the fulfilled duty and that the expectations of our fellow citizens will never be disappointed, more than anything else because having for supreme Inspiration *1 unlimited love for our land and our relatives, we will make every possible effort within our reach, to demonstrate to the whole world that in spite of being our Island small in territorial extension, the soul of Puerto Rico is capable of the most heroic deeds (Continued on page 16).
OAP Requests List of Cigarette Retailers
.. .r l K - - - shall I Have received , number protests to interpretation regulation X illllma bom inrr measures in- ■ <!<- o,M'. di.... ■ t no. .b'lalhsm... cue bul' ■ - b:do . ■ 'Threads (bstHn,..dolos n -na- ■ aw ' ' '"'''W A' 1 '' ii la .¡a 'm' 1 " 1 de (|ue 'T de Adn:- s! ; neo n ce l'reeios ir- I > ' ' ' 1 । . ' n -- i s ■ '- Mi ' ' ■os " ribindol.. U' (imib'Hi M . ■ -'.r,/.-| - - - .-; Í "J. ' zXMfe* <> ' ' '.J V-' 1 '' Cen'le , ,s feet "■■■■ 'Jes d I H S ■ '- V ' 1 ' --í , ® o' ' M ' 4 ' '' H ) is o , , ,,,,,,,, s ,.,,; ,.... ce! p 1 oX o,,o ■ : ■' ' ' ' : " , i,i. ¿. - S "g" ¡bultos the reqi sdn of the (h- p i W®-® d.'ll r.eslu tl\n. une tequióte <e I \ 1 . ' 'T a ' ' ' ' V, each ntasonsta o d M i tbutdor the ■ indieaeton of inlnrnvs content i\os ■ from a list do all ciKurrillo customers.s during the months of " May and June 1944, indicating BBL - ' 4i can ü? ad i v^ nd i ,d i a e * da . u ¡?° of eI podwf® fe American weapons of no use to the nasl to creerae a superman, as m eUo". The 'original of this report was shown by Hitler. The photograph above shows a German soldier, lying in the midst of the ruins of an anti-aircraft carriage. The scene was prodílo "n FranJii during lo! ra । d j I I? The scene took place in FranJii during the last few war moves that the enemy thought might yield him victories, but which thwarted another tAPLocartd pueWo'doSe the ma-' V " 10 " in the western fr ® nt ® of Europe. (Communications Corps Photo (Attributed by PA)
yorlsta or distributor has its offices. "As soon as these reports are filed," says the PAO notice, "the Local Boards, Price Panels, Community Relations Members, and Inspectors of the Office of Price Administration will be in a better position to know to which retailers the cigarettes will be distributed and to see that they comply with the provisions of the regulations. "The Central Office is preparing the list of importers' customers submitted by the importers and the quantities sold to them during the course of this week. This information will be submitted to the Junats Lócale" of the OAP. "Once again, the Office of Price Administration once again appeals to traders and consumers to give their full cooperation to the rationing program." The fact that the shortage of cigarettes in the local market has not yet been resolved, despite the fact that the distribution of cigarettes in the local market has not been resolved, despite the fact that the distribution of cigarettes in the local market has not been authorized since last Tuesday morning, is due, it was alleged yesterday by person well connected with the market situation, that "many wholesalers and retailers have misinterpreted the order of the Office of Price Ad* ministration to the effect that they are entitled to receive a quota equal to 75 per cent of the el* frarrlllos they received during os months of May and June, 1944." Our informant said that "during the months of May and June, 1944, the shipments of cigarettes for Puerto Rico were normal, no less than 2,000,000 straws being received weekly, At present the shipment received is much less, which means that the stock in the market must be distributed among all the customers, according to the purchases they made during the basic months it took the OAP to decree rationing. This, however, does not mean that each customer has to receive exactly 75% of the cigarettes they received during the basic period, because there is not enough cigarettes in stock to dispatch this amount." According to reports gathered yesterday, a distribution house in San Juan, which supplies 13% of the local market, was able to dispose during the months of May and June 1944 of about 16,000,000 cigarettes. However, the shipment recently arrived on the Island and destined for this house is approximately 2,000,000 cigarettes, which means that the present stock is one eighth of that received during the two months taken by the OAP as the first two months of May and June 1944, and that it is only one eighth of that received during the two months of June.
Local Bacardi factory to be enlarged Bosch says it will be larger than that established by the company in Cuba WASHINGTON, 5. (PU) -Within the next three years, Bacardi's liquor interests in Puerto Rico will be larger than those of the company in Cuba, according to a statement made to the United Press by Jose M. Bosch, assistant general manager of the "Bacardi Rum Company". Bosch is currently in Santiago de CuManifested that although the current Bacardi factory in San Juan is larger than the one in Cuba, the financial investment in Cuba is greater because the ownership of the "Hatuey" brewery and other assets and properties have been accumulated over the course of eighty years. The company in Puerto Rico has only operated for eight years, but Bosch stated that "I have no doubt that, over the course of three years, the Bacardi factory in Puerto Rico will represent a larger financial investment than the one in Cuba." They will bring salt from Curacao without raising the price The AGS will absorb the losses arising from importing the product * Mr. Antonio Vlcens Ríos, director of the General Supply Administration, yesterday addressed the territorial director of the Office of Price Administration, Mr. Sam Gilstrap, requesting that this war agency authorize a readjustment in the price of salt. As already reported by EL MUNDO, the General Supply Administration will have to import salt from Curacao to face the crisis that the island is facing due to the shortage of this item. Yesterday afternoon, Mr. Glls(Continued on page 16.)
Sugar producers decide to negotiate with the CGT Union The talks on the agreement submitted by Ramos Antonini will begin on January 10. - Union authorizes work On January 10 of this year, that is, Wednesday of next week, discussions will begin, at the latest, on a collective bargaining agreement between the Puerto Rico Sugar Producers Association and the General Sugar Producers Union affiliated to the General Confederation of Workers. This decision was taken yesterday by the" producers and is recorded in a letter from Mr. Antonio A. Roig to Federal Conciliator Charles A. Goldsmith, the text of which we publish below.
The same day, the 10th, the Board of Directors of the APA will meet to receive the report submitted by the Labor Committee of the APA on the draft collective agreement submitted by the Union. Yesterday was a very active day on the sugar front. The Assembly, meeting during the morning, agreed to submit the draft agreement sent to it by the Union through Mr. Goldsmith to its Labor Committee so that the latter, after studying it, would report to the Board of Directors, which, according to the original agreement, was to meet on the 12th of this month, leaving the initiation of negotiations for "after" this TKha. A commission composed of Messrs. Roig and Francisco López Domínguez met yesterday at noon with the Federal Conciliator and the Island Conciliator, Mr. Fernando Sierra Berdecla, at the offices of the former. The representatives of the APA reported what was
agreed in the morning meeting. One hour after this meeting and when Mr. López Domínguez and Mr. Roig had already left Mr. Goldsmith's offices, Mr. Goldsmith invited Mr. Ernesto llamos Antoninl and the members of the General Council of the Union and the Union's Convention Committee by telephone for an exchange of impressions, which was attended, in addition to the conciliators, by the regional director of the National Labor Relations Board, Mr. James R. Watson; Mr. Ramos Antoninl and Mr. Ramón Alvarez Conde, vice-president of the Union. This meeting lasted about two hours. The persons gathered there then received the representatives of the Press informing them that the Association was drafting a letter, addressed to Mr. Goldsmith, stating that it was willing to negotiate a collective bargaining agreement with the Union. (Continued on page 16)
If so, it will be effective January 11, and in accordance with Washington's instructions, men between the ages of 30 and 38 will be reclassified.
The Director of the Selective Service in Puerto Rico, Colonel Harry F. Besóse, is studying the order issued by Washington, to be effective January 11 of the current year, on the reclassification of all the Enlisted Men between the ages of 30 and 38 to be called to service. The study is to determine whether the order has application in Puerto Rico. From
The study is to determine whether the order applies to Puerto Rico, as advanced by the Director of Selective Service, who reported that "Washington has ordered that the liberality in the classification of these registrants be eliminated, because more men are needed".1 I fear," said Colonel Besóse on that occasion, "that it will be the same here under present conditions.
- vh * Mw* W be applicable will proceed to order the reclaslflcadón of all men between these ages, to the end that*they may be Included in the next call of the Local Boards. THE WORLD, in its edition of December 30, 1944, reported on the possibility of men up to the age of 38 years being called up for military service, WASHINGTON, 5. (PU)- In order to reduce the number of non-essential trips, the Director of the Movement, James Bymeo, has ordered the cancellation of all conventions of fifty or more people scheduled after February 1, 1944. Henceforth, a governmental committee will consider a study to 'reaUse oonvancionea to determine "ai occasions rounlonoa "on the sufficiently naco* oary, without interest of Is war, to justify the use of the means of transport."
Tugwell has not ruled out idea of convening the Legislature Its sole purpose would be to appropriate funds for the PEG. - Muñoz agrees he does not agree because the House presidency issue has not yet been resolved.
I --- WESTERN FRONT: Marshal Montgomery yesterday launched three Allied armies against the northern side of the German salient in the Ardennes and oue Buntas of tense won a half a mile and a half on several points. By provision of the high command, Montgomery is now in command of all Allied forces on the north side of the Baylent. The Third Army had to withdraw more than a mile in some places northeast of Bastogno because of recent German counterattacks. o * - EASTERN FRONT: The Russian High Command announced that Russian troops had joined the German counteroffensive to break the encirclement of Budapest. Berlin reported Russian operations south of Warsaw. In Budapest, the Russians continue to gain ground, having already entered the racecourse do a<w "Ha doubt. e o o o ITALY! Troops of the Eighth 1
A highly credible source reported yesterday that early next week Governor Tugwell and Senate President Luis Muñoz Marin will discuss measures to be taken to continue the activities of the Emergency War Program, but we are assured that it is not definitely settled, although it is highly probable, that the Emergency War Program will continue to operate with an appropriation from the Emergency Fund. This was one of the issues to be considered at the conference of Messrs. Tugwell and Muñoz Marin. We were further informed that Mr. Tugwell has not
We were further informed that Mr. Tugwell has not ruled out the idea of convening the Legislative Assembly for an extraordinary session and that he would decide to do so if Mr. Muñoz Marín agreed with the idea. It has been pointed out that the main drawback for a special session is the question of the election of the President of the House of Representatives, which has not yet been resolved by the leadership of the Popular Party. It is understood that if a special legislative session is held, it would not last more than two days, since the only matter to be considered would be the appropriation for the Emergency War Program.
Outgoing northeast suffers impact of 3 armies Armored units of the 3rd. Army forced to give up some ground British attack again in Holland Seventh Army continues to withdraw to c o s ado by heavy Nazi pressure By JAMES McGUNCY PARIS, 5,' (PU)-Marshal Montgomery today launched the attack on the northern side of the German Ardennes and his armored spearheads gained about a mile and a half at several points despite the cold weather and the stubborn resistance of the best divisions at Marshal Von Rundstedt's disposal. Meanwhile, a dispatch from the U.S. Third Army front reports that armored units under Lieutenant-General Patton have retreated more than a mile and a half in some places to high ground three miles northeast of Bastogne. The withdrawal was made to the southwest of Mlchamps, as a result of constant German counterattacks with tanks and heavy artillery and infantry. The fact that all the Allied forces on the north side of the German salient were now under Montgomery's command was due to an order of the supreme command, which was made, it was officially announced, for "tactical reasons, but also for the reasons of the Germans.
officially announced, for "tactical, geographical, and supply reasons." With reference to other sectors of the western front, the Supreme Allied Command has given no Information but instead Berlin radio announced that the Germans had repulsed British attacks in the Dutch area of Wandshum, north of Venlo. It also said that Canadian troops, with tanks and Isnzallams", had penetrated into Hemme, northwest of Nlmega, also in Holland. That is the first* news ■e have had about thei activities on the Dutch front after several weeks of cha|ma. As for the American attacks, dispatches from the front say that the fighting is extremely hard and that advances must measure them "* by meters . "* instead of miles. They add that the Americans, despite fierce German resistance, continue to make progress, sometimes at close range to the Nazi artillery, which has caused them "severe" tank losses. The overcast skies again prevented the Allied air forces from using their full power to support the troops in the battle zone; but the Eighth Air Force stationed a thousand flying fortresses and Liberator planes, escorted by 500 fighters, against the lines of communication, junctions and other targets behind the Von Rundsted bridge. The first news of such a withdrawal was given by the United Press last Wednesday, in a dispatch from the front. . The latest news states that Lieutenant General Patch's troops are fighting hard in the Bltche area, where the Germans have attacked to the west and east. The Nazis have filtered into Wingen, three miles south of Relpertweiler, and are now threatening the main road and railway line from Sarreguemmei to Haguenau. The onslaught also threatens the line of communication of American troops still holding in the Wisemburg Gap. The British forces cooperating with Lieutenant General Hodges' First Army advanced nearly a mile and a half to a point three miles south of Hotton, toward the western end of the odor. In the central part of the attack, the First Army advanced a thousand miles to the north of Llernoux, three miles east of Malempre. (Continued on page 16)
■ ¡I-- ! THE WAR IN SYNTHESIS i ■■■■ । ■ ■■■■■■ ii ■ । ■ a ■! ■ ■
The Germans were pushed back from powerful positions along the southern bank of the VUU of Comacchlo, in the eastern part of the Po Valley. Brazilian troops repulsed a powerful German onslaught north of Volpara - * - GREECE: British forces penetrated the northern part of Athens and now occupy the fourth part of the Greek capital. AIR WAR: More than mU British planes attacked eight German territory. Dea heavy bomber forces operated against Rannovér, while Berlin was twice bombed with 9,606 ton bombs*. o o o o o PACIFIC t American forces occupied the island of M" rlnduquo, off Mindoro, without Japanese resistance. Formosa and Iwo Jima were bombed by U.S. forces,
The Üh of a "superman" and his weapons.
ItWO