THE DAILY MORNING OF THE MARANA
2 Sections
34 Patinas 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
YEAR XXVII
I don't liquidate the bonds purchased, if I only want to liquidate Sitiar.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 1945
Entarod aa socond olaso mottarPota Ottioo, Boa Juan. >■ "■
NUMBER 10283
TOKYO IS ENGULFED IN FLAMES RUSSIANS NEAR BERLIN'S BORDERS
Convention of school officials today
It was convened by Dr. Gallardo, who will deliver speech ■r Will outline guidelines in school problem The Commissioner wishes to have, unity of action to solve it At new this morning begins its work the convention 4e_iutorldadee school, convened by the Commissioner of Instruction, Dr. José M. Gallardo, for the' ner effect in the hall of act" do ; the Central High School of Santurco. Its purpose is to consider and study the most important aspects of the problem of Puerto Rico and to promote the achievement of the necessary unity of action in regard thereto. -The fundamental purposes and objectives of the act, as stated by Dr. Gallardo, are the "study of the school system, in the light of its relations with the various agencies involved in its organization and operation: the examination of the educational problem of the Island and of the means conducive to its solution, especially with a view to the improvement of the system and the extension of its benefits to the entire school population: and the unity of purpose and action for the most effective reallza- . The convention will be constituted under the chairmanship of the Commissioner of Instruction, who will make a speech. In addition, the superintendent of schools of San Juan, Mr. Fxanclsco Rodriguez Lopez; the dean of schools of Ponce, Mrs. Juana Clavel! de Spaulding; and the superintendent of schools of Salinas, Miss Stella Marquez, will speak. Francisco Collazo, Deputy Commissioner of Instruction, who will make an "analysis of the school system, in its main organic and functional aspects", and Miguel Meléndez Muñoz, Deputy Commissioner of Instruction, who will make an "analysis of the school system, in its main organic and functional aspects"; Miguel Meléndez Muñoz, school director of San Juan, who will speak on the "harmonious interrelaclon of the different parts that integrate the school system, as an essential condition for the full realization of the educational program"; Luis Muñiz Souffront, President of the Teachers Association, who will be in charge of a presentation on the selection of teachers: Ramón T. Rivera, school director of Barranquitas, who will make a presentation on the topic "The municipal administration as an Indlspensa4 ble factor of collaboration in the educational work"; Francisco Modesto, superintendent of schools of Fajardo, who will speak on the topic: "The superintendent of schools as a link between the local administration and the central management of schools"; Francisco Collazo, H. A. Martin, José Vázquez 'Ortlz, Leandro Garda Pacheco and A. Andino, who will make a presentation on the topic "The municipal administration as an Indlspensa4 ble factor of collaboration in the educational work". Andino, who will make a presentation on the expansion of the school system, through the creation of new schools, construction of buildings, acquisition of land and others; Miss Maria Socorro Lacot Íy Señores A Andino, Antonio Fernández, Nelson Ramirez, represen- ' Unte de la OS. y José M. Quigly, representative of the PRCDA, who will speak on school cafeterias; Francisco Collazo H; A. Martin, José Vázquez Ortlz j A. Andino, who will speak on "New school legislation, regarding the igu" lamient fund, transfer of service d< (Continued on page 18)
Bishop Davis urges Christian reform in the home He points out that otherwise, "there is no salvation for family life, faced with total dissolution.
An exhortation to peace, and a call to give Christian permanence to the home, is contained in the pastoral letter that Monsignor Jaime P. Davls, Bishop of San Juan, has addressed to the diocese under his jurisdiction on the occasion of Lent. "There can be no doubt," he says, "as to the need for reform, a reform that is to take place only when we revive respect and veneration for the ideals of Christian marriage, after putting into practice the teachings of Jesus and his Church." . The pastoral letter is worded as follows: "Our Holy Mother the Church invites us once again to the excellent and very profitable spiritual retreat, as is Holy Lent. A great multitude of the faithful of all social classes has come to our temples for Committee wishes to help the Island, Bell expresses He writes to Bolivar Pagan that the report is in process of writing In a letter addressed to the former Resident Commissioner, Mr. Bolivar Pagan, Congressman C. Jasper Bell, president of the Committee that bears his name, informs him that "it is the hope" of all the members of said organization "to be of real and permanent help to the people of Puerto Rico". He adds that (Continued on page 18)
to receive the ashes, a sign of penance, a reminder of death and judgment; death and judgment that we would not wish to remember, if Our Lord Jesus Christ had not established by his own passion and death, the sure basis of all our hope. "Holy Lent does not oblige us to only and exclusively in death or to remember our penances; rather it makes us raise our gaze to Calvary. And so! the most salutary end of Lent is to make us come to the knowledge, to the true understanding of the Sacred Passion and death of Our Lord Jesus Christ, so that we may accept Him as our Savior. Jesus Christ, so that we may accept with joy and zeal the obligation to suffer and practice penance, so that we may then be able to confess with the Apostle St. Paul, faithful imitator of Christ, "We must glo(Continued on page 18) New office will serve municipalities Muñoz wants them to have facilities to process their affairs Mr. Abelardo Román Font, who was head of the Public Debt Division and is now head of the Property Bureau of the Department of the Treasury, will be in charge of the organization of the new office. The Treasury Department, will be in charge of the organization and direction of an office to be established in the Legislative Assembly to provide service to the citizens of Puerto Rico, and will be in charge of the organization and direction of an office to be established in the Legislative Assembly to provide service to the citizens of Puerto Rico.
The Economy of Puerto Rico 1 Suggestions for Exploiting the Prospects for the Future
This is the latest in a series of articles written by Professor Bol L. Deocartee, former advisor to the Government of Puerto Rico and now an advisor to the Government of Puerto Rico. - Deocartee, former adviser to the Government of Puerto Rico and now a member of the U.S. Armed Forces, on the Island economy. In this treatise the author gives a summary of the general situation and makes suggestions for taking advantage of the favorable prospects of the future, - By SOL L. DESCARTES The Island is, at this time when the decision of the war in Europe will apparently not be long in coming, in an economic position full of promise. The chances are that federal revenues will continue at higher levels during the post-war period.
The chances are that federal revenues will continue at higher levels in the post-war period than in the years preceding the war. The value of exports appears likely to remain at relatively high levels, or increase for some years after the end of the war. After that, when the Island's competing industries on the mainland return to their usual production, and the other countries are rebuilt, the course of exports of our principal products - sugar, rum, tobacco, tobacco, pesticides, and sewage - will depend mainly on the action of Congress as to customs tariffs, quota systems, and administrative provisions. It should not be forgotten, however, that while the outlook is encouraging in general, it is based on factors that are not very certain, and there is a risk of
and the risk of inflation. The Island Government, because of the high resources at its disposal, and the prospect of very high revenues during the next few years, will play a major role in our economic life. The plan of action to be adopted by the public authorities as to the use of public resources is potentially capable of producing radical changes in our economy. Failure to implement vigorous plans to prevent this will result in a decline in agricultural production for local consumption to levels which, although higher than during the war, will be considerably lower than those prevailing during the war, but which will be considerably lower than those prevailing during the war.
Judicial Council has not had the help it expected: Travieso
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court comments on the words of the Governor and explains the work carried out by the aforementioned body
"The Judicial Council has done enough, within the circumstances, and could have done more than it has done if it had received the cooperation it expected from the other branches of the Government," said yesterday the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, Martin Travieso, when asked by an editor of EL MUNDO if he had any comments to make on the reference made by Governor Tugwell to the Judicial Council in his message read at the inaugural session of the Legislative Assembly. He further said that he agrees with the recommendation made by the Governor to the Legislature to create the office of the Administrator of the Courts, equal in its foundations to that existing in the United States. "I agree that there should be an official office or center through which the Interim proceedings would be administered, as this would not only relieve the judges from having to distract their attention from routine matters, such as having to intervene in the accounting of the courts, and to understand the
in the accounting of the courts and dealing with the disbursements that are made, but could also be entrusted with the mission of carrying out the inspection of the processing and progress of judicial matters," Judge Travieso said. He added that he recently spoke with the Governor on this matter and referred to the need for an official who can attend to the numerous administrative details of the courts, such as the signing of payrolls, economic reports, disbursements and accounting in general, as well as the proper organization of the judicial indexes, showing the pending cases, their status, those resolved or filed and the general standardization in the order of the files and archives. Regarding Governor Tugwell's reference to the Judicial Council, of which the Executive said in his message that "perhaps because of the manner in which it is organized by law, it cannot be said to have justified its existence." Judge Travleoo referred (Continued on page 5.)
Grassroots leaders disagree with Tugwell's stated purpose.
He will be asked to desist from making savings in the Emergency Relief Program payroll. It was reported in official circles yesterday that Governor Tugwell is in favor of reducing the Emergency War Program payroll by twenty percent and that he has discussed the matter with the officials in charge of this activity. It has been assured that the Chief Executive of the Island is of the opinion that the Income on the rolls particularly will have to suffer decreases in the future for which it is necessary to make savings. - '■ ' - ' --
Although absolute secrecy is maintained on this matter, we understand that the leadership of the Legislature is opposed to suspending projects and services Sue is currently providing on an emergency basis. It is alleged that a twenty percent reduction in the payroll of the referenced Program would leave some thirteen thousand families without jobs and livelihoods. We have been informed that the central leadership of the Popular Party will ask Governor Tugwoll to desist from his intention to make savings by cutting activities of the Emergency Program, it is claimed that there would be no justification for such a step in view of the solvency of the Treasury. On the other hand, a bill has been filed in the Senate by Messrs. Marín, Gélgel Polanco and Quiñones to allocate an additional two and a half million dollars for the Emergency Program, and it is certain that it will be one of the most urgent measures to be approved by both chambers. It is understood that Governor Tugwell made indications on the purpose already expressed to the directors of the Emergency Island Council. If the
Rexford G. Tugwell Governor of Puerto Rico are maintained, no new projects could be started at this time, it was reported yesterday, until at least next May and June.
í Spearheads approach the suburbs
Konev's and Zhukov's armies united for final onslaught Konev's troops take the initiative From Moscow hint at the i n minence of a double attack on Berlin For ROBERT MUSEL LONDON. 18. (PU)-Soviet spearheads, "attacking in the very heart of Germany , according to Moscow Reports, are approaching the suburban residences of Berlin and the river Spree. Moscow radio reported that two Soviet armies are destroying defenses southeast of Berlin in a coordinated attack that appears to be the first phase of the decisive battle for the German capital ... . The Germans reported to have contained the Russian onslaught against Cottbus, the fulcrum of the defense system southeast of Berlin and barely 48 miles from the capital. Marshal Konev's forces are closing on Cottbus with extraordinary speed. The White Russian First Army, commanded by Marshal Zhukov, with its left flank protected by Konev's onslaught in the Brandenburg province, is ready to attack the capital from its positions in the Oder valley, some 30 miles to the east. The newspaper "Knasnala Zvozda" (The Red Star) hints at the imminence of the double attack on the defenses near Berlin by saying that "only a short distance remains to the banks of the Spree and the suburban residences of B o r 11 n", adding: "The air is saturated with the smell of gunpowder. The Germanic earth burns and gives off smoke. The horizon is obscured by smoke from the fires and explosions. The terrain and the weather favor the enemy, who never fought so tenaciously or desperately as now, when our spearheads strike at the very heart of Germany." Other dispatches from Moscow report violent blows delivered by American and British planes to Dresden, Cottbus and other strategic points behind the German lines, preventing desperate efforts by the Nazis to send reinforcements to hold back Konev's onslaught. They add that behind Konev's advanced positions there have remained dozens of pardal or totally isolated German groups, fighting desperately in a fruitless effort to escape the enveloping Russian movements. The German high command announced that it had increased the encirclement in Lower Silesia, but in the same communiqué said, however, that Konev "was able yesterday to extend his zone of rupture." Moscow radio confirmed the news that had been circulating about the total encirclement of Breslau, and said that in the vicinity of that city the Russians had occupied more than two hundred towns, including Klettendorf. The Soviets crossed the Oder to the west of Iruenberg. Moscow also reported that with (Continued on page 15.)
British forces enter Cleve
r ' 'AHI 1 a ' Viuk.A A A ■ Gold to This official British photo shows British troops entering the important German town of Cleve on Feb. 11, in an advance of the coordinated offensive by British and Canadian troops. The strips that can be seen along the road were placed by the British to show the road clear of automatic mines. - (Official British photograph, distributed by the Associated Press).
Lawyers resent Governor They believe the Executive has not given consideration to their recommendations The Board of Governors of the Bar Association officially considered in its meeting last Wednesday "the resentment of the directors of said institution for the little consideration Governor Tugwell has been giving to the recommendations of the Bar Association in matters of judicial appointments". This was reported yesterday by a spokesman for the institution. After having considered the matter at length, the Board appointed a commission to discuss the matter with the Governor. The appointed commission was composed of Senators Luis Alfredo Colón and J.M. Dávlla Monsanto, Samuel R. Quiñones, president of the College, and the vice president, Félix Ochoteco Jr. An agreement was unanimously adopted by the Board, whose session was attended by the largest number of members who have attended any meeting of said body to date, in the sense of recommending to Leda. Alma Delgado, Municipal Judge of Añasco, for the position of Clerk of the Ponce District Court. The Executive Secretary of the Board, Roberto H. Todd, Sr., informed the meeting that according to the regulations, the members must pay their annual dues of $6.00, which is due every January 31. As of the date of the Board meeting on Wednesday, about 600 of the College's eight hundred members had not yet paid their dues, according to Mr. Todd. The Board agreed to give those members who have not paid their dues a deadline of 31 December to pay their dues.
Producers have not yet replied on the T ugwell formula All the APA and Rufina mills have ceased milling. What Barreto, Ramos Antonini and Quiñones report. Jesús M. Ríos, president of the Sugar Producers Association; José Ramón Quiñones, president of the Farmers Association; and Nicolás Nogueras Rivera, general secretary of the Libro Federation, paralyzed activities at the plant at about eleven o'clock yesterday morning. This means that, according to Mr. Ríos, all the plants affiliated to the APA are currently at a standstill.
The Cántral Victoria, while all the other APA plants remained inactive, continued to operate normally, by virtue of a local collective bargaining agreement which governs relations between employers and workers. The Central and its workers, represented by an independent local union, have not been directly affected, until yesterday, by the general strike movement decreed at the same time by the CGT and the FLT, in the sugar industry of Puerto Rico. According to reports received by Mr. Quiñones, who supplied them to an editor of EL MUNDO, at the time of the strike at Central Victoria there were about three thousand tons of sugar cane cut in the sugar mill plaza and in the fields, and about two thousand sacks of sugar were in the process of being processed. All those cut canes, added Mr. Quiñones, as well as that amount of sugar in process, run the risk of being lost, if the efforts that Be began yesterday to get the workers to agree to work to grind them and liquidate the factory are not successful. A commission of settlers took steps to see the Governor, to explain the matter to him, and to ask him to (Continued on page 15.) - (Continued on page 15.) - They will decide today to ration the water supply.
Butter rationing to be decided today - I There are 584 tons left in the local market. Consumption 400 tons per week The Office of Price Administration will decide today when the rationing of butter in Puerto Rico will begin. Yesterday afternoon the Territorial Director of that agency, Mr. Sam Gilstrap, communicated with the authorities in Washington to notify them of the shortage of that product in the Ix'a and to discuss with them the rationing in Puerto Rico and the date on which it should begin. Yesterday, it was reported that the butter stock in the local market now amounts to 584 tons, while consumption on the Island is (Continued on page 18)
The directors of the OAP and JISM did not meet yesterday, Friday, to discuss the policy to be followed regarding increases of river room in the industries.
The meeting that had been announced between the directors of the Office of Price Administration, directors of the Island Minimum Wage Board and representatives of the Governor, to try to reach an agreement so that both agencies would work in full cooperation, was not held yesterday*, because Governor Tugwell announced that he would be out of San Juan, as our readers will recall, The idea of holding this meeting arose after letters were sent between Mr. Ssm Gilstrap, Territorial Director of the OPA, and Mr. Gabriel Guerra Mondragón, President of the ISWB, in which the former declared that he did not agree with the decreeing of wage increases for workers in the Island's industries, since he understood that this would be detrimental to the maximum prices established by the Office of Price Administration. He considered that "when the producers have to increase their salaries, the cost of production increases, and as a consequence, this office is requested to also increase the maximum prices established". When Gabriel Guerra Mondragon was asked yesterday when this meeting was to be held, he informed that he had no knowledge of it, although it was his im-
He said he had no knowledge of it, although it was his impression that it would take place within the next week. "All I know is that the meeting was postponed because the Governor had to leave San Juan, and I was told that I would be notified when it would be held. So far I have not been notified of any specific date, although I have the impression that it will be during the course of next week".
PACIFIC FRONT: Last night the belief prevailed that the attack begun at dawn Thursday by American carrier bombers against the Tokyo area and the Volcano Islands was continuing. Imported damage to the Isle of lwo Jims was reported. RUSSIAN-GERMAN FRONT- - Moscow reported that Soviet spearheads "are approaching the su- , hurban residences of Berlin and the Spree River." Unconfirmed news indicated that Marshal Zhukov had resumed his ope* radons on the Oder.
WESTERN FRONT: The Canadian First Army continued its offensive, which has placed it at the ports of the Ruhr. It is reported that in this sector the Germans have launched forces of their Eighth Division in an effort to prevent the Allied breakthrough. PHILIPPINES: The North Americans conquered the Batean peninsula after an amphibious assault around Marlvoles, on the southern coast, while the guns of the warships neutralized the Japanese batteries on Corregidor Island.
The column of smoke passes 2,000 meters.
The air attack on the Japanese capital lasted - over nine hours The fleet guns the lwo base American ships of all 1 o s types have joined in the attack - By FRANK TREMAINE ALMIRAL NIMITZ HEADQUARTERS, GUAM, 18. (PU)-This evening a gigantic column of smoke rose over the city of Tokyo, more than two thousand meters high, as if rising from a huge funeral pyre, after the attack which lasted more than nine hours by American airplanes from aircraft carriers; while the Japanese reported that a United States squadron was still shelling the island of Iwo. at 8:30 p.m., after twelve hours of continuous fire. The radio from. Tokyo, which was broadcasting music when the historic naval operation began, said clearly that the Imperial command now believes that the attack may reach its culmination with the American landing on the island, located 1,120 kilometers from the Japanese capital. American warships of all types, from battleships to destroyers, are taking part in the attack on the lwo, which is five miles long by four miles wide. It is well presumed that this American squadron is the most powerful ever to ply the waters of the Pacific. Vice Admiral Maro A. Mitacher, commander of the force that attacked Tokyo, and Admiral Raymond A. Spruanco, commander of the Fifth Fleet, will have to say when they abandon the attack to inform Admiral Nlmlts aobro of what is expected to be a historic victory. Spruanoo is in charge of all tactical operations. It has been indicated that planes of Mitscher's carrier forces cleared the skies over Tokyo and Isa adjacent areas of Japanese aircraft, leaving their bases or military installations reduced to ruins. Tokyo said that the first three formations of attacking planes had 300 aircraft each. There is sufficient reason to believe also that the Spruance squadron has devastated the island of Iwo, destroying its powerful air forces with cannon fire, supported by bombs from the planes of the Pacific strategic air force. After the air raid, Tokyo radio gave the obligatory account, trying to present a picture of heroism of bus inhabitants, of whom he said that they flocked to bus fighting posts. He added that, notwithstanding the attack, the workers in Tokyo's war factories continued to work. In another broadcast, the station said significantly that Tokyo residents "are determined to fight to the death when the homeland becomes a battlefield. The transmissions from Tokyo were heard by Admiral NI* mltz, who, from his headquarters, gave orders and received reports on the naval air operation. Later, showing excellent humor, Nlmltz left for lunch. United Press correspondent Dan McGuire, who spent nearly six months with Vice Admiral Mitscher's naval forces in the Pacific last year, reports that the Vice Admiral has enough aircraft carriers to field 1,000 to 1,500 planes in a single action. An all-day operation of this kind involves two or even three sorties per plane,' McGuire goes on to say that the first wave of planes that (Continued on page 5.)
THE WAR IN BRIEF