THE WORLD
34 puúim 5 ctvs. 2 Sections
34 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DIARY OF THE TANGLE
YEAR
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, MAY 19, 1945
Entered as second class matter. Pod Office, Bad Juan, P. B.
NUMBER 10474
XXVII
The best victory celebration in Europe: buy more bonds.
Government gives aid to 24,005
Abí informs Negociado d e Asistencia Pública for the month of March 194 performed social work Investigated average of 14.5, 12.5 and 15.4 cases from January to March At the end of March, the Negociado da Aalatancla Pública was granting economic aid to 24,005 cases. These cases involved 63,456 persons. A total of $539,000.41 was granted as public assistance, the highest amount being 87.50 dollars per case. Emergency aid was granted to 330 families in January, 372 in February, and 498 in March, for a total amount of $83,795.60. "The Bureau - says the official note - had a total of 52,529 applications pending at the end of March, of which 3,409 were for the first three months of the year. Each of these new applicants was interviewed for the purpose of obtaining eligibility data, interpreting the rules and procedures relating to au caao, and, when necessary, providing service" to address the situation when it was their turn to receive assistance. "Given the shortage of personnel in the Public Assistance Bureau, the heads of local offices were forced to devote part of their time to research and social services. Including the bureau chiefs who performed research and social services, the number of public assistance workers was 190 in January, 191 in February, and 194 in March. "During the month of January this period, 1,248 cases already receiving assistance were investigated and 1,248 cases were referred for assistance. They provided social services to 631 cases that were not receiving assistance, and attended to 830 emergency cases. The total number of investigations conducted by them amounted to 2,754, which is equivalent to an average of 14.5 cases investigated per public assistance worker. During the month of February, public assistance workers conducted 703 new investigations and 892 roinveatl rations. They also provided social services to M2 unassisted cases and handled 372 emergency cases. The average number of inquiries during the month of February last year was 12.5 per public assistance worker. In the month of March, 797 new applications were investigated and 875 cases of assistance were handled. A total of 1,027 cases that were not receiving financial assistance were served. The total number of emergency cases served was 496. Each public health worker investigated or investigated an average of 15.F cases. In addition to this work, public health workers continued to serve the cases already under their care. "They provided other services such as screening of applicants for admission to district hospitals to determine eligibility on the basis of financial need, applicants for admission to the Asylum for the Blind, and applicants for services from the Puerto Rican League Against Cancer, as stipulated by a contract between that agency and the Department of Health. Temblón performed on the public assistance workers all those investigations requested by the Intoragondalo Services Unit and by the Central Office of the Bureau, the latter relating, for the most part, to complaints and inquiries from the applicants or beneficiaries of the agenda, or from other personnel interested in the welfare of the latter. In some towns, public assistance workers provided additional services. In Latos, for example, on the occasion of the fire that occurred on February 3rd , all the workers from the Aguadilla area were transferred for several weeks to the town of Ilnlootve to cooperate in the relief efforts for the victims. The San Juan and Río Piedras public works workers conducted a survey of the families who had illegally built their homes on federal or island public lands. Throughout the island, with the exception of San Juan and Culebra, aid workers carried out a census of homelessness that extended from February 15 to February 3. They enumerated 1,578 beggars, which, in addition to the 302 already enumerated in San Juan, make a total of 1,890 beggars on the entire island of Culebra," the official report concludes.
According to information received yesterday by the War Production Board, the repeal of Ordinances L-53 and L-53b, which control the production, purchase and sale of tractors and tractor parts, has been suspended by Order L-192, as amended on May 17, 1945. Order L-192 regulates the deliveries of those machines and parts which are expected to remain in short supply. The articles covered by this order are those included in Schedules 1 and 2 (including tractors, which were formerly covered by Order L-53). In general, the order reserves to military agencies up to 75 percent of the minimum production of tractors and parts achieved by each manufacturer. The remaining 25 percent, plus any quantities not used by these military agencies, may be sold to other persons without restriction, provided they are on Schedule I; but only by specific authorization of the War Production Board, if they are on Schedule 2. In accordance with the procedure set forth in Order L-192, as amended on May 17, 1945, no person may sell or control any new construction machinery specified in Schedule 2, except a military schedule, unless the purchase or delivery order is accompanied by an authorization on form WPB-1319, or by a certificate as explained below. Application for authorization and preference grade must be made by filing form WPB-1319 with the War Production Board in accordance with the Instructions for filing this form. When a person receives authorization on 1/ form WPB-1319 to purchase Schedule 2 construction machinery, he shall deliver to the supplier the authorization along with the purchase order, or if he prefers, shall deliver to the supplier a certificate in the following form: "Authorized under Order L-192 on form WPB-1319, Case number---''. This certification will constitute evidence to the War Production Board that the purchase or delivery of the construction machinery ordered and listed in Schedule 2 has been specifically authorized by the War Production Board on form WPB-1319. The rule of apportionment on repair parts I is somewhat different, and the apportionment on repair parts I is somewhat different and the apportionment on repair parts I is somewhat different.
Suspended revocation of order on control of tractors There was an amendment on Thursday, 17, as to this machinery and accessories thereto. Manner in which deliveries are to be made
applicable "only when orders not dispatched by Abduct oj, but requiring immediate delivery of a particular repair part, exceed the" stock of that part. While this situation lasts, with respect to any repair parts, the producer will not make more than 75 percent of its total deliveries of such parts to military agencies, if there are undispatched orders for other" persons, nor will it deliver more than 25 percent of the total delivered to other persons, "if there are undispatched orders held by military agencies. Leaders' meeting postponed Susoni says municipal aid legislation should be passed The meeting called by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Dr. Francisco M. Susoni, to take place in the office next Monday, has been postponed until further notice. Dr. Susoni maintains absolute confidentiality on the issues to be discussed at the meeting. He limits himself to say that it will be an exchange of views between government leaders and representatives of different activities on fundamental problems confronting the island. The Speaker of the House of Representatives has been working late into the night in his office at the Capitol, attending to both matters of the Popular Party, of which he is interim president, and issues related to legislation approved by the House in its last session and signed by the Governor. Dr. Susoni is of the opinion that at the special session of the Legislature to be held in June, legislation should be passed to help the municipalities. As is known, the Governor vetoed a bill which would have allocated $3 million for aid to municipal governments.
CCA contract accepted for 1945
Many clauses are similar to those of past agreement Subsidy payment will be periodic. Sugar to be sold at S3.74 The Sugar Producers Association yesterday accepted the contract for the sale of sugar from the present sugar harvest, submitted by the Agricultural Credit Corporation. The document was discussed clause by clause, and many of its main provisions are reported to be similar to those of last year's contract. The points on which substantial variations were made were analyzed and given special consideration. No amendments were proposed to the document and it was approved as submitted by the Agricultural Credit Corporation. The CCA's offer of fifty-five cents subsidy per hundredweight of sugar for the current harvest is included in the agreement and it is provided that the total amount of the subsidy will be paid to the processors and colonos by means of periodic payments. The first payment will cover all the sugar that has been processed up to the time of the signing of the contract by the parties, and it is stipulated that the same will be made effective immediately after the signing of the contract. The second payment will be made one month after the first, and the third and last, when the harvest has ended. The extraordinary general meeting of the Sugar Producers' Association, held yesterday, at which the sugar purchase and sale agreement was approved, began at about ten o'clock in the morning and ended at about one o'clock in the afternoon. The director of the Association, Mr. Antono A. Roll, presided. Roll, the head of the Wáshlngton office of the APA, Mr. Dudley Smith, being also present. This gave a full report of the negotiations held in Wáshlngton on the contract, eq try the Committee. APA negotiator and representatives of the CEC, and explained to the growers various clauses of the document. The agreement covers only this year's crop. Sugars will only be used for the (Continued on page 18.)
PROVOKED THE IRE OF LONDONERS
■' r ■ w ■L. m " Ja indignation of the London people reached a climax when it was revealed that Wllll Meeaerachmltt, one of the Nazi leaders taken prisoner, was living in luxury and comparative freedom in a residential district of London, the city which they helped to destroy in large part by Meeaerachmltt's own airplane manufacturer for Hitler. (PA photo). Two Puerto Rican soldiers were reported missing* in action. Four Puerto Rican casualties Two Puerto Rican soldiers previously reported missing in action against the Germans have been returned to U.S. barracks, according to information received at Military Headquarters, West Indies Military Department, by the War Department. Private Auspicio Villamil, son of Mrs. Estefania R. VI (Continued on page 8).
CCA offers 66 cents subsidy for 1946 crop; Legislators to go to Hyde Park
Roosevelt is expected to give an interview to delegates Munoz Marin is active in New York He has already held several conferences - Arrillaga returns to the country By CHARLES McCABE NEW YORK. 78 (PU) - Resident Comlslonsdo PIAero and Sen. Bolivar Pagan arrived in New York this afternoon to join other members of the Puerto Rican Legislative Committee to lay a wreath at the tomb of the late President Roosevelt on Sunday. The other members of the committee who are already in the city are MuAoz Marin, Dr. Arrillaga, Pacheco Padró and Ernesto Cadiz. These members are mostly resting from their hard work in Wáshlngton, although MuAoz Marín has continued to keep up the pace of his heavy work begun in Wáshlngton. Yesterday, MuAog conferred with Roger Baldwin of the American Civil Liberties Union, former Indian Affairs Commissioner Joel Collier and CMR Beanie Ralrfwing of the CIO's Political Action Committee. During his visit to New York. MuAoz is a guest of Samuel L. M. Barlow, visiting professor at the University of Puerto Rico, last summer at Barlow's residence in Gramercy Park. Dr. Arrillaga told the United Press that he is returning to San Juan tonight because he believes his work as a member of the Legislative Delegation is over and also because he wishes to return to the practice of medicine. Dr. Arrillaga will arrive in San Juan accompanied by Victor Gutierrez Frenquf. who is going to Puerto Rico on a special mission from MuAoz Marin, as reported. Gutierrez will be in San Juan only three or four days. According to the" current plans. which have been drawn up by Police Chief. Joshua Hellinger, in cooperation with the NYPD, the Legislative Delegation will leave for Hyde Park at 9 a.m. Sunday morning. Roosevelt's widow is expected to give an interview to Puerto Rican legislators during her visit to Hyde Park. Francisco Eduardo Irizarry, who was taken prisoner by the Germans when he was forced to make a forced landing in enemy territory, after a year of captivity, has been released and has told his relatives in Santurce that he is safe and sound. Eduardo Perez Casalduc, ex-flacal of Aredbo and uncle of Lieutenant Irizarry, sent us a telegram yesterday informing us of this particular and adding that "in the name of my sister in the United States and in the name of all of us, we give to the friends who expressed their sympathy" in the moments dr Incertldnmhre, our expressive thanks."
For now there will be no increase in supplies So declared Gihtrap yesterday on his return from Washington City.
On his return to the island yesterday after discussing Puerto Rico's problems with federal authorities in Washington, Mr. Sam Gilstrap, territorial director of the Office of Price Administration, told EL MUNDO that "I have reason to believe that during the next few months rice stocks on the island will remain at the same level, but I don't think there will be any increase in rice supplies. I believe that the same situation will persist with regard to mann. teak and soap". When interviewed in his offices, Mr. Gilstrap began by stating that "both Mr. James P. Davis, OAP's regional director for Region 9, and I were surprised by the news spread in Puerto Rico that I would not be returning to my position. Neither have I ever thought of resigning, nor has Mr. Davis thought of appointing someone else to my position. When asked hahla any change in OAP policy as far as rationing and price programs are concerned, seAor Gllstrep told us that "the policy of the' OAP after the victory in Europe has already been announced, No so will price control and rationing continue a day longer than is necessary for the welfare of the people in general. I have neither the desire nor the intention to perpetuate this agency". As to the chances of this office being able to continue operating one more year, he said the dlrec(Contlnued on page IR.)
The Island Treasury expects to surpass by more than six million dollars the estimated revenues for the current fiscal year. The Acting Governor, Mr. Rafael Buscaglia, in response to questions we asked him yesterday, informed that before the end of the fiscal year, ordinary revenues of more than seventy-seven million dollars will have been collected. The Interim Treasurer, Mr. Jorge Bermudez, when questioned by one of our editors about the collections to date, stated that up to April 30 last, some sixty-five million dollars had been deposited in the public treasury. In the month of April eight and a half million dollars were collected.
On the ground that the price of wheat flour has been increased by the Bureau of Supply, War Food Administration, the tahoneros of the entire lela have filed with the Office of Price Administration a request asking that the maximum price indicated for the sale of bread be increased. We were informed yesterday at the OAP that the request "has been received and is being studied", but they did not "want to go into the matter".
Robert Ley's capture Reich's most fanatical Nazi clings to his creed
By PIEME HUBS BALZBURG, 18. (INB)-A rabid Nazi, just captured by American troops still wearing blue striped pajamas and an inferior overcoat, finally admitted that he was Dr. Robert Ley, the Nazi emperor of labor in the Third Reich. To better disguise himself, the leader of the German Workers' Front and of the labor organization and the National Socialist Party had grown a beard, but, when I saw him, he was already clean-shaven. A single glance at this stocky man by anyone who had once seen the Nazi creator of the movement called "Force for Joy" confirmed his statement.
Force for Joy" movement, confirmed his statement. It was undoubtedly the same Dr. Robert Ley who, without stopping drinking a large quantity of beer, organized in the pre-war period the tours through Germany of twenty-two million workers, who also paraded at the officially imposed goose-step. He was the disastrous doctor of the Law who crushed the workers' unions throughout Central Europe and gave speeches in the squares and small squares which gave rise to Adolf Hitler's phrase describing him: "He is the most ardently loyal Nazi of Germany".
He was also the same man who played the role of guest during the visit of the Duke and Duchess of Windsor to Nazi Germany. Dr. Ley is now a somber man. His belly and beard have disappeared and he barely weighs about eighty kilos. Saying that life was weighing on him, the Nazi labor leader said: "I knew that after Hitler there would be chaos. Léy was one of the first great leaders of National Socialism who tried to lose himself in the pro(Continued on page 18.)
Eisenhower paid Churchill a visit.
IL. "■ - i-*! W-I v Lt During a visit made to 10 Downing Street, famous residence of the English Premier. Gen. Dwight I). Elsenhower (Left), holds a broken chsrla with Winston Churchill. the conversation followed a luncheon attended, by surprise, by the supreme commander of the allied forces in Europe. (Associated Press photo).
Treasury expects to collect $77,000,000,000. That sum would exceed by six million the estimated revenue for the fiscal year. - Buscaglia intervened with Tugwell
Mr. Buscaglia's estimate for the fiscal year expiring June 30 was $71,102,000. He made this estimate before the Legislative Assembly met last February. When Treasurer Ruscaglia assured Governor Tugwell that he expects to exceed his revenue estimate by more than six million dollars, he was able to get him to sign several appropriations bills, especially on works and activities to be carried out in numerous towns" on the Island. Otherwise, they would have been vetoed because of the doubt that resources would not be available to carry them out.
It is unlikely that the OAP will agree to an increase in the price of bread. -------- The tahoneroA have asked for such an increase Aohre the haAe that flour ca more rare. - EMá caAi* finished report Aohre AUAtihito* of the rice
in more detail" in this regard. We have learned from other sources, however, that there is little likelihood that this request for an increase will be granted, claiming that "the difference between the increase decreed in the price of flour and the price paid before is so small that it does not warrant an increase in the price of bread". Yesterday we learned that the OAP filled can termlnedo its Report related to the fixing of maximum prices for the products of the shovel that can be used as a supplement to the daily rice diet, and that the same will be sent at any moment to Wáshlngton for its final approval. ' We were also informed that the Office of Price Administration is to fix prices for used bottles, and that the Report has been completed and will also be submitted to Wáshlngton for approval.
WASHINGTON. 18. <PU) - Gilberto Concepción de Gracia, president of the Pro Independence Congress of Puerto Rico, accused Luis Muñoz Marin and the Legislative Insular Commission of delaying action on the Independence project for the island. Speaking to the press Concepción said: "MuAoz Marin knows that his petition for a referendum on Independence, statehood or dominion will only serve to prevent the Congress from passing the bill.
Concepción de Gracia responds to Muño" Marín
He then added: "Congress will never pass any bill that would directly or in any way make Puerto Rico a state of the American Union. The dominion alternative proposed by Muñoz is foreign to the constitutional system and tradition of the United States." Concepcion pointed out that the Insular Legislature could have held a referendum long ago if it had wanted to. "Regardless," he insisted, "the independence movement will triumph."
The subsidy in the U.S. is $1.00.
The offer does not meet the demand for equal treatment for Puerto Rico (see that it tries to soften pressure in Congress to encourage the planting of sugar cane on our island WASHINGTON^~r "iPLDThe CCA Consumer" Credit" Corporation has offered to pay Puerto Rican cane growers $1.60 per ton of sugar cane for the 1946 crop. This news, disclosed by representatives of the Puerto Rico Sugar Producers Association in this capital, adds that the offer of the federal agency stipulates that the situation of the Puerto Rican mills is under study and that the subsidies offered to them will be announced later. Dudley Smith, who was carrying the signed contract for the purchase by the Federal Government of the sugar production of Puerto Ríen for the present year. This offer of subsidy on the 1946 crop is equivalent to 66 cents per hundredweight of sugar, compared with the current subsidy on this year's crop, which is 55 cents per hundredweight of sugar, but falls short by 34 cents to represent a treatment equal to that which the Federal Government grants to the metropolitan producers of Florida, Louisiana and other cane sugar producing areas. As will be recalled, Puerto Rican settlers and sugar producers have insisted on their long-standing demand for treatment equal to that granted to metropolitan producers, equivalent to a subsidy of $1 per hundredweight of sugar, claiming that Puerto Rico is a domestic area, with a full right not to be treated as a foreign zone. The Consumer Credit Corporation has not disclosed whether the new contracts will contain special clauses requiring the cane growers to share incentive payments with their workers, as was done in previous agreements, but it is anticipated that the leadership of Puerto Rican organized labor will put up a fight to see that this is done. Congressional leaders have sponsored. For several months now," the cause of Puerto Rico's sugar cane growers and sugar producers, in extemporaneous pronouncements" in public hearings" of different* Senate and House committees, as well as in official reports; and, on this point, it is recalled that, recently, several congressmen have urged the Administration to adopt immediate measures to stimulate Puerto Rican sugar production for 1946, by means of the necessary intensified cultivation, for which an early announcement of the CEC's offer of subsidy was indispensable, as well as that such a subsidy be granted to Puerto Rico's sugar producers. It was also essential that the subsidy be as high as possible. Evidently, the CEC's announced offer tends to soften the pressure which these pronouncements and the demands of the Puerto Ricans have been exerting on the Government, and although it represents a 20 percent increase over the subsidy agreed upon for the 1945 crop, it is ostensible that it falls short of the 1945 subsidy, it is ostensible that it falls two-thirds of the way short of what settlers and harvesters would like to see the CEC do with its incentive payments so that the industry can achieve a more or less reasonable profit, "after the penalties suffered in the last four years," as has been observed in the industry's "circle.