THE MONDO
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
3Ó P*8in*s 5 Ctví. 2 Sections
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVII
Accelerates victory in the Pacific, buying more war bonds.
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, AUGUST 4, 1945
Entered a" second cía#* matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10460
No secret agreement was made at Potsdam.
President Truman assured the people of the United States yesterday. The Augusta sails with the sea choppy All the might of the United States and England will be thrown against Japan By Roberta Nlxon ABOARD THE CRUISER "AUGUSTA". WITH PRESIDENT TRUMAN. 3. (INS) - President Truman today aaassured the American people that no secret agreements* were made at the Potsdam conference. The President of the United States authorized his (Itera verbatim, when he stated, "There are no secret agreements of any Indole." The warship "Augusta" is crossing the Atlantic bound for the United States, after the meeting of President Traman with King George the Sixth d¥-Jmtl England was verified yesterday. Meanwhile, a supplementary communiqué revealed that Great Britain has agreed to employ in the fight against Japan all her naval, land and air forces that could serve to advantage in the contest. (The supplementary communiqué deals only with the military problems of the nations at war with Japan.) This communiqué revealed that secret talks were held between the United States and Great Britain for the purpose of taking appropriate measures to crush Japan rapidly. These meetings took place while the main conferences were in progress. The above-mentioned communiqué says: "The American* and British* military chiefs were meeting every* day* to perfect the details of the coordination of the Anglo-American forces in order to achieve the total defeat of the Japanese land and naval forces, the unconditional surrender of Japan, at the earliest possible moment" and the liberation of the territories occupied by the enemy." The communique further said, "The British* will bring to bear in the war against Japan all naval, land and air forces* that can "er* be advantageously brought into play. A new division of zone* and command* in the regions of the Southwest Pacific and Southeast Asia was discussed, and consideration was given to the possible employment in the fight against Tokyo of forces of the other Allied nations at war with Japan. The proposals* submitted by the jrfes of the Combined Chiefs of Staff were approved by the President and the British Prime'Mlnlslro." Ijt conference of the* Big Three" will go down in history as "the Berlin conference." Since Allied air raids and Soviet artillery fire reduced the Berlin metropolitan area to rubble, the conference had to be held at Babelsberg in the Potsdam region, west of the capital. The site is magnificent, with woods and a lake*, having been the luxurious abode of the deposed Hohenzollern dynasty. In this suburb of Berlin there were still a few residences untouched* by the war. Among them* was Cecllienhof, which had been the summer palace of Prince Frederick, heir to the Crown of Kaiser Wilhelm. In Cecllienhof. the* conference* was held, and in the same district, but in a different area," took up residence the* Heads* of the American*, Russian and British delegations together with their staffs. At the distance of one day from the cos(Contlnued on page 9.)
1 Agr ¡culturists consider the 1 subsidy on 10 I , -- For rué purpose they will hold 1 an assembly, to be held in the Capital Manage to speak J. R. Quiñones - Nido wishes to obtain from 1 the latter an additional detail - on offer of $2.10 । i Next Friday morning the farmers are to consider the offer of $2.10 announced by the Federal Secretary of Agriculture, Mr. Clinton P. Ander- - son, to be paid as a subsidy for each ton of cane for the next harvest. The board of directors of the Aso. - elation of Farmers, of the Sector i of Colonos and lo* president" of > lo* other agricultural sectors' d "n - tro of the Association, have been con- ■ vocadoR for that day. to a reu- ■ nlon to be held at San Juan 1 beginning at ten o'clock in the m- ■ ñañaña. 1 The Acting president of the Ano- ¡ clarion of Farmers, Mr. Pe- , dro Nido, was unable yesterday either! .to communicate by Internaclonal telephone with Mr. Jose Ramon Quiñones, who is in Wáshington. Mr. Nido said that he intends again to try to establish communication with Mr. Quiñones, in order to obtain further information on the subsidy offer and on the steps taken in connection with the problems of the tobacco, tobacco and cattle ranchers. Yesterday it was learned that talks are being held with the representatives of Holland and Spain, with a view to obtaining the sale of tobacco from Puerto Rico and as a measure to solve the tobacco problem in the island. The Acting President of the* . farmers authorized the following: j "We have just received copy of) i official bulletin which the Federal Department of Agriculture issued i in Washington on August 1, regarding the subsidies to be paid to cane and beet sugar harvesters for the 1946 crop. "Secretary Anderson, after 1 explaining in said bulletin that "the primary objective pursued is to obtain the largest possible proau:1 tion in 1946 of both cane and beet sugar" announces a program, whereby a total income of about $4.00 per ton of 1 t*beet, as a subsidy payment, compared with a payment of $3.00 per ton in 1945, is to be gaiantlized to beet harvesters. "In regard to the cane cose' chero*, the bulletin states e*1 pacifically as follows: 'The ' sugar cane cose' chero* in ' Lulsiana, Fla. Puerto Rico, I*- ' the* Virgin Islands and Hawaii, will receive a , payment of $2.10 per ton of cane. ' *1 payment to be made in each . producing area on an asse- , dent or descending scale, according to the recoverable percent in sugar of each individual producer's deliveries* of cane, in relation to the recoverable sugar of all* I the cane delivered in each . respective area. The payment in the case of i lo* harvester* of Luialana would be the , equivalent of $2.04 per ton . of 'standard* cane. In the case of: Lulsiana and Florida this compares - with a payment of $1.60 per ton (Continued on page 20) i
Memoirs of PauLReynaud Lord Gort's withdrawal puts an end to Wevaand's plan.
- On May 24, Weygand had the impression that the British High Command was showing weakness with regard to the execution of his plan, and consequently telegraphed Churchill; eneats forma: 1-"Gen.' Weygand presented to you ames yesterday at Vincennes in my presence a plan, to which you and the officers who accompanied him gave their full approval. 3- "You made a written summary of this plan, and General Weygand approved this summary. 3- "General Weygand understands perfectly well the difficulties of the situation, but maintains that your plan offers the only possible solution of it, provided it is adapted to the necessities of the case, as for example, by directing to the southwest the right wing which is moving toward the Somme south of Amiens. - 1
Lord Gort. who commanded the British* troops* quo retreated to Dunquarqua.
"He has accordingly renewed this morning's boarding for the execution of this plan. The* army* which has been isolated*, in consequence, must make a desperate effort to unite with the French forces which are advancing from the south to the north, trying to advance from the Somme and especially from Amiens. ' "General Weygand is surprised...." ' 4- "Gort's army must be supplied by Dunkirk, which is protected by two divisions of General Fayalde .... . 5- "General Weygand is surprised to learn that the British troops yesterday evacuated Arrá*. which does not agree with this , Pianij 8--"Genet al Weygand is enI (Continued on page 20).
Promises review of Island problems.
And ■"°'"' i * I B i" K * Wr * Wr * Mason Barr, Chief of the Puerto Rico to lsl "s Virgin Division of the Department of the Interior. He will shortly be giving a c t i o n for the country He states t[ue Puerto Rico needs greater, attention No comment on status By RUTH BROOM WASHINGTON, .3. (INI)- Ma*on Barr. new chief of the Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands Division of the Department.of the Interior, declared today that Puerto Rico "needs more attention" and. to that end, promised an early review of the island's problems. Speaking to 1NS, Bsrr stated, "I hope to have some definitive statement for the people of Puerto Rico very soon." Barr assumed his new duties on August 1, 2001, in the Territory and Possessions Division of the Department of the Interior. In his "statement," he added: "I need to familiarize myself with what this division has been doing so that I can better understand the pace of events. He also stated that he has conferred, albeit informally, with (Continued on page 10.), Commander Bunker Back in Puerto Rico To Represent Veterans' War Veterans' Employment Board on Island By ANDRES "MARTINEZ CACIA' 1 CAGUAS 3. - After four years of service to the Nation, Navy Lieutenant Commander Osbar L. Bunker returned to Puerto Rico on Monday of this week, and is now enjoying a short vacation. He was accompanied by his wife, Mrs. Carlita Rovlr* de Bunker, and his children Oscar, Car-; lita and Madeleine. The Veteran's" Employment" Board in Washington has appointed *1 Mr. Bunker its director in Puerto Rico. With the European war over, the Marini agreed to temporarily leave the adjoining Bunker on inactive duty so that he can represent in Puerto Rico - and possibly in the Caribbean area - the Veteran's Employment Board, whose main task is to provide jobs for veterans, and which also includes activities of the Bureau of Human Resources. Major Bunker, who will soon take up his new post, holds degrees in architecture and civil engineering. As a federal supervisor on the island, he has directed the "trade and industry education program".
Food supply for the island will improve significantly during the last three months of this year.
First rice quota to be distributed Monday ■ OS to deliver 6,000 tons; and another six thousand on the 20th j Change does not alter amount to be received, OAP insists that consumers receive 2% pounds per week Although 1* Office of the Federal Department of Agriculture has "nuncladc that the distribution of the" 12,000 tons of rice will be made in two shifts and that 6,000 tons will be delivered on August 6 and 6,000 on the 20th of the same month on August 20.000 on the 20th of the same month the Rationing Executive of ! the OAP. Mr. Roberto Muñoz Mat , Cormlck. told EL MUNDO that the [ change in the distribution, i.e.; . the fact that the distribution *" i be made in two shifts" instead of one, - "does not alter in any way 1" quantity that ■ each wholesaler, retailer or consumer will have to receive." I amount to be distributed by the OS to wholesalers and this" to log retailer." he said- will be 66 and two-thirds per cent of the transfers during the basic period indicated by 1* Office of Price Administration" in its 1 rationing order. "It has already been announced that 1o" conI sumers are to receive one" pound more rice per week for each person or "ea total of two and a quarter pounds instead of one and a quarter pounds per person per week. As there have been many "Ido* and consumers who have called these offices* inquiring whether the change announced by the Bureau of Supply entails an" alteration in the amount they are to receive as their quota of rice, we wish to make it quite clear, and have so notified the Local Boards, that no matter that the distribution is made in two shifts, the amount they are to receive is 66 and two-thirds* of the transfers made during the basic period, i.e., an increase of 26 and two-thirds pounds per person per week: or an increase of 26 and two-thirds percent. (Continued on page 20.) Sanchez Vilclla to ask for change in loan post He will insist on the reinstatement of several of the positions not approved by the Board In his recommendations to the Board of Commissioners, which he will file with the Secretary of the Government next Monday, the Governor of San Juan, Mr. Roberto Sanchez Vilclla, will include the reinstatement of several of the positions not approved by the Board. This will include the reinstatement of some of the positions that were eliminated by said agency, including the "। corresponding to the Ida Te "orerla Department. School Department. Office of Purchases and Supplies, and the Department of Charities and Public Works. As of yesterday, the Administrator had not completed the memorial which he will address to the Board. He was just finishing the study of the communications submitted to him by the various department heads. The Board eliminated the position of head of the Office of Purchasing and Supply*, a position which the Administrator will request to be reinstated, in order to put this new service into operation. He will also include in his message the positions* of janitors, aides* and such other personnel as he considers indispensable to the welfare *service* abolished* by the Board.
' Not yet hav"/ ¡ agreement on ; the cemetery ' They are studying land near ; San Juan, in order to ; choose the best plot - A definitive agreement has not yet been reached ■ for the acquisition of the new property that the 'Government of San Juan will dedicate to the municipal cemetery. This was reported i yesterday by the Director of Public Works, Mr. Salvador V. Caro. "Our Department," he added, "continues 10 studies of land in different areas near the capital. We have not reached a definitive conclusion, since we have been carrying out studies of the depth of these lands to determine their water table. This "finca" is being studied in areas recommended by the Junta do Pía¡nificación as more appropriate for the construction of a necropolis. The Administrator of San Juan, Mr. Roberto Sanchez Vilclla, will recommend to the Junta do Comíalo'¡nado" the approval of an ordinance authorizing the arrondamien. to of the property acquired by the former administration for the municipal cemonterio. This property, as will be recalled, is located in the seo' ción of Isla Verde, an area declared by the Board of Plapcs as lm- ' prop's for the munlcl- * pal cemetery. The' Administrator reported yesterday t that this property, mostly planted with coconuts, can be leased with benefit" to the Government, J establishing .the contract on a । basis of payment" monthlye". . "I will recommend monthly payments" . -I will recommend monthly payments," he said, "because in that way we will be in a position to take possession of the property again when it is needed to carry out any project of this Government. The municipality maintains a caretaker on this property. It will not be permitted, once leased, to carry out permanent constructions on the property. The treasurer fixes the cost for the farm.
The treasurer fixes j the cost for the merchandise I, I, I - Must add ¡0% - to the cost at the place from which it is trac e The Treasurer of Puerto Rico has issued orders to the effect '. that "any person who traffics, , business, has in his possession by his own right or in the name of the owner, or in the name of the owner, or in the name of the owner. recho own or on behalf of another, R or in deposit, or has had morcanc'i subject to tax under In Law, shall, at the request of his office,' "umlnlstrar Ins fact urns coHmcrcl "le" authentic and any '¡other document or report that may be ¡'¡required in relation to such mer' ¡canelas. Such invoices shall be necessary to determine the cost in Puerto Rico of imported merchandise for purposes of the payment of Internal Revenue taxes, as provided in Act 72 of May 7, 1978. The cost in Puerto Rico of taxable merchandise shall be the cost at the point of origin plus 10 percent of such cost, computed for freight, insurance and other expenses of (Continued on page 20.)
1 ¡ By JUAN MALDONADO Editor of EL MUNDO Despite the threat of a storm. Puerto Rico had a normal day yesterday, but there were some cases in which Government employees in San Juan requested permission to go to their respective towns to be with their families in case the weather disturbance hit the island. The Navy and the Army gave the day's notice to their civilian employees so that the personnel in the armed forces could make preparations and take all precautions in case the disturbance should hit the island. The ■ Island Government and some of the federal agencies gave permission to their employees from three o'clock in the afternoon. Notwithstanding the "view of the Weather Bureau that there was no danger, all precautions were taken and both the police and the employees were seriously injured in Okinawa.
Island officers were seriously wounded in Okinawa.
A Puerto Rican officer and tree "uboflciale* were seriously wounded* on Okinawa on June 30, according to a report" supplied* to the Antillean Military Department* by the War Department. Lieutenant Enrique Malaret. e". potó of the seftórg Raque! Martinez de Malaret. of Jfyncoi; "argento primero Rivera, son of "eftor Tomá" Rivera, of Aguirre; "argento Rafael Santiago Camacho, brother of Mrs. Carmen Santiago, of Vleque*; and "argénI lo de estado mayor Luis González Carreras, son of Mrs. Juana 1 Carreras, of Culebra, ion lo* cu**
- The following are some of the insular military troopers who were wounded* on Okinawa. There is no information available ■ at this time "as to how these mi- ' litare# were wounded. The War Department also reports that Private First Class Fraaclsco Crespo, son of Mrs. Maria Garda Mon- ! talvo. of Añasco, died at Al*' mania on July 19, and that Private First Class Luis Pizarro Santiago, husband of Mrs. Laura M. Santiago, of Rayamon, was drowned in the sea. "e ' drowned in |"s vicinity of Smithj ville. State of Texas, on the 28th of > July.
[ HALSEY RECEIVES VISIT FROM VIAN 11 -- J I -n | I v 1 A v । k fe* r 4a L I ' a ' ' "í ' ' r I I I I Bsa ' R I ~ i'^aaaapsi^p"- i x*' 1 ■ ■ - * - . Ir 1 B ▼ B H ) w. . .f BK * Admiral William F. Halsey (right) receives*on board my ship Insignia the visit of Vice Admiral - Sir Philip L. Man. commander of the porlaavlonr" <le force of Great Britain one accompanies the lerccra i Fleet of E "tado" Unldn*. In the background, Commodore Joel T. Rnnnc, fleet surgeon, (broken from the Navy).
' ' ' ' *" ' '' íiilslrap reports that travel expenses for inspectors and police officers amount to $6,000 each month. i Will submit a budget to Muñoz Marín
In order to enable the continuation of the campaign against the ne- । gro market, keeping the inspectors of the Price Administration Office and the members of the Island Police Flying Squad active, this agency will need an allocation of no less than $6,000 a month, territorial director Sam Gilstrap told EL MUNDO yesterday. This money is needed to pay for the transportation expenses of personnel participating in this ¡campaign throughout the island. Mr. Gilstrap added that this was the amount spent during the month of July, which was the busiest month in this regard. As previously reported by EL MUN:DO, the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, asked Mr. Gilstrap for an estimate of the money needed to maintain the campaign. It has been assured that the money will have to be allocated by the Island Government, possibly from the funds available to the Emergency War Program. This matter was discussed some time ago by the President of the Senate, the Acting Governor and the Internal Treasury. ! discussing the need for the continuation of this amendment. Referh'ntíoso to the urgent need for conl'nuo activity against the black market, c| Mr. Gilstrap said, yesterday:iContlnued on page 2<1>
: Temporal passed south yesterday ■ ninety miles from (.abo Rojo e a Puerto Rico had a normal day yesterday, despite the cyclone threat. - The Army and Navy * took precautions. - Police were on the alert
Two of the Telephone and Telegraph Company. were ordered to be at their posts," in case orders had to be transmitted at the last minute. The Caribbean Atlantic Airlines" yesterday altered its itinerary. It only allowed .1 trip from Santomás to San Juan at 6:00 a.m., and the trip from San Juan to Ponce and from San Juan to Mayagün, canceling the rest of the itinerary during the day, while awaiting official news about the riot. This company kept in touch with the Army's meteorological offices and, on visiting that "at eight o'clock in the morning the indications were of bad weather, as a precautionary measure resolved to suspend the rest of the trips for the rest of the day. I Est* eompany* is taking steps# pertlnen'"* to resume its ¡operations without interruption, inme-l.
Will be large shipments of rice, butter Rationing dp this commodity is nearing relief Fifteen thousand tons, of rice a month Subsidy to/Aicarero represents $21,000,000 revenue, say By RUTH BROOM WASHINGTON. 3. (INS)-L "s prospects for getting more food to -Puerto Rico, for the months of October, November and December, are very bright, including butter and rice, were the statements made today by Robert Baker, Chief of the Caribbean region of the Federal Department of Agriculture. After a series of conferences with representatives of government agencies who came to the Department, Baker revealed that rice and butter allocations, in particular, are expected to be large. The provisional rice allocation for Puerto Rico for the last quarter of 1944b. is expected to be 13,000 tons per month," Baker added, "which is considerably higher than normal consumption. The increase in production is such that in the very near future it will be possible to resume normal sales. The" new rice allocations will enable the Department to "keep large quantities in stock, for the remainder of the year" Baker said. "The outlook for butter is looking better than it has in past months," he added. "We are confident that we will be able to have a large inventory of butter on the island in the next few weeks. I In view rie rsle favorable aspec- ■ to, Baker contended that an - adjustment of mani toca allocations is possible very soon.... Jack Fnhy. Acting Director rie - the Resignation of Terrtorio# and Pose1 sienes Insular riel Department ■ of lo- Interior, said, commenting on es- ' these statements, "Our pollti- ' <a in quant." to providing * Puerto 1 Rico rie consumer items, has ■ Ido always been to secure the greatest can' t ¡dad. Quantity, os 1" best way 1 do combat ol black market." And ' he emphasized that as long as sufficient ' quantities of ' food can be dis1 p-ñor do ' for Puerto Rico, and the * pu-'bb cooperate pnia extirpate the ' black market, "it will be much better pnr.i Puerto Ríen." "The conril* jeions oo Puerto Rico will be greatly improved nonfe since the sugaren program for the 1946 zafra means an additional Ingleso of $21,000,000, qi ' Will go to the* hand" rio the produi: r and olaboradore" rie that product,' Fnhy said. i A certain funclonailo who begged his - name was-.o not disclosed, expounded - that. in his judgment, approximately - $13,000,000 dn . sa sum correspondi dar * the obieros. This program ■ which eoiíi ede the settlers a "UI amount rio $210 per ton rie cs- - ña ,v a ios rlab u arioics 13 cents or more per caria clon pounds rie azui, ipiduc"- at .about .rie $21,000,000 more qm will come into Pto, - Ríen. A spokesman for the Sugar Producers Association stated that the Federal Department of Agriculture had made arrangements with the growers whereby the cane workers would receive an additional increase in their wages when the price of sugar rises. This announcement by the Department of Agriculture regarding the increase in the premium to cane and beet sugar producers for the 1946 crop was the result of several weeks of consultation and study. Secretary of Agriculture Clinton P. Anderson said this statement was made at this time for the purpose of encouraging growers to plant as much as they were able. The new subsidy is $1.00 per hundredweight of sugar. The I "la has been included, in addition, in the domestic zone. Until now it has been classified along with Cuba * the sugar effect#. disastrously after the threatened storm. PAWA maintains au Itinerary The Pan American World Airway* had its* aircraft:* running du* rente the entire du. In the morning the planes departed and arrived from Pto. Rico as usual. At* on* ce a reportare of EL MUNDO visited the" office" (enttales. y en ella* se I" 'nform - que hasta esa hora i*l itinoi regular se habla cumplido. A l "s tv and media rie l" tarI .(Continued on page 14)