THE WORLD
a i" r./j -■ - ' 36 Aginas 5 Ctvs. 2 Secciones
3Ó Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DAILY MORNING
MORNING
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 15, 1945.
NUMBER 10346
YEAR XXVII
Muñoz Marin Insists on Special Session of the Legislature; Food Prices Will Not Increase
MARSHAL COMMITS SUICIDE
$SS
Lallande says , increase would be only nominal Rice to continue at 9 cents.-Will be of type used before war ' Trade requests free market Agriculture does not know "i continue to set aside quantities for Ida By CHARLES MC CABE United Prense Correspondent WASHINGTON. 14. <PU>. - J. Gus Lallande. rice commissioner of San Juan, Puerto Rico, newly appointed consultant to the Office of Price Administration, told the United Press that it is expected that there will be no more than very nominal price increases" in the food articles which. are at present. under subsidy by the Go- ■ blerno. when private commerce -resumes the importation of these, ¡nds, as of Octu' hre 15.
Field Marshal and General Sugiyama, former Minister of War and Chief of the Japanese Army's General Staff during the first two years of the war, committed suicide on the 12th, according to Radio Tokyo, embarrassed by the humiliating defeat suffered by the armies and the militaristic clique of his pala. (Associated Press photo). Barr Failed to Secure New Passenger Ships Maritime Commission Still Needs Him* to Transport Soldier* By RUTH BROOM WASHINGTON. 14. tlNS.^-Ma-son Barr, assistant to the Director of the Division of Territories and Insular Possessions of the Department of the Interior, said today that i insistent efforts of the Interior fun- ¡ cloners to con- iue adequate passenger ships for Puerto Rico "have been unsuccessful, so far." Added Barr: "We have been pressing the Maritime Commission for some assurance that 1 Puerto Rico can expect increased passenger service, but, so far, we have received no definite answer to our questions." Barr explained that, when the war began, all such service for. He added: "For about four years now, Puerto Rico has had to depend on the heavily congested airline to the United States and vice versa; and this has proved to be quite inadequate. The Division has been aware of the growing seriousness of the situation and has made every effort to get the relief of more ships for the restoration of a regular service to the Island." He also indicated Barr that Secretary Ickes has intervened on behalf of the Division, contacting the Maritime Commission: but declined to comment on the specific occasions when that intervention took place. Officials of the Maritime Commission said later today that they "are aware of the problem of the passenger service on the (Continued on page 3).
Gus Lallande added that he is "certain" that there will be no increase in the price of the bus fare, which at present is 9 cents. Items now enjoying government subsidy include rice, butter, beans and codfish. Meanwhile, the OAP is very active in considering changes in the pricing policy it has in mind and ways to prevent the black market in rice and other scarce items when the government's return of the food program to private commerce becomes effective. The regional Price Executive in San Juan, Frank Beso"" has been in intensive consultations with Edward Friedlander, OAP's Price Executive for Region 9. on these matters. Friedlander told the United Press that no price changes are contemplated until the trade resumes the program and the characteristics of the free market begin to manifest themselves. Lallande stated that he has already notified his own rice firm in San Juan to begin taking orders for rice at 9 cents a pound, the same price as the 1.00 cents a pound price in the U.S., which is the same price as the 1.00 cents a pound price in the U.S.
Studies begin for new road in Ponce area Commissioner Méndez inspected the site where the main urban detour will be built. - The cost of the work amounts to 8800,000
The Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Orlando R. Méndez, made an on-site inspection of the proposed road that will form the main urban detour of the city of Ponce. He was accompanied in this inspection by the head of the Engineering Division of the Planning Board, Mr. Carlos M. Pasalacqua, and the acting head of the Department's Highway Division, Mr. Cecilio Delgado. It was reported yesterday that as a result of the aforementioned inspection, the Department will immediately begin the final studies for the construction of these works, the cost of which will be covered with combined funds from the two countries.
The cost will be covered with combined funds from the Insular and federal governments, according to the plan submitted to the Federal Highway Administration. The aforementioned officials walked the entire route, which was proposed in preliminary form by the Planning Board. They discussed "the construction difficulties which the route indicated for such an urban bypass might offer. "This detour will extend from the road to Guayanilla, and will continue eastward, crossing the road to Poni Beach (continued on page 30).
My "twentieth year" with Mussolini The Grand Council approves the elimination of the Duce.
By Count DIÑO OBANDI (Former Fascist Minister of Foreign Affairs and former Ambassador to the Grand Brotada). ARTICLE XI Suddenly, at about 3 o'clock in the morning, Mussolini brought to an end the long and heated debate of the Great Fascist Council, announcing that we were going to vote in favor of my resolution. His Instinct, bear "Animal Instinct" of which he boasted so often, doubled having communicated to him that he had won, =■ In accordance with the priority of the Grand Council, Marshal do Bono doubled to vote first, then De Vocchl; two votes that would crol be in my favor. But Scorsa tried do throw the triumph of the game in favor do Mussolini, and read my resolution to the Council, shouting at the conclusion, "I vote against." Then he called Guardo, who abstained from voting. Do Bono and I said "yes," trying to saturate or n-other voices of the greatest confidence. Someone followed us, then another, and another, and others, until I could understand that the Impossible had passed. We spoke and won the vote.
I looked at Mussolini from milestone to milestone, at the moment when Scorsa was handing him a papellto. Deepaclo, and laboriously, the Duce read the results of the vote. "Nineteen in favor-seven against. One-Suardo-abstained from voting." Mussolini looked at each of us with a menacing and defiant gaze, at the same tlompo. Luogo sat up heavily and as he approached the corner of the table, on his way out, Scorza's mouth opened to articulate the usual "Salute to the Duce." But the words did not come out. With that, the first and last vote obtained in the Grand Council, a sentence was passed against the fascist dictatorship - however, the sentence had yet to be carried out. A delicate action was required, preventing Mussolini from recovering a defeat which, after all, had been inflicted only in the Council Chamber. We were not sure whether we would be arrested at the end of the day, but we were not sure if we would be arrested at the end of the day.
Act yesterday in honor of Battalion Chief 245 With great emotion rl roronel Román spoke in tribute Bayamón GILBERTO O. IGARTVA Editor of EL MUNDO When addressing the people of Bayamón yesterday, who had gathered to pay tribute to him, the commander of the 245th Battalion, Lieutenant Colonel Fortunato Román, was forced to interrupt his words of gratitude on several occasions, overcome with deep emotion, or to evoke his Puerto Rican comrades-in-arms in the European war camps, soldiers who have not yet returned to the island. "More than to me," he said, with his eyes veiled by emotion, when referring to these compatriots, "it is to the boys who are abroad that this demonstration of affection that you so kindly dedicate to me corresponds. In simple words, but full of the highest patriotism, Corotwl Román expressed that "he trusts in the advent of a better world, both for foreign countries and for Puerto Rico in particular. We must eliminate all kinds of prejudices, be good and live as Christianity commands, to be able to enjoy this new era that is coming," he concluded. Tribute In the tribute paid yesterday to Colonel Román, representatives of all the social entities of Bayamón took active part. Each of the city's schools sent a large representation of students, including private schools. The State Guard, Teachers Association, Island Firefighters, High School, and Boys and Girls Scouts, all paraded together in a large demonstration in front of the Puerto Rican military. Carrying signs with messages of welcome and recognition, each one of these entities expressed their sympathies. Groups of school children, as they passed by Colonel Román, cheered and sang patriotic songs, among them "La Borinqueña". Other groups of students and citizens paraded carrying a large number of Puerto Rican, American and other flags. The homage parade gathered on Betances Street, and at about two o'clock in the afternoon, the march began. Marching in front of the High School, it went up to the square, in front of which, in the house of the husbands Dr. J. S. Morales, and Mrs. Josefa Selva de Morales, they met on page 16.)
In the jubilant expectation of returning home
. and, W . a*. *3" TETw?* /WT * > <1 VzJMfe' . "FT- t3kbüL¿*"< zjffwwBftt v "a> <W* ¿ JOSHU A ,hw*£.< ' ■ >* ?íkBf íi Fv v . v v v Jfc ■ s ~~ it "W* w : '' ■ v"^?' y ¿'<t x >v<k y ¿yr < MHmMF ' 4 áMh * - 1MW Í / - .■Jf' VjLa-.
This" to irrigation re" released reclentrmcrtU' in the Pacific, rndhen ron Júbilo the news dr that arrén sent directly to the United States by the aérce way. These heroes of the afre retaban concentrated, romo prisoners of war of Japan, rn lis Ofuna prison, "mu of lea worst prlalonea maintained by the endilgo and where the captives "lindos received the cruelest of the froto". (Photo by Prcnaa Aaoclailn).
A hamlet of 114 houses will be built soon in Santurce The Hiibasla will be announced in the next few days by the Housing Authority. - In the next "rila", the Municipal Homes Authority will announce the auction for the construction of the first housing unit of the San Juan Bautista hamlet, which will be located at Parada 24, between Bolivar and Europa Streets. The interim director of the agency, Mr. Miguel A. Moni illa, informed that this project will provide for the time being only 114 houses, which will be built with insular funds that are available.
w vvMnvi M "S "n w,. i "The original project do vivían-' i das prepared by the Authority,"- i said,-"to be built on this site, - there was a need to revise it. The pro- ■ ¡yerto San Juan Bautista will have, with - reason for such revision only 342 vi- ' viendas, whose construction cost - will reach one million dollars, i approximately, i" This project - has been recommended favororahlemen-¡ - te by the Federal Authority Sobre i Hogares. The review, according to Mr. Montilla, was due "to the fact that in the selected area there are residential and other types of buildings, the acquisition and destruction of which is not justified". For such mo[tlvo, the original cost of the work, "which was estimated at a million and a quarter -;dollars, has been reduced to about i million. The Authority already has the land available to begin construction of the first 114 housing units once the corresponding auction has been held. In addition, the funds will also be held by the agency to cover the project's expenses. । I The" remaining 22R dwellings that ■ form the project will be built L (Continued on page 16.) - -
mvo V, '...-Jr---.... --- Various teachers' checks go in Treasury Auditor Cordero lists all towns covered The Auditor of Puerto Rico, Mr. RnfMcl de J. Cordero, yesterday authorized the following in connection with the payment of salaries to teachers: 1 "According to the records of the Auditor, the teachers' checks for the towns" listed" below were sent to the Paymaster's Office in the Treasury Department on the 10th of this month: 1 "According to the records of the Auditor, the teachers' checks for the towns" listed" below were sent to the Paymaster's Office in the Treasury Department on the 10th of this month: 1 "According to the records of the Auditor, the teachers' checks for the towns" listed below were sent to the Paymaster's Office in the Treasury Department on the 10th of this month: 1 On the 10th of the current month: Adjunta," Aguada, Aguadilla, Aibonito, Añasco, Arecibo, Arroyo, Barceloneta, Barranquitas, Maricao, Maunabo, Mayagüez, Moca, Morovis, Naguabo, Aibonito, Añasco, Mayagüez, Moca, Morovis, Naguabo, Aibonito, Aibonito and Moca. Morovis, Naguabo, Naranjito, Orocovis, Patillas, Pffinrlas, Ponca. 1 (Continued "n Is page 20.)
JPG liberalizes the order on: construction in general; revokes control over repairs and alterations to existing buildings. - Also repeals order limiting construction of highways i I ■
i - - - ! The revocation of Order L-41e,' - - limiting the construction of "- I treetops and the llberallzaclon of an order on constructions in generali ral. bearing number L-41. were announced yesterday by the War Production ■ Board ■. Mediani te an amendment which "e has promul* - gated the order repeals control over alterations and repara- > clonea to building" exlatent", faclll- > dade" construction and transport - taclon and the construction of edlfl- - clos on estates, except vl-¡ , housing. i "This action shows that the i policy announced by the JPG. of . To liberalize the restrictions on construction as far as possible.
This action demonstrates that the JPG's announced policy of liberalizing building restrictions as far as possible is not a mere announcement but a reality," said Ramon Montaner, the director for the Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands district, yesterday. Mr. Montaner explained that the transportation facilities that are now allowed without authorization include airport and landing fields; bridge, railroad, railroad tracks, railroad tracks and repair shops; bus and truck terminals; gasoline fueling lines; and fueling and storage facilities, including bus and truck terminals and facilities. Including terminals and facilities for loading and unloading. i "Alterations and works of.
.Imita will approve project for Lares hamlet It will act on this on Monday, before taking the program to auction ! On the eleventh day of this month, the Puerto Rico Homes Authority filed with the Planning Board the project for the construction of a hamlet in Lares, to house the families affected by the disaster that destroyed that town. These families are living in emergency huts set up by the Government. The site will be located to the northeast of the town, on land whose acquisition was previously authorized by the Junta de Flanes. The purpose is to build 192 houses, "made of concrete blocks and reinforced concrete roofs". The cost of construction, which will amount to about $480,000,000, will be covered by island funds. I The request for the Board to act on this project specifies that "the sewerage will be connected to a treatment plant, which will be built with funds" from the Island Water and Sewer Service. The president of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, informed yesterday that the fact that this project has been filed now "does not imply that in any way hinders the progress of the" works", said works have already been announced in public auction, by the Puerto Rico Homes Authority. The auction will take place on Monday 17 at ló.OO A. M. He also informed, Dr. Picó, that the Board gave its approval in principle to the project for the construction of the farmhouse, after holding several interviews with the members and directors of the Homes Authority, and that the official ratification will be made at a meeting to be held next June, such action, as he explained, was taken "due to the urgency of the works". It was approved by the Board, in the" preliminary di "cu "cu "ions, the type of lo" buildings, materials to be used and other details" tecuico". "Prior to this action," said Dr. Picó, "we authorized the location of the project and the acquisition by the Sohre Ho-¡ gare" Authority of the land for the "heecsarlo"." । repairs that do not involve external ■clone'" - added Mr. Montaner - are now allowed without authorization, no matter the type of work or co""e. Until now, the alterations had been considered "new contracts" and were subject to the same (Continued on page 20.), he added.
Yesterday he proposed Puerto Rican for the Police
Submitted candidate to Governor - Prefers not to reveal his name Says there are matters of great urgency Aid for all* the* municipality* and the temporary* problem.
The President of the Senate and of the Popular Democratic Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, yesterday recommended a Puerto Rican to Governor Tugwell for the post of Chief of the Island Police, but refused to disclose the name of the person he recommended, when questioned by EL MUNDO. Mr. Muñoz Marín held a conference yesterday for several hours" in El Salvador with the Governor. At lunchtime, the Popular leader was a guest of the Chief Executive. Asked about the matters discussed in the interview, Mr. Muñoz Marin said: "I was seeing the Governor on several matters, mainly insisting with him on the need for a special session of the Legislative Assembly, to deal with problems that in my opinion are urgent. The Governor is giving careful study to the matter." "The Permanent Legislative Commission," he added, "has an 'ubco'mission, presided over by Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones and whose members are Mr. Leopoldo Figueroa and Mr. Antonio Pacheco Padró, which is already completing its study on aid to the municipality." When the full Commission has studied the report of the sub-commission, this problem will be dealt with directly with the Governor, I have been dealing with it, but we will be able to reach conclusions according to the report of the sub-commission and the study of the Permanent Commission".
He also said that Mr. Muñoz Marin spoke with the Governor about an increase in the salaries" of the road workers and the Executive offered to give the matter his consideration. Among other topics" discussed at the conference, the convenience of holding periodic meetings with the heads" of the Public Authorities and Corporations "for the purpose of coordinating the part of the general work that" corresponds to each of these agencies within the basic long-range program of progress and improvement for the people of Puerto Rico" was discussed. The problem of temporary employees was also discussed, and Mr. Muñoz Marín insisted on the need for a prompt solution to this problem. In discussing this matter, consideration was given to the attitude of the Federal Public Health Service, which has certain requirements" for employees" on the basis of which it provides aid to the Island Government, aid in excess of one million dollars". When Mr. Muñoz Marin was asked if he had discussed with the Governor the appointment of the new Chief of the Insular Police, he said: "I made a recommendation to the Governor which he offered to consider carefully." - "May we know whom he recommended?" we asked. -Preferring her not to insist," was his answer. -But he recommended a Puerto Rican? - Yes," said the Popular leader. When asked about the statements made yesterday by the Pr""l(Continued on page 20.)
492,450 IN VETERANS' ADJUSTMENT PAYMENTS By RtlTH BROOM INS Correspondent WASHINGTON, 14. (INS) - the Veterans Administration today revealed that since August *1 2ñ, Puerto Rico has received the sum of *92,450 in pension readjustment payments to veterans. Of these pensions, approximately 4,000 people, both men and women, have benefited. Luis F. Cuchi Coll, commander of the American Legion of Puerto Rico, is expected to arrive in this Capital next Friday. It is supposed that "his visit is for the purpose of attending the National Convention of the American Legion to be held in Chicago at the beginning of next month.
Milk prices to go up 1
National OAP would not grant higher increase They will fix the effective date' shortly Cattlemen asked for the increase to be 4c per liter
The National Office of Precycle Administration will not grant an increase of more than one cent per liter of milk sold at retail in Puerto A"' as revealed in confidential reports received yesterday from Washington, D.C., by the National Milk Board, which will not grant an increase of more than one cent per liter of milk sold at retail in Puerto A"'. Although the dispatch from the Federal Capital in this regard is limited to announcing only that the national OAP will not approve an increase of more than one cent per liter in the sale of the product, we can assure you that the recommendation made by the local OAP offices will be approved, and that in the course of the next few days the official note decreeing this increase will be authorized and the date on which it will be effective will be announced. As already reported by EL MUNDO, the Office of Price Administration, after having studied the reports submitted by representatives of the milk industry on the cost of production and their arguments regarding the decree of the Minimum Wage Board fixing wages for the employees of this industry, proceeded to send to the regional offices its recommendation, indicating the increase to be authorized at one cent per liter. It is not yet known for what reason, but the high agency report was requested by the central offices in Washington, which began to study both the report submitted by the OAP and the memorandum submitted by the ranchers. The latter were requesting a higher increase than that recommended by the Office of Price Administration in Puerto Rico. As we have been able to learn, this "national office has resolved that "for the moment an increase of more than one cent in the price of each liter of milk sold on the island to the consumer is not justified. On inquiring about this matter yesterday of the territorial director of the Bureau of Prices, Mr. Sam Gilstrap, he reported that "nothing has yet been reported to me from Washington on our recommendations, but I expect news by next Monday." In making their request to the OAP for an increase in the price of milk sales, the representatives of the cattlemen stated that they would not accept less than ♦ cents per liter, alleging that this increase was necessary to assure them some profit, since, as they alleged, the cost of production had risen due to the increase in the prices of cattle feed, "the situation being aggravated when the JI8M authorized its decree fixing salaries for the employees of the Industry." The request was formally made, the OAP began, through its DI (Contlnued on page Id.).
Vicéns followed up on the resolution
The General Supply Administrator, Mr. Antonio Vlcén" Ríos, sent yesterday to the federal authorities, for the appropriate purposes, a copy of the resolution adopted by the Importers and wholesalers, at their meeting on Wednesday at the Chamber of Commerce, officially stating that they are ready and able to take charge of the importation and distribution on the Island of the articles which the Federal Supply Office has been handling, "provided that the Department of Agriculture (Continued on page 30).