THE WN DO
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
YEAR XXVII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 20, 1945
Entered as second class mstter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10381
PEG Submits Projects for $8,085,000
tHe municipal works would have an allocation of S3,500,000.00 Services would have $3, 4A5, 000.00 Before Ir Plans Board describes plans for service works The ProRraniA rie Emergency recommended yesterday to Ir .Tunta rie Planning Project" worth IR,085,000 for the last fiscal year, excluding Appropriations for direct aid through the Department of Health's Bureau of Public Welfare and funds for the operation of the Department of Instruction's canteens, which amount to about $5,000,000. In addition, the PEG will take charge, as in the current fiscal year, of a number of works included in the Planning Board's Single-Year Plan. This was officially reported by the said agency. Marlo Marrero, PEG aubadmlntstrndor, said yesterday that the recommendation made covers mainly municipal projects and service projects, allocating $ 1,500,000 for the former and $3,485,000 for the latter. The rest of the money, or $1,100,000, is for miscellaneous projects and administrative expenses. The PEG was represented at the hearings held yesterday by Ins señn-1 res Manuel A, Perez, general administra-( dor: Marlo Marrero, deputy administrator and Rafael Urrutia, di-, rector of the Division of Operado-1 nes, It was noted that the Emergency Program intended to make recommendations in connection only with the next fiscal year and did not ron the Six-Year Plan. The recommended municipal projects are divided into six groups, I which have to do with construction and reconstruction or repair work. For street construction and reconstruction a fund of $1,500,000 is requested and for the construction, reconstruction and repair of public buildings, a fund of $1,500,000. The above-mentioned buildings, in order of priority, are as follows: hospitals, schools, dining halls, public squares, jails, slaughterhouses, city hall and others. For construction, improvement and repair of cemeteries, $100,000; for construction and improvement of bridle paths, $300,000; and for construction and reconstruction of recreational facilities (recreational clamps, municipal courts, etc.), $100,000. The Emergency program's recommended service projects and recommended allocations are also as follows; Sewing project - $1,500,000 Nursery schools - $350,000 Native Industry - $450,000 Milk station - $250,000 Food distribution - $300,000 Registration of the unemployed - $85,000 Economic and Social Studies - $150,000 Land conservation - $250,000 Other services - $150,000000 Other services - 150,000 In addition, $500,000 is recommended for miscellaneous projects, which include those that, although essential, are not included in the six-year plan and no funds have been allocated to carry them out, as explained by Mr. Marrero. To cover the administrative expenses, woo.ooo are being requested. The Planning Board will submit these recommendations to a study and then report back to the Goberna(Continued on page 220
The Road to Victory
The D-Day-islamic date of the assault on Mormandy.
Under the heading "The Assault," the Chief of Staff of the United States Army, General George C. Marshall, includes in his biennial report to the Secretary of War the dramatic account of the Normandy Invasion, the point at which the greatest disaster suffered by the German army in its entire history began on the ground. The historic date of June 6, 1944 inspires Marshall to write this chapter: THE ASSAULT By GEORGE C. MARSHALL Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army. The Norma* - dia co "ta for the assault was chosen after a lat go study of the 1$ potency of the German de- tensions and the dlsposl- 1 clone of the Nazi divisions, The au-| large" harbor probe" in that sona presented a xerlo obstacle, but to some extent that obstacle could be sal-, seen due to the relative weakness of the German defenses.
I g K <41 B sOk Ja ■fe r' " - ' Efe, í f U 11 Gen. George C. Marshall
The selection of the dates and times of the "mana" and the construction in England of the artificial "rins" to be emplaced on the "beaches". The selection of the dates and times of the assault required an accurate prediction of the best combination of weather, markings, and favorable light conditions. Moonlight was desirable for air operations. D-Day was set for June 5; that date was later transferred to June 6 because of clear but unfavorable weather. Hundreds of ships, which had left distant ports on the west coast of Liglaterrn, were already approaching the Inva "lon area and had to return or seek shelter in the "bay" already filled with other ships on the south coast. The final forecast for the day of the attack predicted strong" winds; the sea was still rough, but had to accept a delay of several" weeks" until the ma| (Continued on page 17.),
>- Member" da I" Supreme Court of EhIiuIo" United", who recently made their annual formal vlwlta to 1 I- President, neompnñan him in the e "rallnata of the Cn "a Rlanca, Figure in the group, ni front, Left c i-| " right; Chief Justice Harlan F. Stone; President Truman; lo" aneciado" Justices Hugo L. Black ' and Felix Frankfurter. Second row, in mlamn order: associate justices" Stanley F, Reed, Harold 1 H Burton, Wiley Hut ledge, Frank Murphy. Third row: Associate Justice William O. Douglas, "noli- > " rifar general" Unwind MeGrnfh and Solicitor General Torn Clark. Back row: Clerk of the Corto i r Charle" Elmore Cropley and "marshal" Thomas K. Wagman. Wagman (Associated Press photo).
' Of active payment f i n a I grant I. J of the year 1945 T 1 Wilson writes to the chief ¿ <le agricultural enlidail in connection with fuhiro.
> University awarded scholarships for > medicine v graduate studies - " I of Ior scholarship? will study medicine, < five denla! surgery, one veterinary and twenty-seven 1 will pursue advanced studies cu oirás sciences i I." Board rio Rocas de la Unlver"|Cuse, New York. $1.5(10; Nelson ( "idnri de Puerto Rico nenb" de nlor- Lugo Rlgatl, rio Hato Rey, en 1" ,
In a letter to the president of the Agricultural Association, Mr. José Ramón Quiñones, the director of the Sugar Branch of the Federal Department of Agriculture, Mr. Kml B Wilson, assures that "it is our intention to end this matter as soon as possible", nor to refer "*" to a request from the Agricultural President, in the sense that the "final payment" on the 1945 program will be activated. The request was made by Mr. Wilson, in connection with the subsidy to sugar cane farmers. Mr. Wilson replied in this* way to an earlier communication from the president of the Insular farmers. "We are onlcradna" ngrcgn "oñor Wilson "that the office of Mr. La Guardia < the Triple A>. in Snn Juan, osló trnhnjnndn fuerló in In" necessary certifications. Two mills have yn been yn liquidated and the certifications do otrns should oslar yn almost ready pnr" final ncclon. We understand that farmers need money at this time to plant and grow crops, and that any encouragement that can be given to them to help them in their work in the fields will naturally help the farmers and the farm laborers". The director of the Sugar Industry Directorate of APM indicates that the aim is to re-establish as soon as possible "normal conditions in the sugar industry". A) offer, expresses in his letter to Mr. Quiñones: (Continued on page 22.)
gm t'R scholarships in the portornqiieñns to study in different unlvorsida-; 'idos of the United States". A "iml"- - mo nfnrgranted five scholarships n esturilnn-| tos who will pursue studies in Dental Clru- p gla; unn pnra to study vo- -, I orinarla; and 27 parn post 1 ' gtadundns studies in other mat rijas, ( i The boens assigned" n those who . Angel Carlos AcoJvodo Montalvo, of Rio Piedras, to study at the University of Louisville, Kentucky, has been assigned $1,040; José Felipe Reinal-Rosa, of San Sebastián, to study at the University of Loyo- ( I la. in Chicago, so hnn assigned him i [$1,500; Angel Manuel Diaz Monta-, . |ñoz, do Santurce, on the Unlversl- - dnd do Tulano, in Louisiana, $1.500; - Pt Isciln Diaz Alfat o, do Jaguas, on - In Universidad da Tulnnc, $1,500; ' Asdrúbnl del Toro Silva, do Cabo ' Rojo, on do Templo University, ' Flladelfla, $1,000; Adelaida Ellas ' Lnlnrre, do Rio Piedras, on Hahnemmnn Medical College, $1,500; Jose ' A. Fránquiz, of Yauco, eri I" Boston University, $1,500; Roberto González Casillas, of Añnsco, at jln University of California, $1,500; ¡Ina" Mari" Hernández, rio Guaya-¡ Ima, on in University rio Illinois,! ' IChicago, $1.500; Eduardo Jiménez jRabón, of Santurce, in Univer- " sity of Loyola, in Chicago, $1,500; 'Eveline Kulnlan Viñas, rio AreclJho, in In Tulane University, ($1,000; Ramón López García, rio Rio ¡Piedras, in 1" Syra- University, $1,000; Ramón López García, rio Rio ¡Piedras, in 1" University of Syra-
Mnrquettc University, Wisconsin, $1,500; Teodoro Milán Pedió, Sabana Grnnde, at Hahnrni n n Medical College, $1,500; Edunrrin Mlrnbnl Font, of Santurre, at Hnhnemmnn Medirnl College, $1,500; Kcrmel Ocasio ("abañas, of 'Mayngtiez, at In University of St. Louis, Missouri, $1,500; Kcrmel Ocasio ("abañas, of 'Mayngtiez, at In University of St. Louis, Missouri, $1,500; and Kcrmel Ocasio ("abañas, of 'Mayngtiez, at In University of St. Louis, Missouri, $1,500. .Louis, Missouri, $1,500; Edgardo Or'liz Gordils, of Hunmcno, University of St, Lnuls, Missouri, $1,500; Hilda. Isis Ortiz Muñoz, of Caguas, on Rosemont College, Filado*'la, $1,000; Jafeh Ramirez Ledesrpa, of Mayagüez, on Southwestern Medical College, in Dallas, Texas, $1,500; Edwin Rivera Torres, do Cabo Rol (Continued on page 10.)
Supreme Court Justices Visit the President
Justice Travieso visited the President yesterday
Says Tydings Pushes His Own Will Against Wishes of Many - - I Believes Bill Must Have 4 Formulas Island Can Finally Achieve Equality with U. S. Under Statehood By RUTH BROOM INS Correspondent WASHINGTON, 19. (INS)-Puerto Rico Chief Justice Martin Travieso declared today, after having confe- , ranted with President Truman, , at the White House, that he does not favor Independence for Puerto Rico. Said the presiding judge that ' he believes it is economically impossible for the Island, with its extreme ! population density and its" scitas i Ierra", to subsist as an" en- ' tldnd independent. He said, however, that he hopes that the Island can achieve equality with the rest of the American nation through statehood. In the meantime, he said he would like to see Puerto Rico granted the right to elect its own governor. Chief Judge Traviese has been in Washington on official business as head of the war bonds campaign in Puerto Rico; and he declared that he would return to Puerto Rico, by plane, on Sunday, to preside at the next meeting of the Court. Judge Travieso further stated that Senator Millard E. Tydings, a Maryland cicmúerata, chairman of the Senate Territories Committee, "is pushing his own personal will against the wishes of many" regarding the political status of the island. The presiding judge strongly disagreed with Senator Tydings' assertion that Congress would not approve statehood for Puerto! Rico. On that point, he said, "I do not believe that the fate of the Island is in the hands of one man, but in the hands of the Congress. In a democracy, the opinion of one man does not prevail, but the majority rules". Mr. Travieso argued that all four alternatives for Puerto Rico's future political status - Statehood, Independence, Dominion status and election of its governor with a larger government of its own - as recommended by President Truman to Congress, should receive consideration. Asserting that the people should be given the right to decide their form of government, Travieso added: "Until the Puerto Ricans decide for themselves and until Congress freely discusses all alternatives, this question should not be considered settled just because one man is pushing his personal desire against the wishes of many American citizens. Travieso ended by saying that the Puerto Rican pueolo will select । 'a EstndldAd, if granted 1a । opportunity to do so.
It is still unsold half of the 1945 tobacco crop ' It is revealed that there will be a surplus of not less than one hundred thousand quíntale." "The next harvest will be very low. -- The half of the tobacco crop, until next year, has not been sold because there will be no one to sell it to this year, according to what was revealed to EL yesterday. This being so, this means that of the 200,000 quintals still to be sold to a buyer from the United States, who is likely to buy from today to tomorrow, only 40,000 to 50,000 quintals of taco," our informant added, "We will be able to sell it to a buyer from the United States, who is likely to buy from 40,000 to 50,000 quintals of taco. The prices at which the other ven- rns are already being made, "but in accordance with local market movements. The only defense that the tobacco growers have (only about 200,000 quintals), since the total crop for this year is 400,000 quintals to be sold in the coming year, and reduce it to almost 400,000 quintals. Our next harvest, and reduce by almost half the informant, when asked about the next harvest. When asked why the price of the crop will be lower, he stated that "the price of the crop did not improve. He assured us "himself toasted that "the lower it is' i Tto bnhrá a surplus of no more than one hundred thousand quintals that ton- prices, since there will be no rape-! that sor retained for the pró- titse the expensive of this "fto when I*" 110 nfto so achieved a production of 400,000 "This quantity rio tobacco will have quíntale" to sell approximate that be retained by the harvesters," (Continued on page 22.)
It is revealed that there will be a surplus of not less than one hundred thousand quintals. "The next harvest will be very low. "Harvesters impose a quota on themselves
Half of this year's tobacco crop, according to what was revealed yesterday to El Mundo by an authorized source, will be sold, however, from today to tomorrow, to a buyer in the United States, who will probably buy from 40 to 50 thousand quintals of de-stemmed tobacco, at the prices at which other sales have been made in the local market. The information we have is to the effect that there is still a quantity of approximately 200,000 quintals to be sold, so that the total crop for this year will be 40,000 quintals. Our informant, upon our inquiry, stated that "the sales "per", poctlvn" are bad, and possibly the price of vonta'n has not improved". He also assured us that there will be a surplus of not less than one hundred thousand quintals that will have to be retained for next year. "This quantity of tobacco will have to be retained by the harvesters"!
Eivian leaders deal tomorrow with Truman's status message
Tomorrow, Sunday, at 5 p.m., at the Casino de Puerto Rico, will meet Nelson Ramirez, president of the Rotary Club of San Juan; Ricardo Peiquera, president of the Optimista Club; Morris Thyvaert, vice-pre "lden-'.e of the Propellers' Club; Orltla Oliveras de Carreras, president of the Graduate Women's Association of the University of Puerto Rico; Jorge Font Saldaña, president of the San Juan Lions Club; J. A. E. Rodríguez, governor of the Rotarlos de Puerto Rico; and Alfredo Muñiz, governor of the Leo-'.
ne" of Puerto Rico, for the purpose of studying and discussing Truman's message to Congress on the political and economic situation of Puerto Rico. The aforementioned persons, as informed aye"", intend to consider*? Ia tonveniencla of convening a congress of civic associations of all ." Island of Puerto Rico, to present to the Congress of the" £"'.<do" United" and to their respective" s "j< clanone" on the mainland, the Importance of that they tie heavy culvadosamente lo" economic factorsl(Continued on page 22.) | |
Muñoz judges Tydings' reasoning to be mistaken in relation to the formulas for the
Medina Government in Venezuela! Di ' e t>* should "e" f f r camaras Ja" that was overthrown by the Ejercito act in the caao.
Young officers led the movement (foot claims to pursue democratic purpose* and the Mepaiación of military force policy For FVERETT RAWMAN United Press Correspondent CARACAS, 19. (PU).-Army rebel leaders overthrew the government of Venezuela, having surrendered to him" presldenie Isaías Medina Angarlta. The government was overthrown after a night and a row of bloody clashes as a result of which, unconfirmed reports say that 3(X) deaths occurred.
Coincides with the editorial El Mundo Tydings expects that the hearings will have ended on January 25 Pnr Teofilo Maldonado Editor of EL" MUNDO Coinciding with the editorial 4" EL MUNDO rie the day before yesterday, entitled "La Inconsistencl" de Tydings", to the Presídeme riel Senado y del Partido Popular, Luis Muñoz Marín, stated yesterday that he believes that Senator Tydings' reasoning that he and the Senate Territorial Committee should be the ones to decide on their own the alternatives that Congress may or may not be willing to submit to Puerto Rico is wrong. In the opinion of Mr. Muñoz. Marín, it should be the Senate itself in his case, and the House of Representatives in his, that should act on this by a vote of its members. He understands that in this way the people of Puerto Rico will have a definitive answer on the thinking of the U.S. Congress. Asked about the announcement of public hearings for January 10 made by Senator Tydings, regarding a bill to provide for the withdrawal of U.S. sovereignty over Puerto Rico and for the recognition of its independence, Mr. Muñoz Marín commented: "The recommendation made by President Truman to Congress in the sen* Ido that it should not submit to a vote of the" Puerto Rican" any form of political statu" that Congress is not willing to implement, is an expression of the President's good faith toward our people, and is taken from the same request made by the Legislature of Puerto Rico. "Naturally it would be of no use for the people of Puerto Rico to vote on any form of political status without the commitment of the United States Congress to implement any such political status alternative, should it receive the approval of our people in the plebiscite, that position of President Truman and our Legislature is evidently correct. Referring to the editorial in EL MUNDO the day before yesterday that commented on Senator Tydings' attitude of limiting the alternatives: to be submitted to the people of Puerto Rico, Senator Muñoz Marín said he agreed with the ideas set forth" in this regard in our editorial. The PDP leader added: "What I think is wrong is the reasoning of Senator Tydings in the sense that he and his Committee should be the ones to decide on their own the alternatives that Congress is or is not willing to submit to a vote in Puerto Rico. It seems to me that it should be the Senate itself in his case, and the House of Representatives in theirs, which should act on this by a vote of all its members. In this way the people of Puerto Rico will have a definite answer as to the thinking of the Congress of the United States. If Senator Tydings is correct in saying that Statehood would not be submitted, what objection can I have to the full Congress having an opportunity to say whether Senator Tydings is correct in that assessment? Yesterday morning, Mr. Muñoz Matin received a cablegram from the Resident Commissioner, Mr. Jesús T. Piñero, informing him that today he had been informed by Mr. Tydings. Piñero informing him that on January 10, hearings will begin before the Senate Committee on Territory to consider Senator Tydings' bill on independence. He informed him that the hearings would be open to proponents of all alternatives, including Statehood and Dominionism. (Continued on page 2.) NOT TO LEAVE HAWAII UNTIL FEBRUARY The delay in the arrival in Hawaii of the 2M Infantry Regiment, 1114th Field Artillery Battalion and 1558th Combat Engineering Company means that these troops will not return to Puerto Rico in December, as announced. Although the Military Department of the "Antllla" is prepared to receive the 2M and the "other" units mentioned above in November, a radiogram from the War Department received yesterday reveals that "transportation difficulties" will delay the troops' embarkation from Hawaii. The troops are now scheduled to leave for the island sometime after February 1, according to the War Department.
The leaders of the rebel movement declared victory for their cause within 24 hours of the start of the rebellion, at noon yesterday, Thursday. At noon on Friday, the government forces are still holding in two barracks in the northern portion of Caracas, but it is announced that rebel reinforcements will arrive here by air. The news lingeries to this capital say, in addition, that, with the greater part of Caracas are in the hands of the rebels" La Guayra, Maracay and San Juan ric los Molo". The rebellion was organized by a group of young officers of the Army, and counts with strong enlisted and class officers, as well as with lower ranking officers. Said" leaders" declared to the United Press that: "Our movement is democratic and seeks to give Venezuela free elections",!
IfMML ISA1AN MEDINA President of Venezuela
restoring government to the people and divorcing the army from politics.' The leaders of the rebellion also declared that they are holding hostage in Caracas the ex-President López Contreras, General of the Army; the Minister of the Interior, Arturo Uilar Pletrl, and the Inspector General of the Army, General C
the Inspector General of the Army, General Cbalbaud Cardona. The situation turned in favor of the rebels when, on Friday night, the garrison of San Carlos, the main military center of the capital, surrendered after almost three hours of continuous (Continued on page 22).
MM, . ■ -. w-. w- ■■■■■■ I I II i- N.-i "11 Transportation Authority requests allocation of $15,085,000.00 Submitted to Planning Board my six-year plan. "Requests #1,800,000 for the purchase of buses. - Eniimera airports on the Island In its Six-Year program submitted to 1" Board ri? Dianes, the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority requests the allocation of one million eight hundred thousand dollars for the purchase of buses and an additional su-?
The projects" submitted by the Transportation Authority have an estimated cost of $15,085,000, of which amount, it is reported, the sum of three million dollars has already been allocated, $7,725,000 is requested for the Six-Year Program, $4,360,000 to be invested after the year 1951-52. The requested appropriation for next year is $3,675,000; for 1947-48, $2,550,000; for 1948-49, $1,000,000; for 1949-50, $250,000; and for 1950-51, $250,000. Of the $2,800,000 for the purchase of buses, according to the information provided, one million dollars has already been allocated, and the remaining amount is requested to be allocated as follows: $1,000,090 for 1944-447 and $800,000 for 1948-48. The Transportation Authority reports that it is proposed to construct public vehicle facilities at an estimated cost of $200,000. Since no funds are available for this project, the Authority requests that one hundred thousand dollars be appropriated for 1946-47 and the remaining one hundred thousand for 1947 (continued on page 22).
The "Besos" butter price will not be altered here. - Even though the cancellation of the subsidy that had been paid to the butter manufacturers has been a factor in authorizing in the United States a price increase of 5 to 6 cents per pound, the value of this item in Puerto Rico will not be altered. This was announced yesterday by the Price Executive of the Office of Price Administration, Mr. Frank Besosa. Mr. Bososa stated that "we have been discussing with the local importers the convenience of lowering the price of butter consumed on the island, since we believe it to be too high. We have already arrived (continued on page 22).
Ickes' loan backs aid to pay message on Island's 65th status trip.
- War Committee makes new exhortation to meet the quota ! "Fabulous expense has been incurred" to obtain Victory. We have to bring our men home as soon as possible; take care of the wounded, ■upllr the discharge pay, and maintain occupation forces in Germany and Japan. These and other" problems and responsibilities make the success of the Victory Loan absolutely necessary." The foregoing is part of a message from United States Treasurer" Fred M. Vinson, in connection with the Victory Borrowing which begins October 29 and ends December 8, 1945, according to a note authorized yesterday by the War Finance Committee. During this Campaign the Government expects to raise $1,000,000 from the American people through the sale of Victory Bonds. "Puerto Rico has been allotted a quota of 9 million as its । share in eite Empréstito. 1 The" sale" to Individuals have "Ido : i been fixed" at 3 million dollars." i (Continued on page 22.) ।
Hopes Congress Will Act Promptly on Message For Ruth Broom INS Correspondent WASHINGTON, 19 (INS) - Harold L. Ickes, Secretary of the Interior, today called on Congress to take prompt action to implement President Truman's "proposal" on the political status of Puerto Rico. In an exclusive statement to the International News Service. Ickes said he has long been a supporter of giving Puerto Ricans the kind of government they want. "I agree with President Truman's attitude on the issue of Puerto Rico's political future. I hope that Congress will see fit to pass legislation promptly to carry out the President's proposals," he said. Observers believe that Icke" has served as a go-between in presenting the Puerto Rico case to President Truman. Icke" stated that ""an early "oluclon to the future political problem of" Puerto Rico would be highly deaeable.""