THE BACKGROUND
34 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
34 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DIARIO DE i,a MAÑANA
ARO XXVII
The best eolobrarite of victory in Europe: buying more war bonds.
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, MAY 26, 1945.
Entered as second claaa matter. Poet Office, Sao Juan, Y. B.
NUMBER 10481
New Residential Construction Plan To Be Put Into Effect; APA Rejects $1.60 Subsidy
A committee will visit representatives of CCA and other agencies Against change in unit of payment The previous ones "have been made on a per hundredweight basis, not per ton The Sugar Producers' Association yesterday rejected a proposal to pay a subsidy of one dollar and sixty cents per ton of cane for the next sugar harvest and agreed to insist on a payment of $1.60 per ton of cane for the next harvest, and agreed to insist on an incentive payment that would bring the sacharos and island producers on par with those in the mainland areas of Florida and Florida, who were offered a subsidy of one dollar sixty cents per ton of cane by the Agricultural Credit Corporation, "which for those areas means a payment of about one dollar per hundredweight of sugar," the APA yesterday appointed a committee to meet with CCA officials and other representatives of the CCA and other representatives of the sugar industry: The APA yesterday appointed a committee to meet with CEC officials and other representatives of the U.S. Government to reach an agreement as soon as possible on the subsidy issue. The group is composed of Messrs. J. Brooks Keyes, Clarence K. Bowie, Arthur L. Quinn, O. B. Frazer and Dudley Smith, with Mr. Brooks as chairman. Mr. Dudley Sifilth will return Sunday to the United States and will bring with him reports of the results of his meetings with the leaders of the sugar industry of the Island. Mr. Smith brought with him, on his arrival in Puerto Rico, the program suggested for 1946, and it is understood that the details of the program were communicated to him by the head of the Sugar Section of the CEC, Mr. Smith, on his arrival in Puerto Rico, and it is understood that the details of the program were communicated to him by the head of the Sugar Section of the CEC, Mr. Smith.
The Island included in the educational program fund project.
This was reported to Mr. Paz Gránela by the secretary-treasurer of the Federation of Teachers. - He says that a reasonably large sum would be obtained.
The secretary-treasurer of the American Federation of Teachers, Mr. Irvin R. Kuenzll, writes to the vice president of the FLT, Mr. Franesleo Paz Gránela. Informing him that Puerto Rico is included in the federal Senate Bill 717, allocating funds for the educational program nationwide. It will be recalled that the Federationist leader has addressed the FAM, the FAT and the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, Mr. Jesús T. Plftero, asking for the management of the program. Plftero, asking for the inclusion of the Island in the referred measure. Mr. Paz Gránela received favorable responses to his request. "The letter from the secretary of the American Federation of Teachers states, "I would like to point out to you that in
the twelfth page of U.S. Senate Bill 717, Puerto Rico is included as a state within the meaning of this bill. Since the measure is drafted with the basic instructional needs of children in mind, it seems likely that Puerto Rico will get a reasonably large sum of money under the provisions of this bill. I recall how effectively Mr. Rivera Martinez described the needs for better educational facilities in Puerto Rico. I recall that he stated that approximately 40% of the children in Puerto Rico are not in school for the simple reason that there is no schooling in Puerto Rico.
No increase in gasoline rations here War Petroleum Administrator says there is a shortage of tankers The United States War Petroleum Administrator has notified the Office of Price Administration that there is no possibility at present of an increase in gasoline supplies to Puerto Rico or the Virgin Islands because of a shortage of tankers for the transportation of such fuel to these islands. This was announced yesterday by Mr. Snm Gilstrap. Director of the OAP in Puerto Rico, after having received notification to that effect from its affiliates in Washington. Mr. Gilstrap explained that the OAP National Office announced that as of June 22, basic gasoline rations will be increased by 50%, from 8 to 12 gallons per month, in the continental United States. Beginning June 11, "R" rations for gasoline will be increased to 650 miles per month throughout the continental U.S. as a result of the victory in Europe. In making the announcement, Mr. Gilstrap said the Office of Price Administration regrets not being able to immediately extend this increase in gasoline radons to Puerto Rico. "I am sure," he explained, "that the people of Puerto Rico will understand the need to keep the tankers carrying gasoline to the (Continued on page IR)
The end of the war in Europe
m Bato is the third in a series of articles by the famous historian and biographer Emil Ludwlg, now in Europe, where he went to write his impressions of the people, places and events. PARIS-A small room in a house in Bavaria was entered by one of the most-if not the most-powerful leaders of German industry. His name must still remain a secret. He had been arrested a few miles earlier, together with his lawyer, in the mementos in which he was evidently trotting to escape. On entering the room, he immediately went to sit on the chair, so that I had no choice but to sit on a rustic chair. In addition, he did so papa remain seated in the shadows - - old diplomatic trick in virtue M dual - possible to observe in vos do be observed. In his appearance and vitality I re
By Emil Ludwig
An arrogant German potentate
I was a "a certain international cartel. Dearie then commendably praised his own merits. -You were Hitler's right-hand man, weren't you, Mr. X," I questioned. In no way," he answered, "I saw him very seldom. Hitler had around him a group of almost inviolable individuals, who advised him. Besides, Hitler did not know a word about economics. You don't know how happy we were the day we found out that he was devoting himself to Art; that was a much less dangerous field. -What I can't understand," I continued, "is how a man as clever as you could associate himself with such a criminal. -I was so busy with my international business that I didn't have time to deal with the issues at hand inside Germany," she said, "that I had no time to deal with the issues at hand inside Germany," she said.
e remembered the late Lloyd George. Despite having lost most of his factories, all his power and, he hoped, all his money, and despite having lost his powerful fatherland, Mr. X was still beaming with satisfaction. He was neatly dressed and looked as well fed as the faces of the Germans I have seen, with a rosy, fresh complexion, a firm voice and an unshakable confidence in the tutu, ro. I had the feeling that he was not interested in the future of Germany. The only thing he was thinking about was the future of his commercial enterprises. In contrast to the German prisoner generals I interviewed, I found him full of plans and projects. His attitude was such that I expected him, at any moment, to offer a cigar to me and to the American who was guarding him.
He tacitly agreed that he had cooperated with the Nazla. -I was not a member of the Party," he said, "As a member of the International Bank of Basle, I cannot mix in politics. - But weren't you a member of the so-called Reichstag," I asked him. He laughed and replied: "Is that intervention in politics? I had to run large factories and had no time for politics. I told him: "We believe that without the help that you and your friends gave to the Nazi Party, this war would have been impossible. We believe that you are just as guilty as Dr. Schacht, the evil one who went to three different forms of government and who betrayed the Americans to the tune of more than six billion dollars. He was surprised, but quickly composed himself.
He denies his guilt just as all Germans do.
New members of President Truman's Cabinet
i wi IMf 1 H Ob'ib,' < irtL ■ ■ Awj ■ ¡&t' Kl ... MMW| ¡ ¡/sr : < I i ■ l ; - II" I E II BS ''WBBBHBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBIBR mBBBBBBBBBBBBBMMHBHBBBBBHMBBBBM.
From left to right: federal judge Lewis B. Swellen Bach, of Spokane, Washington, who was appointed Secretary of Labor, replacing Mrs. Frances Perkins, by President Harry S. Truman; House Representative Clinton of New Mexico, appointed Secretary of Agriculture, replacing Claude Wickard; and Ledo. Torn Dallas, Texas, who replaces Francis Biddle at the U.S. Attorney General's Office.
More powers given to municipalities
In addition to other income-producing enterprises, according to a new law approved, they may expropriate theaters, buildings Lg Law number 233. which goes into effect next August 9 and which amends articles 2, 4 and 7 of Law number 45 of August 7, 1935, confers additional powers to the municipalities and the Government of the Capital, to establish or acquire, by means of forced expropriation or otherwise,
In addition to revenue-producing companies, according to the new law passed, they may expropriate theaters, buildings, markets, slaughterhouses, meat packing plants, meat packing plants, etc.
markets, slaughterhouses, public meatpacking plants, wharves, theaters and cdlflcloz, in addition to any other revenue-producing enterprises. With respect to the issuance and sale of revenue bonds, the Act includes the People of Puerto Rico as an agency entitled to intervene in the transactions. The text of the Act, as approved, reads as follows: The title of Act No. 45, entitled: "Section 1. 45, entitled: "Providing for the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, reconstruction, alteration, improvement, enlargement, operation and maintenance, by any tjwnlclpio or the Government of the Capital, of revenue-producing enterprises, and for pledging, encumbering and otherwise disposing of the revenues thereof; to authorize and regulate the issuance of bonds payable from revenues, to the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, to provide funds for the operation of such enterprises; providing for the payment of such bonds and fixing the right of the holder thereof; prescribing the duties of the officers of the Insular Government in connection with such bonds; and for other purposes," approved on August 7, 1935, is hereby amended to read as follows: "Providing for the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, alteration, improvement, enlargement, operation and maintenance, by any municipality or the Government of the Capital, of revenue-producing enterprises, and for pledging, encumbering and otherwise disposing of the revenue" of the" ml "ma"; to authorize and regulate the issuance of bonds" payable from revenues, to the United States of America, to the People of Puerto Rico or to any Agency or agency or instrumentality thereof, to enable funds" for the operation of such" enterprises; providing for the payment of such" bonds and fixing the" rights of the" holders thereof; prescribing the duties of the officers of the Insular Government in connection with such bonds; and for other purposes." Section 2. - Section 2 of Act No. 45, entitled: "Providing for the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, alteration, improvement, enlargement, extension, operation and maintenance, by any municipality or the Government of the Capital, of companies iConÜaúa on page 10i
; Believes right ' appointment of Dr. Picó President of Teachers is sure he will be a good Commissioner , The president of the Association of , Teachers, Mr. Luis Muftlz Souf- ■ front, declared yesterday that he believes "aceri fado" the appointment of Dr. - Rafael Picó for Commissioner of ■ Public Instruction of Puerto Rico. ■ He expressed the assurance that doc- - tor Picó "will devote his energies to > improve the school system," 1 His statements "on the" someone- ; tes:' > "The appointment of Dr. RaI fael Piró seems right to me. I agree with RimpAtia" because "he is a teacher who has demonstrated exceptional ability as an executive and a strong public servant, in addition to his record as a teacher" (Continued on page R).
N . 1 - i. ada resolved on session of the Legislature
Only rf I would celebrate I have not found any other way to help the" municipalities Nad" "e h" resolved definitively and officially, "on the holding of a special session of the 1a Legislative A "AmhleA in June. Only in -1 last resort, and if circumstances so require, will such a session be held in the absence of the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz. Marín, "I cannot be back in Puerto Rico by June. The leadership of the people will promote the holding of the special legislative session in the absence of Mr. Muñoz Marín, after conferring with him by telephone and provided that no other means can be found to assist the municipalities for the time being. The President of the House of Representatives, Dr. Francisco M. Susonl, continues to give all his consideration to the situation of the municipal administrations, with a view to discussing with the Governor and Mr. Muñoz Marin, formulas that may be adopted to help them. It is insisted that the President of the Senate will remain in Washington as long as he deems necessary to "form the best atmosphere in favor of the bills of Senator Tydings and the Resident Commissioner, Mr. Piñero, on the plebiscite. It is understood that Mr. Muñoz Marín is of the opinion that the immediate holding of a special session of the Legislative Assembly is not so urgent as to justify his immediate return to the Island without having finished his work.
Muñoz to speak today on radio in Washington about plebiscite
Columbia announced that the Senate president will be at the microphones starting at 10:45 a.m.; lobbying work continues.
By ORARLES MO CABE I WASHINGTON, 25. (PU) - Luis ■ Muñoz Marin, president of the Puerto Rican Senate and of the Popular Democratic Party, is prepared to bring the case for the plebiscite bill before the national public in a 15-minute speech he will deliver tomorrow, from 10:45 to 11 p.m., on the "Co* । lumbla Broadcasting System". Di* , cha radio station announced today to the , Press that the spokesman portorrlque* ño occuparla your microphones, from ' his studios of Wáshington, to the . hour Indicated. CBS said that the speech will be "the plebiscite now before the people of Puerto Rico, as to whether or not his palace is a "plebiscite.
The speech will be delivered at the CBS CBS CBS News, which said that "the plebiscite now before the people of Puerto Rico, as to whether their pal" will have an "independent nationhood, dominion or 49th state of the" United States". Meanwhile, Muñoz Marin has continued to lobby for the Tydings-Piñero plebiscite bill, having interviewed Senators Pep' per, Burton and Capper, as well as Representative Domlngeaux. Another action taken by Muñoz Marin has been to interview Attorney General Frrcls E. Biddle on the" appointment" of Benjamin Ortlz and Campo" del Toro; having announced that he intends to confer with the new Attorney General, Tom G Clark.
It will be from Monday, May 28, under the auspices of the FHA, and will be under the auspices of the H-2 Program of the National Housing Agency, in an effort to alleviate the great shortage of housing in Puerto Rico. The quota granted to the Tata '- rieh" mainly to the" management" of Mr. Earle S. Draper. Deputy head of the Federal Housing Administration in Washington, who recently visited Puerto Rico, according to information supplied by Mr. F. D. A. Carpenier, territorial director of the Federal Housing Administration. -Carpenier, territorial director of the F. H. A. here. It is noted, however, that under the H-2 program, applications for permits for residential construction must continue to be filed as heretofore at the F.H.A. Field Office, Foima W. P. R.-2896. P. R.-2896. These applications will be approved or denied in accordance with the restrictions contained in Conservation Order L-41, as last amended. The sale price ri" the property, including "oler í and house, may not exceed SB.onn v "| the building is for rental, the rent may not exceed $60 per month for caria dwelling. It is further noted that such building permits, once approved, may be financed under the FHA plan provided they meet the other building and location requirements. The permit application forms may be obtained and filed at the FHA Local Office, in the Rnnco Popular Building, San Juan, where details and other information about this program, as well as information on how to finance the loans under the FHA plan, will be available. Appearing in person at the office. people who already have these applications filed, will contribute to delaying rather than speeding up their processing." 1 1 1 e g a d a t e d M. Maverick AronipitáaHo de ffrupo Hp ínveMigaHorp* yesterday Ralió de Wáshington Yesterday afternoon left ri" Wáshlngfnn and a" e "p "rAn "t this afternoon in San Juan, lo" Messrs. Maury Maverick, president of the Small Plant" War Corporation; Arnold and Patrick Me Donough, member" of this Board; and W. Darlington Denlt, director of Finance of the míame. They are coming to Puerto Rico for the purpose of studying conditions on the island and to determine whether the service of the Corporation can be extended. According to reports received yesterday afternoon by EL MUNDO, this delegation is accompanied by Mr. Antonio Luciano, as interpreter and special consultant. As announced yesterday by EL MUNDO, there is a possibility that ge may extend federal aid to Puerto Rico in the form of a loan to the island's small industries engaged in the manufacture of essential products for the civilian population, once the commission, which is expected to complete its studies and investigations today, completes its studies and investigations. According to the advance, this group will visit Puerto Rico on June 2. It has also been announced that this commission intends to visit all the "small" induitrlaa in the I "la and determine, once they have studied the "lo" caioa in detail, "l the CPPG can - not help them, according to the" needs of the" same. So far, it has not been able to determine the - (Continued on page 18*)
L Tokyo under : an intense - - - $ air raid.
S 0 0 luperfortaleM" in action yesterday against the Japanese capital City is engulfed in flames Four thousand tons of bombs dropped. - Factories smashed GUAM. 25 (PU) - Qulnitntss airborne superfortresses unloaded four thousand tons of Jneondlarla bombs on Tokyo after midnight tonight in a second major air raid on the Japanese capital this week. The superfortresses defied defenses which, according to Tokyo radio, were the most violent ever to oppose U.S. air raids. An enormous tonnage of incendiary bombs was again desired. The bombs were set on the strategic inner Tokyo area, which lies between the Imperial Palace to the north and the small factory district of Shinagawa to the south. Shinagawa was hit in full in Thursday's attack, which broke all previous records for air raids on Japan, and in the course of which some 550 superfortresses dropped more than 700,000 incendiary bombs. The mission was carried out from bases on the Salpan River Islands, Tinian and Guam and, according to Tokyo, was preceded by smaller attacks by sixty "Mustang" fighters and reeonoelmlento superfortresses. The superfortresses attacked shortly thereafter from midnight, from medium altitude. Referring to the attack on Thursday morning, Toldo radio said that the capital's defenses had destroyed 27 superfortresses and damaged 30 others. Aerial photographs taken on Friday, while black and immense columns of smoke were still rising from Tokyo, revealed visible damage in distant areas. It is noted that this can only be part of the damage caused, since photographic work was impeded by the smoke still rising from the burning capital. So much so that statements by a spokesman for headquarters indicate that more considerable damage is likely to have been caused. The damage in the Japanese capital now covers an area of at least 95 square kilometers. Radio 4" Tokyo said today that during Thursday's attack, part of the Imperial Gardens was damaged. It added that the main residences - of Hlgashlkunl, Kltashlrakawa and Fushlmlno Mlya, as well as the re. eldenclas of the embassies of Fran. _ da, Italy and Mexico. Japanese radio reported that another formation of "more than ten superfortalozas" attacked the Shl. monossekl Mojí Tona and, after completing its two-hour attack mission, laid mines in the Kanmon Strait, which separates the Kuyshu and Hondo Islands. NIPPON SHIPS RECEIVE ORDERS - TO RETURN TO NEW YORK ". (PU)- The Asul Channel intercepted a transmission from Berne radio reporting that all Japanese ships had received orders to return to their mainland bases "as soon as possible." Berne radio commented that the order may have been transmitted "because large Allied naval vessels are approaching the Japanese mainland Islands."
Green light given
WASHINGTON, 25. (FU)-The War Production Office today authorized the automobile industry to produce new passenger vehicles after the first of July, but warned that labor and material shortages will hamper production. Undecided location of cemetery The municipality will hold a meeting Thursday "e held at the Planning Board regarding the location of the new cemetery proposed by the Capital Government, to be built in the Isla Verde section, on a tract of land acquired by the previous administration rieljfnunlcipió, and which has an area of forty acres. For the Government of the Capital, the Administrator, Mr. Roberto Sanchez Vilo* lia and the Director of Public Works, Mr. Salvador V. Caro, were present. Pre. sldió the discussions the Acting President of the Board, Mr. Sentíago Iglesias, Jr., appearing also other officials of that body. It is our reports that the Isla Verde area, according to studies previously carried out by the Planning Board, figures "as a district reserved to enable the future urban development of the city." It will be crossed by a superhighway, known as Avenida Norte, to be built with federal and island funds. The international airport will also be located in this district, according to preliminary studies prepared for this purpose. The purpose, therefore, is to convert this entire area into a residential district. Although the Planning Board has not yet determined the final action regarding the location of the cemetery on the 40 cuecdu Indicado property, it was revealed yesterday that "both the Mayor of San Juan and the Acting Chairman of the Board discussed this situation at length, agreeing that the municipality should conduct additional studies on available spaces in other sections of the metropolitan area for the location of the cemetery. Among these spaces, there is an area in the vicinity of the Sanatorium and Insular Asylum, unusable for these purposes and in which, in addition, a private cemetery is planned to be built soon. We were also informed that the Mayor of San Juan is in addition (Continued on page IR)*.