THE WORLD
3Ó Pages 5 Ctvs. * 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
U1AK1U UE LA MAÑANA
YEAR XXVII
Let us support the men who made the Victory Loan possible.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 1945
Entered aa second clara mstter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10416
Dr. Gallardo delivered yesterday the critical report of Governor Tugwell's administration requested of him by Representative Jasper C. Bell.
Rico." He made this comment upon being । Questioned about the Report rendered by the Counselor of the National Committee of the Democratic Party, Mr. Welburn Mayock, in which he calls for the Immediate removal of Governor Tugwell and condemns In legislation creating the Public Authorities and Corporations. The following is the text of Mr. Muñoz Marín's statements in response to our question about Mr. Mayock's report: "Mr. Mayock was in Puerto Rico for a few days, or possibly weeks. He came from the United States. He went back to the United States. He has given a report. In the Report Mr. Mayock acts as if he were! an "expert", a man of specialized knowledge on the whole vast problem of Puerto Rico, and he seems to ignore what was the decisive democratic result of the last elections. Using Governor Tugwell as a pretext, he attacks the program of government approved by the people of Puerto Rico in the elections, the most decisive democratic decision in our history. There are certain elements in Puerto Rico, and certain elements in Washington, who want to destroy the program of government approved by the people. Such elements were overwhelmingly repudiated by the people with their free and fair votes. Any maneuver to destroy the government program approved by the people, by forces repudiated by the people, is clearly an insult to democracy, an insult to the hundreds of thousands of humble peasants who came down from the mountains to vote and who indignantly rejected the offers of money for their votes. It is an insult to the democratic capacity of the great mass of the people of Puerto Rico. (Continued on page 16)
Distributors Fear Strike Delays Shipment of New Cars
They have received some communications from the manufacturers, informing that they cannot give assurances about the shipment of orders.
Several automobile distributors in San Juan yesterday expressed to EL MUNDO their fear that the workers' strike in the factories could delay the delivery of new model passenger vehicles in Puerto Rico, adding that "unless there is a quick settlement of the strike conflict, the prospects are that not a single car will be delivered until next year". Some of these distributors have received messages from the manufacturers in the United States, notifying them of the current situation, and informing them in passing that "we cannot assure the date on which we will be able to ship orders in our possession". They only venture to report that "everything depends on the speed with which the strike can be settled, and that is something I dare not predict".
Despite the fact that many distributors speak of having received assurances that some cars would be shipped to them by the end of the year or early January 1948, they believe that the new direction things have taken "may alter the prices and that we may not receive the shipments we have been offered". The situation yesterday was one of complete uncertainty, although many expect that by next week they will be in a position to be able to report with bark "what the situation will be in Puerto Rico as far as 1945 model cars are concerned, including the quantity to be reclaimed and the dates when they will be in a position to serve orders in their possession". Most of the distributors said that they had communicated with the production houses that they had received orders for the 1945 model cars.
Marshall's report The Congressional Medal awarded to 239 men.
1 heroism of the American soldier was fully demonstrated on the battlefields of Europe and the Pacific, according to the report of General George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff of the United States Army. By GEORGE O. MARSHALL, Chief of Staff. It is impossible for the country to compensate for the service of the shoulders that serve it in the field of combat. There is no scale of pay high enough to purchase the services of a single soldier, even for a few minutes of the agony which that shoulder suffers in the heat of battle; of the miseries which he has to go through in the field of battle.
of the extreme hardship and personal inconvenience that a man has to go through in a campaign; of the extreme hardship and personal inconvenience that a man faces in leaving his home for distant, dangerous and unpleasant places on earth, to serve his nation with arms on his shoulder. If only to show our fighting men that the nation understands the meaning of this simple truth, the Army has made a firm and determined resolution to come promptly to decorate our men for their hard service and acts of valor in the struggle. In counting the number of Purple Heart awards, which our soldiers receive when they are wounded in action, -many voices in the same place where they are healed of their wounds,- the
healed of their wounds, - the Army has awarded one million four hundred thousand four hundred and nine decorations for acts of valor and meritorious service of its men-at-arms since our nation entered the war. The highest of these decorations - the Congressional Medal of Honor - was awarded to two hundred and thirty-nine men, more than forty percent of whom died as a result of their heroism. In addition, the following decorations were awarded: three thousand eight hundred and ninety-eight, of the Distinguished Service Cross; six hundred and thirty, of the Distinguished Service Medal; seven thousand one hundred and ninety-two, of the Legion of Merit; fifty-two thousand. (Continued on page 20.),
Muñoz repudiates Mayock report Commenting on it, he said that any maneuver to destroy the government approved by the people is an insult to democracy The President of the Senate and of the Popular Democratic Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin, told El Mundo that "any maneuver to destroy the government program approved by the people by forces repudiated by the people is clearly an insult to the democratic capacity of the great mass of the people of Puerto Rico".
The Brown Swiss breed did not give results here So alleges the College of Agronomists speaking about cattle brought in After test was discarded - Hereford breed did not give definitive results on the island either That the Brown Swiss breed of cattle did not give positive results in Puerto Rico, "not even encouraging", alleges in an official note the College of Agronomists, referring to the bulls purchased by the Agricultural Company for importation to the island. Regarding the Hereford breed, it says that there are no definitive results here either. The message of the College expresses; "Without being interpreted that we wish to enter into public controversies on the matter of the cattle breeds that are most adapted to Puerto Rico, we wish to clarify several concepts expressed in the daily Press on such an important subject. We waited until the last minute to have the opportunity to express our opinion on this matter, but since we were not consulted on the matter, we take the opportunity to do so publicly in the hope that it will be rectified in time and that the waste of public money will be avoided. However, great is our surprise to see in the press that the Agricultural Development Company does not consider the Holstein breed as acclimatized to Puerto Rico. Is it that its members and employees do not travel, nor do they consult the agricultural federal census, nor the Farmers Association, nor the Livestock Sector, nor the agricultural leaders or other government technicians who for many years have been promoting livestock in Puerto Rico? That is indeed the case, because if they have not seen that the Holstein is the breed (Continued on page 4).
Paul Edwards, Assistant Manager of the Agricultural Company Arrived yesterday in San Juan and immediately took office * The Agricultural Company yesterday authorized the following note: "Mr. Paul Edwards, who has been known in Puerto Rico since November, 1941, when he arrived on the Island to take charge of the post of Administrator of the WPA, has been appointed Assistant to the General Manager of the Agricultural Company of Puerto Rico. "eftor Edwards arrived in San Juan yesterday morning and immediately assumed his new duties. "I am very happy to be back in Puerto Rico and I hope that my relations with the Puerto Rico Agricultural Company will be to the benefit of the people of Puerto Rico," he said upon his arrival. In 1942, while he was Administrator of the WPA, Mr. Edwards was selected by the then National Administrator, Dr. Rupert Emerson, to organize the local offices of the Office of Price Administration here. After this organizational work was completed, he again devoted himself fully to the administration of the WPA until, a few months later, he accepted a position with the same organization as representative of the Central Office in the Atlantic and Golf States. Months later, when the WPA was liquidated, Mr. Edwards returned to Puerto Rico as comptroller of the Water Springs Authority and in December, 1943, ul sor centralized on one tola sgsn.(Continued on page 2.)
34 neighbors of Park Street cede land to be used by the Government of the Capital for the widening of the street 34 property owners located on Park Street, in Santurce, have given their consent to the Government of the Capital for the cession of small plots of land on their respective lots. These lots will facilitate the widening and reconstruction of the aforementioned avenue. The Director of Public Works of the Government of San Juan, Mr. Salvador V. Carp, informed yesterday that such approval has been obtained by virtue of a conference held by the municipal government with the owners of these properties. "We have obtained frank cooperation from these" owners," he said, "with which we are fully satisfied. At a meeting held with them, we explained to them the project for the widening and reconatrucclon of this avenue; the urgent need to undertake the work and the desirability, both for them and for the public, of giving up a small piece of land to facilitate the work. Not a single one objected to these proposals". Mr. Caro added that for unforeseen reasons, not all the landowners were present at the discussions of the project. (Continued on page 20.) 1
Senator Bolívar Pagán, president of the Socialist Party, in statements he authorized yesterday, affirms that the coffee growers' problem could have been addressed in a special session of the Legislative Assembly. Here is the text of his statements; "The coffee growers' problem could have been addressed in a special session of the Legislature since last June. Since the return of the members of the Legislative Commission of the Status of Wáshlngton, last June, an extraordinary session of the Legislature began to be talked about and promised by the majority. It was urgent to consider a" few emergency matters, in view of the legislative massacre, committed by Governor Tugwell, who arbitrarily and without explanation"" to the Legislature or the people, vetoed so much"" of the bills"" passed"" by the Legislature at the last regular session, all of great interest and vital importance to our people. "It was considered quo, among others, I ora a problem requiring ac-||
Richardson testifies on Pearl Harbor disaster
B and K| g "M! : ~ &. * * * B I I I MI o. 3 B 1 ' f
Admiral J. O. Richardson (right), once commander .of the Pacific Fleet, talks with member" of the Pearl Harbor Disaster Investigating Committee shortly after leaving the witness chair Monday, from which he explained his conversations with the late President Roosevelt. From left to right: Senator Homer Ferguson, of Michigan; Representative John W. Murphy, of Fonsil venia, and Senator Scott Lucas, of Illinois. (Photo 1 rense Associate.)
PEG director decries delay in public works He notes that due to delays in the "affected" agency's "rule," much of the $8,207,750 fund cannot be used this fiscal year.
The Emergency War Dr. Program has not been able to accelerate its public works program, to be carried out with the $8,207,750 appropriated to it under Act 323 of May 15, this is because the funds are specifically allocated by law to the affected agency, due to delays in the preparation and implementation of public works.
for oeterminncial projects, nimi clon of plans, specifications, and other details required for these works. The executive director of the TEG, Mr. Manue'. A. Perez, reported a dina dina ago that this agency, as an employment agency, is working at only 25 percent of its capacity. In his opinion, the fact that projects are specifically indicated by Law, "limits the employment of personnel." Another factor that has contributed to the delay in construction, according to Mr. Perez, is related to the process that must be followed before starting a project under the Act. One must first wait for the designs to match the needs of the agencies affected by the project, and for them to agree on the work itself. The acquisition of land, often by forced expropriation; the studies and investigations to which the projects are subjected by government agencies before final approval; the preparation of plans and specifications, and other technical details that are currently being followed make the process dilatory, according to the PEG director. (Continued on page 20.)
Admiral Halsey left the Navy yesterday. He believes in military unit on the front lines, but not administratively SAN PEDRO. California. 23. (PU)-The head of the U.S. Third Fleet, Admiral William F. Halsey, ended his military career today. With a total d* 2,000 oflcla- , le" and sailors at attention aboard í his flagship, the battleship . South Dakota, Halsey lowered his four-star admiral's banner and turned over command to fifty-five-year-old Admiral Howard F. Kingman. Admiral Kingman accepted command of the Flagship from Halsey and praised the sixty-three year old "sea wolf" who "is bringing to a close one of the most glorious careers in naval history." Halsey, in retiring, declared himself a supporter of unity of command on the battlefront, "but not in administration." The admiral finally declared, "Common sense tells us that the Navy will be subordinate, should we have unity of command behind the battle lines." Gen. Eisenhower hospitalized WASHINGTON, 23. (PU) - Gen. Elsenhower, who is suffering from an affection of the respiratory organs, Admitted today to the hoapltal general "Ashford", e < White Sulphur Springs, in West Virgl- ' nia, as announced by the War Department. This has been a precautionary measure to avoid complications which might develop. The opinion rendered by Miguel Guerra Mondragón, whose full text we published in our yesterday's edition, refers specifically to the law governing the Island Government Authorities that render public services, that is to say, the Authority of Water Resources, the Island Aqueduct Service, the Transportation Authority and the Communications Authority. Miguel Guerra Mondragon argues that such laws are null and void.
Bolivar Pagan blames Muñoz for missing the legislative session.
Points out problem" that in his opinion merit meeting of the chamber". -- Says Commission has only served to leave things for tomorrow.
In the case of the "tobacco growers", doomed to bankruptcy with last year's harvest. Immediate action was also required to help coffee growers to maintain and rehabilitate coffee agriculture. Another issue was the pressing question of the black market, which was bound to take on a more serious character in the immediate post-war period, as it did after the First World War. This black market issue led to dramatic outbursts on the part of the President of the Senate, but the matter did not go beyond a few bad words uttered by Muñoz Marín against alleged violators of the OAP regulations. Another issue that required urgent action was the situation of the municipalities, the only public administration body directly elected by the people, which has been stripped of its powers and faculties, and has been economically strangled during the last year, and much of the past year.
Updates Snbcommittee document
Bell may me to confer with President Truman Mayock Report is 40 pages long It was drafted as of do" week" ago, United Press ascertains By CHARLES MCCABE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON. 23.(PU) -United Press has learned from credible source" that" former Commissioner of Education, Dr. Jose M. Gallardo, has submitted ■1 Judge C. Jasper Bell, chairman of the House Insular Affairs Committee, a Report critical of Governor Tugwell's administration, which may be used by Congressman Bell as the basis of his discussion with President Truman of the Puerto Rican situation. Dr. Gallardo has been working for several weeks on the preparation of this report at the request of Judge Bell, as he has been informed. Judge Bell requested additional information from the Island in order to update his original Report on conditions in Puerto Rico, published a few months ago. It will be recalled that Dr. Gallardo, who has not yet been replaced as Commissioner of Education of Puerto Rico, since, as is known, the appointment of Rafael Picó was returned by the Senate to the White House, held, several weeks ago, a two-hour conference with Judge Bell, in the company of Chief Justice Martin Travieso of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico. The United Press, in due course, reported on the conference; and the reports are to the effect that Judge Bell asked these two gentlemen for "the latest news" on Puerto Rican issues. Judge Bell's conference with President Truman, which was reported some time ago to be held to enable the Congressman to acquaint the President with Puerto Rican affairs and discuss them with him, has not yet taken place, to which it is to be noted. The United Press has learned that the Report on the Puerto Rican situation, prepared by Welburn Mayock, general counsel of the Democratic National Committee, has been in preparation for several weeks, although it was not until recently that it was delivered to the Democratic chairman, Robert E. Hannegan. The report is said to comprise some 40 pages, typewritten.
BULLETINS WASHINGTON. 28. (PU) - EmL lio Colon informed the United Press that Victor Gutierrez Franqul, aetual secretary to Commissioner Ra■idente Jesus T. Plñero, will be the legal advisor to the Office of Puerto Rican Affairs, effective December 1. Gutierrez will continue to serve as 8a. cretary to the Resident Commissioner," but will at all times advise Colon's 1*. office on lagalea matters. Colón also informed that Provine Visques Nln, currently employed at La Fortaleza, will be hired as second administrative officer of the new office, and that Santiago Ortis will be in charge of Information and Archives. Ortis I currently serves at the Pan American Union. To the above personnel, Colón will add three secretaries, to be hired in the United States. WASHINGTON, 28. (FU) - It was officially announced that as of midnight tonight all rationing on foodstuffs with the exception ' of sugar will be abolished. - WASHINGTON, 28. (PU) - The Veterans Administration was today investigating reports that veterans who have been idled by the strike at General Motors are being unduly deprived of veterans' unemployment compensation. Ornar Ketchum, legislative director of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, complained about this to F. W. Kelsey, assistant veterans' administrator in charge of finance for the Detroit area officials of the Veterans of Foreign Wars. Under the Veteran's Bill of Rights, there is no employment compensation payable under the Veterans' Bill of Rights. (Continued on page 2.)
Auditor suspends dues payment
The Auditor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Rafael de J. Cordero, has addressed a circular letter to the Mayors, Auditors and Municipal Secretaries-Auditors, ordering them to "refrain from issuing dues and checks in favor of the Puerto Rico Mayors' Association as dues". He alleges to the Auditor that his office has come to the conclusion, "after careful consideration of the contents of a letter from the President of the Association, Mr. Manuel A. Barreto, regarding the constitution and the constitution of the Association. Barreto, on the constitution and purposes of the same, that many of the services allegedly rendered by the aforementioned association consist of projects whose execution is subject to the study and approval of higher agencies of the Island Government, which are the ones that finally determine what is appropriate in each case in accordance with the corresponding established norms", He further argues that "in view of these circumstances, it is problematic that the municipalities may render beneficial services in exchange for the fee they pay, when section 18 (f) of the Regulations for the Municipal Accounting Regime prohibits the Municipal Auditor from omitting the issuance of bills until the services for which they are being paid have been rendered". The Auditor also clarifies that "the services not having been previously rendered, any amount paid for the fee required of the members of said Association shall constitute an advance of funds, an act contrary to the provisions of Section 18 (f) of the Regulations" and that "on the contrary, any amount paid for the fee required of the members of said Association shall constitute an advance of funds", and that "on the contrary, if such fee is considered as a donation, it violates the provisions of Circular No. 11 of January 18, 1937, since the Puerto Rico Mayors' Association is a private institution". I ask the Auditor so lo 1 inform "if on date prior to the circular so have made payments on behalf of the said Association and ol montante of the same." He reported yesterday that the Association will discuss at its next meeting the circular letter from Auditor Cordoro, to whom he informed that "the purposes of this Association are, among others: to tend to the protection of municipal interests by obtaining advantageous legislation for the development of the entity "municipality"; to manage the procurement of federal aid; to disseminate information of a technical nature to improve, expanding, the knowledge possessed by municipal officials and necessary for the performance of their duties in an efficient manner; To establish a central office in the city of San Juan to attend to the affairs of the Association; to cooperate with the Insular Government in any management in which the interests of the municipalities may be involved or in any matter of a general nature in which the Association may be of assistance; To cooperate with the University of Puerto Rico in the maintenance of a college of public administration; to establish a library containing works of a technical nature which may be used by municipal officials who have problems under their consideration which may be solved through the assistance of the Association; to promote the development of a type of public official who possesses, in addition to the necessary moral qualities, qualities of a technical nature both as to (continued on page 30).)
TRUMAN'S MESSAGE EXPECTED ON MERGER OF ARMED FORCES
WARRINGTON, 28. (IN">- Word in the circuits of the United States Congress is that President Truman has decided to send a special message to Congress recommending the merger of the War and Navy departments into a single department of the armed forces. The nation's leaders who are aware of these matters expect to know that the message will be sent to Congress in the next few days. However, it appears that the Navy Chiefs are trying to convince the President of the United States not to address the message. Recently, Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal and the chairmen of the respective House and Senate Committees discussed with the President his projected message, and it appears that, on that occasion, he tried to dissuade Mr. Traman from his purpose. However, Traman said in his last press conference that he would send the message on his views on the merger of the armed forces in due course.
Muñoz said SIA should not be a "social burden? Appointed subcommittee to determine if so. - He spoke of a subsidy / If as a result of the study that has been entrusted to a legislative subcommittee it is proven that the operating expenses of the aqueduct service result in "a social burden," an effective administrative or legislative remedy should be sought, as the case may be," said Sena President Luis Muñoz Marín before the Legislative Standing Committee last Wednesday. The possibility that the Island Government may have to contribute economically, perhaps through a subsidy to prevent the water supply from becoming "a social burden," was pointed out by Muñoz Marín as a possible way to lead to the study initiated by the Legislative Commission. As reported by EL MUNDO, the subcommittee appointed by Senator Muñoz Marín to consider this matter is made up of Senators Vicente Gélgel Polanco, Ramón Barreto Pérez and Leopoldo Figueroa. The subcommittee will make a study of the municipal ordinances on water and sewer rates approved by the Public Service Commission, the interim rates of the SIA (continued on page 20).