THE WORLD
32 Pages 5 Ctvs. I 2 Sections
32 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
YEAR XXV
I do not liquidate the bonds bought, d is that I want to liquidate Hitler,
MORNING PAPER
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 1945.
Entered a" Moond class matter. Poet Office, San Juan, P. B.
NUMBER 10269
FINAL BATTLE FOR BERLIN APPROACHING ALLIES OCCUPY COLMAR BASTION
The fall of Manila seems imminent
Two powerful Yankee columns are approaching the city with great rapidity * A m any divisions are coming from the north Plans are already being made for MacArthur's entry into the Philippine capital By WILtlAM B. DICKINSON ALLIED HEADQUARTERS, IN LUZON; 2. (PU) - Do" podeTosas American" column" "e are rapidly approaching Manila, in simultaneous advance from the north: and the haze of the capital seems ln> minimal, to the point that plans are already being made for the entry of General Douglas MacArthur and other senior American officers into the* first Philippine city. Those two columns advancing jon the first cavalry divisionhT; motorized and the thirty-seventh division. Officially it was reported today that in the eastern part of the central plain of Luzon, the Americans advanced 51 miles on the main road number 5, conquering Gapan, Santa Rosa and Cabanatuan. Gapan is 45 miles north of Manila on the east bank of the Pampanga River. Strong American motor patrols have arrived 25 miles south of Sabang, and are on the Angat river, 23 miles from Manila, in a straight line. The American "troopers" now dominate all the roads and railroads of the central Luzon plain, thus completely isolating the Japanese from the north and south of the island. The U.S. forces Calum pit are approaching the important road" and rail center of Malotes. This is the first time in several days that the official communiqué mentions a rapid advance of the 1st Motorized Cavalry Division operating in the eastern part of the Luzon plain. Of the two columns advancing against the most prized American objective in the Philippines, the closest to Manila is the 37th Division, which is advancing on Malotes, 19 miles from the capital. Southwest of Manila, American troops who landed on the Batangas coast advanced 10 miles inland, seizing an airfield, and are now approaching Cayllungan, 35 miles southwest of Manila. On the northern front, the North Americans seized a road between San Nicolas and Natividad, 25 miles southwest of Rosario. At the base of the Batían peninsula, the eleventh corps, advancing from the naval base at Olonpago, covered sel" miles eastward and reached a point 15 miles distant from other American forces at Lubao, west of Calumplt. The junction of these two formations isolates the Japanese troops at Batian. - Off the northern coast of Luzon, American ships destroyed or badly damaged 19 enemy barges and five torpedo boats; having shelled the Japanese coastal positions. PABULS BULLETINS. (FU) - U.S. Army forces, advancing from tree mulas, penetrated iron hajta, the central zone of the West Gemund Line. . e o o o CHUNGKING, X (FU)- U.S. headquarters announced that the aorteamoricaat" aviation base at Suichwan, located east of the Nippon-Hankow-Canton Corridor, was destroyed by its defenders and abandoned on 14 January. t - - - - 11 ms do that the forces of von Bundstodt on to the sector of the First Army of the North American Army have withdrawn towards positions more deep of the western wall. - . - - - ATHENA. X(FU)-Tonight the long awaited negotiations between the government and the United States were resumed.
EXPECTED TO SHORTEN RATIONING
WASHINGTON, 2. (FU)- Colonel Lawrence Wilkinson, Acting Chairman of the Allied Rubber Control Committee, Paria, revealed that the Army's tire production program is running at high capacity in France and Belgium, and that it will shorten the civilian rationing period in the United States. He added that European production will help meet the needs; that, since December, the first 'thousands of tons' of synthetic rubber have been allocated by the Combined Resources and Production Board from the joint United Nations stocks shipped to factories in France and Belgium, which are already producing tires and tubes in "amazing" numbers. Under the direction of American technicians, and that it will be in full operation in about six weeks.
Negotiations for the purchase, by the Island Government, of the Telephone Company, will continue during the first days of next week, as revealed yesterday to EL MUNDO by Mr. Rafael Delgado Márquez, the Communications Authority of Puerto Rico. As will be recalled, these negotiations began in New York, when they began to discuss the expenses incurred by the Telephone Company in the completion of the installation of the automatic telephone system, and reached an agreement to continue it on the Island once the Communications Authority obtained certain information. Mr. John A. Zerbe, vice-president of PRTCO, was authorized by the company's directors to continue the talks in San Juan. According to what Mr. Delgado Márquez reported yesterday, 4a" negotiations have not been able to resume because the company is expected to submit a report that has been requested. . It was revealed yesterday that a high ranking official of the telephone company is on the island and that he may possibly intervene in the talks when they resume. Mr. Delgado Márauez was absent from his office yesterday, as a slight indisposition forced him to confine himself to bed. He announced, however, when interviewed at his home that it depends on the report that the Authority expects, the date on which the meetings will be resumed, but that he expects that the meetings will continue in the first days of the next week. The Liberal Party will be registered by petition There is no atmosphere among the Populares to give it personality by law The Puerto Rican Liberal Party will be registered by petition. In the municipality of San Lorenzo, two hundred signatures of mine have already been collected in affidavits of those required by law to register it locally. No registration petitions have yet been filed with the Executive Secretary. The Central Board of the referred collectivity will meet during the course of this mee to, among other matters, discuss the registration of the Party, by petition, throughout the Island. There is the purpose of seeking the opinion of the legislative majority, in order to see if there are probabilities that the Electoral Law be amended and that the Liberal Party be given legal personality. In this regard, we are in a position to assure that for the time being there is no atmosphere in the central Popular leadership for (Continued on page 16)
It was the German grab in Alsace.
Eisenhower met with the top chiefs of his general staff Patton scores notable advance Three Yankee armies are ramming toward the Sigfredó 5 line itself By JAMES MeGLINCY PARIS. 2. (PU)-Allied tank" and infantry" forces" have taken the mighty Cornish stronghold of Colmar and penetrated the" outer positions" of the Sigfredó Line, both military operations coinciding with the official announcement that General Elsenhower held a prolonged conference with his senior chiefs of staff on the general course of the war on the western front. French and American forces have attacked the German pocket, along the Rln. and occupied Colmar after achieving advances and penetrations that seem to have sealed definitively the fate of this bridgehead left by the Nazis on the western banks of the Rln, in the first days of the current winter, after retreating from the Mediterranean coast through the Vosgo" Vosgo". News from the front reports that the French and American forces occupying Colmar have made contact in the center of the city, which has been occupied by the French and American forces, and that the French and American forces are now in contact in the center of the city, which has been occupied by the French.
Popular Committee to meet Wednesday 7 Detail of vote on nominations in the Government of the.Capital The Popular Municipal Committee of San Juan will meet next Wednesday in regular session. The one held last night at the Capitol was extraordinary, so only the matter stated in the call could be considered. By a vote of 36 to 9 it was agreed to designate a special commission "with absolute powers to document everything related to the new Government of the Capital." This commission, as reported yesterday by a spokesman for the Municipal Committee, "will have the power to recommend candidates for all offices" of the Government of San Juan, including the candidate for Administrator of the Capital. Twenty-one neighborhoods from Santurce and six from San Juan were represented at the meeting and eighteen members of the Executive Committee were in attendance. Of these eighteen only Mrs. Luisa Bolx, who is also an elected member of the Board of Commissioners of the Capital, voted against the approved resolution. Of the 27 barrloa representatives, eight voted against the resolution. At next week's meeting, they will be able to discuss any "items" they wish to submit to the "members" of the Municipal Committee.
The P.E.G. will start repairing municipal public buildings.
Hh submitted project to Planning" for works amounting to $200,000. - Department of the Interior will supervise the work.
The Emergency War Program will invest $200,000 in a program of municipal public building repairs. The announced repairs will be carried out in all municipalities of the island and the project will be directed and managed by the Department of the Interior. The municipal public buildings," it is reported, "are in deplorable condition," with a "great need" for the intervention of the Island Government for repairs. "The municipal "governments" do not have funds for the conservation and improvement of their" public buildings" - says an Information-authorized yesterday, adding: "The repairs to be made by the Department of the Interior con■teten of arregloa in the door, floor" and roof. The electrical wiring and plumbing will be repaired and replaced.
anitarlo" neceeárte",-a "l as the" wall"", beam" and other parts of" the" structures that are in mgl condition. Buildings will be painted when the situation so requires, as well as such other minor repairs as may be deemed essential. "No less than 4,284 workers will be employed in this project to repair municipal buildings throughout the island. It is estimated that no less than $120,000 will be invested in the payment of workmanship including supervisory work. An amount of $73,000 has also been set aside for the payment of materials that will be needed. This project was submitted to the Planning Board for study and recommendation, and it is expected that the work will be started during the month of February.
The Russian infantry makes its entry into Koenigsberg.
* ' I > . - I ■ /'■ : , jj WB l i" H S S 8 ' -j I se a * ■<! -' K '''' 'A :. di...- Wz ' - Si- " % Ia fo "S shows an advance guard of Tá Ihfanterfe-ruaá entering loe aiiImfWoa of the German town of Koenlgaberg, where loe Nazi" currently have two hundred" thousand roldado" trying to stop the Soviet advance on German soil. (Photograph by Franca Acodada).
3,000 people lose their homes to a fire in Lares.
It is estimated that half of the population was devastated yesterday afternoon Estimated losses of §500,000.00 Victims were housed at night in the Catholic Church and schools 400 to 500 houses were razed* by a fire that devastated half of the population of Lares yesterday. When a reporter from EL MUNDO arrived in Lare", at twenty-five minutes past seven o'clock in the evening, he found that about five hundred families, totaling approximately three thousand people, had lost their homes. The desolation was really impressive. The Chief of Police of Lares, Mr. Rafael Ramirez Vazquez, informed our editor that the fire had started at twelve fifteen minutes past twelve in the afternoon, in a wooden shack owned by the "Pura Cueva" company and that it was not insured. By that time the origin of the conflagration was known. The loss was all calculated", (Continued from page 3).
Several members of our Regiment decorated in France Official report tells how a patrol under the command of Lieutenant Urrutia, from Santurce, confronted the Germans and forced them to retreat.
Sentence for obstructing OAP agent
Judge Cooper imposed a year in jail, and issued a severe warning Judge Robert A. Cooper, of the Federal Court, imposed a year in jail to Armando Romero Muñiz, of Adjuntas, for having obstructed Mr. Ruy F. Delgado, President of the Price and Rationing War Board No. 1 of said town, in the performance of his duties when he was carrying out a rationing order of the Office of Price Administration. The indictment, filed by the federal prosecutor, Ledo. Philip F. Herrick and Assistant U.S. Attorney Francisco Ponsa Fellú, charged the defendant with having committed the offense described above by means of force and violence and by using insulting and improper words against the Chairman of the Board, Mr. Ruy F. Delgado. The defendant was put on trial, but the jury was unable to agree. On November 15, Romero Muñiz filed a plea of "nollo contendere" and on the basis of this plea the Court rendered sentence. At sentencing, Judge Cooper reprimanded the defendant as follows: "Uaied you are fortunate that the law applicable to your case does not impose a greater penalty to punish ei delltp you have actually committed." J The director of the Office of Price Administration for Puerto Rico, Mr. Sam Gilstrap, upon learning of the Federal Court's ruling, made the following"" statement"": "The "judgment just handed down by the Federal Court in the case against Armando Romero Muñiz for obstructing a member of a Local Board of the OAP in the exercise of his official duties, should serve as a warning to all consumers and persons who consider themselves at liberty to disrespect, intimidate and assault these honest volunteers who patriotically and selflessly render valuable services to the community during this war emergency. The members of the Local Boards of the OAP act on the basis of rules and regulations and give to each his due in the light of the law. No one can feel free to exercise vengeance because he cannot get what in normal times abounds. Judge Cooper's ruling demonstrates that the members of the Local Boards and the OAP are fully guaranteed against any hindrance or obstruction in the performance of their official duties.
Two Puerto Rican soldiers serving with the 65th Infantry Regiment in Frankfurt have been decorated with the Purple Heart Medal, according to information published in a recent issue of "The Maltese Cross" - the official newspaper of the 65th Regiment - received by the Headquarters of the Military Department of the West Indies.
"He was born in Cayey and lives at 55 Muñoz Rivera St. He entered active duty in May 1942 and has been serving in the Army since January 1943. "Sergeant Rivera Martinez is the son of husband and wife Mr. Quintin Rivera and Mrs. Eusebia Martinez, both residents of Cayey." Commenting on "the first Puerto Rican unit, in all the annals of Puerto TV:. history, to have entered into combat against the Germans *on a battle front, "La Cruz do Molta", publishes a news item about a company belonging to a Battalion of the 65th that Colonel Juan C. Gonzalez commands. "On one occasion," says this military publication, "at about eleven o'clock at night, a German patrol managed to penetrate one of our outposts, opening fire on our people.
on our people. The company captain appointed a reinforcement patrol with orders to move immediately to the scene of the skirmish. The patrol was commanded by Lieutenant Urrutia, from Santurce, and was made up of, among others, Sergeant José Pérez, from Guánlca; Staff Sergeant Ladeo Rivera, from Camuy; Sergeant Pedrosa and soldiers Benigno JiEdwin Rivera, from Santurce; Corporal Ménez, Manuel Torres, Matilde Rodríguez, Matilde Rodríguez, from Santurce; and Corporals Manuel Torres, Matilde Rodríguez, Matilde Rodríguez, Matilde Rodríguez, from Santurce. Manuel Torres, Matilde Rodriguez and other comrades. The patrol arrived at its destination and engaged in a firefight with the enemy, who was forced to retreat protected by the shadows of the night". :- . . j and an officer continent! with ei 65th Infantry Regiment, have received the Infantry Combat Medal, according to "The Cross of Mol(Continued on page 16).
Tonight the leadership of the Popular Party meets in Vega Baja.
Central Committee and Council of Founders was convened by Mr. Muñoz Marín. - The Presidency of the House of Representatives will be considered.
The Central Committee of the Popular Democratic Party and the Council of Founders of said party have been summoned by the President of the Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin, for a joint meeting to be held today, Saturday, at 7:00 p.m., at the Vega Baja City Hall, "to deal with matters of importance to the party". The summons was sent by telegraph by Mr. Muñoz Marín to all the members of the former Central Board of the party, which was in office until the elections of 1940, and to all the Representatives and Senators elected by the party in the last elections. The Founders Council is integrated by all the members of the former Central Board, according to what was agreed in the leaders meeting held in Aibonito in 1942, and in which it was approved, with provisional character, the current regulations of the Popular Party.
The Executive Committee of said co- - lectivity, according to the aforementioned regulations, is composed of all the Representatives and Senators elected by the Party. In addition, the following have been acting as members of the Executive Committee: Mr. Antonio Fernos Isern, Mr. Andrés . Grillases and Enrique Manrique, who also formed part of the former Central Board. The Regulations of the Popular Party provide that the President may call a joint meeting of the Central Committee and the Executive Committee when the resolution of matters of extraordinary importance for the collectivity so advises. Among some leaders of the Popular Party there is an im-! . of the Popular Party there is pressure that in the meeting to be held tonight in Vega . Baja will be considered the question of ' the Presidency of the House, for < occupying which several candidates have been men1 donating.
Russians are already within 38 miles.
Close on Frankfurt and Custrim, the strongholds of the German capital Tanks have already reached the Oder River * Fierce fighting rages inside Koenigsberg, capital of Prussia.
By HENRY SHAPIRO MOSCOW. (PU)-The decisive battle for Berlin seems imminent tonight, the outcome of which will almost certainly be the siege of the capital of the Reich, in view of the fact that the Nazi Army shows no sign of being in a position to contain the Soviet armies which are already, according to unofficial dispatches, less than 38 miles from the city. Marshal Zhukhov threw more armored forces into the fight" in his attack" on Brandenburg, forces that are closing in on Frankfurt and Custrim in support of the tank spearheads" that already reached the Oder at points located perhaps 37 miles from Berlin. Simultaneously, in East Prussia, Marshal Rokossovsky tightened the siege of Koenigsberg and penetrated deep into the southern part of the city, in whose streets bloody battles are being fought. The Koenigsberg garrison, augmented by several large units from other parts of East Priikte and aided by one" 200,000 civilian refugees, fights furiously by counterattacks to prevent the Russians from further penetrating into the city. On the Left wing of Rokossovsky, the Soviets maintain methodical pressure on Stettm, which, together with Frankfurt and Custrlrn, constitutes the last defense system" of Berlin and whose calda is also believed not to take long to produce you. In your official part tonight, Moicu reports that the" force" dtl Marshal Zhukov was positioned 45 miles from the German capital while other Russian troops" Hegaban up to 34 miles from the large port of Stettin, which tes Germans are evacuating by sea. 4 The communiqué of the high command says that although the Soviet advance is now slowing because of the thaw, which is turning fields and roads into quagmires, the Russian forces are pressing forward with no way of holding the Nazis, despite their desperate efforts to at least hold their defensive lines. The First Army of the White Russians, advancing almost fifteen miles in the direction of Berlin, repulsed counterattacks by powerful Nazi reserves rushed to the front and seized Drossen, a German town 45 miles east of the Reich capital and 39 miles inside the province of Brandenburg. The conquest of Drossen puts in danger the squares of Frankfurt and Custrim, tes last citadels in possession of the Germans that defend, the route to Berlin. Drossen is a little more than 13 miles northeast of Frankfurt and less than 12 miles southeast of Custrim. Other Russian columns were positioned nine and a half miles east of Custrim by occupying Llmnrltz. Simultaneously, northeast of Custrim and 35 miltea to the north (Continued on page 3).
The war in synthesis >/UIN EAST EAST? While* Moscow info, maba knows of the conquest of Drooron, a town 45 miles from Berlin, extraoficlaleo reports indicate that the forces of Mayor Hukov have reached the Oder by an unidentified point*, 87 miles* from the capital of the Reich. Fnnctor* and Cuntrim are under direct threat from the M1 1 £ usl of the Stettin - Dam i* point*. p WESTERN FRONT: Colmar, a powerful German shepherd stronghold, was stormed by French and American forces which also penetrated the outer positions of the Line. Slgfredo. The "F.lmero" army. Third and Ninth Army of the United States" are also fighting inside the outer pools" of the Slgfredo Line. - o o o PHILIPPINES: deodoh the north, two powerful American columns" m approaching Manila-whose" fall seems imminent-"ltuánduacfl less than 23 mile" from the eaonH flllnlna upon reaching the sum B Malote", fíanenr. Santa RoeiS Cabanatuán were occupied flH the Americans.