THE
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVII
The best victory celebration in Europe: buy more war bonds.
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, JUNE 2, 1945
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, ? R.
NUMBER 10488
Truman Asks Nation to Renew All-out Effort Against Japan; Dr. Padin Attacks Colonialism
Exhorts to call for change, but without violence During graduation at UPR called for self-sufficiency 730 students graduated yesterday The Rector offered a reception in which Dr. Rohl delivered speeches Rohl delivered messages In his speech yesterday during the graduation exercises held at the University, Dr. José Padín, a member of the Superior Teaching Council, called for the end of colonialism on the Island and for a change in our economy, rejecting "the traditional servitude to monoculture," He made an exhortation to "teach the people to consume what their soil produces," adding that "the extirpation of the colony also demands a radical change in the country's food regime." Dr. Padln's entire speech is conceived in the following terms: "At the present moment in which the fate of Puerto Rico is being discussed, and possibly resolved, I have not been able to resign myself to deliver another speech of academic tone as would be de rigueur in this act. Circumstances demand meditation and exhortation. In life, the time comes for everyone to speak his truth, if only for the relief of his conscience. Like you, I was born in this land and if I have been forced to live separated from it for long periods, its fate has never been indifferent to me. The civilized world is renewing itself. In this new world of fourfold freedom, Puerto Rico aspires to occupy a decent place. No one can deny it that right because our country has also watered the tree of liberty with the blood of its children. The homeland that emerges from this renewal is you, Jos, the young people who will live it, enjoy it or suffer it. That is why it is important that you are not mere spectators of the coming phenomenon. Those of us who were born before the change of sovereignty have not succeeded in organizing for you a homeland in the full enjoyment of all democratic rights and freedoms. Frankly, the task has been beyond our capacity. The original sin of our entry into the Christian world as a colony of exploitation could not be washed away either by the sweat of our brow or by the tears of repentance. The Jordan purlflcadar has been beyond our reach. Four hundred and fifty years after our baptism, we are still a colony. A colony, my dear young people, is not simply a tiny territory politically dependent on a metropolis distant in space and often absent in spirit. It is something much more complex (Continued on page 8).
For now they will not liberalize OTD rules ■' r 1 ■ ■ ■ -- Official made a study on the island and praised work done here For some days now Mr. William F. Schlichting, assistant to the executive officer d" the Office of Defense Trans, portation in Washington. has been on the island and has made a tour of several towns "to observe how the program of this federal agency works in Puerto Rico." As he explained to us yesterday, his visit is related to plans for the next fiscal year 194546, since "our office must prepare the budget and general program." "I can tell you," he said, "that I am really pleased to (Continued on page 163
The End of the War in Europe
By Emil Ludwig - The Ruins of Germany
ARTICLE IX lato "a to the ninth of a serious nrtfouloa by BmU Ludwig, also a historian and biographer, who is in Europe every day ororiblondo his impressions of places, people and events. v PARIS.- The thing that most excites the visitor to Germany is the contrast between the flowers and the ruins. It has been many years since a spring like that of 1945, the most fateful year in the memory of the Germans. As I traveled along Bv df n y Baulera it seemed to me to be sinning through a Garden. On both sides of the road were fields of yellow lupines. But most poetic were the apple trees with their pink and white blossoms, so enchanting that it seemed like a fairy tale. An old farmer told me: "We haven't had such a bloom for twenty years. The new roads for automobiles were partially destroyed, so we had to travel on the zigzagging old roads, lined with apple trees in bloom on both sides. * The whole of this bailiwick was destroyed and the windows were destroyed.
The windows and much of the furniture were destroyed. Large works of art that could not be moved have been destroyed. Several residences in Wuerzburg which possessed famous examples of the decorative art of Tlepolo, the famous Italian reooco painter, are in ruins. VI among the demolished walls, two blue-and-pink painted railings, but they were turning over in the dust Symbol* of the catastrophe ■ In Nuremnerg, where almost the entire old town is in ruins, only one large building escaped the bombardment. The huge stadium and festival site that Hitler built for party meetings is still standing. It is an ugly, arrogant, white building. Under the main staircase I saw a faint light. As I approached, I discovered two women - in their 70s and 50s, mother and daughter - amidst a mess of junk and old papers. They had moved some of their belongings from their bombed-out house to a sort of storage room and were now trying to get them out of the house. (Continued on page 30.)
rrumplda every ten minutes-or maybe less-for a population that has been devastated. Some voice an eollna hid the next aldoa, so that, as you turned onto the road, it would suddenly appear, like a nightmare in the bright daylight. Usually no one is seen in these ruined villages. On the wall I can find some inscription written with chalk quo dies, for example; "Fritz Schmitt has gone to Mannheim". In the ruins, flowers can be seen indicating the grave of a soldier, with his grave outside. A veeea os an unknown soldier. Destroyed by Hitler As we approached Karlsruhe, he said to my American companion: "Here you will see a unique building. The town has been built around a central square, in the shape of a fan, for there are about twenty streets running in all directions". However, when we arrive, the "fan" is no longer visible. In the center of the square speaks a co
lumn with a huge Inscription urging Germans to buy war bonds: "Have you done your part for freedom?" The Interrogante seemed addressed to Hitler, and the ruins around gave the answer. In the ruins of a castle in Baden I saw above a large gate an Inscription which said that the castle had been built by a certain Grand Duke. I imagine that, in some reconstructed German town, ten years from now, there must be a plaque saying: "This town was destroyed during the rule of Adolf Hitler" Some buildings and houses were destroyed, not by American bombs, but by freed slaves, Jews or Poles* Travelling through Germany they felt inclined to destroy the houses of their oppressors. The main office building of the I. G. Farben Industrie in Frankfurt was still standing, but when the freed slaves remained in the building for a week on their way back to their departure, they remembered all the injustices that had been done to them.
Presided over the exercises at the University yesterday.
K R ■ ill f J /K' 4 OS OH ms Presiding over the graduation exercises yesterday at the University of Fuer to Rico, (from left to right) Lic. Rafael Martínez Alvarez, dean emeritus; Lic. Jaime Benítez, rector of our first educational center; Dr. José Padín, who was in charge of the graduation address; Dr. José M. Gallardo, Commissioner of Instruction; and Dr. Eduardo Rohl, Venezuelan clenclaa man who has been visiting the Island for several days, having been invited to deliver the speech during the graduation ceremony at the College of Agriculture of Mayagüez.
CPPG Committee found great industrial possibilities here
Found industries on the Island that can be helped through loans. - Need to resolve labor unrest satisfactorily
The CPPG Committee found great industrial possibilities here, and that "we have come to realize that there is a great labor agitation tomorrow, Mr. William D. Denit, will not be subject to transfer of the contract for the water supply. This agency understands that "the water service supplied under any contract is for the private use of the subscriber and he may not sell any of such water to any person or permit any other person to use the same". The Aqueduct Service intends to remove the meter and terminate water service in cases where this provision is violated. (Continued on page 16.)
That the corporation's program is designed to help the small and not those controlled by the corporation's administrative head of finance and operation," he told us yesterday before leaving for Washington. Mr. Denit has been on the island since last Saturday, when he arrived with Mr. Maury Maverick, president and CEO: Lawrence F. Arnold and Patrick W. Me Donough, members of the board of directors; Paul Jordan, director of the Federal Office of Information, and Antonio Luciano, general consultant. They all returned yesterday to the federal capital, after having toured the island visiting our industries, to see the possibility of offering them federal aid in the form of loans guaranteed by the CPPG. In an exclusive interview for EL MUNDO at the Isla Grande airport, Mr. Denit spoke about the "great future of Puerto Rico, if its industries are developed". We questioned him about the likelihood of these small industries receiving federal aid. --The final decision," he told us, "must be made by Congress. We have requested an appropriation for the Insular program and hearings have already been held on our request. Now the board will have to meet to discuss our studies and research in Puerto Rico. I can tell you that we have found industries in Puerto Rico that can be helped, such as the canning industry, the coffee processing industry, foundries, and others. "The main problem of all the industries we have visited is that they have old equipment that needs to be replaced as soon as possible. I think we will be able to help them achieve this. -And what about the economic situation of these industries?" - we asked. -Most of these industries," he said, "have money. There are others, however, which are interested in obtaining loans to expand their activities, and it will be these cases that we will study. (Continued on page 30.)
Six soldiers from the Island in Europe were awarded a Certificate of Merit at a base in Belgium Six Puerto Rican soldiers who are currently serving in Belgium with the Service Company. Edward L. Wilson, commanding officer of the 52nd Quartermaster Depot Base, were awarded a Certificate of Merit by Colonel Edward L. Wilson, as reported by the Headquarters of the Military Department of the West Indies. First Sergeant Daniel Mejll, of Guánica; Staff Sergeant Ramón Gallndo González, of San Germán; Corporal José R. Franco Franco Franco, of Coamo; Staff Sergeant Luis Carmona Buitrón, of Toa Raja; Private First Class Luis Sánchez Hernández, of Cayey; and Corporal Roberto Ruiz, of Ponce are the Island soldiers whose meritorious work in Europe has been commended by their superiors. The Certificate of Merit is an award given to soldiers who have rendered excellent service even under drastic conditions. During a simple but impressive ceremony, Captain Agus (Continued on page 16.)
Atiles Moréu announces reduction in workers' insurance premiums It will take effect in the next fiscal year and includes the clarification of General Agriculture. - Will take test case to Industrial Commission
The Administrator of the State Insurance Fund, Mr. Guillermo Atiles Moréu, informed EL MUNDO yesterday that the current premium rates, in most of the classifications, will be "considerably" reduced for the next fiscal year, in addition to the reductions decreed in the rates for the last two fiscal years. The determination as to the reduction in the rates of premiums paid to the State Insurance Fund for workers' insurance includes, as recently reported in this report, the announced reduction in the rate currently paid by the "General Agriculture" classification.
The current rate for this general agricultural classification is 4.95 percent per hundred dollars of payroll. The current rate for this general agricultural classification is 4.95 percent per hundred dollars of payroll. The Fund Administrator, Senior Atiles Moréu, is considering a reduction to between e.g. 4.25 percent. So far he has not made a definitive decision as to what the new premium rate will be. One of our editors asked the head of the State Fund whether employers should include in their payroll reports the amount of the workers' participation in the new premium rate.
To Save Themselves Japanese Civilians Must Surrender Nipponese Civilian Population Must Leave Cities "If They Want to Save Their Lives" 4,000,000 Troops Will Go Into Action President Acknowledges Increased U. S. Naval Casualties in Pacific By MERRIMAN SMITH WASHINGTON, 1. (PU)-President Truman today made a fresh appeal to the nation for renewed all-out efforts in the war against Japan. The President said that the American forces to be used against that country will be more than double the forces now in the Pacific. This apparently means that the United States will use an army of about 4,000,000 men to defeat Japan. The President, in his message of some 9,000 words, threatened Japan with an increasingly intense air war, and urged the Japanese civilian population to abandon their cities "if they want to save their lives. President Truman noted that the Army's strength would be reduced from 8,300,000 men to 6,968,000 men in the next year, which would enable us to discharge two million officers and soldiers, "and we shall be in a position to more than double the forces we have in the Pacific, and to throw against the Japanese forces in excess of the three and a half million American soldiers who joined our allies in crushing the Wehrmacht and the Luftwaffe - the German Army and Air Force. The President said that military tactics against Japan require first to fix the Japanese forces where they are now and keep them divided; second, to concentrate overwhelming power on every element of attack; third, to use every available material to achieve victory with the least amount of loss: fourth, to exert pressure by sea, air and land so that Japan cannot rest and reorganize. "If the Japanese insist on continuing resistance beyond what is reasonable, sepals will suffer the same destruction as Germany. Our attacks will destroy all the factories and organization built up during the past century, which the Japanese have devoted to a futile cause. We have no intention of destroying or enslaving the Japanese people. But only their surrender can prevent the ruin they have seen in Germany as a result of continued futile resistance. Trumhn stated that the main Japanese military power, which is four million men under arms and several million more, of military age, who have not yet been called to arms, has not yet been dealt with. The President estimated Japanese combat aviation at over 3,000 planes and monthly production at 1,250 to 1,500 planes. He warned that as U.S. forces move closer to Japan, their casualties will be greater due to the effects of enemy aircraft. He also said that American warships damaged by the Japanese have been on the increase; adding that, "henceforth, we will have to expect greater damage." He promised, however, that when American strategic aviation in Europe "is launched against Japan, it will demolish enemy production resources." President Truman said that the Pacific naval campaign had run through four major stages: the defensive stage, in 1941 and the first half of 1942. The second was of an offensive-defensive character, at the end of 1942, at Guadalcanal; the third was a limited offensive, when we advanced slowly through the Solomon Islands and recaptured the Aleutians; and the fourth was the full offensive of 1944-45, in which MacArthur's and Admiral Nlmltilti's forces carried out a major offensive in 1944-45, in which the forces of MacArthur and Admiral Nlmlti's forces carried out a major offensive in 1944. Admiral Nlmlti's forces conducted their major operations in the Philippines, Iwo Jima and Okinawa. The President then said that the Japanese merchant marine has been reduced by more than the total number it had before Pearl Harbor. He then described the importance and requirements of the attack. (Continued on page 16.)
Capital budget will be about $2,400,000.
Sanchez Vilella intends to make a recommendation to lower the property tax rate.
The Capital City Government Administrator, Mr. Roberto Sánchoz Vilella, will submit to the consideration of the Board of Commissioners, which will meet next Monday, the municipality's budget for the next fiscal year. It is estimated that the total amount of this budget will reach approximately $2,400,000.
The amount includes the funds for the refinancing of the The amount includes the funds for the refinancing of the municipal debt. Mr. Sánchez Vilella stated that he has been devoting all his time and overtime, in the last few weeks, to the preparation of a comprehensive report for the Board covering his government program for the next fiscal year and future years. The budget to be submitted will contain important recommendations to address the problems of welfare, public cleanliness, municipal works, refinancing of the municipal debt, cemeteries, market halls, streets and other services. The Mayor of San Juan considers, and he will make it known to the Board, that a reduction in the rates of several taxes on real property can be made, once the payment of loans and interest on these that have burdened the taxpayer of the city has been taken care of. These recommendations will be part of its Report. Mr. Sanchez Vilella expects to have the study completed today. It was not possible for him, as he indicated yesterday, to advance specific figures on the program for particular services, as his report has not yet reached the Board. However, we know that substantial allocations are recommended to initiate the improvement of the most important municipal services. For subsequent fiscal years, after the war is over, the Mayor of San Juan expects to extend MB fedwwe* o insulates, rló to the street repair and construction program, with the help of the Güera Emergency Program. to be continued after July first next and extended in the coming years, and to projects for the extension of public welfare and city cleaning services.
1 r~ ~ ~ ■ ® 1 i - \ W H L * tal - Capital Administrator, Engineer Roberto Sanchez Vilella, ; UNRRA sends Puerto Ricans to several countries R. Torres Mazzorana chief of a Section; tewWW will go to Mexico WASHINGTON, 1"~(PU)- George Moore, former director of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Supply Office in San Juan, has been appointed chief liaison of the UNRRA office in Havana. Other UNRRA staff changes have been announced as follows: Louis N. Swenson, former head of the Latin American section, has been appointed head of the procurement section of UNRRA's supply office, in charge of total procurement for the organization. R. Torres Mazzorana, of San Juan, has been appointed head of the Latin American section. Moore will not only be in charge of work in Havana, but will also make purchases in Santo Domingo and Hit! Ramón Escrlbá, formerly Moore's assistant in San Juan, will be transferred to Mexico to work at UNRRA in two weeks. Escrlbá was formerly funcionarlo of UNRRA's procurement office pn Rio de Janeiro and will also now be in charge of the ad- ■ qulalclon in Peru. < It has been announced that Luis Vial, Engineer of the Compartía de Fo' mentó de Chile, has been loaned . by the Chilean Government to head the purchasing office of . UNRRA in Bogota, Colombia, which will cover Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, Panama and Costa Rica. Edward J. Bash, currently in Rio de Janeiro, has been appointed head of procurement in Brazil, Uruguay and Paraguay, with headquarters in Rio de Janeiro.
Munoz entertained VIPs More than ISO notables attended cocktail party in Washington By CHARLEN McCABE WASHINGTON, 1".  Abe Fortas; Supreme Court Justice Willey Rutledge; and numerous Senators and Representatives to the Raja House. Mufioz Marin departed tomorrow for New York, where he will remain for several days before returning to Puerto Rico. (Continued on page X.)