THE WORLD
34 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
34 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
LA MARANA
DIARIO DE
YEAR XXVII
Accelerate victory in the Pacific by buying more war bonds.
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, JULY 21, 1945
Entered a second ciaos matter. Post Office, Ssn Juan, P. B.
NUMBER 10536
School । crisis is faced.
San Juan municipality is taking steps to alleviate "as much as possible" the problem confronting the municipality because of the lack of enough classrooms to house the school population. "This problem," he said, "is of an irregular nature and arises every year. During the last three years it has not been possible to deal with it with the effectiveness it requires, due especially to the present war emergency, which has not permitted the development of a complete program of school construction on the Island. Mr. Sanchez-Vllella estimates that no less than 28 new classrooms will be allocated to San Juan in the program recently approved by Governor Tugwell. This program provides $1,357,000 to provide 441 new classrooms throughout the Island. "The Legislature approved," he added, "an allocation of $1120,000 to construct a 24-classroom building in the Las Palmas neighborhood. These 24 classrooms will be included in the municipality's quota, according to the distribution that has been approved by the Legislature. The Mayor of San Juan added that, regarding this last project, "the Municipality has been studying the location of this school on its own land". To this effect, interviews have been held with officials of the Department of the Interior to select the land where this school will be built. The Department is also prepared to begin studies on the design and plans as soon as possible. "These facilities," he said, "will not be available for the present school year. They will not solve the problem definitively, since it is of a chronic nature. However, we are making efforts to alleviate it as much as possible". Mr. Sanchez Vllella informed that they are making arrangements with the Navy and Army authorities to acquire some premises that are not currently used by these agencies, to be used as temporary schools. "The School Director, Mr. Miguel Meléndez Muñoz," said the Mayor, "will hold the necessary conferences in order to try to achieve this objective. In addition, the Municipality has an allocation of $50,000 for the construction of new school buildings. This allocation of new school buildings. This allocation will not definitively solve the problem either, but it will alleviate the situation created, especially if the program is developed in cooperation with any other government agenda. On this allocation, we have also been outlining a program of action" "It has been suggested," he continued, "the possibility that we build temporary wooden shacks to alleviate the problem. This would be possible if we could obtain wood in abundance to undertake these works. But unfortunately, lumber is difficult to obtain, as it is one of the materials whose sale is restricted because of the war emergency. It has also been suggested that we rent suitable premises for additional halls, which we also consider difficult because of the critical shortage of space for the construction of additional halls.
Memoirs of Count Ciano * The traitor Laval had only the contempt of his masters.
From November 1 to December 24, IMS. The dictator Laval of Viehy's France. who is now in Spain, sold out his country without a protest in the frantic days following the American landings in North Africa, according to the memoirs of Count Galeazzo Cieno, Mussolini's son-in-law and Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs. The orders that eliminated the demarcation line that had existed since the surrender of France to the Germans in 1940 were issued by Hitler unbeknownst to Laval, while the one-time apprentice butcher sat "futzing and talking" in a room next to the one occupied by the Fuehrer at the time. Clano himself refers to Laval as "that dirty Frenchman".
LAVAL FEVER
The Pope, in Rome, was worried about the possibility of Rome being bombed, a blow which was struck six months later by a group of American planes. Mussolini, according to his memoirs, had agreed to move the Italian high command from Rome until he learned that England was demanding the evacuation of the entire Italian government, King and all. o - o During most of that crucial period the Duce was trying to cure his recurrent ulcers, he supposed, and was worried that the Germans might learn that the "great shoulder" was forced to subsist on rice and milk. The Germans, for their part, were trying to blame the Italian forces on the line for the army's victory in the war, and the Germans, for their part, were trying to blame the Italian forces on the line for the army's victory.
z - ■ . " British decoration for Zhukov.
IT .^^^^'BBHB1 H >3 í S S A p 1 F í l. : - - ' I I I ■ Field Marshal Air Bernard I* Montgomery (left), greets Soviet Marshal Georgi Zhukov at the Brandenburg Gate, Berlin, during the ceremonies at which Zhukov was decorated with the Grand Cross" of the Order of the Bath. The ceremony took place on the 12th of this month (Photo by PA),
The Cattlemen will appear Monday before the Minimum Wage Board - The Cattlemen's Sector* of the Puerto Rico Farmers Association will appear next Monday before the Minimum Wage Board to present its arguments and evidence in the case of the decree that fixes the minimum wage for employees of the milk industry. This was informed yesterday by the President of the Island Minimum Wage Board, Mr. Candido Oliveras, who added that "if the evidence presented justifies it, the Board is willing to reopen the case of the already approved mandatory decree, which sets the minimum wage*. working conditions and working hours for the employees of the milk industry". Mr. Oliveras revealed that on Wednesday he was visited by a commission of the Cattlemen's Sector, which included Mr. Mario Escudero, Mr. Mariano Mari and Mr. Rafael Géige), in compliance with a resolution approved by the assembly of this sector and of which EL MUNDO has already given an account. The meeting was also attended by the Legal Advisor of the JISM, Mr. Ismael Soldevlla. Although the Board has already studied the requests for reconsideration filed against the decree and declared them inadmissible, "an opportunity has been given to the representatives of the livestock sector and the case will be reopened so that they may have the opportunity to present their arguments, allegations and evidence. Mr. Oliveras also offered to hold all the necessary conversations with officials of the Ofi< ciña de Administración de Precios, "with a view to reaching conclusions that are valid for both parties". Referring to this matter and what the Minimum Wage Board can do, Mr. Oliveras told EL MUNDO yesterday: "Even though the Board's decree prevails and even though it resolved to deny the petitions for reconsideration filed, the Board, by its own consent, could revise the decree if the employees of the Insular Government do not agree with it.
That the employees of the Insular Government will not be paid on the last day of this month the check corresponding to July, was reported yesterday to an editor of this newspaper by different chief paymasters of the Insular Departments. On the occasion of the statements made yesterday by Mr. Guillermo Nigagllonl, President of the Civil Service Commission, one of our editors questioned the chief paymasters of each department. Treasury Mr. Salvador Vivó, head of the Accounts Division of the Treasury Department, said that "today I hope to start preparing the payroll of the Division I am in charge of. In the Treasury we are faced with the fact that there are still two divisions whose budgets have not been definitively approved. This will delay the preparation of the total payroll at the Treasury. I personally believe that we will not be paid by the end of the month. It must be taken into consideration that all the payrolls of the Departments will be sent to Audit at about the same time and the work will be congested. In the Treasury Department there are about 800 employees on the payroll. । In the Civil Service, you will have the task of checking one by one the names of those employees on the payroll and see if they agree with the classification given to them in those offices. This is a time-consuming task. Afterwards, those payrolls will go to Audit and there they will be dispatched. Then they will come to Treasury for us , enter the corresponding libra- । mlentos. and then they will pass to pa- . jgaduria." z , Interior ( Mr. Isidoro Delgado, head of 1 the Pagaduría Division in the De- < portamento do lo Interior, said the ' 'following: 1 "At the end of next week 1 will proceed to pay two fifteen- - ñas to the laborers. As for the employees of the Department, I can assure you that we will not be paid until the middle of August, Unfortunately that is the situation. To- । । । davla we have not begun to prepa- i I (Continued on page 18.)
i Many employees will not be paid on time, say bosses Payroll Only Agriculture and Labor have sent their July payrolls to Civil Service.-This work has not begun in the other Departments.
Tobacco growers unhappy with price drop They do not believe there is any reason for it. Tobacco growers of the Island, in a memorial authorized yesterday and addressed to the Government of Puerto Rico, allege that "there is no normal market reason that justifies a decrease in the prices of Puerto Rico's raw tobacco, as compared to last year's prices. The only reason is the estimated surplus in the current crop and the fear that the supply of that surplus may provide a cheaper buying opportunity and establish a profit competition among buyers." The harvesters state in the memorial that "we endorse in all its parts the Government Intervention and offer our cooperation as to a plan which will in the future equalize production and demand, but the plan proposed in this respect is to take 10 per cent of all top sale destemmed and 20 per cent of all bottom sale undestemmed out of the morcado." The memorial, signed by Messrs. Juan Gomez, president of the Puerto Rico Tobacco Harvesters Island Association; Jose R. Mendez, President of the Puerto Rico Farmers Association, Tobacco Sector; Ramon Carmona, of the "Puerto Rico Tobacco Marketing Association" and Pelayo Rulz, president of the Utuado Tobacco Harvesters, reads as follows: "The plan offered to avert the tobacco crisis existing in Puerto Rico this year, is acceptable in its general lines, but we disagree in certain fundamental aspects to achieve the most reasonable solution for the harvesters. We propose, through the exposition of our points of view, to cover certain defects that we have noticed in said plan. "We agree that the tobacco crop of Puerto Rico this year is larger than last year's crop. This is the main reason given for the prevalence of this plan. (Continued on page 2) Gilstrap returned disappointed Yesterday the Director of the Office of Price Administration, Mr. Sam Gilstrap, who participated in the talks held in Washington with authorities of the Department of the Interior to request that the payment of subsidies on foodstuffs imported by the Bureau of Supply of the Department of Agriculture not be eliminated, returned to the island late yesterday. Mr. Gilstrap went to the federal capital at the invitation of the Governor of Puerto Rico, and in the company of AeAors Schroeder, Director of OS, Ellsworth, Coordinator of Legislative Affairs, Lieutenant Karleten and others, was present at the conferences held. When questioned about the outcome of the efforts made in Washington, Mr. Gilstrap * Continued on page A),
Expect increase in rubber
Collyer predicts some 'A' ration holders will be able to get them Target this year is 25 million Industry obstacles are work stoppage and shortage of arms WASHINGTON, 20. 1PU)-The Director of Rubber, War Production Board, John L. Collyer, predicted today that some "A" gasoline ration holders will be able to get new tires in February or March, 1946. *The production goals currently set will be achieved. Since July 1943, no new tires have been available to holders of this ration. At a farewell Press conference, Director Collyer reported that 25 million passenger car* tires are set for production this year; that is, "slightly more than the essential replacement requirements." Collyer based his estimate that some "A" coupon holders would get new tires, early next year, on the expectation that some three million tires in excess of essential needs would be available by the end of 1945, as well as on production in the first few months* of 1946. which is expected to increase. Collyer emphasized that at least 75,000 tons of natural gum would be needed from newly liberated areas in the Far West if the needs of 1946 were to be met. The supply of natural rubber is the number one problem, as we see it." Collyer also revealed that between two* and three thousand tons of natural gum had already been obtained from the Philippines* and Burma. He added that Allied military progress in natural gum-rich Borneo is "stimulating". The outgoing Director also said that the U.S. Government expects considerable supplies of natural gum to have been separated* in Borneo, underground or under water. On this, he said that the Government "will not "perish to carry equipment there, but will put the gum on the ships, even if wet, and bring it here for sorting and treatment." Meanwhile, the Director of the War Production Board, J. A. Krug. announced that Robert S. Wilson, Vice President of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co. will replace Collyer, who is leaving the War Production Board to reinstate himself as President of the B. F. Goodrich Co. F. Goodrich Co." Collyer took over as head of the Rubber Division of JPG, last March, when the tire production program was in difficulties. In his latest report to Director Krug, Collyer notes that labor stoppage and manpower shortages are the main obstacles* confronting the tire production industry in its goal of achieving the 1945 production levels that have been set. He adds that the* tire industry* is short of some 8,600 workers. Collyer's report also shows that passenger car tires available in 1944 amounted to 18,900,000; and that to meet essential needs estimated at 20 million tires in 1945, production will be 25 million. The needs (Continued on page 18.)
The appeal was filed by AT lawyers Appealing in the case of expropriation of Eastern Sugar's land The appeal brief was filed before the Federal Court, in the case of El Pueblo de Puerto Rico vs. Eastern Sugar Associates, appealing the ruling given by Judge Robert A. Cooper against the Puerto Rico Land Authority, in the lawsuit filed by that government agency for the expropriation of the land* owned by the sugar corporation on the Island of Vieques. The Puerto Rico Lands Authority is appealing the order by which Judge Cooper dismissed the expropriation proceeding, when ruling on the case in a sentence issued on June 22 of this year. It was reported yesterday at the Land Authority that the pleadings in this case will be prepared by the attorneys of the U.S. Department of the Interior and the U.S. Department of Justice, with the Land Authority's Legal Division collaborating in the same. Francisco A. Arrlllaga, head of the Legal Division of the Authority, who brought with him all the documents related to this lawsuit, is in Washington to assist in the preparation of these pleadings, discussing the matter with the attorneys of both federal departments. It has not yet been informed when the allegations will be filed, since the complete transcript of the case is awaited.
The rice problem receives special attention in Washington The Governor held a conference on this matter with heads of federal agencies. - He insists that the quota should be 11,000 tons per month.
By CHARLES Mo CABE I 'WASHINGTON, 20. (PU)-Because of the discretion which Tugwell has * requested them to observe, the officials of the federal agencies concerned cannot make public the details of their efforts to combat the black market in Puerto Rico. No official news will be issued until Tugwell allows the publication of an official press release from the Department of the Interior. In the meantime, it has been determined that most of the work of the conferences held between the Governor and officials of the Department of the Interior, the ' AAG, the AEG and the OAP, have been concentrated on the consideration of the rice problem, ' The present quota of usual sales in Puerto Rico is 8,000 tons, recently increased. over the low wartime quota of six thousand tons, which went into effect shortly after OAP decreed the rationing of rice and butter in Puerto Rico. The normal Island consumption of rice, allocated to the Island before the present rationing, was ten thousand tons. According to the* arguments presented by Tugwell to the federal agencies, even 1 regular monthly shipments would not correct the black market situation, because the true consumption quota of the Island is about eleven thousand tons of rice. This increase in rice consumption is attributed to The following factors are attributed to the increase in rice consumption on the Island since the establishment of food control by the Federal Government: 1- the increase of the population by approximately 175,000 persons, and - the increased purchasing power of the consumers, due to the sending of allotment checks by the Army and the payment of salt in the sugar industry. Some federal officials are astonished at the black market situation in rice on the island, asking how it has developed. They point to the fact that the War Shipping Administration shows with "a record" that over one hundred thousand tons of rice were shipped to Puerto Rico during the nine months ending June 30 of this year (continued on page 18).The Executive Council, meeting in a special meeting yesterday morning, approved an ordinance of the municipality of Ponce for the transfer of 89,853.94 of available surplus in items A and C, for the purpose of covering a sub-item in item B. of the loan of 8147,000. The Council also approved an ordinance of the Municipality of Arecibo to use a surplus of 81,283.59 in the sinking fund of the 8592,000 loan for charitable purposes. The Council acknowledged receipt of a letter from Dr. Rafael Picó, accepting his appointment as a member of the Consulting Committee, appointed by the Emergency Island Council, for the school construction program*.
Puerto Rico at the forefront in the acquisition of bonds of the Seventh Borrowing
The CPI invites the people to be alert about Independence It believes that Muñoz Marín's statements have "no other possible objective than to sow fear in the conscience of the people".
Mr. Antonio Santaella. Acting President of the Pro-Independence Congress of Puerto Rico, made the following statements yesterday: "While Mr. Muñoz Marin insists that independence will bring hunger and death to Puerto Rico, we will continue to insist that it will be just the opposite, that independence will be the only effective means for Puerto Ricans to procure their prosperity and happiness. "It is not our desire to engage in polemics. But it is our duty to contribute to the best possible orientation of our people in a capital matter such as that of their political and economic destiny. "In the interview that the magazine "Bohemia" of Cuba, made to the popular leader in his recent trip to the neighboring Republic and that appears published yesterday in EL MUNDO, Mr. Muñoz Marín gives two evident demonstrations of his weakness before the problem of our political emancipation. First: in speaking to the Cuban people, Mr. Muñoz Marín
First: when speaking to the Cuban people, Mr. Muñoz Marin mentioned the idea of "various possibilities" of status and specifically that of Independence. But Mr. Muñoz Marin was careful not to make any mention of "dominion." We would like to presume that the idea of dominion had some maturity in Mr. Muñoz Marin's mind, since days later; such a voice hours later, he was already backing in Washington such a solution in the Legislative Committee's draft. It should be noted that before going to Cuba. His political instruments in Puerto Rico and in Washington systematically defended this covert form of colony. Mr. Muñoz Marin's political sagacity is the only thing that could explain why, before a free people such as Cuba, he refrained from mentioning a colonial formula of solution for Puerto Rico such as "dominion." "The second is no longer weakness, it is outright denial: Mr. Mu(Continued on page 2)
Our Island assumed the lead of all 48 states and possessions Purchases exceeded "41,000,000,000 Quota for individuals also exceeded, achieving over 131% By RUTH BROOM WASHINGTON, 20. (1NS) - The War Finance Department of the Treasury Department disclosed today that Puerto Rico led all 48 states and U.S. territories in the percentage of total Seventh War Bond sales as compared with its allotted quota figure. With the Island's quota being $12,100,000, bond sales on the Island exceeded $541,000,000, reaching 340 percent of its mark, Treasury Department officials said that Puerto Rico's demonstration was made possible by virtue of a bond investment by the Island Government of $30,500,000 of deferred savings. These deferred savings were invested in securities to be used in the future construction of hospitals, schools and other public improvements as material market conditions permit, the Treasury said. The island possession of Puerto Rico tied with the U.S. state of Nebraska for twelfth place among all states and territories in the sale of securities to individual underwriters, achieving more than 131 percent of the quota, selling more than $6,100,000 to individual bondholders, according to Federal Treasury records. In the sale of "E" bonds - of the greatest importance - Puerto Rico reached 105 percent of its $4,100,000 quota, investing $200,000 more in these bonds*, called "of the people". In sales* to* corporations and other non-individual investors, Puerto Rico ranked first in the Nation, thanks to the purchase made by its Government, reaching 552 percent of its six million dollar quota. Sales in this category in Puerto Rico exceeded $33 million. Meanwhile, Ralph O'Malley, executive manager of the War Finance Committee for Puerto Rico, arrived today in Washington, on an official trip, for conferences with Treasury Department officials.
। - - - - - । I MADRID FLASH BULLETINS, July 20: Alberto Martín Artajo, Minister of Foreign Affairs; Lieutenant General Fidel Dávlla Rondo, Minister of War; Rear Admiral Francisco Regalado, Minister of the Navy; Eduardo Gonzále* Galiana, Minister of Aviation; Raimundo Gonsá- ( le* Cuesta, Minister of Justice; Carlos Rein Segura, Minister of Agriculture; General of Artillery, José Fernández Labren*, Minister of Public Works, and General of Naval Engineers, José Antonio Suá- ' reí, Minister of Industry and Commerce. It is understood that the reorganization of the Cabinet will be complete, leaving only the Ministries* of Education, Finance, Labor and Interior. * * * * CHUNGKING, 20-(INS)-The Chinese high command announced today that Japanese troops counterattacking at 8 points near French Indo-China had been forced to withdraw after a bloody two-day battle. The* Japanese*, reinforced* by* recruited* Indo-Chinese troops, tightened their attacks on Lungpong, thirty miles south of Tslngsl. Dispatches from the front indicated that the fall of Kweilin was considered imminent. Meanwhile, the Chinese were avenging on Lalpo ai southwest of Kwellln. e - * CALCUTA, 2®-(PU)-The communlcedo issued by the headquarters of! Admiral Mountbatten Report that (Continued on page 2) ON FOOD WASHINGTON. 20. (PU)Governor Tugwell told the United Press today that meetings on the Puerto Rican food problem have been completed, but that no official announcement can be made until the official press release on the determinations made at the meetings has been approved by "higher sources. So eroe that the communlcade will be authorized on lunea,
Bolivar Pagan censures Muñoz's phrases published in Cuba He believes that the head of the Popular Party gave with them a blow to the unity that has been manifesting itself among the leaders of Puerto Rico.
The President of the Socialist Party, Senator Bolívar Pagán. commenting on the interview published by the Cuban magazine "Bohemia" with Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin, president of the Insular Senate, and which we reproduced in our yesterday's edition, says that "a todas luce* "on lnnece "arla* a Inoportuna* la* alutlone* combativa* dai líder Popular, etpoeialmente en e*to*this* moment* when homo* dgdo a truce to controversies of partisan character, in an effort for harmony and solidarity to raise globalmenta the right and aspirations of all Puerto Rico." Mr. Bolivar Pagan yesterday authorized the following statements: 'It has impertinent and unfortunate statements that interview given in Cuba by Mr. Mufles Marin, which was published today (yesterday) EL MUNDO. I regret very much those statements made by <1 ""flor Muflas Marin * his passage through Cuba, upon his
I very much regret those statements made by Mr. Muflas Marin during his visit to Cuba, upon his return from Washington immediately after having presided over the joint legislative commission, which worked in complete harmony and cordiality. The manifestations of Mr. Muñoz Marín against parties and leaders of the minority, who have just cooperated with him in a solidary and generous manner in WasIngton, seem to me to be Inopportune manifestations, by repeating in them Inexactitude* and Injustice* that may break the aolldarldad that he wishes you. "In all* lights, the combative allusions of Mr. Muñoz Marin made in Cuba against said parties and leaders, especially at this moment* when we have given a truce to controversy* of partisan political character, in an effort for harmony and solidarity to raise globally the rights and aspirations of all Puerto Rico. Continued on page 18).