THE KANDO
3o Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVII
'""torla in the Pacific, buying more war bonds.
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, JULY 14, 1945.
Entered a* aecond clan matter. Port Offley San Juan, P. B.
NUMBER 10529
Boricua was savior of the "Pittsburgh".
Men under the command of Horacio Rivero closed the gap on her The operation lasted nearly five hours The cruiser broke in two during the typhoon in anna of the Pacific Special dispatch from Ernest Hoberecht, aboard Admiral McCain's ship Inslfnla,. July 0. (late), (Pü)-The uncontrollable fury of a typhoon originating in the western Pacific, was unleashed on Admiral William F. Halsey's Third Fleet, terribly battering this very fast American naval assault formation. For the second time in as many months, Halsey's forces have had to contend with both the Japanese and the fury of the elements. The damage caused by the hurricane included the destruction of the stern of the cruiser Pittsburgh, damage to the leading edge of the carrier's flight deck, several damage to a destroyer and damage to small craft. The typhoon disintegrated the assault formation, scattering groups of ships up to two hundred kilometers away from each other. Fortunately only one life was lost, which is considered a miracle. In the early hours of the night, strong gusts of wind were felt, followed by continuous waves slamming against the fins of the aircraft carriers. The whistles of the commanding officers put the entire crew in position. At 1:30 A. M. a tremendous wave crashed against the stern of an aircraft carrier with such violence and noise that it seemed as if the ship had struck a floating mine. Other ships "caught" in the center of the storm looked like shells of nuts at the mercy of the wind and the gigantic waves. The cruiser "Plftsburgh" lost at a single blow a piece of about 35 meters of stern, being swept away at the impulse of the swell. Many officers and sailors immediately undertook the task of plugging with timbers the part of the ship that had been torn off. The helmsmen received orders to shorten the course, and the ship continued to move slowly through the storm, heeling over alternately to one side and the other up to 90 and 30 degrees, in constant danger of capsizing with its 1,000 crew members on board. While the water entered imposingly through the gap produced by the landslide, only an inch from the abyss, the bravery of the men submerged in oil and water up to their waists, under the orders of Commander Horacio Rivero, from Puerto Rico, prevailed. After five "superhuman" hours of effort, the breach was closed, saving the ship. The part of the detached stern was left floating because the flood-proof compartments had been previously closed, and was towed by a destroyer and several tugboats to Guam a week later. Two days later the cruiser "Pittsburgh" arrived in port, averaging eight and a half knots per hour. Perhaps the Japanese imagine that the typhoon was a "divine breath" woolly against the American naval formations to save their islands from imminent danger. The typhoon, which blew up when Halsey's fleet was about 1,500 kilometers from Guam and swept in with winds at the rate of 160 kilometers per hour, actually caused more effective and rapid damage than any enemy force. By *n(Continued on page 30.)
Memoirs of Count Ciano Goering played with jewels as if he were a child.
From January 1 to February 1H1 Reich Marshal Hermann Goering, now a prisoner of the Allies, bought his famous jewels for less than nothing in the conquered Netherlands, and when he traveled he carried with him a box full of diamonds which he counted and selected, and with which he amused himself when he was depressed, according to the memoirs of Count Galeazzo Clono, son-in-law of Mussolini and Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs. Internal affairs and relations with the Germans were equally mortifying for Duco at the beginning of 1942, according to Clono's account. The Fascist party organization was riddled with accusations of bribery. The Duco's mistress (Duco's mistress) affta-
HERMANN GOERING -
dded new political heads to its collection of victims. In a telephone conversation on Berlin, intercepted by "Italian secret service people, one of Marshal Kesselring's aides was heard to describe the Italians as "macaroni", increasing the discomfort of the Duee. The soldiers "lemanes invaded the Italian homes" as if they were loi tara of a conquered country. Glano continues: January 5. - "Mussolini alnba my speech (delivered on 3 d" January in Bolofla), but shows me a clipping of the "Resto del Carlino" (newspaper of Bolofta) criticizing my ""ludo fascist that I had not made according to the regulations, Will not there be something better to worry?" ' "Vldussoni (Fascist vice-secretary) offers unoa plans eruelM re"
Here the dictator of Germany met his end.
- ' - - * "si b w w mi $ r . h H \ > . - ■ > - - -'W" I wb . ... v I I tjw iiw.y w ¡u - - íl "T I --W ' 1? t jk. L H H I -- U a B H ■. v OKK M V . M - 4- 4- 4 ' /■■■iH IW -. . . ... . n This photograph was taken at the moment when a U.S. Army officer was returning the salute of the Russian guards 1 1 rn 'T íu < , ° new landmark built in the Chancellery of the German Reich and where the dictator of Germany, Adolf Hitler, finally met his death. The well-protected shelter of the paranoid leader consisted of four floors built below the surface of the street - a veritable subway fortress equipped with all modern conveniences. Henry L. Grlffln, of the Associated Press, highlighted this photograph.
Auditor clarifies University payroll case Explains that the UPR introduced a change in the payment system this year The administration of the University of Puerto Rico has sent to the Island Audit Office two payrolls covering salaries of professors in the summer course. One of the payrolls, number 4588, was received on July 9. It includes twenty-five names and covers the period from June 30 to July 7. The other payroll, numbered 2, includes 150 names and was received in Auditoria on July 11 by the tari of. This was stated yesterday by the Port Auditor, Dr. Rafael de J. Cordero. ' v f Explaining the case of these payrolls in more detail, the Auditor of Puerto Rico officially stated the following: "The second payroll includes 50 professors for a period of service extending to June 30 and 100 professors whose period of service extends to July 28. These 100 teachers will not be able to receive their paychecks until the end of the period of service indicated on the payroll. The other 50 teachers on the second payroll and the 25 on the first payroll will receive their checks early next week, as they will be in the hands of the Paymaster of the Treasury next Monday. The Auditor's Office is unaware of the reasons the University Administration may have had for making a single payment during the summer to the 100 professors whose term of service expires on July 28. In previous years, two payrolls were made for the Summer Course, so that the professors were paid half of their salary before the end of the Course. The Auditor wishes to assure the teachers "the Summer Course that his office has taken the greatest interest in speeding up the processing of these payrolls and regrets very much that the 100 teachers who were included in the payroll until July 28, will not be able to collect part of their salaries before the end of the Summer Course".
AT drivers discussed collective agreement clauses last night Union president says negotiations "progressing satisfactorily". - They postponed for Monday's assembly in which they will report.
San Juan's budget is under review Heads of municipal departments will make their recommendations The "heads" of the different departments of the Government of the Capital are studying, at the request of the Administrator, Mr. Roberto Sánchez Vllella, the items approved for expenses in the budget recently considered by the Board of Commissioners. The purpose is to determine whether these items are insufficient or excessive for the normal operations of the different Departments during the current fiscal year. - Mr. Sanchez Vllella, according to what he informed us yesterday, will prepare, as a result of the study carried out by the members of the Cabinet, a memorial which he will submit to the Board of Commissioners before it meets in regular session on August 6, next. In the said memorial he will give the views of the municipal "Departmental "Heads on the approved appropriations, and make the necessary recommendations, with a view to obtaining a revision of the approved budget. It is our Reports that the Board. in some" cases, increased par1 ty "which are excessive, on the ground that it will not be possible to invest 1 the additional sum increased, because it was not foreseen in the administrative program which served as the basis for the pre ■ assumption of the present fiscal year." In other cases it lowered alloca- , done" "which should have been disposed of , in full, to achieve better efficiency in public serv- , bllcoa."
The Steering Committee of the Union of Chauffeurs, Mechanics and Annexed Branch" , Inc, (loca) number one, and Ins.The Steering Committee of the Drivers, Mechanics and Related Branches Union, Inc., number one, and Ins. funclonarlo" of the Authority of continued meeting last night, at the time of the closing of this edition of EL MUNDO, discussing the" clauses for a collective bargaining agreement, while, on the other hand, the declaration of strike which was approved in principle by the Union at its assembly held last Thursday night, remains in place, An editor of EL MUNDO had the opportunity to exchange views last night with Mr. Raimundo Lebrón, president of the Union and one of the members of the committee which is discussing the agreement, Mr. Lebrón reporting that "negotiations are progressing satisfactorily": that the parties "are agreeing on some of the" points" in controversy" and that at that time a clause was being drafted "whereby the Mechanical Drivers Union retains the right to select the Authority's workers." In the negotiations that were taking effect last night and which began at" four o'clock in the afternoon, the Acting Island Conciliator, Mr. Francisco Verdiales, was intervening. Guillermo Rauzá, advisor to the Union, and Raimundo Lebrón, Emiliano Florea, Luis Matoa Reyes, Elíseo Al varado and other representatives of the Union, were also participating in the negotiations. The Authority was represented by the Administrator, Mr. José G. Blolse, and Mr. Herminio Fernández and Mr. José Recurt. Due to the prolongation of the negotiations, it was agreed that the Union Assembly which was announced to be held last night at eight o'clock, would be suspended and postponed to be held on Monday, at the same time. The governing body of the Union will meet during the days of today and tomorrow to consider the clauses which were accepted in yesterday's discussions, and to draft them, in order to render an am (Continued on page 20.)
In Congress ten veterans' bills 2 - * Relating to insurance benefit. - According to information received by the Puerto Rico Chapter of the American Legion, there are pending" approval by Congress ten fundamental measures relating to insurance" benefits" to veterans of the first and second world wars. Not counted among these is the Gurney-May bill, sponsored by the American Legion, which provides for compulsory peacetime military service for all physically qualified young men. In addition to the ten measures mentioned above, 27 other projects, whose provisions apply to disabled veterans, are part of what the American Legion calls "the most titanic effort to provide assistance to veterans" ever undertaken by any organization. Some of these bills authorize the Government to settle claims on Government insurance, including: payment of expenses incurred in court cases won by veterans in connection with the purchase of insurance; court actions for discontinuance of benefits; and to guarantee a totally disabled veteran the protection of the Government, even when he has received more than 240 partial payments. Other bills provide for the elimination of the clause that establishes the filing of claims in a term of not less than one year and the extension of the five-year term to join the premium payment plan. Other measures provide benefits to relatives of fsllecldo8 soldiers, and to veterans in general. It also provides for a specific method of discharge for conscientious objectors, as well as for public welfare and the defense of the nation. With regard to public welfare projects, the following are cited: The one limiting Immigration until the number of unemployed falls below 1,000,000. The bills authorizing the following: naturalization of Filipinos; eliminating abnormal working conditions in the Veterans Administration and correcting certain unfair practices; providing from $150 to $225 as an allowance for burial expenses; providing for the Government to furnish headstones for the graves of veterans buried in remote countries, and other bills which have been under discussion in the respective committees of Congress. It is proposed to kill* them all. I make the remark that" their number reaches a million or more. 'That n" matters,' he replies firmly, 'We must Imitate the Asear! (Italian colonial troops who fought in (Continued on page 30.),
875,000,000 Allocated To Island Gov't Public Service Agencies
Quiñones asks Anderson for incentive 95c President of agricultural body conferred with Secretary Agriculture Discussed case of Isla settlers Anderson promised an announcement of resumption of zafra purchase and sale Fnr CHARLES~MC CARE WASHINGTON, 13. (PU) The President of the Puerto Rico Farmers Association, Lic. Jose Ramon Quiñones, in the course of a fifteen minute interview" with Secretary of Agriculture, Clinton P. Anderson, demanded of the Department of Agriculture that it announce, "Immediately," "an incentive payment of 95 cents" for the Puerto Rican settlers, as their share of the 1946 sugar price. Quiñones informed that he has also asked that the "workers" be granted the participation that is foreseen under the determinations of the Department of Agriculture; but that he has not made any request for the sugar mills. The Puerto Rican spokesman added that he had spoken to Anderson merely as a representative of the island colonists (it will be recalled that the Enfta colonists receive 45 cents as an incentive payment for the 1945 harvest, and that the centralistas receive ten cents). Quiñones informed the press, after the interview, that Anderson told him that he (Quiñones) will be notified within a few days regarding the resumption of negotiations for the purchase of the 1946 sugar crop, with subordinates of the Secretary of Agriculture. Quiñones added that he had told Anderson that "it is of the utmost importance that the (government) program for 1947 be announced within sixty days after the end of the current milling season". To the United Press, Quiñones stated, "I believe that we in Puerto Rico have the right to expect better treatment from this new Secretary, who is a farmer himself." (Secretary Anderson owns an 800-acre farm in New Mexico). Quiñones also told Anderson that, due to the sugar workers' strike, Puerto Rican production will decrease next year because the cane will not have been planted for two months yet. He added that the strike had also operated to create a shortage of workers in the crops, since all the available labor force was engaged in the tilling, hauling and milling (continued on page 20).
Only in five lines did the OS make a loss, he says. De Hostos
President of the Chamber of Commerce affirms that the subsidy does not solve anything socially and "is the fundamental cause of the black market".
The president of the Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Flllpo de Hostos. commented yesterday on the" statement®" of the Director of the QS on the "official ubsldlo for food and affirmed that said contribution of the Government solves nothing socially or economically, and, on the contrary, according to Mr. De*Hostos, is the fundamental cause of the black market operations. Mr. De*Hostos affirms that the OS has made a loss* on only five of the 38 articles whose imports it monopolizes. Mr. De Hostos' statements are as follows: "In writing our note of June 7 last regarding the much carried and brought issue of the vivares subsidy we thought that, having demonstrated ad nauseam that such a subsidy could not exceed $3,500,000 annually, equivalent to $Í.7S per capita per year, a meager sum - Incapable of solving any social or economic problem, we would not have to. occupy ourselves* again with the p*rticul "r. The* statements made to EL MUNDO by Mr. Schroeder, Chief of the Island's Supply Office, and appearing in the 11th of this month's edition of this newspaper, seem to us to be inspired by what appears to be agency policy and so contrary to reality that we do not feel compelled to come out on the side of the truth.
Inconceivable in a functionary who occupies his position. It will not be necessary to go very far to show that they lack any basis. In the first place, the statement to the effect that the cost of rice at the mills is $9.00 per hundredweight does not conform to reality, since this price corresponds to the most expensive variety of rice produced by the United States, namely, REXORA, of which the Bureau of Distribution imported only 14,000 bags during 1944 against a total import of 2,460,000 bags. The vast majority of the rice brought into the Island during the past year was of grades 5 and 6, whose price at the mill is $6.70 per quintal, plus $0.55 for ocean freight, insurance, unloading, etc., yields a cost of $7.25 CIF Puerta Rico. To take as an example and base the price of a type of rice that represents a little more than the Vá% of the total amount imported to the Island constitutes a record whose qualification we leave "1 healthy criterion of the reader. Having made a most careful and conservative estimate on the basis of the official reports as to the quantities imported, we can assert, without fear of contradiction*, that "the average GIF Puerto Rico price of the 2,460,000 taco* imported* in 1944 was 87.67 per caco, which against a wholesale price of $6.55, gives a loss or subsidy of $2,755,200 per year.
Mr. Schooder's assertions show a gross ignorance of the
Río Piedras will have more schools ' B 1 ■ t . \ MI i Mayor Augusto Alvares, of the city of Rio Piedras. Mayor Alvarez explains how he will achieve his goal The Mayor of Rio Piedras, Mr. Augusto P. Alvarez, declared yesterday to EL MUNDO that no less than 2,500 to 3,000 new students, mostly elementary school students, will have the opportunity to attend school during the next school year in that city, according to the plans of the municipal administration he heads. In the high school alone, according to his words, there will be room for a student body which will be twice as large as that of other years. Mr. Alvarez also declared that he was "extremely satisfied with the cooperation of the Commissioner of Instruction, Dr. José M. Gallardo, who has always shown great interest in resolving the school problem in Rio Piedras. He also expressed that "in everything that the Commissioner of Instruction has been able to do, both in the "election of new teachers as well as in his efforts to obtain the necessary equipment, he has shown himself to be very diligent with Rio Piedras." Mr. Aharez also informed that the municipality has already taken possession of the Luis Muñoz Rivera School building previously owned by the University, "which has left it in terrible condition." The municipality, he assured, will proceed to repair it for classrooms. The president of the Puerto Rican Pro-Statehood Association, Mr. José A. Balselro, announces from his offices at the Casa de la Estadidsd, in Ponce, that he will soon appoint the 21 members of the Resolutions Committee of the Congress to be held there on Sunday, July 29, beginning at 9:00 a.m. Of those 21 members, 14 will be representatives of the Puerto Rican Pro-Statehood Association. Of those 21 members, 14 will be representatives, two from each of the island's seven senatorial districts, and the other seven members will be at-large. In order that the resolutions under consideration by the Committee, first, and the Congress, later, "be the fruit of thoughtful analysis, and so that the same" receive the careful study they should deserve", Mr. Balselro communicates that the term or admission of resolutions is open from Monday, July 16 to Thursday, July 26, inclusive. All resolutions must be sent in triplicate, typed, and addressed to the Casa de la Estsdidad, Apartado 189, Ponce, Puerto Rico. On Saturday, July 28, at 2:00 p.m., the Resolutions Committee will meet in Ponce, at the House of Statehood, to discuss the bills submitted and write its Report. So that when the Congress opens, the following day at 9 o'clock in the morning, all the work will be concluded. According to our estimate, which we are certain closely reflects the truth and favors the Administration, the Bureau of Distribution made a loss on the sale of only five of the twenty-eight articles whose importation and sale it still monopolizes. This loss or subsidy, amounting to $4,656,811, is distributed as follows: cod and other salted fish 81,132,800: evaporated milk* 340,848; chlehtro* $9,405; mantee* d* c|rdo $88,000; "rro* 32,755,000. This elfr*, slnbhowever, does not constitute the net subsidy since in the* .(Continued on page 20.),
Only $12,000,000,000 was available to them last year They consider the allocation unprecedented in the Island's history Largest amount for the Land Authority Next is the Development Company, which is allocated $17,500,000 A study of Gov. Tugwell's recent legislation reveals that the total allocation for governmental public utilities for the fiscal year ending last year is $17,500,000, These funds are specifically appropriated" in laws lately passed and include the amount of items included, in most cases, for development during the fiscal year 1945-44. These funds are specifically allocated in laws recently passed and include the amount of appropriations included, in most cases, for the development during fiscal year 1945-46 of the public enterprise program maintained in operation by the Government of Puerto Rico. The largest appropriation approved by Governor Tugwell is for the Land Authority. Funds in the amount of $19,150,000 were approved for this agency. It is followed by the Development Company, with $17,500,000, followed in order of appropriations by the following: Development Bank, $15,000,000; Agricultural Company, $10,100,000; Home Authorities, $4,780,000; Water and Sewer Service," $3,500,. 000; Transportation Authority, $2,r*000; Supply Administration, $l,22.W0: 'Water Supply Authority', $500,000; Isabel Irrigation Service*, $491,000; Communications Authority*, $490,745; Model Homes Commission, $30,000, Unprecedented appropriation! The total amount of $75,266,74í6 allocated to these public utilities is unprecedented in the entire financial history of Tuerto Rico, Last fiscal year, these" companies only had allocations amounting to " $12,160,000, from the general fund, distributed as follows, according to the official Information contained in the Economic Program of Sei" Year"; Communications Authority, $120,000; Isabela Irrigation Servi" ce. 100,000; Land Authority, $1,500,000; Home Authority, 33J30,. OúO; Model Homes Board, $30,000; Development Company, $1,000,000; Development Bank, $5,500,000; and Purchasing Office, $200,000. These" figures, which correspond to the second financial planning study approved by the Legislature, contrast with $1,710,000 appropriated for the 1943-44 fiscal year, when the legislative "impasse" arose, and $6,551,000 in the previous fiscal year. The appropriations approved* are to be invested by the respective agencies in the industrial, agricultural and commercial development of Puerto Rico, and also, by the terms of the laws approved, "for the social and economic improvement of the country. Transportation Authority: This agency shall develop a program in which it shall invest $18,150,000 during the preceding fiscal year. Act 103, approved on May 8, assigns it eighteen million dollars for its general operating expenses, in accordance with the terms of the Act creating it, and an additional assignment of one million dollars to exclusively carry out the provisions of Title V of the aforementioned Act. The difference, -$150,000,- will be invested "in the demarcation and study of the drainage of Caño Tiburones, in Arecibo, and other swampy areas in the northern part of the island", by virtue of the provisions of Act 254 of May 14. Compartía de Fomenta: The Government will contribute $17,500,000 this year for the development of industrial projects" by the Compaftln de Fomento. This allocation is provided for in Act 325 of May 15, which provides that this agency may carry out "research and experiments, prepare plans and reports, acquire, exploit and improve commercial-industrial enterprises; make loans* and stimulate the development and fullest use of the human* and economic resources of Puerta Rico; former and hold interests in subsidiaries" and other* fine". On the Compartí* of Fomento rests the responsibility of .(Continued on page 15.1