THE
lS9Ksssassas3s=s=s=s=s=ss 36 Pages 5 Ctvs. ~ ¿ Sections
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVII
I do not liquidate log bonoa purchased*, to the " qtio gotera liquidate Sitiar.
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, MARCH 17, 1945
iterad as aaoond otase matter. Fort Office, Sea Jota. P. B.
NUMBER 10411
5 PLANTS RESUME MILLING HODGES SHORT FRANKFURT ROUTE
A banquet at Governor Tugwell's.
I EL ■" BE d y " W í ® L " r M LA to the diners who occupied the presidential table at the banquet given in honor of Governor Rexford G. Tugwell by the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Wáshlngton, don Jesús " .♦"* had n *" -<* "Hunos of the Mayflower Hotel, in the capital of the United States, on the 18th of the current month. From left to right are Don Emilio Garcia Godoy, Ambassador of the Dominican Republic; Dr. Guillermo Belt, Ambassador of the Republic of Cuba; Dr. Rexford G. Tugwell* Commissioner Piñera and Mr. Abe Fortes, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United States. (Fate de paÍ
Senate and House Committees to Hold Hearing Next Monday Majority legislators are confident that final action on the establishment of the Medical School in Puerto Rico will be taken at the present session of the House. The Senate and House Treasury and Instruction Committees announced for Monday night at 8:00 p.m. a public hearing to be held at the Capitol regarding three bills that have been filed in connection with the establishment of the aforementioned school. One of said bills proposes that the center be established in the city of Ponce; another one empowers the Planning Board to decide the site where the School should be located. Vlcente'Gélgel Polanco, Ernesto Ramoa Antonlnl, Samuel R. Quiñones and*Miss Maria Libertad Gómez, made statements yesterday urging " all entities and persons i ntere(Continued on page 20.)
Pinero raises today to OAP chief the case of cigar manufacturers Art announced yesterday from Washington. - Davis also asked for an expert to examine class allegations on price here
The Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, Mr. Jesus T. Pinero, will today take before the Administrator of the OPA in the federal capital, Mr. Chester Bowles, the problem of the cigar manufacturers of the Island, who consider that they will have to close their 825 small factories if the OPA insists on rigidly applying in Puerto Rico the order 654 of said agency, by which fixed prices are established for the cigars manufactured in the country. This was informed yesterday by telephone by Commissioner Plftero to the House Representative for ABC, Mr. Antonio Pacheco Padró. Mr. Rafael Roqué, President of the Association for the Promotion of the Tobacco Industry, informed a reporter yesterday
yesterday to an editor <" EL MUNDO that of prevailing the order of m OPA "before a week will be closed lodes the" cigar factories of the pals, since the prices established by the OAP determine a certain loss that fluctuates between a 25 and a 40 percent in the production of cigars". Mr. Roqué reported that "some factories have already been closed" and that "we, the manufacturers, have been put on the road to certain ruin*. Ib which will deprive thousands of parents of their job opportunities and will cause a disaster for hundreds of small business owners. Mr. Roqué further reported, (Continued on page 20.)
Employees propose changes to the current pension law.
They suggest disability retirement upon reaching ten years of service. - Allocations for Retirement Fund. Appreciation to EL MUNDO
25% of OD burden to be assigned to Ponce
Submitting an amendment" to the bill on pensions for government employees, and at the same time congratulating "EL MUNDO" for the editorials published on this matter, R. Sánchez Ortiz, C. Garcia de la Noceda, R. Sánchez Salazar, A. S. Martin, F. García González, Felipe Fagundo, Raúl Otero Fernández, Olga L. Castillo, Angélica Fernández, Josefina Canelo de Lugo and Marina M. Valentín sent a letter to our Director. In their letter they express: "Once again, this is the important ro-
tatlvo that you so rightly direct, deeply touches the heart strings of every public employee, on the occasion of the two editorials of the 15th and 16th of the current month, which so maglstralmente Ihvantan issues of public interest in relation to the current pension law for the funcionlos and employees of the Island Government. "In recognizing such valuable service in favor of our cause, we take the opportunity to suggest amendments which, in accordance with the text of the ideas presented, should be (continued on page 17).
This is how ILA and UTM delegates report after their visit to Washington By ANDRES JORGE MONTALVO PONCE- Mr. Ramón Mejias and Mr. Sabato Carboné, the third delegate of the ILA and the second of the UTM, who made a trip to Washington under the auspices of the Pone Chamber of Commerce, have returned. Both asked the federal authorities to intervene "for the solution of the critical economic situation through which the workers of the Ponce Beach docks are going through." Mejias and Carboné, in a working assembly gave a report of the steps they had taken in the federal capital. On February 28, according to the report, Mr. Benjamin Thoron, Director of the Division of Territories and Possessions, summoned a meeting of Mr. Jesus T. Jesus T. Plñero, Resident Commissioner; Mrs. Reck, Assistant Chief, Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands Division; Mr. Davls, Maritime War Board, head of the Caribbean Zone; Messrs. Godunof and Parker, Food Administration; Mr. Garcia de Quevedo, ODT; Mr. Ccll Morales, Technical Assistant to the Director of the Division of the Territory and Possessions; Mr. Thomas H. Morales, Assistant Director of the Division of the Territory and Possessions; and Mr. Thomas H. Morales, Assistant Director of the Division of the Territory and Possessions, Mr. Thomas H. Morales, Director of the Division of the Territory and Possessions.
Hitler visited the Oder front
The German dictator, Adolf Hitler, right, returns the Nazi soldier's salute during a recent visit to German Headquarters on the Oder front, according to information transmitted together with the photograph by the Swedish agency Presten" Blld Frustrated conspiracy against the president of Cuba, Dr. Grau.
More than one hundred and fifty arrests have already been made. - The leadership of the plot is attributed to the former Army chief, Eleuterio Pedraza. - This under arrest
By ROSCOE SNIPES HAVANA, Cuba. 16, (PU)-Officially "e declared conjured up today a conspiracy against the Government of President Ramon Grau San Martin, before it took the form of open revolution, being arrested about eighty people" by the armed forces cqhana". Extraoflcially it was later reported that the number of detainees amounted to 150 and that the arrests continued. President Grsu attended, as usual, to his executive duties during the day, receiving several delegations, including Senator Jose Manuel Casanova, who has been briefing him daily on the progress of the negotiations related to the sale of the sugar cane harvest to the United States. At 11:00 a.m., the I'residen le salló del Palacio para 1,'.augurar la Exposición de Arte Chino sponsored by Madame Ll, wife of the Chinese minister in this city. (Continued on page 2.) '.
Bill on drivers' licenses Provides * to take them away from negligent.- House met ten minutes In the short session held yesterday in the House of Representatives, was given account on first reading ron a bill. presented by Messrs. Eudaldo Baez Garda and Heraclio H. Rivera Colon, to suspend the llcc- 'as " all negligent drivers of vehicle.! otor. The proyc lo rils states, ademú.i, r. that it will "impend so'''"' ti '*'tfl''' ' r -n (Continued on page 20)
Rationing of rubber production for civilian use is again reduced.
National rationing executive expressed need for economy yesterday. - No shortage of rice here. - Faked work done by OAP
The production of tires during the second quarter of the year for' conaumo of the civilian population, has been again lowered *in a 50 percent, according to informed
He added that only about one million will be manufactured for the civilian population of the United States, its territories and possessions, and that the current crisis is expected to worsen further. Mr. Goodnough reported that the "threat" of rice containers has passed, and that the great demand of the Filipino people for this item will not affect Puerto Rico. Mr. Goodnough toured the island accompanied by OAP's rationing executive, Mr. Roberto Muñoz MacCormlck, returning to San Juan yesterday morning. It was in Mr. Muñoz MacCormlck's own offices that we interviewed him. I will begin by saying," he told us, "that the rationing program in Puerto Rico, as a whole, is going admirably. I can only thank aeftor Muñoz MacCormlck and the personnel under his command for this magnificent work. In my tour of the lila I have been able to realize the patriotic and unselfish way in which all the members of the Local Boards work. They entlen.(Continued on page 20.) j
~ Patton sends " an ultimatum to Koblenz.
Tongs close in to overrun the remnants of the Nazi armies to the west Patch is also placed on the offensive The bridgehead east of the Rhine is widening. It is approaching the plain Per: JACK FLEJSCHER PARIS. 16. (PU) - Forces of the First US Army. Unldoa cut in two points" today, east of Remagen, 1 . superhighway from Cologne to Funcfort, while the American" Third and Seventh armies continue to develop vigorously a pincer operation in the Sarro basin, which threatens to overrun elements of two German armies, the only forces left to the Nazis west of the Rhine. A dispatch from the Third Army front reports that Lieutenant General Patton has sent an ultimatum to the head of the German garrison at Koblenz to surrender or die in the assault on the city, which, according to Brussels radio, has already begun. On the other hand, a dispatch from Bitcho reports that the U.S. Seventh Army today occupied the fortified city of the "Maginot Line, "without encountering practically no resistance from the enemy. The First Army's pressure on the perimeter of the bridgehead began to bear great fruit today when infantry forces south and north of the small village of Hover jumped over the great road to establish themselves firmly on the other side in advantageous positions surrounded by trees, thus dividing the Rhur and Rhineland defenses in two. The bridgehead is slowly but steadily widening, and now measures thirteen miles in frontage by a little over seven in depth. The German villages east of the American lines are reported to be covered with countless white flags and the inhabitants are said to be imploring the Nazi Army to withdraw to avoid the destruction of their picturesque villages. s Northeast of Hover, other forces are battling inside Ittenbach, where the terrain begins to become flat, allowing perhaps the best conditions in the entire bridgehead for rapid operations by armored forces toward the Rhur. In the center of the bridgehead, the bridgehead was cleared and the troops that occupied it penetrated into Strodt, sixteen hundred meters to the northeast. At the southern end, Hoennlngon was finally cleared of Germans. German military spokesmen say that five American armies on the western front "are already on the march" in the opening phase of the general offensive which has Berlin as its goal. (Continued on page 20.)
WESTERN FRONT: Forces of the American First Army cut a>er, at two points northeast of Remagen, the superhighway from Cologne to Frankfurt. Lieutenant General Patton's Third Army is about to launch the final assault on Koblenz, Patten having sent an ultimatum to the Nassi garrison in the city urging it to surrender. The American Seventh Army occupied the fortified town of Bitche. , ' . RUSSIAN-GERMAN FRONT: Powerful* Russian armies began a new offensive against Stettin, while other Soviet forces attacked Prague, on a 74 and a half mile front in Lower Silesia. The Ruaos occupy several villages on the Stettin front, among them Grolffenhagen, to the south of the front. The Japanese resistance to the north of the island ended in the afternoon, according to the Japanese industrial center, which was bombarded by the North-Stettin air force under fire from the Japanese.
Stettin under Soviet fire.
Marshal Zhukov's final assault on the fortress began Intense tank battle rages Fighting in East Prussia intensifies. - The strategy of the Russians By ROBERT MUSE!, LONDON. 16. (PU)-Powerful Soviet armies, attacking under heavy artillery fire, have begun a new offensive against the city of Stettin, while other Russian forces are attacking in the direction of Prague, over a front of 74 and a half miles in Lower Silesia. This news, given by Berlin radio, adds that the offensive against Stettin began early yesterday and that 150 tanks are leading Marshal Zhukov's forces, which have resumed their advance from positions six miles east and south of that large Baltic port. The Moscow night communiqué, while not confirming the offensive directly, announced that Russian troops had seized the towns of Greltfephagen, south of Stettte; R*"en'tsrten, southeast, and Bruenken, also south of Sttetin. The Ber|in radio said that a large taifque battle is being fought in front of Stettin, south of the superhighway linking Danzlg with Stettin. The "Germans reported, likewise. that the Soviets, in another operation which may well be the second phase of the double flanking movement against Berlin, launched an offensive at three prlnclpsles points in Lower Silesia, The "Germans announced that the (Continued on p'na 20.) Senate recessed yesterday as a sign of condolence Appointed commission to visit bereaved relatives of poet Ferdinand R. Cestero The Senate adjourned yesterday, as a sign of condolence for the death of the dean of Puerto Rican poets, Don Ferdinand R. Cestero. It adjourned until Monday * six o'clock in the afternoon. At eleven o'clock in the morning, the President pro tempora, Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones, called the meeting to order. Immediately, Senator Leopoldo Figueroa presented the motion that the Upper House should express its mourning for the death of the poet, and appoint a commission to communicate such agreement to the relatives of the deceased. Senator Bolivar Pagán presented a substitute motion in the sense that the Senate, "in demonstration of condolence for such an unfortunate event, adjourn the session", and that "the family of the deceased Puerto Rican Illustrator be notified". The presidency declared that "in accordance with the provisions of the Rules of Procedure, he had to give way to the session" (Continued on page 20").
Significance of Honeff's occupation Nazi forces' decline on western front confirmed
By JULIO ALVAREZ DEL VA YO. NEW YORK, 16. (INS) - The occupation of the town of Honnef, on the east bank of the Rln, by American troops is important not only because of its situation but because it is the point where the Aleuts have displayed the greatest resistance and confirms our earlier comments on the growing diminution of German war strength on the western front. It is no longer a question of an inferiority in war material but in the number of available combatants. While the Allies, according to authorized calculations, have today in the west of Europe about eighty-five divisions - all of them complete and without any wear, - the Germans do not have to remain, of the sixty divisions that they had at the beginning of the crossing of the Roer about three many intact. One thousand prisoners now number more than ten thousand at the beginning of the Allied advance.
The Allies double the enemy in number and it is no longer possible to establish even a proportion with respect to the war material. In some weapons, they are five times as numerous. In others, the superiority is considerably greater. That is what gives decisive significance to the coming battle of the Ruhr. However much the Germans have endeavored to move their factories away from the areas most threatened by the Allied air offensive, and however many small arms they have been accumulating in the safest places, by the day when the bulk of their armies find themselves in the grip of the Russian armies and the American and British armies, there is one type of heavy industry which could not be moved. The Nazis have certainly dispersed some of their aviation factories, undoubtedly performing prodigies in manufacturing by so1 ' Continued on page ai.) < 9
Yesterday the cutting began in several places.
The settlers define their position and demand parity with Continente Ají oche continued talks Union and producer*" d i s c ti t i a n difference on wage scale Several sugar factories", among which according to "e reported yesterday in the Association of Producers d" Sugar, "e are the" central Mercedita. of Ponce, and Juanita, of Bayamón, will begin today the milling of sugar cane. The workers of the sugar cane farms of the colonists who mill at said mills, according to these reports, have been cutting coffee since yesterday, and loading it to the plaza of the sugar mills to be milled starting today. In addition, yesterday the cutting of cane began at other mills, such as Equal, in Mayagüez, Constancia, in Pone" and Eureka, in Mayagilez, and it is expected that they will also begin grinding today. At the Juanita plant, milling has begun, the workers* working on the basis of the daily wage they were receiving before the strike and subject to the agreements reached in the negotiations of the collective bargaining agreement between the Sugar Producers Association and "1 Sin. dicato Azucarero. It is understood that the other mills will begin milling under the same conditions.
As for the "colono", we are informed that their position is that according to what was stated yesterday by the Board of Directors of the Colonos de Caño Sector of the Asociación de Agricultor, they are willing to resume work in the sugar cane fields, paying their workers the basic wages determined by the government agencies, and the increases for the sugar subsidy, in accordance with the "determinations" to that effect. They insist on a federal investigation to determine the "fair" incentive payment, and that they will not accept any subsidy that is not in line with that given to the harvesters on the mainland. Meanwhile, negotiations continued last night in Fortaleza, between the producers' and the Union's committees of agreement. The talks began again in the afternoon. Last night they continued to discuss the wage clause, with the Sugar Union demanding a 24 cent increase for farm workers and a 15 cent increase for factory workers. Two of the persons involved in the negotiations reported that the producers were making an offer of 23 cents for the field workers, but subject to ratification by the colonists, who, by virtue of the agreement taken yesterday by their Board of Directors, did not agree with the proposal; and 24 cents for the factory workers, on the daily wage they received last year. 14"" agreements of the settlers ■ met" yesterday Not to accept as final any offer of ubsldlo which "is not in parity" with -the Incentive payment granted to the mainland cane harvesters, and to declare that "the settlers are willing to resume work in the cane fields" under the condition that they would pay "their workers the basic Jornalo" established" by the. The main agreements adopted yesterday by the Board of Directors of the Ceña Colonists Sector of the Puerto Rico Farmers Association were among the main agreements adopted yesterday by the Board of Directors of the Ceña Colonists Sector of the Puerto Rico Farmers Association, in addition to the sum for the workers' participation in the subsidy that is finally obtained from the CEC, and in accordance with the corresponding governmental determinations. Puerto Rico Farmers Association. On the other hand, it was declared that the increase would be made by the settlers of the workers' wages as the CCA was making effective to the producers the IntpwB of the sugar industry. The cane growers' dlMoB res imiB that an investtaSB be made by the Congress and the CCA. to determine "fairly" the nB 0 of Incentive that should be made by the sugar industry. The meeting of the diraettoa J Sector d. Colonos commented comarW (Continued on page K).