" -V , t - i .. * f - y - THE DAILY MEND OF ■ L A MARANA
40 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
40 Pages 5 Ctvs. " H 2 Sections
DAILY '
THE MORNING
Roopaldememootoothe meno who made the Victory Loan possible.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1945 pT£"'
NUMBER 10402
AtfO XXVII LA
L
ISLAND ACCLAIMS ITS SOLDIERS
UDEBM OF OUR REGIMENT. - The ooronql Mvádor T. Boig (laaulerda), officer te . d ¿L W" 1 !*"!?. u" Pu F r V' F 1 ® 0 ' and eI César Cordero Dávlla. commander of the Third Battalion of that regiment, which participated in direct action against the German enemy in the Maritime Alm". Cordero also acts as executive officer of the regiment. This photo was impressed by our colleague Luis de Caaenave shortly after having entered the Port of San Juan ex-transport "John Erickson", yesterday morning.
Campos reveals ■ danger of losing federal aid He says he has thought of withdrawing it from school cafeterias due to theft The Attorney General, Enrique Campos del Toro, sent yesterday to the district attorneys, municipal and peace judges, an administrative order in which he states that the federal authorities have seriously thought of withdrawing the aid they have been giving to the school population, through the school cafeterias, due to the escalations that have been taking place in the schools and the school cafeterias. Campos del Tqro instructs judicial officials to initiate a vigorous campaign to put an end to the thefts' to which public schools have been subjected. I believe that one of the means to put an end to this problem," says Campos del Toro, "is to give preferential attention to the investigations of these cases, if possible by the prosecutors personally, in close cooperation with the Police, to quickly prosecute the accused persons and to impose the judges those exemplary sentences that cases of this nature demand". Mr. Campos del Toro indicates to the judicial officials that they will not be unaware of the incalculable harm that would be done to school children if the federal authorities were to discontinue the aid that they currently receive.
Aco "ta says Ellsworth was not authorized to change adjectives.
He explains that the Board used the adjective "known" instead of "outstanding" in juxtaposing Mr. Fennell's qualifications.
Mr. José Acosta Velarde, Director of the Land Authority and member of the Board of Directors of Com- > pañi" Agrícola de Puerto Rico, stated yesterday that the President of the Agricultural Company, Mr. Elmer Ellsworth, was not authorized by the Board to use the adjectives "outstanding" and "outstanding" on behalf of the Board when judging the qualifications of Mr. Thomas A. Fennell. Mr. Acosta Velarde made these statements on the occasion of the communiqué authorized yesterday by Mr. Ellsworth, on behalf of the Board, announcing that Mr. Fennell will be retained as General Manager of the Agricultural Company. The full text of Mr. Acosta Velarde's statements is as follows "In today's edition of EL MUNDO appear the statements that the Board of Directors of the Agricultural Company approved at its meeting of November 8. We made the statements in the English language, and in the original wording of the same, the qualifications and knowledge of Mr. Thomae A. Fennell were considered "outstanding" and "outstanding". Fennell as "outstanding" and "exceptional." At the suggestion of Mr. Arturo Roque and the undersigned, the Board resolved to eliminate the words "outstanding" and "exceptional" and to offer and request "the most effective cooperation in developing a campaign against theft and pilferage".
The word "known" is used in place of both the word "outstanding" and "exceptional" and the word "exceptional" is used in place of both the word "outstanding" and "exceptional". :- Mr. Ellsworth was not authorized to use on behalf of the r Board of Directors of the Tlernw lo" Authorla tions of - overeallentei and exceptional >81 - judging the qualifications of Mr. ■ Thoma" A. Fennell. ■ "Otherwise t ' published statements ' appear to me to be the ' same as those ' approved by the Board;" r F negotiations ; to acquire Telephone WASHINGTON, 9. ~PU). Rafael ! De'gado Márquez, director of the ] Puerto Rico Communications Authority, told the United Press today that negotiations for the acquisition by purchase by the Government of Puerto Rico of the Telephone Company have been definitively broken off. He added that the Communications Authority is unable to meet the price demanded by the International Telegraph and Telephone Company, a relative of the 1 riatema Insular. Delgado Márquez did not disclose the amount of the offer 1 made by his authority. He said, however, that the Insular Government still has powers to Initiate I proceedings for expropriation of < the company's properties in i the Island or to undertake its pro- f competing system. <
Piñero alleged that there was stratagem.
He said before the Judiciary Committee that there were strong indications of it, when discussing the Córdova Díaz case Before "1 Senate Judiciary Committee of the United Entadon," appeared the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, séftor Jesús T. Pifiero, to oppose the confirmation of Ledo. Jorge L. Cordova Días as associate justice of the Supreme Court Insular. The
Mr. Piñero stated: "My name is Jesús T. Piñero. I am the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Congress. As the gentlemen of the committee are aware, I was elected to Congress by the vote of all the citizens of the Island, and, as you also know, the Resident Commissioner is the only elected and official representative that the Puerto Rican people have in the Congress of the United States. It is in that capacity that I appear before you to ask, in the name of all that democracy means, that the appointment of Mr. Jorge Luis Córdova Días to the position of Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, not be confirmed. It is my duty to do so because within the current system we do not have among you any elected representative. I must ask you to become spokesmen for the people who elected me when this matter is discussed with your colleagues in the Senate. Let me say at the outset that Judge Cordova's reputation as a gentleman and a jurist is beyond attack or reproach. As I am a farmer, however, my opinion of jurists is of necessity based on what I have been able to learn by hearsay. It is the one-eyed, undemocratic and unprocedural procedure of those who support Judge Rdova, with the consequent grave betrayal of democracy, and the abuse of his processes in Puerto Rico, which makes confirmation by the Senate undesirable or impossible. Lon gentlemen of the cqml- ' tea will pardon me for going back va- ' rivers years, but I must give you, at least, a paragraph of history, 1 so that you may have a clear picture of what that 1 appointment means and what I have meant by speaking of betrayal of democracy and its processes. The Supreme Court of Puerto Rico consists of a chief justice and four associate justices. There is presently a vacancy caused by the promotion of Judge Travieso to the presidency of the court in the year 1M4. The other three judges on the bench are: the Honorable Angel R. de Jesus, appointed in June 1938; the Honorable Robert H. Todd, Jr., appointed in January 1M1; and the Honorable A. Cecil Snyder, appointed in January 1M1. Cecil Snyder, appointed in December 1941. Judge Travieso was originally appointed to the court in February 1935. During that period of years and until November 1940, the dominant political group, the party to which the people entrusted the foundations of the government, was a coalition of the 1 (Continued on page 31) J
GRAPHIC DETAILS ON PAGES 12 AND 13 In addition to the photos that I present to our readers on the first page of this issue, showing various aspects of the arrival of the island troops yesterday, we have devoted the entire central pages, 19 and 18, to extensive graphic information on the same event. In both you will be able to appreciate the culminating details of the return of our brave soldiers from Europe. At eleven o'clock last Thursday night he arrived in Puerto Rico, coming from Parts, where he attended the International Labor Conference, the floor leader of the Popular Party in the House of Representatives, Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonin, arrived at eleven o'clock last Thursday night. At around eight o'clock in the evening, workers' leaders and island officials who had been invited to meet at his office in Hato Rey for an exchange of impressions with Mr. Ramos Antonlnl. Sato, at the request of the assembled poraonaa, after initial greetings and a slight exchange of impressions, succinctly reported on his activities in Parla. Referring to the question of Puerto Rico's political status, he said that the International Labor Congress had spoken in favor of granting Puerto Rico the opportunity to decide for itself what its "status" would be. The executive committee of that labor organization, of which the American labor leaders Sidney Hillman and Phillip Murray are members, was charged with taking all necessary steps to obtain from the Congress of the United States the approval of legislation containing the recommendations made by the Legislative Committee which appeared at the last hearings.
Impressions of officers and soldiers
The former intend to return to old professions Many soldiers remain in Ejercite How Colonel Roig reflected emotion. Cordero forgot the insignia By E. COMBAS GUERRA Editor of EL MUNDO I soon realized that all the soldiers and all the officers were impatient to disembark first, but, without a doubt, the most impatient proved to be Staff Sergeant Enrique Vásquez, of Juana Díaz, and member of the 65th Infantry Regiment, who could not even wait for the scales to be set, and as soon as the ship had been moored to the military dock, he slipped into the dock, slipped into the dock and was ready to go to sea. He could not even wait for them to lay the ladders, and as soon as the ship was moored to the military dock, he slid down a rope and, amidst a thunderous exclamation of jubilation from the public and the soldiers, he leaned over and kissed the pier, his eyes filled with tears of joy. Pathetic case One of the few shoulders on board to whom the fatal fate cut short the joy of the return to the homeland was Private First Class Roberto Antommattel, of Yauco. Two days before his return he received on board the tragic news of the death of his beloved mother, whom he had so much dreamed of embracing in his loving arms when he disembarked. So many sleepless nights that the good mother had spent praying for the salvation of her absent son! Such was the emotion felt by the soldier Antommattol that he left the ship helped by a captain of his company. The Army allowed him to disembark first so that he could immediately go home in a waiting car. What a great emptiness to find this heroic boy when he arrived at au eaaal While thousands of homes were filled with allergy, that hokar cried au deeeonsolation. Sick On board the ship there were also more than thirty sick soldiers, the first one to go down on a stretcher being Private First Class Crus V. Colón, from Caguas. So much joy pervaded the spirits of Lieutenant Colonel César Corde- * ro, commander of the Third Battalion of the 65th Infantry Regiment, that he went to greet General Grimes, Governor Tugwell and Senator Muñoz Marín, dressed as a private. With < the excitement of the arrival at the choir- 1 nel forgot to put on the Insignia, i (Continued on page 16.)
Jubilant crowds greeted the troop.
Both on board and at the Army dock there was a succession of stirring scenes. 6,069 return home For E. COMBASGUERRaTjUANTmALDONADO Radactorti OF THE WORLD The most ontuous manifestation of sympathy was paid yesterday by the Puerto Rican people to their heroic soldiers who returned from the theater of operations in Europe. Really, it is difficult to describe the emotion experienced by the troops who returned to the native
to describe the emotion experienced by the troops who returned to their native land after nearly 3 years of absence from the warmth of their homes, would be for us a vain pretension. It is these things that must be felt by observing them. Crying, laughter, joy, sadness, in short, all the emotions that a human being can experience, gathered in the soul of each soldier. While some remained leaning against the ship's rail in silent contemplation of the beloved land, others shouted and laughed. The emotions had different expressions; but the feeling was the same. For twelve days the troops were confined in what was for them for the duration of the voyage a floating prison. If the sentiments could have been transformed into a motive force to propel the ship forward, it would undoubtedly have improved the speed of a meteor. This is * the impression we gathered on board the ship from the soldiers themselves. For them the time marched too slowly, but each dawn announcing progress in the march was for them a day closer to the beloved homeland, and therefore more anxious to arrive, and the day before the ship sailed into the port of San Juan, the great majority of the troops remained under sail, each and every one of them anxious to be the first to see their homeland. Even the officers themselves were seized by the same sentiments. The night before the arrival of the ship was spent on deck, charting, singing, improvising orchestras playing Puerto Rican compositions, telling anecdotes and making conjectures about what they intended to do when they arrived home and about their plans for the future. The troops arrived aboard what in peacetime had been a luxurious Swedish liner, now converted into a transport. About six thousand Puerto Rican soldiers were accommodated in its belly. They did not, of course, travel in comfort, but all were content to suffer for a few days the inconveniences of the voyage, which they would have done while swimming. Before dawn, the "John Erickson" remained for several hours in the outskirts of El Morro awaiting the agreed time to begin its entry into port, which was at seven o'clock in the morning. Already at that time, all along the San Juan Gate and the
San Juan Gate and the Malecon, the crowd was already crowded to welcome the soldiers. All the ships in port, '- all the docks and many .qdifl- ' dos along Ja Marina, were in. * were festooned with flags. In diitlntái boat*! Heron the Insular authorities! ' members of the Red Cross and the radio station to welcome the troops. When onfl. '■ lar his bow into the channel, the "John " Erickson" was leaning to 1 port, because hade that side he. ble accumulated the greatest number - of troops who, wished to contemplate i land and respond to the cheers of 1 people. Infinite number of small om. i barcadonos, all decked out, gave- ■ brfn circles around the ship. - Army and Navy planes escorted it to the entrance. The - hubbub was indescribable. Lee i ships in the harbor sounded their slreneo i prolongedly. From ' land also came the sound of the horns of the ships greeting the heroes, and from El Morro there were also salutes. 1 The "John Erldcson" luda by te1 two sides cartelonoe prepared 1 by the soldiers of the different ' companies and units expressing au joy for the return the lar na- ■ tlvo. And through an ootri* bor skylight, painted in red on white cloth, spoke a sign that read: I "Viva Puerto Rico Ubre"- W. ' The exchange of greetings and cheers 1 among the emborcedonos who" . M 1 approaching the ship were eonttnuae. ■ On one of the tugboats, aided by magnavocos, an Intsrpystaa orchestra played nstaments criolla music. La Borinqueño. Le Canción del Soldado, guarachea, boleros.... "Governor Tugwell, the President of the Senate, Lulo Muñoz Marín; General Grimes and his Chief of Staff, Judge Martin Travieso, Proeurodor Campos del Toro and members of the Red Cross and the Press, boarded the "John Erickson" as it sailed through the harbor channel and headed for the military dock in Pueblo Viejo. On board the same ship, the Governor, General Grimes and Muñoz Marín welcomed the troops, the latter having congratulated the soldiers of Puerto Rico for "having contributed with their efforts to the free world of the democracies". The entire beach of Cataño was also invaded by people (Continued on page Kj
- s , 7g=====T -7 III / - - - AM / I / / / / // 1 j , KÍW / 'Á / // I I I . 4 ■iu7 7 / V/u I 1J fi / ■ li Jk. A a J JUWI h£ Jf ASI f / IUV v JmkmB>JT 'S7 KMina JU JBJBBM BEBEIS ~t ""-¿li^'r/é'X - ''- >y. BMMMBMIffBlBiBFt'vi'-^il.^''^-> j ■ Br'WHMHHBMMBMBHHHIBR/rW/ BRMKBBBc* InW xBbPBBHb jo'y' ¿,.lM||M|M|gM THE MOMENT OF INTENSE EMOTION THAT PRECEDEDED THE DISEMBARKATION-In a tight bundle and anxious to be the first to set foot again on Puerto Rican soil, the brave Puerto Rican soldiers who returned yesterday after an absence of nearly three years, try to place themselves in the most conspicuous places of the transport "John Erickson" to contemplate with emotion the warm welcome that their compatriots gave them. There was no place on the ship that was not occupied by a Bocca soldier and the lifeboats were full of our boys, as can be seen in the two photographs taken by our graphic editor Luis de Casenave when the ship docked at the Army pier. Thousands of people crowded at the Buchanan to Cataño road crossing to witness the landing. (See more photographs on pages 12 and 13).