THE HONDO
' 3Ó Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 18, 1945
Entered as second class matter, Poet Office. San Juan. P. R.
NUMBER 10473
Japanese capitulation delegates to arrive in Philippine capital tomorrow; Gasoline rationing suspended.
Oliveras believes unemployment would be only 40% He estimates in the future there will be no more than 250,000 men out of work Estimates are sixty thousand now He announces that the JJ.S.M. will authorize a decree on construction The president of the Junta de SaJarlo Mínimo, aefior Cándido Olivera", declared yesterday that "within the present economic eitructure of Puerto Rico, in nlngú. There may be as many as 250,000 unemployed in Puerto Rico in the immediate future, making an estimate for a situation in which existing industries* are operating at their minimum capacity and the Government is not developing any emergency employment plan." Since the Board is soon to authorize a decree for the construction industry and considering that this industry "will provide such ample employment opportunities that there will not be sufficient export personnel to permit its extensive development," it is assumed" that any minimum to be established by the Board "must be based on reality or otherwise be nominal or academic." -Has the Minimum Wage Board thought about this situation," we asked Mr. Ollvorsi, "Indeed, the president of the Minimum Wage Committee for the Construction Industry, Mr. Santiago Diaz Pacheco, has asked our Statistics or Research Division to prepare a paper that would allow the Committee to know more or less what would be the number of people the industry could count on. No expert could now give a categorical -and even less mathematical- answer to that question. The answer must necessarily be somewhat speculative, based on reality, but also on hypotheses. To reach any conclusion," continued the President of the ISWB, "one would have to start from the basis of current unemployment, the potential employment of existing industries and the annual increase in the pool of workers. By the year 1M1, with construction work being carried out in Puerto Rico by the military authorities, private industry, the Island Government and the emergency agencies then in existence, the construction industry provided employment for some 65,000 persons. As far as we know, at that time there was no shortage, not only of inexperienced arms, but of workers with experience and expertise in certain occupations. Today there are no more than 60,000 employed persons in Puerto Rico. It is clear that the construction industry cannot absorb the large number of unemployed, since not all are male and not all are prepared to contribute to the industry. In addition, the relative mobility of the workers must be considered, i.e., there may be unemployed people in Jayuya who could not be employed in the construction industry in San Juan, because of the fact that they are not able to work in the construction industry in the island.
The 65th Regiment is expected to return to the island in October.
It did not have transportation because priority was given to wounded and soldiers going to the Pacific front.
The 65th Infantry Regiment will probably return to Puerto Rico during the month of October, according to reports recently received from Mannheim, Germany, where the Puerto Rican unit is currently billeted. To date the regiment has been awaiting transportation and the wait is due to the fact that preference is being given to the wounded, and priority was also given to soldiers to be sent to the war fronts in the Pacific. The end of the war in the Pacific, according to our reports, will accelerate the return of the Puerto Ricans to the Island. In any case, our informants insist that the 65th will be in Puerto Rico in time to celebrate Christmas here. It is also interesting to note that a large majority of the Puerto Rican soldiers belonging to the 65th have accumulated more than the 85 minimum points required for discharge, so it is expected that once on the Island, they will be discharged from the Puerto Rican Regiment. Lieutenant-Colonel Charles H. Rowley, who joined the Regiment when it was in France, wrote to inform us that he is still in command of the Puerto Rican Regiment.
that, still in command of the Puerto Rican troops is Lieutenant Colonel Salvador T. Ro. . of Yauco. Colonel Rowley is one of the most beloved officers of the Regiment, and commands the nrb ir battalion, which is at present located in the town of Wollstadt, in the vicinity of Mannheim. Rowley tué roommate of Lieutenant General Alexander M. Patch during the four years they were both studying at the military academy at West Point. Later he retired from military life to devote himself to private business and returned to the Army at the outbreak of the war, with the rank of major. He was promoted to lieutenant colonel when the 65th was in Germany. Soon, he tells us, he will leave the 65th to join the Fourth Army, which is now in Texas. "I am sorry to have to make amends to these clerks and number, for whom I have come to feel real sympathy," he says. -I have been with them for more than a year and I hope that, once the war is over, you will have the opportunity to visit Puerto Rico to renew the friendships made with all the Puerto Ricans.
Cleaners' Strike Resumes, Mayor Raises Wages
The workers were determined when Mr. Sanchez Vilella notified that by law he cannot sign an agreement. - He issued order yesterday
Yesterday at a quarter to seven in the evening and in simultaneous assemblies of public cleaning workers of the Government of the Capital, held in San Juan and Santurce, the "truce" granted to the Administrator of the Capital, Mr. Roberto Sánchez Vilella, was terminated, resuming the strike which was suspended when, through the intervention of the Acting Commissioner of Health, Dr. Angel M. Marchand, both the Mayor and the Union of Cleaning and Public Works Employees decided to resume the discussions of a collective bargaining agreement. The strike, as reported by the Union's president, Mr. Gerardo Rosa, and its organizer, Mr. Marcial Cuevas, began "last night" and will not end "until the Administrator desists from his attitude and decides to sign a document containing the agreements we have reached or will reach in the future in our negotiations". On the other hand, moments after announcing the resumption of the strike, the Administrator of the Capital, Mr. Sanchez Vilella, by means of an administrative order (Continued on page 15)
The Arbitration Committee chaired by Mr. Manuel A. Pérez, which is considering the points in controversy between the Union of Dock Employees, an affiliate of the CIO and the CGT, and three Puerto Rican shipping companies, met all day yesterday at La Fortaleza, receiving evidence from the parties. All the points on which the parties failed to reach agreement, leading to an "impasse" that almost culminated in a strike, have already been discussed before the aforementioned committee, with the exception of the workers' wage demands. This matter will be discussed today (continued on page 20).
Elimination is effective on the Island as of today OAP recommends that it be lifted also on the sale of tires OS will determine as to rice OTD has not yet received instructions on the cancellation of orders The gasoline rationing in Puerto Rico, which was in effect for three years and 17 days, has been lifted by the Office of Price Administration, to take effect as of today, Saturday, at six o'clock in the morning. This indicates that as far as this fuel is concerned, things are back to normal: stations will be able to dispense all the gasoline requested by motorists; they will be able to be open during the hours available to their owners; they will offer service on Sundays and holidays, and motorists will not have to depend on the coupons that the corresponding Local Board had been supplying as a password quota. The lifting of rationing has come just as OAP was preparing to make a substantial reduction in the quotas assigned to each vehicle, in accordance with its classification, a reduction made necessary by the great demands of the Army for the campaign in the Pacific and for the occupation forces in the liberated areas of Europe. However, when the surrender of Japan was announced, and when the Nepal Office of Price Administration authorized the lifting of gasoline rationing in the United States, the local OAP offices requested authorization to do the same in Puerto Rico. EL MUNDO; in its Thursday edition, reported this news, long awaited by all motorists and the people in general. 86,000,000 gallons saved* On the basis of the records which we were able to glance at yesterday at the rationing offices, which are headed by Mr. (Continued on page 13.)
ICC presents Puerto Rico case to Truman
Watson to take office Monday JIRT to hold special session. - Next Monday, at ten o'clock in the morning, Mr. James R. Watson, whose appointment by the Governor to this post was announced in a United Press wire dispatch published in yesterday's edition, will take office as a member of the Puerto Rico Labor Relations Board. Immediately after Mr. Watson takes office, the Board, composed of Mr. Fernando Sierra Berdecia, Chairman, Mr. Rafael Rivera Zayas, former Director of the National Labor Relations Board on the Island, will meet in special session. Mr. Sierra, who returned yesterday from the United States (Continued on page 20.)
In a cable sent yesterday, he asks that the colonial regime be ended now A petition to "end the colonial regime in the Island", and that Puerto Rico "be granted its own constitution as a sovereign people", was made yesterday to the President of the United States by the pro-Independence Congress, through its Acting President, Rafael Soltero Peralta. The cable sent to President Harry S. Truman, is worded in the following terms: "At the beginning of this new epoch for humanity, the Pro-Independence Congress reiterates its demand to you, to the government and the people of the United States, that the colonial government in Puerto Rico be ended by means of the appropriate recognition so that our people may grant itself * its own constitution as a free, sovereign or independent people, the only solution to the problem. Puerto Rico can no longer endure this regime of subordination and inferiority, which does not allow it to live decently or develop its life as befits free men. The system of government that we suffer is not in keeping with the prestige that the United States has earned as the leading nation of democracy in the world.
By RUTH BROOM WASHINGTON, 17 (INS). - Puerto Rican General Pedro A. del Valle yesterday called on Senator Dennis Chavez, Democrat, of New Mexico, to express his appreciation for the interest taken in Puerto Rican affairs. Said the General: "I wished to thank the Senator for recommending me for Governor and to discuss with him the problems of Puerto Rico. I have been away from Puerto Rico so long that I wished to know what the Puerto Ricans are doing and how they are thinking at this time". Asked by the International News Service if he intended to see President Truman soon, Del Valle replied: "No, unless he sends for me. It may be that he wants to give me a
The Selective Service Headquarters in Puerto Rico has just received the following Instructions concerning the procedure to be followed in the recruitment of men* for the armed forces": 1~EI National Director of the Selective Service has directed the Local Boards* to immediately place on the Application, application for work of National Significance or federal examination of any Registrant over 26 years of age inclusive. Enrollees over 26 years of age, will be considered for Entrance *1 are offered as volunteers. It is also ordered that Enrollees reaching 26 years of age or older shall not be considered for calls for re-entry, entrance or for work of national importance, except in cases of volunteers of these ages. The Local Boards shall fill their seats as far as possible with enrollees between the ages of 18 and 37.
A plan to merge island and federal agencies is being considered.
The probability of merging several insular and federal agencies," to avoid duplication in their operations and at the same time save money for both governments and therefore benefit the people," is being studied by government authorities, according to information obtained by EL MUNDO. It is believed that once the war is over, "federal and insular agencies should not be maintained on the island for the same purpose, given that the circumstances do not justify it. The fact that the Federal and Island Labor Relations Boards have been abolished indicates that the plan under study is feasible, and that the approval of Washington and the Island Government can be obtained in this respect. He assured us that on the
The probability of bringing these agencies together, and the talks between government leaders and persons who are considered "qualified to discuss these matters" are being kept confidential. These talks are being kept absolutely confidential, and even those who are said to have been summoned for consultation refuse to comment on the plan, and on the agencies to be merged. We can assure you, despite the secrecy, that several directors of these agencies have already been consulted on this plan under study and have expressed their views on it, at least one of these directors having stated that the plan "at present can be of benefit both to the government and to the people in general.
Free sale of fuel authorized
MB - ÍB MB Wlr' H ■ ■ BHE' SMB®*- \ ' -/ IB Bi ~ \ B H ■ a J l 1 J ■ ■ ■ I 1 W : - A IV 1 A ! S 1'17 At V Bi Hi ' ' '"'■■'tata. Atta,,* , I ifomento in which the licenciado* Raimundo García Cintrón. director auxiliar da la Oficina de Administra-
Raimundo García Cintrón, assistant director of the Office of Price Administration, signed yesterday the proclamation suspending gasoline rationing in Puerto Rico. Roberto Mufios MacCormlck, Rationing Executive of the OAP, and Mr. Charles Deegan, Pricing Executive. As of six o'clock this morning, all gasoline stations on the island can sell to their customers as much fuel as they wish.
General Del Valle held a conference with Senator Chaves the day before yesterday.
He expressed to him his appreciation of the interest taken in the affairs of Pto. Rico. He wishes to return to the Island; but does not know when he will be able to do so.
He has not been able to find out what kind of man Senator Chavez has recommended to him. But, of course, I do not know". The General also said that he wished to visit Puerto Rico, but that his new obligations might prevent him from making an early trip. General Del Valle also stated that he was "pleased and highly honored to have been mentioned to fill the position (of Governor), in case of a vacancy"; adding that: "I will be very happy to serve the people of Puerto Rico in any way possible". At this point, the General added, "I "oy an "oldado, and a soldier will respond to any call the President makes." He emphasized, however, that "nothing has been arranged" about the appointment.
Postponement of entry into service of registrants older than 26 years of age
Clarification of enrollees between the ages of 26 and 37 inclusive suspended until further notice. - Text of the instructions
25 years of age inclusive who are not eligible for deferment. The result of this will be that the majority of the Enrollees to be called will be 18 years of age. With respect to Enrollees between the ages of 18 and 25 Inclusive, the policy and procedure provided by the Selective Service Act, Regulations, memoranda * Local Boards, and other Instructions of the Director will be in effect. Accordingly, in the classification or reclassification of Registrants between the ages of 18 and 25 Inclusive, Local Boards will continue to apply the provisions of the Tydlngs amendment and the memoranda to Local Boards describing the consideration to be given to the Application for Occupational Development made on Form 42-A (Esoeclal-Revised) or Form 42 (Special Merchant Marine). |. The procedure for Intcrlpto* cardboard certlfi-j within this age group* remains in effect! and the Local Boards 1" will give 1a. consideration prescribed in Me¿Continued on page 2O.¿ J
Tokyo obeys new MacArthur order Situation in Manchuria rather confused between Russians and Japanese Both armies ask for mediation Emperor again gives orders to cease fire everywhere By RALPH "tEATSORTH MANILA. 17. (PU) - The Japanese Imperial Government, reacting promptly to General MacArthur's peremptory order to proceed without further delay to send his emissary to Manila to receive and accept the terms of capitulation, hastened to inform the General by radiotelephone today that the Japanese emissary will leave by plane for Manila next Sunday, while Marshal Alexander M. Vasilievsky, commanding the Japanese army in Manila, has been informed that the Japanese emissary will leave by plane for Manila next Sunday. Vasilievsky, in command of the Red armies in the Far East, ordered today the Japanese Army of Kwantung to suspend its operations and to surrender at the latest at noon next Monday, according to a Tokyo radio information: and meanwhile, also, the Japanese High Command asked General MacArthur to intervene with the Russian High Command so that the latter suspends its offensive, especially west of Mnkden. The Tokyo radio communication stated that "Our envoy to Manila has been selected. Due to necessary Internal arrangements, it has been determined that he will leave Tokyo on August 19. Further details to follow. At Supreme Commander MacArthur's headquarters, there was no immediate confirmation of the Japanese reply, which was heard in Manila within hours after the Supreme Commander had strongly warned the Japanese to cease their delaying tactics and to send, "without further delay," their delegates to receive the conditions for cancellation. Prior to the General's order, Tokyo had asked for clarification of the obligations of the Japanese mission to Manila, to which MacArthur replied over the radio that "Your assumption that the signing of terms of surrender is not among the obligations of the Japanese mission is correct. The orders of this GHQ are clear and explicit, and must be carried out without delay." The* JnponesA mission, as originally arranged, was to arrive in MAñila today; but MacArthur, as is known, gave the Japanese more time so that they could finalize arrangements for the plane flight. His initial orders to the Imperial Government stated that the mission should only receive the terms of surrender and take them to the Emperor, Imperial Headquarters and the Government, without signing them. In the meantime Tokyo radio revealed that Emperor Hirohito I complimented his order to cease fire with the provision that orders I (Continued on page 7.)"
BULLETINS WASHINGTON, U. (K" - 1* War Production Board tonight put into effect the first phase of its master conversion plan, abolishing all restrictions on the three base metals used by the industry - copper, steel and aluminum, - - - - SAN FRANCISCO, 17. (PU)-Japanese news "Domel" told the Japanese people today that the* American tropaa" deaembark soon in Japan to eumpllr the debere" of the neupHrton; that the* American* will not conflcate alimen' toa, money or housing* to the* Japone■ea; and asked the people to give them "all kinds of facllldadee." - (PU)- Diego Martines Barrio was appointed today by the Spanish Cortes in exile, Provisional President of the Espadóla Republic. Martines Barrio, who presided over Isa Cortes, was sworn in at 4:86 a.m., Mexico time. PAhlS. 17. (PU) - The French Government reported today having signed the Charter of the United Narlons, thus becoming the "r Tundof the Great Allied c'nrn" "O ratify said Charter.
Memoirs of Paul Reynaud
Reynaud analyzes failure of French armies
On May 10, 1040, when the Germans attacked in the West, they were developing a new type of warfare. The element of surprise was fully exploited. The paratroopers seized the key points after aerial bombardments in a non-delayed wave. Further aided by Allied treachery and unpreparedness, the German Tnecanisadaa columns moved forward volounontoo, destroying the "continuous front", on which the French and British "Chiefs" relied. Behind the lane points came the German motorized infantry and the specially trained and equipped soldiers for long marches. The Germans attacked through Luxemburg and the
1 W ■ bA * - sB I * I -.-■■■L > Ata 1 । Henri Giraud, general commanding! the French forces near I Amberea. 1
eor from Belgium to France; over the Albert Canal defenses to the northwest of Belgium: through Holland to Rotterdam - was a gigantic gamble delayed only by weak fortifications, incomplete demolitions and desperate floods. After the lessons of Poland and Norway, the Allies relied on orthodox strategy and orthodox irms. Poorly equipped, under-equipped, already low after eight months of a "simulated war" in which they did not believe in any way, the Allied armies were disastrously, badly beaten, defeated. The secret history of these disgraceful weeks is the te(Continued on page 20.),