THE DAILY WNDO OF THE MASANA
ff====gg=w * 38 Page" 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
■I -" - - - YEAR XXVII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 1, 1945
Entered as second claaa matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10487
Treasury Closed in Surplus
x As of June 30, the Treasury had a balance of $2,231,776.80 in excess of estimates I Buncaglia assures that the current fiscal year will close with a surplus } Pnr Teófilo Maldonadn. Editor of EL MUNDO. i The Island Treasury has closed the fiscal year which ended June 30 with a surplus of $92,231,776.80. The head of the Treasury Department was । । । । alente । very satisfied with the work / done and the flattering results obtained, as collections exceeded by about eight and a half million dollars the revised revenue stliMhs, in spite of the tremendous decline in receipts" from 1a exporWMM of rums. The" Treasury's" collections for fiscal 1943-44 revenues amounted to $79,502,530.W. The estimate was $71,102,000. which was $71,102,000. Notwithstanding having lielos books under the geendinlco arto which ended June 30 appropriations approved by the Legislative Aséenteles at its last amounted to $5,030,444.45, the ÉMerávlt at the close of the ope- , has been $92,231,776.80. than austanclally all suanterior. Treasury closed with MMK-ante of $874,921,112.81 the aftó '"■■íca 1943-44. in which there were appropriations passed ■MMj| Legislature. In the year eco-1942-43 the surplus was "<-9,650.33. . He stated yesterday to Mr. Bu scaglia MriVit can be guaranteed that the Te- ■■■■ will close its operations by fl-■H-sr the current fiscal year, ■V a considerable surplus. ■Hfnpre and as long as the tax rates are maintained existHe said that of the total aslgIMlones approved in the last selegislative, amounted to about forty-seven million . MKes. He said that the total appropriations approved in the last selegislative amounted to some forty-seven million and seven million dollars (not counting the five million and a half dollars to be taken from the pahay R* 1 * to take into account that many of the ' WHaidal appropriations are not for fiscal years and are to be carried over to the Sda i kftos Plan. But that even in the event that outstanding allocations were carried forward to 1 MMLos in this year, there will be a surplus of nine million dollars at the end of the fiscal year in MNW'iya so that the total WTaf.ii*!--: resources will be S156,406,77fi.8fl
T> I R 8 "rR O" 9ai'"'"'" -Usj, f * v.CKJ Counting on collections expected this year. Treasury receipts during the last fiscal year break down as follows: Customs, $2,150,000; Federal Internal Revenue, Including from export of rums. -7,448,468.54; Island Beverage Tax, $6,142,914.41; Arbl<ns, $11,960,090,000; Open Property Tax. 394,408.58; ConRudon on Revenue. $16,337,4167; ImM||to of Victory, on Hey M, ' p dáneas. - - Mussolini was (dSw&ka to Italy . forte - Edda Mussolini yesterday to Italy dcspuq of eight months in Switzerland. Swiss who handed her over to him at first, when LdKWÉml supposed name of lu&aHRiiAosta, auto-rities. allied 4® which, according to left her to the '*V®dOBy "* Italian authorities. M As Amó' "Mfciiuor of their fegreso. lasl'wepai Radas guarded the "Forlamlni". placed in luga real isM éRfos to avoid represan arikm>a> "the people. Although' tja quiet, al romo, few moments oHI averuzar the border, *WVda esú ■nómada in a conqm where he stayed Ola a a occasion cbtu-n iMWa visit several R)s. but interned AdjllMKlia dudad reallzade hostility, the give him death, ' auisas deddle' KovomAa i linón -dy'- ' -,n entered Sul--Mis before Aroeiha ' "liado by "rwiw ®la acusaLoa ínteraak address giving tt,. ün the VICTdtó Anortado
NEW YORK, 31. (INS)-Singapore radio, controlled by the Japanese, today broadcast a message to Lord Louis Mounbattan from the Japanese Quartermaster General, advising him that his instructions to prepare the Singapore Government for occupation on September 5 had been carried out.
The Government of 'San Juan will make : payment of debts Owed to merchant* and entities $470,000. - Stabilizes salary payments The Government of the Capital is prepared to settle approximately $470,000 owed by said administration to merchants and entities of San Juan and the Island. This amount corresponds to commitments not settled by the municipality, due to lack of the corresponding funds, during fiscal years prior to July 1. "One of the administration's main purposes," Administrator Roberto Sánchez Vilella told EL MUNDO yesterday, "is to raise the municipality's credit, so that the administration will walk on its own feet. Our efforts have ensured that such credit will be stabilized, for which we will have to liquidate in the next few weeks, pending commitments from past financial years, amounting to $470,000". The Mayor also informed that he is preparing a notice to all businesses to submit to the Municipal Auditor all the documentation necessary for the prompt payment of their accounts. "We hope," he added, "that the vouchers which to date have not been presented by the merchants, and by other organizations which have not collected delinquent accounts, will be filed, for greater efficiency in the payment plan." Payments on these accounts will be made through the Office of the: City Auditor, sefior Francisco; Grovas. "We are working out,"-said the Mayor,-"the payment plan for all these overdue obligations." Funds reimbursed to the mu-i niciple by the Aqueduc(Continued on page 22.) Service will be used to cover these accounts.
By RUTH BROOM WASHINGTON, 31. (INS)-The Children's NcRociado of the Department of Labor announced today that during the month of July, 1945, three thousand five hundred and sixty-four wives of servicemen and their babies have received in Puerto Rico the benefits of the emergency maternity and child welfare program approved by the Insular Government in February, 1944. \ Pursuant to a Congressional recommendation, the Bureau also announced that wives and babies of recently discharged servicemen, under certain conditions, are now eligible for medical care and hospitalization under the program. Until now, application for the benefits of the maternity and infant care plan had to be made while the husband or father was still on active duty,
Rector against lawyers' procedure Does not concur to Committee; repudiates appointment Ochoteco to preside i The Rector of the University, "<-- flower Jaime Benitez, in a letter addressed yesterday to the Executive Secretary of the Bar Association, sefior Roberto H. Todd, states that he considers it contrary to the most elementary principles of justice that the complainant and main prosecution witness ata appointed president of the court that is to judge the validity of his accusation. He refers to the Inquiry being conducted by the Bar Association in connection with the Equalities of James $urry and other lawyers. Here is the text of the letter from Rector Benitez: "I answer your letter received by me yesterday afternoon, in which I am summoned to appear before the special commission of the Bar Association presided by Mr. Felix Ochoteco, and which will have to report on alleged irregularities committed by Government agencies in the hiring of their lawyers. He believes it is convenient to publicly clarify the whole matter related to the compensation of the lawyers of the Bar Association, and to report on the alleged irregularities committed by government agencies in the hiring of their lawyers.
Surrounded by their equipment, which included machine guns, these airborne infantry troops waited at an Okinawa airfield for the order to take off for Japan. Shortly thereafter they landed at Atsugl. airfield near Tokyo, thus beginning the occupation of Japanese territory for the occupation of Okinawa. (Associated Press Photo)
Some 50 fire hydrants cannot be used Gándara points out to the SIA deficiency of one hundred to two hundred more in S. J. In a letter addressed to the chief of the Insular Service of Aqueducts, Mr. Raúl Gándara, director of the Insular Fire Service, informs him that "there are in San Juan more than 100 or 200 hydrants:, of fire, mounted in .lempo of Spain, which are completely deficient for the ectual service." He also adds that the water service for the control of the Parada 17 fire was reestablished by the SIA in a term of seven minutes after Mr. Luis Cuevas, employee of this agency, was called. Mr. Gándara also reports that "no less than 50 fire hydrants have been out of service for more than 25 years" and advocates for "legislative action so that the aqueduct may be expanded in proportion to the increase in population". We publish below the text of Mr. Gándara's communication to the head of the SIA, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante: "I am disturbing your attention today with the purpose of clarifying a possible misinterpretation that may have been made by Mr. Cuevas Bustamante". In order to clarify a possible misinterpretation that there may be regarding any statements published in relation to the water supply in Santurce ,V riurante eI incenen the night of Monday, August 27 w, in Santurce. j inform you that in the "statement" given by ml to the Pren- । sa on Tuesday 28. I ended the mlsmp fílicitando al. Insular Service (Continued on page 22.) Pagan censures Tugweil's attitude Questioned as to whether he had to comment on published reports that Governor Tugwell is not Inclined to favor the holding of a special session of the Legislature, excomislonadp Reddente and Socialist senator, sefior Bolivar Pagan. stated that he is "extrafia Ja the attitude of Governor Tugwell" and that it "shows how little interest he has in our problems." "I am surprised at Governor Tugwell's attitude," said Lumberjack Pagán, "refusing to call a special session of the Legislature when there are urgent problems that require immediate action by the legislative branch. That shows the little interest that -1 Governor Tugwell has in our problems." 1
■ The third for wives and babies i of discharged servicemen continues I Even though, the soldier leaves the Army, the pregnant wife will continue to enjoy the ¡ benefits of the medical assistance program.
The wife of a serviceman may apply for assistance for herself and her (Continued on page 22.) EQUALS REPORT READY The Report of the Bar Association-appointed Commission to determine the Equalization Awards received by various attorneys from island and municipal governments and various government authorities and agencies is now ready. The report, which includes recommendations and analyzes the refusal of Mr. James F. Curry to appear before the Commission, will be discussed by the assembly of the Bar Association <01e begins today, in Ponce, once it is revealed by the president of said commission, Mr. Felix Ochoteco.
It was approved in principle the i arrangement streets Incluyr Park, Allrn and San Francisco. - Planning Board objects to others The project for the repair and permanent reconstruction of, numerous city streets, to be carried out -with combined funds from the San Juan Government and the Emergency War Program, was approved in principle yesterday by the Planning Board. । This body! also discussed numerous requests for the segregation of lots. On the San Juan street project, it was reported that there was ■ no objection to the permanent reconstruction of Alien < and San Francisco Streets, as well as ! del Parque Street. The Board recommended < that a separate project be submitted' on the latter, being ' of a different nature from ' Allep and Francisco streets... i Heliodoro Blanco 1 was commissioned by the Board to prepare the final report on the overall street project. This body will have to establish i certain conditions with regard to the reconstruction of some of the streets in certain sections of Sanfurce. to the works and to the disposition of so- " ¡ ConU" '
Interior has slats for new wagons - - -
I The number of those registered dropped from 28,233 to 23,665 The Department of the Interior is prepared to issue additional motor vehicle licenses in the event that the liberalization of production restrictions makes it possible for new vehicles to be received on the island during the current fiscal year in excess of the amounts previously fixed. This was reported yesterday by a spokesman for the agency. The Department has in its possession, it was informed, a sufficient number of metal license plates, of all classifications, to face any situation. In addition, the work of the Automotive and Transit Division is well organized for the prompt dispatching of new Ucencies in the future. According to authoritative information, the American automobile industry will be able to produce 500,000 new motor vehicles of different types and makes by December 31, 1945, and six million in 1946. Previously, production had been limited to a smaller number of vehicles. This situation and the future tightening of restrictions, it was reported, "may establish an industry-wide scramble for the largest and fastest production, which would make it possible for Puerto Rico to receive new automobiles and other vehicles for civilian use in excess of the quota previously estimated. As of July 15, 1945-46, only 23,665 motor vehicles had been registered with the Department of the Interior, which were authorized to operate during the 1945-46 fiscal year. During the last fiscal year, the figure was 38,233, but this agency expects to reach, in the course of the next few months, a figure close to the latter, due to the registration of new tabulations, transfers and other operations which are being carried out. The Department is working on the computation of revenues received from new license plates. The distribution of authorized vehicles for this fiscal year is as follows: Private, 19,205; public, 3,433; insured public, 1,367; governmental, 1,367.
Balseiro believes that Tydings' attitude is contrary to the rights of the Island.
" He judges it undemocratic and contradictory. - । Gov. Tugwell presented the President with a misrepresented picture of island aspiration, says.
The president of the Puerto Rican Pro-Statehood Association, Sofior José A. Balseiro, said yesterday that the attitude of Senator Tydings is "undemocratic and contradictory" when he announced that statehood will not be one of the alternatives to be included in the plebiscite which, according to the federal senator, will be held in eighteen months in Puerto Rico. Balseiro said the following: "91 Senator Tyding has been asserting, from 1936 until a few days ago, that Puerto Rico is asking for and wants independence. And that same Senator Tydings says now "that there is some possibility that, if Puerto Ricans are given a chance, they could choose statehood. And because he knows " <senate Tydings that being so . -. if a truly reasonable and truly honest plebiscite were held here, he goes so far as to opine that the United States "would be disqualified:" from giving "statehood to Puerto Rico, s Senator Tydings's contradictory and anidemo- ■ temic opinion, in the light of the history of the United States, is of no value. For almost every Terrl- . torian who entered the Union to live in full dignity and equal rights has heard, again and again, such monstrous arbitrariness as that of Senator Tydings of Maryland. The important thing is to denounce immediately before the authorities . of the Administration and of the U.S. Congress the crir men that seems to be forged in con- . tract of our highest citizens' rights. We reject > as "a free choice" that which 1 begins by violating fundamentally* i i mind the optimum con* i Ututional expression of that citizenship with * whose duties we have fulfilled. Where is the freedom to choose, ; if you begin by leaving out a i
Would we have "the kind of government we desire" (Tydings' words), if the best kind of government -statehood- enjoyed by the American citizens of the United States were excluded for the American citizens of Puerto Rico? And for that monstrosity the unity of the Puerto Rican people was solicited? For that offense to citizenship was the agreement between us made more expensive? No! There can be no harmony here on the basis of discrimination. Here there must be no concert of wills on the basis of demeaning inequality and abusive outrage. Here, as in Washington, there must be firm and growing opposition by every bona fide American citizen and by every honorable ruler and legislator to the mockery just announced by the sounding Tydings. It is mensstar- rscordsr, without em(Contlnued on page 22.)
The Attorney General, Enrique Campos del Toro, has summoned all the judges and prosecutors of the District Courts of Puerto Rico to a meeting to be held in his office on Saturday, September 8, to discuss the problem of juries. "This is the most important problem we face in relation to criminal trials," Campos del Toro said, adding that "the district courts have their calendars full for criminal cases." Judge Gallardo Díaz of the Bayamón District Court found it necessary to dissolve the jury of that court.
- ----- -J- * n |a Page "- ' Procurador cites prosecutors and judges on jury problem
* Campos del Toro has been studying adequate legislation to solve the problem of juries. "This has two aspects: a permanent reform through the necessary legislation, and immediate measures that can solve the problem. We are studying those measures that can be submitted to the Judicial Council and the Permanent Legislative Commission and to take quick action I am summoning the judges and prosecutors of the District Courts". Campos del Toro leaves today for Ponce, where he will attend the annual meeting of the Bar Association.
k -J p Message from Truman on status expected next week.
J Occupation of the Empire is extended
p Both the Japanese civile* comr p lo* militare* "e show passive r Thick forces ' will arrive tomorrow o ' occupied MacArthur. - ' Will enter Tokyo within J shortly. Gives other orders * By WILLÍÁbFbT DICKSON WITH MACAR' THUR FORCES AT YOKOHAMA, 31. (PU1 - American forces! ' airlifted and Marine Infantry have taken possession j of a strip of territory which "n "n "n" ' an extent of over two hundred square miles, in the area of the ' Japanese capital. The Japanese government, in fsnlo, broadcast the news that ' the ' bulk of the forces of the American Eighth ' Army ' desharcatá on । Sunday at Yokohama and on Monday _ at Tateyama Hojo, on the peninsula ' of Chiba, southeast of the speech d" Tokyo. Japanese radio announced that the landing of these forces was postponed on Saturday. As the occupation of Japan enters its second day, without incident of any kind, fifteen to twenty villages and ideas south of Tokyo have been occupied by paratroopers, infantrymen and sailors from the war units. Airborne reinforcements have been constantly arriving from Okinawa at the Atsugi airfield. Reinforcements sent to Yoko' hama and the Yokotu* * ka naval base have been arriving on sealift transports based at the giant block anchored in To1 klo Bay. More than 40,000 Americans have set foot on Japanese soil, while more than a hundred superfortresses based at Taiwan and an escort of fifty to sixty fighter planes based at Iwo have maneuvered over the Tokyo area to watch for any hint of Japanese treachery. All of the fleet's cafflons have been loaded and provided with gunners. But no firing order has been reported since the landing began at six o'clock Thursday morning (five o'clock Wednesday afternoon, Eastern War Time). (Continued in nárins 2 > '
Awaiting orders to leave for Japan
í Just awaiting ' meeting of Congress - Tyding* will authorize a formal statement on the situation / The new measure is a compromise In Washington original hill on Independence is believed discarded By CHARLES McCABE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON. 31 (PU)-C.Well-informed people in this Capital predict that the expected "decisive action" regarding the political status of Puerto Rico will come next week in the form of a message from President Truman to Congress requesting the swiftest action "on the thorny problem of Puerto Rican status . It is generally believed that the Presidential message is already prepared and will be sent to the Senate and House of Representatives as soon as the houses resume their work next Friday. Meanwhile, the office of Senator Millard Mondlngs (D-Md.) has informed United Press that the Senator will authorize a formal statement "on the Puerto Rican status problem but that it is not likely to be released to the Press until Congress has reconvened. It is understood that Mr. Tydings is studying the legislative position which was submitted yesterday by the President to Truman and that he will probably suggest some changes in it before making public his statement on the situation. We have not been able to determine whether or not yesterday's conference spells the final death of Senator Tydings' original resolution granting Independence to Puerto Rico; but such is the impression prevailing in some of the circuits of this Capital, in which there is much speculation on the subject. The statement made yesterday by Tydings to the United Press to the effect that the Senate Committee on Territories is in the process of perfecting the bill which it wishes to submit to the people of Puerto Rico, has been interpreted by many circles as an indication that the legislation as finally drafted will represent a compromise. The compromise , , in any event , would be between the views held by the j Island Legislature and Mufioz Ma- . rin , on the one hand , and the Committee da . The Senate Territories Committee, on the other hand, with Tydings and President Truman acting as "honest brokers." Ever since President Truman s made the statement that the United States has no intention v of abandoning in the postwar period the " > vital military bases it ahon t" have, the opinion has prevailed on ' Capitol Hill that the draft i.Tyding's "independence bill will meet with many obstacles" during its passage, and that the aggressive Maryland senator may find it difficult to get his own committee to even form it. i In well-informed circles it is i t.ee that the legislation which go- - barnadnr Tugwell submitted to Prests dent Truman contains three alternatives. viz: the state, sU I guiding the New Mexico - Instrumentation Act, . .The Tydings-Pifiero measure; the Inder pendency, with dispe letones t to provide for definite economic separation from the United States, as in the original Tydings bill; and, the revision of the Charter, granting the Island greater liberties to govern itself. >It is understood that by virtue of the proposition submitted by Governor Tugwell, in the preparation of which it is presumed that Mufioz Marin actively collaborated, three alternatives would be offered to the people of Puerto Rico by the Congress of the United States, by means of a concurrent solution of the Senate and the House of the United States. In the source we gathered the impression that the presidential message will add significance to the legislation, this being taken as the just reward due to the people of Puerto Rico for their contribution to the achievement of 1" victo™ in the war. It is further believed that this * standard of action was agreed to by Truman. Akes jrTugweU anta" of '°- -