THE NON DO
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2Sections
YEAR XXVII
DAILY MORNING
MORNING JOURNAL
Accelerate victory in the Pacific by buying more war bonds.
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, JUNE 14, 1945
Entered m eocond clara matter. Poet Office, San Juan. V. R.
NUMBER 10502
The Infantry commemorated its holiday yesterday.
Harding pronounced the jÜBcurao of occasion in a program offered There were drill Losey Field Ceremonies at all camps. - 18 medal recipients L*- Infantry had a special place yesterday in the tropical sunshine, as the Military Department of the West Indies held conme* moratlvaa ceremonies of the day, extolling the acts of bravery of the Infantrymen. With songs and speeches, with realistic combat demonstrations, equipment displays and medal presentations to the infantrymen stationed on the island, "the Incomparable Infantry" was honored by their compatriots. "Impressive," says the official note, "was the demonstration given by 160 recruits from Camp O'Rollly, who in Spanish and in English, sounded a program from Camp Buchanan, performing the stirring song - 'Rodger Young,' the story of the Infantry hero who 'fought and died to save the band of men he led,' "Impressive also," it adds, "was the combat demonstration given on Losoy Field, where Infantrymen in combat fatigues, with the help of the infantrymen of Camp O'Rollly, were given the opportunity to perform the song 'Rodger Young,' the story of the infantry hero who 'fought and died to save the band of men he led,'" and "Impressive also," it adds, "was the combat demonstration given on Losoy Field, where infantrymen with their full equipment executed an attack on a fortified platform, using flamethrowers, bazookas, explosives and smoke screens to overpower the enemy, "At Camp O'Reilly and Camp Tortuguero, infantry equipment displays, troop reviews and the presentation of Good Conduct medals marked the day's activities. "A large crowd of soldiers gathered at the Soldiers' Club at Buchanan to witness the special broadcast of the Infantry Day program. General E. F. Harding, commanding general of the Military Department of the West Indies, delivered his Infantry Day address in both Spanish in the afternoon and English in the evening. "In addition to the performance of the Infantry Day Chorus, directed by Professor Augusto A. Rodriguez, two MetropollUn singers, baritone Leonard Warren and soprano Agnes Davis, who tour the camps of the West Indies Military Parliament, contributed their performances to the program, Warren accompanying the Chorus in "Rodger Young". "Administrative Officer Ralph Sanchez, with his band No. 81 of the Ground Forces and the military drums and eqrnets, accompanied the Chorus. "The high note of the day was given by Colonel Hardlhg when in his speech he exclaimed: "To them (the Infantrymen) this day of the Infantry is another day of agonizing struggle, another day of supreme effort, of unforgettable sacrifice, of continual threatening danger. For this reason, let our hearts offer the homage of our gratitude, our admiration and our recognition to those shoulders of the long-suffering Infantry battalions... to the invalids and the missing... who with blood wrote a glorious page of our history". "Two dramas were presented in the program, one, "Who Walk tho Ground" and the other based on the heroism of Rodger Young, performed in English by a cast of soldiers, and in Spanish by members of the Airborne School. Fighter planes and first aid to the "casualties," rendered by the modest corps, gave a real note to the mock battle "General Harding was present at the parade held late yesterday at Losoy Field, where the Security Forces of the Military Department of the West Indies, manXContlnued on page 13).
Construction materials outlook Likely improvement anticipated for coming months, per JPG The War Production Board issued an official statement yesterday on the situation as far as "construction materials are concerned." Although it anticipates a "probable improvement during the next few months," it warns that "it will take some time, even after the expected reductions in the war program, to restore production to normal and to achieve the required number of workers." The situation regarding some building materials, according to the communique issued yesterday after notification was received from Washington, is as follows: "Steel-stock has improved as to profiled steel parts and plate, but other products continue to be in short supply. Cast iron pipe-stocks very low and no hope of improvement at present. Orders are numerous and continue to increase. Portland Cement-stock is vast. Concrete pipe-available in bulk and production is vast. Concrete products-generally stock is adequate, although shortages are reported in some localities. The situation regarding wood remains the same: critically scarce due to the demands of the Army. Asphalt roofing-production is increasing in line with demand, but deliveries are slow. Bricks-although production in gold is sufficient for current needs, it has been reported to be in short supply in some localities. Clay tile-production and shipments remain in balance, but stocks are low in Alabama, Georgia, Georgia, Carolina del (Continued on p. 20.)
From 200 to 300 teachers alone were left without the summer course.
Cebollero explains how the problem of the original log five hundred was solved, - The number of enrollees amounts to exactly four thousand**.
Two to three hundred of the five hundred provisional teachers who applied for enrollment were left out of the summer course of the University of Puerto Rico, which, on the other hand, has registered four thousand students, the highest enrollment in a summer session.
This was explained yesterday by the Director of the Summer Course, Mr. Pedro A. Cebollero. Mr. Cebollero's statements are as follows: "The official enrollment period for the regular summer session ended on Wednesday, June 13, The total enrollment amounted to exactly 4,000. In the entire history of the University of Puerto Rico, no regular summer session has ever reached such a high figure. Last year's enrollment - the highest to date - was only 3,659, or 341 less than this year's enrollment. The University has spared no effort to serve all the teachers and students who applied for admission. It put the last of its teachers at the service of the summer session. In addition to those who constitute the regular faculty*, it hired the services of a large number of professors (eleven in Pedagogy alone). The problem of approximately 500 provisional teachers, who without having credentials for admission came to Rio Piedras to apply for enrollment, was solved for the most part by the opening of new sections in various Pedagogy courses. This was made possible by the willingness of some of our teachers * to carry an unusual load during the tiring summer session. When we had the pleasure of receiving the representatives of the Teachers' Association, we explained to them the measures taken to open new courses and the impossibility of extending the teaching facilities in Pedagogy courses beyond what had already been done. This was admitted by the distinguished comrades Muftlz Souffront, Arroyo and Rivera. The matter of the enrollment of provisional teachers has given rise to various public statements by persons whose information on the matter is evidently incomplete. It is convenient to explain here the origin of the situation. When we were preparing to organize the special twelve-week course, it was our intention to accommodate in that session those provisional teachers who have no other studies than those of the secondary school. The Department of Instruction recommended that instead of admitting this group of teachers, it would be preferable to have them enrolled in such twelve-week courses.
The number of ships entering the port of San Juan in recent weeks has been such that there has been great difficulty in delivering cargo to traders, according to the traffic manager of the Bul! Insular Lino, Inc, Mr. A. Valencia, in a letter to the trade. Mr. Valencia says that in the last two weeks this shipping company has received two ships, which have unloaded at eight different docks, and have been able to unload their cargoes at eight different docks, according to a letter addressed to the trade.
The cement issue
Development and outlook of the Puerto Rico Cement Corp.
By Antullo Writw" Editor of EL MUNDO xn Last year the total payroll of the Puerto Bloc Cement - Corporation was the highest of all the years up to 1H4, the amount of all the little arithmetic being S8M.M6. > This represents more than double the wages and salaries paid by the corporation in 18M. -Reports obtained from PBCO indicate that there are currently about 800 permanent and temporary workers, supervisors and clerical employees at ComLa Puerto Rico Cement Corporatlon, as mentioned in the first part of this report, m proposed to reduce its cost and be able to reduce the cost of its operations.
- The plan is to lower its cost and be able to oot on conditions to reduce or 1 pure cement price to meet the possible competition once the factories in Europe begin to tondonev" I comment. Part of this plan, which has been in the pipeline for some time now, consists of reducing the number of personnel in the factory. We have already indicated above that in the collective bargaining agreement signed by the company and the Unión de Cantoras, Operadores y Demós Empleados de la Industria dd Cemento, affiliated to the Confederadón General do Trabajadores, a clause related to the mechanization of the plant had been included, with the company being empowered to "eliminate those parts which in its judgment are unnecessary" once the new plant has been installed.
Once the new machinery is installed, this provision of the agreement added that "the company is committed to obtain similar work to the employee" thus eliminated*, in other subsidiaries of the Company of Puerto Rico, within the metropolitan area of San Juan. In the last interview we had with the president of the Union, Mr. Felix Morales, at the offices of this labor entity in the Sabana neighborhood of Guaynabo, he informed us that everything possible would be done so that the workers would not lose their jobs. The impression we got from our meeting with this and with other union leaders is that the union will insist on compliance with the clause.
The union will insist on compliance with the above-mentioned clause of the agreement, leaving itself open to the possibility that the factory management will carry out some reduction in its personnel without providing the means for the affected workers to work in another subsidiary of Fomento. The administration, for its part, assures that the factory is currently operating with more workers than it needs. To give our readers a full picture of how the company's payroll has been increasing since the cement plant began operating under its management, here are, in round numbers, the figures supplied to us: (Continued on page 20.)
Large number of ships unloaded here during the last weeks
In the last two weeks received ten Bull Insular Line ships, - This has created a problem of delivery of goods for the local trade.
This has created a delivery problem for the local trade in many cases where a steamer has had to go to three or four docks to finish unloading. The letter adds that at present there is cargo for the trade spread over eight docks and that other shipping lines have been receiving steamships and tonnage in excess of normal, which has contributed to the reduction of dock personnel. This circumstance has created a problem for the said shipping company, which assures, through its traffic manager, that every effort is being made to find a satisfactory solution to better serve the trade: "In the first place, this Company has received ten steamers during the last two weeks. Most of these steamers have come with cargo, bringing a tonolage in many cases two or three voices larger -* ton***!" By steamer, which we used to receive on San Juan in normal times. This implies that many of the steamships have had to unload at more than one dock. In many cases a single steamer has had to go to three or four docks in order to finish her unloading, due to the fact that the available docks do not have the capacity to receive the volume of cargo that is now being moved by steam. Today, for example, we have cargo for the trade at eight different docks, which will give an idea of the magnitude of the manning problem we face, apart from the congestion which must necessarily prevail at those docks. On the other hand, the other companies have been receiving at the same time steamships and tonnage in excess of what (continued on page 20).
Salute to the victorious General Patton
With a smile of satisfaction, President Truman shakes hands with General George R. Patton, commander of the U.S. Third Army in Europe, and to whose courage and determination the triumph over German arms was largely due. Truman received Patton at Casa Rios. (Associated Press photo).
Materials allocated for island needle industry; Conference to be held in Berlin.
Labor leader Clement Attlee ,1o revealed yesterday The news was later confirmed in the U. S. by the White House President had kept secret The British will offer a united front at the meeting of powers WASHINGTON,Ts7(PU> - White Hunting announced "ztoday afternoon that the next interview of the Big Three - Truman, Churchill and Stalin - will take place in the vicinity of Berlin The White House Press Secretary, Charles G. Roas declared that the location of the conference has been officially disclosed - something President Trumah himself had refused to report in his last press interview - "in view of the British announcement" - evidently referring to the letter from the English Labor leader, Clement R. Attlee, to Prime Minister Churchill. A dispatch from United Press correspondent Phil Ault, dated today in London, reports on the exchange of correspondence between Churchill and Labour leader Attlee, in which it is revealed that the Big Three conference will be held in Berlin, Churchill asked Attlee, who was his prime minister in the dissolved Coalition Government, to accompany him to the meeting with Stalin and Truman. Tn* eonteMHWn. accepting the invitation, AttlM discovered the thirst of the conference by referring specifically to "the forthcoming conference in Berlin." Yesterday, Churchill spoke in the House of Commons that the Three Grand*" conference - the first after the defeat of Germany and the first in which Truman participates - will take place before June 26. 1 In spite of the prevailing ferment due to the propaganda for the forthcoming general election, it appears that Big Britain will offer a united front at the forthcoming conference. The following is the text of Clement R. Attlee's reply to Winston S. Churchill: "I thank you for your letter of today. "For your earlier intimation 1 of your intention to invite me as Leader of the Labor Party to accompany you to the conference in preparation for the forthcoming conference, and to invite me to join you.
By RONALD CLARK HEADQUARTERS OF THE BRITISH OCCUPATION FORCE IN GERMANY, 15. (PU)-The former Reich Foreign Minister, Joachim von Ribbentrop, was yesterday arrested in a room in a boarding house in Hamburg and taken by plane to an unspecified place for interrogation. Like Heinrich Himmler, von Ribbentrop was carrying a container of poison, but had no opportunity to use it. The ex-amnlstro nasl figures prominently on the list of war criminals and a death sentence against him is considered certain. Von Ribbentrop tried to take refuge in the house of a wine merchant, but he was denied asylum and had to stay in the boarding house, giving the assumed name of Herr Relse. For some time, no one knew who he was. But after a long search, which lasted for weeks, a lieutenant and three sergeants knocked on his door. The exmlnlstro dló a
Joachim Von Ribbentrop
Mr. Roy Schroeder, director of the War Food Administration's Office of Supply for the Caribbean area, who left a hospital two days ago after being confined there suffering from high blood pressure, intends to leave tomorrow for Washington on official business. Mr. Schroeder expects to be absent from the Island for about ten days or at most two weeks. Mr. Schroeder feels quite recovered, and although his doctors have recommended rest, he insists on his trip, since, as he told us (Continued on page 20), it is the OS's quota for the trip.
He insists on his trip, since, according to what he told us (Continued on page 20), the OS corresponds to one month's quota, that is, from June 11 to July 9, when the next distribution will be made. This official information was supplied to us by Mr. Welms Tietjen, acting director of the federal program, when we questioned him about complaints from the Island that numerous wholesalers are refusing to dispatch the quotas corresponding to the retailers, alleging that they have not yet received the amount due to them and to which they are entitled according to the OAP Regulations. Each wholesaler," Mr. Tietjen told us, "has been paid the quota prescribed by the OAP, i.e., 40 percent of the total amount purchased by them during the basic period fixed (January 15 to March 17, 1945). The delivery of the quota to the wholesalers is made once a month, and it includes all the rice to which they are entitled to cover the needs of the population for one month. Since all the wholesalers on the island have already received their quota, the retailers must insist on obtaining their quotas from the wholesalers. It is the consumer's duty to insist that the retailer deliver the amount of rice to which he is entitled according to the restrictive order. "Our duty is to sell to the wholesaler the amount of rice to which he is entitled in accordance with the provisions of the rationing regulations promulgated by OAP. However, if the retailer or consumer does not receive the quota to which they are entitled, they must report the case to OAP. As far as we are concerned,* we sell at the per diem fixed by OAP. In other words, the Price Administration Office rations the item and we sell the quantity (continued on page 20).
Ribbentrop captured in Hamburg City He was arrested by British troops while asleep in a boarding house - he was accompanied by a 35-year-old woman.
He was accompanied by a 35 year old woman who knew his identity and calmly surrendered. Tonight it was revealed that an attractive brunette woman, 35 years old and divorced, was found on the fifth floor of the house in Hamburg where Von Ribbentrop was arrested. The woman opened the door at the sound of Ja bell and said she had no knowledge of the identity of Von Ribbentrop, who jumped out of bed where he was lying, muttering, "What is it?" On inspection of his clothes, a container of poison and three letters addressed to Marshal Montgomery, Prime Minister Churchill and Foreign Minister Eden were found. Von Ribbentrop said that he had tried to hide until British opinion against Germany calmed down and then turn himself in for a fair trial. The identity of the detainee was confirmed by his own sister, who had been arrested shortly before, As the high command has forbidden Jai interviews with the criminals of (Continued on page 20.)
OS reports that he distributed rice to all wholesalers on Tietjen Island says that the quantity delivered amounts to about 100,000 sacks. - Gilstrap explains that all dealers are obliged to sell it The Supply Office, of the War Food Administration, finished selling yesterday afternoon more than 100,000 sacks of rice to wholesalers all over the Island, as the quantity that corresponds to them according to the quota indicated by the Office of Price Administration in its restrictive order. This quantity sold up to
víshumru vvssvsvm éi "avn oyn pul Yesterday, the war restrictions that prevailed in the ports of the Island ceased yesterday, according to information authorized by the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Orlando R. Méndez, by virtue of which, the services of pilots and signals were again transferred to the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Docks and Ports of the Department of the Interior. The restrictions will be maintained only in the case of ships bound for the Pacific. In this regard, Mr. Méndez authorized the following: "I wish to inform the public in general, and especially the shipping companies, that yesterday the war restrictions that by executive order of the President of the United States prevailed in the ports of Puerto Rico ceased. "The service of pilots and signalmen in the ports of Puerto Rico, which were under the jurisdiction of the United States Coast Guard, are now under the direct supervision of the Bureau of Docks and Harbors of the Department of the Interior. However . it is noted for the record that the । war restrictions remain i force in cases of vessels bound for the Pacific."
Portor Ricans against Japanese HONOLULU, Hawaii, 15. (PU)-A fighting unit, composed entirely of Puerto Ricans, is officially reported to be undergoing special training for fighting in the Pacific, preparing to go into action against the Japanese. The group was organized in 1940 and has served in the Caribbean defense command. The size of the unit cannot be announced; but such a team usually consists of a regiment with additional units for special tasks. There is no indication of when and where this Puerto Rican unit will go into action.
Work will be assured for laborers
Raw material will arrive on the island sometime next July Federal Dept. of the Interior intervened A ■ ■ ■ ■ । n । ■ - Puerto Rico is granted exemption so as not to paralyze industry Tor CHÁrLES~MC CABE WASHINGTON, 15. (PU) - L*. War Production Board today allocated 4,300,000 yards of cotton and rayon fabrics for the needle industry in Puerto Rico for the quarter beginning July 1 of this year, a spokesman for the Department of the Interior announced. A meeting has also been announced, to be held tomorrow, between David Flowers of the Department of the Interior and Malcolm V. Me Farlan of the War Production Board, to determine whether the requisitions for materials are to be processed through the Department of the Interior or the War Production Board. The spokesman said it is almost a "virtual certainty" that the Department of the Interior will be the agency responsible for making the allocations to individual manufacturers in the United States and to needlework firms in Puerto Rico. He also said that the materials are expected to arrive in Puerto Rico sometime in July, and that a normal wartime employment level of 42,000 persons should be achieved shortly thereafter. Recently, there has been no official estimate as to the number of persons employed in the needle businesses on the Island, so that any estimate of the increase to be determined by the decision of the War Production Board allocating materials to Puerto Rico will be academic. Last week, the War Production Board allocated 17,200,000 yards of cotton and rayon fabrics for Puerto Rico - for one year - which is exactly the amount requested by the Department of the Interior in communications to the Office of Economic Mobilization and Restructuring. In those communications, addressed first to James F. Byrnes and then to his successor, Fred M. Vinson, the department requested that Puerto Rico be granted a special exemption by the War Production Board from that agency's order compelling needlework factories in the United States to produce only simple, inexpensive underwear. If such an order had finally been applied to Puerto Rico, it would have virtually destroyed the island's needlework industry, which is based on non-essential, so-called "luxury" items such as fine women's underwear. The fabrics now allocated will be made primarily in Puerto Rico into handkerchiefs, children's clothing, night gowns, women's underwear, tablecloths and pillows,
Truman addresses United Nations on 23rd WASHINGTON, 15. (PU)-White House announced late today that President Truman is scheduled to address the closing session of the United Nations conference in San Francisco on Saturday, June 23. White House Press Secretary Charles G. Rosa said that President Truman's presence in San Francisco must necessarily depend on the date of the conclusion of the conference; He added, however, that the conference is making real efforts to complete its work* by the end of next week, and, consequently, it is expected that the President will address the United Nations delegates in person on Saturday, the 23rd. (It has previously been announced that the President will arrive by plane in San Francisco a few hours before the plenary session at which he will deliver his address, and that he will leave San Francisco for the State of Washington a few hours after the meeting, and that he will be in San Francisco for the State of Washington a few hours after the meeting, and that he will be in San Francisco a few hours after the meeting.