THE hÜNDO
34 Ptona" 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
34 Páginss 5 Ctvs. : 2 Sections -
tangle journal
YEAR XXVII
I do not liquidate the bonds purchased. I want to liquidate them.
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, MARCH 24, 1945.
Entered as second claaa matter. Poet Offley San Juan, T. B.
NUMBER 10418
U.S. 3rd Army assault forces cross Rhine and secure bridgehead; Russians break through Berlin defenses.
Committee urges reorganization of rural school
Proposes creation of a new bureau in Dept. of Instruction Calls for higher teacher's pay Plan to supply education of school dropout child The passage, among other me* ¡ rlidae, of a bill creating, as part of the Department d* Instruction, a bureau of rural education composed of a chief-director, three stenographers, and ' supervisors, superintendents, and superintendents of rural education. and ' such supervisors, superintendents (assistants, principals and teachers " as may be necessary, is one of the main recommendations ' made by the committee of direct- ; res of government agencies and private entities on a plan of reform for the rural public education system of Puerto Rico. i Other fundamental suggestions i made by the aforesaid committee, on- j return appropriations bills, i It is recommended ol that a < request be made to the Legislature, to "sign in'budget the sum of t two hundred thousand d Wm,** to the end of "Initiating a plan aimed at su- . I I not school at the end of the third grade; that an act be passed appropriating the necessary funds for the construction of houses for rural teachers, and appointing a commission composed of the Commissioner of Instruction, the Commissioner of the Interior, and the chairman of the Planning Board, to determine the proper manner of carrying out the provisions of said act; that in the budget of the Department of Instruction the appropriation for the payment of rural teachers be increased, in proportion as may be necessary, to cover the increase in the salaries of rural teachers, . (b) That the Commissioner of Instruction use, in carrying out rural school reform, the increase in educational facilities recommended by the Planning Board for rural schools, to cover the increase in educational facilities recommended by the Planning Board for rural schools; that the Teacher Certification Act be amended to provide for specific requirements to be met by the Commissioner of Instruction in issuing certificates to teachers, principals, assistant superintendents and supervisors of rural education; that the Teachers' Salary Scale Law be amended to consider teaching in rural schools as a specialized service, and that the increase corresponding to this service be fixed; provided, however, that only those teachers and principals who reside in the rural area sites determined for such purposes by the Commissioner of Instruction, after study to that effect, shall accrue said increase; and that the Commissioner of Instruction and the Rector of the University appoint a committee for the purpose of designing university courses for the professional preparation of teachers, principally for the purpose of the training of teachers and principals.)
-- ; 1 : - - - Ceramic factory $750,000 for plant; will employ 275 people.
Bayamon. William J. Stubblns, general manager of the company built with the financial contribution of the island government, reported yesterday that all the material and equipment has been ordered for the establishment of this new enterprise. "Once construction is completed*', he said, 'which will last for a period of eight months, the plant will go into normal operation'! The Federal Government has given its approval to a number of applications for the new plant.
By B. SANTIAGO SOBA Editor of EL MUNDO The Development Company is finalizing the plans and specifications for the construction of its ceramic factory. The work, the construction cost of which is estimated at $450,000, is to be announced at public auction within the next few CU The Government of Puerto Rico has obtained, through the Development Company, plans and specifications for the construction of its new ceramics factory.
The new plant will be located in Olivar, Puerto Rico. The new plant will be located on the new kilometer of the Loiza road. Its buildings will be located on an area of approximately fifteen acres. The adjoining tortéeos, -85 acres-, will serve as a source of supply for the manufacture of ceramic articles as soon as the different departments into which this Ind' ttrla will be divided begin to operate. These lands are rich in mud, so (Contlnua on page 18)
Outlook for the country's cigar industry unclear
OAP's Davis says he is not optimistic that the agency will review the current price cap issue By CHARLFSMC CABE WASHINGTON, Feb. 23 (FU)-James P. Davis, director of Region Nine of the OAP, told the United Press that he is not optimistic that the agency will review the U.S. price caps to benefit the Puerto Rican industry. He added that there is no change in the current regulations for the immediate future.
for the immediate future. Other sources maintain that it is very unlikely that OAP will break the price caps in order to help the cigar industry on the island, because it would mean taking the dog by the tail, since Puerto Rican production is a mere fraction of the national cigar production. In government circles it is believed that a subsidy to the cigar industry, as is granted to the sugar industry, is equally unlikely, because the CCAC and other federal lending agencies have no funds available for tobacco subsidies. Mr. Davis said that ÜAP would be pleased to hear from a representative or a representative delegation of the cigar industry, since the national office wishes to make a full exploration and have a full understanding of the problem confronting the Puerto Rican cigar industry. It has been learned that Resident Commissioner Riflero has sent a (Continued on page Uj
IOSSIUIV Vil tu a IUU1I Vil éül -. I Pft 1 . * f JtniM B L . 1
House passed a measure authorizing CA to sell bonds Among other bills passed Thursday was one that sets the residential period before filing for divorce at one month.
The House of Representatives approved in its session last Thursday, with the votes in favor of the minority, House Bill 19, by Ernesto Ramos Antonlnl, authorizing the Puerto Rico Communications Authority to issue and sell its own bonds "in such amounts as its Board of Directors deems necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of the Authority. We are assured that this bill is the first step towards the implementation of the purchase of the properties of the Telephone Company. Another of the approved bills, House Bill 396, by Mr. González Porrata, provides that those who accept in Corto the paternlBill authorizes a new telephone system Negotiations will shortly continue with the Telephone Company. It will be recalled that the talks were initiated in San Juan, but were suspended to be resumed in the United States in the next week.
(Continued on page 4) The law provides that the parents of natural children must proceed to legally register them in the population registry within a term of three days, imposing a penalty of two to six months in jail for those who violate the provisions of the law. (Fellu) -Relieving the Governor from signing certain documents which may be signed by department heads. P. 52. (Ramos Antonlnl) -Increasing from one hundred to two hundred dollars the sum for which may be drawn in cases of death, without the necessity of having to make (Continued on page 18" Drivers' licenses to be reviewed i Interior has ready the i machinery, certain to pass law The Department of the Interior . will conduct a complete review of all licenses issued to operators of motor vehicles in Puerto Rico, according to Acting Commissioner Frank Rullan yesterday. It is proposed to issue new licenses to authorized drivers, eliminating those who are unfit to drive motor vehicles and canoe (Continued on page 18).
The announcement was ■made by the Nazis themselves.
Soviets attack with powerful support of tanks and planes They found a weak point in the line They are now only 31 miles from the capital of Germany By ROBERT MUSE! , LONDON, 23 (PU) - German Informations dk-in that about 90,000 Soviet solder broke through the immediate defenses of Berlin today with powerful tank and airplane support, arrived i. the suburbs d* Golzow. seven miles . i west of Custrlm and barely 31 from the German capital. The same Informations add that finding a weak point on the German Oder line, after several weeks of groping, the White Russian First Army took advantage of the situation with vigorous attacks on the southwest and northwest of Custrlm. The Germans also announced that the Russians had established bridgeheads at Gantchmar, sle4"-mlllM to the noroeeée dr Custrlm and Manschnow, three miles to the southwest. The embestldr according to* Berlin, began after an hour and a half of terrible artillery fire, and was spearheaded by over a hundred gigantic tanks of the "Joseph Stalin'* type and by nourishing formations of dive bombers. A dispatch* of a German war correspondent, transmitted by Berlin radio, states that the Russians, employing *or six rifle divisions, which normally make a total of 90,000, "succeeded in breaking through our front, owing to the great masses of war materials employed, and reached the suburbs of Golzow". The dispatch adds that "the enemy was afterwards contained ; *r our counter-attacks; but the battle continues." Moscow, de - 'uerdo con su prác(Continued on page 18.) Senate fixes four causes for eviction Tenancy measure regulates price rent and form of. The Tenancy Bill, as approved by the Senate, provides that an eviction may only be initiated in the following cases: (a) When the tenant fails to pay the basic rent or the reasonable rent fixed by the Administrator, as the case may be, corresponding to a monthly payment, (b) When the tenant uses the leased property for illegal or immoral purposes, without the knowledge of the landlord. Provided that in this case the landlord shall prove this to the satisfaction of the court. (< When the owner proves to the satisfaction of the court that it is in good faith to repossess the premises for the purpose of demolishing the same, with the intention of constructing a new building, provided that the landlord's plans for such construction have been duly submitted to and approved by the appropriate authority. It is provided in the bill that in this case the court shall not issue the order of release until after having given the Tenant reasonable term within the present emergency, to secure other shelter. The term shall not be gnayor than six months in the case of a dwelling, nor syor than one year in the case of a building intended for business, commerce or Industry. To that end, the courts of law are vested with the necessary power to exercise their discretion in this matter. The bill further provides: "The owner shall commence construction of the building within thirty days after the date on which the tenant vacates the property and shall complete the construction within a maximum period of one year from the same date, unless the Administrator extends such period for good cause.
General Patton gives no truce to the enemy I,
■■ ¿. ■ w.. ■ - jl ' Jr Jr g /Bit I u - ; 1 If if if B k i II tqpirate General George I. Patton, commander of the Third Extadoe T'nldon EJérefto, who, nn well ee HeaUIV WRF "plantante vlctnrU "obre lee aloman?* on the Marre, has crtrmdeyir the Rln, staMeclemln a bridge eabeeeen on the east bank of the river. - (Associated Press photo.)
Him mi urinated other Puerto Rican casualties Killed" Alvaro Sanchez, Lt. Guy J. Cole and J. Varga" Maldonado Lt. Guy E. Cole, the husband of Mrs. Alicia M. Cole, of Cagua", was killed in action in the European area on January 25, according to the announcement made by the Headquarters of the Military Department of the* Antilles*, based on a report rendered by the War Department in Washington. Lieutenant Cole, according to reports* previously furnished, was missing in action. At the same time the War Department reports that Private Alvaro Sanchez, brother of Mrs. Juana Sanchez, of Caguas, died in France on March 10, and that Private Jeronimo Varga* Ma'donadb, son of Mr. Luis Varga", of Yabucoa, died in the American area on March 16.
Six-Year Plan work projects were presented There was great activity in both chambers during the last day for the filing of measures - A proposed creation of the Sugar Company The*legislative*chambers*met yesterday for a brief time. The majority*of the senators and representatives remained in the Capitol during the day and part of the night, since yesterday expired the term for the filing of the bill", - --- --- Numerous*measures" were intended to be filed.
Numerous*measures*were introduced in both the Senate and the House of Representatives*. The fundamental recommendations contained in the Sel* Year Plan of the Planning Board, which have not yet been presented in a bill* in the previous* "ealone", were emptied* into legislation. Various measures were also submitted by the Administration. For the most part, the bills presented" yesterday were appropriations for works" of a local nature, related" to almost" all" the" people" of the Island. In the Senate, Senator Fontrla" presented a bill "so that the municipality of Rio Piedra" be officially named Ciudad UnlveriUarla". Senator Géigel Polanco pre(Continued on page 18)
65th Infantry donation received It was forwarded on behalf of the 3rd Battalion for milk donations Governor Tugwel) has received a letter from Lieutenant Colonel Wilson P. Colberg. Commanding Officer of the 65th Infantry Regiment, containing a donation for the* milk stations on the Island. The letter reads as follows: "I enclose receipt PTA No.
J Reorganization of the authorities and boards proposed by Bolivar Pagan ; He has presented a project" providing that the" ; members" of such bodies be elected in ( ' ' "a majority by the people directly j 1 The president of the Socialist Party, Senator Bolivar Pagan, has presented a series of projects "to reorganize the Island Government, i 1 with respect to the various boards and authorities" created* in the last few years. These projects* cover the Land Authority," the Insular Emergency Con- < ■ aouncil, the Transportation Authority, the General Supply Admlnls- < i traclon," the Supply Company and the Mfnlmó Wage Jun- < ■ ta. ■ ,
7448, issued in his favor, in >the amount of $2,500. This sum in the voluntary contribution of lo" members of the Third Battalion and Specific Units* of the 65th Infantry Regiment, Interim under my direction, to the fund Pro Milk Stations sponsored by 'i Mrs. Tugwell. "It is with great pleasure that I, as Commanding Officer of this Regiment, send to you this amount. In the not distant future, contributions from the 1st and 2nd Battalion will follow this one. I can assure you that our men are doing all that is possible within their means and that the memory of Puerto Rico is always latent in our hearts." The Governor in turn forwarded in reply the following cgj't*' "Dear Colonel Colberg: "We do not* feel deeply (Continued on page 5).
The purpose is that the mlem- r ' broa composing each of ' ■ said* board* or authorities "shall be " 1 elected by the people, shall be respons* t< sable* to the people, and may be ( * changed by the people." The vo" I tants of Puerto Rico, at the general elec* r clones held 1 ■ dq accordance with law every four or 1 years, would elect by direct vote, a majority of the" member" of * each of said boards and auto* C rldades. In such boards and auto* n ■ rldades, representation would be given to the minorities, or "?a to that" party" which had obtained second and third place in the total computation of votes cast at the election. d "In this way," it was reported, "the party which obtained the majority of the votes" would have control of the majority of the members of each of these government agencies, and "the opposition would have an oversight representation, so that all the people would have a voice in these important government agencies. IF the party that won the majority *in the
If the party obtaining a majority in the selections, it would be assured of a powerful majority control in those boards and authorities. Each such board or authority "* would be presided over by that head of the department of the Island Government best suited to each of them. "The Land Authority," it was added, "shall be composed of the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, who shall preside, and six additional members, four of whom shall be elected by the people. The other two additional members shall be appointed by the Governor, upon the proposal of the central bodies of the parties which in the elections obtained second or third place in the total number of votes cast. "The Island Council of the E*tarian Emergency composed of "the Labor Comidonate, who shall preside it, and by sel. additional members, four of whom shall be elected by the people, and the other* members appointed by the (Continued on page U) x
WESTERN FRONT: The American Third Army crossed the Rhine last night and established a bridgehead on the orlIM of the river. The crossing was effected in the face of fierce German resistance. Last night there was still no confirmation from an Allied source of the information from Berlin that Allied armies, under the command of Major Montgomery, had crossed the Rhine between Arnhelm and Dusseldorf. It was reported that British patrols crossed "l Rln near Nijmegen.
Paris assures Montgomery launched crossing Northern onslaught into Germany may already be under way Security blanket covers operations Diminishing resistance to Hodges' thrust in Remagen area By BRUCE MUNN PARIS. 23. <PU> - A dispatch from U.S. Third Army headquarters reports tonight that' Lieutenant General Patton's forces crossed the Rhine River by assault boat*, establishing a bridgehead on the east bank of the river. Meanwhile, British assault patrols crossed the Rhine near Nijmegen, while an unconfirmed Paris radio transmission claimed that three Allied armies, under the command of Marshal Montgomery, "launched an attack across the great river on a 62-mile front" extending southward to Dusseldorf in the Ruhr valley. The Nazi agency "DNB" had claimed this afternoon that elements of the American Third Army "have established themselves" on the eastern bank of the Rln, opposite Oppenheim, "where they crossed the river using amphibious tanks." He added that Lieutenant General Patton's" force" crossed the Rln from" the "ur of Mainz, under the protection of the fue go of "u artillery and cloud* artificíale," "being eliminated* all* except a limited party." There is Irrefutable" evidence that the "last onslaught" to end the war in Europe is about to produclrae to the northern end of the extensive western front, possibly in a matter of hours, if it has not already begun. Throughout the day today, endless swarms of Allied planes flew over the steaming Ruhr valley from the four corners of the world, laying a blanket of dynamite and shrapnel over the complicated German defensive system east of the Rhine in the area. All the "strength" of the Allied air power was thrown into the battlefield at rates not even exceeded by the operations which preceded the invasion of Europe. British observers openly commented in the morning editions of the morning paper* that the great air offensive was a prelude to the final battle in western Europe. The Berlin radio, making literature of the news," said that "through the" artificial clouds covering Montgomery's army, "" the steel notes of the symphony of cannon fire preceding the moment of raising the curtain for the great drama of the crossing of the Rln." A dispatch from London says that the "Evening Standard" newspaper reports that there has been imposed by Marshal Montgomery "strict censorship on the movement" of his Twenty-first Corps of Armies." The only information available on operations in the northern sector of the western front is limited to say that skirmishing" of some proportions took place yesterday in the Nijmegen and Arnheim areas. The gluxion made to the Arhelm area, situated on the opposite bank of the Rln, leads to the deduction that at least allied patrols crossed the river in that area. The Paria radio, in giving the news that the battle of the Rhine had begun, reported that aua (Continued on page 13).
THE WAR IN BRIEF
Berlin reported that about 80,000 Soviet* soldiers* broke through the immediate* defenses* of Berlin and, with powerful tank and plane* support, reached the Golsow suburb of Golsow, located just *1 oeate from Cu a trim and less than 11 oeate from Berlin. According to the* Germans, the Russian" Mtablederoa two bridgeheads* southwest and northeast of the Cuatrim fortress. PACIFIC FRONT) - The American* conquered the town of NaguiHáa and "I MTÓdrOBO.