THE
48 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
48 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVII
Ja.*"!*'!? !®>
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY DECEMBER 22, 1945
Entered as second clans matter, Post Office. Ban Juan, P. B.
NUMBER 10446
CORDERO'S MEMOIRS A woman saves Cordero from a Japanese trap.
Had it not been for that woman, the Colonel would have continued walking into the midst of the enemy troops We insert below the second chapter of the Memoirs of Colonel Virgilio Cordero, Puerto Rican hero of Bataan and survivor of the Death March. He goes on to relate how he retreated with his troops to Bataán, harassed by an enemy that was getting closer every hour. The timely warning that, fortuitously, a tearful Filipino woman gave him prevented the illustrious Puerto Rican soldier from falling immediately into the hands of the Japanese -an ungrateful fate that was to befall him later, as it did Wainwright and other officers and allied numbers. By CORONEL VIRGILIO CORDERO Of the United States Army At Gumaca, the island of Luzon becomes particularly narrow. It is barely fifteen miles wide, from the Pacific side to the other shore in the China Sea. My only hope, under the conditions in which I found myself,-described in the preceding chapter,-was to cross over to the
shore of the China Sea; to take a boat there that would take me to Padre Burros, and from the latter place to cry to the main road at a point about twenty miles west of Atimonan. Thus I would not be able to escape from the trap in which I found myself; and thus I would be able to place myself once in front of the Nipponese enemy. / And so it was, indeed. It was eight o'clock in the morning of December 24 when I arrived with my two companions - a Filipino officer and an American civilian - at the town of Pítalo, by the China Sea. There we took a rustic boat known as "bancas", and left for Padre Yurros at half past five in the afternoon on Christmas Eve.
Construction: of units has been accelerated and 1 medical center in Cidra has been completed. - The first twenty-seven flubunidadet have a cost of 8229,000.00 So comes activating the program of eonetrucción of rural medical contrae, public health units and municipal hospitals, entrusted to the War Emergency Program, according to the provisions of law 323 of the last Legislature. PEG Acting Director, Mr. Mario Marrero, reported yesterday that the agency completed the construction of its first medical center in Cidra and is currently working on the one in Maricao. The completion of designs and the closing of transactions for the acquisition of land in different municipalities of Puerto Rico are expected to be completed before the auctions are announced immediately, according to Marrero. The rural area program includes 'the construction of rural public health subunldades, in places where the inhabitants of three or four adjoining neighborhoods can come to avail themselves of said health center." Another preference point "is that the site where it is located de(Contlnued on page 8.)
It was not long before I confirmed that the luck factor was still with us. The Japanese had moved on quickly, and had reached the crossroads from which I had hoped to reach the main road leading to Atlmonan. They were already advancing along the railroad on my right. So, once again, I was trapped. I decided to follow a route parallel to that of the Japanese advance. To accomplish this purpose, we had to cross swamps and marshes. So we did. And so close were we to the Japanese troops that we could hear the conversations of the enemy soldiers as they and we advanced along our parallel routes. At about half past two in the morning on Christmas Day, we met a Filipino woman. Be approached us. She was crying bitterly. When I asked her what was wrong, she merely pointed back in the direction from which she had come, and in between her tears, she said to me, "The Japanese! It's the Japanese! We were really on the verge of our end. If we had not heard from that woman, we would have continued walking to the heart of the enemy contingent. It is obvious to say that we quickly changed our route. To avoid dangerous places, we had to make big detours. I fell several times in swamps and marshes; I crossed with my companions several streams, and we all got soaked to the bone. At four o'clock in the afternoon we arrived at the hut of an old Filipino, who prepared for us some black coffee. I had never had such a good cup of coffee before. It was as if that coffee infused new life into all of us. From that old man I got some information about where we were. So I was able to orient myself with relative precision. And since we were once again close to the coast, I decided to continue walking in that direction, hoping to find a boat that would take us to Paghtlao, on the central road. I felt confident that we could get there before the Japanese did, and it was six o'clock on Christmas Day morning when we reached the coast. There we met a Filipino who was willing to drive us in his "banca" to Pagbilao. At about 6:00 a.m., as we were approaching the village, we were shot at from the shore and the first shell passed over our heads. We heard the whistle of the second one much closer. I was sure that the third would hit the target". If our "banca" had been flying swiftly through the waters before, now we had the impression that she was flying.... My feeling, at least, was that a boat with a six-cylinder engine could not go any lighter. At last, luck favored us. Before the third shot was fired, we had reached a place where a projection of the eosta protected us. It was clear that those waters were no longer "suitable" for our purposes.
Status Committee will move to the U.S. next week. Yesterday, arrangements for transportation began. - Ramos Antonini will not go for now. - Muñoz completes economic study Yesterday, efforts began to provide transportation to the United States for the members of the legislative delegation on the political status, which, meeting last Thursday afternoon at the Capitol, under the chairmanship of Senator Luis Mufioz Marin, unanimously agreed to move to Washington, D.C., to travel to the United States next week.
The delegation agreed to move to Washington during the course of the coming week in order to be in the capital of the United States no later than the same day that the Federal Congress opens its session, after its brief Christmas vacation. The delegation agreed that the delegates who will go to Washington will be the same as those who appeared at the public hearings held last May and June by the Senate Committee on Territories, chaired by Senator Millard E. Ty dings. Luis Mufioz Marín, Vicente Gélgel Polanco, Samuel R. Quiñones, Juan Dávila Diez, Leopoldo Figueroa and Bolívar Pagán, and Representatives Ernesto Ramos Antonini, Antonio Pacheco Padró, Celestino Iriarte, Rafael Arrtllaga Torréns, and Ernesto Cádiz. In the legislative circuits it was reported yesterday that, due to the prevailing labor situation within the CGT, the Acting President of the House, Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonlnl. will not accompany the Commission, having expressed his intention to remain in the country. The President of the Senate, Mr. Munoz Marin, informed the Committee of the text of the cablegram he had received from Senator Tydings, Chairman of the Committee on Territories, and of a letter from Representative C. Jasper Bell, Chairman of the corresponding committee of the House, in which the two aforementioned legislators expressed their desire to remain in the country.
In these communications, the two legislators expressed their desire to examine jointly with the Puerto Rican legislators the proposals on the future political status of the Island. The legislative delegation agreed to insist that opportunities be provided for democratic consideration of all political status alternatives. An extensive exchange of views took place during the meeting, in which leaders of all political parties participated, on the economic problem of Puerto Rico and on the economic relations that should prevail between the United States and Puerto Rico under different forms of political status.
WASHINGTON, 21. (IN8)- Admiral Richmond Kelly Turner declared today that the U.S. Pacific Fleet, if it had been on the alert, could have destroyed the Japanese fleet sent against Pearl Harbor. Speaking before the Congressional Committee, he noted that he and other Wáshlngton Naval Chiefs had "full confidence" in Admiral Husband Kimmel, and believed that his Hawaii command was prepared to repel the attack. He revealed, however, that as late as December 8, 1841, Vice Admiral Wilkinson, Chief of Naval Intelligence Services, did not believe that his command in Hawaii was prepared to repel the attack.
BULLETINS
that Japan would attack the United States, although he-Turner-was convinced of it. - (IN8)-The Foreign Press Association disclosed today that Phllllllp Noel Baker, Minister of State of Great Britain, had put forward, in concrete form, a proposition that the United Nations Organization should have a regional office in Europe. Noel Baker made this proposal in a speech which I delivered at a banquet given to the British delegates by Dr. Eduardo Zulete Angel, delegate of Colombia and Chairman of the Preparatory Commission.
i of the Preparatory Commission. MOSCOW, 21. (FU)-This afternoon the sixth session of the conference of the Ministers of Relations of the Big Three was held and, despite the secrecy surrounding its deliberations, official circles declared, in the course of the same, that there have been more positive than negative achievements, Be reported that the atmosphere of the conference is good and that the three Ministers of Relations are dealing with their affairs with very good humor and cheerfulness, it being understood that there have been difficulties, they "tis(Continued on page 13),
C4yo A BRAVE
General George 8. Patton, whose death, which occurred yesterday in Germany, deprives the United States of one of its most battle-hardened commanders. Patton died at Heidelberg at 5:50 yesterday Bronchial affection caused his heart to fail him. Tribute from McNarney HEIDELBERG, "¿1~PTD--E1 General George S. Patton died this afternoon at the local military hospital at 5:50 o'clock. Patton lost his fight with injuries sustained on December 9, when his automobile collided with a military truck as he was on his way to participate in a pheasant hunt not far from his headquarters. The veteran general suffered a fractured cervical vertebra in the accident and was partially paralyzed as a result. However, shortly after 48 hours in the hospital, he was declared "out of danger", unless unforeseen complications arose. These complications, in the form of bronchial infection, suddenly appeared on Wednesday evening. Yesterday and last night, his condition rapidly worsened, Today his doctors said Patton was in grave danger. '(Continued on page 12.)
CORONEL CORDERO ARRIVED LAST NIGHT Colonel Virgilio Cordero, hero of Bataan and survivor of the Death March, arrived in Ban Juan last night at about half past eleven o'clock, with the purpose of spending some time with his family after sixteen years of absence. At the airport of Isla Grande the Colonel was received by commissions of the Government of the Capital, the Army, private citizens and representatives of the Press who since eight o'clock had formed a reception committee to welcome him. Colonel Cordero will be today a guest of the Government of Is Cspltal and of civic and social entities. Tonight, in the "Armory" of the University, where twenty years ago Colonel Cordero was a military Instructor, you are offered tm bolle by the Ivones Club of Rio Piedras, most of whose members were disciples of Colonel Cordero. Judge La * Costa transfers Fonfrías' case The judge of the District Court of San Juan, Ricardo La Costa, Jr., issued yesterday a resolution in the certiorari filed by Senator Ernesto Juan Fonfrías, annulling in turn the resolution of Judge Carlos del Toro Fernández£d6 which declared without place the motion of Fonfrías requesting the transfer of the case that for an alleged crime of contempt is pending in the Municipal Court of San Juan. Therefore, del Toro Fernandez has been ordered to transfer the hearing of Fonfrías' case to the Municipal Court of San Juan.
For the first time in more than two years, the Bupremn Court of Puerto Rico was again complete yesterday with five Justices. This photograph was printed yesterday morning, shortly after the new judge, Honorable JorglFL. Córdova Días. From left to right: Judges Angel R. De Jesús, Martín Travieso, President, and Roberto H. Toda, Jr. Standing, in the same order, Judges A. Cedi Snyder and J. L. Córdova Días. (Photo EL MUNDO.)
A large representation of society, the professions, the Government and the armed forces was present during the installation A true demonstration of public recognition was yesterday for the Hon. Jorge Luis Cordova Diaz, new associate member of the Supreme Court, his inauguration of the high office to which he was appointed by President Truman, an act which was extremely brief and brilliant and which was attended by a distinguished and select concurrence composed of notable personalities from the official world and the professional spheres of our capital.
There is enough rubber for local consumption Gihtrap says there will be no problem in lifting the restriction "The termination of rubber rationing will not present any problem in Puerto Rico, because there is sufficient quantity in the local market to meet the needs of the island," said yesterday the Director of the OAP, Senior Sam Gilstrap. "Some months ago, two attempts were made to put an end to rationing on the island, but the shortage of rubber, which is still being felt on the mainland, led us to consider the possibility of beginning to export rubber to the island.
i Er session hall and the galeI rias of the Supreme Court were occupied by the large audience which welcomed the presence of Judge Córdova Díaz and retired Judge Hr M. Hutchinson, with enthusiastic applause.' The audience remained standing while they gave their ovations of recognition to the two mentioned magistrates. The ceremony was of great simplicity and solemnity. The ceremony began at 10:30 a.m., and the members of the Court, Honorable Martin Travieso, President, Angel R. de Jesús, A<. Cecil Snyder and Roberto H. Todd, Jr. Also seated on the Presidential bench were the Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Mr. Enrique Campos del Toro, and the President of the Bar Association, Mr. Rafael Rivera Zayas. A few seconds after the inauguration of Judge Córdova Díaz was declared open by the President of the Court, Judge Travieso, retired Judge Hutchinson entered the Presidential dais.
Planning submitted to the Governor a six-year economic program which includes expenditures for $384,000,000.00
Agronomists 1 take Fennell case to court Mariano Mari announces this to Senate President Muñoz Marín Tells of his efforts to Muñoz He says he has lost hope that the popular leader will resolve it The President of the Puerto Rico Agronomist Association, Mariano Mari, has written to the President of the Senate and the Popular Democratic Party, aeflor Lula Mufioz Marín, announcing that, having lost hope that the case against the General Manager of the Agricultural Company, aefior Thomae Fennell, will be resolved by the administrative intervention of sefior Mufioz Marín, the College of Agronomists has decided to take the matter to the courts of Justice. The letter from! aefior Mari to sefior Mufioz reads as follows: "I refer to my letter of September 10, 1945 addressed to ui- , ted in my capacity as President ; of the College of Agronomists of Puerto Rico in connection with the Injusi tlflflcated appointment of the Director of the Agricultural Company of the Insular Government of Puerto Rico. Dated September 14, you answered me said communication with a detailed explanation of the executive and legislative powers and the demarcation of their fields of action, justifying your limited intervention in the matter but promising to intervene as soon as said senior in the performance of his office demonstrated his incompetence. Then, in the first" days of the month of October I went! personally to interview him at his residence in Isla Verde in the company of Juan Matos and Rafael Brenes, secretary and executive secretary, respectively, of our College of Agronomists to deliver the information received by our office from Mr. Joshua Dartigue, Minister of Agriculture of Haiti, from which it is clear that the failure of the "Crystostégla" program to produce rubber, sponsored by the Haitian Ministry of Agriculture, is undoubtedly due to the failure of the "Crystostégla" program, to produce rubber, sponsored by the American Government, as well as the program of Rehabilitation of Haitian Agriculture known as SHADA, sponsored and financed by the Haitians, was due to the incompetence of Mr. Thomas Fennell, who directed both activities and currently directs the Agricultural Company. You argued to us as to the veracity of such information and expressed confidence in Mr. Fennell's ability by the mere fact of having "been brought into the service of the Government by Governor Tugwell. On the 22nd of October I went to the city of Port-au-Prince, capital of the neighboring Republic of Haiti, and personally investigated from the offices of the Government of said Republic the results of the work done by aefior Thomas Fennell with the results published in my report on this matter, the contents of which have not yet been disproved or refuted. In my interview with you, you ratified your previous offer to intervene as soon as Mr. Fennell demonstrated his incompetence to carry out the work planned by the Popular Party, since you would not allow under any circumstances that the work of justice to the people should be spoiled. The sefior Fennell began to act in ( an attempt to improve the bovine ga- 1 nado of our pals where works with the same purpose have been carried out by competent authorities of the Insular and Federal Governments in the last 47 afios. Di- . cho seflor, contrary to all professional principles, neither investigates nor consults the authorities who have worked on the matter and goes out of his way (as a civilized man would do when setting foot for the first time on a land hitherto inhabited by savages) and buys (Continued on page 25).
In view of the agreement adopted by the Executive Committee of the cegetlsta sector presided over by Francisco Colón Gordlany, recommending that the Congress for Workers' Unity not be held until February 23 and 24, 1946, and in view of the possibility that the Cuban delegation which is on the Island trying to achieve that unity may not be able to remain in Puerto Rico until that date, it has been decided to hold a series of interviews, not only with both sectors in dissidence, but also with the Independent unions and the Free Federation of Workers. This was reported yesterday to EL MUNDO by an authorized spokesman of the unity table. According to these reports, the Cuban delegation met to discuss the agreement taken by the Colón sector, and "tu-.
Judge Córdova Díaz was the object of a warm demonstration of public esteem yesterday.
Everything indicates that the Pro-Unity Congress will remain in recess Head of the Cuban mission* Lázaro Peña is confident that he will achieve unity. - Separate meetings are held with the trade unions
to take measures conducive to the achievement of workers' unity on the island. We are informed that they will proceed to summon from today to tomorrow each one of the sectors, but the talks will be held separately. Once the conferences with the cegetlstas are over, the Cuban delegation will summon the independent unions and the Federación Libre de los Trabajadores de Puerto Rico, to discuss the situation from all its angles, and try to find a formula to achieve unity. The head of the Cuban mission, Soflor Lázaro Peña, said yesterday that he was not in a position to authorize statements until he had conferred] with his fellow delegates to see what would be done in the case? He told us that by EL MUNDO (Continued on page 3), l
Suggests that direct aid continue under the Health Welfare Division Supports the elimination of PEG Points out the situation of the University indicating a decrease in funds Yesterday "the Governor of Puerto Rico submitted to the Planning Board the economic program of the Government for the next two years". Said program "assumes that during the six-year period" a total of approximately $.350,000,000 will be received in "1 General Fund from public revenues". It is recommended that expenditures be made from these funds in the amount of $384,000,000, broken down as follows: Financing of the current public debt, $250,337. Financing of the proposed public debt, I $0.475,000. Current expenditures, $271,I 760,149. Permanent agency improvements supported by contributions, $54,885,700. The members of the Board, in their message to Governor Tugwell, also state that "since it is presumed that the fiscal year 1946-47 will begin with a small surplus in the General Fund, and practically no surplus, the difference between Revenues and Expenditures, estimated at $34,000,000, will have to be financed by borrowing within the legal borrowing range". The corresponding totals for the fiscal year 1946-47 recommended for approval by the next Legislature are as follows: Revenues to the General Fund are estimated at approximately $59,500,000. Financing of the public debt, $114,525. Permanent "improvement project" - to enterprise" supported" by contrlnbuclonea, $11,785,475. 1* Board indicates that "what is recommended for the coming fiscal year is a program of expenditures to be met as funds come in and drawing on the borrowing power as needed in subsequent years. The Board's tentative program, submitted for public hearings on November 22 last, was amended in several respects. The Board's recommendations, related to the administrative and governmental reorganization of certain agencies, are as follows: "Direct aid should continue under the direction of the Division of Public Welfare of the Department of Health, and it is recommended at this time that the Legislature appropriate funds directly to that agency, rather than to the Emergency War Program. War. ■ - "The leehe stations" and nursery schools, which are now administered by the War Emergency Program, should also be transferred to the Division of Public Welfare. "The School Canteen Program, Including food distribution, has been assigned to the Department of Instruction. The distribution of food has heretofore been in charge of the War Emergency Program. "It is recommended that all appropriations for construction formerly made to the War Emergency Program be placed under the administration of the Department of the Interior. "An additional amount of $100,000 is recommended in the operating expense budgets of the Senate and House of Representatives. in order to cover the costs of telegraphic services of , members of both Houses. "It is recommended that the Scholarship Commission of Puerto Rico be abolished and that the administration of scholarships, which is now under different agencies, be transferred to the Civil Service Commission, with the exception of scholarships for needy students and medical students, which we recommend under the direction of the University of Puerto Rico. We recommend that the funds of the Division of the Department of Justice be transferred to the Legal Division of the Land Authority. "No appropriations are included for the Department of the Interior for its current Bureau of Mines. The functions performed by this Bureau - are very similar to those performed by the Development Company, to which we propose to transfer it. "The permanent improvements proposed by the various Port Authorities are grouped under a single agenda, and we believe that the foundations of these Au. (Continued on page 19.),