THE WORLD
48 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
48 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
LA MARANA NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXVII
Let's support the men who made the Victory Loan.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, DECEMBER 15, 1945
Entered as "econd class metier,
NUMER0 10437
Mere mention is not equivalent to a title
Supreme Court Rulings in Case Involving Planning Board Order Reversal of Annotation in Case Involving Plan for Express Highway through Hato Rey Area The mere fact that a street or highway project whose future realization is contemplated is mentioned in a resolution of the Planning Board, by authorizing a segregation in a particular aolar, "does not constitute title to any right of way nor does it have the effect of creating uh right of crvldumhre", because the law "did not confer power to the Board for the aola to establish the layout for new roads and streets", depending also on "loa demAa requirement" demanded" by the legal dlapoalctonea", just reaolver the Supreme Court, ruling yesterday in favor of the seftor José Benet Colón a governmental recurao by which ae ordered the Property Registrar of Rio Pledraa to proceed to register I* eacrltura of segregation, purchase and sale and grouping of an aolar of seftor Benet, by recording in the reglatro an annotation of supuetta aervldumbre de paao added by the Reglatrador following IncHcaclonea contained" in a reaoluclón of the Planning Board. £1 Tribunal resolved that the appealed annotation should be revoked and the title should be registered upon taking the complaint into consideration. The aeAor Benet is the owner of an aolar in Hato Roy and acquired another part of a Contiguous aolar by purchase, and in order to inacrlblr the segregation and grouping, he appealed to the Planning Board for the corresponding permit. The Board granted it in an extensive resolution in which it said that "it does not want to fail to inform that the Regulatory Plan of Main Public Roads for the Metropolitan Area of San Juan already adopted by the Board included a road called in said document Carratora Express, South Branch, and that it is projected by the section in which the lots object of this lot are located. Although to date no plan has been drawn up that precisely locates the right-of-way that will be necessary for said road, this Board recommends that before any construction is erected in the first 20 meters of these lots, that is, between the present military road and the back of said properties, the studies or plans on the subject should be consulted". Presented in this form to Registration, the deed by Mr. Benet, the Property Registrar registered it but stated that "said property is subject to mention of a project" of easement for a public road still under study by the Planning Board of Puerto Rico". Mr. Bonet requested the cancellation of that mention of easement, which the Registrar refused, alleging that the Board's report "has the effect of a mention of easement." The aeAor Benet appealed to the Supreme Court. The opinion, which is by Judge Roberto H. Todd Jr." reads as follows: "The question to be resolved seems to us to be simple: Does the mere recommendation included in the Report approved by the Planning Board 1"! have the effect of authorizing the Registrar to make a mention of easement on the appellant's property? In our opinion, the question must be answered in the negative. The opinion, which is ten pages long, says that Articles 8 and 9 of the Planning Law, in addition to granting power to the Board to adopt regulatory and urbanization plans, Article 11 states that the Board must request from the Department of the Interior the preparation of the street layout and (Continued on page 18)
The great trials Laval says he would have rejected the armistice.
In the defense he never presented to the Court whose sentence placed him in front of the firing squad as an archcollaborator, Pierro Laval tries to deny that he had any part in the armistice signed by France in the days when it was overrun by the German armies, and says, albeit very belatedly, that he would not have accepted the armistice. In his answers to counts IV and V of the indictment, he answers the charge that he prevented the transfer of the seat of the French Government to North Africa. But he speculates on the possibility that the Germans would have come into possession of all of North Africa. He asserts that Germany and Russia prayed in that allied focha, and that between the two countries they could have expanded as far as the Near East and Asia.
Finally he tries to prove that the fact that the French Government did not move to North Africa allowed the United States to acquire there a springboard from which to launch its attack against Germany. In his demagogy Laval goes so far as to speak of "honor", the same honor that the short proclaimed to the lost speech to! be convicted of being a traitor to France. By FIERRE LAVAL Expremier of France executed for treason (Distributed by the International News Service) PARIS, (INS)-The indictment reads as follows: "When the military situation deteriorated in May 1949, Laval was at the head of the line of those who demanded an armistice. That is why his name was included on the list that
i in the list that Petaln offered to the . President of the Republic immediately after the resignation of Paul Reynaud. In the meantime he had remained in the rear, but three weeks later he appeared in the vanguard and from then on he played a leading role during the whole period leading up to July 19, 1949. That charge raises two questions about me. It appears that I was at the head of the line of those who demanded an armistice and then it appears that my name was included in the list of ministers submitted by Marshal Petaln. I wish to emphasize the fact that I had no part in the armistice, and that I was not in a position to make any decision or assume any responsibility for the armistice.
Policies will be offered to cover the loss of coffee on the tree.
At its last regular meeting, the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rico Coffee Insurance Corporation discussed "the need to get the Legislative Assembly to increase the funds allocated to said entity for the payment of losses" caused to coffee by hurricanes, so that the Corporation may insure the plantations in their entirety. The executive director of the Coffee Insurance Corporation, Mr. Angel Martin, in informing this yesterday, added that the Corporation "is focusing all of its initiatives" towards this purpose, and that the Board of Directors of the Corporation "is focusing all of its initiatives" towards this purpose.
Board of Directors "to prepare a report,' determining the probable loss that coffee trees, shade trees and the coffee bean in the tree could suffer". This report will be submitted to the next ordinary legislature. Pending determination of the total risk that can be assumed by the Corporation*--he reported--"it was agreed to advise coffee growers that the Corporation will be in a position to offer policies covering losses to coffee beans on the tree as soon as the investigations are completed" (Continued on page 18).
WASHINGTON, lé. (PU) - The four-member legal staff" of the Peart Harbor Investigative Committee resigned today, raising the charge that the Committee is wasting its time. The ™nunclM will take effect as soon as the Committee is able to secure new" counsel". The Committee's chief counsel, William D. Mitchell, speaking for himself and on behalf of his" colleague," said today, "It seems certain that several more months of hearings will be necessary. When Mitchell assumed this assignment, he believed that the Committee intended to present the facts" that would make it possible to "give a final engagement" by January 8 to the question: "Who was responsible for the final failure of our Hawaiian forts to stand guard against a Japanese surprise attack on December 7, 1M1?" * - - - WASHINGTON, 14. (PU)- The President today decorated Fleet Admiral Amos W. Ring with the Gold Star of the Distinguished Service Medal. The ceremony took place at the White House, the home of many of the nation's distinguished leaders. The ceremony was attended by the miebmro"
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Cabinet, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Cabinet, Congressional leaders, । another' high functionary' and a glittering contingent of foreign diplomats'. - WASHINGTON, lé. (FU)- After eleven days" of convereaclonra, the last of the" phase" of the" negotiations between the United" States" and Cuba for the purchase by the Federal Government of next year's Cuban safra were officially recessed" today, until January of next year. Dr. Oecar Slegle, head of the Cuban delegation, told Prensa Unida. United Press that the current recess had been foreseen when they began the talks, since they had realized that the negotiations "would take quite a long time." - ■ " - " WASHINGTON, 14. (FU)-The Senate Labor Committee today postponed until after the Christmas holidays consideration of legislation on Fact-Finding Boards in labor disputes, which President Truman had hoped would be passed just these days. The Committee's statement explaining the postponement reads: "In the Committee's judgment, it is impossible to complete
[the "hearing" on the bill and bring it to the "floor (of the Senate) before Christmas." The referred action of the Senate Committee kills the President's eaperanaa for quick action on rat legislation, which he said was urgently needed to get the big "labor dispute" to resume conversion. - (PU)-Great Britain and Canada today faced obstructionist maneuvers aimed at preventing an immediate vote on whether the headquarters of the United Nations should be in the United States or in Europe. The delegates of the "anti-U.S." or "anti-European" camp, captained by the British and the Canadians, first tried to postpone the meeting of the Headquarters Selection Committee, refused to introduce amendments to the original proposal to choose the U.S. as headquarters and then, with delaying tactics, used two hours of debate. - WASHINGTON. 14. (FU)-The White Gaffer was credited today to the proeiden (Continued on page 18).
They will spend Christmas in Puerto Rico
Al- w ■ These "Roldado" Puerto Ricans, who are part of a group of B00, are smiling with joy as they return to the island from the State of Maryland, coming from the Panama Canal Zone. Here some will be discharged and others will enjoy a 45-day vacation. (Photo by the U.S. Army Communications Corps. -
Klein says no deadline was given to coffee growers El Mundo has a report of a specific case in which this was done The director of the Puerto Rico Hurricane Relief Loan Section, AeAor J. P. Klein, authorizes statements commenting on the information published by El Mundo yesterday, regarding the debts of the coffee growers. Mr. Klein's statements are as follows: "For some time now they have been publishing news" regarding the Cómlilón Rehabilitado™ and the debts that Agrlcultores de Puerto Rico have contracted with this organization. Despite the fact that many of this information"" have not been accurate, I have not been concerned about their rectification, since they do not do any particular harm. However, in the decision of Friday, December 14, of EL MUNDO, there appears an article that may cause considerable damage to this office and may at the same time cause among its debtors a feeling of uncertainty and concern. "Because of the seriousness of the situation that may arise as a result of the above-mentioned information, I believe I must make statements in order to eliminate the fear and displeasure that the inaccurate article may cause among our debtors. "The Information to which I refer is one which indicates that this office has given the debtors of the Commission a period of two weeks, I cannot imagine where such false and misrepresentative Information could have been obtained, and I wish to warn the debtors of the Commission that there is absolutely no truth in such an article. Debts to the Commission Rehabilitated™ will continue to be adjusted as they have been in the past, giving debtors an opportunity to pay adjusted amounts until June 30, 1947, which is the cut-off date given by the WAshlngton office. "It is true that the Commission's debtors should make arrangements to adjust their debts as soon as possible, as it appears that the work of this office will be completed about March 30, 1946. He has asked the WAshlngton office also to make statements in connection with this matter, in the hope that any resentment in (Gontlnúa at náelna 18) >
Five hundred troops arrived yesterday from Panama on leave of absence They will enjoy the m i uny for forty-five days. - A group will be discharged at Fort Buchanan. - More military returning
Plan for civilian personnel in the Army Grimes assures that on the basis of it they will be able to enjoy improvements A peacetime program to be applied to employees," under which employees of the Military Department of the West Indies and the Army would benefit," was announced yesterday by Maj. Gen. William M. Grimes. Chief of the Department. "The plan will offer-ae said-an opportunity to every employee elvl! to improve his position in *1 Federal Government. It will also spora, as a result of the program, mAs sita possible efficiency of work production. "The facilities of the Department of Civilian Personnel will be increased to include Assistant Directors of Payroll and Payroll Administration, Recruitment and Emplacement, Law and Regulations, Training and Employee Relations. These assistant directors will initiate and direct projects to mutually benefit the operation of the Army and the position of the employee. General Grimes, in Inaugurating the program, expressed the desire. that the civilian employees of the Military Department of the Antlllaa will maintain a "high degree of efficiency, morale and loyalty." The Department Commander stressed that Army civilian employees must be "a well-trained contingent," and that through continuity of service, "they can perform non-military duties on Army installations." The General also assured that "all Individuals employed through the Department will be afforded uniform and juatlclero treatment." The Ultromar Branch of the Office of the Secretary of War has appointed AeAor Martin E. Whlto as its representative for the West Indies. Mr. White, who was previously stationed in Puerto Rico for several years, will assist Major August Roth, Civilian Personnel Department Officer, in the development of the new program.
The thought of returning home for Christmas was the greatest joy of the Puerto Rican troops who disembarked Friday at the Fort Buchanan pier. They were returning from Panama. "To be able to reunite the enlisted men with their families at Christmas time has been a constant preoccupation of the military authorities of Panama and San Juan for some time," says the official note, adding, "Before Christmas Day and Three Kings Day, it is expected that more troops will return to the island on leave or to be discharged. Most of the men who disembarked yesterday came to take a 48-day leave of absence. Fifty-five of them will be discharged. The soldiers arrived aboard the "State of Maryland" and began to disembark while the 81st band of the Land Forces played Latin pieces and military music, "All the men quickly descended the ladder of the "Maryland". They were delighted to find themselves back in their homeland. They had served in Panama for a year and a half to two years. By mid-afternoon yesterday the men were on their way home. They were granted short furloughs, after which they will report to camp to receive their orders granting them their longest furlough. "The plan to bring troops to Puerto Rico on furlough as soon as possible was announced two months ago by Lieutenant General Willis D. Crlttenberger, commanding general of the Caribbean Defense Command, on the occasion of his first official visit to the island. Al said at the time that the Panamanian authorities of the Military Department of the Antilles are using all possible means of transportation to provide eligible men with a day's leave to enjoy at home. One year of service in Panama is normally sufficient to make a shoulder eligible for leave, but due to the shortage of transportation facilities it has been necessary to establish a priority list. Thus, men who have served longer in Panama have been placed at the top of the list, while those whose stay has been shorter must await transportation for a later date. Ships and airplanes transiting between Panama and Puerto Rico have a fixed itinerary for bringing soldiers to the island. During the Christmas and Epiphany season, special efforts are being made to meet as many licenses as possible. As a supplement to the ship service serving between the two ports, there are airplanes which bring in 100 Korean shoulders a week."
White House discloses that Tugwell has not yet resigned; but does not
comment on future plans
I Will study more sources of income to create Medical School I The Commission discussed the point and entrusted the report to Dr. Picó. - It would cost $1,200,000; its operation, $400,000 The Planning Board will carry out a study to determine the new sources of income that could be created for the Government, with the purpose of defraying the expenses that the establishment of the School of Medicine in Puerto Rico would cause, according to a request made to the Board, through the Permanent Legislative Commission, by the President of the Commission.
Governor very active in Washington Shows denalirnto in what "t ting to the transportation L i n e a * shipping pipe" project increase The Island is not to receive reasonable treatment from the Aeronautics Board Pnr CHARLES MCCABE WASHINGTON, 14, (PU)-EI White House "Pren "rio de Pren" secretariat, Ren Ayres, replying to questions asked about Governor Tugwell's future status, said that the Governor had not yet resigned, and that, beyond that, the White House would not comment on the Governor's plans or future. Meanwhile, Mr. Tugwell spent his last day in Washington in laborious conferences with Government officials, including those of the Civil Aeronautics Board and the United States Maritime Commission. The Governor said he would leave for New York tomorrow, where he will remain until December 20, where he will fly directly to San Juan to spend Christmas with his family. 1 Tugwell told the United Press that the situation regarding the passenger trsnaportnelon da Pin. Rico, in the future-both sea and air- seems "definitely disheartened™" at this time. Over quote, the Governor said that reports have come to his attention that private steamship lines operating in Puerto Rico intend to increase passenger and cargo rates as soon as the Government loosens the wartime controls that have been imposed on those lines. He added that he had lodged a vigorous protest with the Maritime Commission officials against the reported plan, but did not specify any counter-proposals. Tugwell also expressed disheartenment regarding his conferences with officials of the Civil Aeronautics Board. He indicated that he was aware of the general lines of the Board's future decision regarding Latin American air traffic, and that he believed it would not be entirely favorable to Puerto Rico. The Latin American decision now before the CAB involves the requests of many American airlines, in addition to Pan American, for the establishment of a large number of airlines which will operate through San Juan. Late this afternoon, Tugwell said he hoped to see Senator Tydlng before leaving tomorrow for New York, but doubted if he could arrange an appointment because of the pressure of other business. The Governor also stated that, during the day today, he had been working on the schedule for a new conference of the Anglo-American Caribbean Commission, which is expected to take place in St. Thomas next February. He added that this will be the largest meeting of the Commission since the conference in Barbados in 1943, which was attended by some 200 delegates-at-large from most of the Caribbean island and other neighboring countries.
Judge Córdova Díaz's commission is notified ml YK ■ \ i' JUDGE CORDOVA DIAZ Official notification was received yesterday at the Clerk's Office of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico that the President of the United States had extended the corresponding commission to Judge Jorge Luís Córdova Díaz, days after his appointment as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court had been confirmed. Supreme Court. The Ledo. Córdova Dias conferred yesterday in chambers with his fellow justices. EL MUNDO understands that the new justice will be sworn in next week. Muñoz toured 'El Fanguito' - . With "! purpose of observing closely the situation in which the inhabitants of that municipal area live, the President of the Popular Party and of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, made at the beginning" d* this week a tour in yola by the canal that borders the working class neighborhood of "El Fanguito", being "very sadly Imprealonsdo by Is dojnrosa condition in. that live this" citizen" of 1a" poor and humble classes" of our population", according to ae reported yesterday. Mr. Muñoz Merln made this tour for several hours accompanied by several friends, among them the Mayor of Rio Piedra, Mr. Augusto P. Alvarez, with whom Mr. Muñoz Marin studied on the ground the proposal of Mr. Alvarez to make the port of Rio Piedras, along the Martin Peña channel. Mr. Muñoz Marín observed closely the way in which the small houses and cabins of the inhabitants of the mentioned suburban zone are located and the numerous problems that confront this sector of the population of San Juan. In circuios related" to the Senate Pre-idencla ae reported yesterday that the vlalta of aeflor Muñoz Marin to "El Fanguito" ea part of a study that the President of the Popular party is doing on the problems of housing and elimination of suburbs, with the propó "lto formulate some proposals to the government "on how to go facing them according to the resources available.
The problem of the School of Medicine was raised again by the representative for the ABC in the meeting held last Thursday by the Legislative Commission, when he informed Dr. Rafael Picó, president of the Board, that the establishment of the School of Medicine has not been taken into consideration in the economic program of the Government for next year. The Legislative Commission continued to discuss in its Thursday session, together with the members of the Planning Board, the Government's economic program and the Board's recommendations for dealing with the financial problems of the Island Administration, The problem was brought up by Senator Vicente Gél1 gel Polanco for discussion among the le- ' insulators and the present" function, Dr. Picó explained that, in his opinion, the problem was an economic one, "The "chalando that the Island Government will find itself with a very scarce" resource" to be able to face next year the organization of the School of Medicine which will require for its establishment one million two hundred" thousand dollars and, in addition, not less than 8400,*000 per year for its operation. [Taking into consideration what the Government and the University invest annually in scholarships for medical students, the difficulties encountered by the Island's students in the schools of the North, the problem of the shortage of doctors and other factors, the matter was extensively debated by legislators Gélgel Polanco, Ramón Barreto Pérez, Bolívar Pagán and Pacheco Padró, pro(Continued on page 15).
Charges to be filed against Mayor Lopez Assurances Governor to take action, upon recommendation Justice information obtained by EL MUNDO reveals that through the Puerto Rico Department of Justice, the Governor will soon proceed to file charges against the Mayor of Humacao, Mr. Asuncion Lopez, for alleged irregularities in his administration. The Audit Department has been investigating the activities of the municipal administration of said town, and has submitted a report to the Department of Justice. In spite of the great reserve that is maintained in the offices of the Department of Justice, we can assure that the investigation of these alleged "Irregularities" has been carried out and that sworn statements have been taken from several witnesses in relation to the same. Although it is alleged by some officials in the Attorney General's office that the Audit Report has not yet been submitted to the Department of Justice for consideration, other sources have assured us that the Governor will proceed at any moment, upon the recommendation of the Attorney General, to file charges against Mayor Lopez. We have not been able to learn the number of charges or the nature of the charges.
Eastern Airlines requests route i from San Francisco to San Juan. The request has the number 2148 in the file of the Civil Aeronautics Board. -Reasons it has presented to support it.
By CHARLES CORDRT WASHINGTON. 14. fPU) - The Civil Aeronautics Board has given file number 2148 to Eastern Airline's application for permission to operate an air route from San Francisco, California, to San Juan, Puerto Rico. i The CAB has not yet set a date for the hearing on this petition and, so far, has not received any request in support of Eastern's petition from Island entities or the Department of the Interior, which, however, it may do when the Board decides to set a date for the hearing, i Upon filing its request. The president of the aforementioned airline, E. V. Rickenbacker, stated that the company "intends to intensively develop local, national and international traffic along the route and between the aforementioned cities; and, due to the favorable geographic, atmospheric and economic characteristics of this route, to revolutionize the transcontinental and trans-Caribbean air services of this route. Observers believe that Eastern Airlines may face difficulties in persuading the CAB of the viability of a new transcontinental route, particularly by this petitioner, because there are already four transcontinental carriers in the first place:
Grimes praised the Boricuas before officials ofieiales Replacement officers recently arrived in the United States and praised the work of the Military Department of the West Indies on Thursday. by the head of that Department, Commander General William M. Grimes, and his Chief of Staff, Colonel Leslie D. Leslie D. Grimes. Leslie D. Carter. The Commanding Gen- 1 neral welcomed them with a short speech, delivered at the. (Continued on pAglna 16)
BULLETINS