THE WORLD
pass- =' 'i 1 '.riT! ■ aas-a-p 34 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
34 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
MORNING
MORNING *
YEAR
XXVI
Ño liquidate Ím bonds bought, if I want to liquidate Hitler.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 3, 1945.
Entered m second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10397
THE 9 o'clock -EJERCY ARRIVES IN THE RIN YESTERDAY THE RUSSIANS CAPTURE 200,000 MORE NAZIS
House to take action on PEG
The Speaker of the House of Representatives yesterday appointed a committee, composed of the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Maria Libertad Gomez, Celestino Iriarte and Ernesto Ramos Antonin, to make representations to the Governor of the Republic of Panama on the PEG and the TA, to make representations to the Governor of Puerto Rico and the Director of the Emergency War Program, so as not to reduce the personnel for the work being carried out by the PEG. The motion that brought the matter before the House was made by Mrs. Gómos, who explained that "action must be taken on the matter, so as to alleviate unemployment in Puerto Rico. The motion had already been approved when Mr. Celestino Irlsr* to requested to be informed if there was "any agreement of the (Popular) caucus that opposed the motion, so as to second it". To this, the chairman, Dr. Francisco M. Suoonl, replied that the Popular caucus had not made any agreement on the matter and explained that the Senate had approved a bill allocating funds for the PEG. Mr. Iriarte said that this bill, as well as another one allocating funds to the Land Authority, had been in the House for several days and that they were in the Treasury Committee, from which they should be immediately discharged for approval. Dr. Susonl then stated that this was "a matter of great importance" and that "it should therefore be left for consideration at next Monday's meeting". In yesterday's session, which began at 5:20 a.m., Mrs. Gomez requested that the secretary of the Chamber request information from the corresponding authorities about the "Blue Cross", including the names of the directors, what it does, how the dues are paid, number of members, etc. A motion was also approved for the special commission that will study the problem of the slums in San Juan and Santurce to study those in Aguadilla, Camuy, Hatillo and Quebradillas. A petition was presented by Representative Setter M. Rivera Baerga, to request the following information from the Adjutant General of Puerto Rico: "Present number of officers and soldiers that compose the Puerto Rico Army Guard; . "Annual amount in salaries paid by the Pueblo of Puerto Rico to said officers and soldiers, with details of how they compare with those paid for the same concept in the National Guard until it was incorporated into the federal service; "Reason why this appropriation should not be discontinued, or reduced, in keeping with an emergency that is more remote today than for the date on which said organization was created: "What benefits, if any, the People of Puerto Rico have derived from the creation of this Institute ar- ~ made: "Relation of the salary increases recommended for the next year for the administrative personnel (Continued on page 18.)
The enemy surrenders
496 million program for six years
I would punish him
nK * d4B John W. Mattern, son of coman-
John W. Mattern, son of German Commandant General Bruno Mattern. who, according to wire reports, was taken prisoner when the Soviet Army entered Posnan, said recently in Chicago, where the son resides, that if the father "is on the list of war criminals, he must be punished. (Associated Press photo.)
Changes in government accounting
Expert Harria says the current structure 'is complicated, embarrassing 9
The Auditor of Puerto Rico, Dr. Rafael de J. Cordoro, has circulated among the personnel of his Department the instructions related to the reorganization of the accounting system of the Island Government. The first section contains abundant information on the new accounting and fiscal procedures to be followed by said department.
The study of the reorganization of the Government's accounting system was prepared by Mr. Walter O. Harris, Certified Public Accountant of the Public Administration Service of the City of Chicago. In his instructions, Mr. Harris stated that "the records and procedures which are proposed (Continued on page 2.)
It was submitted by the Planning Board to the Legislature yesterday afternoon They believe it is feasible in spite of its size It will require borrowing in excess of the Government's borrowing margin Yesterday afternoon the Planning Board submitted to the Island Legislature the Six-Year Economic Program, as amended by Governor Tugwell. The Board reports the following analysis of this program, in its message to the Legislature: "In this program the Island Government projects to invest for all purposes, the sum of $8496,118,464 from its General Fund, during the next six years. The principal items included in this total are the following: Public Debt. 82,432,433; Ordinary expenses, 8280,878,503; Contribution to public enterprises. 8130,816,000: Improvements remaining from agencies supported by contributions, $81,991,528. Total, 8496,118,464. As a result of these General Fund expenditures, which may be supplemented by funds from other sources, both public and private, it is estimated that the agencies of the Island Government will be able to implement a program of permanent improvements at a cost of $403,044,308 during the next six years. "This time the complete program of improvements is presented in a single table, which includes projects of both agencies supported by contributions and public enterprises that support themselves totally or partially. This procedure is used for the purpose of presenting in a single table a complete picture of the program (Continued on page 18).
New Tax Authorized in Jayuya,Vieques
Among the resolutions adopted yesterday by the Executive Council The Executive Council, yesterday, Friday, authorized the municipality of Jayuya to impose a surcharge or additional property tax of 451100 of 1 percent during the fiscal year 1945-46, for the purpose of cooperating in the support of the municipal hospital and other charitable services. . The Council authorized the municipality of Vieques to impose a surcharge (continued on page 18).
Auditor of the Capital alleges that there are not enough funds in the cashier's office
He states that "unless funds are made available, the Municipality will not be able to walk on its own feet 99 -Reports overdrafts in Sanitation items.
At the close of operations on February 28, the municipality of San Juan only had $3,400 of ordinary funds in cash, *according to the municipal auditor, Francisco Grovas, who said that this is a reflection of the economic difficulties faced by the Government of the Capital". The sum Indicated, he added, was available to meet the needs of all the municipal dependencies." ""Vil* *...!*.*.* 4 . - ....
This, of course, does not mean that such sum represents the amount of funds available for the municipal services, since during the month of March and until June 30, remittances will have to be received from the Island Treasury to swell the expense items, but it indicates that the municipality of San Juan will not be able to walk on its own feet unless funds are made available so that the Municipal Audit Office can quickly meet the daily expenses of the loblerno", added Mr. Grovas. He informed that remittances amounting to 8115,000 have already been received from the Treasury for the amount of the property tax and that such remittances will increase in the coming months, as the taxpayers pay said taxes.
He also indicated that in February 9 । there were surpluses in the ordinary fund items for Health and Charity. The former had , $960.90 of overdraft, and the latter ■ with $6,258.11. These charges have been , solved, he explained, "orlgl- , nándose los mismos al autorizar la . anterior administración gastos so- । bre los fondos disponibles en caja." The budget for ordinary funds of the Capital City Government is 8793,923.44. This includes the pa- , go of salaries, services, amortization of borrowings, interest, etc. i Seftor Grovas fears, as explii cated, that "at the close of operations on - June 30 next, the total funds budgeted by the previous > administration will not be covered by ■ the collections that will be made to meet the municipal needs i consigned in the budget."
Men of the People's Army confess futility of their struggle.
By TEE CABRON BERRENDORF, Germany, 2. (INS)--When they charged into a town defending ol Volkasturm (ol People's Army) of Chancellor Hitler, the columns of the i First Army found the members of that guard waiting - patiently to be taken prisoner, hidden with five hundred other civilians in the basement of a Bare of their insignia as members of the Volkssturm (a ribbon on ql shoulder), unarmed and unwilling to fight, seventy-seven members of the Nazi civilian guard meekly paraded from ol basement of an-
and discovered the troops, invading the place where they had hidden the weapons. Hoynrich, an electrician, a platoon commander declared with a shrug: "We have had enough. If the Wehrmacht (the German Army) can't stop the Americans, we can't." The Volkssturm commander in Berrendorf was not among the prisoners. In his house we found instead a grief-stricken wife and a note from her absent husband in which he wrote: "Dear Anna, you will never see me again". The Volkssturm soldiers--thick and old as well as the young, physically fitter elements, he said--wandered the streets of the Volkssturm.
saw--rushed through the streets of the towns, proclaiming at the sound of a bell, "The Americans are coming!" The members of the civil guard solemnly adjusted their Badges as members of Volkssturm, going to the city arsenal in demand of cus weapons. On instructions they all proceeded to take up their posts in the various sections of the town until the "oberfuehrer" (senior commander) conducted a tour of inspection. Afterwards, all fled* stealthily to their quarters and to the basement of the church, leaving their weapons in the armory beforehand. One of the local Volkssturm leaders expressed himself as follows: "We did not ooabatimoa because
We knew that our resistance would immediately attract the Allied planes, which would have destroyed us. Besides, what was the object of our resistance? This chief of the so-called People's Army added that the Volkssturm forces in Berrendorf took the oath in November 1964 - one month after Hitler's order was published, which gave rise to the 'Volunteer' conscriptions" and added that this order of the Nazi ruler was not direct but necessary for everyone who wishes to continue to attend to his business. The local Volkuturm leader, who participated in the previous world war under the orders of Kaiser Wilhelm II, declared that Hitler's civilian guard speaks this way.
The Danzig railroad was cut off
Zhukov still consolidates his positions for the assault on Berlin - He is already receiving equipment and reinforcements Nazi remnants in Prussia and Silesia resist with suicidal fanaticism By ROBERT MU8EL LONDON. 2 (FU) - Germany is about to lose another 200,000 troops, for according to the Nazi high command itself the Second Army of White Russia has introduced a spearhead into the Pomerania up to the railroad from Danzig to Stettin which is the last remaining overland escape route for these German forces. A communiqué from the German high command, .transmitted by Berlin radio, said that, in effect, troops under Marshal Rokossovsky cut the above-mentioned railway line between Koesiln and Scholchau, which means that the Soviets have aouefected a 27-mile stretch of that railway line, which in that sector runs at a distance of six to twelve miles from the Baltic coast. At the same time, on the Berlin front Marshal Zhukov continues to consolidate his portions while receiving reinforcements and materials for the expected resumption of his offensive against the German Chaltal which, according to military observers, will be coordinated with some general Anglo-American onslaught from the west. In Breslau and East Prussia the actions continue to wipe out the last remnants of the Nazi forces which, in spite of their hopeless situation, resist with suicidal fanaticism. The German communiqué also announces the Soviet penetration of the main Nazi defense system north of Arnswalde, in a sector 39 miles to the southeast (Continued on page 18).
President Roosevelt arrives at the Capitol.
IK I ! t V ■ ; U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt arrives at the Capitol in Washington to read his message to Congress after conferring at Yalta with Marshal Stalin, chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of the Soviet Republics, and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill. In his speech, President Ronsevelt invited "to work for the peace or run the risk of another world war," such as the one that is currently shaking the nations. (ACME Photo). 40/ subsidy penalizes settlers, Wilson says
Before House Committee Explained Island Case Is Separate From Cuban Case Accused Puerto Rico Producers Said They Have Not Given Concerted Ideas On Subsidy Sharing
BPP has until Monday at noon to contract with Union
There will be a general strike in the electric industry if there has been no agreement on wages by then. General Council receives order
The San Juan chapter of the Electric tria, after having been conversations between said Union > River Springs, not having been able to II them, agreed yesterday in assembly "< lar de Uniones de Trabajadores do an Insular strike in the electric and irrigation service in Puerto Rico, at such time as the Insular Council deems convenient, if due justice has not been done to the demands presented by this Union; providing that this time shall not be later than today, Friday, March 2, until "1 Monday cln. co of March at twelve o'clock meridian." At the beginning of yesterday's assembly an account was given of a message addressed to the Union by the Director of 1.a River Source Authority, seflor Antonio Lucchetti, which reads as follows: "Following discussions for a new collective bargaining agreement held with your Island Council during the afternoon and evening of yesterday, and not having his own analysis of the resources available allowed the Director
Isa v representatives of the Authority to reach an agreement as to whether or not to order and authorize the Electric Industry Board to declare Executive to meet the substantial increase you demand in the salaries of your employees, I respectfully submit my suggestion that your Union submit the request for the increase it demands to the Governing Board of the Authority". The Union is demanding a 25% wage increase; the BPP Executive Director offered a 5% increase. Negotiations between the Union and the BPP continued throughout Thursday afternoon and into the evening, and representatives of the Waterworks Authority reportedly rejected "virtually all" of labor's key amendments to the previous agreement with the BPP.
By CHARLES McCABE WASHINGTON. 2. (PU)-Earl B. Wilson, Chief of the River Source Authority Section. Wilson, Chief of the Sugar Section of the CCA, told the House Insular Affairs Committee that the Cubans have evidently given up hope of equal treatment with Puerto Rico in the present negotiations over their sugar production, and are prepared to accept the agency's offer of three dollars per hundredweight of sugar. Under stern questioning from Republican Congressman Fred Crawford, the sugar official denied that the Cuban sugar negotiations were linked to the Puerto Rican negotiations, adding that "they were separate programs. Wllson said that Puerto Rico is considered a U.S. area, and is therefore receiving five cents more on the basic price per quintal of sugar, as well as a ten-cent freight advantage over Cuba. At present, Puerto Rico is being offered $3.46 per hundredweight of sugar, plus 40 cents per paJo compensation; v is trying to get an increase,* because of the demands made by the field and factory workers, who are supporting them by strike Wllson was an exceedingly reluctant witness to testify, and asked permission of the Chairman of the Committee, Congressman Bell, to appear before an executive session of that body. Reporters and attendees at the hearing were ordered to leave the Committee room,' while Wllson's motion was being argued. And it is understood that it was at the insistence of ... Representative Crawford, who requested that the hearing be "public and Imparclal," that the doors of the Committee <lo" reporters were reopened. This is the first time that Wllson, who is usually silent and inaccessible, has discussed in public the details of the Cuban and Puerto Rican negotiations over the 1945-46 sugar harvest. Wilaon's confident assertion that the Cubans have given up hope of equal treatment with the Puerto Ricans is at odds with recent credible reports that the Cubans are not only asking a higher price than three dollars per quintal of sugar, but are trying to sell forty million gallons of Indus* alcohol.
Tax Court affirms that there is no law to stop the levy.
The taxpayer may, however, resort to the courts to avoid the sale at public auction of the property subject to seizure.
Concluding that Act 169 of 1943 does not expressly or implicitly repeal section 57 of the Tax Law, the Tax Court has decided to revoke its own resolutions on the matter, issued in October 1943 in the case of Arbona y Arbona, and in November 1943 in the case of Enrique Diaz y Hermanoz, resolving, in addition, that the appeal brought before the aforementioned body by the Estate of Alejandro Suarez Villamil does not proceed, since it is a deficiency and the required bond has not been posted. The Court also stated that in Puerto Rico there is not a single law that authorizes the suspension of a levy proceeding initiated by the Island Treasurer. The opinion, which is dated February 27, is by the presiding judge, Leo. Borlnquen Marrero Rios. It is a question of contributions on income corresponding to fiscal year 1943, the details of which were discussed in hearings on January 30 last. The Treasurer argued that the Court had no jurisdiction because the appellant did not file the tax required by law.
The appellant admitted that he had not given bond and that the question involved was a deficiency, but contended that the law governing the matter is No. 169 of May 15, 1943, and that under it (continued on page 2.)
Dusseldorf is already under fire
THE WAR IN BRIEF
WESTERN FRONT: Forces of the Ninth Army arrived on the banks of the Bin, in Neuss, or immediately opened fire on Dusseldorf, bastion and industrial center of enormous importance, while at both ends of the great front the bastions of Venlo, in Holland, and Trier, in the entrance door to the valley of the Mótela, were conquered. Kréfeld was shaken occupied by the Allies. The First Army is already at least five miles from Cologne, which yesterday was subjected to intense bombing by Allied planes. BUSO-GERMAN FRONT: Deopaeiws of the Third German Army last night
The Rokossovsky forces broke through the railroad east of Koealin last night, to reach within five miles of the Baltic coast. This means that between 200,000 and 300,000 Germans fighting in Pomerania have been overrun. / PACIFIC FRONT: Ix>8 Americans cleared the Japanese from Lubang Island, where they landed the day before yesterday. In Paragua, they occupied the town of Iwaslg, and the island's occupation is considered a certainty. The bstslls of Iwo Jims has already sat on its Anal taso.
Paljon's Third Army occupied citadel of Trier, in Moselle C a y o also the stronghold of Venlo The First Army continues to break through in front of the capital of the Rhineland By BOYD LEWIS PARIS, 2. (PU) - Allied forces, maintaining the sweeping pace of their offensive, llesmon today to the banks of the Rhine River, in the Neuss area, front by front of Dusseldorf, while on both flanks of the great attack front were conquered the great bastions of Nazi defenses of Venlo, in Holland, and Trier (Trier), at the gateway to the Moselle valley. Troops of the U.S. Ninth Army arriving on the Rhine immediately opened artillery fire on the defenders of Dusseldorf, on the other side of the stream. Dusseldorf is an important stronghold and a major manufacturing center, with a population of 500,000 souls. The legendary city of Trier - westernmost citadel of the German wedge projected against the Luxembourg borders - fell into the hands of the Third Army of Lieutenant General Pattan. The Interior section of the Allied left flank ■- in the southern Canadian sector -- joined operations today with the occupation of Venlo, a Dutch fortified town. German radio broadcasts state that General Elsenhower has already incorporated the British Second Army into the decisive fight for West Germany. Meanwhile, American First Army forces-which, according to dispatches from the front, have not yet begun the final assault on Cologne-continue to fight their way through the intricate system of Nazi defenses around the great industrial capital of the Rhineland in positions five to nine miles apart. Some 1,000 British heavy planes this morning subjected Cologne to a terrible 'saturation bombardment, dropping 5,000 tons of explosives on the city. The Ninth Army forces arriving on the Rhine - the 83rd Division - have split the German front west of the river in two, threatening to fan out north and south along the western banks of the stream from Neuss to form two large pockets if they link up with Allied troops descending from the Goeh-Kalkar area and others descending from the Ertt River areas, trapping considerable numbers of German troops. Meanwhile, another* force under Lieutenant General Simpson, operating under the security "blackout," advanced northward for miles, occupying the important manufacturing and communications center of Krefeld, less than five miles from the Rhine. i The spearhead of the 83rd Division reached the Rlp near Neuss along the Jullers-Du-saeldorf road. Dispatches from the front say that there is a possibility that the rapidity of the Allied advance prevented the Germans retreating across the Rhine from blowing up the important bridges at Dusseldorf. Hundreds of tanks and some one hundred thousand infantry veterans are still moving toward the Rhine, keeping their eyes on the heels of the nsal*q troops that reached the river. Allied bombs and fighters have been very active during the day today, strafing Nazi positions on the Rhine. A spokesman for the Allied command reports that the Germans are offering very weak and confused resistance, employing as ''fodder'' popular grenadiers, with a swastika armband on every military uniform, to cover their retreat, while reconnaissance pilots of the Vlgésimoprlmer Corps of Armies have begun "a frantic German retreat on the Rhine" in the Dulsburg area, although they do not report similar lnd'< cloz on the Pt! front.