EL MLf N DO DAILY MORNING DAILY GO
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
- 38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
ARO XXVII
I do not liquidate toe bonds purchased, ai m quo who liquidate Bitter.
SAN JUAN, P. R. ~ SATURDAY, MARCH 3.1, 194?
NUMBER 10424
entered aa second class matter. Poet Offloe, San Juan. Y. R.
The armies of Germany in the West have.
begun to surrender en masse to the Allies; Hussars occupy Danzig and enter Austria ■ ■ ■ r \ 1.
THE WORLD with the 65th Infantry The chaplain is the most popular officer in the group.
GENERAL PATTON'S ORDER OF THE DAY By ROBERT RI CHARDR WITH THE THIRD NORTH AMERICAN ARMY IN GERMANY, M. (PU)-Lt. Gen. George S. Patton praised in an order of the day capéela! given cata night, the performance of his troops for the resounding victories Ingradas desda they crusarnn the Rln. "History - says Patton - does not record a greater prompt in so limited a time." Patton Indicates in au message that súitóronas have taken reres of ",600 square miles of Aloman territory, have occupied .3,072 cities and towns, have taken 140,112 prisloneroa. have <ladn killed or wounded 98,000 Germans and have practically eliminated the German First and Seventh armies. As Patton was issuing his order of the day, it was learned that a senior German officer had surrendered to Third Army troops yesterday afternoon and had stated that there is no organized resistance between the North American Army and Berlin. The officer added that resistance had been prepared over the Weser rfn but that Allied tanks are moving too fast. ....The officer in question, whose Identity has not been disclosed, was taken prisoner by being hit in a vehicle mlmetisadn by a detachment of the Third Army. Pio. Rico in the security plan, Soviet Russia has asked for three votes in the Council and the United States counters with an equal demand. - A speculation PoTlÍoÑPEARSÓn WASHINGTON. 30. (1NS)-With the announcement that the Russians have requested three votes in the United Nations Assembly, it was revealed today that Moscow made its first request for a multiple vote in the world councils in October 1943. when it demanded multiple votes in the Commission on Crimes of Guérra | u X*_*.*UI* ■ A > 1 m I el la a - ■ <■-I
Passed bill on tuition exemption f Favors students whose parents' income does not exceed $1,500 each year. Other measures in the Lower House The House of Representatives, meeting on Thursday under the chairmanship of Dr. Francisco M. Susonl, considered in Full Committee and then approved on third reading, numerous bills that had been discharged from different standing committees.
In the Senate, the Senate allocates millions for three agencies. The Senate approved on Thursday an additional appropriation of $85,000,000 for the Development Bank; of $82,500,000 for the Transportation Authority; of $500,000 for the Water Resources Authority; of $82,500,000 for the Puerto Rico Canal Authority; of $500,000 for the Puerto Rico Canal Authority; of $85,000,000 for the Puerto Rico Canal Authority; of $85,000,000 for the Puerto Rico Canal Authority; of $85,000,000 for the Puerto Rico Canal Authority; of $75,000,000 for the Puerto Rico Canal Authority; of $75,000,000 for the Puerto Rico Canal Authority; and of $75,000,000 for the Puerto Rico Canal Authority. 500,000 * for the purchase of land for the construction of schools and rural Second Units; of >380,000 for a Central Hall of the Department of Health; of >150,000 for the continuation of the Capitol; of >234,650 for the Communications Authority; of >2,000,000 for the reflnancing of the public debt and * $49,000 for the Isabela Irrigation. It also approved numerous minor appropriations projects. Bolívar Pagán called attention to the fact that the measure provided that part of said appropriation could be used to make improvements in the transportation system currently operated by said agency. He said that, in his opinion, it is a mistake for the government to engage in a passenger business between San Juan and Rio Piedras "in a competition of citizens who have legitimate investments in identicalX (Continued on page 18).
Huge booty taken in port Reds" seized 45 submarines" before" Nazis destroyed them 50,000 casualties cost the enemy in the fight In the far south other Red troops began the invasion of Austria By ROBERT MUSEL LONDON. 30. (PU)- Today was another day of great Soviet victories. The Russian forces seized Danzlg - They raised the Polish flag over the valuable German naval base in the Baltic, while in the extreme south of the eastern front other Soviet troops began the invasion of Austria. Nearly 50,000 Nazis of the Danzlg garrison were killed or captured during the battle for the conquest of that stronghold, a battle which was mourned for three days in the streets of the former free city and which was Hitler's pretext for declaring war on Poland. I<ai forces of Marshal RokosMviky, who conquered Danzlg, iqcluyondo 45 submarines, qge the Germans had time to destroy them'. While the Soviet spearheads crossed the Auitrla border north of Koszeg (Guns), 48 miles north of Vlena, the Russians began other offensives on the northern bank of the Danube and south and west of Lake Balaton, in the course of which they occupied more than 7G0 villages and advanced up to 30 mines.The Soviet armies are now in full offensive on a front of more than 185 miles from the center of Czechoslovakia has(Continued on page 22)
Captain Raymond Stadta t was parish priest of Maricao for seven years Soldiers flock to j ' him in scores I * Discovery of the corpse of 1 a German soldier.- An officer's | chasm Miguel A. SANTIN Oorreepnnsal of War of THE WORLD ' WITH THE 65th INFANTRY IN EAST FRANCE-(Received by military bomber and through * the United Press)-Undoubtedly what the most popular officer of the Puerto Rico Regiment, is Captain Raymond M. Stadta, Catholic chaplain of the 85th. Some say that he is one of the hardest working _and I can attest to this after seeing him in action all day today. Captain Btadta was parish priest in Marineo for seven years and speaks perfect eipaftol. A me. I day late, after having visited several companies and talked to scores of soldiers, each of whom presented him with a different problem for solution or advice, the chaplain turned to me, took off his steel cap and, pointing to the hairs that stood on his temples, said: ''These hairs are not the same as the hairs on his temples. I didn't have these hairs before I came to the 45th. And they didn't grow on me when I was old either. Each one represents a soldier of the Regiment." L Stadta began the day by taking to a representative of the Red Cross , uq group of Roldados who for dlversaa reasons wish to tegresar, with use of Uc^ncta," go to Puerto Rico. The (Continued on page 22)
A communication from the Governor was presented, informing that the 12th and 13th bills were closed; the first allocating funds to distribute seeds among the farmers and the second making an appropriation for the campaign against certain insects in the cotton plantations on the Island. The Secretary also gave an account with a communication from the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Rafael Buscaglia, responding to a request made by Representative Pacheco Padró. The letter, in its main paragraphs reads: "In reply, I hereby inform you that the Treasurer of Puerto Rico has not been able to, dosnrmtoaf the raottead of di net or nue correéponde to be paid from Insular funds to the Municipality of Comerlo for the years 1942-43 and 1943-44, since the Autorid|d de Fuentes Fluviales, in turn, has not made any payment for the municipalities through this Department. nor has it sent official notice of the action taken on the matter. ■. We understand that the liquidation of the payments of said Authority should be made through this Department, in order for the Treasurer of Puerto Rico to be in a position to determine the deficiency that corresponds to the municipalities, as well as the deficiency that corresponds to the municipalities.
Tugwell Signs Amendments to the Land Law A 5-Year Limitation on Expropriation Powers W* LegisteUtva 1 ñau lar Laws Nos. S, 7 and 8 were signed into law Thursday by Governor Tu Al . Act No. 6 amends subdivision (a) of Section "5, pet-a to provide that the par parishes to be ceded to laborers on the farms ds proportional benefit shall be limited to families residing on the farm "at the time they are acquired by the Land Authority and who alin dan residents thereon at the time the lease is signed with the lessee." Act No. 7 deletes the following paragraph from Section 73: "Nothing in this title shall prevent a lessee from (Continued on page 22)
The United Nations. The United Nations, which, when this agenda was established in London, the GoWernq xyjp requested that it be granted a veto by one of the Soviet states which had been invaded by the Nazis. When London refused to grant the Russian request, Mozcu refused to join the War Crimes Commission, organizing instead his own agency to investigate war crimes in the Soviet capital. Some time later, the Russian press denounced the London-based Commission for its lack of aggressiveness in denouncing war criminals. Even when Ruala's allegation was made known today, there were already
- II ■ 11 --- -I " r-"Si-"Si-evidence from the Soviet that Russian representation in postwar international organizations should be established taking into account the size of its territories and the importance of its population. In Washington it was also learned today that the Russian demand for three votes in the General Assembly of the world security organization was originally submitted to the Dumbarton Oaks conference last August, but was rejected. However, the same thing happened at the Yalta conference. In Yalta, the United States tabled a counter-proposal of three other votes in the same way, so that the U.S. could not vote in favor.
Panic seizes the Germans They are surrendering at the rate of two thousand per hour, announces London Allied advance turns into marathon Nazi units flee amid refugees/ -Positioning of armies By BoIdlÉwIS PARIS, ,30. (PU)-News has reached Allied Supreme Headquarters that the Germans are surrendering by the thousands before, the formidable onslaught of Allied armored forces, which ae projected deep into the Nazi rear nn area* barely 180 miles from Berlin, virtually enveloping the Ruhr industrial basin, where the largest remaining fighting strength of the Germans in the west is located. The German High Command announced in an official communiqué that forces of the North American Third Army were about 185 miles from Berlin, at Wildungen, 20 miles southwest of Cassel, that being the point nearest the German capital specially indicated to where the Allied forces are located. It seems that the absolute disintegration of the German armies in Western Europe has begun. Columns of tanks of Hodges' First Army have already advanced almost a mile by road to the rear of the German forces defending the Ruhr, meeting only demoralized and battered Germans, ready only to surrender. The Allied-controlled Luxembourg radio said that one of the largest mass surrenders in the world's military history was in progress and that it would be the largest in the world's history.
Thousands of people at last night's Stations of the Cross ceremony dedicated for world peace
and 46 the act of the "Via Crucli" jnue"-"3 !
"3 ! for world peace, organized by an Executive Committee chaired by Monse- i
The Executive Committee, presided over by Bishop Mariano Vassallo, Vicar of the Diocese of San Juan, was held in front of a statue of the Virgin Mary.
erected in front of the statue of Victory. MiUares of people from
I gar. । After brief words pro-| Flooded by aoftor Antonio Anlúteo López, member of the organizing Committee|
i organizer, Monsefior Vasallo, who was in charge of the description of the fourteen stations of the "Via
I "Let us place ourselves in the preaerwia of plot and with a spirit of faith in you effi-
the day of Good Friday, in which the Passion and Death of Our Lord is commemorated.