THE WORLD
36 Pages 5 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 2 Sections
DIARY OF THE TANGLE
NUMBER 10480
YEAR XXVII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 25, 1945
Entered as second class matter, Poat Office, San Juan, P. R.
Ickes Expected to Favor Plebiscite Bill
Also ge expected Truman attitude to sway Tydingg A Closed for now gubernatorial case Créeae Tugwell will gegilirá here while* Ickea is in the Cabinet By CHARLESMIC CABE Correipomal of United Pre nia WASHINGTON, 24. - The assurance given by President Truman that Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes can remain in the Cabinet. Ickes, may remain in au tarso as long as he wishes is regarded by people" Informed of insular affairs as an Indication that so* hetnador Tugwell will also remain in power, at least as long* as Ickes retains his post, The President's statement is likely to put an end, at least temporarily, to recent widely spread rumors that the governor would soon resign and that he might be replaced with Major General Pedro A. del Valle, or by the Resident Commissioner, Jesus T. PIftero, or by Luis Munoz Marin, or by Jose M. Gallardo, or by Major Thomas Hennings, Well-Informed circles here have no doubt that Tugwell has the full support of Ickes, and that, moreover, Ickes would vigorously oppose any move to replace the . Governor, Some circuits see Truman's "vote of confidence" in Ickea as the virtual termination, for the present, at least, of the campaign for Del Valle, initiated by Senator Dennis Chavez, two weeks ago. And the conservative party says it is confident that the Tugwellian authority structure will remain undisturbed for the foreseeable future, and possibly be expanded. Although reporters attempted to question the President about the future of the Governor of Puerto Rico at his last press conference, the meeting was so full of exchanges of questions and remarks that it concluded without many questions being asked. The vote of confidence in Ickes, in combination with Truman's statement on Wednesday that he favors a quick determination by the Puerto Ricans of their political problem, is seen on the Island sites as an augury of good omens for the immediate political future of the Island. The great obstacle to the passage of the Tydlngs-Plftero bill, at this date, would seem to derive from one of the sponsors of the measure, Senator Tydlngs. The latter has indicated that he has no intention of holding public vis- ► tas, at least during this year, aobi* the plebiscite bill, which he filed by petition. However, it is believed that the President's strong statement in favor of rewarding Puerto Ricans for their participation in the war, through free political choice as to their future, might influence Senator Tydlngs. The full text of the public hearings held by the Senate Territories Committee on independence for Puerto Rico - including the testimony of Muñoz Marin - was released this week by the Committee. This text is (Continued on page 20.)
Control over materials will be revoked Expires October 1. - Does not cover inventory restriction New orders to clothing manufacturers Refer to special program for cotton clothing for civilian use On October 1, the system of control of materials will expire automatically with all its respective orders, except the restrictions on inventories. This also includes all "gulas" and orders issued prior to August 21, directed to mills, warehousemen and distributors, as announced yesterday by the director of the War Production Board for territories and possessions, Mr. Gordon W. Foote. Mr. Foote added that "until the end of September, all transactions in steel, copper and aluminum will continue to be regulated under this system." He said that "all orders placed with mills, warehousemen and other distributors requiring delivery after September 30 will be considered as non-priority orders, "To take effect immediately," he added, "all allocations of controlled materials (steel, copper and aluminum) for the fourth quarter will be considered as non-priority orders, Mills and warehousemen should consider orders placed for the fourth quarter of 1945 and subsequent quarters as orders placed without priority, unless they specifically receive orders to the contrary." CMP 5 and CMP 5A orders and all P and U orders, which establish priority rates for maintenance, repair, and operation of business or Industries, will be in effect hntil Sept. 30. at which time they will be revoked. Under the new priority system, after September 30, no priority rates may be extended to obtain materials for maintenance, repair and operations, in the manner now provided in CMP 5 and CMP 5A orders and those orders now in effect in P and U series. New provisions to clothing manufacturers The War Production Board yesterday released the most important provisions of Schedule 3 to Order M-328, which replaces Order M-388 A to be revoked, effective September 30. This order concerns the special schedule for cotton clothing for use by the civilian population. It provides that manufacturers must file form WPB-3732 by the fourth quarter of 1945, not later than September 5, and that as soon as they file this application, they must procure an AA 3 classification for the purchase of cotton materials for use by the civilian population.
Memoirs of Paul Reynaud
By PAUL REYNAUD French War Premier. Despair was rapidly taking hold of the French government now transferred to Bordeaux. Dazed, insecure, they were ready to grasp at straws. The moment for which Petaln and Weygand had fought so hard had at last arrived. Reynaud fought furiously to counteract the influence of their defeatist propositions on the rest of the Government. But to these desperate men, the calm of a spurious pass, even under the German boot, was more attractive than the severe alternative proposed by Reynaud: to fight to the end in North Africa in spite of the immense obstacles. The government was disintegrating. It is the secret history of these terrible" last days in Bur* , déos that Paul Heynaud na-ra in this twenty-eighth folio his MEMOIRS, the first of two chapters on the disaster of Bordeaux;
"I - Camille Chautemps. succeeded in changing the French Cabinet in favor of Petaln.
Chautemps made Petain's idea triumph in Bordeaux.
the death throes of the French Republic. IN THE EVENING of June 14, the Government arrived in Bordeaux. Pierre Laval, leader of the supporters of the capitulation among the politicians, was in the City Hall, whose corridors immediately became corridors of a defeatist parliament. My telephone lines were tapped. My efforts to fight on and my plans were immediately known to these supporters of capitulation. That night, the British Ambassador, and General Sir Edward Spears, (British contact officer attached to Reynaud) came to tell me that the Government was anxious that France's promise not to negotiate a separate armistice should be kept. On the morning of June 15, I received a visit from Admiral Jean Francois Darlan (the Commander g.t Jete of the French Naval Forces whom Petaln seduced by promising to make him First Consul of France). He went to tell me, rather embarrassed, that he could not move all the transpor(Continued on page 20.),
HE PLANNED THE CROSSING OF THE MOSELLE RIVER
M * IBA Ib 1 . F Commander Rafael Morales Boyer His action sealed the fate of the city of Metz Puerto Rican soldier returns to the Island full of decorations A modest electrical engineer from Puerto Rico who five years ago abandoned a position in the Department of the Interior of the Insular Government to devote himself to a military career has returned to his home in Rio Piedras after covering himself with glory by participating in great European battles. This was reported yesterday by the Military Department of the Antilles. Such is, in synthesis, the story of Major Rafael Morales Boyer, who as executive officer of the 135th Combat Engineering Battalion, had an outstanding part in the remarkable operations of the 20th Motorized Corps, attached to the Third Army of General George S. Patton. Major Morales Boyer considers that his work in the European Theater of Operations was no more extraordinary than that of many soldiers in the American ranks. His modesty prevents him from relating how he planned in mid-November the crossing of the Moselle River at the town of Thlonville, an operation which sealed the fate of the city of Metz and enabled the 20th Corps, better known as the "Ghost Corps," to continue its sweeping thrust across the fields of France. For this action Morales Boyer holds the Bronze MedxUa, decoration that he wears together with the Cross of War awarded by the French Government. Major Morales Boyer arrived this week at the Military Department of the Antilles on leave which will be extended until December 6, when he will receive his discharge by virtue of the high score in his favor. A former member of the National Guard, the Rio Piedra soldier was called to active duty in 1940 and assigned to the 130th Engineering Unit until June 1943, when he was sent to the United States. After several months of training in different military centers, among them the Engineer School at Fort Belvoir and the General Command and Staff College at Leavenworth, Kansas, Morales Boyer was assigned to Battalion 135 which was trained in the state of Tejaa pai (continued on page 20).
Storm delays arrangements for occupation of Japanese territory by U.S. armed force.
Hearing on zoning began yesterday Martocci explains that the regulation establishes several districts Construction varies in different areas The elimination of restrictions on commercial buildings was requested At two o'clock yesterday afternoon, the public hearings related to the draft zoning regulations began, with Dr. Rafael Picó, president of the Planning Board, presiding, with the other members of the body in attendance. Participating in yesterday's discussions were representatives of economic and governmental organizations, property owners, engineers, architects and other citizens interested in the provisions of the draft regulations. Dr. Picó, who opened the event, explained the purposes of the hearing, as well as the essential precepts of zoning, for whose existence he advocated "because it is an indispensable element" for the survival of cities. José M. Menéndez José M. García and Adriano González, representing the Property Owners Association and League, and the American Society of Engineers", requested the postponement of the hearing "to have enough time to analyze the provisions of the project and to be in a better position to issue our opinions". Engineer J. Freíxas González expressed himself in the same manner, but the presidency did not agree, considering that "the hearing had been summoned in accordance with the Law, which creates the Board and the Invitation to the public, sending a copy of the Regulations to be discussed to the Interested Parties". The technical part of the zoning was extensively discussed at yesterday's hearing. The technical part of the zoning was extensively discussed at yesterday's hearing. Sanchez Vilella talks of study in U.S. cities San Juan Administrator Roberto Sanchez Vilella reported yesterday that he is "considering the possibility of conducting a study on the public cleaning system of a U.S. city with a population equal to or close to that of San Juan. "The experience acquired in the study," he added, "can then be applied to San Juan, thus improving the present methods for cleaning the city, until a maximum of efficiency is achieved." The Mayor has not yet outlined, he said, his plan for conducting such studies. "It is our purpose," he said, "to acquire additional equipment until a fleet of modern trucks is completed and to put into operation the facilities deemed indispensable to perfect as far as possible our system. We know of some North American cities that are facing similar problems to ours, or have faced and solved them in the past. I believe that such experience could be of great help to us". The Administrator also indicated that his Department of Public Works" has been studying specific (Continued on page 20).
New bond sale will be the final campaign O'Malley left for the Island. Treasury very pleased with Pto, Rico By RUTH BROOM WASHINGTON. 24 (INS) - Raphael O'Malley, Executive Director and Treasurer of the Treasury War Committee for Puerto Rico, left today for the Island to attend to preparations for the inauguration of the Victory Campaign for the sale of war bonds. "This campaign will be the last of its kind," O'Malley said, "but we will retain the same organizations that were in charge of the last war bond campaign to continue the sale of the bonds. He told Puerto Ricans that these bond sales are necessary because the Federal Government has a big job to do in rehabilitating veterans" and paying for war expenses. The Victory campaign will help to combat inflation, and to ensure a prosperous future for the entire world, O'Malley said. Treasury Sec. Fred M. Vinson, condensed the Idea of this campaign in the following" phrases, as O'Malley said: "National stability will be best" guaranteed if national obligations are spread among the greatest number of our" citizens. The individual who systematically increases the number of bonds he owns will find that he has built up the best and most positive protection* against every need. Treasury officials are "very pleased" with the way Puerto Rico has responded to all bond sale campaigns in the past, O'Malley added. "Puerto Rico has been highly commended here at the Capital for its history in selling "€war bonds. I have been instructed by the War Treasury Division to express to all the appreciation of this agency for their splendid cooperation."
The control of the property business by the Insular Government is to be recommended to the Legislature of Puerto Rico, "because of the great increase in the prices" of the Rolares, especially in the metropolitan ark. This was agreed by the Puerto Rico Consumer Advisory Committee at its meeting last Thursday. It is alleged that lots for which Santurco was charging $2.50 per meter are now selling for $7 and $9. The Consumer Advisory Committee, after considering this matter in all its aspects, agreed that the only way to control this business is through legislation to be passed, since the Office of Price Administration does not have the power to regulate this business. The National Office of Price Administration requested the U.S. Congress, during the last session of this legislative body, to grant it powers to control the ralee" business, but the authorization was denied. During the meeting of the Consumer Advisory Committee, it was alleged by the members coming from the Island, that the situation alleged in San Juan regarding this business, "is the same throughout the Island." The Committee at the same time appointed subcommittees to study the possibility of establishing other price controls that are not under the jurisdiction of the OAP, such as public entertainment, including movie theaters," be. treatments (Continued on page 14).
That "Puerto Rico can look forward with peace of mind to the post-war period," and that "the Island is better prepared than the great majority of the mainland states and perhaps even better prepared than the Federal Government itself in terms of specific plans" for government activities," Planning Board Chairman Dr. Rafael Picó reported yesterday. These plans," he added, "form the complete program. - He added, "they form the complete program of our Government and this Board has participated in their formulation. They are not, of course, exclusive plans of the Board, but are also part of the programs of the government agencies." Dr. Picó added that both the Board and the executive agencies "have formulated vast programs for the construction of public service facilities for the post-war period, some of which have already begun". | We are ready," he said, "to absorb returning veterans with diverse employment opportunities. They will not return to an island without job opportunities. The Government has arranged for them to get the faclll-
Saving an error What Muñoz and Bolivar Pagan said about Truman words
Due to a collation error in our Information yesterday on the reaction of the island political leadership to President Truman's statements, we wish to clarify that the comment authorized by Don Luis Muñoz Marín was the following: "All Puerto Ricans should feel satisfied by President Truman's categorical statement given through Governor Tugwell, in which he recognizes our right to have the problem of our political status decided in direct consultation with the people of Puerto Rico. "I am sure that this will satis-
-I am sure that this will satisfy the other political parties that concurred in the petition submitted to the United States Congress three months ago. 'i "The pledged word of Presl- * dente Truman must be of decisive value in the achievement of a -; prompt and satisfactory solution " i this great problem through the ■ of the will of the Puerto Rican people. -| It is incumbent upon us, in addition to our deep gratitude to President Truman for his words, to take all the necessary steps to bring about the most rapid and complete solution of this great problem,
Truman talks with De Gaulle KEL * IMF - . - President Harry S. Truman (right) talks with General Charles de Gaulle, President of the French Provisional Government, shortly after the French leader arrived at the White Thing, Wáshlngton. It is believed that the two leaders have been holding conferences to discuss matters related to the future of France (Associated Press photo).
Government to control real estate business The Consumers Committee will address the Legislature on the increase in real estate prices. - Action on livestock problem
Sanitation alleges that rat extermination continues It maintains that at no time was it paralyzed. - Payment to workers The Department of Health, in an official note authorized yesterday afternoon, alleges that at no time have the rat extermination works been paralyzed due to lack of funds. The note adds that due to the termination of the fiscal year and the beginning of the current one, there was a consequent delay in the processing of funds, but maintains that "the" work of rat extermination, at all times have been carried out normally". It reads as follows. "In relation to the statements made in EL MUNDO, edition of the 19th of the current day, by Dr. SAMUEL MORRIS, advisor and Instructor of the Typhus Control Unit, of the Sanitation Bureau, Public Health Division and in which it is stated that "there will be considerable delay in the training of personnel for the pest control campaign", the Department of Health, assures that at no time have the pest control work been paralyzed.
Picó believes that there will be for the veterans employment opportunity.
He says the island can look with optimism to the postwar period. - In his opinion, the government is prepared to confront the situation.
to earn the livelihood to which they are entitled. Among the post-war construction projects, "which will begin as soon as construction restrictions are liberalized", Dr. Picó mentioned projects for schools, medical centers, hospitals, roads, urban roads, aqueducts, sewers, government buildings, and works of diverse character". "But even more important," he added, "are the plans to be put into effect in all their intensity during the post-war period, which include the stimulation of our economy, with the promotion of new industries; the development of agricultural activities, and transportation, which during the war were hindered by the lack of essential materials and technical personnel. Now, at the end of the war, all these "projects" of the Government are in a position to be given "preferential attention". "The tranquility which I believe the people of Puerto Rico should observe," he said, "is based on the fact that their Government has prepared plans to win the peace. We do not find ourselves like many States, in which airfields have been converted into airports," he said.
Airfields have become quagmires Japanese complain of Russia's announcement of paratroopers Claims Moscow so informed Tokyo declared yesterday that such action would be regretted by Japan By RALPH TKATSORTH MANILA, 25 (PU). - The storm which has today delayed Japanese arrangements for the arrival of U.S. acupaclon troops" has raised the possibility of a slight hitch in the occupation plan outlined by General MacArthur. At the same time, Japanese Imperial Headquarters today complained to MacArthur over Tokyo radio that, according to a Moscow radio announcement, the Soviet High Command is about to send airborne troops to the Japanese metropolitan island of Hokkaido. The said Imperial Headquarters also reported the existence of two other allied landing plans, according to which allied airborne troops will descend on Kanoye airfield on southern Kyushu Island, and, on the following day, another very large group will land on the same airfield and also at Takatu, northwest of Kanoye. The Japanese also informed MacArthur today that torrential rains have turned the Atsugi airfields into mud flats. At this point, it is recalled that General MacArthur has specified that the descent of the North American occupation troops next Tuesday would depend on the weather. It is not yet known whether the airfields will dry in time for the drops on the date fixed. The General today officially informed the Japanese that he wished Japanese officers of the Communications Corps to receive his advance force group on August 26, to install direct telegraph and radio communications between Supreme Commandant's Headquarters, the Japanese Government, and Japanese Imperial Headquarters, Regarding the announcement of the intention of the Soviets to send airborne troops to Hokkaido, the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters said over the radio to Mac Arthur that, if such news is true, "it will be most regretted by the Japanese Government, which is doing its utmost to comply with your requests, by placing the" militare" and naval force" and civilians under strict control." The new" allied drops officially announced by Japan will occur on September 1 and 2, in Kyushu, where they will use the Kanoye and Takasu airfields. Such landings will be accompanied by "landings" of naval forces. The Japanese added that, to avoid complications, they have already withdrawn their forces* from those areas. (Meanwhile, International News Service correspondent Frank Robertson reported* dude Manil* that Japanese Imperial Headquarters reported today *1 General MacArthur that popular mobs* and guerrilla and bandit activities were causing serious difficulties for the Japanese army in China. The message from Tokyo asking for special considerations in connection with the surrender of the Japanese in China, pointed out that the Chinese were carrying out acts of revenge against lu Japanese forces wishing to surrender, in compliance with the Emperor's order. According to "Domel," the Japanese military authorities dispatched a note to the Yenan Army chiefs advising that they would take the necessary measures to suppress the disorders unless "the early unification of Chln* H > The note noted that some military elements in Yenan were planning "the illegal occupation of the large cities in northern China, such as Peking, Tientaln and Tilngtao, after Japan's acceptance of the conditions set forth in the Potsdam Declaration." The note went on to say that such plans "were causing great anxiety among the Chinese population" and that "the Japanese Army in North China had to assume full responsibility up to the last moment for the maintenance of peace and order, as well as for the original "vine" of the people. Another dispatch from "Domei* said that 1* withdrawal of Japanese troops from the areas to be occupied by the Allies began *and "r Centlnú* in patina 1"| .