THE WORLD
34 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections".
34 Pifinai 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DB LA MARAÑA DIARY
AHO XXVII '
There will be more ' cleaning ' equipment
Man Juan Administration plans to invest a sum of 180,000 Seventy road workers are likely to be appointed For the past four months a study on garbage collection has been carried out - For the past four months, the San Juan Government has been drawing up a program for the solution of the various problems related to public cleaning. The Administration is preparing to invest no less than 180,000 on equipment, once the new budget comes into effect. San Juan Mayor Roberto Sanchez Villolla has been giving his personal attention to the improvement of these public services. The public cleaning services, formerly attached to the Department 41o Beneficencia, are now under the direct supervision of the Director of Public Works, softor Salvador V. Caro. Mr. Caro, whom we interviewed yesterday, informed us that the Administration has been studying the acquisition of the necessary equipment to provide San Juan with an efficient public cleaning service, according to the program outlined by the Mayor. A scientific study has also been carried out during the last four months to determine a program for the organization of these services. The study also aims "to determine the work to be carried out in the territorial jurisdiction of San Juan, by zones, in such a way that all the present problems will be definitively solved." * The Government of the Capital estimates that the present fleet of trucks should be increased, to have 38 in the next fiscal year. At present, 18 trucks are in use. They are studying the specifications of the vehicles to be acquired, to complete the necessary number. These vehicles will be of the same style as those used in the large waste dumps, with covered tanks* and a "rotating cylinder" system for piling up the waste in the truck's tank. Also under consideration is the establishment of a system of mechanical sweepers to complement the service provided by the garbage trucks. The Municipality will have to test one of these sweepers," and price bids are now being considered. These sweepers, by means of the cylindrical brooms on their sides, accumulate the garbage scattered on the streets or in the yards, towards the center. The garbage is automatically picked up by a mechanical shovel, which deposits it in a compartment of one cubic yard of capacity. This sweeper is powered by gasoline and is easily handled by a motor vehicle driver. It could be fitted with a tank, in the form of a "trailer", to increase its capacity. The Municipality plans, according to Mr. Caro, to purchase a number of additional sweepers as soon as their efficiency is proven. - The program will also include the use of street sweepers. To this end, it is planned to install two of these sweepers, with sufficient capacity, in the Santurco pits. Studies have determined that not more than 200 tons of garbage will be removed daily, considering an approximate population of 205, (Continued on page 18).
NUMBER 10509
World Letter of Peace to be approved at Monday's session; People honored Del Valie yesterday
Fleet of 27 "jeeps" made "invasion" of San Juan with 350 vendors Exciting gesture of an octogenarian Numerous public watched the arms exhibition at Muñoz Rivera Park By Juan Maldonado Rodactor do EL MUNDO The town of San Juan paid tribute to the illustrious Puerto Rican soldier, Comandante Geno"! Pedro Del Vallo, commander of the First Marine Infantry Division who, with other forces, completed the victory of the United States troops on the strategically important Japanese island of Okinawa, acquiring two hundred thousand dollars in bonds of the Seventh War Loan, sold house to house by ladies of the Capital. The day's activities commenced with a solemn ceremony attended by, among others, General Thomas R. Phillips and Colonel Francisco Parra, of the Military Department of the West Indies; Chief Justice Martin Travieso, Chief Judge of the Supreme Court, Mr. Martin Travieso, and the chairman of the Seventh War Bonds campaign, Mr. Mi(Continued on page 180).
----■ ,i i.., । -,i. i,,, " , ■ .i- i, !■ । । -i" - Sanchez Vilella unhappy with budget amendments
This was approved last night by the Commissioners, who reduced many salaries and eliminated numerous positions. - The Mayor is absent for 10 days
Medina Bem is new glass factory manager Lately he was one of the vice presidents of Banco Popular de P. R. Having resigned his position as Administrator of the Puerto Rico Glass Corporation, a position he had held since the founding of said industry, with the purpose of dedicating himself to commercial enterprises on the mainland, he has been appointed in his place, Vicente Medina Bem, one of the vice presidents of Banco Popular of Puerto Rico, By virtue of negotiations carried out by Mr. Teodoro Moicoso, president of the Puorto Rico Glass Corporation, with Mr. Rafael Cerrión, General Director of Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, this institution has ceded the services of Mr. Medina, "as a proof of the cooperation of Banco Popular to the work of Industrialization of the government of Puerto Rico", as it was officially informed yesterday. Mr. Vicente Medina Bom has a Bachelor's degree in Agricultural Sciences from the Colegio do Agricultura de Mayagüez and a Master's degree in Sciences from the University of Puerto Rico (Continued on page 18).
The Board of Commissioners yesterday approved the budget of the Government of the Capital, for the 1945-46 fiscal year, after introducing a considerable number of amendments to the project submitted by the Mayor, Mr. Roberto Sánchez Villolla. These amendments are eliminations of positions and reductions in salaries to positions, whose approval was requested by the Mayor. Since last Monday, the Board has been holding private meetings, which lasted until late at night. He requested the appearance at these meetings of the various municipal departments. Ayor appeared at the request of this body, Mr. Roberto Sanchez Vllolla, who defended his original recommendations for approximately several hours. We were informed that Mr. Sanchez Vllolla "expressed his dissatisfaction with the action taken by the Board, not being satisfied with some of the items allocated, salaries reduced and positions eliminated. Before the Board came into session, he
Before the Board began its session, he filed a request for a leave of absence for a period of ten days, which he will begin to enjoy next Monday. He indicates in his communication that he proposes to leave the Island on Monday, having designated Mr. Manuel Moléndoz Muflón to replace him. The Board, according to what we were informed, answered the communication granting the requested leave. This matter was not officially discussed at the session since it did not appear on the official calendar. Among the changes to the draft budget submitted by the Mayor and approved by the Board were the following: Treasury: Salaries were reduced in the following positions: general collector and paymaster, from 82,700 to 82,400; Inspector General, from 8,800 to 81,500; receiver, San Juan, from 81,500 to 81,200; collector, Santurco, from 81,800 to 81,500; reductions were made in office positions, stenographers and archivists. Public Works: eliminated the pia (continued on page 13).
Memory" of Count Ciano Italy was on the verge of a break with Hitler.
(loto oa "I dared article appraising in the memoirs of the ~ Goto-> Chus*. quisa toó me" -ESmS and pomo of the D" oaX £ From the first to the II do August, 1838. - - - - - : B1 Condo Ciano, son-in-law of the Muse*Uní. went to Salzburg on August 183¿ to have Hitler and Ribbentrop put their letters on the mosaic, v fuá eomolaoldo. It was plainly stated that there would be war. Nothing by Mussolini's immediate reaction, as revealed in the Centenary's laughter, was to avoid a conflict for which Italy was unprepared. But the idea overwhelms■aww&WTS Dlco Ciano: August 1-"Attollco (ambassador in Germany) continues with his favorite shot. .. quo a sudden decision will be bocha by Hitler ol die.
I '> I i I i I i ■ i I 1 B < ■ < I 1 ■ í 'Cr * I । >7. y 1 ' O । ; J I 1 ' ■' 1 gg . / ■, ; H । I 1 I i i i ! I < * i , \ . *
August 15. Well, this ambassador has either lost his mind or he sees and knows something quo escapes us. Appearances favor the first alternative". Massimo writes a private letter from which I learn that he is not in touch with the Ambassador (Attollco) about the danger of a near crisis. Roatta, the new military attaché, informs us about the concentration of forces on the Polish frontier. Who will be able to prove it?" August 4. "The situation is confusing me. I'm beginning to consider an interview with Rib- 1 bontrop". Following the Allies we shall enter the war under the most unfavorable conditions for the Axis and particularly for Italy. Our gold reserve has been reduced to almost nothing, as well as our supply of metals. Our military and economic preparations are far from complete. I am proposing to the Duco an interview with Ribbentrop..... during which he dlscu- 1 P (Continued on page 18.), . j
On July 1, the sewage and sanitary sewerage system of the city of San Juan will be transferred to the administration of the Servicio Insular do Acueductos y Alcantarillados. The transfer obeys the provisions of the recent law that created the new agency. A spokesman for the Municipality of San Juan informed ayor that the program to be developed for the expansion of these services has not yet been determined by the SIA. Socalcula quo no more than one third of the territorial jurisdiction of San Juan lacks sewage system. It has also been reported that the Aqueduct and Sewer Service, although it has been preliminarily studying its program for the development of these public needs, has not definitively drawn up the program for the extension of these services.
5 The value of three superfortresses still needs to be covered |||raM|^ '''' TTM I I I | - I Til ■ U1 ■ ii i Va 1 I I SÍota "uperfortaloga/ could be purchased with the amount already covered by Puerto Rico from the quota assigned to it in the Seventh War Empréstitof War. But not a single one will be purchased until the country fully covers the quota representing the value of ten super for talas - the gigantic super gunship planes which are taking the life out of the Japanese enemy, as before they took it out of the German enemy. The value of three superfortresses has yet to be covered. And that amount must be covered before the last day of the current month. The sale of bonds of the Seventh Borrowing advanced yesterday, when the City, in tribute to General Pedro del Valle, purchased two hundred thousand dollars in a quick house-to-house sale. At right are the President and Executive Director of the Seventh Loan Campaign, Miguel Such and Ralph O'Malley, respectively, in front of the symbolic sign erected in the South Precinct, in San Juan, revealing to the public the course of the bond sale campaign. (Photo by Casenave).
E. V. offers 3.45 cents for 1946 Cuban sugars.
Offer includes purchase of alcohol and purge honey on terms similar to 1945. Cubans request time to consider proposals division ??-iS" rer u úe the Commodity Credit Corporation, announced that State" ■jar - Cuba buy from it au coaecha of 1946 sugar at O.S0 cent" pound. - -
The offer also includes the' purchase of alcohol and purge honey, on condition" almila"" to those of the 1945 production. Wilson said the Cubans have expressed their willingness to begin negotiations for a final agreement when they can see better crop prospects in rotation with the weather conditions over the next few weeks. Negotiations are expected to begin before October 15. The crop has been seriously damaged by the eight-month drought, which may have ended with the rains that began a few days ago, but it is still too early to make a reasonable estimate. The Cubans, whose cooperation Wllson praised, have also said they cannot enter into negotiations before full discussion with the plantation owners, but assured the Americans that all Cuban sugar desired by the United States will be sold to the Commodity Credit Corporation.
No definitive plan yet for San Juan sewage system
The Planning Board has been ordering all the legislation approved by Governor Tugwell, related to the permanent improvement and management of governmental services. This work is being done as a preliminary to the Six-Year Economic Program review. In accordance with the Law creating the Planning Board, the Planning Board is required to submit to the Legislature annually a permanent improvement program. To this end, it will revise its last program, in this case the one submitted to the Legislature on February 21, 1945, adjusting it to the recommendations of the Government. The preliminary steps for such revision are being organized by Dr. Picó, as he revealed yesterday. Dr. Picó added that "a series of funds in trust will be studied, pertaining to the Government's agendas". It is his criteria that this study should be brought forward "because this fiscal information is the most difficult to obtain". The agencies will be required to submit the information to the Planning Board by mid-August. The plans currently being drawn up form the preliminary work of the Six-Year Economic Program review.
The Purple Heart to an East Puerto Rican killed in action in the Pacific. - A ceremony in Gurabo Private First Class Raul M. Burgos, an infantryman killed in action in the Southwest Pacific on March 13, was posthumously decorated last Thursday when Colonel Miguel A. Mufloz, Commanding Officer of Camp O'Reilly, representing Major General E. F. Harding, commanding officer of the Military Department of the West Indies, presented the Purple Heart Medal to the soldier's mother, Mrs. Tomasito Burgos, of Gurabo. The ceremony took place at the residence of Mrs. Burgos, in the presence of Commander Miguel Gonzalez, of Gurabo, and other high-ranking municipal officials. (Continued on page 18.)
i works to be carried out in San Juan * and Santurco. The Government of San Juan, before the approval of the Law of reference, had carried out "extensive studies on the completion of the pluvial and sanitary sewage system". These works, he said, ' the cost of which was estimated at a little more than one million dollars, "would have provided facilities for the drainage and transfer of storm water and the sewage of the entire section between Far- ' que Street and Tapia Street, including the entire jurisdiction known as San Juan Moderno, Vlllapalméras Street and Eduardo Conde Avenue." It also planned to build "a modern > albaflal water treatment plant and a waste incinerator of such capacity as to provide for a considerable number of wastewater treatment plants.
Disparity of criteria on the appointment of Procuraduría Ledos. Muñoz Morales and Rivera Zayas disagree as to whether or not the Governor can make the appointment. - Jesus A" Gonzalez does not comment.
Mixed legal opinions were expressed yesterday in San Juan when commenting on the appointment made by Governor Tugwell in favor of Mr. Luis Negrón Fernández to act as Acting Attorney General in substitution of Mr. Jesús A. González. The same factual situation occurred when EL MUNDO proceeded to question four lawyers.
attorneys. Two of them, the expert constltudonallstá. don. Luis Mufloz Morales, and the also eminent lawyer, Mr. Rafael Rivera Zayas, expressed dissimilar and opposite criteria. Jesús A. González, Acting Attorney General, and Samuel R. Quillones, Pre I Bidente of the Bar Association, did not express an opinion. Continued on page 18),
Text is advanced as drafted Subject only to language revisions by jurists Machinery for global security Measures against aggression The International Court. Security Council SAN FRANCISCO. 22 (FU) -The following is the full draft text of the United Nations Magna Carta, which is subject to minor revisions in language by the Coordinating Committee and the Advisory Committee of Jurists, as well as approval by the United Nations Conference at its plenary session next Monday. The text does not contain the Preamble, which is being redrafted by the Coordinating Committee. CHAPTER I. - Purposes and Principles Article 1. - The purposes of the United Nations are: To maintain international peace and security, and to that end: to take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about, by peaceful means and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of disputes or of international situations which might lead to a breach of the peace. Paragraph 2. - To develop friendly relations among nations, based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, and to take appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace. To achieve international cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, and to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion; o Paragraph 4. - To be the center for harmonizing the actions of nations in pursuit of these common ends. Article 2. - The Organization and its Members, in pursuance of the purposes expressed in Article 1, shall act in accordance with the following principles: The Organization is based on the principle of sovereign equality of all its members. Section 2. - The members, in order to secure all the rights and benefits of membership, shall fulfill in good faith the obligations assumed by them in accordance with this Charter. Section 3. - Members shall settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace, security and justice shall not be jeopardized. Section 4. - All members shall proscribe in their international relations the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any member or of any other means inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations. Section 5. - Members shall give the United Nations every assistance in actions undertaken by the Organization in accordance with the provisions of the present Charter, and shall refrain from giving assistance to any state against which the United Nations takes preventive or compulsory action. Section 8. - The United Nations shall ensure that all non-member states act in accordance with these principles to the extent necessary for the maintenance of international peace and security. Section 7. - Nothing in the present Charter shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any state, or require members to submit any matter for settlement under the Charter; but this principle shall not affect the application of the compulsory measures contained in the Seventh Chapter. CHAPTER I - Membership Article 3. - The original members of the United Nations shall be the states which participated in the United Nations Conference on the International Organization of the United Nations at San Francisco, or those which, having signed the previous United Nations Charter, have not signed the United Nations Charter, or those which, having signed the previous United Nations Conference on the International Organization of the United Nations at San Francisco, or those which, having signed the previous United Nations Charter, have not signed the United Nations Charter.
the victory in the Pacific, by buying more war bonds.
* SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, JUNE 23, 1945
CHURCHILL CONGRATULATES * ' THE PRESIDENT
WASHINGTON, M. (FU)- * Prime Minister Churchill congratulated President Traman on the magnificent victory achieved by the United States forces on Okinawa. Churchill says in his message that this battle has been one of the most violent and famous in military history, and expresses deep admiration for the courage of the Americans and their determination to win the battle at any cost. The University Board, at its last meeting, denied the request made by the University faculty to reconsider its agreement adopted a few weeks ago, so that the time that a professor has been on sabbatical leave granted by the University, is counted in the computation of the three years of satisfactory service required by law to acquire permanence in the institution. The Senate, as we were informed yesterday, was represented by Professor José M. Zapata, representative of the Senate before the University Board, who defended the point of view of the professors. As soon as the University Board's decision became known, Professor Zapata announced that he would appeal it to the Superior Council of Education, which has been meeting periodically during the last few days. The president of the Puerto Rico Teachers Association, Mr. Luis Mufllz Souffront, on behalf of the Association he presides, addressed yesterday a communication to the Superior Council, supporting the professors' petition. In his communication, Mr. Muflía Souffront says that "the professor who stands out to improve his academic studies in foreign universities, has spent at least 6 years of work with good experience and satisfactory results in his teaching work. Upon returning to the University, he/she must submit a memorandum of the work done (Continued on page 18).
Poet Otfleo. San Juan. P. ■>