THE WORLD
34 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
34 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DAILY MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVII
Accelerate victory in the Pacific by buying more war bonds.
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, JULY 28, 1945.
Entered aa second claaa matter. Posé Office, San Juan, P. R-
NUMBER 10543
Muñoz paid a surprise visit to an OAP Panel yesterday.
For an hour and a half he watched as the accusations against accused traders were aired.
He congratulated . members of the group for the work they are doing Invites picket against agiotistas Believes the line to follow is against the "big culprits, without mercy" By Teófilo Maldonado Rodador do El Mundo. In his determination to attack the black market in every possible way "until ridding the people of the crime that robs them of their livelihood", Mr. Luis Mufioz Marín. President of the Sonado, appeared yesterday, without prior announcement of his visit, to the precinct of the Parada 8 of Puerta de Tierra, where he was holding hearings against accused merchants, the Panol of the OAP corresponding to the Barrio Obrero. For an hour and a half, Mr. MuAot Marín stayed with the Panel, composed of Mr. Enrique Collado, president; Mrs. Eloísa A. Laltus and Mrs. Eloísa A. Laltus. Laltus and Senior José María Garda Volga, while they heard complaints from numerous consumers, of having been sold at excessive prices, and other violations to the price control regulations. During the proceedings, members of the Panol often consulted with Senior Luis F. Pires, organizing officer of the OAP, and Senior Pedro Roger, head of the San Juan Inspectors' Office, directed the investigations. The President of the Senate never stated a specific sum, but in all cases he insisted that "it should be high enough to serve as an example to the guilty, and as a lesson to others." On one occasion ol sefior Mufioz Marin said, "The object is not simply to affix it to the operating costs of the black market, but to make this practice against the people Impossible." Dueflo of "La Pavita" pays For selling corn at illegal prices, the trader R, S. Garcia appeared before the Price Panel. He was also charged with 18 other violations. Senior Mufioz Marín examined the defendant's notes, and addressing the defendant, stated the following: "You are charged here with ten and new violations. But I see a more serious offense on your part. Your establishment is called "La Pavita", and an establishment with that name should defend the beans of the people, not make them more expensive". The merchant paid a Compensation of >25 to the affected consumer and promised the Uder Popular not to sell any more at overprices. Many violations in milk, meat and huecos During the last few days, most of the violations found by the OAP Inspectors and the Police have been in such products as milk, meat and eggs. Several cases of these were seen before the Panel during Senior Mufioz's visit. Trader Felix Guardiola, of Bar Falansterlo, Puerta do Tierra, paid 835 to conaumidora Maria Martines, for selling him a liter of milk at illegal maximum prices. Retailer Ramon Melendez, of "La Placita" on Borinquen Avenue in Barrio Obrero, paid 125 to consumer Noeml Torres. (Continued on page 10)
HEADS 20th AIR FORCE ■ 1 ■ Go Lt. Gen. Nathan F. Twining, who will take over from Maj. Gen. Curtia )<eMay as chief of the 20th Air Force, effective Aug. 1. The announcement of the change of command was made by Lieutenant General Ira C. Eaker, assistant commanding general of the Army Air Forces, at a press conference in Washington, will become chief of staff to General Cari A. Spaats, commander of strategic air forces in the Pacific. (Associated Press photo), Lower rate for homes under $1,000 Water Service sets it at forty-sixty cents* a month* 1.he Board of Directors of the Aqueduct and Sewer Service approved at its last session the new 1-B rate, suggested by the Administrator and Chief Engineer, Senior Sergio Cuevas, applicable to service rendered to residences whose assessed value is less than $81,000 through 1A and 3 8 inch service connections. Pursuant to said rate, the subscribers who meet the required conditions will pay forty cents per month for service with connections of 38" and 60 cents per month with connections of 38". When the service is combined with sewerage, in the first case the monthly payment is 45 cents and in the second case 70 cents. When asked how this new rate compares with those in force in the Island's municipalities, Mr. Cuevas informed that "it is cheaper than any of the existing rates in Puerto Rico for the same service". He mentioned the following examples, "In Ponce they charge 65 cents a month for 1A inch service in a house whose value is 1500 00 and 90 cents a month for equal service in a house whose value is between 8500 and 81,00000. We will charge only forty cents in either case. (Continued on page 10.)
Delay in aid to Lares
The construction of the new farmhouse will not be ready until April 1946 Plans are still being prepared Red Cross has housed victims of the fire in wooden shacks Pnr Juan Maldonado Editor of EL MUNDO Although six months have passed since the day when half of the population of Lares was destroyed by a fire that left hundreds of families homeless, the only thing that has been done by the Government of Insulza is the construction of a new farmhouse, the only thing the Island Government has done to provide shelter for the victims have been plans and blueprints, and specifications are being prepared to put out to public auction the project for a new farmhouse, which will take eight months to build, if no last minute problems arise. During most of those six months, or to be more exact, until 15 days ago, the victims of the fire have lived in an improvised camp, having as their home huts ceded by the Army to the Red Cross, huts that for the most part are already destroyed, leaving the unfortunate ones exposed to the inclemency of the weather. Lares is a town where it frequently rains; and on rainy days the muddy ground turns the camp into a kind of flooded sewer. With the first impression caused by the catastrophe, it was announced that sums of money would be allocated so that the Housing Authority would proceed immediately to erect a house where to lodge the victims. The money was allocated some time later, once all of the paperwork that is common in these cases had been eliminated. The Authority announced that it would proceed to work immediately on the preparation of the project, but until Thursday nothing had been done, except to announce that the works would be put out to bid during the first two weeks of August, and that once the contract was awarded, the contractor would have 250 days to finish the works. This means that the inhabitants of Lares who lost their homes in the con- : (legration, would have to wait until April of the year 19é6, ( before being provided with safe and permanent housing. Unless something comes up that can stop the work, they will have a house fifteen months after the incident. A letter received by our Director from I-ares, tells ' of the tragedy of these unfortunates. ' That letter led us to make an In- 1 vestlgaclón near the authorities < pertinent: that is, the dlrec- * tores of the Red Cross and the Au- < tority of Hogaies of Puerto Rí- 1 co, and here is what has been done so far in ' favor of the homeless < of the fire of February 2 of the current year. i Nine ranchones al- 1 Jan to 81 families The director of the Puer- 1 to Rico Chapter of the American Red Cross, Col. Antonio R. Silva, In- ' formed that 15 days ago the 63 fa- 1 miles that were housed in the 1 camp that was originally erected in Lares and that were occupying land ceded by the Army have been transferred to 9 ranchones that have been erected on the land given by the Ho* 1 gares Authority and where the farmhouse that is to be built will be located. Each of these ranchones will have room for nine families. The es- : pació for each family consists of t a room measuring 16 feet by 12 i and a kitchen. The floor is of cement and the structure is of wood. The ; partitions are made of cardboard < (Continued on page 18.) (
Memoirs of Paul Reynaud Petain condemned Mandel and Reynaud without accusing them.
On May 18, 1M0, when General Corap's army had been shattered, with France invaded and a German armored corps already located beyond St. Quentin, the Allied armies in Belgium were threatened with immediate encirclement. At all costs it was necessary to restore the morale of the army and the pals, in order, at least, to save our honor on French territory. It was then that I appealed to Marshal Petain and General Weygand, as the last two surviving heroes of the previous war, in whose patriotism, like all Frenchmen, I was. A few weeks later, the "panzer" divisions of the enemy have deeply stuck their claws into the body of France. In new" another national territory, we spoke if' do defeated. But there still remained intact, in our possessions, the second great colonial empire of the world.
I General Maxime Weygand, to whom Reynaud entrusted the command of the French armies before the surrender. 1
We were, moreover, bound by that reciprocal promise made between the Allies not to mutually desert the war and to refrain from negotiating a separate armistice. Were we to be the only one of Germany's adversaries to surrender? Were we to repudiate France's word, once pledged? I refused to even consider such possibilities. THE "ENEMY FUSUCO NUMBER ONE" It was my intention to continue the war in North Africa. I had taken steps there for this purpose when I took charge of the War Ministry. I am going to copy the present report on those darmatlc meetings of the French army, held at Ture¡na and Bordeaux; at which I fought for the honor of France against the two "heroes" of the French army. (Continued on page 18.)
The United States announced yesterday to Japan the next eleven Japanese cities to destroy the superfortresses.
Labour triumphant are hailed.
'''' íiv bbhhmI Clement R. Attlee v mu wife (center) M<"n cheered at the People's Palace, London, after the announcement of the Labour leader's victory in the July 5 election held in Britain. From left to right, at the front: W. J. Edwards (with ribbon ribbon), Labour candidate victorious in the Whitechapel division, Ktepney! Attlee, victorious in the Limehouse division, Stepney, and Mrs. Attlee, and, between them, in the background, Fhll Piratin, the only Communist whose re-election was announced, for the Mlle End constituency. (Photo by PA).
The normalistas of the University of Puerto Rico who are to finish their course on the 17th of next August, and who had made a petition to the university authorities to accelerate the courses so that they could graduate a week before the date set, withdrew the request after conferring with the Acting Commissioner of Instruction. This was reported yesterday to EL MUNDO by the director of the University's Summer School, Dr. Pedro A. Cebollero, who added that the "students" who submitted the request to the university authorities, after an exchange of views with the Commissioner, realized that there was no reason to accelerate the course, since there are schools for all of them. The normalistas in question, a group of 300 who will graduate on August 17, in an assembly held at the University, agreed to request that the courses be accelerated so that they could finish their courses at least one week after the regular course began in the public schools of Puerto Rico, instead of finishing two weeks later, as originally determined. The teachers alleged that at the beginning of the school year, the vacant positions in the different municipalities of the Island would be filled by emergency teachers, "who have neither the academic preparation nor our #1 right, an unfair situation by all means," according to the teachers. The president of the Puerto Rico Teachers Association, senior Luis Mufiiz Souffront, also assured the students who will graduate on the 17th that there will be enough schools for all of them and that there will be no discrimination against the graduating class of Norma!
I The San Juan City Hall will be picketed from today Last night the negotiations between the Adininklrudor and the cleaning workers" were resolved. - Tons of garbage are deposited in the middle of the street.
Quiñones will see Anderson next date E "lá awaiting notice from him. -- The secretary of the Farmers Association issued an official statement yesterday, informing that the president of the entity, Mr. Jose Ramon Quiñones, who is in the national capital, has written that he is waiting to receive notice from the federal Secretary of Agriculture, Mr. Clinton P. Anderson, to "resume the" talks in relation to the new subsidy and the sale of the harvests of 3946 and 1947". The note adds that because of "the grave food crisis the nation is going through, the task which rests on the shoulders of the Secretary of Agriculture is of extraordinary magnitude and, naturally, any delay in entering fully into consideration of the island's sugar case is more than justified." "The president of this Association," he continues, "is deploying great activity and is also attending to other agricultural problems" of the country - such as the current crisis in the tobacco industry and the case of the cattle industry - and is also managing the final solution of the coffee debts. Our President is not only in contact with the federal officials who are attending to the problems of the Island, but he has also been in conference with the Governor and other officials of the Island who are in Washington, D.C., on official business.The farmers of the domestic Aren" ticles are being offered and allowed the same beneficial measures as the farmers of the domestic Aren" s."
Decide h o v whether there will be stoppage on the docks Tonight meets in assembly Labor Union. The Union of Dock Workers of Puerto Rico, affiliated with the CIO and the CGT, will meet tonight at 7:00 p.m. in the assembly hall of the San Juan Dock Workers Union No. I, affiliated with the Puerto Rican Labor Federation. The prevailing impression among the union's leadership is that this assembly, which will consider the suspension of talks between the union and the shipping companies, will discuss declaring a general strike that will affect all the ports of the island. The call, signed by the president of the EMU, Senior J. A. i Clntrón Rivera, and by the secretary, Senior Rodrigo Carreras Valle, reads in part: "The main issue to be discussed will be the defiant attitude of the shipping companies in breaking off the negotiations of the collective bargaining agreement we had been discussing.
l From the first hours of today's morning and until the conflict is resolved will be picketed by the workers of public cleaning, on strike since Thursday, the City Council of the Capital. This was announced last night by Francisco "Colón Gordlnny, president of the sector of the CGT in which the Union of Public Cleaning Workers is affiliated, shortly after the negotiations in which the workers and the directors of the Government of San Juan had been participating broke down. The talks with a view to reaching an agreement were resumed yesterday afternoon at 4 o'clock, with the participation in pots, on behalf of the Municipality, the Administrator, Mr. Roberto Sanchez. Mr. Roberto Sán- , choz Vilclla. At seven o'clock in the evening, the "deni- , elations were broken. । sefior Colón Gordiany expressed , to the Press that "the workers have encountered certain Intransigence on the part of Administrator Sánchez , Vilella, for his part. He informed that ( "law number 130 prevents the Go- j blerno of the Capital from signing con- ( venios colectivos". He explained the sofior ( Sanchez Vilella that the Capital has 3 done its best to resolve the si- ¡ tation within the Government's policy, but that it has not been successful because "it is impossible to accept the conditions demanded by the workers," f "The situation was left tonight pending a new meeting which may be held at any time, when the workers will resume the talks," said Sanchez Vilella. f (Continued on page 18.) "
Balseiro urges ir m a ñ a n to pro-Statehood Congress Says the arlo in Ponce "aspires to begin a new stage of affirmation of the ideal". - Call to members* of all* the* parties
Regarding the Pro-Statehood Congress, which will be held tomorrow in Ponce, the senator Jos* A. Balseiro makes an appeal to all Puerto Ricans, without distinction of parties. The president of the organization stated: "Tomorrow, Sunday, at the athletic field in Ponce, the Third Pro-Statehood Congress will take place. This Third Congress will not be held within the limits of an auditorium or a theater, like the previous ones. It is not now a meeting of distinguished leaders or the Ideal. It is a deep and broad movement of multitudes from all the fields and towns of Puerto Rico, in absolute and clean overcoming of all partisan boundaries and all economic divisions. Labor leaders, small farmers, district judges, medical doctors, social workers, lawyers, directors of feminist movements, IndurlrlalM school teachers, university professors, gas station owners, are all in harmony!"
The Insula. 1 board of directors of the Puerto Rican Association of the Puerto Rican Association is a representative cadre of all the disciplines and interests of Puerto Rican life. These women and men are active in all our communities. Hence we can say, with rigorous accuracy, that Statehood is the Ideal for Puerto Ricans of all parties. Among those who invited - via radio - to tomorrow's Congress in Ponce, we have Mr. Emilio del Toro, former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, Mr. Martin Travieso, current leader of the same Court and Mr. Felipe Colón Díaz, one of the district judges of Ponce. The former is Unlorropubllcan, the latter liberal and the latter popular. Some of the committees of the" various towns of the Island are presided over by figures of each of these parties; others by figures of the Socialist Party. And always alternating in every directive there are affiliates of all the groups that have legislative representation in our Chambers. (Continued on page e.) ;
BULLETINS CHUNGKING, 27. (PU)-F.F.he official Chinese communiqué today reports that Chinese "troops" occupied Yangsc and stormed into the town of Kwellbt, both former "American air bases" in Kwangsl province. The capture of Kwellln ends a four week" long march and siege for the capture of that important objective. - - - - WASHINGTON, 27. (United Press. - The Office of the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico said today that it is unlikely that any of the three Senators invited to attend the Pro-Statehood Congress in Ponce, Puerto Rico, will be able to do so. A spokesman for Senator Chivea said "the Senator is trying to go." The other two senators are Republican" William Langer and Robert A. Taft. - MANILA, 27.- Formations composed of Allied rakes and bombers" from the Far East attack- 1 (Continued on page 8.) í
TUGWELL SEES CHAVEZ WASHINGTON, 87. (PU)- According to information rendered by Elmer Ellsworth, Governor Tugwell conferred with Senator Denlo Chives before leaving the Capital, the exchange of impressions concerning the proposed appointment of Dr. Rafael Pico, to the office of Commissioner of Instruction, and other island vice-presidents. Chives' office informed that there is no certainty that the senator will attend the Pro-Statehood Assembly, scheduled to be held in Ponce, Puerto Rico. He went ahead to say that his trip would depend on whether the Senate would vote on the World Security Charter before the end of the week.
The U. S. Third Fleet destroyed 456 Japanese ships in the past few days By WILLIAM F. TYREE GUAM, 27 (PU)-In a gc "to unprecedented in history, the U.S. Twentieth Air Force, corroborating with shrapnel the words written in the Potsdam ultimatum, today revealed to the Japanese the next eleven Japanese metropolitan cities to be destroyed by superfortresses. With three other Japanese war production centers still burning, after the last incendiary attack by the big B-29s, another superfortress formation flew over the one© targets in perspective to drop sixty thousand leaflets advising the Japanese to evacuate those cities, if they did not want to be burned to death. Thus, the 20th U.S. Air Force, announcing in advance the targets to be hit, for the first time in all the world's wars, issued the most direct challenge possible to the Japanese to fight, abandon the war or face the consequences. Major General Curtis Lemay, current head of the 20th Air Force, told correspondents: "Faced with the Japanese, there is nothing left but destruction. We have reached the point where they refuse to fight while we burn their cities. And now, we tell them in advance where we are going to attack." The eleven cities destined" for destruction and announced are: on the island of Hondo: Ichlnomya, Tsu, Ujlyamada, Nagoya, Nishinomiya, Aomori, Ogaki and Koriyam". On the island of Kyushu: Kurume. On the island of Shikoku: Uwajima. On the island of Hokkaido (Yczo): Hakodate. Three of these" have been bombed previously. Meanwhile, United Press correspondent R. H. Shackford reports from Washington that Japan has rejected the ultimatum sent to her by the United States. Britain and China, despite the danger of being completely devastated by the Tartar offensive, consisting of powerful sea, land and air attacks by forces concentrated in the Pacific. The Japanese point of view was announced by the "Do" mel" agency, controlled by the Japanese Government, in a dispatch in which it stated that Japan would ignore the ultimatum issued last Thursday in Potadnm, and that it would "fight to the last moment". The "Domel" Agency also said that the Japanese Cabinet held a special session today, Friday, to hear a report from Foreign Minister Shlgorl Togo on the terms on which the Allies would cease hostilities. Apparently at that session a decision was made not to take any action on the ultimatum. Thus, the Japanese Government rejected the last chance to end the war without the necessity of wiping out national existence.
(OMTRMAN TO BULL FIELDS By CHARLEN Me CARE WASHINGTON, 27. (PU) - The. The Judiciary Committee of the Nonada today approved the nomination of Enrique Campos <le| Toro for Attorney General of Puerto Rico, replacing Judge* (ioorga Malcolm, who left office more than two years ago. The aforementioned action of the Judiciary Committee is tantamount to " a senatorial confirmation and thus virtually fills the vacancy in the Justice Department's Jafacy. According to sources in the know, the Committee's action on this nomination was taken after the Justice Department had exerted considerable pressure on it. Yesterday, Campos del Toro had conferred with the new Attorney General of the United States, Tom C. Clark, outlining to him the gravity of the situation at the Tala, in whose Department of Justice an extensive reorganization was in progress, without a proper Chief to head it. The Chairman of the Committee, Senator Me Carran, in an unaccustomed action, held a referendum on the nomination of Campea del Toro, among the members of the Committee, in the very "wing of the Navy.