THE MÜNDO
32 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
32 Pages 5 Ctvs. । 2 Sections
DAILY OF . LA MAÑANA
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO, SATURDAY, JANUARY 13, 1945.
Entered a" second class matter. Port Office, San Juan, ?■ B.
NUMBER 10248
YEAR
XVII
I do not liquidate the" bonds purchased, " if I want to liquidate Hitler,
Income Tax reform in the works
If approved in the February legislative session, it would be in effect for 1945 It does not alter the tax rates It includes a new payment and deduction system in income sources The Income Tax Bill, which the Chief of the Income Tax Bureau, Mr. Rafael Buzcaglia, Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Santos G. Ramírez, has been working on by special assignment from the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, will be discussed in its entirety in the next session of the Legislature. Ramírez, will soon be discussed in its entirety by the Head of the Treasury Department, Mr. Jorg - Bermúdez, Treasurer of Puerto Rico and Mr. Ramírez. The bill does not repeal the current law. It is a new law retroactive to taxable years beginning on January 1, 1945. This law will be submitted to the ordinary Legislature next February. This confirms an exclusive information of EL MUNDO, published in its December 5, 1944 edition. The authorities of the Treasury Department consider that the present revenue law establishes a system that is too antiquated. It is considered, "moreover, that it creates confusion in its application due to the continuous amendments which have been introduced by the Legislature year after year. The bill, it was reported yesterday in the Treasury, resembles the provisions of the Federal Law on this subject. It establishes the economic principle of the origin of the sources of income and the residence of the persons receiving the income. As recently announced by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, the bill will also establish a separate distinction and distribution for gains and losses incurred in working capital. Losses may be distributed two years backward and two years forward. Changes will be made to the current statute of limitations periods, establishing a new 'withholding tax withholding system at the source, upon payment of certain fixed and determined income, such as salaries, wages and emoluments. ' Discussed up to the present: Mr. Santo* G. Ramirez Informed yesterday that some parts of the project have been discussed in final iorma, working now on the final details. It is considered that the approval by the Legislature of the model law to be submitted by the Treasurer will prevent tax evasion in many cases, simplifying the payment system and establishing a procedure for deductions by the employer. It will also offer, as explained, greater relief to taxpayers, especially those of the middle class, with respect to the payment of the tax by means of reduced deductions in their emoluments. If this Act is approved by the Legislature, its provisions relating to withholding tax would become effective on January 1, 1946, and the method of deductions to be established will resemble, as far as employees are concerned, the one in force on the Victory Tax Act. Deductions proportionate to the employee's salary would be established to cover the total income tax based on his income for the taxable year. It is also considered that by said date, the Victory Tax will be totally eliminated. Other points of the project: An increase in the personal exemptions for singles and dependency credits is almost certain to be established in the new statute. A personal exemption for singles of 11,000 will be recommended, in com< pared with $800 at present and generally 6600 for each dependent, instead of $4Q0,000 per dependent.
An average overall deduction of ten percent, to cover reimbursements for charitable contributions, deductible expenses, and others, will be recommended. No changes will be made in the contribution rates, which will continue to be based on a five percent normal tax rate and an additional rate ranging from 5 percent on $2,000 to 72 percent on $6200,000 or more. A system of redemptions will also be established in those cases in which the taxpayer considers that the computation of the tax withheld at the source should be reconsidered. The obligation of every person with reasonable income to file the corresponding tax return will not be eliminated, even when he/she considers that he/she does not have enough money to pay tax to the Treasury. Professionals, farmers and senior citizens will also be given the opportunity to pay their taxes on an equal basis. Another measure that will be included in the Law concerns exemptions for medical care. It will allow a deduction for these expenses, which include medical and dental care, in excess of 10 percent of the taxpayer's total gross income. BULLETINs U.S. Army reports that forces under Lieutenant General Patch made an armored attack on German penetration points on the Maginot Line in the vicinity of Ritterehoffen and Hotton, north of the Haguenesu forests, reoccupying three-fourths of the Bittershoffsn.
Interior recommends Benjamin Ortiz
By CHARLES McCABE WASHINGTON, 12. (PU)-A spokesman for the Department of the Interior confirmed to the United Press that the nomination of Benjamin Ortiz has been submitted to the Department of Justice for the vacant position of judge of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico.
Preparations for workers' election to begin Monday Names of voters to be taken from March 1944 payrolls Next Monday at 8:00 a.m., the officials and employees of the Department of Labor will begin to obtain from the Sugar Producers Association and its members, the names of the workers entitled to participate in the elections of the sugar industry. New changes have been introduced, and, to that effect, new instructions have been issued regarding the lists from which the names of the workers are to be obtained. Fernando Sierra Berdecía, Island Commissioner of Conciliation, and James R. Watson, Regional Director of the National Labor Relations Board, who were appointed to jointly organize the necessary machinery for the holding of the elections, have decided to obtain the names of the workers from the payrolls corresponding to the month of March 1944, considering that this month is the most representative among those of the last zetra, as far as the employment of the greatest number of workers is concerned. The way in which the field laborers work, especially on the south coast, has forced Messrs. Sierra Berdecía and Watson, as stated yesterday, to introduce some changes in the payrolls. The month of March covers payrolls for several weeks; and in the southern logging many laborers change places of work frequently, working one week at one place and another week at a different farm. } At the suggestion of some sugar producers and several labor leaders, Messrs. Sierra and Watson have come to the conclusion that it is sufficient to copy the payrolls for one of the busiest weeks of March, so that as many workers as possible will be covered at all sites. This ensures that each worker's name will only appear on the payroll of one site, thus avoiding any duplication. The week beginning Monday, March 27, 1944, has been selected to copy from the payrolls of the plants the names of the workers who will participate in the elections. This week is the week that preceded Holy Week and is known among the sugar cane workers as "the big week," because it also includes the working days of Holy Week. In those southern mills that were affected by the strikes that originated during the month of March, among others Aguirre (including "Luce and Company") Machete, Guamanl and Caribe, the payroll for the week following the settlement of the strike will be selected. It is expected that by Wednesday of next week, the personnel in charge of taking the names of the workers, in all the plants, will have finished their work. On the other hand, we have learned that
Passenger Documents Uncensored Price Explains How Examination Process Now Works WASHINGTON, 12 (PU) - Byron Price, director of the Office of Censorship, told the United Press that about a month ago censorship was lifted on all communication between the United States and Puerto Rico, except when telephone and radio routes are used. He stated however, that censorship still applies to all international communication transmitted through Puerto Rico. He specifically stated that mainland travelers' documents are not inspected: now, he indicated that the reason for censorship of telephone communications with the mainland is the possibility of interception by the enemy. * Price explained that radiotelegraphic communications are not specifically censored but rather examined to determine whether it is advisable to transmit radiograms or cablegrams in cases where the possibility of interception by the enemy is considerably less. He added that the measure has led to some reduction in the staff of the 1* cable graphic censorship office in San Juan. Public notice of the suspension of the restrictions was deliberately svlt: by the censorship : Information to that effect was only offered now, due to specific inquiries from the Press.
Montgomery and Patton's troops made contact yesterday in Ardennes; Yankees sink 47 Japanese ships.
Police to enforce OTD order Quinn asked for Uniformed help near racetracks Text of his letter to Chief of Police Even on adjacent streets, cars cannot be parked The Chief of Insular Police, Col. Joshua Helllnger, yesterday instructed the forces under his command to give "our fullest cooperation to the Office of Defense Transportation in securing the strictest compliance, in its pertinent part, with OTD Order No. 14-A". This is the provision that prohibits the use of motor vehicles to transport the public to the Island's racetracks. Colonel Helllnger transmitted with his order a letter from the OTD Regional Director, Mr. Paul Qulnn, containing the provisions of the aforementioned order. Mr. Qulnn's letter to Colonel Helllnger reads as follows:- "Confirming our telephone conversation of yesterday, and with respect to the cooperation in the I would like to point out to you that this order prohibits the use of vehicles whose tires are fitted with rubber for the transportation of persons to the racetracks. That pertinent part of said order reads as follows: Section 501.62 reads: Transportation and the use of transportation (Continued on pg. 16).
Rundstedt succeeds in withdrawing forces Hope of catching him is now in advance of an armored division By JAMES McGLINCY PARIS, 12. (PU)-American and British forces linked up today in a devastating operation which virtually eliminated the remaining German "panzer" units west of the Ourthe River and penetrated almost to the very heart of the once menacing Ardennes salient. Marshal Montgomery's forces rammed eastward to establish solid contact with Lieutenant General Patton's Third Army at the southwestern end of the German wedge, in 1* znna southeast of St. Hubert, a town now firmly under Allied control. The Germans, however, are battling stubbornly at their strongest points to protect 1* retreat, which is still proceeding orderly. Almost the whole of the bulk of their forces is already east of the Ourthe River. The advanced elements of the British and American forces that have massed their flanks are already only three and a half miles from Houtfallze, the main transport center which the Nazis are defending in order to evacuate, through it, the rest of their elements that are still fighting in the corner of St. Hubert. The British report having completely cleared the area west of the Laroche-St. Vlth road. Vesqullle, nearly two miles southeast of Laroche, was occupied by Patton's forces. A dispatch from the front says that the terrain southeast of Houffalize can provide (Continued on page 12).
I am allowed to comply with our
APA insists on individual agreements June attitude reaffirmed. -A committee visited the Governor The Board of Directors of the Sugar Producers Association, after hearing the report of the Labor Committee on the discussions held Wednesday between that committee and representatives of the Sugar Union on the collective bargaining agreement in the sugar industry, passed a resolution reaffirming "the resolution passed by the Association on June 22, 1944, favoring individual agreements by mills." The resolution, which was approved yesterday, provided for the designation of a committee to meet with the Governor to inform him of the labor situation in the sugar industry and "request his cooperation in solving the labor jurisdictional conflict existing on the Island. The commission appointed to meet with the Governor was composed of Antonio A. Rolg, president; Fernando A. Villamil, Orlando J. Antonsantl, and James R. Beverley. The group met with the Executive at four o'clock in the afternoon. The visitors said they were "very impressed with Bolivar Pagan and Dr. Bolivar Pagan.
Bolivar Pagan and Dr. Figueroa explain their votes on PEG.
The former considers it beneficial because it provides jobs. -Figueroa in favor of allocation but against validating what was done before.
Bolivar Pagan said yesterday that the bill allocating $16 million for the Emergency Program "is good because it tends to legally provide jobs and bread to needy Puerto Ricans. He stated that he was very pleased to vote yes "thus cooperating so that so many Puerto Ricans do not suffer hunger and need while there is money in the public treasury to remedy the evil." Explaining his attitude in the Senate the day before yesterday when he voted in the affirmative on the bill allocating funds for the Emergency Program, Mr. Bolivar Pagan expressed himself in the following terms: "I did not have to explain anything when I voted in favor of the bill. I voted yes, as I will defend with my word when necessary and I will vote yes, in favor of all legislation that is good and that tends to the welfare of the people. "The sentence of imprisonment that was imposed on Mr. Juan J. Gerardiño, for violation of OAP regulations, has been commuted by Federal Court Judge Robert A. Coooer, the judge who sentenced him after a long trial before a jury in that court. Prosecutor Phillip Herrick granted the petition filed by attorney Benlclo Sánchez Castaño, Gerardino's defense attorney, after taking into consideration the medical report of Dr. Btach, of the United States Public Health Unit, who certified that Gerardino is in very poor health, suffering from an infection in his left kidney. It is understood that Gerardino will be hospitalized at the Mayo Brothers Clinic, where he will undergo surgery if it is determined that his right kidney is able to resist. In Mr. Sánchez Castaño's petition, other reasons were given, but prosecutor Herrick only took into consideration the state of the patient's condition. (Continued on page 6.)
The only reasons given in the petition of Mr. Sánchez Casño were other reasons, but prosecutor Herrick only took into consideration the state of the law, "I did not give it any importance," said Mr. Sánchez Casño. I did not attach importance to the technicality of the intent of the previous Legislature when the original law was passed, because it seems to me academic, after the Legislature, in the exercise of its powers, has made a retroactive appropriation in this bill. "My purpose is to consider in the same spirit, on its merits all legislation that is introduced, without thinking' so much about what was done in the past. Before this bill, I see the tremendous problem of so many unhappy Puerto Ricans who suffer, and before that problem the bill is good, because it tends to give work and bread to those needy Puerto Ricans. I was very pleased to vote that (Continued on page 16) Teaching Council to meet on Monday Approval of pension plan for UPR personnel is expected Next Monday the Superior Teaching Council of the University of 1. University of Puerto Rico and it is certain that it will definitely approve the pension plan for Prof. Corada and administrative personnel of our first teaching center. The referred plan was approved in principle in the last meeting of the Council and was submitted to a special committee presided by Mr. Manuel Garda Cabrera to adapt amendments and recommendations formulated by members of the university personnel. The special committee has reached final conclusions after hearing from representatives of the various agendas of the University. The plan will be effective the first of this month, and a maximum pension of two thousand four hundred dollars a year is fixed. Not only is a pension plan established, but also an additional pension system that covers the years that employees have worked at the University without having contributed to the pension fund. This pension (continued on page B).
Several agents of the Insular Audit Department went out yesterday to different points of the Island, with the purpose of helping the new mayors and municipal officials who wish it, in the first administrative procedures related to the accounts and properties of the municipalities and in the relations of these with the different dependencies of the insular government. The Insular Auditor, Mr. Rafael de J. Cordero, has given this order "as a cooperation of the Audit Office with the new municipal administrations that are taking charge now, for the first time, of the new municipalities".
By JOHN LEE WITH THE SEVENTH NORTH AMERICAN ARMY, 12. (INS)- In arta aceto- of the Rln, where American tanks are charging the Germans who hold strong positions in the Hatten and Rlttershoffen area, ■- is waging noy a violent cat-and-dog fight. The Nazis have concentrated powerful infantry forces in this sector and have some tanks at their disposal. They have also transformed the historic sites of
Of the enemy's losses in Luxembourg ■ ~ 1 A : ■ 'WIL'" : ' ' ' Wt-RK"
At Heidencheid, Luxembourg, about twelve miles south-southeast of Bastogne, a fierce tank battle was fought during the German counteroffensive. The above photograph impressed after the battle shows some of the losses suffered by the enemy. Cpl. George F. Hearhart, of Danville, Pa., exa mine Nazi tanks eliminated at the very point where Hearhirt's tank battalion engaged the German forces. On the right, below, the lifeless body of a German soldier. - This photograph, from the Army Communications Corps, was transmitted by radio to the United States).
Muñoz Marín announces measures to attack the black market
Strongly condemning this practice, which he says goes against social justice, he promises to go to the "maximum limit" to eliminate it.
Describing as a "robbery" the practices of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin, that the island government will go to the "maximum limit" to eliminate speculators who "conspire against social justice," he promised to go to the "maximum limit" to eliminate it.With a payment by the plant of $88,000 to the colonists, as an advance corresponding to * two of the years in which claims have been made before the Public Service Commission, a preliminary settlement has been reached in the conflict arising between 1* Central Plata and its colonists of San Sebastián, in order to avoid the strike with which it threatens (Continued from p. 7).
Audit agents will assist new officials They will cooperate with the administrations of the municipalities, as the latter take charge of all local affairs and property management.
The Audit agents have distributed the municipalities, in groups of ten or fifteen villages, and will cooperate with the mayors in the new local organizations, "if problems arise in any way. of administrative order." Auditor Cordero explained that the visits of agents of Auditoria Insular to the municipalities have the r.lsame character of cooperation in Investigations proper to the municipalities as were carried out before the elections and immediately after them."
In a statement yesterday, the President , made statements expressing the "maximum limit" to punish imminently against the people." In announcing that measures will be taken to that end, Mr. Muñoz Marin stated: "The constant clamor that reaches me from the suffering people, and the reports that have been supplied to me by the pertinent agencies of the Government, indicate to me without a doubt that such speculative black market practices are on the rise, The Government agencies are making the maximum effort within their reach to prevent these practices. But they need the active and militant cooperation of the people and all public officials concerned. "The people of Puerto Rico cannot ignore this serious situation any longer. He who sells on the black market is miserably trafficking with the life and future of all. And he who buys on the black market is making himself an accomplice of this miserable traffic against his own children and against his own right to a better life. "It is necessary to point out with all clarity that the black market is possibly the most sinister enemy of the social justice that with great effort the Government is developing by mandate of the people. While the Government is striving through its laws and its actions to get more money into the pockets of the worker and the great mass of the suffering people, the black market dealers are conspiring so that, by unduly raising prices, this money will not serve the people to feed themselves better and to make a better life for themselves.
I WESTERN FRONT: American and British forces engaged in an operation which virtually eliminated the remainder of the "panzer" divisions west of the Ourthe River, and penetrated almost to the very heart of the Ardennes salient. Marshal Montgomery's forces rammed eastward to establish eóHdo contact with Patton's Third Army, southeast of St. Robert, a town already held by the Allies. - EASTERN FRONT: It appears that the niM" have begun a final attack to eliminate the remaining *lem*nes in Budapest Berlin announced the beginning of the Soviet offensive in southern Poland, in the Sandomir region. - In the waters off San Fernando, west coast of Lusaka, 46 Japanese ships were sunk or seriously damaged the day before yesterday. The land forces entered with some patrols the year before yesterday.
Fighting against the 7th U.S. Army is intense.
.a rlon as, for example, the ce- ) mentery of Rlttershoffen. In the . fighting that is going on, the Germans are making an intense fuen go of artlllerlr and their grenades are going , to explode on the road linking" Rlttershoffen with Hatten. - At the southern end of the Bltche salient, troops of the U.S. Seventh Army have recaptured some ground, but in that sector the Nazis are counterattacking, taking advantage of the bad weather, which is preventing operations.)
Advance southward unopposed; but hard fighting to east Soon battle will occur on the plain Americans are 40 miles from Clark Airfield By WILLIAM WILSON ALLIED HEADQUARTERS, PHILIPPINES, 12. (PU)-Official communique today reports that on Thursday were sunk or badly damaged off San Fernando, Lu?én. 4 small Japanese cargo ships; that the North American troops have reached 19 kilometers from the coast, in the central sector of the invasion zone; that the Americans continue to advance southward, without encountering any opposition; that on the eastern flank, fierce fighting is going on; that the American naval forces, after sinking the aforementioned enemy ships, have shelled the port of San Fernando, at daylight. The communiqué also reported that MacArthur's troops had reached the towns of San Carlos and Malasiqul in the central sector and added that "increasing contacts with the enemy indicate that our advance forces are entering the area of enemy concentrations", most noticeably, on the eastern flank, along the Manacag road, Pozarrubio and in the hills rising to the north." Our aviation attacked the ferrovtary In i talacioneí and rolling stock, deitruyendc severali locomoto>ai and forty freight cars. Today's communiqué goes on to say that other planes of ours strafed enemy motorized columns from low altitude, destroying more than 200 vehicles and five tanks. On the western flank, the Americans forced small enemy groups to retreat near Umanday, more than eleven kilometers from the coast. While the American Sixth Army is advancing on the Agno River, everyone at Headquarters is convinced that a fierce battle of great proportions will be fought in a few days, perhaps a week, on the Luzon plain. The frontal advance on Manila p: osigue without meeting much resistance, and observers say that Jos Americans could now cross the Agno with important forces, if it were not for the need they have to consolidate their flanks against Japanese blows from the east and west. (A Japanese communique, the first in 48 sheets, says that the Americans have landed two infantry divisions and one tank division and have advanced beyond San Fabian, over the eastern end of the bridgehead, in spite of "brave" Japanese attacks; and that heavy fighting is going on. It also says that Japanese planes have caused heavy losses to American ships bringing troops into Lingayen Gulf.) The bridgehead is now about 600 square kilometers in area, and supplies and troops continue to pour into it," without the Japanese aircraft being able to prevent it, in view of the Americans' almost complete domination of the air. So far, MacArthur's invaders have occupied more than 40 poolaclones. The inhabitants of the Philippine villages continue to welcome the Americans trlunfalmonte. In one village, they had put up a large sign reading "Welcome freedom warriors." The American soldiers are now 64 kilometers from the airfield (Continued on page 5.)
THE WAR IN BRIEF 1
The war in brief 1. The twice h "ci* e south continues unhindered, but on the left flank the fighting is intense. - o o o ITALY: Patrol" of! Fifth Army broke deep into German-held territory yesterday along the aur sector of the Rl-mlnl-Bolonla road and engaged in violent hand-to-hand fighting with tes German patrols. Action on the Eighth Army front, along the Reno River line, Adriatic sector, was limited to patrol operations. GREECE. At the request of the recent reS recenters of the Elas" forces, hostilities will cease at midnight tonight, and a truce will prevail for the duration of the" negotiations between the two sides. BURNING: Authorized circles in Burning. China, said that the Japanese have begun the total evacuation of central Burma and part of southern Burma.