THE MÜNDO
38 Pages 5. Ctvs. 2 Sections
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 27, 1945
Entered a" lecond class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10388
PAO has decided to revoke control on rice sales.
Rationing order for that commodity from lime* In kerosine same action is taken Prospect* good in connection with supply* of butter Pnr .IVAN MALDONADO EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Executive rie Rationing d* the Office of Pre-!-He announced yesterday that effective Monday, the 29th of the current month, will be without effect the restrictive order that gathered the transfers of rice in Puerto Ríen, pudlendol be made freely the purchase and sale of this item. He also announced that the rationing of kcresine and kerosine stoves will be lifted on November 1, confirming in this way the information exclusively advanced by El. WORLD, This arrangement has been made by the Rationing Division of the OAP, on I view of the fact that supplies have improved markedly, there being} sufficient stocks in the Is. I la to meet the demands for less than three weeks, once rationing has been lifted, and also with supplies amounting to as much as 10,000 tons, of which some 10,000 tons have already been received. There is assurance that by the beginning of November the balance of this quantity will be received. -After a thorough study which we have made, and after investigating the stocks on the island and the orders placed by the importers and the assurances given by the exporters of immediate shipments," said Mr. MarCormlck, "we have decided that we can proceed to lift the rationing, without there being a shortage. The stocks in Fuer- 1 to Rico are sufficient to meet the demands for three weeks, with the rationing lifted. There are orders placed for 30,000 tons, of which large shipments have already arrived, and the balance will arrive early in November. In view of the circumstances justifying this action, I" Rationing Division of the OAP, true to its promise, has decided that the restriction can be lifted without danger to the population." Seven mase" rationing lasted Rationing dr arms in Puerto Rico was decreed on April 2, 1945. At its termination next Monday it will have lasted exactly seven months" and 26 days" When the restriction was put into effect, transfers were allowed for 40 percent of the amount transferred in the basic period indicated, that is, from January 15 to March 17, 1945. During this basic period the distributions made by the Bureau of Supply rose to 12,542 tons, the amount of 5,016 tons to be distributed every four weeks by the Bureau of Supply, or an average of 1,254 tons per week, being allocated for consumption in accordance with the rationing order. On June 14, an amendment to this order was decreed, allowing a readjustment in the rice quota for those retailers who were not receiving enough to deliver the one and one-quarter pounds per week per person as determined by the order. Shortly thereafter, in ñ August 1945, a* increased the quota to be transferred! to M and two-thirds percent of the amount received during the (Continued on page 22) I
j Cuevas says the 2c rate is lower He believes the service is to be made even cheaper in coming years He assures that he will expand present systems 12 alranlarin.Assuring that the two-cent rate fixed by the Servicio Insular de Acueducto for the "slcanta- ¡ Tillados turned out to be a cent and a third lower" than the one recommended by the "technical" Co [ mission of Public Service in October 194'1, the director of the Service, Mr. Sergio Cueva" authorized statements to no effect in yesterday morning's I" morning. Mr. Cueva" added that the determination for the fllaelon of.esn more haI ja rate, is based on the purpose of achieving the strictest compliance with the Law "and in the interest that all households enjoy the benefits of the "is of the alklarllladn", Mr. Cuevas further said that this rate increase, and the reduction of the fees for aromolida, and the expansion of Ins services, according to the plan that has already been publicized, "will provide an opportunity for the rn. | This, for the time being, according to Mr. Cueva's statements, will produce scarcely enough income to cover the operation of the work and its proper maintenance. The" said CueyW- r*-| I adÓn" FMi this matter, They' also include data" in relation to the or- ' denance approved to that effect by the I Government of the Capital and which was before the consideration of the Public Service Commission dnn-j of, as Mr. Cuevas explains, was never the subject of definitive consideration. Mr. Cuevas' statements on this matter are as follows: "On October 5, 1932, the Board of Commissioners of the Capital of Puerto Rico 'approved Ordinance' i No. 97 entitled "Rara to create and or- 1 ganlzar the administration, opera-' 'Confín a on page 22).
Today, Saturday, the nation celebrates homage to the Navy Truman urges the 4,000,000 men who make up the naval corps to be celebrated on this day.
It has been announced that today marks the 170th anniversary of the United States Navy.  For this purpose, the Tenth Naval District is proposing to conduct a commemorative "actlvlvldade" commemorating the First Navy, authorized by the United States Congress on October 27, 1775.
- - .. ......... The crew of the cruiser "Little Rock", which is in the port of San Juan, has all participated in battle during the past war. Her commanding officer, Captain W. E. Mll-I ler, a 1920 Annapolis graduate, has served in practically every class of navy units. He commanded the destroyer "Montgomery" and the transport "Anderson" in North Atlantic waters from 1943 to 1944. The executive officer of this cruiser, Commander J. T. Hazen, took an active part in the most important battles in the Pacific: at Palau, Yap, Ullthi and Talas Noloau, New Guinea, Guam, (Continued on page 22) !
The Road to Victory The sweeping offensive that shattered Germany
In this part of his report, General George C. Marohall, Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army, recounts the final assault of the "Faerie" armies, which resulted in the surrender of the defeated German army in May. By GEORGE O. MARSHALL Chief of Staff. During the critical week ending March 22, U.S. aircraft alone made 14,430 S toed bomber attacks, 7,262 medium bomber attacks, and 29,981 combat flights against European targets. By March 95, the hard fighting in the Remagen area had extended the headwaters to a depth of ten miles.
The German High Command, expecting an immediate advance on the Ruhr dead in this direction, spoke of a powerful concentration of force in Army Group "B" north of the river Sleg. To "u greatest surprise, General Hodges emerged from the headwaters to the aureate on March 26, when his armored team advanced into Luxembourg, seized the bridge over the Lahn, and raced along the highway to Frankfurt. Other armored "columns" of the First Army, rolling down the Aeate at speed up to 40 miles a day, reached Marburg and Giessen by March 28, and then turned north through the mountainous territory to the west.
The Third Army troops crossed the river at Maine to reduce the German bun, which they had set aside between Mainz and Frankfurt, while, at the same time, other Third Army forces advanced toward Kassel and the Fulria River line. Having established solid contact between their advancing corps, the First and Third Armies were now making a massive thrust northward toward the heart of Germany. The total disbandment of the German military force was already under way. In the sector of Marshal Montgomery's Group of Northern Armies the American Ninth Army exerted prealon on the northwest section of the Ruhr. Todavie -I (continued on page 13)
Prepare the new Constitution ¡ ■ ; ■ J
■ jBBBk >w nk A ■klLOI Prince Fumlnarlo Konoye, VI- । eeprlmer Minister of the Japanese government who hlio the pn" and who, by special entrustment of Emperor Hirohito, is preparing the draft Constitution pure Japan in accordance with the" conditions" agreed upon with Allies. (Fotn ria PA) Filé postponed the hearing against o assemblymen It will be on November 26 in the District Court of Mayagüez I." hearing of Ins quo warrantn" rndtcados pnr the Attorney General 'against ln" Messrs. Fernando riel [Torn, Podro Barbosa and Felix Castillo, member* do I" Municipal Assembly do Mayagüez, that oslaba! scheduled for Monday, November 29th, has been postponed until November 26th, when a motion, to that effect, was granted by the Mayagüez Court of Appeals, by Mr. José R. Gel-f, pl. Gel-f, pl. A motion in opposition filed by Guiller- । mo A. Gil on behalf of the [General, but the same has not been filed nor has a date been set for the same. L In his morlon the Hrenctario Gelpljj ¡who represents ln" asambÍMa-11 ¡t"" defendants, alleges among nfin" cn-|¡ [sai that he will not be able to ostar ready for the । date appointed to see the quo wa- t líenlos, since he has had and [llene to hear case" nnlo the Municipal Corle" f [le" of Aroclho, Maya- i güez and ('abo Rojo and before the" Corle" * rie District rie Agunrillla and May"- , gÜet; that he is a member of ln dlrccti- r [vn of the Colegio de Ahogados do t Puerto Rico, entity that is in ¡ । I" pnloKtr" public" and that he celebrates' । oxtrnorrilnarln assembly that is of great Interest for the referred Colé- ( gio, and that he (Gelpl) llene that tras- ' ladnrse n San Juan possibly ( (Continued on ln page 22) |
The Status Commission will move to the North in the first days of December; it will go earlier if circumstances demand it.
Rivera Zavas sees no reason to go to U.S. Believes rivalry between Interior and Justieia will not dent Córdova Believes he is above rancor His resignation in Colegio Abogado* will depend on the* circumstance* The pt rsldrnl <- riel Colegio rio Ahogsrios, lirrnrinrinrin Rsfnrl Rivor" Zny "s, nn believes it is" necessary to go " Wáshingtnn " support the appointment of llcenrlario Jorge Luis Córdova Diaz, to the position of associate justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, "unless objections are raised to tnl appointment, which are worth h "cer the trip." Questioned yesterday by Mr. Rivera Zayns regarding the position which, according to United Press cables, has been adopted by the Secretary of the Interior, Mr. Harold L. Ickcs and the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico, Mr. Jesús T, Piñero against the appointment of Mr. Córdovn Díaz, the president of the Bar Association stated; "It does not appear that the rivalry that may exist as to who should have the power to recommend a candidate for office in Puerto Rico - whether the Department of Justice or the Department of the Interior - is a reason to justify any serious obstacle to the appointment of Mr. Córdova Díaz by the United States Senate." Mr. Rivera Zay "s added that "Mr. Córdova Díaz's ""m mótale" and professional conditions ri "1 Mr. Córdnv". Ten are above all suspicion and everyone knows it, including the Department of the Treasury in Washington. He stated that even though he does not believe in the need to "go to WAshinglon" to defend the appointment before the appropriate committee in the Senate, this os a matter to sor dei'lriido, not by him as president of the Bar, but by I" directive of es" entity. When asked if he had any comments to make regarding the assembly of the Bar Association to be held today at the Ateneo Portorrljpiefto, Mr. Rivera Zayas stated that he had nothing to say. He added that he expects the proceedings to "proceed normally. When asked if he would present his resignation from the presidency of the College, if any agreement was adopted declaring the Attorney General, Enrique Campos Toro, unwelcome or confirming the resolutions of the Ponce assembly, he said that 'everything depends on the circumstance*."! San Juan Municipal Judge Cario" Del Toro Fernandez declared yesterday that he had not yet decided whether he would attend the meeting today and that everything (Continued on page 17.) One thousand tons of rice for sale by OS E* product of Brazil and has a gray color because it has not been polished The Supply Office will put on sale in Puerto Rico next "emana, one thousand tons of rice. *Roy Schrorier, director of that recently liquidated federal agency, said the rice had been received on the island by the Federal Economic Administration during a recent rice shortage. The rice was to be sold to the Bureau of Supply, but Schroder refused to accept delivery of the grain because it was not free. The product was to be harvested in Brazil because, according to Schroder, there are no milling facilities to fully polish it. That is why the rice is of a light color, instead of white. The OS director said, however, that the product is not bad as food for human consumption. The lot will be sold to the highest bidder in a single transaction. The rice and other rice traders and wholesalers have been advised that the sale will take place next Friday to the highest bidder. Schtoder expects that some of the bids will be made by a combination of dealers, who will participate proportionately in the purchase price. All bids are subject to the approval of the Board of Directors.
Dr. Brownlow as of yesterday in Puerto Rico
He will take part in the Conference * on Public Administration Coming from Chicago, yesterday arrived on the Island, accompanied by his wife, the director of the Office of Public Administration Information Exchange of Chicago, Mr. Louis Brownlow, guest of honor for the Conference on Public Administration, which will be held at the University of Puerto Rico, from Monday to Friday of next week. He was met at the San Juan airport by a committee composed of Mrs. David Flower, representative of the Governor; Guillermo Nlgagllonl or Israel Planel, of the Insular Civil Service Commission; Frnnk Pieper and Donald Wagner, of the Chicago Civil Service; Goodrlno Hessler, secretary of Mr. Wngner; and Jame* R. Watsnn, representative of the University Chancellor, Mr. Jaime Benitez. Mr. Brownlow, who is considered an authority on public administration in the United States, will remain on the island for about two weeks. After his arrival he was escorted by the committee to the University, where there will be a lecture to be given during his stay here. Tomorrow, Sunday, Mr. Brownlow and his wife will be the guests of Governor Tugwell, at the summer residence of James James, and will be there, among others, Rector Benitez and Messrs. In addition, a meeting will be held today at the Palace Hotel, San Juan, to discuss the round table discussions to be held during the Public Administration Conference, as well as the procedure to be followed by the Conference and other public service agencies.
1 and other public service agencies. - The situation created by the Aqueduct Authority is clearly intolerable, as well as by other Government Authorities that are not yet prevailing in Puerto Rico," said Senator Bolivar PagAn. I "The Aqueduct Authority, under a law passed by the legislative majority in 1942, has taken away the aqueduct systems of the city of San Juan and of all the municipalities of the Island. Those aqueduct systems were established with the commitment and fund of the people, paid for by the taxpayers of San Juan and of all the municipalities of the Island. These aqueducts" were established with " i commitments and funds of the people, paid by the taxpayers of San Juan and of each and every municipality of the Island. That* acue[Jduelos were administered by fun-J ...[clonarlos elected by the people, and p responsible directly to the people.' u T-ns rates for water supply were always countersigned by the k ! Public Service Commission, where the public had recourse to challenge abusive or unreasonable rates, and the public had arch- . clonal remedies to appeal to the courts of law. "The Aqueduct Authority stripped the city of San Juan and all of its municipalities of their rights. and all Ins municipios rie their rcspee-i itlvos aqueduct systems"; and ln e Autoridad rio Actieriuctos hn organl>| znrio an Insular monopoly, governed rl by officials not elected by the " people, and hn have suppressed ln" gnran-[ n[tlns against abusive rates and iría-; e'znnahjes formerly held by the people j,¡ before the Public Service Commission and before the courts of Justice. | (Continued on page 22.)
Industrialization would only be possible with independence: (IT Committee of the organization answers the* sentence* of Reñor Muñoz Marín before Roldado*, and insists that the only solution consists of this status.
In response to the statements made before a group of Puerto Rican soldiers by Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, who referred to the industrialization of the island, the Executive Committee of the Pro-Independence Congress has authorized the following statements: "Mr. Muñoz Marín persists in equating hunger and misery with freedom. We need freedom precisely to combat hunger and misery. Political and economic colonialism must end in Puerto Rico so that we can induntiiallize the pala", to order clentlfk imente orgar nlzar agriculture, protect our trade, promote production, open our ports to international traffic, manage [ new ménades, increase the po-[ der adquliltlvo of the people, make a fairer distribution of rlIqueza, procurer jobs for our mnsn" '.
itra" mnsn" '!abajadora*, raise living standards, further sustain our population, and in general, establish the civilization of justice to which we are entitled IndUjutlhle, "El "eftor M "ftoz Marín "r has insisted on putting fear into the people and is now" using the increase of the population to create discouragement! and frustration, and justify the "aftangotamleuto of many" of our" "leaders" tnA" connoted", The truth e", that "I misery continues and the colony continues, the population will continue to grow at the same rate. By the cnn'rarlo, "i the production of 1a wealth is encouraged by raising the" standard" of living of the population, the rltmi. of increase "e reduced "ustancially. And this can only be done within an Independent regime of government, which is the only one that can be (Continued on page 15.) 1
Cruiser "Little Rock" in our port I e- - SB /jr■ 1 t The cruiser "Little Rock", of 1" U.S. Navy*, ol cunl has been in our port since yesterday morning, on a courtesy trip to the Island, on the occasion of Navy Day. Civilian "niernsiis empicada" from the Naval Department and other offices visited the ship during the alia ! yesterday, being attended to very courósmenfe pnr the pcr-sonnl of the cruiser. The "Little Rock" is of the "Clrvelnnd" rail class (Navy official photo).
Bolivar Pagan trusts ('omission will ask the legislative session I will say here have been suspended warranties* against abusive rates, alluding to the imniiestas.
Bolivar Pagan said he is confident that the Legislative Standing Committee will recommend to the Governor that he immediately convene the Legislature next week to resolve the matter, Senator Bolivar Pagan insisted yesterday on the need for the Public Service Commission to assume jurisdiction over the Aqueduct Authority.
Dr. Chardón is the arbitrator in the Guániea easo The" negotiations between the representatives of Russell and Company, that is, Central GuAnica, and the Puerto Rico Land Authority, have entered their second stage after the two parties failed to reach an agreement on the price to be paid by the TA for the land owned by the plant. In spite of the great reserve kept by both parties, EL MUNDO learned yesterday that during Thursday afternoon the negotiations were suspended, with the appointment of an appraiser or arbitrator, in accordance with the provisions of the consent decree filed with the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico. | Dr. Carlos Chardón has been appointed to arbitrate in this case, and he will begin work on this matter next Monday. Dr. Chardon left yesterday for Santo Domingo, but is expected to return to the Island on Monday morning. - We can also assure you that the Authority will not have to pay more than four million for the land of the Central Guániea, even though it will be up to the Supreme Court to decide, if no agreement is reached through the appointment of the Arbitrator, the amount to be paid for this property. According to the information we have [ gathered from sources that deserve] credit, both parties made concessions, and everything led us to believe, until Thursday, that "an "agreement would be reached. The Authority has offered the amount it is willing to pay, its representatives stating that they would not go up. The representatives of the Central explained the sum for which they were willing to sell. After discussing both proposals, no agreement was reached, so it was decided to appoint the appraiser or Arbitrator. Our informant said that the fact that the second stage of the negotiations had been entered into, and that no agreement had been reached, "should not be taken to mean that the negotiations had been concluded in their entirety. All these things are foreseen in the consent decree, so that so far things are going on as they should. | He said that should the appraiser or arbitrator fail in the case, then it will be the Supreme Court that will decide fl1 (Continued on page' 22.) |
In November, he will decide on the date of the trip He validated what was done on Ramo's trip to Paria* Antoninl Muñoz admits he acted outside the law Grigel Polanco filed a vote on the agreement on the message ror TEOFhTo MALDONADO EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Legislative Commission on the Status, in its meeting the day before yesterday, agreed to move to Wás, agreed to move to Washington well in advance of the date set for public hearings to be held by the Senate Committee on Territories on Jan. 10 on the Tydings Independence Bill and to hear from other political alternatives. The Status Committee tentatively set early December as the date to leave for 1" Federal Capital. It will leave earlier "1 the events" that will take place so justify it. To this effect, it resolved to meet again in mid-November to determine the attitude to be followed definitively as to the date on which he should be in Washington. The Commission validated without any vote against the trip of Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antoninl to the International Labor Conference held in Paris. At the opening of the session, Mr. Muñoz Marín explained that he believed it was useful for the Puerto Rican people and for the demands of the Committee of the Legislative Assembly on the status that Mr. Ramos Antoninl attend said Conference, because of the support that Puerto Rico needs in its aspiration to resolve its political destiny with the labor organizations of the United States, represented in the referred international convention, which, he said, would be subject to the decisions that would be made therein. । He stated that with the haste he had to act in order for Mr. Ramos Antoninl to be in Parts on time, he had to proceed as he did without convening the Status Committee. That the papers he submitted to Audit authorizing the payment of Mr. Ramos Antoninl vlr.Je riel were the same as those that "c would have been submitted if the Commission had authorized them. Mr. Muñoz Marin declared that he was to blame for everything that happened, that he accepted that he did not act as provided by law, and that since the procedure he followed was not the one that should have been followed, he was in agreement that the Government should deduct his per diem as a legislator, since he had no other resources with which to respond for the amount spent by Mr. Ramos Antoninl on his mission to Paris. The matter "-" was discussed at length; the Belgian Hcenc ario Triarte maintained that Mr. Muñoz Marín did not act within the law, to which the latter replied that he did not accept his guilt and his responsibility in having his "- allowances withheld until the sum involved in the case was paid. All those present, including Mr. Triarte, accepted that the President of the Senate had acted in good faith and in accordance with the best interests of the people of Puerto Rico, and it was proposed that the Commission validate what had been done by Mr. Muñoz Marín. I said that I had no interest in that "o That he had summoned the Commission when three of its members, the majority party and some absent, were out of Puerto Rico, [ knowing that if the minority opposed it, it would not have the two-thirds [required by law to reach agreements. That he understood that he acted as the clrcunstan. cia" for the good of Puerto Rico and its political destiny, but outside the legal prorimient, and that he repeated, that he accepted his guilt. When voting on the motion for convalidation, Mr. Muñoz Marín vetoed against it and all the other members present, including the majority, voted against it. Since there was still one vote to complete the two-thirds, at the request of fellow members of the Commission, Mr. Muñoz Marín reconsidered his veto, and after thanking his colleagues, the majority and the minority, for their support, he abstained from voting. On motion of Mr. Muñoz Marín, the Committee unanimously agreed "to grant EL MUNDO a vote of recognition for its editorial campaign on the problem of the Puerto Rican political situation, for its support to the work of the Committee, and for its helpful attitude to guide the public opinion and for the solidarity of all the civic en" I tldades towards the aforementioned project" ¡ ¡ (Continued on page 22.)