THE WORLD
> j 38 Page" 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
38 Peinas 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
ni ARIO DE LA MAÑANA
YEAR XXVII
Let's support the men who made the Victory Loan possible.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1945
Entered aa second class matter, Post Office, 8an Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10409
Funds for aqueducts distributed -
The SIA allocates the sum of $10,344,900 for the current fiscal year. Includes sewerage system List of municipalities in which works are to be carried out Allocations amounting to $10,144,900 have been made by the Insular Water Supply and Sewerage Service during the current fiscal year. The RIA has allocated funds for $8,641,300 during the current fiscal year for water supply system projects in numerous towns of the Island. The balance, or $1,70,1,600, has been set aside for storm and sanitary sewer projects. The following is the distribution of funds made by the RIA for the flecarpreaente year! Aqueducts: San Juan, Rio Piedras, Carolina, Trujillo Alto, Bayamón, Cataño, Guynaho, Toa Baja, Toa Alta (metropo. titano aqueduct), $6,288,000. Ponca-Peftuelas. $528,500. YaucoGuayanilla- Guénlca, $72,000, Barranquitas, $49,500. Utuado, $66,800 Jayuya, $38,750. vleque", $7,000. Naranjito, $48,400. Corozal, $30,500. Ma-yaguez-Afta "co -Hormigueros- Cabo Rojo, $147,000, Manati- Clales-Bar-cdoneta- Vega Baja- Vega Alta, $107,100. Coamo-Santa Isabel-Sall-nas, $93,500. Lares, $8,500. Isabela-Quebradlllai, $31,400. Arecibo-Ca-muy-Hatillo, $95,500. Fajardo-Cel-ba- - Naguabo - Luquillo, $12,500. San Sebastián, $56,800. Aguas Buene", $4,000, Aguadltla-Moca-Aguada-Rincón, $57,500. Guayama-Arroyo, $26,000. Humacao, $29,500. Cayey-Cidra, $37,000. Yabucoa-Maunabo-Patilla, $21,000. Comerlo, $6,000 <4an Germán, Laja"-Sabana Grande, $60,500. Junco"-San Lorenzo-La" Piedras, $16,500. Culebra, $2,500. Orocovl", $5,600. Dorado, $1,000. For individual slstemaa in rural area, $337,950. Office" and equipment, $350,000. 7,o" mtemii da ekaWTlUtdo, Iu" to appear in the TA program for the current fiscal year, are as follows: Dorado, $46,900. Isabela, $61,500. Quebradillas. Patillas, $70,500. Mocha, $60,000. Aibonito, $75,000. Adjunta, $70,000. Coamo, $149,000. Sabana Grande, $100,000. Luquillo, $45,000. Arecibo. $115,000. Santa Isabel, $40,000. Ceiba, $52,000. Tos Alta. $45,000. Ran Sebastián. $117,000. Cidra, $66,300. Ponce, $20,000. Aguas Buenas, $70,000. Cabo Rojo, $100,000. Lares, $.32,000. San Lorenzo, $20,000. San Juan, $25,00. Guayama, $30,000. Fajardo, $15,000. Mayaguez, $90,000.
Plan to be recommended to give bonus to coffee growers
It is being prepared by members* of the sector, with the purpose of submitting it in case the importation of coffee from foreign countries becomes necessary.
The Committee that will make a coffee rehabilitation plan, appointed by the Coffee Farmers Sector, is carrying out a study, as a result of which it will recommend to the Government authority, including the Legislative Assembly, that at some point it will be necessary to import coffee, the amount of the Customs tax to be levied for this Importation be dedicated in part to level the price for the consumer, the remaining amount being used to grant a bonus to coffee farmers, based on that proportional amount that corresponds to them individually for each quintal of coffee harvested this year."
In this way "it will compensate in something the" increased losses that the coffee farmer is suffering, due to the smallness of "his harvest." The results of the study and the pertinent recommendations, will be considered" in the assembly of coffee growers" in Ponce, on the 25th of the current". On the other hand, the committee, which met recently in the city of Ponce, also agreed to support the request of the president of the farmers to the Agricultural Extension Service, in the sense that it makes a study on the costs" of coffee production, so that "if it is convenient. Im(Contlnued on page 2.)
The Road to Victory The initial disadvantage of the Yankee arms was defeated.
The following report by General George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army, provides a comparison between the U.S. and American arms. By GEORGE C. MARSHALL Chief of Staff In major ground campaigns - aimed not only at destroying the enemy's forces, but also at ending his potential for resistance - one of the basic factors in the final decision is in the equipment of the Infantry divisions, and in the manner in which that equipment is used. This was the case in our actions in North Africa, in Italy, in France and in Germany. A nation with the warlike tradition of Germany, which concentrates its resources on the
i its resources in the power of an * army and which enjoys the initial advantages inherent in its readiness for war, "should have great advantages - if not all the advantages - in the basic disposition of its infantry weapons. It is certain that in two of the basic lines, "1 German army sustained its advantage 1 until almost the termination of the war. Let us examine the first of these lines, and let us speak of the trlNple 88-millimeter rifle, with which our men had to face North Africa. It is true that already by that time the United States Army had a similar weapon: the 90-millimeter rifle, with an even greater penetration power than the aforementioned German rifle; but we did not have that weapon at our disposal.
But we did not have this weapon in large quantities, and on top of that we were at a disadvantage for the use of a weapon that the Germans, besides having it in current mass production, had already been able to experiment with over a period of several years. In other words: the German "88" was a powerful weapon, in whose technical handling the enemy was ahead of us, as already mentioned, almost until the end of the war. During the Spanish Civil War, the Germans were very careful not to reveal the role that their "88" was to play in tank and artillery actions, and limited themselves to demonstrating the effectiveness of this weapon as a defense against air attacks. When we had to face for the first time vm the 1 (Continued on page 14.)
Streetcar order cancelled
APT directors discussed the case It was admitted that if they were withdrawn now, a crisis could arise By JUAN MALDONADO KL MUNDO Editor I The order suspending trolley service on Snn Ju "n, has been cancelled Indefinitely by the Board of Directors of the Waterways Source Authority, according to information gathered by the moa yesterday. According to the same information, it was alleged at the meeting held that in vl "ta of the maní-' feataclonea made by Mr. Jo>4 G. Blolse, director of the TA, in the "entldo that there will be a delay in the delivery of new" buses and that only ten or twelve would be ready" to be put into service by the Transportation Authority by December 30, it would create an "erial" in transportation in the capital if the trolley service were to be suspended for December 10 as officially announced. In the" manifestations made by Mr. Blolse, and published by! EL MUNDO in its Thursday edition, he revealed that not until June 1946 will all the buses be in Puerto Rico. In the agreement of the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rico Waterway Authority on the suspension of the order decreeing the cessation of trolley service, no date is set for the original order to become effective, but rather the order is cancelled indefinitely. We can assure you that prior to the start of the meeting, two of the Board members agreed to address the problem of the suspension of trolley service, in view of Mr. Blolse's statements that the Authority would not have sufficient material to take over this service. However, the agenda prepared "included the suspension of the order indefinitely and until the TA is in a position to take care of the problem of passenger transportation on the route currently covered by the trolley. Official information announcing the suspension of electric trolley service for November 30 was authorized on September 19 by the Governor of Puerto Rico, Dr. Rexford Guy Tugwell. The Governor informed that by that date the Transportation Authority "will have already organized the substitute service, which "will use buses for transportation". Regarding this order, as will be recalled, statements were made by Mr. Antonio Lucchettl, executive director of the BPP, who declared that he had learned of it from what had been published in the Press; by Mr. Anto-| nlo R. Parceló, Jr., president of the Public Service Commission, in the same sense; and finally by Mr. Blolse, who recently declared that he had not received any official notification as to the suspension of the streetcar service. The order raised a wave of protest on the part of the general public, alleging that the Transportation Authority was not in a position, because it did not have enough buses, to take charge of the transportation of passengers using the trolley cars. It has drawn attention to the fact that, despite the official agreement to put the order on hold until the TA is able to offer service on the route covered by the trolley, the Government has not given, so far, an official note to that effect. We assure you that the agreement is official, and we hope that the relevant authorities will have to announce it from today to tomorrow.
Drug brings back his memory
V - W - Y IBM Ski -
While he was being treated for an injection of a powerful drug, the young man, who for the past twelve years has been a victim of amnesia, said his name was Kent Manon Fuller, a student at Stanford University and the son of Ina "po "o" Carleton Parry Fuller, of Cambridge,
MaNRarhu "N?tt". (Fnto PA) Aponte reveals serious problem in milk sales
There are a number*o* cano" of adulteration in the Capital area José C. Aponte, San Juan District Court prosecutor, revealed today that there is a serious problem with the sale of adulterated cow's milk in San Juan and Santurce. Aponte said that the problem is of such magnitude that "already what is being adulterated is the water with the milk, according to the file of numerous cases of adulteration of this product carried out by officials of the Sanitation Department for my office. He added that only yesterday three new cases were submitted to him, in which the corresponding complaints have been sworn; and that in the last four months 49 trials have been held in the District Court of Ran Juan, of which 37 have been found guilty, 8 are pending trial and only 4 have been acquitted. "In this same me" of November 9 raso" have been brought to my oflcinn, as compared with 4 complaint" in e! me" of October, In the Investigation of one case it hs । been ascertained, by chemists d "U Sanitation Department, that the I defendant has been offering "n venia cow's milk for consumption (Continued on page 22.) I
Tugwell instructed to go to Washington as soon as possible; has everything ready to make the trip.
1,1, ~ II ~ ~ ■■■■ I ..-.w-- .... nw-WM ■"II. I - Farmers joined in ¡ the protest Board of Directors adopted yesterday rcRolticion in which he exposes my attitude He asked for reports to the Agricultural Company Plano* of e*this entity *will be discussed* in the a*amb1ea of Ponce on 9 Regretting "that the speed with which the protest was carried out i after" the agreement taken by the 1 College of Engineer." The Board of Directors of the Farmers' Association agreed yesterday to express its "regret that the protest was carried out so quickly after the agreement taken by the College of Engineers" and that it had not had time to meet and designate a delegation to actively participate in it. of Farmers agreed yesterday to express its sympathy" with the act of protection held on Tuesday" in front of Fortaleza, against the word" spoken" by Governor Tugwell at the University, considered" injurious" to native talent. "The Board of Directors of the Farmers' Association" gave "-! agreement- "meeting in San Juan today, November 18, 1945, conscious of the relevant position of our agricultural technology" and, therefore, of the Puerto Rican professional capacity, agrees to express its "sympathy" for the act of protection carried out on Tuesday, November 13, 1945, by the College of Engineers" of Puerto Rico, the College of Agronomists", students" of the University and the College of Agronomists". The Board of Directors of the University and of the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts, and other professional and working classes, in disregard of the disparaging remarks made in a speech delivered by Governor Tugwell on the 29th of October last, "at the University of Puerto Rico," regrets that the Board of Directors of the University of Puerto Rico has not been able to attend this meeting. This Board of Directors regrets that the rapidity with which the said protest was carried out," of the agreement taken by the College of Engineers," has not given it time to meet and designate a delegation to participate actively in said protest. The Board of Directors of the agricultural organization and other farmers of the pal" * were discussing matters yesterday from two o'clock until the close of six o'clock in the afternoon. Among ' other matters, they rnnsldet the s plans the Agricultural Company and the organization of the annual r assembly of the farmers on December 9 f I I in Ponce, besides * ntras questions of Inter- * no. character. ( 1 Other resolutions were adopted, but they were reserved, and it was reported that today or tomorrow a copy of the corresponding resolutions would be furnished to the press, acting on behalf of the Board of Directors of the Association. However, we can inform you that among the agreements is one requesting certain information from the Agricultural Company. On the other hand, it is known that the ' , Farmers' Association has obtained information with respect to the projects developed and proposed to be developed by the Agricultural Company. The data which may be gathered on the * holiday will have to be examined at the annual general meeting of the Association in 1 . Ponce.
The Department of Instruction thinks it would be possible for teachers to be paid on Fridays if they work on holidays in the Department of Instruction is "hoping that. to work" in the "1 D "partment of Auditing on the" holiday" that will be next! "emana, lo" maeatro" will have to co-! br "r your" have"" d"" November, *! víame" coming. According to "- Reported. "1 Department of" ln "trur "ation forwarded yesterday to" the" Auditor's" office the" last" payroll" of" the" maeitrn". rorraspondienta" to" the" month" of" November. This" payroll" began to be sent on Wednesday," when the Department had "received" and submitted to Audit the" payroll" of "19 people". Another number of payrolls were submitted on Thursday and yesterday, the last group was delivered. It is considered that Auditoria will only be able to process loa check" of the teachers, to be sent| to the various towns on Thursday, in order to "e received by the Interested Parties on Friday, if the corresponding pergonal of that agenda works during Monday and e) Thursday, which aon lo" do" holidays in the coming week. Monday commemorates the date of the discovery of Puerto Rico and Thursday will be Thanksgiving Day. If no work is done in the Auditor's offices on those two days, the work will not be completed next week and the teachers will not be paid next Friday, according to the opinion expressed in the Department. In order to be able to finish promptly" (Continued on page 21) 1
"-jwi w" voaiiiwiivv* #▼--"-"-"*" ws" ssv> "E1 ship docked at the military " pier, at - -! Fort Buchanan, at" 4:30, and minute" d*"pué" lo" veteran" portorriqueños alagre" y! ! smiling, they went down the eacalerllia while" the Randa number 81 of the" Land" Force". It interpreted Creole music. Major General William M. Grimes, head of the Military Department of the West Indies, was among the officers of the Department and the Red Cross "lady" who came to welcome him to "this" garb. Immediately, a "soldier" from Panama, who have served overseas. Panama, who have served overseas for a large number of 1 were transferred" in trucks to Camp Tnrtuguero to undergo" the" formalities" of rigor. Early yesterday morning they left the Redlstrl-j huclon Center to visit their relatives on short leave. Upon their return to Tortuguero in a few days, they will be sent to the Licensing Center in Buchanan to be "discharged" from service. Ten officers also arrived on board the State of Virginia. Captain José Luí" Benitez, of Santurce, dean of the group, was in charge of the troops. With the appointment of these troops, more than 1,500 Puerto Rican soldiers have returned from Panama in recent weeks to be discharged.
Planning based its revenue estimate on three items Estimated revenue* includes $20,000,000 from rum sales*; $15,000,000 from income tax; $14,000,000 from excise tax* (B O LETINES LONDON).
B O LETINES LONDON, 16 (IN8).- An authoritative portovos of the Soviet Union today criticized the atomic bomb control plan, drawn up by President Truman, British Prime Minister Attlee and Canadian printer Minister King. The' plan, according to the Soviet portovos, cannot be regarded by Russia as a step to strengthen the pas, but as a new post in the direction of anarchy. - General Dwight Eisenhower, testifying today before the Senate Military Committee on the proposed unification of all armed forces, said that "I know" that the Allies would have lost the war in northwest Europe and in the Middle East if there had been no single command. He said that if the allies do not want to lose the war, a single Department of Defense must be established. - WASHINGTON. 16. (1N8). British Prime Minister Clement E. Attlee today ended his sixth day of conferences with President Truman on atomic energy. The English statesman will return tomorrow to the White House to bid farewell to the President before leaving for Canada, accompanied by MeKensie Klnf.
Commenting on the procedure employed by the Planning Board in establishing an estimate of $58,975,000 for the fiscal year 1946-47, the head of the Finance Division, Mr. Francisco de Jesus, reported yesterday that "Revenues and excises represent 83 per cent of the total estimated funds for that period." He added that "the estimate on rum made by the Board, of $20,000,000. is based on an export of no less than 1,800,000 cases, with a federal tax of $8.00 per gallon."In this regard, Mr. de Jesús autbrlw the following comments: "The estimate of General Fund Revenues made by the Planning Board for the period 1946-47 to 1951-52, especially with respect to the first year's Revenues, is the result of a careful analysis of the most important items comprising the revenue picture of the Island Government. Revenues derived from Internal Revenue (820,000,000), from the tax on income ($15,000,000) and from excise taxes ($14,000,000), together account for more than 83% of the total amount estimated to be paid into the General Fund 1,1 1,000,000.
The General Fund 1 in 1946-47. As for the tax on rum for export, which reverts to the Island Treasury by provision of the Organic Charter, the Board considered that $20,000,000 will be collected during the next fiscal year, based on the fact that about 1,600,000 cases will be exported and that the tax will be $6.00 per gallon. It should be noted, however, that everything seems to indicate that Congress will not pass any legislation at this time to reduce the tax on alcoholic beverages from $9.00 to $6.00 per gallon, since the legislation pending signature by the President excludes the clause providing for such reduction. In estimating that $15,000,000,000 will accrue to the General Fund from the income tax during 1946-47, the Board took into consideration the following factors, among others: the 1945-46 sugar production, which is estimated at about 1,000,000 tons of sugar, the increase in commercial activity resulting from an increase in the quantity of sugar merchandise, and the increase in the number of sugar producers in the United States, which is estimated at about 1,000,000 tons of sugar, and the increase in the number of sugar producers in the United States.
Increases in the number of those returning from overseas - í; ■■' ■■■ s,; ..i r Jr -JE J xi .'.le S * JFsJHtov " Yk ■■■■/hlf ■* . Y.. WwW ■* The "State of Virginia'' transport, aboard which returned uuinineroMos Noldmlo" portorriqueño" who were stationed in Pniiamá, atruc""l Army pier, at Buchnn "n, shortly after arriving at Snn Jiiun on JtirvoN afternoon. Among the" oficlule" <|ue Hendieron " receiving the" tropn" fliturado ej commanding general VVIIIhun M. Grimes, Chief of the Military Department of the" Antilla". (Army Photo) -
Six hundred arrived from Panama on leave last Thursday General Grime*, cnlre another* clerk*, went to welcome them. - The discharge will not be long. - 1,500 have returned from the Zone More than $00 Puerto Rican soldiers from Panama arrived last Thursday afternoon on board the "State of Virginia" to be discharged. "State of Virginia", to be discharged from the service, according to the Military Department, *in a note that adds:
PAWA INCREASES NUMBER OF TRIPS The Pan American World Airways announced yesterday that " beginning next Friday, November 2.1, there will be six daily Trips from San Juan to Miami and vice versa, and daily flights from and to Port of Spain will be doubled. This increase will be due to the addition of a new daily flight from Miami to Port of Spain and back. The new plane will depart Miami at 1:00 p.m. and arrive in San Juan at 12:40 a.m., after stops in Camagüey, Cuba, and Port-au-Prince, Haiti. From San Juan it will depart at 1:05 a.m., and arrive in Port of Spain at 6:10 a.m., after a stop in St. John. On the return flight, the plane will depart Port of Spain at 7:30 p.m.; it will arrive in San Juan at 11:55 p.m.; it will leave San Juan at 12:20 a.m. and will end the flight in Miami at 7:10 a.m., after stops in Port of Prince and Camagüey. Susoni will leave for the North next Monday He has already improved from the ailment that prevented him from traveling a short time ago Finding himself notably improved from the ailment that affected his health, and if something else is not arranged at the last minute, the President of the House of Representatives and Vice President of the Popular Party, Dr. Francisco M. Susoni, will leave next Monday, in the early hours of the morning, by air, for the United States, with the purpose of undergoing an internal medical treatment. During the "last" two "emana", in the course of his illness, the doctor Susoni "e vitto forced to suspend "u" activity"" political" to recluse" "n bed, Informándoa" in "1 day of yesterday in clrculoa close to the Speaker of the House that the dlatlnguldo leglalador "has entered in a frank improvement", which will allow him to make in the next "emana" the projected trip to the" E "tado" Unldoa. In the North eapera to Dr. Suaonl au son Franclaco M. Suaonl, Jr. lawyer, and will accompany him on au trip Dr. Antonio Suaonl, another of loa sons of! loa Prealdente da la Cámara. No ion damocrúticoi The Deptn. of Retado informed Bulgaria that loo eleoelonee of the paaado Sunday aran "really democratic"", and that, therefore, nn e" ti muí aré la concartaolón do concartaolón do a treaty do pao.
For TEOFILO MALDOADO Editor of EL MUNDO Governor Rexford G. Tugwcll has been instructed by the Federal Administration to leave for Washington as soon as possible. We can" state that in the" last" day" he" has" been called twice" over" the" last" day" by" the" high" function," requiring" him" to" go" as" soon" as" possible" to" confer" with" lio". Given the absolute re "erva that "e observed in the oficíale" circles, not "lia" lia "been possible to find out" the motive" that have caused the order received by the Chief of the Insular Executive to embark immediately. However, we are able to sign categorically that Governor Tugwell will leave without loss of time for Washington and that already yesterday he had in his possession a check for the sum of one thousand dollars from the Island Treasury as a result of a requisition for travel expenses issued by Governor Tugwell. In our yesterday's edition we said it was a certainty that the Chief Island Executive would soon leave for Washington, and we picked up the version from an authoritative source that he was inclined to assume the position of Director of the University of Chicago's Institute of Planning, which he has been offered. A "center" very close" to the Palace "a no" reported yesterday that several" day" ago the Governor received ! Ordered" from the Department of the Interior that he "e" be sent to Wá "hlngton as soon as possible. The Chief Executive began to make arrangements" for the trip, but "ln setting an immediate date for it. In the middle" of this week he was called back " from the federal capital and was asked to embark immediately. Given the discretion that ¡ "- keeps on the matter I have not been" able to find out when he will board - I plane, but "I "abemos que ayer tenia en "u poder un cheque por la suma de mil dólares para cubrir ln" gasto" del viaje, por lo cual se tiene entendido que saldrá de un momento a otro. It was also revealed yesterday that in addition to the investigation conducted in Puerto Rico by Democratic National Committee Counselor Milburn Maycock, who in his report to President Truman is reported to be a "scathing" critic of Governor Tugwell's regime in Ida, another leading figure in national politics is now in San Juan conducting a private investigation of Ida's political and economic conditions, to report to the Administration. At the last minute THE WORLD ave- " rigued that Governor Tugwell and had separate passage on the Pan American Airways to leave today, Saturday, for Miami and thence to 1 Chicago, where he expected to be Monday; but owing to feeling somewhat ill yesterday he cancelled the ticket. ' In Wáshlngton, a spokesman for the b Department of the Interior informed the United Press late yesterday , that Tugwell was expected there this weekend "to hold routine . cenferenclas with Department officials during . the coming week." It was revealed ade- . niá: that the Governor speaks cat = biographed requesting instruedo h ne" about the Interim Governorship , ). It was added that this will be performed, during Tugwell's absence, by the Commissioner of Health, Dr. Fernó* Isérn, because the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Buicaglia, who has been acting as Governor lately, has had to leave for the United States on official business. Although o! > >. Department spokesman denied . that Tugwell had been called to Wáshlngton admitted, however, that the Soborna- . dor's "deeldon" to make a further trip to the i capital "seems somewhat "úbita," ' De Gaulle, resignation | i PARIS, 18 (P.U)- n Proaidonta i d" the National Assembly of Fraa- , da, Gunln, dló eata night a com "* i nlcadn announcing that of General Charlea de Gaulle, prealdente inte- ; riño de Franela, enrió him a car- : te in which" "1e returns the manda- ! i te that" -" I" I" had enaltado." Sota . declalon d "l General De Gaulle Mo- . i ne "u equivalence in a ronua- I , da of the earge for which he was I - unanimously appointed on November 1$ ¡.