THE NíUN DO
34 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
34 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DIARIO DB la MAÑANA
YEAR XXVII
I don't liquidate the bonds I bought, I want to liquidate Hitler.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 10, 1945
entered aa second class matter. Poet Office, San Juan, Y. R.
NUMBER 10404
American heavy artillery has begun to smash the Ruhr valley; Russians begin final offensive against Berlin.
Government urged to withdraw excess tobacco crop
Agriculture leaders say it is the only way to avoid ruin Details of view before legislators This year's production is estimated at about half a million quintals This year's tobacco crop in Jamaica will be about half a million quintals and "the only thing that can prevent the ruin of the tobacco growers is for the Government to buy, withdraw, pledge or give away the excess tobacco crop, The only thing that can prevent the ruin of the growers of this product is for the Government to buy, withdraw, pledge or deprive a good part of the crop," according to the testimony offered by a number of agricultural leaders who were testifying for nearly ten hours on Thursday before the Tobacco Investigating Committee, made up of members of theThe hearing was held in the Senate chamber of the House of Representatives. The hearing was held in the auditorium of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce, beginning at 1:00 p.m. and ending at 9:30 p.m., and was attended by a large part of the tobacco agricultural leadership of most of the island. The Investigating Committee, under the chairmanship of Representative Heradio H. Rivera, is also composed of Senators Juan Divila Diez, Pascasio . Garda, Bernardo Méndez, and by Representatives Miss Maria Libertad Gómez, Antonio Pacheco Psdró, Juan Cabrer and Esteban Susonl. Thursday's hearing was also attended by the Commissioner of Agriculture, Mr. Luis A. Izquierdo, the Sub-Commission*' do Ulplano L. Colóm, the director of the Tobacco Institute, Mr. Antonio Rojas, numerous mayors and assemblymen of tobacco municipalities, who are also farmers, senior government officials, directors of cooperatives, dealers, industrialists, refecdonistas and other persons interested in the problem of the industry. No less than twelve witnesses, representing sectors of the industry, testified before the Committee, among them, Mr. Luis Fortuño Jr, agronomist and farmer from Caguas, Julio Torres from Aibonito, Marcial Bosch from Cayey, Rómulo Corrada from Morovis, Mario Pérez Hernández from Hatillo, Esteban Reyes from Trujillo Alto, Clemente Ruiz Nazario, lawyer and representative at the hearing of the United Tobacco Growers Association, Serafín Inclín, president of said Association, Antonio Arroyo, from Caguas, Ramón Carmona, manager of Porto Rico Tobacco Marketing, Julio Mayml Garda, president of the Cigar Manufacturers Association, and others. Mr. Fortuño said he was in favor of the government acquiring this year's crop from the lower classes, as a first step to rehabilitate the industry and regulate the planting next year following the federal government's quota system. He said that this year's crop will be not less than 400,000 quintals, stating that a normal crop should not be more than 250,000 quintals. He said that "traffickers do not put a price on tobacco until they know more or less how the com< piadores are going to pay for it" and answered numerous questions put to him by the members of the Hearing and the Investigating Committee. Fortuño stated that "one of the solutions to the problem is that the Governor (continued on page 2.)
Tro" ChapUtepec ~ Inter-American Meeting a Complete Success
By WILLIAM LANDE* MEJICO CITY, D. F. 9. (PU) - The Chapultopoc Conference came to an end last night after achieving the "modernization" of the Pan-American system and, at the same time, bridging the gap between the Yalta and San Francisco conferences. Few conferences in these times have achieved as much as this one, in the words of delegate Parra Perez, from Venezuela, and in this *s-.
and correspondents who have attended the consultative meetings of foreign ministers since the first one, which took place in Panama in 1939. Naturally, the importance of the decisions taken at this meeting will depend to some extent on the way in which they are put into practice or the way in which they are set aside and forgotten. Only a prolonged study of the motions passed at the lus of future Interpretations and of the ■ -< 'XA* *- i . JU.- , ■Ait ' . *
The true results of this conference will be seen from the uses to which they may be put, although there is no doubt that certain of the papers adopted constitute important events. First, the Act of Chapultepec, which provides security for the small nations of America, not only against possible aggression from European or Asian nations but from the continent itself, (Continued "n page 1).
i Congressman Gibson Suggests $1 Sugar Subsidy
4yer directed Bell to subpoena responsible officials, especially those of the CEC. - The Ledo. Ramos Antonini Accuses Producers By CHARLES MC CABE WASHINGTON, 9. (PU)- Ernesto Ramos Antonin!, counsel for the General Confederation of Labor, in the final session of the House Insular Affairs Committee investigating the situation of the sugar industry in Puerto Rico, said that the sugar producers calculated, planned and coldly provoked the present strike in Puerto Rico, without caring in the least for the war effort. He said that the present situation in Puerto Rico is not a strike, but a "lockout" by the producers, "moved only by their own interests".
Among other witnesses was Manuel A. del Valle, vice-president of Eastern Suga. Associates, i The possible attitude of the Committee, acting in the situation, is inferred from the words of Congressman John S. Glbson, who said he would suggest to the Chairman of the Committee, Congressman C. Bell, that the responsible Government officials, specifically those of the Consumer Commodity Credit Corporation, be brought together in session before the Committee; he added that the Committee would ask for a meeting of the Committee. He added that the Committee would ask these officials to give the Puerto Rican growers a one dollar subsidy, equivalent to the Equal treatment given to the Lulalana and Florida cane growers, and to demand the termination of the strike within 48 hours. Congressman Glbson said that if the government officials refuse to act,.... I will do the worst to them and denounce the government's refusal to act, he said.
J A ' : ."!■ ; Ledo. Ernesto Ramoa Antonini
- " ■ - They study laws to liberalize I * * * practice of foreign physicians Cold of the measures would permit them to practice i private practice of the profession in off hours after their contract hours. - Other amendments
Senators Vicente Gélgel Po- ; lanco and Cruz Ortiz Stella, who have been preparing legislation to amend Laws 36 of 1942 and 29 of 1943, relating to the practice of medicine in Puerto Rico by physicians of foreign nationality, intend to hold a meeting with the members of the Board of Examiners of . Doctors and with the President of the । Medical Association of Puerto Rico, . doctor Carlos Muñoz Mac Cormlck, , to jointly consider the : Accountants of Ja : CSP rendered : va their report ■ " It will serve as a basis for the . The Chairman of the Public Service Commission, Mr. Antonio Bari. celó, Jr., reported yesterday that he had in his possession the report of the Commission's accountants on the study of the passenger transportation service in the San Juan metropolitan area. Said study will serve as the basis for the discussions to be held at the next public hearing to be scheduled by the Commission to discuss this matter in all its breadth. Mr. Barceló indicated that he was not in a position to be able to summarize the most important details (continued on page 4).
The draft amendments to the aforementioned laws in force. The two aforementioned laws were approved by the Legislature taking into consideration the emergency situation due to the lack of physicians in Puerto Rico and the lack of adequate technical personnel to attend to the public welfare services. Under the provisions of these laws, several physicians are currently serving in some municipalities of Puerto Rico.) Engineers submit list of candidates Recommend nine of them to Tugwell for the Interior portfolio The College of Engineers of Puerto Rico has submitted to the Governor of Puerto Rico a list of candidates to fill the position of Commissioner of the Interior, vacant due to the passing of Mr. Sergio - Cuevas Bustamante to the position of Director of the Aqueduct Service, i The following names have been included in the list submitted to the head of the Island axis- , Cutlvo Insular: Messrs. Roberto Sánchez Vllella, present Administrator of the Government of the Capital; Frank Rullán, who acts as acting Commissioner of the Interior; Jesús Benitez Castaño, Jo- ) sé Benitez Gauthier, Orlando M. (Continued on page 3.)
They are already fighting inside the city of Custrim.
This is the last obstacle in the direct passage to the capital of Germany They assault suburbs tie Stettin and Danzig Troops of the armies of Zhukov v Rokossovsky join in the attack - By MEYER HANDLER MOSCOW, 9. (PU) - Everything indicates tonight that the final phase of the offensive against Berlin from the Oder and Nelsse sectors has begun. which Soviet dispatches say are "on fire, with the second decisive phase of the Winter offensive in full swing." . The Russian high command has been reserved, as usual, in its communiqués, but judging from the advances of Marshal Zhukov's forces in front of Berlin, these troops have already entered the fortified town of Custrim, which is the last bulwark of the defenses of the German capital and which will prove fatal. Simultaneously, the armies of Zhukov and Rol** jvaky have begun an assault on the suburbs of Stettin and Danzig, which are subjected to the infernal fire of Soviet artillery and aviation. East of the river Odor, the Russians seized Stolp, the last town in the Pomeranln held by the Germans, Here there is no news about the spearheads that the Berlin radio said yesterday have advanced almost ten miles west of the Oder, to a point southwest of Custrim located just 25 miles from Berlin. But the most intense battle is being fought around Danzlg, where three armored columns, supported by Infantry forces, converge on the city book from the west and south, in "Irresistible onslaught". On both sides of the Vistula, on the approaches to Danzlg, the Cossacks forced the crossing of a dense network of irrigation canals and smashed numerous German pockets that had been cut off. Russian aircraft subjected the naval installations to relentless bombardment and sank numerous ships fleeing Nazi troops withdrawn from East Prussia and other pockets. The center of the city of Danzlg has been turned into a gi~intesca bonfire by Russian fire. On the Hungarian front, the Russians again repulsed violent German attacks near Lake Balaton, which during the height of the campaign against Budapest was the scene of fierce battles. (Continued on page 3.) Indian Leader Takes Interest in Island Case Before Senate Committee Said Both Countries "Test Cases" WASHINGTON, 9~(PU) - The political problems of India and Puerto Rico are being discussed at the congressional hearings being held on the Puerto Rican Independence legislation. One World Association representative Ramkrlahna Modak, who was a legislator in Bombay during the Halifax administration, told the Senate Territories Committee that "palees" like Puerto Rico and India have offered test cases under the Atlantic Charter. Shadu Modak admitted that it would be easier for the United States to give independence to Puerto Rico than for Great Britain to give it to India, and said: "We are especially trying to help obtain freedom for such countries as Puerto Rico, India, Korea, etc., for the reason that these countries seem to be test cases for the sincerity of the United Nations.
Churchill visits the Aachen area.
. m k - SÉ s ' Yes 4 í British Prime Minister Winston Churchill is pictured here during his recent visit to the Higfredo Line defenses at Aachen. He is accompanied, from left to right, by Field Marshal Sir Bernard L. Montgomery, General Sir Alan Brooke, and Lieutenant General William Simpson. (Official British photograph, distributed by ACME).
Suggestions on tenancy measure Chamber of Commerce offers objection to several of its provisions The Chamber of Commerce of Puerto Rico has filed before the Senate Committee studying the tenancy bill, a memorial containing recommendations. The document, prepared by the Judiciary Committee of the Chamber of Commerce, states that the housing problem is a product of the war emergency and also exists in the United States. It alleges that the Administrator General of Supply is vested with "excessive powers", and that "while it is true that there will be a Court of Supply Appeals, it will be constituted by a judge selected from the District Courts, who, being too busy, will be unable to perform his duties and the owners will be prejudiced". Proposes that a Board of Tenancy be established, having the powers of the Administrator of Supply, Elsewhere in the document it is objected that there should be only three cau* (Continued on page 2.)
A rejWWWentaKvaae commission of the parties is to go to Washington, D.C. It is expected to be there on April 23, in order to negotiate a law implementing status alternatives. - Triarte insists that it be defined It is expected that when the public hearings on the Tydlngs Bill resume on the 23rd of next month, a committee of the Legislative Assembly, composed of legislators of all political parties, will be in Washington to negotiate with the United States Congress for the approval of a law implementing the definitive political status alternatives for Puerto Rico, which said Congress is willing to implement with the approval of the people of Puerto Rico. i* 1 - - - --
The only thing that may prevent the said legislative Commission from being in Washington on the date indicated, is the need to extend the sittings of the Legislature beyond April 15, but all indications are that they will end no later than the said date. - It is resolved that the presidents of the Popular, Republican Union and Socialist Parties, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin, Mr. Celestino Triarte and Mr. Bolivar Pagán, as well as the Liberal representative, Mr. Ernesto Cádiz, will be part of the official commission of the Legislature that will go to Washington. Regarding the appearance of the legislative committee at the public hearings on the Tydlngs Bill, (Continued on page 3.)
I n s t r u c t i o n s o n t h e u s e o f t h e a u t h o r i c a t i o n o f t h e a u t h o r i c a t i o n o f t h e a u t h o r i c a t i o n o f t h e t i c a t i c telephone will depend, ca "l exclusively, on the proper use which "é makes of it". To this effect, it will begin within ten days the distribution of Instructions to subscribers "for the sole purpose of bringing to the attention of the customers certain rules" which they must observe to obtain good service. The" Instructions are divided into seven key points to enable the person to obtain efficient service. The company tells its customers: "The first step in the proper use of the automatic telephone is to ascertain the number of the telephone you wish to reach by consulting the latest edition of the Telephone Gluttony. "There are two reasons for doing this - the changes and new insertions that are made in each edition of the Guide and the fact that memory, although a human quality, is subject to error. "Once you have ascertained the correct number you wish to obtain, proceed according to the following instructions: "The second step in the proper use of the automatic telephone is to pick up the receiver with your left hand, hold it to your ear, and wait for the "dial tone" which consists of a continuous buzzing sound, indicating that the line is ready for you to dial the desired number. "IF after a reasonable time you do not hear the dial tone, hang up the earphone, wait a while and then repeat the operation described in the preceding paragraph. "The dial has been called the soul of the automatic telephone, because it is used to control, at will, all the complicated machinery of the telephone exchange. "To dial a digit on the dial, place the index finger of the right hand in the recess of the dial (continued on page 13).
/Measure creates judicial district and ; District Court in Río Piedras 1 It was considered on first reading during yesterday's Senate session. - Four bills approved on third reading. - The House session - - The Senate held a very short session yesterday, and recessed until Monday at ten o'clock in the morning. It passed on third reading four bills: one, to "perfect the law authorizing the grievance procedure in wage claims"; another, appropriating funds to cover deficiencies in the House of Representatives; another, appropriating $320,000 to pay for hours worked by Vocational Agriculture students and another amending the Forestry Law.
* The sealón began at half past ten in the morning, under the presidency of Mr. Luis Muñoz Ma1 rin. In the first reading were consli dorados by the da their titles, several r bills, among them, the P. . of 8. 187, of Señorea Dávila . Monsanto and Fonfrías, to create the , Judicial District and the Court of Dls- > trlto of Rio' Piedras and the P. of 8. 189, by Mr. Anselml, to con- > donate the debts for contributions, on properties . whose value does not exceed four thousand ) dollars, which have been adjudicated to the People of Puerto Rico." > On third reading were unanimously approved, the P. of 8. i 150, of Mr. Gélgel Polanco, appropriating 320,000 to increase the corresponding item in the current budget of the Board of Vocaclonal Insu- , lar de Instruction, with the purpose of paying for the hours worked by the students of Vocaclonal Agric- . culture on the farms of the Second Rural Units and Vocaclonal Schools. Vocaclonal Schools. i It was approved on third reading the ■ P. of S. 98, by Mr. Gélgel Po- * lancé, to amend sections 1, 2, 3, 3, 4" I, 7,12 and 14 of Act No. 10, approved in *14.
I, 7, 12 and 14 of law No. 10, approved on November 14, 1917. The bill, as explained by its author, "perfects the law which regulates the procedure for the filing of a complaint" for the claim of salaries". P. of C. 6, by Mr. Ramos Antonlnll, (by petition) amending the Forest Law, was passed on third reading. It is prohibited to illegally possess or use a forest products marking tool - to possess or seal, except for forest island officials, any standing or cut tree, or trunk, or any other foreztal product belonging to El Pueblo de Puerto Rleo, either with the regulation marking tool bearing the letters trument that is of similar design." P. S. 105 was reconsidered by allocating funds to cover deficiencies in the budget of the House of Representatives. Adjourned' until Monday at six o'clock in the evening. In the House The House of Representatives is(Continued on page 8.)
Another army joins operations.
The First and Ninth joined forces in the vicinity of Brohl Nazi positions continue to fall Germans have not yet emerged from the stupor caused by the crossing of the Rhine River By JACK "FLEISCHER PARIS, 9. (PU)-While the Allied artillery "sigantencas piece" of artillery began the bombardment of the Ruhr valley, where the bridgehead to the eastern bank of the Rhine is being widened, from the headquarters of the Allied Twelfth Army Corps" "e gave the sensational news that a new American army is about to join the final offensive against the Reich. It was also reported that the First and Ninth armies joined forces this afternoon in the vicinity of Brohl and Andernach, south of Remagen. More than 250 pieces of field artillery of the heaviest caliber opened fire on the industrial centers of Rute, covering numerous towns, including Enen, with shrapnel. The bombardment began at 4:00 p.m. today, when U.S. Ninth Army gunners brought into play huge eight-inch and 240-millimeter pieces, as well as heavy-caliber mortars and 155-millimeter long toms. At least two-fifths of the Ruhr basin are within range of the U.S. gunners. The supreme headquarters continues to maintain rigid censure over the progress of the troops which have established themselves on the other side of the Rhine, in the Remagen area, where, according to reports from the front, they have penetrated up to three and a half miles into Germany from the banks of the river. The Germans admitted that the Americans have occupied the Ludendorf bridge intact and are at the gates of Llnz, "about three miles southeast of Remagen," where a "fierce battle" is being fought. From the headquarters of the First Army they report that the forces" that crossed the Rhine at the Remagen bridge occupied Erpel. The news reporting the presence of a new American army - the Tenth Army - on the western front was limited to saying that it is under the command of Lieutenant General Leonard T. Gerow and that it is part of Lieutenant General Bradley's Twelfth Corps, which also includes the First and Third Armies, therefore, the position of this army on the western front is unknown, as well as the immediate operations that will be assigned to it. The presence of the Tenth Army on the continent was revealed during ceremonies in the course of which the French Legion of Honor was conferred on Gerow and seven other American generals in recognition of their "cooperation in the liberation of France". General Alphonse Juln, je(Continued on page 2.) The war in brief "WESTERN front: The First and Third U.S. armies united their forces yesterday afternoon in the vicinity of Broh! and Andernach, south of Remagen. The troops which crossed the Bin continue to extend their bridgehead and have occupied several villages, among them ia of Erpel. It was officially reported that the American Tenth Army, under the command of Lieutenant General Gerow, is about to go into action on the western front. .... -. RUSSIAN-GERMAN FRONT: Dispatches from Moscow indicate that the final phase of the offensive against Berlin has begun, from the sectors of the Oder and Neisse rivers. Although ol alte Russian command keeps reserve in its communiqués, loe advance do Zhukov They indicate that sue tropea already entered in Custrim, ol last bastion of leo defenses of , the German capital. Stolp, the last town in Pomerania that gomaba in power doo naeis, oteú in {Oder of loe raeos.