THE MBN DO
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections".
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
YEAR XXV
liquid
loo bonds purchased, doro Uquldaf a¿tier
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, APRIL 28, 1945,
Entered u ooeond ooeond oían metter. Pote Otfloo, San Juan. P. R.
NUMBER 10453
1 > _ _ _ > i r 11 p Hussos occupy Tempelhoi airfield, 1 JT 7 thus cutting off the last escape to Nazi chiefs; it is divided into three zones.
Deacríben aus war experiences in Europe | lUr " iMkli K/wLdr■ Ixm five veterans of '65 who are on vial te in the Island, relate even adventure* in Europe, to a Sergeant of the Military Department of the West Indies. From left to right: First Sergeant Bartolo Cabin, Cialea; Private First Class Moises Rivera Rivera, Cidra; Staff Sergeant Mariano Nevéres, Coroaal; Katado Sergeant Juan Rodrigues, Corozal; and Private Ernesto Cotto Ramos, Cayey. (U.S. Army Communications Corps photo).
50,000.00 Muñoz and Suso "i opted not to draw against the fund for the current mission. The Island Audit Office yesterday denied the circulating version that the fifty thousand dollar allocation approved three years ago to comply with the resolution of the Legislative Assembly on the "status" has expired. An official source disclosed that the legislators who have been appointed to go to Washington will cover their expenses with funds from the Senate and the House of Representatives. Auditoria made it clear that the referred appropriation is in effect and that no disbursement has been made against it so far. A spokesman for the parliamentary Majority' informed that the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, and the Speaker of the House, Dr. Francisco M. Susonl, have resolved not to draw against the referred fund of fifty thousand dollars, and thus allocate to each delegate five hundred dollars from the funds of the legislative chambers, "so as not to give the impression or incur in waste, thus avoiding misinterpretations in the Senate and House of Representatives.
Five other veterans of '65 are visiting
One of them, Sergeant Mariano de Corozal, with 12 men faced a large enemy group in Turin. - Action in Corsica
A member of the 85th Infantry Regiment who took part in direct action in Europe when his 12-man patrol faced a large group of German infantrymen is back in Puerto Rico. He and four comrades recounted their adventures yesterday at the Antilles Military Department Headquarters.
Staff Sergeant Maligno Nevárez, of Corozal, told how his patrol was confronted by a larger German patrol in the vicinity of Turin, Italy. The Nazis attempted to ambush the Puerto Rican soldiers. "I was ordered to lead a patrol through the mountainous Alps," Nevárez reported. We were equipped with lubanudralladoras and "Garand" rifles," said the 26-year-old veteran. -Our mission was to ascertain the position occupied by the enemy and we carried it out, when we stumbled upon a large number of Germans. "Indisputably, the enemy's intention was to ambush our patrol. The fire at that time was heavier than ours, but we replied with full fury until we reached an area out of danger. None were wounded. Sergeant Nevárez participated in eleven other patrol missions, but did not see action. He holds three campaign stars, indicating participation in the Italian, Corsican and French campaigns. He is the son of Mr. Esteban Nevárez and Mrs. Catalina Agueda de Nevárez, of Corozal, whom he has not seen in 28 months. Other soldiers of the 65th Infantry Regiment accompanying Ranger Nevárez were Private Ernesto Cotto, of Cayey, who received the Purple Heart Medal for wounds received while on guard duty in Corsica; Staff Sergeant Bartolo Cabán, of Claloi; Staff Sergeant Bartolo Cabán, of Claloi; and Staff Sergeant Bartolo Cabán, of Corsica, who received the Purple Heart Medal for wounds received while on guard duty in Corsica, and Staff Sergeant Bartolo Cabán, of Claloi.
Today Dr. Figueroa leaves for Washington Carry letter from Tugwell recommending priority Pagan will shortly leave for the United States mler unlorrepubllcanm Senator Leopoldo Figueroa. Dr. Figueroa informed yesterday that until the last minute there were difficulties in getting priority to continue his trip from Miami to Washington. He has in his possession a letter from Governor Tugwell, recommending priority so that he can continue without interruption his trip to the federal capital. Dr. Figueroa also expressed that Mr. Iriarto and Mr. Cá (Continued on page 20.)
Tariff Expert Declares on Island
Puerto Rico would not maintain its level of Ivida with bill Tydings He impressed the author of the bill Secretary of the Interior Ickes will testify on Monday. He is working on a statement. By CHARLES MC CABE 4 WASHINGTON, 27. (PU) - Ben Dorfman, first economist of the United States Tariff Commission, told the Senate Territories Committee today that independence for Puerto Rico, as provided by Bill Tydings, "would undoubtedly create an economic situation on the island that would make it hopelessly unlikely that the island would maintain even its present low standards of living, much less improve them. Dorfman added that "independence will be economically desirable from the point of view of Puerto Ricans, only if they can have the confidence to deal effectively with economic problems under that 'status' (of independence)," he said at tomorrow's hearing. The speaker Tydings announced that the next hearing will be on Monday, when the secretary of the Interior, Ickes, is expected to testify. He was scheduled to testify today, but his office called to say that the "Secretary wanted additional time to prepare his statement. Ben Dorfman's long-awaited testimony greatly impressed Senators Tydings and Chivos, the only members of the Committee who were present: and both urged that the Puerto Rican Press publish the economist's report in full so that the Island would have an opportunity to realize exactly what the economic consequences of freedom under the Tydings bill would be. Although Dorfman's testimony was definitely not favorable to the economic provisions of the Tydings bill, Dorfman seemed pleased with the statement, especially those parts that stated that Puerto Rico's current level of prosperity is provided primarily by "the remittances of American taxpayers. Dorfman stated that, "Unless lmpr*declbl*s technological events occur, the maintenance of even the present low level of vi* f da on the Island will likely depend on continued aid from abroad."He added that the ability of Fuer* to Rico to provide an adequate standard of living for its people depends not on natural resources, nor on the expertise of its workers, "but on the unique commercial and fiscal relations that exist between the island and the United States. Dorfman also said that, immediately after the granting of Independence, the United States ceased making "the customary shipments" to the island, which he said have amounted to five hundred million dollars since the beginning of the association.
. ORLANDO .B. MENDEZ, COMMISSIONER OF THE INTERIOR
Governor Tugwell yesterday appointed Orlando R. Mendez to be Commissioner of the Interior. Mr. Mendez is leaving his position as Engineer of the Isabela Irrigation Service to devote himself to his new duties. The new Interior Commissioner was sworn in on January 1MR and holds a degree in Civil Engineering. He was Assistant Engineer in charge of the construction of the lulneo and Me* trullas dams during the years lina to 1935, inclusive. He was Superintendent of Construction of the hydroelectric project of (iarzaa from 1986 to 1140. In 1940 he was appointed Assistant to the Director of the Puerto Rico Homes Authority, whose position he resigned in 1940 to accept the position of Chief Engineer of the Isabela Irrigation Service.
General Patton is about to join the Russians in the Bavarian mountains He has penetrated into Austrian territory The British now dominate almost the whole of the port of Bremen.
By BRUCE W. MUNN PARIS, 27. (PU) - The American and Russian armies joined forces on the banks of the Elbe, south of Berlin, in a historic link-up which divided Germany into three zones. The vanguards of both armies joined their western and eastern fronts in the Torgau area on the Elbe River, about 75 miles south of Berlin. The union of Russians and Americans has divided the Reich into three wavering sections: the North Sea ports, the Berlin area and the Bavarian stronghold in the mountainous regions of southern Germany and Austria. Another liaison between the Russians and their Western allies seems imminent in the foothills of the mountains - -am* den, where the forces of Lieutenant General Patton's Third Army, after occupying Regenburg (Ratlsbona) and invading the Austrian regiment, established radio contact with a Russian column, apparently only 30 or 36 miles away. The Infantry of the 69th Division of the First American Army advanced from the Mulde River, separated by about 29 miles from the Elbe River, to join up with the 173rd Regiment of the Russian Guard in the vicinity of Torgau, situated on the western bank of the Elbe. The patrols first met along the Elbe River at 8:40 last Wednesday night, but the first liaison in force was not effected until 8:00 last night, European time, when the American infantry and the Russian Guardsmen shook hands inside the town of Torgau. The first contact between Russians and Americans was made accl(ientally at Rlesa, when a 20-man patrol of the First Army, not receiving orders to suspend the advance, penetrated the Russian lines. The official liaison took place later in the afternoon at Torgau. German resistance seems to have completely collapsed in the liaison zone. It is reported that the roads to Torgau are crowded with Nazi soldiers and civilians who are fleeing to the Muido River, heading for the North American lines.
Molotov will return to Moscow in ten or twelve days.
By EDWARD XLEINLERER SAN FRANCISCO, 27, (INS>- Speaking exclusively to INS, a Russian delegation official today revealed that Russian Foreign Commissioner Vyacheslav M. Molotov intends to return to Moscow in ten or twelve days, believing that all the major problems confronting the United Nations conference will have been resolved. The person who made this revelation came to the United States by plane in which Moscow traveled and proposed to return to the United States.
The person who made this revelation came to the United States on the plane in which Motov traveled and proposed to return to Moscow accompanying the Russian Commissar for Foreign Relations. The Russian Ambassador to the United States, Andrei A. Gromyko, assumed the chairmanship of the Soviet delegation in San Francisco after Molotov's pattlda. Molotov has enjoyed great popularity among the delegates, the secretariat staff and San Francisco residents in general. The Russian Commissar is known to be pleased with the reception he has received in this city. The Russian official who made the above statements to the INS said that Molotov's return to San Francisco was a great success.
said that Molotov's return to Moscow should not be considered an extraordinary step since he had left much unfinished business in Moscow when Marshal Stalin accepted President Truman's invitation to send his "right arm" to San Francisco. The Russian official stated that Stalin sent Molotov to the United Nations conference out of a desire to get Moscow's dealings with the new American President off to a good start, but with the understanding that he would not be able to make a good start with the new President.
FENNELL MANAGER OF THE AGRICULTURAL COMPANY Governor Tugwell appointed the following persons to the Board of Directors of the Agricultural Company of Puerto Rico, to serve for the terms indicated below: Elmer Ellsworth, five years; Arturo Roque, four years; José Acosta Velarde, three years; Emilio Piñera, two years; and Juan Rennasar, one year. The Board held its first meeting on Thursday, April M and elected Mr. Elmer Ellsworth as president. Mr. Thomas Fennell was appointed general manager of the Company. At present Fennell is agricultural adviser to the Chancellor of the University.
Hitler 1 is assured to be in Berlin
General Dittmar said at his surrender that the Fuehrer is determined to die. - Reds are dominating the resistance By "RO'BÉRf'M¡JSEL LONDON, 27. (PU)- Soviet assault troops seized today the great Berlin airfield of Tempelhof, cutting off the last escape route for the Nazi chiefs trapped inside Berlin, among whom Adolf Hitler is most firmly believed to be.
The Allied armies make final liaison
Subsequently, the Russians occupied the districts of Neukoelln. Steglltz and Schmargsndorf, advancing over a six-mile frontier, while other Soviet forces conquered Potsdam, Spandau, and Rathenow. Dispatches from Moscow say that tank or infantry forces from two Russian army groups are blocking a new link in the heart of the dying city, and are assaulting the last line of Nazi fenslva protecting the subway fortress from where Hitler is said to be directing the clone operations. The Berlin radio commentator, Lieutenant General Kurt Dittmer, said on surrendering to the Americans in Magdoburg that the fall of Berlin is a matter of hours and that Hitler is inside the city, determined to die. A communiqué from Moscow reveals that the main German force - defending Berlin is airborne in a 30-square-mile zone in the center of the city, where it is being relentlessly - , deatroyed by Russian artillery and aircraft. The two Russian armies which this' blocleron new link Jo hiciereis ! in the area do Charlottemburg, al . eate of the Zoological Park (Tiergar* ten), where they copied mucha nothing. . The Berlin garrison is now attacked from all sides. The Russians charge from the south up to beyond Tempelhof; those operating to the north have reached the Moabit obroro district, and those to the east are within rifle fire of the Zoological Park. Marshal Stalin issued three orders of the day to greet the three groups of Russian armies attacking Berlin and advancing on a 100-mile front from the north, south and west of the city, towards a new link with the British and Americans. The first order of the day, addressed to Marshal Zhukov, announced the conquest of Potadam, Spandau and Rathenow. The second declared that Marshal Konev's troops had seized Witomberg after crossing the Elbe at a new point 24 miles downstream from Torgau, where the first Russian-American liaison took place yesterday, Thursday. The third order of the day, addressed to Marshal Rokossovsky, states that the Second" Army of the White Ruala, in * advancing along the Baltic Sea coast, has taken Prenzlau, a town 27 miles southwest of Stettin, and Angermuende, 29 miles northeast of Berlin, during an advance to link up with the British Army, which is fighting in the Hamburg area. Mlentraa at Moacu 324 cannon fired 22 salvos each, in jubilant celebration of the link-up of the Russian and Anglo-North American armies, the Soviet people are more confident than ever that the fall of Berlin is a matter of hours. The Moscow radio played the Soviet national anthem and then Stalln spoke, announcing the union of forces in Germany, followed by the British, American and Russian anthems, to close the celebration.
The event took place 75 miles from Berlin, on the banks of the Elbe River The hour of the great victory is at hand Allied leaders made a joint announcement yesterday. What President WASHINOTONjrT (PU)-President Harry S. Truman announced today the union between the Anglo-American and Russian armies at Torgao, on the banks of the Elbe. The President issued a special message in which he says, however, that "this is not the hour of final victory in Europe, but that hour, for which the American people, the British people, and the Soviet people have worked and prayed so hard, is at hand". A similar announcement was made at the same time in London and Moscow. According to information from White House Secretary Jonathan Daniels, the liaison took place on Thursday, at 2:00 p.m. Eastern War Time, between considerable forces of the U.S. Sixty-ninth Division and Soviet forces. The point of junction was about 75 miles south of Berlin. It is noted that the announcement was made prematurely by the French Press Agency, which transmitted the news by aus teletype at 10:55 a.m., Eastern War Time, before the time fixed for publication. The news was then given by the Paris radio. Patrols of the two armies made contact at 2:40 p.m., E.W.T., on the 25th, but the meeting with the most likely forces was not held until yesterday. President Truman said that with the junction "the faint hope of Hitler and his go(Continued on page 17.)
THE WAR IN BRIEF
WESTERN FRONT: The American and Russian armies joined forces. "The American and Russian armies joined forces on the Elbe River, south of Berlin, in a historic junction that divided Germany into three regions. The union occurred at the Torgau sons. Further to the south, another Russian-North American link-up seems imminent, at the foot of the Bavarian Mountains, where Patton's forces, after occupying Regensburg and invading Austria, established radio contact with a Russian column. In the north, the brlUnlcoo are in the suburbs of Hamhurg, ready for the final assault on the city. - RUSSIAN-GERMAN FRONT: The Russians seized the large Berlin Tempel airfield.
The Russians seized the large Berlin airfield at Tempelhof and then occupied the districts of Netikoelln, Stegllta, Sdunargendorf, Potadam, Spandau and Rathenow. My lieutenant general nasi Kurt Dittmar. radio commentator and spokesman for the German high command, m" delivered loa American* in Magdeburgn and said that Berlin cea* rñ and the war will be over shortly. The Fifth Army yesterday entered Genoa, Germany's nth naval base in the Mediterranean, Piacenza, 84 miles from Piacenza. Piacenza, 84 miles from Milan, was also occupied by the Allies. Forces" of the Eighth and the Fifth were able to accelerate the TJnro Vone "B na, without finding any referral.
Henri Petain incarcerated in He passed in front of soldiers with guns baria down, as a sign of dishonor PARIS. 27. (PU)- Marshal Petaln arrived at the small suburban station of Igny, accompanied by his wife. The Marshal seemed calm. Twenty automobiles were waiting to take Petain and his entourage to the place of arrest. General Koenig, governor general of Paris, took the first car and the convoy was preceded by motorcycles to the fortress of Mont Rouge, where Petaln was transferred to a poorly furnished dormitory. The elderly marshal refused to take medicine or drugs, saying, "The only pills I take are those of good humor." The person who prepared Petaln's room said that the first thing the marshal asked for when he saw the room was a picture of General de Gaulle, to put on the wall. - After crossing the border from the Swiss station of Vallorbe, Marshal Petaln was transferred to the French station of Lea Hopataux, where the special train was waiting for him. On the platform of the station, the Attorney General Carrlvo, high officials of the Ministry of Justice and the military governor of Paris, General Fierro Koenlg, an old friend of Petain, were waiting for him. The Marshal was dressed in civilian clothes and his face showed the deep emotion that overwhelmed him. The marshal crossed in front of the French soldiers who remained in a rigid attitude, with their weapons down, that is to say, in sign of dishonor. Procurator Carrlvo briefly read out the charges against Petaln and then informed the marshal that he was under arrest. (Continued on page 20.)
Thirty-one legislators yesterday addressed Senator Millard E. Tydings, author of the bill con?* dlendo Ja independence to Puerto Rico, informing him that "as the author of the bill, as the author of the bill, he is the author of the bill con?* dlendo Ja independence to Puerto Rico.
31 Island Legislators Urge Congressional Action on Status
They call for legislation that would allow the island to decide its permanent political status as soon as possible. Cablegram addressed to Senator Tydings
We, the members of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico, urge Congress to pass legislation that will allow our people to decide as soon as possible the issue of their permanent political status. In our personal capacity, we fully endorse his independence project, with amendments that guarantee the progressive development of our economy and the maintenance of reasonable standards of living and work. The world situation calls for quick action. Approval of the Tydlngl bill, with the suggested amendments, would do justice to Puerto Rico, while strengthening the position of the United States as a democratic power. Signing eato. cable are legislators José M. Dávlla Monsanto, Bernardo Méndez, Ernesto Juan Fonfrlas, Rafael Arjona Slaca, Pascaalo García. Vicente Gélgel Polanco, Lula Alfredo Colón, William Córdova Chirino, Samuel R. Quiñones, Francisco L. Anselml, Antonio Pacheco Padró. José Luis Fellú, José Portilla, Adolfo L. Monserrate Anselml. Carmelo Avila Medina, Eudaldo Báez García, Obdulio Bauzá. J. Mimoso Respaldo, Agustín Burgos, E. González Porreta, Libertad Pascual, Alfonso Ro(Continued on page 8).
Speaker to appear before the Tydings Committee by cablegram
Will express in message the right of Puerto Rico to "sovereignty without limitations but always on the basis of acceptance by the people in plebiscite".
The Speaker of the House of Representatives, Dr. Francisco M. Susonl, will address by cablegram to the U.S. Senate Committee on Territories "emphasizing Puerto Rico's right to sovereignty without limitations, but always based on the acceptance of the people through a plebiscite". Dr. Susonl held a lengthy telephone conversation yesterday with Resident Commissioner Jesus T. Riflero. It is reported that it was about the public hearings that are being held in connection with the Tydings Project, which, according to all indications, will be suspended today until next Tuesday. Speaker Susonl was working yesterday on the cablegram which he will address to Senator Tydings. setting forth his views in regard to the Independence project. Although absolute secrecy is being maintained on the matter, we have reports that it will be drafted in line with the principles upheld by the Popular Democratic Party, but emphasizing "the right of Puerto Rico to political sovereignty without limitations, always based on the acceptance of the people through a plebiscite".
It is understood that the Speaker of the House of Representatives will address such cablegram early next week to be reported on when the hearings resume on Tuesday.