THE WORLD
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections - . , 1
3rd Pages 5 Ctvs.
2 Sections
DAILY MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 1945.
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10360
Agriculture submits plan $10,092,050
Includes 10 projects - to be carried out within the Six-Year program $2,650,000.00 to conserve soils
Izquierdo believes they will leave great benefits in prosperity to the Island
A work program to be developed within the Six-Year Plan, which includes 15 permanent improvement projects to be carried out at a cost of $10,092,050, has been submitted by the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, Mr. Lula A. Izquierdo, to the Board of Directors. Izquierdo, to the Planning Board. Among these projects are the livestock deposits, whose cost will be $8,778,000; the protection of watersheds for hydroelectric projects, whose estimated cost is $3,170,000; soil conservation and land use, at a cost of $82,850,000; the acquisition of land for forests, which will cost $81,992,000; roads and trails in the Insular forests, which has a total estimated cost of $1,200,000 and the construction of $5 milling centers, whose estimated cost is $458,900. Mr. Izquierdo, in submitting these projects, explained their scope as follows: "Project number 1. Fumigation Plant: which will facilitate the fumigation of certain products prior to shipment to the continental United States, as required by federal law, and where all plant material imported into Puerto Rico, whether from the United States or foreign countries, must also be fumigated in accordance with certain specific plant quarantine laws. In the case of cotton, of which an average of 1,000 Sea Island bales are exported and which are harvested in the United States itself, a fumigation is required as a condition precedent to admission to the southern ports of the United States.
the southern ports of the United States. The installation of a fumigation plant in Puerto Rico would offer great advantages for compliance with both federal and island quarantine laws. The project would cost 876,950:00 to implement. Project number 2. Veterinary Laboratory, This project consists of the construction of a small laboratory with adequate building and equipment, to form part of the Animal Industry Division of this Department and which will be used to diagnose domestic animal diseases. The laboratories established so far on the Island that can do this kind of work are overloaded and cannot do it efficiently due to lack of time and other limitations such as staff and personnel. The execution of the project will cost 868,000.00. Project number. 3, Livestock Depots: Approval of this project is requested for the purpose of "stimulating production and producing purebred stallions for sale to farmers to further the systematic improvement of our animal breeds including horses, dairy and working cattle, hogs, goats, and cattle. Three farms will be established, one on the north coast, one in the mountainous region and one in the arid southern section. The execution of the project is estimated at $768,000.00 Project number 4. Determination of the collndanclas and titles to the lands belonging to the extinct Safe Homes Commission: The approval of this project would place under proper administration those lands belonging to the People of Puerto Rico, located in the tributary basins of the Carito and Patillas Reservoirs; lands that are being exploited by the people of Puerto Rico and of which persons are taking possession (continued on page 20).
Jimenez makes public amendment agreed to paragraph of his letter
He expresses that a matter of principle is involved, in which details are unimportant. - The Ledo. Rivera Zayas interpreted him well
That he found out about the letter addressed to him by the President of the Bar Association, Rafael Rivera Zayas, through EL MUNDO and that several hours after it was published he received it, said yesterday Gustavo Jiménez Sicardó. -I must say," he added, "that the reasons that my colleague Rivera Zayas has had for returning the letter that I recently addressed to him have personal importance for him and for me. There has been a misinterpretation of my position regarding the problem that the Government has posed to the Bar Association. This misinterpretation is motivated by the fact that I have clarified, subsequent to the conversation I had with Rivera Zayas, my interest in occupying the position of Municipal Judge of San Juan because of issues related to the Bar Association.
Intimate diary of Potsdam
principles. At the last meeting of the Board of Governors of the Bar Association an amendment to my letter to the President was agreed upon. This amendment was drafted in the same offices of the College and the same was delivered to me by the stenographer of record of the College after having dictated the same ol compañero Felix Ochotoco. I request that the original paragraph of my letter be published and how it was later amended. This refers to the Intervention of Rivera Zayas before the Attorney General, so that he would appoint the Judge of the Municipal Court of San Juan. The paragraphs of the letter to which Mr. Jimenez alludes are as follows: (Before the amended version). "I don't explain why I have interpreted (Continued on page 8).
Black market in Berlin attracts Russian soldiers
American and British soldiers do good business with their Russian allies in Berlin. Full of occupation marks, the Russians want to buy, especially watches. And the Yankees or English oblige, at fabulous prices. In another chapter, the twelfth, of the "Potsdam Diary" Robert G. Nixon relates how the Russians paid as much as $1,000 for watches not worth a tenth of that amount. By ROBERT O. NIXON (INI White House Correspondent), Chapter Xn POTSDAM, Tuesday, July 34 (INS)-The angel of death is still reaping his harvest among those who lived through the last days of Berlin. ' Hunger and disease are wreaking havoc. Almost daily the world's rarest
Almost daily the world's rarest funeral procession passes slowly down our cobblestone street. A German family carries a deceased to the cemetery. The body is carried on a wooden, two-wheeled cart. There are no boxes, or if there are any here, the family can't afford to buy them. The wheels of the cart crash against the stones. Then the callus is alloneioaa again. I BERLIN, Tuesday, July 34.-The most fantastic thing in this rare city m ol black morcado. There are no tlondae. Heavy explosive bombs, loa fires ended eon tedas. No merchandise and very little food. The scarce, ol hunger and taita do confidence in paper mnnoda has inflated prices by an incredible pro* portion.
To obtain food or clothing or any small luxury item, Germans have to go to the black market. Morgan Beatty, of the N.B.C., and I ask our Interpreter, the daughter of a Bor* llnese banker, how much a pound of coffee costs. "Coffee!" says she. "Real coffee? We have nothing but Imitation coffee for the whole war." I reminded her that the Nazi leaders lacked for nothing. "Oh, ol," replied ol, "they had everything." A pound of coffee, said olla, cost about a thousand francs. A pound of tea, he said, cost troa thousand marks. "Notice," says olla, "that the tea leaves can be used over and over again." Powdered sugar and locho powder are to be (Continued on page 30.1
Tydings repudiates 'bill' also introduced in House by Piñero
Does not want his name associated with । the measure. - Bell circulates criticism of Popular government acts on Island By CHARLES MeCARE~ United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 28th (PU).-In his recent statement to a Puerto Rican official about additional public hearings on) the "status" of Puerto Rico, Senator Tydings told the official that he wished to hold supplementary but brief hearings for the purpose of hearing testimony from only a few prominent people before taking his independence bill to the Territorials Committee.
to the full Committee on Territories. Informed persons believe that the main purpose of the supplemental hearings will be to implement President Truman's request that the Puerto Rican people "be given a choice of status" as compensation for their wartime services. Tydings, it is understood, wants to discuss with Island leaders and Interior Department officials some form of plebiscite that is favorable to all parties involved in this matter. The current position of the Senator from Maryland, judging from what he told Puerto Ricans who visited him recently, is that he favors the idea of a plebiscite except for the fact that he does not want a plebiscite to be associated with a plebiscite; that he does not want his name associated with the so-called Ty* dlngo-PIflero bill, drafted last spring by the Puerto Rican Legislative Commission, and that he cannot take any position on Tugwell's simplified version of the Tydings-Piñero bill because he has not yet seen that version, nor has he any direct knowledge of its contents. On Capitol Hill and in the eye of the Government offices, a great silence continues to prevail when reporters mention the simplified draft. Meanwhile, on the House side, Congressman C. Jaspor Bell, Chairman of the House Insular Affairs Committee, sent to all members of the Committee a report "on some of the most recent developments in connection with the Wco. The report contained a scathing critique of the Popular Democratic Party of Puerto Rico, making the charge that it has gone "completely insane," which was written to Congressman Bell, of Puerto Rico, by "a gentleman whose understanding and discernment is second to none in Puerto Rico. Said author of three letters, which Bell included in his Report, is not otherwise identified. (Continued on page 8)
।¡Capital Commissioners Appointed They will be sworn in on Monday. - Sanchez Vilella to submit program Next Monday, Antonio Fernández Castrlilón, E. Dávila Díaz, José N. Gándera, M. Meléndoz Muñoz and J. F. Correa, appointed yesterday by Governor Tugwell to fill the existing vacancies, will be sworn in as members of the Board of Commissioners of the Government of the Capital. The Board will meet in regular session on Monday, at 4 o'clock in the afternoon, and the new members will be sworn in before the Secretary of the Board, Miss Flni Rincón. San Juan Administrator, softor Roberto Sánchez Vilella, informed EL MUNDO yesterday that he was "pleased that the vacancies on the Board of Commissioners have been filled". He added that "we are in the best disposition to work jointly with said organism, confronting the community's problems. "We believe that there has been a good ooloetion," said Mr. Sánchez Vilella, "we hope to have an exchange of impressions with all the members of the Board to outline a program on the part of this government. In circles close to the municipality, it was reported yesterday that it is the purpose of the administration "to accelerate the solution of all the problems with which this government agency is still confronted". The Mayor's program includes, as reported, "the development of a program of municipal public works, among which the new cemetery of the city has preference; "a new square in the morca (continued on page 30).
Commerce encounters stumbling blocks I
De Hoston says it's due to unconscionable delay in Washington An appeal to Clinton Anderson
Chamber of Commerce reiterated need for immediate action
The President of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Fillpo L. de Hostos, yesterday authorized statements regarding the food supply problem, expressing among other things that "the inconceivable delay with which the authorities in Washington have proceeded in relation to the problem of the supply of food to Puerto Rico, has created serious difficulties that have prevented the island commerce from making the necessary purchases to replace the OAS when it completes its foundations on October 15.
Fully aware," he said yesterday, "of all aspects of the problem and of the way in which free contracting is affected by the policy of seizure established by the federal government, by virtue of which reserves of certain articles have been created to meet the needs of the armed forces and of other services and commitments of the government, from the first moment we have insisted that, by covering these reserves, the quantities that the government will have to pay for the goods and services of the armed forces and other services and commitments of the government will be covered by the policy of seizure. Since these stocks covered the quantities which the Food Administration had calculated to supply Puerto Rico's consumption, it was a sine quanon for the supply of the Island that these quantities should be made immediately available to suppliers in the United States, so that the Island trade could acquire them through the normal distribution channels.
In view of the recent price increases in the continental market, we have also insisted on the need for a revision of the maximum prices which would provide the local trade with the indispensable basis for making purchases in the continental market. ** In view of these circumstances, more than three weeks ago, the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce, through its representative in Washington, Mr. J. Gus Laliando, raised the issue of the maximum prices in the mainland market. Gus Laliando, raised the problem with the competent authorities, establishing as essential objectives to facilitate both mainland and island commerce, the immediate adoption by the government of the two measures indicated: (1) declaration by the Secretary of Agriculture announcing that he had placed at the disposal of the mainland suppliers, for exclusive sale on the Island, the quantities destined for Puerto Rico which were included in the reserves of rice, beans, butter, and other foodstuffs whose production the government controls; (2) rapid revision by the OPA of the prices of these articles in accordance with the increase registered in the North.
Since then to date, there have been continuous meetings and consultations in Washington on the subject, both between our representatives and the authorities and between the authorities and the suppliers of rice, beans, barateo and pork products, but sensihlemen(Continued on page 8).
The Auditor gives an explanation of Ramos' trip
The Auditor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Rafael do J. Cordero, informed yesterday that "the Auditor's Office has not authorized any payment in favor of Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonin to go to Paris in representation of the Puerto Rican workers". He stated that "the Auditor's Office authorized an advance of funds to Mr. Ramos Antonin as representative of the Permanent Delegation of the Legislature," based on a requisition signed by the President and the Secretary of said Delegation. The Auditor addressed the following letter to "El Imparclal" yesterday: "In today's edition of "El Imparclal", on the 28th of September, there is a leaflet with the following headline: "CGT Gordlany Formulará Cargos Contra Auditor por Pagar Viajo de Antoninl. That the reasons that the CGT, which Mr. Colón Gordlany preoid, has for charging the Auditor are the following: 1. That the Audit Office authorized the payment of expenses to Mr. Ramos Antoninl to go to Parla to represent the Puerto Rican workers before the World Labor Congress. 2. That the undersigned disregarded an opinion of the Attorney General to the effect that he did not (Continued on page 1).
Balseiro conferred with President Truman yesterday; confident plebiscite will include Statehood
More than 2,000 Prominent People Arrested By Farrell Regime
aMMFi My W I ® ¿ I Wo \ * gkjía - S at W " wM \ ' Iff 4 ■St SaHKr
Argentine citizens gather in the streets of Rueños Aires, with flags and placards, in demonstration of protest against the military dictatorship ruling their country. Demonstrators called for the return of constitutional government and free elections. Argentina's military government again declared a state of siege on the 28th of this month and suspended most of the people's freedoms. The situation has worsened and numerous persons of prestige have been arrested and imprisoned on charges of inciting revolution. (Associated Press Photo).
WASHINGTON, 28 (PU)-The sudden reImposition of a state of siege in Argentina and the arrest of numerous prominent persons. Identified with the government's return to normal constltuclo*
nnl, were the main topic today for Spanish-American diplomats in Washington, as well as for U.S. officials concerned with lntcramerlcan issues.
Acting Secretary of State Dean Acheson said he had to consult with President Truman, Secretary of State James F. Byrnes and the Ambassador of the United States.
.meat supply was received yesterday Consists of 443,136 Ihs. of superior quality. - Available shortly One of the largest shipments of meat to arrive at the lela in months has been stored in a refrigerator by the Bureau of Supply and will be shipped to the wholesale next week. The OS reported that this meat will be available to consumers through grocers in eight to ten days. The shipment contains a variety of grades: "commercial," "good" and "select." This is the first large shipment of select caUdadea, received from Ida Eataooa Unldoa in more than three years. Typically, the shipment of meat received in Puerto Rico has been exclusively of the "utility" type, the inferior quality of meat generally offered in the market. Only one-quarter of the reclaimed beef was of the "utility" grade, while the other 2,990 quarters were of higher grade, according to the OS. There has been some delay in the distribution of that meat because the OS dea "to ensure that each detail will receive a reasonable portion of the various types of meat that have been received," The shipment comes to aer the prl(Continued on page 20.)
Cleanup in Rio Piedras was carried out yesterday without incident.
Mayor Alvarez announced that on Monday he will initiate a Public Cleanup Week. CGT leaders interviewed him yesterday "as friends".
During yesterday's cleaning service in the city of Rio Piedras, without any incident. The Mayor, Mr. Augusto P. Alvarez, announced last night that on Monday will begin in "that population the "Week of Public Cleaning", having already hired the men to proceed to the arrangement of the sidewalks that are in bad conditions, as well as the weeding of the same. During yesterday afternoon there were no pickets of the workers who have declared themselves on strike, having informed the corporal of the Insular Police, Juan Alvarado, who is the interim head of that district, that no incident was registered.
Benjamin Ortiz, chairman of the House Treasury Committee, announced yesterday his intention to file a motion for the House of Representatives Treasury Committee to take up the matter.
Mayor Alvarez, speaking last night for EL MUNDO, said that "I offer the people of Rio Piedras that, in exchange for the inconveniences they have endured during these last few days, I will put into use, instead of four trucks, no less than six daily to do the garbage collection." During the day yesterday visited Mayor Alvarez the President of the CGT, Senator Manuel Barreto Perez, representative Bu,losa and labor leader Osorio, whom he received. the Municipal Executive "not as mediators on strike, but as friends, because I do not recognize any state of strike." The mayor (Continued on page 20.)
(Continued on page 20) establish a Commission, before which the Authorities may appear to discuss their plans and actions regarding rates or services, maintaining that "in this way the people, through their representatives, may keep in touch with their own agencies, and the Legislature may contribute to the good functioning of such Authorities. Commenting on this matter, Mr. Ortiz made the following statements to a reporter of EL MUNDO yesterday: "The problem of the various Authorities that have been created in our Island has been recently discussed at great length. The purpose of the Popular Party, in creating these agencies, was to establish agencies or instrumentalities that would give better service to the community at lower prices or rates within the philosophy of social justice and identification with the people, which served as the driving force of our Party.
. Colonel Cordero is about to move to the United States " He is in perfect health and is only waiting for transportation to return to the continent. - He sends a message to his relatives and friends
"Within the reality of our colonial system of government, or independently of the liberal attitude and democratic motivation of our present Chief Executive, I understand that it is incumbent upon the Legislature, as the only direct organ of public opinion in Puerto Rico, to assume the responsibility of remaining vigilant and ensuring that the actions of these Authorities are oriented toward the faithful fulfillment of their two fundamental objectives, namely, better service and lower fares. "I am the first to recognize the ability, competence, honesty and devotion to public service of the leaders of these agencies. But from the standpoint of the necessity of considering these agencies as more or less permanent institutions, and on a principled conservation basis, I believe that the Legislature should undertake, at its next regular session, a study or examination of the manner in which these agencies can, at present or in the future, fulfill their raison d'etre, that is, directly promote the welfare (Continued on page X.),
Colonel oortorrlqueflo Virgilio ' N. Cordero, ptulonero of the Japo1 nesea since General Waln1 wrlght surrendered at Bataan on May 8, 1942. is "enjoying perfect health and is only waiting for air transportation to move to the United States," according to Information supplied yesterday vier1 nee by the Department of the Gue- ■ rra to the Headquarters of the * Military Department of the West Indies. This is the first news we have had directly from Colonel Cordoro since his release with General Wainwright. Cordero was placed under American control in China shortly after the Japanese surrendered to the Allies at the end of August. When General Wainwright was released, inquiries were made at General MacArthur's quarters as to the status of Colonel Cordero. The Puerto Rican officer, a member of the Regular Army, for(Continued on page 8)
■F H ■iMEFjO
Virgilio Cordero
Says Executive will send message to Congress shortly The prospect of ships for Davis Island foresees no regular passenger service for now By RUTH RROOM (INS Correspondent) WASHINGTON. 28. (INS.)- Jo "é A, Bsliolro, president of the Puerto Rico Pro-Statehood Association, released a statement following his conference with President Trumen today at the White House, in which he said: "I am immensely pleased with the talk I had with the President. I am confident - today, more than ever before - that the President is not committed to anything other than achieving the progress that his predecessors did not help him accomplish under the American flag and as a citizen of the United States. As a Senator, the President once said that the people in our possessions and territories should be treated the same as the people of the continental United States. Today, I have every reason to believe that he feels, more strongly than ever before, that if we fulfill all our obligations, we are fully entitled to the enjoyment of the rights of American citizenship, "My impression is that this attitude for Puerto Rico is of greater accomplishment than at any time in the past. I am under the impression that the President will send a message to Congress soon on the status of Puerto Rico. I am not at liberty to discuss what the message will recommend; but I am confident that he will urge the Puerto Rican people to accept the election of the government, among other forms of "status".
"The President said that he is very interested in Puerto Rican problems; and in the course of our conversation, I had the privilege of realizing that he feels the same way." (A United Press dispatch, also dated Washington, also reports that Mr. Balseiro's interview with President Harry S. Truman lasted a quarter of an hour.) Prospects for passenger bareoe
On the other hand. J. E. Da vis, head of the Caribbean Division of the War Shipping Administration, predicted today that Puerto Rico will not have regular passenger ship service before next year. Military transportation is our number one task now. We have to bring our troops home from the war zones before we can even think about resuming regular passenger services at the site. Davies also said that the War Shipping Administration has considered the resumption of a fairly regular service to Bermuda, which would continue to Puerto Rico; however, no definite plans have yet been made. However, Davies said that "some passenger service" to Puerto Rico and other Caribbean ports will continue on interim voyages, as long as ships are available. Davies continued: "We understand the seriousness of this situation, and would like to resume regular service as soon as possible; but military needs are our first consideration now. . .
On another subject, the Department of the Navy, in announcing its plans for the celebration of Navy Day, Oct. 37, announced today that the light cruiser "Little Rock" will be assigned to San Juan to participate in the celebrations there. So far, this assignment to Puerto Rico has been the only one in the Atlantic Fleet made outside the continental United States, a Navy public affairs official said.
"This ship is one of 375 Atlantic Fleet vessels to be assigned to ports up and down the eastern seaboard for Navy Day celebrations," said the spokesman. *
The "Little Rock" was assigned to Puerto Rico by Admiral Jonathan H. Ingram, Commander in Chief of the Atlantic Fleet. The Pacific Fleet probably assigned ships to port along the west coast," he said today.
The Navy spokesman added that: "The Little Rock will dock in San Juan harbor and will be available for civilian inspection on Navy day.