THE DO
34 Pages 5 Ctvs,
34 Pages 5 &vs2 Sections
2 Sections
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVII
I don't liquidate the bonds ootnpradog, ' -* * I said" quléfo liquidate Hitlor,
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, APRIL 7, 1945.
Entered u aeoond dais matter. Fort Otile®, Sao Juta, P. B.
NUMBER 10432
Germans retreat as Allies close in on Hanover, Bremen, Hamburg; Fighting rages in approaches to Berlin.
British two miles from Hanover Germans fall back toward Elbe line toward Berlin Bremen harbor flanked by south Large Allied forces are deploying across northern plains By BRUCE MUNN PARIS, 6. (Pt')~ Allied armies are advancing today toward Hanover and the great northern ports of Bremen and Hamburg," in a coordinated offensive which is forcing the Nazis to retreat to the Elbe line and toward Berlin. Lnndrea radio reported tonight that the British had reached points less than two miles from Hanover and a dispatch from the front says that the American Ninth Army has finally occupied the town of Hamm. Long and powerful columns of Allied tanks and infantry are spreading out across the vast northern Uanu" tes of Germany, from six or more solid bridgeheads on the east bank of the Weser River, west and southwest of Hanover. Broma, Germany's second port, was flanked from *1 south by the sudden Anglo-Nor-Tamorian attack. T.he latest official dispatches this afternoon placed the Allied units 19 miles from Hanover, adding that they are rapidly approaching" that great railway port, situated just over 130 miles west of Berlin, Armored and infantry forces of the British Second Army and the American Ninth Army forced the crossing of the Weser at six points in a 53-mile arc stretching from the town of Hamelin to Stolzenau in the north. At Stolzenau, British soldiers are about 40 miles southeast of Bromn and less than 79 miles southwest of Hamburg. These Anglo-Norman-American spearheads continue to operate under reserve, the official communiqué having merely reported that they "advanced about five miles inland from their bridge-river rafts on the Weser, west and southwest of Hanover." But unconfirmed dispatches report that "the Remans are hastily evacuating Broma and Hamburg," News received here directly from the front says that other British forces moving up the river estuary, following the German-Dutch border line, have reached Meppen, on the Ems river, 46 miles south of Emdom. Further south, inside Holland, forces of the First Canadian Army arrived, after a spectacular advance of 24 miles, at Coevorden, a town 27 miles northeast of the city of Zwolle and only eleven miles from the Zwolle-Gronlnga railroad, the last remaining north-south escape route for the Germans trapped inside Holland. At Coevorden. the Canadians are also less than 50 miles: in a straight line from the shores of the Zu(jlgfge" (South) Sea. To the north of Coevorden, other Canadian elements £ 're moving toward Nordhorn, where British forces are, to close (Continued on page 3).
Caucus approved the transfer of the aqueducts.
The measure provoked a strong debate - Muñoz defended the bill Báez García said it is a law of dispossession It was also opposed by Mimoso Raspaldo, of ' 1 Caguas, and senator García. a group of legislators, led by Representatives Eudaldó Báez García, of Mayagüez, and José Mimoso Respaldo, of Caguas, and Senator Pascaslo Garda, of Huma* cao, and after a prolonged debate that lasted several hours, in which intervened, among others, Senators Luis Muñoz Marín, Rafael Z Arjona filara and Luis Alfredo Colón,' the- caucus of the popu"° lar legislators approved early Thursday morning, with some amendments, Senate Bill number 612, - which creates the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Service and x provides for "the transfer to said service, of all public aqueduct and sewer systems I -er Pflerto Rico." The measure, which was presented and defended by Senate President Luis Mufloz Marín, "as part of the sixty basic projects that implement the part of the six-year economic plan for the current year," is intended to "help provide the inhabitants of Puerto Rico, in the most economical way possible, with the most efficient and efficient water and sewage systems. in the most economical manner possible, of sewage systems - adequate for the disposal of their sewage waters and of a supply of pure, regular water for those purposes and all domestic, industrial and commercial uses and to provide them, at the same time, with any other service or facilities related or incidental * to such services," according to Section 4 of the aforementioned bill. According to information obtained yesterday by an editor of EL MUNDO, Rep. Baez Garcia insistently fought the bill "in all its parts," calling it a "law of dispossession" by virtue of which 'those who do not know how to manage their municipal affairs are rewarded and those who manage them efficiently are punished." - Said Baez Garcia, as reported, that "the Municipality of Mayagüez is proud of its aqueduct and its people are satisfied with the way this municipal public service is administered and attended to, which I am willing to prove in any test that may be made." Rep. Mimoso Respaldo abounded in what was said, by Rep. Báez Garda and protested that "it is intended to take away from Caguas atTheueduct, which has never been as efficient as it is now." Our reports also indicate that the senator for Humacao, Mr. Pauasio Garda, who also supported the measure, stated that "the municipal administrations in my district are almost all newly elected and they must be given a chance to show how to govern better than previous municipal administrations." Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, according to our reports, expressed himself strongly in favor of the I (Continued on page 13.)
EL MUNDO with the 65th Infantry
By MIGUEL A. 8ANT1N Corresporiul.de Guerra de . THE WORLD WITH THE 65TH INFANTRY NEAR THE GERMAN BORDER-(Received by military bomber and via the United Press)-Despite repeated efforts of the enemy to commit acts of sabotage against the lines of communication and other strategic installations of this region, not a single subversive act has occurred since the First Battalion of the 65th Infantry, under the command of Major Charles A. Rowi
R. Rivera Bermudez, of Coamo, took charge of an important part of the security of the area, attached directly to the Seventh Army of Lieutenant General Alexander M. Patch. There have been many occasions when German paratroopers and spies, wearing American Army uniforms or civilian clothes, have tried to damage vital installations, but each time the enemy agents have been thwarted by the zeal of the Puerto Rican sentries. So commendable has been the work* quo
The First Battalion of the 65th Battalion has been given official citation
in this sense, that the commanding officer of one of the supply depots of this region recently declared that "I would rather have one of these Puerto Ricans on guard duty than ten ordinary soldiers". "The Puerto Ricans," he said, "have friends enough when they are off duty, but while they are at work they have no friends and are occupied only in carrying out orders received." These sentences are contained in (Continued on ¡t page lí.)
British forces on their way to the city of Munster.
> Hr - -" H H ■"h f B I hr. i K|T/: \ . a jvn OH GERMANY.-British troops and transports advance through the German town of Stadtlohn, reduced to rubble, on their way to the city of Munster, which is already in the possession of the Allied armies. - (Official British photograph, distributed by the Acmé agency).
The case of the SI6,000 was filed yesterday Prosecutors alleged that they did not have enough evidence against Pin Vizcarrondo The filing and dismissal of the case against Felipe (Pin) Vizcarrondo for an alleged crime of grand larceny was ordered yesterday by Judge Marcelino Romany, of the District Court of San Juan, after having taken cognizance of a motion in that sense presented to the Court by prosecutors José C. Aponte and Julio Suárez Gardga. Vizcarrondo was accused of being the author of the theft of $16,000, -amount that in January 1944 disappeared from the Negociado del Impuesto de la Victoria, in the Insular Treasury'. It was prosecutor José C. Aponte who addressed the Court to file the motion, which copied verbatim reads as follows: "The People of Puerto Rico, represented by the undersigned attorneys, appear before this honorable Court and respectfully submits, alleges and requests: 1* That we have been appointed by the Attorney General of Puerto Rico to represent the People of Puerto Rico in the case of epigraph, and that we have been appointed by the Attorney General of Puerto (continued on page 18).
Muñoz would have to convince majority in favor of Hollín ger
House passed the language bill yesterday.
If he fails to do so, the appointment will not be
confirmed. Nominating Committee members will move to have the nomination withdrawn.
Only dissenting vote was Triarte - Cited Aibizu Campos and Muñoz
Unless the President of the Popular Democratic Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, succeeds in convincing the majority of the Senate otherwise, the appointment of Mr. Joshua Kellinger as Chief of the Island Police will not be confirmed by the Upper House.
In more or less the same attitude is the majority "of the Popular Senators, regarding the appointment of Mrs. Haydéo de San Miguel as Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico. They are not inclined to confirm her. Both appointments will be discussed definitively during the course of this week or early next week by the caucus of the full congressional majority. Last night, the Senate Nominations Committee met under the chairmanship of Senator Santiago R. Palmer and with the attendance of Senators Barreto Pérez, Isérn Aponte, Garda, Fonfrlar, Anselml, Gélgel Polanco, Dávlla Monsanto and Figueroa. The appointments which it was agreed in principle to recommend favorably to the Senate and those which it was agreed to recommend to be rejected have not been made public. We were informed,,however,,that there was a feeler as to the appointment of Mr. Joshua Helllnger to Chief of the In-
sulur for the purpose of determining how many members of the Committee favor his confirmation and how many his rejection. Only the Chairman of said body, Senator Santiago R. Palmer, did not oppose the confirmation. The other senators of the parliamentary majority were in favor of rejecting the appointment. We were informed that in view of the fact that it is understood that Mr. Muñoz Marín does not agree with the rejection, the Popular Senators of the Appointments Committee will meet with him to see if it is possible to ask the Governor to withdraw the aforementioned appointment from the Senate. More or less the same attitude was assumed by the Popular Senators on the Nominating Committee with respect to the appointment of Mrs. Haydéo de San Miguel as Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico, although it is reported that it will not take as much pressure as in the case of Mr. Helllnger to change their minds. c Both appointments, it is reported, will be finally considered by the caucus of the congressional majority from one moment to the next. No agreement of any kind was taken by the Nominating Committee.(Continued on page 3.) - PIÑERO'S LETTER TO GO TO ROOSEVELT WASHINGTON, 6. (PU) - K1 Presidential Secretary William D. Hassett today wrote a letter to Resident Commissioner Plftero acknowledging receipt of his letter urging prompt action by the President on the nomlr amlents of Attorney General and dues of the Island Supreme Court. Hassett tells Plftero that he will bring his letter to the President's attention, expressing assurances that Roosevelt will appreciate Plftero's presentation of his views on the matter.
A lively debate arose yesterday afternoon in the House of Representatives when Senator Arjona Siaca's S. 26, "providing for the exclusive use of the Spanish language for teaching in all the schools of Puerto Rico", was discussed in the full committee. Celestino Irlarte, the only representative who argued against the bill, stated that "this is the most important measure to be discussed in the House this session*' and added that it was not true that "learning in English subjects children to torture.
Russian troops have made good progress
German resistance is growing more intense, according to Moscow itself The time is near, said radio Berlin The three-sided assault on Vienna continues. Russians occupy suburbs For ROBERT MUSEL LONDON, 6. (PU)-While Soviet forces assault the city of Vienna on three sides and overrun it on another to ram towards the Bavlera, Russian and German reports indicate that a great battle is going on on the approaches to Berlin, a battle which is perhaps at this moment in full fury. The Soviet high command maintains absolute reserve on the Berlin front, but unofficial sources in Moscow announced that Russian troops are making good progress in the direction of the German capital, from the bridgehead over the Oder River, distsnte about 30 miles to the east. They added that the enemy's resistance is becoming more and more intense. Berlin radio reported that the Soviets are throwing the heaviest weight of their armies into the Goerltz and GuberiT 1 areas southeast of Berlin, and that "the hour is approaching when the storm will break out". This German news referred to the possibility of a three-way attack on Berlin, from the southeast, from Custrlm and from the Oder estuary at Stettin, against the approaches to the capital in the northeast, In the south of the eastern front, the Third Ukrainian Army, commanded by Marshal Tolbukhin, penetrated 14 miles into Austria, from the southwest of Hungary, and has reached Feldbach, located less than 20 miles from the great industrial center of Graz. Reports from Moscow say that Vlcna 1)® wri'áda on three sides and that Tolbukhin units have entered the suburb of Simmering, on the eastern fringes of the city, where the main installations of the capital's gas and electric utilities are located. Similarly, the Russian high command announced the conquest of the large Industrial suburb of Schwechat, on the southeastern side of Vienna.' It was also reported that other Soviet forces, ai cutting the main ferroVla leading from Vienna n Llnz and Munich, have made a wide flanking movement in the direction of the Bavlera frontier. Although resistance in Vienna is said to be much fiercer at the Presburg (Bratislava), the Soviets have surrounded the city with such rapidity and have overrun its suburbs in such a manner that it is doubted whether the Germans could have or(Continued on page 18.)
Rivera Martínez urges unity of settlers, producers, workers, etc.
He stresses that "it is imperative" to defend the rights of Puerto Rico -He considers that increases in the sugar industry are not a substantial improvement.
Upon his return to Puerto Rico, "1 president of the Free Federation of Workers of Puerto Rico, Mr. Prudencio Rivera Martínez, launches an invitation "so that all the united interests can obtain the necessary protection for our people", He says that "the united action of all the working forces of the pals with the producers and settlers, is now more imperative than ever, we want to save the future of all". Mr. Rivera Martinez authorized the following statements: "As I rejoin the active service of our Federation to resume the duties of my position, I wish to extend a cordial greeting to all the members of our organization. "In the same way I wish now to personally reiterate my warmest congratulations to all the workers of the sugar industry, field and factory workers, and most especially to the leaders of the unions of which they are members, as well as to the members of the sugar unions of which they are members, as well as to the workers of the sugar industry.
Caucus approved $20,000,000 to Cia. An additional sum of ten million dollars shall be appropriated by the Legislature to the Banco de Fomento de Puerto Rico, to increase its financial facilities, as a consequence of the recommendation to that effect made by the Treasury Committee of the House of Representatives to the caucus of the legislators of the majority, which gave its approval after hearing an extensive presentation by the House of Representatives, which approved the appropriation of $810,000,000 to the Banco de Fomento de Puerto Rico.
New Japanese premier
A". Kantaro Suciikl, chairman of the Japanese Privy Council and former commander of the Japanese Navy, who was called upon by Emperor Hirohito to form a new cabinet upon the resignation of Prime Minister Kolso. Suzuki is considered to have moderate tendencies. (ACME photo) Farmers insist on higher pay They say 55c. was provisionally accepted. Senate investigation requested The governing bodies of the 1? Asociación do Agricultores y del Sector de Colonos de Caña, reunk d or yesterday to hear the Report of the president of the agricultural entilad, licenciado José Ramót Quiñones, on his dealings in Wáshlngton regarding the country's agriculture, approved a resolution declaring that "the directors of the Colonos Sector were obliged " to accept provisionally the 55 cents sugar baldío s "; reaffirming their statement that such a subsidy is "Unjust and will cause the ruin of thousands of small farmers: e Insisting on the request that the Investigation conducted by a federal Senate subcommittee on food be extended to the Island's sugar industry. (Continued on page 3.) I n v c s tigation in the Washington Office of Enviudo Supplies, here on a mission to be carried out in 48 states' On a mission entrusted to him by the office of the Comptroller General of the United States, Pedro Gotay is on the Island, who, according to reports gathered yesterday, will be auditing the Office of Supplies of the War Food Administration. When Gotay was questioned about the scope of his work on the island, he limited himself to saying that "the investigation is of a confidential nature". " Continued on page 13.)
THE WAR IN SYNTHESIS
WESTERN FRONT: The Allied "armies" are advancing on the city of Hanover and the great ports of Bremen and Hamhuego, forcing the Nasls to retreat to the Elha river line and towards Berlin. An unconfirmed dispatch last night placed the British within two miles of Hpnnóver. Bremen, Germany's second port, has been outflanked by the eur as Im allied forces reached Ntolsenau. Lga towns of Meiningen and Eisenach, on the Third Army frapte; H">nm, on the Ruhr and Diepholz, on the route to Bremen, were fully occupied yesterday by loa Alladoa.
RUSSIAN-GERMAN FRONT: The city of Vienna has been surrounded on three sides since yesterday, while on the other side it has been overrun by the Russians advancing towards Bavaria. PACIFIC FRONT i U.S. Airborne Infantry troops seized Lucena, capital of the province of Tayabas, Luzon. American fighters shot down some 1M Japanese planes which tried to attack U.S. fleet units in the Byuityu tolaa.