THE MONDO
sassssssssssssssmssssaes" 36 Pages 5 Ctvs. -> 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
YEAR XXVII
NUMERITWS
YANKS OCCUPIED NUREMBERG RUSSIANS WITHIN 7 MILES BERLIN
Chaplain of the 65th describes 'entry into Nazi Germany
Grueao of the Regiment reached enemy Alíelo on Good Friday Mass was celebrated on Easter Sunday The crucifixion that Germany itself sought in following Hiller By MKÍÍÍrj.'Á. RANTIN War Correspondent rie V EG WORLD " WITH THE "5 OF INFANTRY IN GERMANY. - (Received by military bomber and through the United Press)-Asking Dloa's blessing on all of us" at the Easter Sunday Mass celebrated on German soil, Captain Raymond M. Stadia, Catholic Captain of the Regiment, also asked that the next Easter Sunday Mass be heard by the 65th Infantry on Puerto Rican soil. We entered Germany with the bulk of the 65th, in the same jeep of the capltin Stadta and with him we shared the emotions of having violated the very heart of the "Fe "tung Europa". At our request, Father Stadta has written the following about our entry into the Nazi territory: "We entered Germany on Good Friday. As I rode in my Jeep along German roads full of German war equipment, destroyed by fire and shrapnel; as I passed through German villages and towns destroyed by American artillery and aircraft; I could not help but think that this was a Good Friday Ierrlhleñiente see. (I lead for Germany. "But they were a crown of thorns and a crucifixion of their own making. Germany has rejected the Cross of Christ for the swastika of Hitler; she has chosen to follow Hitler on the path of cruel Imperialism, instead of following Christ on the path of peace and respect for Romanian rights. Germany has adopted as its moral code the principles and tactics of International gangsterism, rejecting the moral code of Christianity. "For two, three, four years, - it has subjugated * * Europe - its roaring war vines have taken over the roads of France, Belgium, Holland; northward, southward, eastward and westward. The swastika flag waved superbly over the great capitals of Europe. "But today the picture has changed - France is liberated; Belgium. Holland and the Balkans are no longer occupied by the Germans; on the contrary, Germany is occupied; and where the swastika once waved from every rooftop, today the stripes and stars waved. St. Germany celebrated Holy Week desolated by the storms it spawned to desolate other nations; crowned by the thorns it tried to place on the heads of others; crucified on the cruel and crooked gamma cross. I thought of all this as the bulk of '65 entered Germany. I thought of Puerto Rico. In San Juan a grandiose religious procession is being held today, with a great number of people in the streets of San Juan, with their heads crucified on the cruel and twisted gamoda cross.
The Silver Star to Captain Gilormini for a heroic act He dived to put out the fire on my plane, and continued to fight until he eliminated a German convoy and the bridge of (.onetto IN,A BASE OF I.A TWELFTH NORTH AMERICAN AIR FORCE IN ITALY, - The "lemans on the Italian frontier have discovered ron deep, disgust that Captain Mli'hnei Gilormini, of Vaneo, is obstinate in doing cosns his own way. And, in fact, that habit has earned Captain Gilormini the Pialar Medal.
That honor was awarded to the aviator as a result of a mission in which he refused to abandon an attack on vital enemy targets, even when his plane's engine had been licked by Nazi anti-aircraft fire and flames engulfed his P-47 as it flew over the battle zone. Captain Gilormini, son of Mr. Domingo Glto(mlnl ,v wife, of Yauco, was able to relieve his detrrlorada machine; he swooped down to put out the fire - and retook his position as flight leader in an attack that seriously wrecked German road and railroad transport equipment, The official orders announcing the award of the Píala Medal read in part as follows: "The Píala Medal was awarded to the Germans. The official orders announcing the award of the Píala Medal read in part as follows: "On November 4, 1944, Captain Gilormini led a formation of eight aircraft, composed of fighter bombers, in an attack on the railroad bridge at Conneto, Italy. Masterfully maneuvering through (Continued on page 30."
■A.Michael Gilormini
Farmers call for 1946 subsidy to be announced this month.
The aim is that harvesters "know how to (foot alenerse in terms of new sowings." - Nido asks Triple A to pay deficiency caused by the drought
As reported in yesterday's edition of EL MUNDO, the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rico Farmers Association, meeting in San Juan, agreed to address the federal authorities, insisting that the offer of the sugar subsidy for the next harvest be made this month, so that the sugarcane growers "know what to expect with respect to their new plantings".
The meeting was held under the chairmanship of Mr. José Ramón Quiñones, president of the agricultural entity, who requested that an agreement be reached in this sense. Mr. Quiñones was authorized to send a cable to the Agricultural Credit Corporation, imposing the agreement. The Board of Directors did not consider yesterday the matter related to the resignation of the Secretary-Treasurer, Mr. Horacio García, who yesterday submitted his resignation in writing to the Chairman, and it is understood that he will insist with Mr. Garda to withdraw his resignation and continue in his position. On the other hand, and by virtue of an approved resolution, the president of the Colonos de Caña Sector, Mr. Pedro Nido, addressed a letter yesterday to the director of the Agricultural Adjustment Agency, Mr. Garibaldi La Guardia, requesting that an investigation be carried out for this agenda, The drought situation reported in this letter "has occurred in such aggravating proportions as last year -affecting fundamentally the production of sugarcane in a large part of Puerto Rico, for the crop being harvested- from the month of ■ ■ ■ ■
October next past, until a few days ago this month." "31 bien os certain that in its letter riel January 18, 1945" - added- "" the comunleadón .- "in reply to a resolution passed at our annual meeting in connection with this matter, you expressed the view that each harvester concerned, at the end of the harvest, should send a certificate from his headquarters to the Administration, for it to act in each case individually; it seems to me that, in view of the extent to which the Island of Puerto Rico has been affected by the drought factor this year, it is appropriate to act in a manner similar to that used by the Agency with respect to last year, that is, to determine that there has existed in Puerto Rico a general situation caused by the drought, that a deficiency payment be made to all those producers who deserve it in accordance with the existing regulations, and that the Agency, which you so worthily direct, immediately proceed to begin the investigation of the production obtained by each farm and specify the basic years* to be taken into account in the calculation of the deficiency payment.)
NAZISM COLLAPSES
What life is like in Berlin, a city where fear reigns supreme.
This report on the conditions inside the German capital, practically besieged by the Allied military forces, comes from a visit to Berlin by a European journalist who, for obvious reasons, cannot sign his own name. 14 information written for "Colliers" magazine, New York, is distributed by the In- " tarnarlonal News Service. NEW YORK (INS) - In the
In the crumbling streets of central Berlin, it takes an hour's walk today from Kreuzberg to Anhalter station, which was only a 20-minute walk before the Allied bombers began their relentless campaign against the capital. It was in this part of the city that I recently had an adventure, typical of Berlin these days. I was caught in the dusk outside the house, and was trying to find my way with the help of an electric flashlight. From
Suddenly shots rang out, and some shouting and imprecations, accompanied by the sound of many wooden soles against the pavement. Two men, running at full speed, rushed at me, and while one of them, pointing a torch in my face, was glaring at me, the other grabbed me tightly by the lapels. "Your papers!" roared a voice behind the torch. It was the so-called auxiliary police, who were performing a pat-down on their ma nager, because "♦ she had just committed a robbery nearby. They<
I was led to the nearest guard post, and while my papers were being examined, I had plenty of time to look around me. / On the walls hung posters in black and red, offering" various" amounts of reward for information leading to the arrest of such and such subjects - numerous murderers" and thieves". One of the" rewards amounted to ten thousand marks", for a robber; another offer, one thousand marks", stimulated the enlightened (Continued on page %.)
Nazi command recognizes disaster First city defenses annihilated by Soviet machinery Maneuver to encircle the capital Russian and Yankee patrols made contact yesterday in the vicinity of Dresden By ROBERT MUSE! LONDON. 20. iPU) Ls balsll* of Berlin lia enlixdo m its rulmlnsnle phase, whose development "'sié favoring weapons rt "l Sovl*t. Huge forces of troops and 'anks of Marshal Sinlin some onihlsllenrio will risk their bridgeheads west of the Oder and Nelssc rivers to make a gigantic enveloping movement against the Nazi c*. pHal. The Germans themselves have admitted that the Russians have penetrated "their own holding zone" of Berlin [ and are now within seven miles of the capital, which is ar- | rilating as a result of aerial bombardment. Simultaneously, Moscow made known this afternoon that Russian and American patrols have probably established liaison in the Dreade area, towards which are advancing the spearheads of the eldlonal column of the army of Marshal Konev and the patrols of the American Third Army commanded by General Patton. Another Polish army, commanded by "general Walther", participates with the Hopas of Konev to hear the onslaught towards Dzesde. The Polish First Army, under General Poplasky, is operating north of the Berlin front,
A Nazi spokesman said on Berlin radio that Soviet tank and infantry forces entered the Hangelsberg area a little over six and a half miles eastward from Berlin, on the main road leading to Frankfurt. He adds that these forces arrived, the Berlin defenses were sufficient. Likewise, the German high command admitted the serious setbacks suffered by the garrisons of the fortresses defending the capital, saying frankly that "the situation has worsened," Another* Nazi radio reports state that powerful Soviet forces are advancing directly on the German mainland between Muncheberg and Wriezen. The central group of these forces has reached Strausberg, less than ten miles from the capital, while the Left wing is already at Hangelsbajg, a little more than six and a half miles from Berlin. Although dispatches from Moscow received after the confirmation of the offensive against Berlin by the Russian high command say modestly that the Soviet armies have extended their bridgeheads on the Oder and Neisse rivers, it is known that the first defenses of Berlin have already been annihilated. * A communiqué from the Nazi allied command announced that the Russians had opened another breach in the southeast wing of Berlin's outer defenses. It adds that the" Russians rammed south of Cottbus and entered Kalau, which is 47 miles south of Berlin. They also reached Vetschau, five miles northeast of Kalau. The communist's account of the battle of Berlin has a pessimistic tone, for he confesses that at (Continued on page 3.)
Scene in a German crumbling crumbling city
WESTERN FRONT The American Seventh Army seized Nuremberg, where in the "last hour" of a,ser ended the organized realstencl. of the enemy. Forces of the same Army are now advancing towards Munich. The British Second Army was last night less than a mile from Hamburg. North of Brunswick the German force which the day before yesterday was repulsed against the Ninth Army. Patton is still advancing in Czechoslovakia. RUSSIAN-GERMAN FRONT. - Berlin said yesterday that Russian troops are now within seven miles of the German capital.
Patch defeated there the last resistance Launched in Aeguid.i divisions h li n d r d r - Miaría city of MnnirK English only 7 miles Hamburg The Third Army continues - liarla ( hrroesInvRquiR. Triumph dr Leipzig Pro BRVCK Ml NN PARIS, 20. (PU) Hilary's Septlme Army" United" "e ap*detted from Nuremberg, where in the - last, hour, today ended the r*,i*tence na/l organized. The t*nimle gene: al Patch launched do" armored divisions" towards Munich n "ra Start the battle for that reduelo hitleriala, supported, by hundreds of aircraft that are destroying the line" German* and the, column* da : enemy troops, which brought from ímr í ask that lo, noj teamericano, lle' guen to Munich. In the north, the British Second Army has moved closer to Hamburg and is now within seven miles of this important port. Other British armored forces have reached the Elbe River, on a 15-mile front to the southeast, and are fighting for a point 112 miles northwest of Berlin. ' To the northeast, the American First Army eliminated another Nazi pocket in the center of Leipzig, a city already held by the Americans." Some 150 Germans who were holding out in the Napoleon monument were rlniltraded at dawn, twelve hours after the rest of the garrison had capitulated. () The final battle in Nuremberg was concentrated in an area of little more than a square mile, in the center of the ruined city. The American artillery 3 posed 3 opened huge" boqueItes in the wall d* 1* fortress where they speak refugee do lo" Germans and poro later ]g infantry j anquí forced to surrender to lo., survivors. In I.eipzig, nearly sd, thousand Nazis were captured in the last 24 hours, bringing to 27,627 the total number of enemy prisoners taken during the week-long battle for that city. Also falling into । American hands were two German generals and 1,000 anti-aircraft guns" which will make Leipzig one of the most difficult targets of aerial bombardment in a month. - Another German force to the north riel 1 Ninth U.S. Army tu- - fried a gta\e setback after con- ■ traatacacar el flanco norte rie las ' force" yanqui". The" Germans Jen- - zed yesterday an armored division and infantry will "over the flank [ ! of the Ninth Army, northeast of Brunswick, peto after advancing i 15 miles ha,la the wooded area rie . Kloetz were dispersed this morning by a strong American onslaught. Both divisions now consisted of groups of 50 to 60 isolated Nazis, which were gradually annihilated. The 11th Armored Division* under Lieutenant General Paitan charged from the Bayreuth sector and after advancing 16 miles penetrated into Gr "fenwe "er, which is * 19 miles from the Czecho-Slovak border. Another armored column advanced six miles eastward to reach a point less than 11 miles northeast of Grafenweser. In addition, three infantry Ti visions of the Third Army are advancing on the Czecho-Slovak border on a front more than 60 miles north and northeast of Grafenweser, while elements of the 90th Division are already more than eu*. I (Continued on page 20),
THE WAR IN SYNTHESIS
mana, in Hangekherg, admitting that the Soviets* have entered "I* same son* of defenI m" of Berlin. Moscow milestone saher that Russian and American" patrols" probably established liaison in the Dreade son*. The Russians are approaching Kamens, less than 20 miles northeast of Dreade. ITALY FRONT.-Troops* of the Fifth Army entered the Po valley and cut off the No. 9 earretera one" dies miles "I west of Rolonld. They reached the outskirts of Casa lace hi o. The Eighth advanced from Porto e ¡ Msgglore. (Continued on page 20.), J
N® nqSS 5 !" bought, the co quo quisto liquidate Hitler.
1 LA MAÑANA NEWSPAPER SAN JUAN, P.~R. - SATURDAY, APRIL 21, 194$.
I '1 I I II J 1 ' 'Sfi " KW ...I . _ ■ Af" B 1 m y i n■ iipiip VA German woman wc stops near the handcart loaded with the, belongings" she was able to salvage from war-torn nu rasa to observe an eight-inch rie cannon" and other" units of the" United States military" force" passing through the devastated section of the town of Aschaffenburg The German woman's youngest son runs beside her. The "ruin" of the building in the background is still smoking (Associated Press photo by James Pringle for the "poor' of war photographs).
OAP to freeze prices at restaurants Final order awaits approval of measure prepared in San Juan Food prices in the restaurants in the rosiauianles of Puedo Rico will be frozen.
Muñoz Marín will embark for Washington in a moment
He will appear at the hearings on the Tvdings project. - No resolution yet on sending legislative commission to status management
prepared in San Juan The prices of meals in the reatauunle* of Puerto Rico will be frozen* next week by the Office of Revenue Administration. The freeze will be effective as soon as Washington "proves an order that was prepared" by the Legal Division of the OAP office in San Juan. When the new order becomes effective, all prices will be fixed at the October 1944 levels, according to information supplied by the restaurant owners. As a first step in regulating these prices, the 'OAP received price lists' from each owner which included the 'prices' to be regulated as of a certain date in October, The new order will give effect to the 'prices' as the maximums which each restaurant may charge, and a certified list of these prices is to be prominently displayed at each location. The d l "edor of the OAP. Mr. Sam GlUtiap, said last night that about ten 1 ! percent of Jo, reatauran(Continued on page 20)
The president of the Popular Party pemoci ático, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin, leaves at any moment for Washington. where he will remain for rio, weeks at sutnn. He intends to appear at the public hearing to be held, beginning next Monday, by the U.S. Senate Committee on Territories or the Senate Committee on Ways and Means, in connection with the bill
Tydlng" providing for Independence for Puerto Rico. It will promote in the congressional circuits the concurrent resolution approved by the Insular Legislative Assembly, by virtue of which it requests the approval of a law implementing the alternatives on the definitive political status for Puerto Rico that said Congress is willing to implement, having any of them the approval of the people of Puerto Rico, "in such a way that our people may clearly know the mutual economic relations and the recognition of mutual moral obligations that would exist under each of the alternatives that the Congress may present. Mr. Muñoz Marin has made no specific mention of the steps he has in mind to take in Washington. So he has reported in general terms that (Continued on page 20>
(anco measures signed a y c r the . Governor TugWel! signed yesterday five bills" approved" by the Island Legislature, viz: Act No. 27, which authorizes the Governor to hire the services of experts to investigate the tax system of the Insular Government and recommend necessary changes. Said Act allocates the amount of $1()O,(XX) for this purpose. Act No. 25, which authorizes the Supreme Court to issue regulations regarding the conduct of judicial officers. Act No. 28, which appropriates $50,000 from the Insular Treasury fund to increase certain items of the budget of the Insular Police for fiscal year 1944 45, Act No. 2t". which appropriates $35,000 (KM) to increase the item entitled "Department of the Interior, Division of Public Buildings and Municipal Works, General Expenses, Constructions, Maintenance and Repairs of Public Buildings" and Lands belonging" thereto,' Including the. Purchase of the Machinery Necessary to perform the Work" by Administration. Act No. 29. which eliminates the $5,000 (KM),000 restriction fixed to the bonus, omitted, by the Communications Authority, (Continued on page 20J').
House Committee did not
investigate the Presidio insular
Aiiarlmi reports rilo a? due to work congestion at the eleventh hour. - Daily rations to inmates in prisons and other institutions.
The Legislative Assembly ended its" work without the committee appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives to investigate the Insular Penitentiary in Rio Pieriia" having completed its work. The primary reason was that the said committee was appointed when the Legislature was nearing its end and when, between caucuses and sessions, the legislators had to be almost continually at the Capitol. In-ular. This committee, of which Representative Monserrate Anselm was appointed chairman, will not be able to work officially during the legislative recess period, since it was not authorized to do so by the House of Representatives. He may, "however, visit" the criminal ln "tltuclóh and obtain all the "necessary data" to take any action, in the next ordinary "ealon of the Legislature. As is generally known, as it has been published in EL MUNDO, the committee chaired by Representative Anselm was appointed at his request, who made his own a suggestion to that effect from the Lions Club of Rio Piedras, which investigated the Presidio Insular, and then sent a comprehensive report to the Legislature. On the other hand, Rep. Alfonso Bujoaa has received from the Acting Attorney General, Lic.
Acting Attorney General, Mr. Jesús A. González, a report on the types of daily rations fixed" for the feeding of the inmates" in the Insular Penitentiary, District Prisons, Industrial Schools" for Boys and Girls" and the Juvenile Home. This information responds to a request made in camera by Representative Bujoa. According to this Report, the ordinary ration for Jos inmates in the PenKenciaria Insular is fourteen cents" daily" and the special ration for sick" and employee" is thirty cents". He added that "in addition to the radon Upo indicated, h. prisoners" in the Penitenciarla use the products" of the farm and in addition, often slaughter pig" of what" they have in the pigsty of this dependence, for the feeding of the confined", which represents an increase of one cent to one and a half cents for each prisoner". It also says that "the allocation for the feeding of the prisoners of this Institution does not allow to increase the ration amount, because it is limited and that is why fourteen cents per day was fixed" adding that "although this amount is low, there is the advantage that in this unit there is a large number of inmates" (1.39T) and that (Continued on page 20)
alnfered a" second ciaos matter. Post Office, San Juan, Y. R.