THE N®N DO
34 Pages 5 Ctv". 2 Sections
34 Pages 5 Ctvs. " - 2 Sections
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVII
Accelerate victory in ol Pacific by buying more war bonds.
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, JULY 7, 1945
Entered as second elaae matter. Foot Otfloa, Saa Juan. F. B
NUMBER 10522
Dispute with CCA expected
Would be with Puerto Rican producers; these with backing Congress Relates to 1947 program Wilson does not favor making announcement. - Pace favors making Pot CHARLES McCABE WASHINGTON, 0. (PU)-Inaularea officials have seen the likelihood of a lively dispute between the CCA, on the one hand, and the Puerto Rican sugar producers, on the other, strongly supported by Congress, over the question of the purchase of the 1947 sugar crop. The problem has been brought into focus by the publication today of the text of Earl R. Wilson's testimony on the matter before the House Special Committee investigating the food shortage, chaired by former Representative Clinton P. Anderson. The vigorous congressional dissent from the views expressed by Wilson during the hearings before that Committee is also considered significant. It will be recalled that Dudley Smith, representative in Washington of the Puerto Rican sugar producers, omitted a demand last week that the 1947 sugar program be announced if the Government wishes to see any substantial increase in production that year. Smith's demand followed a statement that "it is too late now" to do anything about the 1940 production increase; and this view was later reiterated by Jose Ramon Quihones, president of the Farmers Association. Wilson could not be reached by telephone because he is on vacation, but, since his present views are those expressed before the Food Shortage Investigating Committee, I can only assume that there is no provision for an early announcement of the 1947 sugar program by the U.S. Government. Responding to questioning by Stephen Paco of Georgia, Wilson told the committee plainly: "I do not believe that (the announcement of the 1947 program) will contribute anything at this stage of the situation. The Government's wartime sugar operations are based on the assumption that there will be shortages. Unquestionably, there will be sugar shortages throughout 1940, although the supply situation should be much better than it was in 1940". He then added, "We believe there will be enough sugar in 1947 to meet the demands. Pace asked him again, "IF you anticipate a shortage in 1940, why is it not a wise thing to go ahead with the purchase of the 1947 production"; to which Wilson replied, "I personally believe that buying beyond the shortage period will present very serious problems to the Government. If this ends the control period with surplus sugar, it is going to have to confront the problem of having that sugar in competition with the production that is then going to the market. Congressman Pace then expressed his disagreement with Wilson's views on the surplus issue, pointing to the fact that the military authorities were not concerned about shortages when fighting the European war. The representative continued his exchange of ideas with Wilson on the purchase of the harvest.
Quiñones greets new Secretary of Agriculture
i 9 T| ?
The president of the Puerto Rico Farmers Association, Ledo. Jose Ramon Quiñones (right) was among the first visitors to the new U.S. Secretary of Agriculture, Mr. Clinton P. Anderson, shortly after he took the oath of office in Washington. Quiñones offered Mr. Anderson the congratulations and cooperation of the Puerto Rican agricultural organization (Photo by Associated Press).
The Administrator of the Division of Hours and Wages and Public Contracts has amended Section S45.ll of the regulations for home work in the needle industry in Puerto Rico, adding and amending piece rates for operations related to the sewing of hand seams on machine sewn corners of handkerchiefs. The piece prices for hand selvage sewing in corners are as follows: Hand selvedge on machine sewn scarf corners Operation 13. Hand selvedge on one side of corner only. The price per piece will apply under the following conditions: " a) The hand selvedge shall extend to the end of one side of each corner; and on the other side, the space available for hand selvedging the corner shall not be less than one-quarter inch nor more than one inch; and, b) Hand selvedge shall be made on only one side of each corner; and the hand selvedge shall not exceed one inch in length. 10 cents per dozen handkerchiefs. 14. Hand selvage on both sides of the corner. The price per piece shall apply under the following conditions; a) The machine selvage shall not extend to the end of either side of the corner, and the available spacing for hand selvage on each corner shall not be less than one-quarter inch nor more than one inch; and b) Hand selvage shall be made on both sides of the corner, but the hand selvage shall not extend more than one inch on either side of the corner. 20 cents per dozen handkerchiefs. 15. Hand selvage on both sides of corner. The price per piece will apply under the following conditions; a) The machine selvage will extend to the end of one side of each corner; and on the other side, the space available for hand selvage on the corner will not extend more than one inch on either side of the corner; b) The machine selvage will extend to the end of one side of the corner; and on the other side, the space available for hand selvage on the corner will not extend more than one inch on either side of the corner.
Edwin G. Arnold, is the new chief
He was a professor at Prineeton University and currently holds a senior position at UNRRA.-Jolin R. Fahy deputy chief of the Division of Territories.
For CHARLES MC CABE WASHINGTON, 6. (PU) - Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes today announced the appointment of Edwin G. Arnold, head of UNRA's Far West Division and former Prineeton University professor, to head the Division of Territories and Insular Possessions, replacing Benjamin Thoron, who resigned effective July 1. - Ickes also announced the appointment of John B. Fahy as Arnold's deputy, replacing Mrs. Ruth Hampton, who resigned several months ago. The Secretary said that both Arnold and Fahy were sworn into office immediately. Until today's announcement by Secretary Ickes of Professor Arnold's appointment, there was no way to notice any indication of his appointment. Thoron's position has been filled, for the past few days, by John R. Fahy, with the title of acting director. Fahy, who for several years has been an official of the Department of the Interior, and who has been in Puerto Rico and has experience of its problems, has been on the payroll of the department as "special assistant to the Secretary of the Interior. ; Professor Arnold replaces Benjamin Thoron, after two years of the latter's service as Director of the Division of Territory and Insular Possessions (a position in which he replaced Dr. Rupert Emerson at the end of June, 1943), who had retired from public service to engage in private business, had already had extensive experience and knowledge of Puerto Rico, because he had been connected with the Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration, of which he had also been an administrator since his induction to the Territorial Division. These new appointments, with the recent appointment of Mason Rare to replace Wiliam A. Brophy in the Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands Section of the Department of the Interior, complete the reorganization of the territorial administration, (continued on page 18).
D e u <1 a of San ■ Juan rises to i $3,947,400 ' It was contracted for a ; number of improvements, by ' previous administration The Government of San Juan owes by way of borrowings contracted. the sum of $3,947,400. as of । June 30 last spoke paid only $1,807,589.84, out of a total debt * of $5,854,989.84. . These borrowings correspond to i bond issues, promissory notes, bank antis cipos and advances of con- , trlbuclones. The most important are covered by the proceeds of property loans. Most of these were contracted by the municipal administration, with the funds being used for construction and improvement of asylums, hospitals, streets, aqueducts, schools, schools, schools, schools, payment of salaries and other public improvements. The following is a summary of the municipal borrowings of refeR renda: Issuance of bonds in 1939, in the ' sum of $1,045,000, to be paid from a tax of 17 percent and one percent on the proplel. dnd. It matures in 1962, only $160,000 having been paid. The funds were earmarked for the construction of nursing homes, hospitals, streets and other public improvements. Issue of $511,000 in honors, ' for public improvements. Contracted in the year 1938, maturing in 1966, $84,000 having been paid. 1 Bond issue in 1938 in the sum of $82,000 for improvements to the , aqueduct, to be paid from a con- , trlbuclon on the property, of ,3 percent of one percent. . Matures in 1962, having paid . $18,000, 1 $241,000 bond issue, contracted in 1935. Matures in 1965, having paid $51,000 . Bond issue of $550,000, contracted in 1922. The funds were used for school construction and were paid from a property tax levy. Issuance of $2,500,000 bonds for public improvements, to be paid from the proceeds of a property tax levy. The $650,000 has been paid and matures in 1968. * Notes for $15,000, $75,000, $85,000, $390,000 and $6,000, for improvements to the aqueduct. These notes are payable in annual payments. An advance from Banco Popular in the amount of $80,000, for public improvements. Advances from the Island Government in the amounts of $207,328.23 and $67,661.01 obtained in 1944 for payment of salaries and wages.
TA decides to purchase "Cambalache" At its meeting yesterday, the Puerto Rico Authority unanimously agreed to purchase the Cambalache Plant for $1,975,000, which price includes the factory, tracks, locomotives and other rolling stock, material stores with their exlstenclss and all the buildings. This transfer includes the easements, rights and franchises that the Central Cambalache enjoys today.
Memoirs of Count Ciano The Duce was about to ask Greece for a truce.
From November 1, 1940, to January 1, 1944 In the early days of 1940 the Duce, who had the grandiose dream of an empire, was forced to make an abject plea to the Germans to get him out of the troubles he was experiencing in Albania and Egypt, where his boastful divisions had been torn to pieces, according to the memoirs of Count Galeazzo Ciano, Mussolini's son and Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs. Within eight days after the attack against the Greeks, Ciano regretfully admitted that the initiative had passed into the hands of the Macedonian "rough fighters". Within weeks after that attack, Mussolini had resigned himself to the idea of asking for an armament and it was only at the last moment that he was persuaded not to do so.
; ■ ' a. ■3F A W
The English coup was unloaded in Egypt on December 9 and the cup was filled when the Duce discovered that his commander in Albania, General Soddu, spent his nights composing music for talking pictures. Ciano says: November 1.-"The sun finally rises. I take advantage of this to make an excellent bombardment of Salonika (Greek port in *1 Aegean Sea). On the way back I am attacked by Greek planes. Everything turned out well, but I must confess that the feeling is not very beautiful." - Mussolini does not feel happy about the way the situation in Greece is developing. The attack on Gorltza takes place, the enemy achieves some progress and the fact becomes palpable that on the eighth day of operations the Initiative has passed on to the Greek side" (Continued on page 18).
Marshal Badogllo
Preliminary bases are approved to structure the unity of the insular workers' organizations.
They will not lift the restriction on rice It was given after a conference between the heads of OS and OAP The shortage of butter and soap continues । There will be no improvement in the ' import of red bean: Schroder 11 । Despite the fact that an increase in the rice quota has been obtained, amounting to about , 4,000 tons monthly - from 6,000 sctuslly to about 10,- ' 000 - the Office of Price Administration J there will be no lifting of the ; restriction imposed on the sale of ' this commodity. This was decided yesterday after a conference between Mr. Roy Schroder, director of the Supply Bureau of the Federal Department of Agriculture, and the directors of the OAP. As Mr. Schrorier told an EL MUNDO reporter moments before the meeting began, the quota allocated to Puerto Rico of approximately 10,000 tons per month is the same as before rationing, adding that "it is my opinion that there will be enough rice in stock to lift the restrictions." After the conference the OAP territorial director stated that "despite the increase in the quota, the restriction will not be lifted." We learned later that after the exchange of views with Mr. Schroder, the OAP directors agreed that the distribution of rice would be made next Monday according to the quota already set by the rationing order, that is, 40 percent of the quantity purchased during the basic period, and that later a careful study of the situation would be made to see if it would be possible to lift the restrictions "without danger that the people would suffer." At the conference to which we have he(Continued on page .3.)
In its opinion issued yesterday - Associate Justice A. Cecil Snyder was the rapporteur - the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico separated Rafael Bosch from the practice of law in Puerto Rico for a period of one year. The high court concluded that Mr. Bosch performed acts constituting misconduct in the performance of his professional duties. The Court upheld its jurisdiction to disbar Mr. Bosch. That jurisdiction was denied by counsel for Mr. Bosch, alleging that he had never practiced law in Puerto Rico and that he was not a member of the Bar Association of Fue, to Rico. In resolving this point the Court held that "it may be admitted that he could not practice law in Puerto Rico unless he belonged to the Bar. But this was a purely formal and routine requirement that he could comply with at any time; his power to practice emanated from his oath before us, and not from his enrollment in the Bar. Once he is sworn in as an officer of this Court he may at any time be called to answer for his professional conduct so that this Court may determine whether our decision admitting him should be vacated. Indeed, to rule otherwise would be tantamount to permitting any local attorney threatened with such a proceeding simply to de-
No objection has been raised as to the aqueducts It is expected that by the end of this year they will all be under the Insular Service It is expected that before the end of the present fiscal year, the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Service will control the municipal water supply and sewage disposal systems. Act No. 40 of May 1, 1945, effective as of said date, transfers to this agency "all real, personal, mixed, corporeal and incorporeal property, of any kind whatsoever and in any place located, owned, operated or controlled by the Insular Sewerage Service, created by Act No. 16 of November 21, 1941," and "all such property as the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewerage Service, created by Act No. 16 of November 21, 1941" and "all such property as may be owned, operated or controlled by the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewerage Service, created by Act No. 16 of November 21, 1941", 1941" and "all those properties owned and operated or administered by the People of Puerto Rico or any of its political subdivisions, agencies, municipalities, or Instrumentslldades, which are used n primarily useful for the disposal of albaftal waters or for the supply of water for domestic, Industrial or commercial uses." These transfers are effective on dates to be determined by the Executive Council, - request of the AdmlContinued on page 18.)
For Juan Maldonado Editor of EL MUNDO With 278 passengers on board, the steamer "George Wáshlngton" arrived in San Juan yesterday afternoon, at exactly 2:35 o'clock, the first ship with civilian passengers to enter our port during the last four years. The passengers were mostly Puerto Ricans who had been away from the Island for more than 10 years, and many of them, as they stepped ashore, showed their joy "at stepping again on the soil of my homeland". When we were struck by the large number of children on board, a lady explained that "we did not want to risk the return trip, using another means of transportation". It was at 2:35 p.m. that the ship entered the port and anchored to await inspection by Customs and Health officials. One hour and 23 minutes later, it weighed anchor again, and assisted by a tugboat, began to maneuver to dock at Porto R|co Line's pier number 9. This maneuver took twenty-two minutes, amidst the impatience of the passengers on board and the families waiting outside the dock for their loved ones to return. During the course of the maneuver, the passengers on deck waved their paftans to all those on the dock, a small group due to the war restrictions that still exist. At 4:30 in the afternoon the ladder was set. The struggle of the passengers to be the first to set foot on Puerto Rican soil was noticeable from the shore, but this honor went to an American sailor. William Mac Griff, who (Continued on page 7)
Friends decide to publish the work of Rafael Martinez Nadal The commitment was made yesterday at the tomb of the procer, when paying tribute to him on the occasion of the fourth anniversary of his death.
Presided by the president of the Partido Unión Republicana Progreslita, Mr. Celestina Inerte, a large group of uniorrepubllcanos attended yesterday at 4:30 pm, at the Fournier Cemetery, in Isla Verde, on the occasion of the fourth anniversary of his death. Mr. Celestino Triarte, on behalf of the Partido Unión Republicana Progresista Progresista, placed a wreath on the tomb of the hero. Among the people who attended the cemetery were the president of the Unión Republicana, Mr. Irlarte, Mr. Celestino Triarte, on behalf of the Partido Unión Republicana Progresista.
n, Mr. Irlarte, Juan B. Soto, Adolfo García Veve, Gonzalo DI*go, Rafael Díaz Clntrón, Joaquín A, Becerrll, Luis Ramos Rodríguez, Fernando J. Gélgel, Jesús Mediavl11a Morey, Eduardo Ortiz Reyes, Ricardo Echevestre, Francisco Gelp!, Juan Falú Zarzuela and José L. Telemaco. In front of the tomb of the hero it was agreed, at the indication of Fernando J. Gélgel, to make all the necessary arrangements so that the work of the writer, journalist, tribune, politician, jurist and legislator of Mr. Martinez Nadal is printed as soon as possible, so that it will be recognized by the present and future generations of Puerto Ricans.
Supreme Court separates Bosch for a term of one year Concludes he performed acts of misconduct in the performance of his professional duties. Guilty on five counts
■ i Ledo. Rafael Bosch Je of paying his dues as a member of the Colegio. This would separate him from his matricula and then" could deny our jurisdiction to punish him on the ground that he was not a member of the Colegio. The Court adds that the Jurisprudence holds that a drowned person practicing in one jurisdiction can be punished for improper conduct occurring outside of it". Another of the cueitlone" raised by Mr. Botch's lawyers" (Continued on page 7.)
The 'George Washington' departs San Juanhoy with 277 passengers.
Arrived yesterday afternoon with an equal number aboard. - The first ship to bring
civilians to the Island in the last four years
Gallardo asks that double session be avoided He expresses this reduces the time the child spends in the classroom The Commissioner of Instruction, Dr. José M. Gallardo, has addressed you by circular letter to the superintendents of schools, recommending that every effort be made to avoid the systems of "interlocking" and double enrollment, in the elementary grades. "Due to the enormous increase in the enrollment of our schools," the circular states, "it has been necessary to organize some school groups under interlocking and dual enrollment plans. This situation has greatly affected the operation of urban elementary schools. As a result, the Department wishes to make its policy on this matter clear. "The organization of elementary school groups under interlocking or dual enrollment systems considerably reduces the time that young children spend in school. It also keeps them late in the morning and afternoon sessions. "On the other hand, the organization of the middle school under the ■tatem of "Interlocking" would make it possible for students" to have full" program" without auatancial loss in" class" time. This is especially true, if the programs are arranged so that the" student" have their academic" classes" one after the other, and return to school only to take their" vocaclonal classes. "For the above reasons, it is suggested that every effort be made to discontinue the organization of the elementary grades under the interlocking and dual enrollment systems." Another penicillin price cut Expanding on information published a few days ago, the Office*of Price Administration announced yesterday that it has already "e recommended another suhstan'clal price cut for retail penicillin. The new maximum prices of $1.45 and $2.25 per vial of 100,000 and 200,000 Oxford units, respectively, are expected to take effect within a day,
FLT and CGT sector heads met They appointed a committee in charge of receiving suggestions from unions A new meeting will be called soon Clause against colony provoked debate that threatened harmony For Antullo Rodrigue* (EL MUNDO Staff Writer) With the attendance of leaders of the two sectors of the General Confederation of Workers; of the Free Federation of Workers of Puerto Rico and a number of independent organizations, including the Drivers and Mechanics Union, Local No. 1 of San Juan and Obreros Obreros Obreros de San Juan, among others, the General Confederation of Workers (GCOW), the General Federation of Workers of Puerto Rico, and a number of independent organizations, among others, the Chauffeurs and Mechanics Union, Local No. 1 of San Juan and Obreros Obreros Obreros de San Juan, the General Confederation of Workers, Local No. 1 of San Juan. 1 of San Juan and Obreros Unidos de Ferrovias de Puerto Rico,-the announced preliminary meeting of labor unity was held on Thursday night, at the Raldorloty de Castro School, Raldorloty de Castro School, in this capital city. The meeting was called by the Drivers' Association of Puerto Rico and was presided over by the general secretary of the union, Mr. Alberto E. Sanchez. After lengthy discussions, which lasted from Thursday night until 2:30 a.m. yesterday, and after having approved the "basca tentative proposals for structuring labor unity" in Puerto Rico, which include the creation of the Labor Unity Council, a commission was appointed to receive suggestions from unions and individuals as to clauses* to be included* in said council. A proposition that the declaration of principle* should include the sentiment of the working class against the colony in Puerto Rico was left pending, to "er *be* submitted to the conventions of the various unions and independent unlone* and to a possible general convention of all the workers of Puerto Rico. There was a moment*, especially when it was being discussed whether or not the declaration against the colony should be included in the approved document, when it seemed that the parties would not reach an agreement and that this new attempt at labor unity would be frustrated. At the beginning of the meeting, Mr. Alberto E. Sanchez explained the reason for the meeting and called the roll, being present* representatives" of fourteen workers" organizations. By unanimous agreement, Mr. Sanchez continued as president and Mr. Miguel Torres acted as secretary of the ae' tas. Among those present were Messrs. Ramón Barreto Pérez and Francisco Colón Gordiany, presidents, respectively, of the two blind sectors; Prudencio Rivera Martínez and Nicolás Nogueras Riveia, president and general secretary of the FLT; Benigno Ortlz, president and general secretary of the FLT; Benigno Ortlz, from the Drivers' Association; Alberto Sánchez, for the Diamond Union; Miguel Torres, from Obreros Unido* de Ferrovla"; Raimundo Lebrón, from the Unión de Chóferes** y Mecánico* Núm. 1; Irene Torres Resto, of the Unión de Chóferes (FLT); Pedro Vega, of the Sindicato Azucarero (CGT); Ern**to Ramos Antonlnl, Sandalio Alonso, Antonio Arroyo, Ramón Alvarez Conde, Ella" Martínez, Héctor Gradan! Juan Santos Rivera and others. Also in attendance at the meeting as special* guest** were the mayor of Ponce, leflor André* Grillase* and Dr. José Lanauze Rolón. Preamble approved. After a minute of silence in memory of the labor leaders "who fell in the defense of the workers' cause" and the reading of a message from the "organizers of a new newspaper in Ponce," the meeting began to consider the "genera]**" points to be considered at the preliminary meeting of workers' unity. Ideas" on the subject were discussed and finally, on motion of the Secretary of Minutes", "eftor Torre", -1 Mr. " -■-■"ras Rivera read * u.i draft of "tentative bases" prepared by him and which had been submitted, prior to the meeting, to the different* (Indi-c-le" workers. The preamble of the document was read, the latter was unanimously approved, with a slight amendment. It reads as follows: "In order to set the basis for a conatructlve and fraternal understanding between the different labor organizations: to establish rules* and procedures* tending to unify the punishment and action of the working men* and women* and their leaders in the field of labor and the labor organization.