THE WORLD MORNING NEWSPAPER
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
38 Pages 5 Ctvs.
2 Sections"
YEAR XXVII
Let us support the men who made the Victory Loan possible.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 1945
Entered a# aecond claM matter, Po#t Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10395
Justice says Román García should not be paid
Believes legislator's "status" disqualifies him from Pension Board post Appointment removes him from CSC Concludes influence of legislator was what determined his selection ■■ - In an opinion rendered by neither the Attorney General nor the Auditor General of Puerto Rico, who consulted him on a payment of $244 to Rep. Alfonso Román Garda, the head of the Department of Justice states that he believes said legislator "is unfit to hold the position of accountant" in the Teachers' Pension Board, and recommends that the payment not be authorized" Referring to the details of Mr. Román Garda's appointment, the Attorney General states: "There is still more. The legislator does not extend to a usual appointment: he resorts to the expedient of a pvofeslonal service contract! a remuneration of $12 per day reduced to six hours (a shorter day than the ordinary one in the Government) is fixed: and, since it is not an ordinary appointment, the candidate is exempted from the effects of the Civil Service laws which guarantee the hiring of public employees on the basis of merit. In these circumstances*. it may be concluded that the influence of Mr. Román Garda played a great role in his selection. The full opinion of the Procu-1 rator reads as follows: "I acknowledge receipt of your letter of August 12, "Je last forwarding a copy of a contract granted in ¡ San Jupn by the president of the Board of Pensions for Teachers*, Dr. José M. Gallardo, and Mr. Alfonso Román Garda. In the aforementioned contract, Mr. Alfonso Román García obligated the aforementioned Board to perform, for an indefinite period, a position as bookkeeper for the compensation of two dollars per hour during a six day workday. You are aware that Mr. Alfonso Román García is able to perform the position in question "notwithstanding the provisions of the Organic Charter" and the fact that said Mr. Román García is a member of our House of Representatives. The need to approve the payment of the sum of $244.00 for services rendered in accordance with the aforementioned agreement for 122 hours during the period July 2 to July 31, 1045. Justifies his consultation. Considering the nature of the position of accountant, the nature of the rule contained in Article 30 of the Organic Charter - "No senator nr representative... shall, during his term of office, be appointed to any civil office under the Government of Puerto Rico" -, the "essential features of the position of Padrón Rivera, the "antecedents" and the "purpose" of the rule, as well as the consequences of a restrictive interpretation, my opinion is that Mr. Alfonso Román García is disqualified to perform the position. The position of accountant is a public employment. The aforementioned Pension Board is a creature of the legislature (Act No. 1R1 of March 10, 1945); a dependency of the Department of Instruction, whose elected president, an "ex-officio" member of the Board, is Commissioner 7 and 9). The" funds of the Board are, for the most part, subsidies from the Insular Government (Sections 2 and 4). 2.- The practical difficulties" (Continued on page 13.)
Colonel Roig sends message I to Puerto Rico He points out the concern of the soldiers and his own, in returning to the Island My greatest joy will be to arrive, says Army "cooks" rehearse the menu that will be served to the soldiers The following message by Colonel Salvador T. Roig. Roig, commanding officer of the 65th Infantry Regiment, was received yesterday, Friday, at the Headquarters of the Military Department of the Antilles: "After almost three years of absence, the Infantry Regiment is on its way back to Puerto Riro. During this period of time, as one more member of the unit, I have been able to appreciate the Puerto Rican soldier from every angle: his keen sense of responsibility, his tenacity in the performance of his duties, his spirit of fidelity and his exemplary rectitude and behavior. However, he has a constant restlessness for the Island and all that it represents: the beloved relatives, the Intlml¡ty of the distant home and all the set of impressions that make our Island our homeland. Because I know that after the long absence there is in everyone a tense anxiety to arrive at the warm bosom of home and because, as one of them, I participate in that same anxiety, I anticipate the greatest joy of my life, when the ship that carries us begins to enter the bay of San Juan". The 65th Regiment is expected to arrive in San Juan on Wednesday, Nov. 7, aboard the transport "John Erickson." When the troops, Regimi- । to 65th and other accompanying units disembark and are transported to Camp Tortuguero, Henry Rarrack, and Fort Ruchanan, a succulent special welcome meal will await them there, continues Army Reporting, (Continued on page 22).
Cuban sugar harvest conference broken off WASHINGTON, 2.-(PU)- Officially it was reported today that the" American c u b ah on American negotiations on the Cuban sugar harvest were closed today until December 4. The official notice stated that: "Problems have developed which require additional diacuaionea in both countries" - the United States and Cuba. The breakdown of the negotiations came as no surprise to anyone, as the American negotiators were unable to offer anything resembling the terms desired by the Cubans.
Vista aver en 'around central petition Carmen
Numerous" person" in favor of authorizing rl cessation of the factory ■■ " I Before the Public Service Commission- ( 1 hlico, chaired by Ledo. Antonio R. Rarceló and Commissioners nso' ciados Juan A. Farla and Enrique Cor-J nler. took place yesterday, during the entire din. ln public hearing on the notice filed by the Gonzalez Succession for the Public Service Commission to authorize the cessation of the sugar factory activities of Carmen Central lnc" of Vega Alta, and to relieve it of its obligations, contracted under the franchise issued by the Commission, in accordance with Law 221. Represented by attorneys Jaime Sifre and James R. Beverley, the Gonzalez Estate alleged, through witnesses and evidence submitted to the Commission, that Central Carmen Inc, once. sold the land of its subsidiaries, Finlay Brother# and Waymouth Trading. Company, to the Puerto Rico Land Authority, by virtue of a De- [ ereto by Consent, in the ¡ ¡ ¡ quo warranto lawsuit followed by the People of Puerto Rico against ' Carmen Central Inc. and its subsidiaries. said Carmen Central Inc., being exclusively in the industrial phase, cannot operate without considerable losses. For this purpose ■ re submitted to the. Commission an audited ha- ■ lance by the firm of Stagg, - Mather and Hnugh, in which it states ■ that Carmen Centrala Inc. has tin- ¡ ¡ duced losses during the* last few (Continued on page 16.) ¡
CSP has jurisdiction over the 1 Authorities, says Ledo. Guerra to submit to Legislative Committee on the basis of "legal criteria. - Campo del Toro refrained from passing judgment on the matter.
The former President of the House of . Representatives and director of the DI- । vision of 500 Cuerdas de) Depari lamento de Justicia, lic. MI-' ilgúel Guerra Mondragón, nplna that । the Public Service Commission Heine j't'lsdIcción on all, em- ¡ presas of! government dedicated to । public services. This was stated by Mr. Guerra anle the Subcommittee of the Legislative Commission - which is studying this problem on the recommendation of the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín. - The Subcommittee is composed of Mr. Celestino Irlarte, ra- , presenter, Mr. Luis A. Negrón Ló- * pez, senator and Benjamín Ortlz, representative and chairman of the sub-committee Mr. Guerra Mondragón and the Attorney General, Lic.
Enrique Campos del Toro, were summoned by the subcommittee to present their views on this matter. In addition to stating his view that the PSC has jurisdiction over the gohie-no companies, Lic. Guerra Mondragon promised to submit to the Committee a legal Hfmme stating the, merits# of his view. Campos <del Toro expressed his desire not to discuss the question, since in his opinion the clarification of the ¡mma corresponds to the court, or to the Legislature. The subcommittee chaired by Rep. Ortlz will submit a report on its study to the Permanent Legislative Committee. 4
The Road to Victory
Island-on-Island Triumphs Close Pacific Clampdown
In the following report, General George C. Marshall describes the island-to-island triumphs in the Pacific Ocean, and the establishment of clamps closing on the Japanese enemy. For GEORGE C. MARSHALL Chief of Staff On July 1, 1943, General MacArthur had under his command four American* and six Australian divisions. His air force consisted of less than 150 heavy bombers. Admiral Nimits had new Army and Marine divisions. Even so, in the spring of 1945, these two commanders were launching the Japanese from the Philippines and the Ryukyu, already well on their way to Japan's home territory. After the end of the extremely difficult Buna campaign at the end of June 1943, difficult because of the shortage of facilities and the characteristics of the stingy, two combat units embarked on the 1,000-meter-long 1,000-pound
embarked at Wood-Lark and Klrlwlna, near the eastern tip of New Guinea. The operation was small, but typical of the general method of the offensive in the Pacific zone. Fooled, by amli* attack, the Japanese were surprised. Airfields were quickly established in the area, from which effective support could be provided for the operations which were to follow, and which would permit the rapid transit of fighter planes, if necessary, between the Solomons and New Guinea. The capture of New Georgia, with its important airfield of Munda, was made by the Fourteenth Army Corps under Major General Oscar W. Griswold. The first major landing was made on June 30 on the nearby island of Rendova. The Japanese ground action was poorly mounted, but in the air the enemy tried hard to dislodge the Japanese air force from the island of Rendova.)
GEORGE O. MARSHALL Chief of Staff
Attorney Clark consulted by Tugwell regarding the effective period of various island laws passed as an emergency.
Works have been suspended in 4 municipalities According to the PEG, another 4 have said they will not be able to contribute to this one" Perez says I i e 11 e to abide by the CIE i Reports 37 municipalities"| communicated they would contribute the necessary amount Thirty-seven municipalities, of the Island have reported ,1 Emergency Program, as notified by the agency, their agreement ron contribute that part of the money that corresponds to them, for the realization of municipal works. "For these works, said yesterday the PEG, the Island Legislature assigned in its last session [a fund of $2,093,000 that was distributed by the Island Emergency Council, taking into account "the needs, wealth and taxable income of each municipality. There are also municipalities that have promised to contribute their share later and others that have reported that they could only provide part of the money that was assigned to them in the dis- tribution made. Eight of them have indicated that they are not in a position to contribute and another eight have sent "vague and confusing answers". Mr. Manuel A. Pérez, PEG administrator, referring yesterday to the statements made by the senator of Humacao, Mr. Cruz Ortiz Stella, which were published by this newspaper, stated that the works, which have been suspended until now by the PEG, were being carried out in Humacao, Yabncoa, Guayama and Cxyey. Regarding the latter, however, it was explained that the matter is on the "road to recovery". On the other hand, Mr. Perez said that he cannot do anything other than adhere to the agreement of the Insular Emergency Council, in the sense that the municipalities must contribute the corresponding part for the realization of said municipalities and that in the event that there is any municipality that is not in a position to make its contribution, that the case be submitted to the ICN for its consideration and determination. Works to be carried out, ¡ The municipal works that are being carried out or that would be carried out by the PEG with these funds include, in order of priority, the following: Construction, repair and improvement of municipal buildings, such as schools, marketplaces, slaughterhouses and jails; paving of streets; street paving; and improvements in the Río Piedras marketplace. However, there are still deficiencies for the correction of which they give 30 days to correct. - In relation to the state of the sanitary facilities of the Rio Piedras market place, the Health Commissioner stated yesterday that according to a report rendered by the Public Health Unit of that city, the pertinent action has already been taken and some of the deficiencies have been corrected. He further stated that the Rio Piedras Sanitation Officer has notified the Mayor, Mr. Augusto P. Alvarez, specifying the deficiencies to be corrected in the market place, and giving the Municipality a period of thirty days to correct the deficiencies, and that the Municipality has been given a period of thirty days to correct the deficiencies.
SIB employees shall be temporary employees and shall have that status until such time as they offer examination and establish eligibility until such time as the Civil Service Commission offers the least number of vacancies for the Island Service positions. Until such time as the Civil Service Commission offers the corresponding registers, as well as until such positions are filled by persons appearing on the registers, the incumbents of the positions in the SIR, from the assistant director on down, shall have the status of employees, provisionally (temporary). | Reports obtained by EL MUNDO reveal that the Island Fire Service has submitted to the CSC all the classification sheets corresponding to all its vacancies, with the exception of two or three which are not now in the possession of the Commission, since they had to be returned to the SIR parameter, with certain amendments. These two or three sheets correspond to the same number of clerical positions in the SIB that are currently vacant, and the duties corresponding to them were recorded in the sheets. These report, on duties should be submitted both with respect to vacancies, occupied, and i< vacancies, vacant. The Classification Division of the CSC has already begun work on the classification of the post (in the Island Fire Service), and it is expected that, unless unforeseen obstacles arise, the total work will be completed within a week. In addition, the Report on the organization of this unit was returned to SIB for further amendments and resubmission. After the total classification is ready, the Commission will notify the SIB, the Auditor, the Bureau of the Budget and the Division of Administration of the CSC of this fact, as appropriate. With respect to the proposed classification of the position of the Island Police, we are informed that the project is still under study, "without having reached a definitive conclusion. It has been indicated that in the case of the Uniformed Police Force it is not being requested- ' (Continued on page 22.)
! As General Crlttenberger pinned the Soldier's Medal and the Air Medal on Captain Muftiz's chest, he was joined in the ceremony by Major General Wiliam M. Grimes, Chief of the Military Department of the West Indies, and Brigadier General George C. Lundberg, Chief of the Air Command. Captain Muftiz earned his decorations for heroism displayed in the Chinese Theater of Operations. In May of this year, a fighter plane loaded with incendiary bombs crashed while landing at an air base in China. The, aircraft stationed in the vicinity of the crash were in danger of fire spread by the [plane that crashed. "Despite the present danger," the citation reads. 1 - "Captain Muftiz. guided the planes parked there to a place out of danger. One of these planes was loaded with dangerous rocket explosives. For this feat the captain received the Soldier's Medal. The Air Medal was awarded for "meritorious action in air raids". On January 25, the captain commanded one of four groups of fighter planes attacking railroads and railway centers in northern China. Despite continuous anti-aircraft fire and the constant threat of being intercepted by other aircraft, the raid resulted in the destruction and damage to 48 locomotives, of which Captain Muftiz partially destroyed two.
! New police uniforms - new police uniforms submitted for requisition
For ANGEL CRUZ CRUZ Editor of EL MUNDO The Auditor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Rafael de J. Cordero, said before the Conference on Public Administration held at the University, that "it is essential that the people be kept informed-in such a way that they can understand what is being done with the money paid to the government. He also said that the people's money "should be used only in accordance with the law and in those enterprises that will return to the people the best possible return. Auditor Cordero's speech discussed budget control, public accounting and auditing, and how it is a financial control instrument.
- The Police Department has already submitted to the Office of Com- 1 ! prisons of the Insular Government, the re- ■ qulclone for uniform# for the ■ Police, covering more or less half of the $80,000 appropriation, allocated in the budget for that purpose. This was reported yesterday by "eflor . Rodolfo Torres, in charge of the . property at Headquarters, - who expects that the procedures for the auction will be carried out shortly. > Various# difficulties "urged the ' making the t distribution of the party.¡ - since many officers and guard#! - are not in agreement with the auction, because in this way the contract will be made with the highest bidder, which will make it impossible for the officers and guardsmen to bid for the auction.
which will make it impossible for the suits to be tailor-made. The matter was discussed at the recent Police Association meeting in Pbnce, where suggestions were made to the effect that "an estimate be made of the amount due to each member of the force and then the Department would give those who so wished orders to have their suits sewn at private tailors' shops. Those who so thought ¡ ¡admitted to pay for the possible dlferen-i [cia in the cost of the uniform# and, ' the amount assigned to them. i On the other hand, the di,cu-' I arose.(Continued on page 22.),
Captain Muñiz, fighter pilot j)eleven. was decorated for heroism in China zone ¡ x ■ i I H ■i". ¡w wwli -- i //Wli Hf W JW' 'j y Te- A Y? ¡■ir--t ■-¿ a w ¡/ 1 11 i h j j IIfli K i Inw ' } .-A 1 1 1 ini lii i j ÍJ uHK .... WJK dlllí tí HiB® a --■■■""■ ■ !■ His lady mother and au wife congratulate ni Captain José Muñí", who is accompanied by Lieutenant General Wlllls I>. Olttenhcrger (left), Chief of the Caribbean Defense Command, and Major General William M. ("rimes. Chief of the Military Department of the West Indies. Muftiz. received two medals from the new commander of the Caribbean in a ceremony held at the Rorlnquen Base. (Photo by the Army Communications Corps).
General put on his chest Soldier's Medal Lh ceremony took place at Borinquen Field attended by three generals. - While six generals' stars glittered in the morning sun, Captain Jose A. Muftiz, a fighter pilot from Ponce, participated in an impressive ceremony at Borinquen Field yesterday, Friday, when he received two medals from Lieutenant General Willis D. Crittenberger, the new Chief of the Caribbean Defense Command.
Ramos Anton is expected here Monday He left Paris Thursday. - From Wednesday to Thursday Colón Gordiany arrives Francisco Colón Gordiany, president of the General Confederation of Workers, will arrive in Puerto Rico on Wednesday or Thursday of next week, according to a letter received by Miguel Sánchez León and Héctor Gradan. (Mr. Colón Gordiany has also informed us that if he has not yet returned to Puerto Rico, it was because it was not possible for him to continue his passage by ship, due to the last strike on the New York front, which hindered the departure of steamships. > Colón Gordiany went to the United States a little over a month ago for medical treatment. ( - We are informed that from Monday to Tuesday of next week, Ernesto Ramos Anto- > nlni, member of the General Council of the Sugar Union, CGT, who left Paris on Thursday, where he went to attend the International Labor Conference, is expected to arrive here,
Cordero believes that the people must know how the money is spent! He said this during the Public Administration Conference at the University. - Round table discussion. -- They reject a question from the Rector
[The clergy relate to the administrative functioning. I "In order to carry out its" ac- ¡ tlvidadea," said the Auditor, "the government has to get money from the' people. This results in the imposition of contributions! In governments that are responsible to the people, it is up to the representatives of that people to authorize, through laws, the use of taxes and other means to support the kind of government they wish to maintain. Later, Mr. Cordero added: "The money obtained from the people under this pledge imposes on those who pledge it - that is, on the executive branch of government - a series of grave responsibilities, which must be protected from the moment it is received.
These depend on the cessation of hostilities Additional contribution on income expires 90 day" after war l aiiibion there is doubt about PEG Act To be counted from p! August 14 would urge a special session । Pnr CARLOS RECHAM AGRAIT K Editor of EL MUNDO For more than a month the governadm Tugwell requested from the Pro- ■£ curator General of Ins State" United States. Tom C. Clark, an opinion in ■' regard to the validity of several Puerto Rico le- JKyes, among these one by virtue of which an" additional contribution was imposed on lo# ln- SF* gresos. In this Act, as in the* H other", there is a clause which determines the validity of the statute. It is regularly stated in that clause that the term of that Act shall be ninety days after the cessation of hostilities between the United States and Germany, Japan and Italy. Persons" knowledgeable in taxation matters addressed yesterday to Mr. Santos Ramirez to ask him what would be the position of the Bureau of Revenue Revenue Taxes after November 15, when, according to them, the law would cease to be in force, imposing a new tax on revenue. The "on income". Ramirez, H, who directs the Negociado, informed the interested parties that the law was in force. The interested parties were informed that there was no official knowledge that hostilities had ceased between the United States, Germany, Japan and Italy; that neither President Truman nor even the Congress of the United States had, to date, made any official announcement on this point, and that therefore the Act continued to be in force for Income Tax purposes as heretofore. It was added by Mr. Ramirez that that# BE , nm enta day, would begin to con- jL tar from the date of the oft- .S rial announcement of the cessation of hostilldade# .when this was made. When we asked Mr. 1 Santos Ramirez for a statement on this matter, he reaffirmed the criterion he had already expressed, as we have reported, to those who questioned him on the same matter, he added to Mr. 9 Ramirez that his business was conditional on the cessation of hostilities, He added to Mr. Ramirez that his negotiation was conditioned to face the situation at any time when "it was determined that after the 15th of February 15 the new tax on income imposed by Law No. 10, approved on April 9, 1943, could no longer be levied. In close sources, " La For- K taleza learned yesterday that this matter ■ on the validity of these laws h "bis been previously discussed by the Governor, Treasurer Rafael (Runaglia and various, legislators and MB that. after what was discussed, was that "e proceeded to submit the con- I suit' to Attorney Clark. It was further stated that in case Attorney Clark should be of the opinion that, President Truman having announced on August 14 of this year that the "war is over," this implies the cessation of hostilities and therefore also the cessation of the operation of the laws in question, it was agreed to convene the Legislature for an extra-ordinary session as originally intended at that meeting. Should the Legislature be summoned "- I [to consider the need to legis- I I to legislate on the tax "on income since. if the validity of Law number 10 of April I, 1943 were to cease, the income of the Treasury would be seriously affected," according to "I was informed yesterday in governmental circles. As of yesterday afternoon, no reply had been received at La Fortaleza M I Jalguna from Attorney Clark "on the consultation submitted to him. I It was believed, however, that the opl- I (Continued on page 22.) BULLETINS ■ WASHINGTON, 2. (P, ü.) - The ■ War Department announced today that the next flight without I eacalaa by the, Miperfortalesaa, of Miperfortalesaa, dets. I of Japan for" which no "e has fl- I Jada date, will air an Attempt to vo- Ilar from Hokkaido tot* Puerto I ¡¡ Rico, a distance of 13,000 kilo- ■ ( meters, little more hand", n to ■ ,! Cuba, a distance of 12500 klióme- I § tros. One of the four superfortresses which completed the flight from Hokkaido to Washington yesterday, attempted to continue the flight to Puerto Rico, but was prevented by strong winds which caused the plane to take on a greater amount of fuel and to return to the island. R tibie. (Continued on page 22.), , H|l|