elnAndo
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 Ctvs.
2 Sections
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 22, 1945 E r™'o," rs. "n .>11" "t"'
NUMBER 10353
Price of rice will not change
Gilstrap makes no such assurances for other imported items Roy Schroder believes shortages will arise He makes arrangements for the handling of the last consignments to OS A "u rearmo of the Virgin Islands, where he carried out the arrangements""fl "alea for the closing of the Supply Office" in that area, the director of that office for the Caribbean area, Mr. Roy Schroder, said yesterday that. In his opinion, it is likely that the island will face a rice shortage during the first weeks of November. Confirming information obtained earlier this week from the local supply office, Schroder said that the distribution of rice to traders next week could be the last one to be made by the island, The distribution of rice on a quota basis is done every two weeks within the normal operations of the OS, Next week's distribution would end all stocks held by the OS if all traders receive their full quota. And. according to Schroder, he intends to deliver his full quota to every trader. More rice is expected to arrive for the Tala consigned to the Supply Office, but it is doubtful that the ship bringing that product will arrive in port in time to be distributed before OS closes its local operations on Oct. 15. Schroder said that the time required to unload, collate and distribute the cargo takes about a week. Therefore, all ships arriving after October 1 could not be handled by the Supply Office. Since the shipping schedules are not yet known, Schroder believes that the arrivals will be after the closing date. In that case some arrangements will be made to deliver the shipments to private traders who, by that time, will have begun to take over the distribution of all food imported into the Island. It has not yet been determined how the sales of goods received by OS after the closing date will be handled, however, according to Schroder, he expects to make arrangements with WAshlngton before the beginning of next week for the disposition of those goods. In addition to a cargo of rice that is set to arrive in October, OS also has six other ships that are scheduled to leave for this route later this month. Their cargoes include laundry soap, evaporated milk, pork products and other items now being imported by OS, but which will be delivered to private traders between now and October 15.
He said he believed that there would be shortages of several items, even after the private trade took over the food supply. That, he said, is due to the short supply in the United States and the uncertainty of shipments. Although no shortages are expected to reach alarming proportions, current market conditions will not allow things to go smoothly, said Rchroder: One of the known factors in the rice supply is the current stock in the hands of wholesalers and wholesalers throughout the island. It has been estimated by some people that current stocks that could be used to cover an emergency shortage range from 100,000 to 150,000 bags. Schroder said he hopes to make arrangements with WAshlngton, which will allow him to sell any merchandise that may be needed to cover an emergency shortage.
(Continued on page 20)
Expresses his gratitude to President Truman
. . i . m II h
War Riibecc reta ry Robert Patterson expresses his thanks to President Truman for appointing him Secretary of War, in aubstl tuclon of Henry L. Stimson. (Associated Press Photo)
Boston denies motion on JISM decree * Declared without merit the motion filed by Luce & Co. in sugar case The Boston Circuit Court declared without merit a motion filed by the attorneys of Luce & Co., "in the appeal brought before this court by the Island Minimum Salary Board, of the decision of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico on the nullity of the mandatory decree number two, which covers the sugar industry. This has been communicated to Mr. Ismael Soldevila, Chief of the Legal Division of JISM. Mr. Soldevila received yesterday a communication from Boston, informing him that before the Court of Appeals, and in connection with the appeal filed by the Minimum Wage Board against the judgment issued by the Supreme Court, a motion was filed by the appealed party in this case, Luce y Compañía, requesting that the appeal be dismissed or that the appealed judgment be confirmed without entering into the merits of the case, because, according to the allegation, the appeal of the Board lacked merit. This motion has been denied, which means that the Boston Clerk's Court of Appeals will consider the matter on its merits and will render an appropriate decision in due course. Counsel's contention that (Continued on page 20)
On Wednesday, the Minimum Wage Board met in ordinary session with the attendance of its president, Mr. Cándido Oliveras, and its members Mr. Jesús M. Benitez and Mr. Lorenzo Fernández, representatives of the employers and the workers respectively.
One of the most important agreements adopted by said Board was to convene public hearings to introduce amendments to several decrees mandating minimum wages, maximum working hours, working conditions for various industries, businesses and occupations in Puerto Rico. and occupations in Puerto Rico. The Board agreed to revise, as soon as possible, Executive Order Number 9, applicable to the Bread, Biscuit, Pastry and Flour Dough Industry. The review of this Decree has been requested to the Supreme Court by the Sunland Biscuit Company after the Board refused to reconsider the Decree. Once Decree No. 9 is amended, the Board will continue its plan of amendment" in the following order: Mandatory Decree 3, on the Sugar Industry; Mandatory Decree 1, on the Raw Tobacco Industry; Mandatory Decree 4, on Clinics, Hospitals and Sanitariums. Mr. Candido Olivera", Chairman of the Board, did not provide details as to which provisions of said decrees the Board of (Continued on page 20)
Study legal phase of collection of farmers j QuiñonpR erre not rp Ipr ; gives opportunity to RORtenrr ru oath The Farmers' Association, as reported yesterday by its president, IIcenclaclo José Ramón Quiñones, understands that "the oath taken by the farmers has been ignored", in relation to the amount of their payrolls. It has under study the legal aspect of the procedure used by the State Insurance Fund, for the fixing to the farmers, of the amounts to be paid in concept of premium" of worker's insurance. The agricultural president considers that "the farmers have not been given an opportunity to sustain their oath". Mr. Quiñones said that in the offices of the Aioclaclón, complaints continue to be received from farmers who are not satisfied with the "estimate" made by the Administrator of the Employee's Fund, regarding the harvest that has just ended, as well as with the preliminary determination of the amount to be paid for next year, both with respect to sugar cane, coffee and other crops. Puerto Rico," he stated, "after consultation with persons experienced and versed in State Insurance Fund matters, is in a position to recommend to all members of the Association, that when it is understood by the farmer that the amount shown by the Administrator of the State Insurance Fund is not reasonable, and does not adjust the amount to be paid, The Association recommends to all members of the Association that when it is believed by the farmer that the amount of the payment he has received from the Administrator of the State Insurance Fund is not reasonable, and does not conform to his expenses for the 1944-1945 crop, he should immediately send a communication to the Administrator of the State Insurance Fund, requesting an investigation of his payrolls and the documents he has for his records, and that he should immediately send a communication to the Administrator of the State Insurance Fund, requesting an investigation of his payrolls and the documents he has for his records.
Fortaleza explains about payment of expenses to CGT sector delegate The request of the Colón Gordiany group was sent to the Attorney General in consultation and an adverse opinion was rendered. - Tugweil eMaba out
The Information Office for Puerto Rico yesterday released the official correspondence sent in connection with the petition of Francisco Colón. Gordiany, president of the General Confederation of Workers, for the Insular Government to pay the expenses of a labor delegate from Puerto Rico to the International Labor Conference, to be held in Parts, France, next October.
The same was referred to the then Acting Governor, Rafael Buscaglla. The same was referred to the Attorney General by the Acting Executive Secretary. As Governor Tugwell was not in Puerto Rico during that time, the matter was not at any time submitted to his consideration". The text of the Attorney General's letter to the Executive Secretary reads as follows: I have at hand your letter of August 23, 1545, referred to me for return with information,' (continued on page 8).
In the same communication you must request an extension of thirty days, failing which you must pay the sum fixed by the Administrator of the State Insurance Fund, as shown on the Notice of Collection issued by said Administrator. The" member farmers of this Association must send to our offices in San Juan a copy of the communication they send to the State Insurance Fund Administrator, together with a copy of the notice they have received, so that our personnel may activate the collection before the officials of the State Insurance Fund. "The Puerto Rico Farmers' Association has under study the legal aspect of the manner in which the fixing of --such payments has been carried out, since under this procedure the oath taken by the farmer is ignored, without previously being given an opportunity' to sustain the same." । BULLETINS NEW YORK, 21. (PU) Henry J. Kayser and Joseph W. Fraser, shipbuilder and president dr le "Graham Paige Motors" respectively, announced today having organized" an automobile company, with 820,008,000 capital, 1 for the construction of the 'passenger car, cheap, "Kayser," utlll(Contlnüa on page 20) j
"Mr. Colon Gordiany's letter, dated August 15, 1945," says official note, "was received by the
Intimate diary of Potsdam
Stalin's absence delays
I * Ñ * ' ** * conference of Tres Grandés
Prime Minister Churchill and President Truman arrived in Potsdam. Everything was ready to open the "Three Grand'' conference, but Premier Stalin's tardiness prevented the start. Robert O. Nixon tells us about this, in the sixth chapter of his fascinating "Potsdam Diary", By ROBERT G. NIXON INS Home Correspondent Dyspnea Chapter vi POTSDAM, Sunday afternoon, July 15, - (IN8>-The end of a long day is near. It seems that it speaks a moa past, when we arrive until tomorrow to Ambares. This land by the war, seems another world, out of peace and prosperity of America. It seems to have returned to the Middle Ages. The C-M dol President Truman landed at Gatow airport at 4:15. The air-
- Prime Minister Churchill's plane followed at 8:10. The President was greeted by a guard of honor from the 2nd Infantry Regiment, 2nd Division, and a band of Ce 85 múaleoa, wearing a gray double-breasted suit and a gray felt hat. Secretary of War Stimson; General Eisenhower, Admiral King and Generals Sokolovsky and Berbatov, representative! of Marshal Zhukov, were waiting while the President's eeroplane aterrlzabe in front of the airport. * ChurchllK was accompanied by Deputy (now Prime Minister) Clement Attlee: Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden and the Prime Minister's daughter Martha. The energetic British statesman wore a colorful army uniform. Squeezing tightly the thick cigar that has become part of his personality, he raised two fingers high in the air to for(Continued on page XX 1
Washington believes Cordova Diaz's nomination to Supreme Court will go to Senate next week
No agreement yet on shutdown Carmen
Company president ignores whether or not there is an intention to reach an agreement Citing Manuel Gonzalez's succession Legislative Committee intends to clarify owners' intentions
Mr. Muñoz Marín offered a reception in honor of the aforementioned labor leaders, an event attended by officials of the Island Government, among others," Labor Commissioner Manuel A. Pé-ez, the president of the Minimum Wage Board, Mr. Cándido 011vera"; the president of the Labor Relations Board, Mr. Fernando Sierra Bordéela; the Administrator of the State Insurance Fund, Mr. Guillermo Atiles Moréu; the Attorney General, Mr. Enrique Campos del Toro; the Director of the Land Authority, Mr. José Acosta Velarde; the Administrative Assistant to the Treasurer, Mr. Jorge Font Saldafta; the Administrator of the Development Company, Mr. Teodoro Mo "co "co "co", Mr. Teodoro Mo "co "co "co" and the Director of the Land Authority, Mr. José Acosta Velarde. Mr. Teodoro Mo "co "o; the Rec'or of the University, Mr. Jalme Benitez: Professor Antonio .1. Colorado: Senator Vicente Gélgel Polanco, the representatives Antomo Pacheco Padró, Alfonso Bulos" and Adolfo L. Monserrate Anselmy; the Administrator of the Capital, Mr. Roberto Sánchez Vllella. Also ""latieran, among other repr"""ntante"" of labor entity*"", lo"" aeftorea Ramón Barreto Pérez, Pedro Vega, Gumer "lndo Ramos O""orlo, Carlos Rabasaa, Raymundo Lebrón. Pedro Vega, Armando Rivero, José A. Clntrón, Juan David Fehus Guillermo Pomares, Antonio Díaz, Antonio Quiñones Bird, Heine
. The administrators of 1" Sure-.slón de Don Manuel González, owner of the majority of the shares of Central Carmen, have been summoned to appear next Tuesday before the Permanent Legislative Commission, with the purpose of explaining to said body the plans they have for the operation of the plant next year. The administrators of the Camhala'be San Vicente. Tos and Plazuela, for them to report what milling facilities they could provide for the canes that they would like to mill the Catmen, "I was closed, and the costs to be charged" for the processing, in order to finalize how they compare the same. The Commission was meeting on Thursday until Urde in the evening, o'upando prlnelnsimente the attention of the legislators the testimony of ecldo by Mr. Rafael Martínez Domínguez, president of the company that opo a la Carmen and shareholder and administrator of the menclonada sugar factory. Mr. Martínez Domínguez told the insulator that he did not know whether or not the decision to close the operations at Carmen had been made and that this was a matter to be resolved by the shareholders. He informed then, answering to wins questions, that the i majority of my shares is in possession of the Succession of don Ma t '.mi 'González. The administrator of "Carmen" was unable to refer to plans for the future of the plant since, as he told the Commission, he is retiring from the business at the end of the month, leaving his position as administrator. In all the questions put to him as to production costs, tonnage, quota, rate, and other aspects of the industry, he was asked to explain that he is retiring at the end of the month, leaving his position as manager.
WASHINGTON. 21 (PU)-I. Se. cretary of Commerce, Henry A. Wallace said today that he will do all he can to see that "u "s Department employs all its strength to reach the desired goal of "eienla million jobs" by the year 1950. Wallace told the "perlodl "tas" - to whom he announced plans for the reorganization and expansion of the Department of Commerce - that the world cannot afford another depression in the United States. He added that the "prosperity in Britain and the United States forms the largest single factor in relation to the prosperity of the world," adding that prosperity in these two countries means prosperity for Canada, Latin America and Western Europe. Wallace - who is participating in the conference between British and American representatives on financial matters - said he is in favor of extending credit to England if it means benefiting its foreign trade by restoring it on a firm footing. The reorganization plans for the Secretary of Commerce include "vigorous expansion" and facilities for the department to
Attorney General Instructs on OAP Cases Calls Attention to Judges and Prosecutors Regarding Defects in Complaints
A few days ago, the Office of Price Administration submitted for the consideration of the Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Enrique Campos del Toro, the model complaint that is used for the prosecution of ruMs for violations of Act No. 31 of April 29, 1943, calling attention to the fact that some municipal courts have declared objections to the same to be admissible, due to the following considerations: 1.--That in the complaint the name of the town to which the streets where the violation of the law was perpetrated did not appear, although it was alleged that they belonged to a municipal judicial district, naming it.
2. -That in the denunciations, although the town where the infraction took place is alleged, establishing that they belong to a certain municipal judicial district, the judicial district to which said towns belong is not alleged, and 3.-That in the denunciations" the violation of a regulation is alleged for facts committed when it already ateaba in a revised regulation, but which declares the alleged facts a crime. In a letter, circular dated September 18 sent by the Attorney General to the Municipal Judges and District Attorneys of Puerto Rico, he states, among other things, in reference to this particular; "Although the complaints filed are not a model of perfection and the best practice advises expressing in a clear and definite manner the place where the crime was committed and the court or district to which it corresponds, nevertheless, I understand that the objections proposed under the first and second considerations lack legal validity, under the authority of known precedents of our jurisdiction. In the first place, in the consld* ration of the complaints, there is a (Continued on page 20)
President Truman will speak on October 2, in a program sponsored by the National War Fund, on a network of United States radio stations.
The executive director of the National War Fund in Puerto Rico, Mr. Lloyd A. Le Zotte, reported yesterday that, according to notice received, the broadcast of the President's speech will take effect at half past ten in the evening of the above-mentioned day, E.T.A. war time. I will try to make the necessary arrangements to have the President's address heard in Puerto Rico through a local radio station. If this is possible, then an electric tape will be made from the radio to be carried by the Inaularea radio stations. The meeting of the "directors" of the War Fund Victory Campaign will be held today at the Condado Hotel. A luncheon will be served at noon. Campaign district chairmen will receive Inatrucclones, and (Continued on page 20)
Muñoz asks the working class not to sabotage industrialization During the reception he offered at his home to the Cuban workers' delegation, he said that the government needs the cooperation of the workers.
The President of the Senate and of the Popular Democratic Party, Mr. Luí" Muñoz Marin, declared himself in favor of workers' unity, in an exchange of impressions that he held last night at his residence with members of the Cuban workers' delegation visiting the Island to study the conditions of the sugar cane workers in Puerto Rico.
■ * ■ MI jU . aA. Ex a WHajsev'- - Lula Muño" Marin Rivers, Rodrigo Carrera" Valle, Rr. món Alvarez Conde, Fernando Ma-¡ rrero, Clemencia Pérez. de| Valle, ¡ Teófilo Villavicencio, Lorenzo Fer- ¡ nández, Miguel Angel Colón, Juan (Continued on page 20).
Henry Wallace will reorganize the Department of Commerce
Will give businesses, especially small businesses, equal help as Dept. of Agriculture gives to farmers. - Toward 60 million jobs
Encourage foreign trade and help domestic businesses, especially small businesses. Wallace said that Great Britain "will be our biggest competitor and our biggest market," in foreign trade. "RurIr," he continued, "will be busy in the" next" twenty years" in supplying its own great Inland market and probably no major competitor in the" world" markets. He said that Russia's main export products will be gold, timber, manganese and platinum; and that it will be a large customer for machine tools, electrical equipment and other similarly manufactured goods. Wallace foresees considerable unemployment in the immediate months ahead, but said most economists estimate that within six to eight months there will be a change in the employment situation, which will be favorable to workers. He said that among his department's plans is to give businesses, even small ones, the same kind of services as those provided to farmers by the Secretary of Agriculture, whose portfolio he held from 1933 to 1940.
The CSP directors are meeting today to discuss how to set the war fund for the harvest periods Truman announced that he will speak in October about the vital role he has to play in the campaign.
The Public Service Commission considers its role in fixing harvest and milling periods for each sugar company to be of vital importance. It is of the opinion that "by means of a fair and reasonable determination of the harvest and milling periods of each sugar company, damages which may result from delays in the harvest work can be avoided and reduced". This agency has been requesting the mills to notify the number of tons of cane that they have had to leave standing at the end of the 1945 harvest. During the course of the harvest, it requested periodic information from the companies on the development of milling activities.
"The second paragraph of Law 221 of May 12, 1942". -The second paragraph of Act 221 of May 12, 1942," said the Commission in a recent ruling, "directs this agency to "report to the Commission on the progress of the milling activities of the milling companies".
Judge Snyder asked Clark for the appointment.
Assures that Cordovés will replace Snyder upon his resignation
Interior Could Objet Cordova
Justice intends to act without consulting Interior Secretary For CHARLES MC CABE United Press Correspondent
WASHINGTON, 21, (PU) - Puerto Rico Supreme Court Justice A. Cecil Snyder conferred today with United States Solicitor General Torn C. Clark and reportedly urged that former District Judge Jorge Luí" Códova Díaz be appointed to fill the vacancy on the Puerto Rico Supreme Court. Meanwhile, another "circle" reliably reports that the Justice Department will send Córdova's name to the White House as soon as possible for nomination to the Supreme Court, without consulting the Department of the Interior.
Córdova Díaz, who is visiting Washington in connection with legal matters, said, "No comment" when questioned on the matter.
It is understood that Acting Secretary of the Interior Abe Forta" may vigorously oppose Córdova's candidacy and the principle that major appointments" to positions" in Puerto Rico can be made without Interior Department approval. In recent years, Jckes has jealously guarded the prerogative that all major appointments to Puerto Rico must be approved by the Department of the Interior. However, he knows that certain senior Justice Department officials believe that the Department of the Interior has ineptly handled the situation regarding the vacancy on Puerto Rico's Supreme Court, since two Interior Department candidates - Rafael Bo "ch and Benjamin Ortlz - were unsuccessful for the position. Acting Secretary For'as, who is attending Cabinet meetings in the absence of Ickes, who is in London, could not be reached today for comment on Cordova Diaz. The reported endorsement of Cordova Diaz by Judge Snyder is regarded as very significant in this capital's well-informed circles on Puerto Rican affairs. Snyder's current line follows "Tugwell's line" and it is said that Tugwell "has vigorously opposed the appointment of the relatively young Córdova Díaz, because of what he calls his conservative political views. If Cordova Diaz is appointed, it will mark a definite setback for Tugwell and the Popular Democratic Party. Most of the" popular favor the appointment of Rafael Cordové" Arana, who, until these latest reported events, was considered the leading candidate for the office. * Another who has made no secret of his desire to occupy the high judicial office is Enrique Campo" del Toro, who is said to have begun a campaign for the post shortly after he was confirmed for Attorney General.
Snyder's support of Cordova "is based, according to reports, partly on Snyder's personal esteem for Cordova, and partly on the fact that they both belong to the Graduate Corps" of Harvard Law School. Another consideration believed to motivate Snyder's management is the fact that he has been carrying the burden of legal work in the Puerto Rico Supreme Court recently, due to the absence of Justice De Jesus due to illness. It has also been reported that Snyder believes that Cordova is more liberal than Governor Tugwell believes and that it would be of global utility for him to be acquired by the Supreme Court. Meanwhile, rumors continue to fly in Washington that Snyoer's own long-announced resignation is about to be consummated. It has been reported that Snyder has received a very lucrative offer from Schenley Distillers, who are now closing a transaction for the purchase of the Carioca Distillery interest.
Snyder has been described as favorably inclined toward such an offer and as finally determined to give up the short Insular. Thus, according to some well-informed people, both Córdova Días and (Continued on page 20)