THE WORLD
32 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
32 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVII
I don't liquidate the bonds I bought, if I want to liquidate Hitler.
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 20, 1945
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R-
NUMBER 10255
Russians occupy Lodz, the second Polish city, and sweep through Prussia; British penetrate two miles into Germany.
Enemy fortin surprised by Americans on Luzon ' y} 1 ' -i* ' Shortly after the first landings of the liberating force which arrived on Luzon on January 9 under the command of General of the Armies Douglas MscArthur, these American soldiers entered the Manso road and surprised the fortin which can, the reader appreciate above. Cautious, the Yankee soldiers approached the enemy position and quickly silenced it. (Associated Press photo), Bell Committee Report Provokes a Good People: Muñoz Marin
Bolivar Perez Rios recovered and returned to his post in France Three Puerto Rican soldiers were slightly wounded in action in France, and two who were wounded have returned to their posts, according to information supplied by the War Department in Washington to Headquarters 1 of the Military Department of the West Indies. Sgt. Pedro A. Qulros, son of Mrs. Marla L. Qulros of Comerlo; PFC Agustin Ramos, son of Manuel Ramos of Isabela; and PFC Antonio Rivera, son of Mrs. Isabel Rivera of Aibonito are the wounded. Qulrós and Rivera were lightly wounded on December 27, while Ramos received his light wounds on December 26. Lt. Bolivar Perez Rios, (Continued on page 16"
Asks God for 'another big piece of patience 9 for Puerto Rico The anti-democratic attitude of a Congressional Committee can also be unfairly confused by the rest of the world, he says
Hearing on the suspension of the streetcar on the 31st Measure is included in plan of improvements ; to P a r q ü e Street At ten o'clock in the morning of the 31st of the current month (le January a public hearing will be held in the halls of the Committee of Public Set vicio vicio related to the project of) War Emergency Program to widen a section of Ponce de León Avenue, between the Guillermo Esteves Bridge v stop 22 and which proposes the elimination of the electric streetcar in said section and in all of Paique Street. The project also recommends limiting this service to the route between San Juan and the former Parque Borlnquen station, round trip, following the Condndo route. The hearing was requested by the Planning Board with the purpose of giving an opportunity to government agencies, civic associations and persons affected by the suppression of the streetcar service in the indicated area, to present their points of view. The Chairman of the Public Service Commission, Antonio R. Barceló, Jr., informed EL MUNDO that "the Public Service Commission has no definite criteria on the suppression of the streetcar service in the projected form." "The Commission will await the outcome of the public hearing announced for the 31st of the current mea." He stated, "and will act in accordance with the outcome of the hearing." As he recently stated (Continued on page 16)
The president of the Senate and the Lula Muñoz Marin, referring to h yesterday that "estaa people, who without di personal ground, are making him i zo of war of democracy." Mr. Muñoz Marin added that "these people, under these continuous provocations, will not always be able to distinguish the difference between a Congressional Committee and the rest of Congress and the American people, no matter how much effort men like me may make to keep them understanding that difference." He further stated that "the undemocratic attitude of a Congressional Committee in the face of the overwhelming majority of a people can also be unfairly confused by the rest of the world with the attitude of that entire Congress". We publish below the text of the interview we held yesterday with the Popular leader; -Do you have any comments to make on the conclusions of the Bell Committee as they appear in today's EL MUNDO? (Continued on page 16)
Popular Democratic Party, Mr. the authors of the Bell Report, stated uda are respectable gentlemen in the ol worst conceivable service to the effortStaff crisis arose in the Municipality | Audit the d i vi s ión most affected. - Several employees resign The San Juan Municipal Auditor, Mr. Rafael Cabrera Torres, informed EL MUNDO yesterday that "he has been encountering in the last few days serious difficulties with regard to keeping up to date all the (Continued on page 7)
Roosevelt begins fourth term today
He said yesterday that the first twelve years in office are the most difficult. - He did not explain the meaning of this phrase WASHINGTON, 19 (PU) - At a press conference 24 hours before the inauguration of his fourth presidential term, Roosevelt today summed up the past and the future of his Administration with the phrase that the first twelve years are the most difficult.
the most difficult. - Immediately questioned about the meaning of that phrase, the President replied with a facetious, giving the same answer to the other question as to whether this term would constitute his last presidential term. When asked for some Information on the future of the Vice President,Henry Wallace--who will be until noon tomorrow--he told reporters that, in this regard, -give them light this other phrase: "I don't think Wallcce is going to starve to death." The White House has denied thousands of last-minute Invitation requests for the Inauguration of Roosevelt's fourth presidential term, which takes place tomorrow, Saturday, at noon. An estimated seven thousand Guests are expected to attend the simple twenty-minute ceremony at the White House. It is expected that those not invited will gather outside the gates surrounding the White House, while Truman will be sworn in by Wallace, and Roosevelt by Chief Justice Harlan Stone. Roosevelt's Inaugural address is expected to be no more than 500 words. Despite having been invited.
Carrión director of Continental Bank NEW YORK. 1" (PU)- Rafael Carrión, executive vice president of Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, has been elected member of the Board of Directors of the Continental Bank and Trust Company, New York, for a three-year term. In connection with the election, Frederick Haller, president of Continental Bank, stated that the two banks - his bank and Banco Popular - "have been closely associated for many years, and Cerrión's election is a recognition of Puerto Rico's further development of business with the island. Thomas E. Dewey, the defeated Republican presidential candidate, will not attend the ceremony. After the ceremony, Roosevelt and his family will pray.
Popular leadership to "legislate" on discrepancies in the municipalities. - Will intervene in case of San Juan if parties do not harmonize
JPG adopted decision in view of the shortage of that product on the Island In view of the shortage of lumber on the Island and with the purpose of economizing the one in stock, the War Production Board announced yesterday that, effective today, Saturday, January 20, sales of lumber in the amount of LOO feet or less, made by dealers without authorization from the Board, are restricted. Mr. Uordon W. Foote, Director of the War Production Board, explained to a reporter of EL MUNDO that the Board had authorized sales up to the pks, "without the necessity of official permission) from this war agency, but that in view of the shortage which exists at the present time, the restriction which takes effect today has been rescinded. It is hereby decreed that *n rnsos of sales of 200 feet (Continued on page 16).
The discrepancies that have arisen between the elected Administrator of San Juan, Mr. Carlos Muñoz Santaella, and the Popular Committee presided by Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gauthier, will have to be submitted, if not resolved by mutual agreement in the next few days, to the Central Committee of the Party. The leadership of the Popular Party, it was noted, has remained attentive to the development of these events, having recently expressed the President of the Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, when asked if he would intervene in the settlement of the difficulties arising from municipal appointments that "he will cooperate in the establishment of the best possible government for the benefit of the inhabitants of San Juan and in harmony with all the factors interested in the problem" The leadership of the Popular Party, by virtue of the provisions of a regulation of the Popular Party, has been attentive to the development of these events, by virtue of the provisions of a regulation authorized by its Central Committee for the solution of conflicts in all the municipalities of the Island, would intervene in the case of San Juan if a satisfactory agreement is not reached between Mr. Muñoz Santaella and the Popular Committee. The rules provide that in these cases, when "the Committee and the Mayor do not reach an agreement as to the person to be appointed, they may, by mutual agreement, submit the case to the decision of the Central Committee, which shall have the power and authority to re (Continued on page 16)
They were 219 miles away from the Nazi capital yesterday ----.
The day has been the greatest in the history of the Soviet army Moscow celebrates with great rejoicing The Reds have already made advances of up to thirty miles along the entire front By BRUCE MUNN LONDON, 19. (PU) - The Soviet armies today conquered the city of Lodz, the second most important in Poland, while Moscow officially announced the occupation of Krakow, whose liberation was reported the day before yesterday by the Lublin radio. The Russians penetrated thirty miles into East Prussia, in one of two new offensives which have intensified the gigantic struggle on the Eastern front. Advancing as much as thirty miles over the entire front, the Soviets reached Praszka, located 57 miles from Breslau, capital of Silesia, and were 219 miles from Berlin. Moscow announced tonight that Tarnow, in southern Poland, fell to its troops*, with more than 2,100 other towns. Today's day was the greatest in the history of the Soviet Army. The victories were proclaimed by Marshal Stalin in five orders of the day and the capital of the Soviet celebrated the triumphs with artillery salvos for five hours, with a total of 28,992 cannon fire.' ' A The second new offensive was initiated in southern Poland, while other Russian forces were advancing along the Polish corridor toward Danzlg, to effect a huge enveloping movement around East Prussia. AHI, they are only two miles from the border of the cradle of German militarism. Nearly four million Soviet troops, according to Berlin, are involved in this unprecedented offensive to end the war," as the Soviet high command has assured. On a front of 6 (Xi miles, the German armies are in full retreat, relentlessly attacked by hundreds of Soviet planes, which made 35,000 sorties in the last three days, and pursued by tanks, infantry and cavalry. Everywhere the Russians advance at the rate of almost twenty miles a day. Many groups of Germans are pinned down in the Russian rear, where the Cossacks cut them to pieces with sabers. In East Prussia, the Third Army of White Russia broke through the powerful German defenses in five days of offensive and, after defeating the fanatical German troops aided by the slow-moving "People's Army", advanced 7 miles on a front of 35. Other towns of importance conquered today by the Russians were Jallo, 28 miles southeast of Tarnow; Gorlict, 26 miles southeast of Tarnow; Kutno. Tomaszow and Leczyca; Mlawa and Plonsk, north of Warsaw; Dzlaldowo, on the Polish-Prussian border; Plllkallen and Krauplichen, in East Prussia. In Budapest the battle for the annihilation of the enemy in the Buda sector is still being fought. Meanwhile, the Moscow radio, announcing that "the entire German front in Poland is collapsing," warned the German people that they must '-endlr now if qule(Continued on page 7)
Talking to contractors The construction industry is poised for postwar boom.
The Chamber of Commerce, in a recent study on urban development, reported the following: "In Puerto Rice 3,000 residences were built in 1937. Two thousand were built in 1940. The cost of the first ones was 612,543,040, including several apartment buildings in the city of San Juan. Those built in 1940 were built at a cost of 611,220,000. However, although less funds were invested in the development of buildings in 1940, the cost per unit increased, over three years, from 64,100 to 65,800. In the study period, the average number of housing facilities was 1.8 percent; 4.1 percent for Mayogilez; 1.6 percent for Arecibo; .6 percent for Aguadilla; .7 percent for Rio Piedras; 16 percent for Ca- < guas; .7 percent for Bayamon and .4 percent for Humacao, which shows that the average number of housing facilities was 1.8 percent for Mayogilez; 1.6 percent for Arecibo; .6 percent for Aguadilla; .7 percent for Rio Piedras; 16 percent for Ca- < guas; .7 percent for Bayamon and .4 percent for Humacao.
Humacao, which demonstrates the great demand for residential houses, due to the increase in projects of both the Insular and Federal Government and the commercial boom produced by the abundance of jobs. The restrictions imposed by the war on the acquisition of construction materials paralyzed the development of urban construction in San Juan and its metropolitan area. The limitation of maritime space । on vessels making their voyage between Puerto Rico and the mainland produced a stagnation in the construction program of residential, housing developments and government works. After the United States declared war on the Axis nations in early ■ December 1941, the building contractors in the U.S. were U-.
The projects begun earlier in the metropolitan area and towns of the island were to be completed within existing facilities. From that date on, the private and public construction program was paralyzed. The development of events in the various war zones has been encouraging Puerto Rican contractors and private capital. The hope that the war will end in the near future, bringing with it the normalization of the country's industry, commerce, agriculture and other economic sources, augurs the resumption of a vast construction program throughout the island. New urban developments will serve as the basis for the urban development of its main cities.
Numerous apartment houses will occupy the most promising lots in the residential areas of San Juan; private capital is being prepared to finance those projects that can yield reasonable profits; commercial buildings that will house fruitful businesses are being outlined; and the Government is drafting projects to finance a public works program unprecedented in the history of the country. The Contractors' Association: The President of the Contractors' Association, Mr. Javier Zequelra, told EL MUNDO aua Imprealones about the development of works during the period of the war. "My general impression," he told us, "is that after the war has (Continued on page 10)
The holding of the workers' elections will be decided on Monday E "e din resume their meeting of yesterday the APA and the CGT Union.-Exchange of views on central refusing to recognize CGT.
The Working Committee of the Sugar Producers Association (APA) and the representatives of the General Sugar Union (CGT) held a meeting yesterday, behind closed doors, which lasted about four hours, and was adjourned until Monday, at 9:00 a.m., to be held in the conference room of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce. Monday will be decided, definitively, whether or not to hold the sugar elections decreed by the Island Board of Relations of the Tfahaja to take effect on Friday of next "emana. The main issue discussed yesterday by the APA and the Union was
whether or not the agreement to be negotiated will cover "all" members of the Association. Despite the secrecy surrounding the details of the meeting we learned that, according to one of the members of the APA Working Committee, there were "some "els centrales" who did not agree to give the CGT recognition as the exclusive representative of all workers in the sugar industry. This number has reportedly been reduced to only "two or three" who insist on this position and who prefer that an "unofficial" election be held among their workers to determine which will be Ja .(Continued on page 7)
Attack north of Sittard, by way of Hollandia
Patton pushes Germans back toward positions in Sigfredo He is ramming with great force In the German shepherd sector, however, the Nazis continue to extend grip Vor JAMES~McGI.tNCY PARIS, 19 (PU) - Forces of the British Second Army, keeping up the pace of their attacks against the Nazi bridgehead in Hollandia, north of Simard, occupied Hongen. Almost two miles inside German territory, while troops of the American Third Army "egulnn successfully developing their attacks on the line south of Luxemburg©, driving the Nazis back toward the Sigfredo Line. At the southeastern end of the western front, however, the picture is less rosy, as German forces occupied three German shepherd villages, linking their Gambshelm bridgehead with their troops operating north of Haguenau, thus posing a direct threat to the city of Strasbourg. The German agency Transocean, meanwhile. It reported that the Canadians had landed in the Schouwen area. "where violent fighting is going on south of Zlerlkzoe". This operation has not yet been confirmed in allied sources, which yesterday limited themselves to announcing a "commando" operation in that area. The British forces that occupied Hongen. three" miles northeast of Sittard, continued to advance northwestward, seizing Stein, Lind, Havert and Schalbruch, located on the Susteren road. Further north, British troops operating in the Echt area occupied the Holindes" village of Schllberg, east of the Susteren-Roermond road, and Hlngen, on the Susteren-Roermond road. In the arc of the Ardennes, Hodges' forces "on the left flank advanced an average of two miles, forcing the Nazis to retreat to improvised positions, which indicates that they are retreating from the entire St. Vlth-Houffallze defensive ridge, in search of positions on the Sigfredo Line. In these operations, Hodges' forces occupied or dominate the towns of Schoppen, Ebertange, Rech and several others. On the right flank of the arc. Patton launched his forces" sudden attacks against selected points, among them a six-mile "ector between Dleklrch. north of the city of Luxemburg©, and the German-Luxemburg border, east of Dleklrch. Dispatches from the front say that Patton's forces have overrun a number of German strong points, leaving them to the rear to be occupied by other units. The Americans crossed Dleklrch and after crossing the Sure River drove the Germans over the Oun River which in that sector forms the border between Luxemburg and Germany. On another front of "lete miles, southeast of Dleklrch, other forces" of Patton occupied Rospert. three and a half miles east of Echternach, and Waselbllllng. seven miles further south, but a German counterattack dislodged the Yankees from BtHzdorff, in the Moiela area. In the Alsacla area, a new attack by the "Germans opened a corridor between 1" Gamhshelm bridgehead. north of Strasburg, and "u main front. A dispatch from the front says that the attacks have been contained" generally along the line of the Zorn River, but that the" "lemane" are increasing your pressure for the moment." E "ts" operations create a direct threat to Strasbourg, for the Germans have succeeded in establishing a continuous line as far as Gambiheln, seven mile" north of the Strasbourg tuburblo",
THE WAR IN BRIEF
WESTERN FRONT: The British Second Army occupied Hongen, two miles inside German territory, while the American Third Army continues to push the Nassians back towards the Slgfredo Line south of Luxemburg. EASTERN FRONT: Lodz, the second Polish city, was liberated by the Russians, who also swept into East Prussia and moved into Silesia towards Oppeln.
IT AI JA: While the fighting on the front of the Uulnto and Eighth armies intensified, the first units of the new Italian army went into action on the Adriatic coast. PHILIPPINES: The Americans occupied Sison, moved six miles to Fariac, reached Santa Ignada and repulsed several Japanese attacks near Rosario. Cabaroan was also conquered.