THE BOTTOM
36 Pages 5 Ctvs - 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVII
I hasten victory in the Pacific by buying more war bonds.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 11, 1945
Entered aa second class matter. Po "t Office, 8an Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 1
0466
ALLIES CONSULT TO DECIDE WHETHER TO ACCEPT JAPANESE SURRENDER
History of the war with the Japanese The events from Pearl Harbor to capitulation The destruction of Japanese power Victory culminates in the atomic bomb and the declaration of Russia NEW YORK, 10. (PU) - The Japanese Empire offered *its surrender * to the Allied powers after 1,383 days had elapsed since the attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, the year in which a diplomatic crisis* between Japan and the United States took place. In contrast to the relative lack of military preparedness of the United States at that time, the forces of the American nation have since been relentlessly encircling mainland Japan after the tide of the war turned in late 1943, when the Japanese began to abandon several positions in the Pacific in the face of growing Allied power in that theater of operations. The Intonsifcation of the Allied offensive during the past twelve months culminated in the use by the Americans of the£ jitomlroa against such WjWve" mt!Ttares of Japan. There has also been some speculation that American forces would have Invaded Japan toward the end of this year, Diplomatic relations between the United States and Japan were broken during 1941, and by mid-November war seemed Inevitable. The Japanese tried to buy time by sending Saburo Kuruso as special envoy to Washington to reconcile differences between the Japanese militarists and the late President Roosevelt for the latter's criticism of Japanese aggression in the Far East. Kuruso, with Ambassador Nomura, visited then Secretary of State Cordell Hull on that fateful December 7 to discuss an exchange of diplomatic notes between the two nations. The visit began at 2:30 in the afternoon and before it was over Japanese planes had bombed Pear Harbor. Disabling the U.S. Pacific Fleet and launching the United States into war. The Japanese simultaneously bombed the Philippine Islands. Guam. Wake. Singapore and Hongkong, invaded Thailand and Malaya. Japan's offer of surrender continued on page 17). '
Jubilation in San Juan over capitulation Students at Santurce High School began demonstration. An incident at Matienzo School
The news of the surrender of the Ja-, pón yesterday produced extraordinary enthusiasm and rejoicing throughout the Capital. The joy that "e seized the citizens of San Juan was clearly manifested on the faces and in the demonstrations of enthusiasm in the street, in coughs, homes and offices. Students from the Central High School, where the principal dismissed the students at about half past one in the afternoon, and from other schools in San Juan, joined in the jubilant expression of the people on the occasion of the sensational news. A large group of students from that school, -improvised a demonstration and moved to other schools, to demand that the students be given the afternoon off. In some cases they were able to penetrate inside the schools and to get the children to join the movement. According to what we were informed, the group of demonstrators was joined by other people from outside the school and as a result there were several disorders in some schools, such as in the Matienzo School, where stones were thrown, glass was broken and objects were taken away. In the case of the latter school it became necessary to indol plantel, "eflofl Rom Maria Montee, said she could notice that the people who tried to enter the (Continued on page 9.)
Instruction hopes to fill every vacancy Will soon send list to superintendents, of some 250 candidates A readjustment in the Ponce school More classrooms in Juncos and Corozal. In order to fill elementary school teacher vacancies that arise, the Department of Instruction, as reported yesterday, will send within the next few days to school superintendents a list of about 250 candidates who completed a semester of work in a special course offered by the UnivMaidyd These candidates are in ¡1w to the normalistas who will graduate on August 17. The Department of Instruction (Continued on page 20.)
Hato Rey will soon begin an extensive home program.
HA intends to house 8,000 families there - Project of 100 homes in San Lorenzo and Aguadilla. - Others in Mayagüez and San Germán.
Yesterday, from ten o'clock in the morning until one o'clock in the afternoon, the draft collective bargaining agreement submitted by the Union of Cleaning and Public Works Employees of the Government of the Capital to the Administrator of San Luis, Mr. Roberto Sánchez Vile11a, was being discussed. The negotiations took place at the latter's offices, and were attended by Mr. Sanchez Vitella, Mr. Salvador Cato, representing the employer's side, Mr. Francisco Colon Gordiany and Mr. Hector Gracianl, Mr. Gerardo Ro "a, Mr. Ramon Hernáiz and others for the employer's side. Ramón Hernáiz and others on the labor side. Contrary to what was expected, the Administrator of the Capital did not raise any legal issue related to whether or not the Municipal Government can negotiate a collective bargaining agreement with a labor organization. The draft agreement was discussed paragraph by paragraph, leaving for consideration* at the next meeting of the* parties, the clauses* related* to such* agreement*, the workshop and vacation". The labor side, as "e informed an editor of EL MUNDO, believes that the* negotiaclone". carried* " out yesterday in an atmosphere of cordialldac. will continue within this e "plrltu and that the parties" will reach s an agreement. At one o'clock yesterday, at which time the meeting was adjourned until Monday at ten o'clock in the morning. already the Administrator of the Capllai and the workers' representatives (Onntln continues in 2n.) Appraisal at the "Guanica*' The appraisal of the land of the Central nica has been completed and it is expected that the estimated rtel value of the land, - more than 16,000 rope"- "e will be made ponto. This was reported yesterday by a senior official of the Land Authority. The appraisal that has been made includes the buildings, irrigation, and improvements" made. It was also reported that the 1945-44 "will be the last one for Central Guanica" before it passes to the Puerto Rico Land Authority.
The Puerto Rico Homes Authority will not be able to immediately purchase the land offered by the JRRA in the Roosevelt Urbanization, because it does not have the necessary funds to do so. This was informed yesterday by Mr. Emilio Serra. Executive Director and Secretary of the agency, adding that he will ask the Governor to include in the call for an extraordinary session a bill to allocate the necessary funds. The Board of Commissioners of the Homes Authority decided at its last meeting to initiate the construction of a project of 1W houses in two-story buildings on the lands of the Sellés Estate and the "General Cigar" in San Lorenzo. The land for the editi
The land for the construction of these homes is in process, but it is reported that the Authority has been having difficulties in acquiring them and will proceed to expropriate them if an agreement is not reached soon. This project involves an investment of $230,000 to build 100 units at a cost of $2,300 each. In the recent floods* on the Island, the San Lorenzo River destroyed 70 houses and damaged 9 and the Red Cross has been housing the affected families in tents. The Housing Authority will soon begin an extensive construction program in the Hato Rey area, east of the road between Villa Palmetas and Rio I (Continued on page 17).
Memoirs of Paul Reynaud Petain in intelligence with Hitler before 1940?
By Paul Reynaud Premier of War of France
By PAUL REYNAUD Premier of War of France. The mysterious nail of the tragedy of the collapse of France still m Henri Philippe retain, Marshal of France, >fr of the State Francée," chained to the fate of Germany. Paul Reynaud tells the sorry story of delusions of grandeur, trickery and deceit" through which Petain unraveled the government which Reynaud was trying to persuade to fight on, and he defeated Reynaud to hand the country over to the traditional enemy Germany. The man who surrendered France to the Germans in spite of his promosaz. surrendering, was the man whom all Frenchmen knew as the Victor of Verdun. This apparent paradox can be explained. One must know the man; one must understand Petain's long cherished ambition to attain power; one must remember that Jnffre had to command that heroism for which he received credit Fetaln *n *n Verdun. and one must know his relations
f * jé ■ U Mr ' - , l 7 / " Georges Clemenceau. 'The Tiger' franeéa, rim derruiste to ''r-rl Pétala since al afio lili.
with the Germans, even before the beginning of this war. While Francesco Nittl. si exPremier Italian, and I were together prisoners in Germany, he told me that, during the peace conference in 1919. Georges Clemenceau, then Premier of France, came to see him one day at his hotel. -What do you think of Petain," asked Nittl. -He is a defeatist who believes in nothing. He hates the English. He wanted to surrender in March 1918. It would be a catastrophe if France *1 ever came to occupy a prominent position in this country. The summary made by Clemenceau was harsh, but accurate. The prophecy has been fulfilled as later events have shown. We know the discouragement experienced by Marshal Joftre, who had pushed Petain to the highest position, when at Verdon he was obliged to give Petain definite orders not to abandon the right bank of the Moza. Napoleon said: "character is worth more in a general than brains". - Joffre expressed the opinion of all 1 when he told F. "ym"''d Pomcaré, I (Continued on page 30.)
The first news reaches the Fortress
k i "L r jlil Through the extraordinary edition of EL MUNDO, the first news of the Japanese surrender reached the office of the Governor of Puerto Rico yesterday. At the moment when our colleague, Miss Josefa Luisa Hernandez, presented to the head of the Interim Executive, Mr. Rafael Buscaglla, the first copies of the "extra", the President of the House of Representatives, Dr. Francisco M. Nusonl. (Fntngrafia da Lula de Caaenave).
Chavez recommends Del Valle 1 , for Governor of Pto. Rico í He h" addressed in that sense to the President.-"I have come to the conclusion,'' says the senator, "that he is the most apt person*''. Pinero's statements *
More butter to consumers as of the 13th ('.adH person will have 5 ounces per week. - OAP urges acceleration of readjustment As from August 13, 1945, consumers have the right to obtain from the retailer of whom they were customers during the basic period, a minimum quantity of butter of 5 ounces per week. In addition, any retailer may obtain from his supplier 70% of the average weekly transfers obtained during the basic period, instead of the 60% he has been receiving until now. Those retailers who need a readjustment of their quotas in order to be able to serve this amount of butter to their customers must file (Continued on page 20.) -panini ni JlilHII II■ i- - ■' ' r "
Workshops deí : PEG will operate I to capacity í This is possible due to fabric permit. - 1 Hav 36 throughout the Island ■ i _ i Lo" sewing workshops of the Pro- > grama de Emergencia de Guerra. The War Production Board's authorization for the purchase of 475,000 yards of fabric during the months of July, August and September was obtained. i The War Production Board's authorization was obtained through the Division of Land and Possession of the federal Department of the Interior. The corresponding orders will be placed by the PEG directly with the factory to ensure prompt delivery. The clothing produced in the PEG's "workshops" will be distributed free of charge to needy families through the Public Welfare Division of the Department of Health and, in case of emergency, directly by the PEG offices, as was done a few days ago in Bayamon and San Lorenzo, when the floods affected those towns. Part of the production is also distributed among charitable institutions of the pats. The 'ostura *c workshop project originated under the administration of the Federal Works Agency, which had three ta-| lleras in operation until November 30, 1943, when it suspended its operations in Puerto Rico. Upon assuming responsibility for this project, PEG increased the number of tsitares to 20 from December 1943 to June 30, 1944. In the year 1944-45, the number of workshops was 44, but had to be reduced due to lack of materials. Since then, 36 workshops have been in operation "' In 1944-45. lo' teltare" nrmluje(¡ron 549,030 pta/a d" rppa tnriuyenjConiinúa "n page 20.) ।
Pnr CHARLES MAC ( ABE ' WASHINGTON, 10. (PU) - Eli Senator Dennis Chavez said today that ta speaks recommended to Truman the name of Comandante Ge- 1 neral. Tedio del Valle, for Go- < hernador of Tuerto Rico. And, he added- r gó immediately, "I have come to ( the conclusion, from the qualities of i Del Valle, that he is the person most . fit for Governor. And I have come to that conclusion after considering and keeping in mind the best interests of the United States and the best interests and welfare of Puerto Ricans. If the President should deem it advisable and appropriate, such appointment would constitute the fact that a son born in Puerto Rico would be the Governor of the Island for the first time in history. It is convenient to remember that re- f clentcly Chávez suggested that the L (Continued "i" page 80.) '
| TO OUR READERS
A few days ago, the administration of EL MUNDO had to dismiss an employee for reasons affecting the discipline of this organization. Said employee, after having acknowledged his guilt, the reasons for his dismissal, went to our Administrator, who told him that he appreciated his understanding attitude and that he would take it into account in due course. The ex-employee then asked to be rewarded with a certain amount of money to go to a certain town on the Island, to which our Administrator agreed, and the former employee then expressed his gratitude. It was a cordial conversation in which, apparently, the ex-employee left very satisfied. However, it turned out that yesterday, upon receiving the news of Japan's surrender, we decided to immediately publish a rare special edition adp.When we proceeded to put it into circulation in San Juan, we found that a group of newspaper vendors refused to distribute it, claiming that in order to buy it, they would have to buy newspapers from the alluded employee, who was precisely in the sales department of the newspaper department.
- precisely in the department <ta sale* of copies. s Faced with such an urgent - and untimely request, which for the first time came to us a week after the aforesaid employee had left his post, faced with the ■ duty of our company to publish the newspaper at such an important time, and faced with the refusal of our company to - - - - to publish the newspaper at such an important time, and faced with the refusal of our company to publish the newspaper at such an important time, and in view of the repeated refusal of the said group to proceed with the sale of the paper, we decided ■ that we would take THE MUN- - DO Immediately to the public anxious to learn the great news in India. The company's employees are a large number of employees. - The company's employees, with the cooperation of other groups of young salesmen, began to The extra, which was avidly purchased by thousands and thousands of citizens in the whole of the motor- -politan Aren. as shown in the photographs inserted in the seventh page of this issue. . It was our duty to the public, and we did everything in our power to fulfill it. Da. ■" moa esln explanation for if .today the distribution of THE WORLD -ino comes to s "r so fast and oficien.it" chorus >tra- toces in the area me j¡tropo "la. a. nu "sup" favoring" i ieptn the reason.
White House confirms capitulation U.S. is in communication with the other allied powers 1 Hirohito forms "Peace Committee'* It is composed of numerous Japanese personalities. Surrender formalities Pnr PRÉÑBAUÑIDA WASHINGTON. 10. (PU)-The White House officially confirmed the news of the Japanese offer of surrender, and added that the United States Government is conferring with Great Britain, Russia and China about the offer. . The White House Press Secretary, Charles G. Ross, was the one who officially announced the news of the Japanese surrender offer. Charles G. Ross made the official announcement at 3:28 p.m., telling reporters: "Our Government, through its current diplomatic channels, is in communication with Great Britain, Russia and China about the) offer of a Japanese military aid to the United States. Russia and China about the Japanese offer of surrender. This is all that can be announced for the moment. From Chungking it is reported that well-informed circuios" on Japanese affairs revealed that Emperor Hirohito has created" a "Committee d" Faz", composed of 21 members, among whom are Prince" Chichibu and Takamatsu, several former prime ministers of the .plug -Konoye, Tojo, Hlramura. Hirota- and the present Prime Minister and Ministers of War, Navy and Foreign Affairs. This committee met on Friday morning, Tokyo time, and decided by a majority to offer the surrender of the cap. Before' the official announcement by 1" (White rate, United Press has reported, from London, that 1a Moscow radio station said that the Minister of Foreign Affairs (such .plug, Admiral Toga, told the Soviet Ambassador in Tokyo, .tacpb Mallk (whom he called to his office for a conference this morning), of Japan's readiness to accept the "De- : clarification of the Big Three", signed in Poisdsm, in the form of a "ulli" ¡malum to the Japanese Government. Moscow said that the Minister of Foreign Affairs had asked Malik for a detailed report on the "status" of Emperor Hirohito (against the Allies), Togo, and Mallk held a conference in Tokyo, as reported by Japanese radio, which added that a similar statement had been transmitted to the other three great enemies of Japan through Sueci8< The Soviet broadcast, quoting the official Russian news agency "Tass", said: "It has just been reported from Tokyo that today, August 10, 1910, the Japanese government has agreed to accept the "declaration" of the "Big Three". From Tokyo today, August 10, there was a meeting between the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Japan and the Soviet ambassador, Mallk, at the latter's residence. Mr. Togo (the Minister)! made the following statement to the Soviet Ambassador; 'The Japanese Government is prepared to accept the conditions of the Declaration of July 26 of this year (the ultimatum from Potsdam) to which the Soviet Government adhered. The Japanese Government emphasizes the fact that in the Declaration there are no terms concerning the position of the Em(Continued on page 9.)
BULLETINS I , ■ 1 ".... WASHINGTON, 10. (INS)-The Government of the United States e*s pledged to the continuance of Emperor Hlmhlto on the throne and to accept the unconditional surrender of Japan, provided the* other* great* power* allies* concur. The U.S. attitude has been communicated to the members of the "Big Four" - Great Britain, China and Russia - in order to know their decision. The U.S. notes in their Allies also request them to state a point of view on the question of retaining Hirohito on the throne. This American position was formally adopted by the Cabinet, chaired by Truman, at an hour-long meeting from <l<™ to three o'clock in the afternoon. " " - WASHINGTON, Ta. fTU) The Secretary of the White House informed reporters late in the afternoon that there would be no further communique" oflclatax rrspacíu to the surrender of Japan until tomorrow. . .