THE
* ================ 36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVII
Acetare victory in the Pacific, buying more war bonds.
SAN JUAN, P. R. - SATURDAY, JUNE 30, 1945.
Entered as second class matter. Port Offley Sao Juan, V. B.
NUMBER 10516
Tobacco Plan Submitted
Harvesters propose that the Government purchase a larger quantity of tobacco. Meeting at the Fortalesa By ANTONIO PACHECO PADRO In the course of yesterday was delivered to the Commissioner of Agriculture and Culture, Mr. Luis A. Izquierdo, the memorial in which the leaders of all the tobacco growers' organizations of the island, expose to the high officials of the Island Government the distressing situation through which they have been going through, due to the low prices offered for the product in the offers of the buyers. The aforementioned document is signed by José B. Méndez, president of the Tobacco Sector of the Farmers Association; Juan Gómez, president of the Insular Tobacco Harvesters Association; Ramón Carmona, Secretary-Treasurer-Admlnlstrator of the Puerto Rico Tobacco Marketing Association; and Pelayo Rulz, president of the "Cosecheros do Tabaco de Utuado" cooperative. The memorial is the product of a week of deliberations and studies in which the agricultural leaders of the different sectors have participated, and who have been attending the tobacco conference that met every day last week in the caucus room of the Capitol. Although the plan offered to the growers by the Government and the document of the former making counter-proposals have been kept in the strictest confidence, we can report that in the official plan it is proposed that the Government purchase a share of the crop, suitably distributed among the tobacco suppliers or suppliers of the present crop. In their counter-proposal the harvesters accept this proposal of the Government, but request that the quantity of tobacco which the Government has planned to purchase be increased. One of the most important agreements of the growers' counter-proposal, according to information obtained by EL MUNDO, is that in which, according to the memorial delivered by them yesterday to the Commissioner of Agriculture, all the tobacco growers officially represented by the organizations participating in the "united front of tobacco growers" accept and support and offer their cooperation for the intervention of the Government in the control of future harvests and the equalization of production and demand.) Centering the allegation of some buyers on the claim that the current crop is "over-produced," the tobacco growers solemnly state as fact that all official statistics reveal that the price of processed tobacco is higher today than before; that market demands are much higher than in the past; and that market demands are much higher than in the past, and that the price of processed tobacco is much higher than in the past, and that the market demands are much higher than in the past. market demands are much higher than in the past; that consumption will increase considerably when there are more arms, soon, to be employed in the manufacture of cigars, and that, with the Government intervening, as proposed, to withdraw the alleged exemption and regulate the future costs, there is no reason whatsoever why it should be pre(Continued on page 30.)
Buildings now only require a permit from Sanitation
The Planning Board is only concerned with urbanizations and subdivisions, pending approval of the Zoning Regulations.
Until the projected zoning regulations come into effect, persons interested in constructing any building may do so, as long as the construction is authorized by the Health Department and the respective municipality. This was reported yesterday by the Chairman of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Picó. "Once the Zoning Regulation is in effect, the interested parties must comply with its provisions. "Said Regulation," explained Dr. Picó, "shall be submitted to public hearings as soon as possible. In order to expedite its final drafting, it will be reviewed by the Board and its technicians in a special session to be held tomorrow (today). We hope to be able to finalize it and have it ready for public hearings in the coming days.
Count Ciano Memorial
"The present requirements for construccolnes," said Dr. Picó, "have not been varied. The same rule continues, since the Zoning Regulation is not in effect, nor will it be until it is discussed in public hearings and officially promulgated. Currently, a person interested in constructing a building, be it a residence, commercial, etc., may do so when his lot is duly registered in the Property Registry and the plans comply with the sanitary regulations and receive the approval of said Department and the municipality. Dr. Picó explained that for now, the Board only intervenes when it is a question of new urbanizations or land to be segregated, destined for urbanization or housing, or when it is a question of a new development, or when it is a new development (Continued on page 20).
Mussolini in Breñero makes the second to Hitler
From IB hand to May 9, 1940. । Hitler summoned Mussolini for a meeting at ol Paso do Breñero, I quo took place in hand do 1940 I - f after which, while" loo I J Italians awaited a new German mo- I T vimlento in the Balkans, I ol Fuehrer launched his "j4rclto" con- I tra Denmark and Norway, says I Condo Glano, Mussolini's son-in-law, I in his diary Intimo. Glano's account is the first known eyewitness account of these famous meetings of the two dictators, which always left Mussolini depressed, because Hitler was the one who talked about everything. The end of the Norwegian campaign found Hitler complaining that the victory had been so quick that it was impossible to fight with and destroy the English major armies. - Ciano says: Mano IB,-"He is novando on ol I Breñero Pass. Mussolini mir- ■ na to his guest with a sense I k do anxious pleasure. More and more, I since recent mosos, he has been I feeling a certain fascination toward the Fuehrer. He tells me that he had a
PAUL TELEU ♦
release during the night that 'broke the veil of the future', but he does not tell me what the release consisted of. That has happened to him on other occasions, he adds. Once he dreamed he was wading in a stream and woke up to learn that the Flume question was close to being settled. Hitler talks, ol Dugo listens. "The meeting with Hitler is cordial on both sides. The conference is more of a monologue than anything else, Hitler talks all ol time, more calmly than usual. He gesticulates rarely and speaks in a calm voice. His physical appearance is good. Mussolini listens with interest and deference. He speaks little and confirms his decision to march with Germany. He did not find in Hitler the Intransigence that Von Ribbentrop has indicated. The meeting does not change our respective positions. March 19. "Inwardly Mussolini resented the fact that Hitler was the one who spoke everything. He wished to tell him many things, (Continued on page 301).
BORICUA BAMS IN OKINAWA
Two additional Puerto Rican casualties on Okinawa were announced yesterday by the Military Department of the Antt4laa according to information supplied by the War Department. As in the case of the deaths on Okinawa this week, there are no details indicating the cause or circumstances surrounding the new casualties. The latest deaths are: Private First Class Jorge Crus Amésquita, son of Mr. Edelmlro Crus Torres, of Dorado, who died on June 19; and Technician Fifth Class Prudencio QulfionM Benitos, son of Mr. Manuel Quiñones, of Santurce, who died on June 18. Cadiz asked to summon the Liberal Central Board The purpose is to render a report of its work on its trip to Washington The Central Board of the Puerto Rican Liberal Party will be summoned to an extraordinary meeting from one moment to another, to "examine the political situation of the Island and hear the report on the activities of the Legislative Commission that went to Washington in negotiations on the political status of the Island."This was informed yesterday to an editor of EL MUNDO by the liberal representative in the House for Junco, Gurabo and San Lorenzo, Mr. Ernesto Cadiz. Mr. Cadiz was also a member of the Legislative Committee and I attribute to him the decision to include the form of "dominion", among the alternatives on the definitive political status for the Island, worked out by the Puerto Rican delegation in the plebiscite legislation requested from the U.S. Congress. Representative Cadls took to Washington specific instructions in this regard from the leadership of his party. "I have conferred with the president of the Liberal Party, Josefina Barcoló do Romero," said Representative Cádiz, "and I have informed her extensively of the development of Wáshlngton's legislative activities, and I have also asked her to summon a meeting of the Liberal Central Board, for the purpose of rendering a report.
nlfestó
PEG to invest $16,939,750 in its 1945-46 program; Puerto Rico Section Chief Barr.
Puerto Rico Still No Car Quota Local Dealers Lack Information on Possibilities Class Meeting Interested One dealer believes that quotas will be announced within fifteen days Car dealers doing business in Puerto Rico still have no information from their respective representatives on the mainland as to the new cars to be allocated for the island under the latest quotas assigned to the manufacturers by the War Production Board, which we reported on in yesterday's edition. Some fear that these quotas do not include export quantities, so that Puerto Rico would have no share in the new models to be manufactured during the period covering July 1, 1945 to March 31, 1946. "We have no information," said one of the distributors we spoke to yesterday, "but we know that Washington has not assigned any quota for the export of the units to be manufactured. There are some dealers who are interested in joining the Automobile Dealers Association (continued on page 30).
He leaves the position he held in this Capital ...... Louis Sturcke to assume head of public works design committee By CHARLES McCABE WASHINGTON, 39 (PU) - I learned from the highest authority today that Mason Barr, present head of the Puerto Rico Public Works Design Committee, will soon be appointed head of the Puerto Rico Section of the Territories and Insular Possessions Division of the Department of the Interior. Barr has been one of Governor Tugwell's closest advisors; he ascends to the position vacated by William Brophy when he was appointed Commissioner of Indian Affairs. So far, the duties of the office have been performed by Mrs. Daisy Reck. Although the Department of the Interior has already approved the appointment of Mason Barr, this is not necessarily an indication that Thoron's successor has been selected. When Fortas. was asked this morning about Thoron's successor, he said, "There is nothing new yet on the matter." And, at a press conference this afternoon, Secretary Ickes reported that when the position of director of the Territorial Division becomes vacant at midnight on Saturday morning, when Thoron's resignation becomes effective, Jack Fahy will assume his duties as "acting director." Barr's appointment will be officially announced when the Civil Service Commission approves it. The position of director of the Puerto Rico Department of the Interior Territories and Possessions is one of great influence over the affairs of Puerto Rico, although those who have held that position in the past have done so very quietly. Prior to Brophy, the position was held by Jack F'hy, who, on the Interior Department payroll, has the title of "special assistant to the secretary of the Interior." Barr's appointment is generally considered a good selection and an indication of (Continued on page 30.)
Harding sends communication to EL MUNDO
On leaving the Island after ten months of service here, Major General E. F. Harding, who was head of the Military Department of the Army, addressed the following letter to our Editor: "This is to express my appreciation for the editorial comments published yesterday concerning the services I rendered in Puerto Rico. "The esteem in which I hold the Puerto Rican people in high esteem has been interpreted by you with preclausion and you know the sympathy that (Continued on page 30)
Gallardo is all set to leave the Department
It is very likely that he will ask for a leave of absence if his successor has not been confirmed by the expiration of his appointment. One thousand more teachers would have room
If Dr. José M. Gallardo's replacement as Chief of the Department of Instruction is not confirmed when the current Commissioner's appointment expires next July, it is very likely that Dr. Gallardo will request a leave of absence from the Governor. In such case, the Deputy Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. H. A. Martin, will act as Acting Commissioner of Instruction. Dr. Gallardo has everything ready to relinquish the office of Commissioner of Instruction. It is understood that he is not inclined to remain in office after the expiration of his term, if by the date of the expiration of his appointment, his successor has not been confirmed. Dr. Gallardo has resolved to continue to act as Commissioner until such time as the new officer takes office, but this is in the event that he is confirmed before Dr. Gallardo's appointment expires. The Chief of Instruction continues to do all that is necessary for the proper functioning of the school system next year, without going into other matters, such as promotions, which would be left to be acted upon by the new Commissioner. The Department of Instruction believes that there will be a large number of teachers who can be hired additionally to teach in the schools. The Department of Instruction believes that there will be a large number of additional teachers who can be hired to teach in the schools.
The creation of new positions will depend on whether the Bureau of the Budget allows it, as well as on the facilities available to absorb the new teachers. The Department could hire one thousand additional teachers for the next school year. It has officially notified the municipalities of the appropriations made by the Legislature to build new classrooms, and has suggested that they proceed to make the corresponding arrangements with the Department of the Interior, so that the construction of the new classrooms may begin as soon as possible. It is not expected, however, that these additional classrooms will be ready for use during the first semester of next year, (continued on page 18).
In his latest Annual Report for 1944, now released, Puerto Rico Governor Rexford Guy Tugwell describes the boom in the rum industry as "spectacular" as a result of increased exports to the mainland. "The most spectacular progress in industrial activity," he says, "was the great expansion of the manufacture of rum for shipment to the United States. The amount of rum
General Stilwell at the Okinawa Front
General Joseph W. Stllwen, commander of the Tenth Army, consults a map with Colonel William C. Bentley, Tenth Army aviation officer, at a base on Okinawa. Col. Bentley is the General's pilot. (Photo by Anortada Press).
Minimum wage $400 demanded for lawyers in Gov't.
Quiñones argues for classification equal to that discerned for doctors. ■ Ledo. Ochoteco
also argues in favor of the request
The President of the Bar Association, Lic. Samuel R. Quillones, addressed yesterday the Prezldente and the members of the Civil Service Commission, claiming for the" members of the togado class employed" by the Government the same classification discerned to the members of the medical class with a minimum monthly salary of $400.00. The vice-president of the College, Mr. Felix Ochoteco, in turn, addressed to Mr. QuIAones suggesting the appointment of a commission to practice the indicated geatlon near the Civil Service Commission. The letters sent yesterday are the following: From Quiñones to the chairman of the CSC "I am pleased to occupy your attention with reference to a matter already raised previously before the corresponding government entities, both legislative and executive. It is about the classification that for the effects of the graduation of jobs in the civil service has assigned that Commission of your worthy presidency to lawyers. "The decision fixing the mlnlmun do salary to be earned by a médi(Continued on page 16.)
For sewing ■ project give : $1,500,000 I It will be sponsored by ¡ Health with funds from ¡ PEG. At a special meeting of the Emergency Island Council, held on Friday morning, the body approved an island-wide sewing project to be sponsored by the Health Department, at a total cost of $1,500,000, to be paid from Emergency War Program funds. The Council approved appropriations for the eleven projects mentioned below, for a total of $503,800, to be covered by appropriations of $2,093,000, as provided by Act No. 323 of the 23rd (Continued on page 16.)
Order on the sale of agricultural machinery to be revoked
Mr. Foote announced yesterday that the revocation will take effect on July 2. - As of yesterday, the production and sale of baths is permitted.
The order controlling the production, purchase and sale of agricultural machinery in general, will be revoked by the War Production Board to take effect on July 3, as announced yesterday by the director of that agency in the possessions of
the director of that agency in the possessions and territories, Seflor Gordon W. Foote. Along with the order numbered L-257A, all "gulas" in the order will be revoked, Mr. Foote said. Also to be revoked, effective the same date, is Order L-257A, which controls the production of agricultural machinery for export. Also to be revoked by the Guerj$ Production Board and effective next Monday, is M-2W-which controls the production, purchase and sale of tools. Mr. Foote stated that yesterday Order L-42, which controls the production, purchase and sale of residential house baffles, was revoked. According to the order, these baffles could only be sold for use in homes built by the Federal Homes Administration.
Tugwell explains that 1944 is a year worth remembering.
manufactured and shipped to the continent, limited only by the amount of honeys available for these purposes, increased ti great proportion over that of the previous year." Governor Tugwell also reports a remarkable progress in the development of the Industrial program of the Island. In his report, he refers to the construction work by the Development Company of the factory for the production of the sugar mill, which is being built by the company.
8 million for construction $8,732,000 for direct aid, canteens and similar services Perez explains the plan to be followed The employment of personnel will increase with the beginning of the works Par" the fiscal year which will begin next July 1, the Emergency War Program will have an allocation of $16,939.750. In an interview granted to EL MUNDO, the Administrator of this agency, Mr. Manuel Pérez, said that "we are actively working on the final liquidation of the activities of the present fiscal year and finalizing the plans to be developed during the coming year". "We will have," he said, "$8,207,750 for the development of construction projects and $8,732,000 for direct aid, school canteens, and so-called 'white collar' projects." Of the latter figure, $3,000,000,000 will go to direct aid, which will be administered by the Public Welfare Division of the Sanitation Department; $2,422,000 to school canteens and the remainder, or $3,310,000 for service projects, such as sewing workshops, nursery schools, industrial workshops, research on economic and social problems, infant feeding program, including milk stations, unemployment registration and others." "The new program to be initiated on July 1," Seflor Perez told us, "has varied fundamentally. This is in terms of the way in which the work will be carried out. In previous years, allocations were made globally for the direct aid and school canteen programs. Then we coordinated a work program with the funds, which was developed through projects approved by the Emergency Island Council. Now, in accordance with the new appropriations laws, the PEG has been given specific funds, which will be invested in specific projects, leaving only a total of 13,093,000 for projects sponsored by the municipalities of the island. Construction Program: Seflor Perez indicated that the allocation of $8,207,750 to be invested in construction projects purchasing important public improvements, fl. gurando mainly the following": Exten "lón a la Penitenciarla In■ular, at a cut of $110,000; conatrucclón program d" carretera" secundarias, $1,074,00; soil conservation, $350,000; repopulation foresta! forest roads and forest ranger housing, $326,000; improvements to the Agricultural Experiment Station, $152,000; construction and improvements to the Mayagttaz Tropical Agriculture Institute, $88,000; improvements to the Mayagttaz Tropical Agriculture Institute, $88,000; improvements to the Mayagttaz Tropical Agriculture Institute, $88,000; improvements to the Mayagttaz Tropical Agriculture Institute, $88,000. 88,000; improvements to the Agricultural Extension Service facilities at the Carmelita farm, Pone", *95,000; construction of rural medical centers and public health units, $556,800; construction of latrines for the prevention of uncinariasis and bilharziasis, $250,000; for the control of malaria, $166,000; expansion of the Hospital for Lepers in Trujillo Alto, $95,000; expansion of the Anti-Tuberculosis Sanatorium in Rio Piedras, >475,000; construction, reconstruction and expansion of municipal hospltalea, $400,000; improvements to public welfare Inrtltudonea, including Hogar de Nlflos de Guaynabo, Escuela Industrial para Nifios in Ponce and Escuela Industrial para Niftag in Mayagüez, $438,000; School facilities, $976,000; construction of vocaclonal instruction workshops, $72,150; parks for sports and recreation, $657,000; municipal projects, $2,093,000. Additional funds: The Emergency War Program will also have additional funds for its operation during the next fiscal year. "These funds," he told us -> Seflor Perez, "are still undetermined. They will be raised as a reissue of the liquidation that is being carried out and will repay the surplus balance as of June 30, (Continued on page 1&)¡ j