THE MUN DO
32 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
32 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVII
NUMBER 10262
RUSSIANS ARE VERY CLOSE TO DANZIG ALLIES CHARGE TOWARDS ROER
Soviet artillery aids infantry Soviet artillery aids infantry advance on the second Russian front in Poland, according to the tracing of this photo received in New York on January 23, via radio from Moscow.
There will be a nursing school in the summer
Another Puerto Rican dies and 5 sou wounded in the European Front
Agapito Rosado Rivera^from Hatillo, died on January 2 in France -The wounded represent different populations -Martin Alvarez appeared
The Council of Teaching also decided to create scholarships.-Medical School E> establishment d" a School d" Nurse" at the University, --which will begin to operate next summer,- and the creation of a scholarship fund that will allow n fifty young people to begin studies in Medicine, were do" agreement" Important" taken" by the Higher Council of Teaching. This university body also reaffirmed its decision to establish, as soon as possible, a School of Medicine at the University. Before closing its work and after discussing with Rector Jaime Benitez, various "problems" related to the School of Medicine, the Council concluded that due to "the magnitude of this undertaking and its exceptional importance, both for the protection of the health of the citizens and for the best development of the University, it was necessary to establish a School of Medicine at the University.
Another Puerto Rican soldier died on the European front and five others were wounded, as announced by Jo" Quartet" Generals . of the Military Department of the . Antilles according to official notification from the War Department in Washington. It was also reported that a Puerto Rican soldier previously । reported missing has turned up. Pvt. Agaplto Rosado Rive- . vera, son of Mrs. Sofia Rivera Valle, of Hatillo, died January 2 at Franela. Private Martin A. AJvarez J1'" son of Ja Mrs. Fernanda B. de . Román, of No. 8 Palma Street, via Loíza, Santurce, who was reported missing on December 23 in Luxcmburgo, was not -missing according to a corrected War Department Information ।. Private first class Guillermo Perez, son of Domingo Pé-.
■ rez of Puerta de Tierra, was seriously wounded in action on 4 January in France. 1 Private First Class Fé1 1lx Alicea, whose sister Miss ■ Margarita Alicea lives in Villalba, was seriously wounded on January 4 in France. Staff Sgt. José Roble" Jr. son of Mrs. Antonia Prados Font, of Canó.vanás, was slightly wounded on January 4 in France. Private German Santiago, son of Guadalupe Santiago de Coroza, was slightly wounded on January 4 in France. Gabriel A. Hurtado, son of Mrs. Juana R. Hurtado, of Ponée, was slightly wounded on January 1 4 in France.
CSP lifted the order of suspension of thirty buses.
Decision was adopted at the request of the OTD Regional Director, after a conference attended by Barceló and ADOI leaders.
The Public Service Commission yesterday put on hold "the recent suspension order of 30 buses belonging to the Association of Independent Bus Owners, according to its President, Antonio R. Barceló, "at the express request of the Office of Defense Transportation and pending the outcome of the public hearing scheduled to discuss the motions filed" by said Association. The aforementioned hearing will take place on February 14, at nine o'clock in the morning. Therefore, there will be no
the announced ADOI bus strike will not take place on the 29th. OTD Report: The Office of Defense Transportation announced yesterday that the Association of Independent Omnibuses has granted its request to desist from the strike announced for next Monday and that at the same time the Public Service Commission agreed to suspend the recent order that put 30 vehicles out of service during off-peak passenger hours. Such suspension is to be continued in effect Jiasta to be held on Monday, and that the Public Service Commission has agreed to hold in abeyance the recent order which put 30 vehicles out of service during off-peak hours.
The needle industry now enjoys higher peaks.
Concession was made to balance wage increases mandated by the Wage and Hour Division - Minimums increased by 20 percent - t
Wage and Hour Division of the Department of Labor. This has just been announced by the Price Administration. The action covers Puerto Rican needlework contractors who supply the labor for sewing and embroidery articles for sale in the United States and contractors who buy materials from manufacturers and resell the manufactured articles to the same firms. The increase in the cost of individual items to the manufacturer or to the distributor who pays the contractors' charges will be exactly equivalent to the increase in labor costs. The increases are retroactive to January 1, 1945, the effective date of the wage order. Minimum wages on most lines in the Puerto Rican needle industry were increased by 20 percent; and, on a few lines, by as much as 40 percent. Prior to the order, the Puerto Rican contractor could add to the direct cost of the labor he employed a percent profit based on his similar service charges" in March 1942. The new amendment to OAP 1" (Continued on page 16).
WASHINGTON, 26. (PU) Needlework contractors in Puerto Rico now enjoy higher maximum prices, in most branches of industry, to balance the "increase" in wages mandated by the U.S. Labor Relations Act.
It is believed the FLTen ballot will be left to the
Labor Relations Board to meet on 29th -Federation's Joint Statements <1 e ('ampos del Toro Point" of view of the centrals are sent to the organizer Watson By A. Rodríguez Cantillo ' , (Editor of EL MUNDO) The Insular Board of Labor Relations will be summoned by its President, Mr. Enrique Campos del Toro, for a meeting to be held next Monday, and in which the letter of the Free Federation of Puerto Rican Workers will be presented, in which they state their position regarding the sugar elections scheduled to take place on the 30th of this month. The fact that the Board is summoned for the day before that on which the elections are to be held has been interpreted as an indication that said body will not only not postpone any more Ja voting among the sugar industry but will maintain its decision that the -FLT appear on the election ballot. The letter from Francisco Paz Granola and Nicolas Nogueras Rivera, president and secretary general respectively of the Foderaclón was received yesterday morning by Mr. Campos del Toro. When asked if the sugar elections will be suspended again, he answered "no", adding that "the election is the only way to solve the controversy that has arisen as to which labor organization will represent the workers in the collective contract with the members of the Sugar Producers Association". "There are two organizations in Puerto Rico that claim the right to collectively contract with an employer organization," said Campos del Toro, "All official and unofficial efforts have been made to address this conflict and the result has been unsuccessful. There is only one means left, the only one, and that is the holding of elections, that is to say, that the workers themselves decide by voting for the organization that they consider should represent them. "It is inconceivable that there could be any opposition to this, since it is, I repeat, the only effective way of solving the problem. When Campos Ael Toro was asked about those cases in which there is a plant whose employers, being members of the Federation of Sugar Producers, have collective bargaining agreements with an independent workers' organization, that is, one that does not belong to the Cut, he answered that in such a case the worker can vote in the part of the ballot destined to those who do not wish to be represented, for the purposes of hiring, neither by the Free Federation nor by the General Confederation. As we have indicated in previous reports on the sugar problem, the Central Victoria de Carolina is in this situation, where the Employers have an agreement with the Union de Irabajadores de Loíza, presided by Mr. Lorenzo Fernández, which is an independent labor organization. As the election ballot has been made, an exact reproduction of which was published by EU MUNDO, there are three spaces to vote; one for the FL1, one for the CGT and one for those who do not want to be represented by either of these two entities. Closed workshop As is known, one of the points which gave rise to prolonged discussions in the talks held lately between the Working Committee of the Producers' Association and the Agreement Committee of the Sugar Union and which determined the impasse which arose lately was the acceptance of the system of "closed workshop by means of which only workers affiliated to the Union could work in the centers". The Association objected to this, as we have said, alleging that it could not put out of work any federally-employed worker who did not want to become a member of the Sugar Union. In connection with this matter of the closed shop and the right of the workers to join the Union without the Union having the right to fire him, persons familiar with the matter inform us of the existence of a law, in the statutes of Puerto Rico, which, according to such persons, has application in this case. They refer to Law No. 42 of 1917, approved on November 30 of said year and which appears in the Statutes of Puerto Rico of 1941 and in the compilation of labor laws published by the floor leader of the Popular Party in the Senate, Vicente Gelgel Polanco, attorney Vicente Gelgel Polanco, the law reads: ■ "Section 1- It shall be Illegal by part" of any corporation, company, society, partnership, association, Indivl-
PARIS, 3 (PU)- More than one hundred thousand Germans, well equipped with artillery, tanks, ammunition and a nursery which they estimate to be sufficient for at least another year, continue to hold out for months after the liberation of France, in a French Atlantic port at Dunkirk, where they are defying all attempts to name it. It is reported that they are not continuously supplied by avlonen of large radius of action or by submarines carrying reinforcement. I r r r e gularity in several of the municipalities The Auditor reports <|iie authorized g a " t o " in excess.-It will request action Insular Audit He reported yesterday that as a result of Investigations carried out by agents of his, it has been found that in several municipal administrations that ceased ol day 8 of the current month Irregularities and violations of rules and regulations issued by the Auditor were committed. It was said that the Auditor will request the Attorney General to "proceed to prosecute former municipal officials who, in light of the investigations carried out, are guilty of such irregularities. The Audit reported that in some of the aforementioned municipalities, more was spent on public services than what, according to the law and regulations, should have been spent during the first semester of the current fiscal year, and that in one municipality, expenses and payments were authorized in excess of the appropriations that were budgeted for the fiscal year that expires next June 30. The Island Auditor understands that in the case of the overdraft that has been verified in a municipality, in which municipal officials issued checks to pay for services, for amounts in excess of what the municipal administration should cover, it must proceed with all the rigor of the law, and will request the Attorney General to do so. Works will be done with money from the State Insurance Fund Atiles Morón alludes to urgently needed facilities I." construction of the Industrial Hospital and of the physical rehabilitation rooms for the workers, projected at a total cost of $700,000, will be carried out with money from the same State Insurance Fund, according to the administrator of the aforementioned agency, Guillermo Atlles Moreu, who informed an editor of EL MUNDO. The plans and other reports related to the constructions have already been submitted by the Administrator of the Fund to the consideration and final approval of the Planning Board, according to our reports. Administrator Atlles Moreu pointed out as an interesting detail the fact that the expenses to carry out these projects will come almost entirely from the same "fund" of the State Insurance Fund, which has money reserves, increased by some surpluses and savings that have been made lately. Atlles Moreu stated that "the idea is that the money invested in these urgently needed expansions will be replenished by the same revenues of the State Insurance Fund. It is unlawful for any employer or any employer of labor to require as a condition of employment or as a condition of continuance in any employment, contract, agreement or reservation, evidenced in writing or otherwise or by conditions reserved in any contract that the person or persons so employed shall separate from or refrain from per' fencing any legal organization or corporation, or under any pretext whatsoever, to prohibit, ; limit or restrict such employees from exercising their "ocia- > l, economic, fraternal or co- ' mental rights in connection with or through any organization or ■ legal partnership, during their ■ employment with any employer. Continued on page 16).
7th Army restores lincas in Strasbourg.
Smashed Nazi offensive, the aimed at recapturing Alsace First Army ready to attack Awaiting notice of the Third to continue toward the Rhine. Eliminated Nazi salient PARIS. 26. (PU)-British and American "forces" advanced toward the Roer River on a 27-mile front west of Cologne, while in the woods" west of Haguenau, in Alsace, the American Seventh Army completely restored its lines north of Alsace, repulsing the Germans "on the" eastern banks of the Moder River, containing the "dangerous Nazi offensive on a 19-mile front" from Haguenau westward. However, the 'acclone' on the subtraction of the western front was on a small scale. Dispatches from the front of the American First Army say frankly that Lieutenant General Hodge's forces are observing a time-out while Lieutenant General Patton's Third Army rectifies its "Unen" in its sector in the "Ardenne". To the north, the British Second Army and the American Ninth Army began operations to extend their "poalcinoe" in front of the Roer River. Both armies hold almost the entire western bank of the river, except for a small Nazi bridgehead north of Brachelen. The 102nd Division of the Ninth Army added another five square miles to the ground it occupies on the west bank of the Roer after fording the Wurm River north of Linnich in an operation before dawn today without opposition of any kind. The advance enabled the occupation of Brachelen, two miles northwest of Linnich and nearly ten miles into Germany. The" patrol" reported that Jo" Germans withdrew from the town under cover of night. The British Second Army (Continued on page 16.) Governor Limits g e s t ion Washington Alludes in Circular to Officials Overstepping eh Task Governor Rexford G. Tugwell has addressed a circular to all heads of departments, agencies and Instrumentalities" of the Insular Government, directing them to 1a convenhnce that when funcionarlo" of any of said" office" go to Washington in ge". (Iones oficíale" be strictly limited to dealing with matters affecting their" respective offices, according to reliable Information obtained by an editor of THE WORLD. It was alleged yesterday that because "some officials who have gone to Washington on official business" "have taken the liberty of giving opinions on other matters in other departments," "confusing situations and misinterpretations of general Government regulations have sometimes been created," In his circular Governor Tugwell pointed out this fact, without naming individuals, and recommended that officials follow the rule of confining their business in Washington to matters within their respective offices.
Morss Lovett's removal from office has been referred to court.
By CHARLES McCABE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 26 (PU)-Dr. Robert Morss Lovett, who was removed from the federal payroll while serving as secretary of government in the Virgin Islands in 1943, received from Congress "an extreme penalty for conviction in a constitutionally permissible disqualification proceeding" without due process of disqualification. So says a memorandum filed today with the Court of Appeals. Lovett, a distinguished liberal educator and literary critic, is currently a member of the English department at the University of . Puerto Rico. The memorandum was filed by the law firm of Covington, Burling, Roblee, Actheson and Scherb. The pleading is believed to be the first shot in the test case involving the Congregation.
involving the Congress and the executive branch of the Government in a fight over the right of Congress to legislate outside its "federal employee" positions, in which the Executive Branch maintains that such action (by the Congress) interferes with your constitutional power. The referenced pleading was filed not only on behalf of Professor Lovett, but also on behalf of two other Government employees-Goodwin B. Watson and William Dodd, Jr. both former employees of the Federal Communications Commission-who were cut off forever from the federal payroll by a provision added to an appropriations bill deficiency for alleged "subversive activities." Lovett's case attracted widespread attention because, according to the Did he continue on page 16.)
They invaded the East Prussian hinterland.
F u n d a d a d e r s i n t e r v e r v i n g Speaker Muñoz Marín lew spoke about his and the Party's responsibility On Tuesday, members of the Council of Founders of the Popular Democratic Party met at the residence of Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin, at the invitation of Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin. We are informed that this is the first meeting held by said body in the last four or five years. The meeting was attended by, among others, Dr. Antonio Fernós Isérn.lossoftoros Félix Alvarez. Pascasio Garda. Francisco Anselml. Julio N. Mato", Podro Juan Dumont, Cruz Pacheco Rufz. Hcraclio Rivera and Mrs. Luisa Boix and Mrs. Maria Luisa Quiñones, We have been informed that Mr. Muñoz Msrln spoke do Ja enori me responsibility that in these (Continued on page 7.)
The Commerce Committee rejected Wallace's appointment
The vote was fourteen to five.-Tanibién recommended the bill separating the secretary of Commerce from federal lending agencies.
Washington. 26. (pui.- ei c vote fourteen to five, of recent appointment of exvlce; Secretary of Commerce. The full Senate may now reject the report of its Commerce Committee, proceeding to confirm Wallace. The said Committee also decided, by a vote of fifteen to five, to recommend to the Senate to pass the bill separating from the Department of Commerce the" federal lending agencies." The Committee's rejection of the bill came as a surprise to the Washington offices. It is true that there was a great atmosphere in the Committee for the bill separating the Financial Reconstruction Corporation from the Department of Commerce: but it was expected in some circles that if the Committee recommended the measure, on the other hand it would endorse, albeit by a majority. the appointment of Wallace. Yesterday, nnbefore the aforesaid Committee. Wallace had stated emphatically that he intended to serve as Secretary of Commerce, even if Congress were to shear the Federal lending agencies from that department. The day before Wallace's statement, Jesse Jones, the former Secretary of Commerce, had testified before the Committee that he did not consider Wallace (without expressly mentioning it) qualified to direct the vast financial and credit operations of the Federal Government now conducted by the Department of Commerce through the agencies of the Financial Reconstruction Corporation. Wallace had the opportunity yesterday to implicitly reply to Jones before the Committee. He did so by stating that the question was not one of fitness for office, but of whether the FRC should help big business or small business, which is to provide the sixty million post-war jobs that President Roosevelt guaranteed to the American people. In this indirect way, the personal feud between Jesse Jones and Henry A. Wallace culminated. Wallace, which became a real public scandal, in the spring of last year, when Wallace and Jones accused each other of hindering the war effort and called each other "liars", the bitter controversy was dissolved by the President, in a letter addressed to Wallace and Jones, who was deprived of his duties and powers at the head of special war agencies; taking advantage of the opportunity to give notice to all Government officials that when he decided to publicly air his views on the matter, he was to be "informed" that the President was to be "informed" that he was to be "informed" that when he decided to publicly air his views on the matter.)
The Committee of Commerce of the Sonado, by ecldió Informar desfavorablemente el epresidente Henry A. Wallace para Prioridad para el auto ni ático del Gobierno Delgado Márquez explica progreso compraventa de Compañía Telefónica There is a probability that the Telephone Company will become the property of the Government on July 1st of this year, if a final agreement is reached in the talks that are being held and which have progressed remarkably. This was reported yesterday to EL MUNDO by the General Administrator of the Puerto Rico Communications Authority, Mr. Rafael Delgado Márquez, who returned to the island on Thursday night, after having participated in the negotiations with the directors of the Porto Rico Telephone Company. In connection with the" gestlones made by Mr. Delgado Márquez to install the automatic telephone service for Caguas and other towns served" by the Authority, the necessary priority was granted in Washington and orders have already been placed for the purchase of the necessary equipment. When interviewed in his offices, he said that the Authority's (Continued on page 5.)
WESTERN FRONT: The American Seventh Army halted the dangerous Nazi offensive west of Haguenau, the only sector where the enemy still retained the initiative, while the Americans and British advanced toward the Roer River west of Cologne. EASTERN FRONT: German reports, not confirmed by Moscow, yesterday placed the Russians" M miles from Berlin, on the frontier of the German province of Brandenburg. Posen, a Nazi stronghold in western Poland, has been flanked from the north and south. and Breslau, capital of Lower Silesia, is under intense" attack" by Russian forces.
German Transocean agency says Soviet spearheads are only 94 miles from Berlin By ROBERT MUSEL LONDON, 26. (PU>- From the Baltic Sea to the Carpathian Mountains, the Soviet armies are carrying on their sweeping offensive and have already overrun the entire interior of East Prussia, attacking at once towards the Baltic, with the towns of Koenigsberg and Elbing as immediate objectives, while Gdynia and Danzig have been exposed or the onslaughts of Marshals Rokossovsky and Zhukov, along the Polish corridor. The radio silence of Danzig indicates that the Russians are very close to that city.
(The German agency Transocean reported that Red Army spearheads have reached the borders of the German province of Brandenburg, in which the city of Berlin, the capital of the Reich, is located. If the information is correct, the Soviet forces break out 94 miles from Berlin,) Meanwhile, Posen, the main and last German stronghold in western Poland, which defends the eastern frontier of the Reich, is tonight directly threatened by a frontal attack by the forces commanded by Marshal Zhukov, from the suburbs, aided by flanking movements from the northeast and southeast. Similarly, the Soviets have carried out an enveloping movement against Breslau, capital of Lower Silesia, while General Petrov's forces, advancing to liaise with Marshal Konev's Left Wing, are on the eve of completely isolating Polish Silesia. Although the Germans are said to be sending to the battle lines large reinforcements withdrawn from the western front, there is as yet no indication that they are capable of offering effective resistance to the Soviet thrust. These reports, coming from Moscow, were somewhat confirmed by the Berlin radio = transmitting statements of a military spokesman rtnzi, who admitted that Thorn (Torun) is encircled while Posen is attacked from the east and south and Bromberg (Bydgo.scz) from the south and west. He added that Soviet spearheads advanced between Schniedcrmuhl and Posen, but tried to play down the importance of such penetrations, saying that not too much importance should be attached to these movements. Moscow radio, for its part, said in a broadcast in German that "the operations outside Germany are over," and added: "The last great battle is being fought on German soil and Hitler will lose it as he has lost the other previous battles." He also broadcast dispatches published by Moscow newspapers, in which impressive accounts are made of the enormity of Nazi ba--jas on shoulders and portrecho', in East Prussia, Poland and Silesia. Berlin radio, in a series of broadcasts which convey the fear bordering on panic which has seized the Nazis," exhorted the people to defend themselves, declaring that this is "their last chance". The correspondent of the Columbia Broadcasting System of New York spoke this evening on the Moscow radio and said: "Tonight we expect some news from Zhukov, whose forces, outside Posen, are heading towards Berlin by the main railway line passing through Frankfurt". Meanwhile, Marshal Stalin confirmed today in an order of the day that Marshal Rokossovsky's forces reached the Baltic Sea, thus isolating East Prussia from the central territory of Germany, Stalin reports the conquest of the following towns in East Prussia: Muelhausen, 11 and a half miles east of Elbing; Marienburg, h.16 miles southwest of Elbing; Marienburg, h.16 miles southwest of Elbing; Muelhausen, 11 and a half miles east of Elbing; Marienburg, h.16 miles southwest of Elbing, h.16 miles east of Elbing. miles southwest of Elbing; Stuhm, 25 miles southeast of Danzlg; Tolkemlt, 10 miles northeast of Elbing; Locwenhagen, nine miles southeast of Koenigsberg; Tapian, 19 miles west of Insterburg; Alienburg, 29 miles southeast of Koenigsberg; Nordenburg, 20 miles southeast of Al'enburg, and Loetzen, 22 miles south of Nordenburg. Tonight, the Danzig radio stopped transmitting, which leads one to believe (Continued on page 3.)
| THE WAR IN BRIEF
M" that it is under siege. In East Prussia, isolated from the Reich, the fall of Roo" nlg "bcrg is expected from one moment to the next. - - - - ITALY: Patrol" of the Qulrito Army attacked German troops" south of Bologna. In the Adriatic Sea a German patrol which crossed the Senlo River was repulsed. PHILIPPINES: The" outag ndfl teamcrlcanns advancing ÚmHI from Clark base towards MaÍM are finding increasing riB" tencla south of the river the eastern flank, lo" yaifliln occupied positions in lagBcmtaña" north of RoaariabS.
I do not liquidate lo" bonds purchased, ■i is that I want to liquidate Hitler.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 27, 1945,
Entered a" second claa" matter. - Post Office, San Juan, P. R.