THE DAILY WORLD OF THE MARANA
40 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
40 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
Item XXVII
Let's support the men who made the Victory Loan possible.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, DECEMBER 8, 1945
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10430
Gen. Del Valle denies seeking governorship
Says he is too busy handling Navy business Hears it in newspapers His greatest ambition is to retire to his Maryland estate Pop JEANVANVRANKEN WASHINGTON, 7. (INS) - Commandant General Pedro A. del Valle, of the United States Marine Corps, today denied reports that he is seeking the governorship of Puerto Rico. On this matter, the General stated: "I have been busy with the Marine Corps since I re-' groad to the United States, and I don't have time to look for another job. All I hear about my possibility of becoming governor is what I read in the newspaper...". The Puerto Rican war hero, who has returned from Okinawa, has been a constant subject of rumor in the air as a possible auceaor of Governor Rexford G. Tugwell. Dennis Chivea, D-New Mexico, has announced his nomination to President Truman. On this indication, the General declared: "I am honored that Senator Chives thinks me capable of the office. But, as far as I am concerned, Tugwell is still the governor of Puerto Rico. Until he is out of office, I believe it is premature to discuss an auceaor. Although I have lived in the North since I was five years old, my interest in Puerto Rico is very much alive. I will do all I can to help Puerto Ricans. However, my whole life has been devoted to military work, and I have never been involved in politics, here or there. The governorship of Puerto Rico would, therefore, be an entirely new assignment for me. I would have to begin to work my way down to learn how to be a governor." The General further stated that his main ambition is to "retire to my farm in Maryland": adding: "It is a historical tradition, since the time of the Roman General Clnclnatus, that the soldiers turn to the plow. Agriculture is a challenging profession. Today, I require the best technical preparation possible." General del Vallo has spent most of his leisure time studying the modern methods of agriculture. In the interview granted to this correspondent, he said he is particularly eager to experiment in contour farming. Even during the Okinawa campaign, the General carefully observed local farming methods. On this point, he said, "The Okinawans taught me a lot about cultivation. They had developed their own variety of contour farming, having adopted certain Japanese practices which resulted in high production. We encouraged the continuation of planting and harvesting in the untouched areas so that the people could feed themselves. General del Valle is now the Commandant's staff officer in charge of the inspection of the continental Marine Corps posts. He has already made several excursions to investigate installations on both the east and west coasts, and, next week, made routine inspections of Camp Lojoune and Cherry Point, North Carolina. Finally, the General said, "The emphasis in the work right now is on the problems of demobilization. In our Post Inspections, we try to consider as many individual problems as possible, and to adjust the official records to the needs of the personnel, as well as those of the Marine Corps."
Major sugar shortage predicted in '46
Agriculture has made a study which includes the । sugar found in Java Wouldn't factor an increase here । ¡ Nor is sugar Cuba mentioned in report. By CHARLES McCABE WASHINGTON, 7. (PU).-Pron-' so United States has obtained exclusive information from an Agriculture Department source that sugar stocks for the year 1948 are expected to be "va1 rivers million tons below the taming," even if the 1.6 million tons of sugar reported to be available in Java. The information obtained in the recently completed study will be extensively used in the present negotiations for the purchase of the Cuban 1945-48 crop, according to government informants. The study was made by one of the officials of the Sugar Division of the Department of Agriculture, which is headed by the chief U.S. sugar negotiator with the Cubans, Earl B. Wilson. Wilson, and it states that the United States will not only enter 1948 with low sugar stocks, but will be prevented from increasing those stocks during the first few months of the coming year. The Report adds that the United States has already harvested 1" Cuban harvest, as well as the Puerto Rican and Hawaii harvests. It goes on to say that: "The next few months constitute the most uncertain period for the accurate prediction of the supplies that will be available in 1948. This is true because it is not until late in the spring that final estimates of sugar production in Cuba and Puerto Rico can be made, and even later that a reliable estimate is available concerning the entire production of beet and cane sugar in the United States. The above-mentioned report, completed "a short time ago", also states that: "Even with the availability of sugar stocks in Java, world sugar supplies for 1948 will be several million short of demand", due to deficits in the production areas. And they go on to say that: "with regard to the political situation in Java, such unrest makes it impossible to say when the sugar reported to be available for use in the United States will be available in that area. (Continued on pAgln 24.)
Independent unions try to get Colon sector to attend Congress At the request of entities, formulated by Rivera Martinez, the Executive Committee will meet on Monday to discuss. - Reception for Lázaro Peña
With the purpose of reaching agreements to intervene so that the Cegetista sector presided by Francisco Cplón Gordlany attends the Congress for Unity which is scheduled to be held on December 15 in Santurce, independent workers' organizations of the Capital, among them several of those that make up the Mees de Unidad del Trabajo, met yesterday at the premises occupied by the Unión de Empleados de Hoteles, Cafés y Restaurantes, in San Juan. It was agreed to ask Mr. Colón Gordlany and other members of the C.G.T. sector to give an interview, in which he will present, it was informed, the point of view of the organizations "...".
The C.G.T. and other members of the sector of the C.G.T. that he will attend the I Congress. ' To this effect, just yesterday the pre ' Bidente of the Free Federation of ■ Workers, Mr. Prudencio Ri- ■ vera Martinez, on behalf of the or- > ganzaclones gathered, got in ■ communication with Mr. Collón Gordlany, notifying the latter that " next Monday I will convene the Executive CoImité which he presides to hear the views of the i applicants. The talks - will take place at the offices of this - " cegetista sector. - I (Continued on page 18)
Puerto Rico in the Tugwell regime on the island is coming to an end.
(This is the second in a series of four articles written for the New York Herald-Tribune by American journalist Emmet Crosier, who recently returned to the North after having made here, as reported in the Herald, a survey of the political and economic situation of the country). By EMMET CROZIER New York Herald-Tribune Staff Writer 'NEW YORK.- The news that the Democratic Committee of Puerto Rico's Democratic Committee on the Island is at the end of its tugwell regime on the Island is nearing its end. The news do - quo the Democratic Committee speaks on- , sent its legal adviser, Judge : Welburn Mayock of California, to , investigate the situation on Puerto 1 ; Rico, has fueled Reports here । do that ol President Truman will accept- , will soon accept Governor Tugwell's resignation. Over a cup of coffee on La 1 ■ 1
Mallorqulna, in the Condado Hotel canteen and at the Palace Hotel's rooftop dance and entertainment restaurant, overlooking the ancient rooftops and stone terraces of San Juan, there was talk of Governor Tugwell finally getting the call that would send him back to the Continent. That was nothing new. Since he went there in the summer of 1941, coffee politicians have been throwing Governor Tugwell out of his old palace regularly, every few months, sending him back to the Continent. He has proved himself a tough and resilient statesman. He has survived Congressional Investigations, student protests and denunciatory rea- ommendations of an outraged Insular legislature. But there are signs that Dr. Tugwell's time is coming. I
Rumor has it that he has ended the pact with his political ally, the influential or impronostlcablo Luis Muñoz Marin, president of the Puerto Rico Senate. His appointment' of Thomas A. Fennell as head! of the Puerto Rico Agricultural Company, at an annual salary of >15,000, provoked a one-day strike of the native engineers and technicians, who declared that they had plenty of men ready for the job. University students launched an outrageous "picket" line in front of the palace entrance, backing the Engineers and attacking the Governor. Tugwell's old policy is recalled I There is an additional reason why Dr. Tugwell's retirement is imminent, in addition to the rancorous animosities he seems capable of I (Continued on page 24),
Presents the draft of the Truman plan
MU jo® ■, .... Congresswoman Mary Norton, Domo-, Crete, of Georgia. | Norton on industrial peace would create boards to intervene in labor disputes By JAMES F. DONOVAN United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 7. (PU).-The Acting Chairman of the Labor Committee of the United States House of Representatives, Robert Ramspeck, Democrat, of Georgia, yesterday filed in the House, on behalf of the Chairman of that Committee, Mrs. Mary T. Norton, Democrat, of New Jersey, who was in Puerto Rico, leading a Congressional delegation, for the funeral honors of the President of Puerto Rico, and the Chairman of the Labor Committee of the United States House of Representatives, Robert Ramspeck, Democrat, of Georgia, who was in Puerto Rico, presiding over a Congressional delegation, on the occasion of the funeral honors at the death of the then Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in the United States, Santiago Iglesias Pantln, a bill Implementing President Truman's recent message of industrial peace. The proposed legislation would authorize the President to establish fact-finding boards whenever a labor dispute threatened to disrupt the national economy. In spite of the frank support which Senators and Representatives have been reported to be willing to give to the President's proposals, it is beginning to be anticipated that there will be a sharp fight in the Labor Committee over the Norton bill. It is noticeable that the bitter opposition to Mr. Truman's ideas which the labor organizations are increasingly making has begun to have its effect. However, one of the members of the aforementioned Committee said today that, unlike the President, the Committee will make it easier for Mr. Truman's (Continued on page 18)
Truman states that Mayock was only representing himself when he made his recent trip to the island.
500 More Puerto Rican Soldiers Arrived Overseas Yesterday From Overseas
Hundreds of Puerto Rican soldiers who for some time have been stationed in the U.S. heses of the English island of Trinidad returned yesterday to the Island, aboard the transport "State of Virginia", some to be reassigned after their leave and others to return to civilian life, having completed their military Jomada. The photo was taken as they began disembarking yesterday. (Photo EL MUNDO), fw-s " ' Z
Plan ready for Muñoz Rivera Avenue improvement ■' Interior is studying whether federal permission could be used by the Municipality Expanding the information published several weeks ago exclusively by EL MUNDO on the Muñoz Rivera Avenue improvement project, the Department of the Interior, through the voice of its deputy commissioner, Mr. Jesús Benitez Castaño, informed yesterday that "all the plans and specifications of the works to be carried out have been completed". He added that "they will be submitted to the consideration of the Planning Board, and we also expect the initiation of conferences between the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Orlando R. Méndez, and the President of the Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, on the works to be carried out". I will also negotiate, with the military authorities, rights to use the land located on both sides of said avenue. This authorization was extended a little more than a year ago to the Government of San Juan by the Military Department of the Antilles. In this regard, the Department of the Interior authorized the following: "Both the project and the plans for the reconstruction of Luis Muñoz Rivera Avenue have been completed. This avenue was built by the former municipality of San Juan, having been recently transferred to this Department. -! "Both the project and the plans are ready to be studied by the Planning Board and it is expected that the Commissioner will soon initiate conferences with said Board to reach definitive agreements. "The project calls for changes in the present alignment in many places, greatly improving the avenue, as well as for increases in the bearing surface and the modification of the grade, lowering it in front of the Capitol Insular almost to the level of the entrance of this building, which now appears practically buried in this section of the avenue. "These plans run up against the difficulty that the Federal Government has several buildings at the edge of the avenue and the military government will have to give its consent to the plans". The Government of San Juan obtained the corresponding permission from the United States Army, while acting in the administration of the city from Mr. Gonzalo Dlago, for the use of military property to eliminate the curves on Muñoz Rivera Avenue in front of the naval base, which is located in the vicinity of the Young Men's Christian Association, according to information obtained by EL MUNDO. The corresponding authorization was granted to the municipality in no¿Continued on page 24).
They came from garrisons in various areas of Trinidad. Those who did not meet the requirements to return to civilian life were reassigned. The group was discharged to visit their relatives here ' More than 500 Puerto Rican soldiers entered the Redistribution Center at Camp Tortuguero yesterday, Friday, from garrisons of the Military Department of the Antilles in Trinidad, to be discharged or reassigned.
■ Forbidden to take ; sand in the area ' of Isla Verde I ----- ; Strong swells have deteriorated the coast J to Boca de Cangrejos Due to the strong swells that have been lashing the coasts of Isla Verde, Boca de Can- . grajos, Cataño and Palo Seco, the De- . parliament of the Interior has [ been forced to prohibit the ex- . traction of sand in these sections. "Yesterday afternoon," the Deputy Commissioner, Mr. Jesús Benitez Castaño, told us, "I made an inspection visit to the entire coast, which has been affected for days by strong tidal waves. On the road to Palo Seco, the sea has burst through two places. The sea has also washed away part of the road between the so-called Boca Vieja and Punta Salinas. "Property owners in , this entire area oppose the ex- , traction of sands because , bub properties suffer serious per- , lawsuits. Not only such opposition is , made in the area alluded to, but also in the do Isla Verde and Boca de Cangrejos. j "It has been the rule of the Departa- . ment to grant permits to extract sands, forming it within । the maritime zone only. The . swells these days make it impossible for trucks to take the . sand under these provisions." (Continued on page 18)
-| Shortly after 10:00 a.m. । morning these troops arrived at the Army Pier, Fort {Buchanan, aboard the transport "State of Virginia." Commanding- ■ te General William M. Grimes, Chief of the Military Department of the West Indies, accompanied by Colonel E. W. Walter, Deputy Chief of Staff I, and other officers, were ' present during the landing. Forty-nine Continental soldiers-with sufficient score to be discharged immediately-are also coming aboard the State of Virginia. They will be sent to the United States on the transport "Monterey," which i arrived on the island from New Orleans two days ago, bringing approximately 1,000 island soldiers. An Army band played pieces on the pier as the troops left the ship, and several Red Cross ladies served refreshments. The officer who sees (Continued on page 19.)
Grimes will be presented with a diploma this afternoon He will speak at the ceremony to be held in front of the Victory Statue In a public ceremony to be held today in front of the Victory Monument, opposite the Capitol Insular Capitol, on Ponce de Leon Avenue, Judge Martin Travieso, insular chairman of the War Finance Committee for Puerto Rico, will speak over the radio to the American Nation. The ceremonies will begin at one o'clock in the afternoon and their main purpose will be the presentation of a diploma by Judge Travieso to General William F. Grimes, commander of the Military Department of the West Indies. This diploma will be presented as a token of appreciation for the valuable cooperation given by that Department to the War Bond program during the seven loans and the Victory Loan, both by the military and the clvilei employees. In receiving this diploma, General Grimes will speak on the radio, and his speech, which will be broadcast coast to coast in the United States, will refer to the magnificent work done by the soldiers for-' (Continued on page 19)- (Continued on page 19).
The ÓÁP denies the request for an increase in the price of coffee Gilstrap announces he will fight the black market. * Quiñones disputes agency's views - Coffee growers leave today for U.S.
In communicating yesterday to the General Supply Administrator, Mr. Antonio Vlcéns Ríos, and to the president of the Coffee Growers' Association, Mr. José Ramón Quiñones, the decision denying the request for an increase in the price of coffee, the director of the Office of Pre-Coffee Administration, Mr. Sam P. Gils-
i - -- -- - ; | | BULLETINS ||
trap, stated that the OAP will fight with "all our might" any black market situation that may arise in said commodity, and recommended to the head of the AGS to proceed with the importation of whatever quantities of coffee are necessary to maintain an adequate supply of coffee to fill the needs of the people i consumer. | Since it is our firm conviction"-says a letter sent yesterday by the director of the OAP to the head of the AGS, answering another in which the latter requested the revision of coffee supplies and prices-"that the prices currently in effect are reasonable and adequate, we, as we have informed Mr. Quiñones, will combat with all our might any black market operation that may occur. Since the agency which you direct is responsible for the supply of necessary and essential articles in Puerto Rico, we are recommending that you import any quantity of coffee which may be needed, in order to insure the needs of consumers in this crop year, and that you cooperate in the avoidance of a black market," (Continued on page 13.)
WASHINGTON, 7. (PU) - Representative Edwin A. Hall will introduce legislation providing bonds for veterans of World War II. The bonds would amount to "a few thousand dollars," plus $500 or $1,000 for "disabled veterans," Hall told the House. - - - WASHINGTON. 7. (PU) - During its second year of war, 8,000,000. children were born to the United States, according to statistics of the Federal Children's Bureau. o - - - NEW YORK, 7. (PU) - American Airlines mechanics received a 10 per cent increase in the number of American Airlines i
line." received a 10.7 per cent. increase in their Wages and on Jan. 20 will receive another 20 per cent. increase, until in their 40-hour week they receive the wages they received for 48 hours during the gue- ■ rra. - - - - CLEVELAND, 7. (PU) - Commandant General Claire Chennault today praised former Ambassador Patrick Hurley for openly accusing the State Department's career diplomats. f ' --- LONDON. 7. (FU) - A spokesman for Britain's Foreign Office I (Continued on page 13.)
It is stated that he had ' no official mission The President skilfully avoided referring to Tugwell's future * Speculation in island circles Interior official says there is curiosity about Tugwell plans By CHARLES McCABB I WASHINGTON, 7. (PU)- President Truman, at his press conference today, said that Welburn Mayock, on his visit" to Puerto Rico, was representing himself, and not the President or the Democratic National Committee. The President, when questioned as to whether he intended to act on the proposition of the Democratic National Committee for the impeachment of Tugwell, said that the Committee had made no proposition to him. Asked whom Welburn Mayock was representing, on his recent visit to Puerto Rico, Mr. Truman said that Mayoík । was representing only himself, and not the President, nor the Democratic Committee. A spokesman for the Department of the Interior, meanwhile, told the United Press that the President's announcement regarding Mayock did not come "as a surprise," adding that "the definite presidential repudiation" of Mayock "should place the gentleman in his own perspective in Puerto Rico. I On the other hand, the Insular circuits in Washington are a hive of rumors regarding Tugwell's immediate future. According to the Department of the Interior, the Governor is expected in Washington next Tuesday. It is not known how long the Governor intends to remain in this capital, or how long he intends to request an interview with the President. 9 It is generally believed here that . Tugwell will accept the position reportedly 1 I offered him by the Unl- , versldad of Chicago, but, beyond that, no one occupying a position of responsibility in the official t circuits is engaged in coo mmenting Tugwell's plans. A senior official of the Department of the Interior told the United Press that the department is "extremely curious" about Tugwell's plans, and expects that the Governor will inform him of his intentions when he arrives in this city next week. In San Juan, meanwhile, as . already announced, it is known that Governor Tugwell will leave next Monday for Washington, . I accompanied by the Coordinator of . Insular Affairs, Elmer Ellsworth, having been informed by a por- . tavoz of the Fortress that the Goi bernator is going on a trip of mere . । routine, that he proposes to be in -1 Wáshlngton about two weeks, and -. that at the end of them he will return to . Puerto Rico. ■ Cuba asks to export 800,000 tons r of refined to U. U. S. HAVANA, 7, (FU) Representatives of eighteen Cuban sugar mills, which constitute an important sector of the industry, cabled today to the Cuban Commission discussing the sale of the . harvest in Wáshlngton their views on what they consider essential .'to satisfy the needs of the Cuban refining industry and sugar production in general. This is as follows: L No limitation whatsoever should be admitted to (...our right to the Ubre , c!ón of refined sugar to the United States , but on the basis of varying the peculiar system of sale, equating it with the conditions of sale ' of raw sugar and establishing > i equal conditions of payment for the ( raw, that is, an interest-free advance t of 90% of its value; 2. Agreed terms as to centi.i (Continued on page 24.) " 1 ELLSWORTH ACCOMPANIES ; THE GOVERNOR The Co-ordinator of Insular 1 Affairs "*, Mr. Elmer Ellsworth, will accompany Goberi nadar Tugwell during the latter's vioJe next moons to Wáshlnirton. A spokesman for La Fortaleza said yesterday that the Governor's trip is a routine one and that the island chief executive will be back in San Juan in two weeks.