THE M&NDO
3Ó Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
1.A.M. DAILY NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXVIII
Let us support the men who made the Victory Loan possible.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY JANUARY 19, 1946
Entered as second wave matter, Post Office San Juan, F. R.
NUMBER 10472
Coffee growers claim subsidy prevents them from meeting clientele.
Problem was discussed yesterday but no solution was reached Favorable reaction among farmers Canale* considers that official aid should have been extended in August The coffee cooperatives are facing the problem that, in order to benefit from the five-dollar coffee subsidy granted by the Government by selling coffee to the General Administration of Sujnlnlslros-, they would have to stop fulfilling their commitments to their clientele. The problem was discussed yesterday *11 ■erante de Cafetero! de Puerto Rico. Mr. Ramiro L. Colón, with the Administrator of Supplies, Mr. Antonio Vicéns Ríos, and. according to ae reported, no agreement was reached for the solution of the same Our informant, the president of the Sector do Cafeteros of the Farmers Association, representative Mario Canales, said Mr. Ramiro L. Colón will submit a memorial to the Chief of the AGS. outlining all that was discussed in yesterday's interview, and then Mr. Vicéns Ríos will finally resolve the problem. Mr. Canales, of whom nb'iN we nb'iN we saw comment them around the granting of the coffee subsidy- , ro, said that, on behalf of the coffee farmers and the sector he presides, he congratulated the Governor. 1 who resolved to grant the five dollars as a subsidy to the coffee growers, and to the other officials who directed their efforts to achieve this subsidy, Messrs. Luis Muñoz Marin, President of the Senate, and Antonio Vicéndez Marin, President of the Senate, and Antonio Vicéndez, President of the Senate. President of the Senate: and Antonio Vicéns Ríos, Administrator of Supplies, Representative Canales said that the coffee farmers have reacted favorably to the granting of the coffee subsidy. He added that the farmers who have coffee in exhttenclas will benefit greatly from this subsidy, but that those who came to sell it, who are the most net "altados will be deprived of it, since the subsidy has been granted on the basis of coffee sold to the Government, through the AG8. The president of the coffee growers indicated that the fact that some farmers benefit and others do not, from this subsidy, would perhaps have been avoided if the measure that is now being adopted had been decreed in August, when the farmers requested it, and that a greater quantity of coffee would have flowed into the local market at a time when the population was in need of greater supplies. Referring to the conference in Fortaleza, where the question of the coffee subsidy was considered, Mr. Canales said that all those present were eager to find a way to resolve the situation of the farmers, The Governor asked Mr. Vi-Ana Ríos to submit a memorial to him. "As a result, the Governor approved and instructed that the subsidy be granted. The administrative order of the Supply Administration will probably be ready on Monday, as well as other regulations necessary for the implementation of the coffee subsidy, The head of the AGS reported that as soon as this order is published-which he said was almost certain to occur on Tuesday-the same will go into effect. Nor has it been possible to complete the Stock Declaration Forms, work which is also expected to be completed by the beginning of the year.
Investigation will be requested into disbursements of Cia. Agricola Log lawyer* of Suarez Martinez will file a motion to that effect on Monday. - Justice filed another motion yesterday. - Molina has not yet acted I Attorneys Edelmlro Martínez Rivera, Luis Blanco Lugo and Fernando Fornaris Jr. will file a motion in the San Juan District Court in the early hours of Monday morning, on behalf of Jo-é Suárez Martínez, plaintiff in the injunction against Compañía Agrícola de Puerto Rico, for the Court to order an investigation of the disbursements made by the company to the company.
Court to order an investigation of the disbursements of said agency since Judge La Costa declared the injunction paralyzing the operations of said Company to be valid. The motion is based on the fact that the plaintiff's attorneys claim to have knowledge that the Agricultural Company has been investing large sums of money since the lawsuit challenging the constitutional validity of the law by virtue of which said agency was organized was filed. On the other hand, Attorney Luis Venegas Cortés on behalf of the Attorney General filed yesterday afternoon a motion for the resolution of the motion on the preliminary injunction order, stating that on January 14, 194G they filed a motion to dismiss and file, which contains each and every one of the oppositions to the issuance by the Court of the preliminary injunction requested by the plaintiff and on which the appellants exclusively rest their case; that later the Attorney General of Puerto Rilen submitted a pleading in support of the original motion. It is further requested that in (Continued on page 20.)
- "V UlUVUV pWl JH I I I ■ i * A Thoma* A. Fennell, manager of the Agricultural Company, who authorizes the disbursements of the entity Together with a Treasurer appointed by himself. (Photo EL MUNDO.)
Sierra affirms that the law covers labor disputes in hospitals Copy Ja 7 (b) of Article 7 which specifies the procedure to be followed in 1a* inathucione* dedicated* to the care of the sick* ¡ The President of the Puerto Rico Labor Relations Board, Mr. Fernando Sierra Berdecla, yesterday authorized the following: "The newspaper EL MUNDO, in an information related to the threat of a strike in the municipal hospitals of San .luán, published in its yesterday's edition, refers to a statement by Francisco Colón Gordlany in the following terms: "The licensed Francisco Colón Gordlany
Francisco Colón Gordlany informed yesterday to a reporter of EL MUNDO that after studying Law number 130 in depth, he discovered that the Insular Labor Relations Board had not complied with the provisions of the law. Labor Relations Board had not complied with the provisions of Article 7 which states that 'after holding public hearings, the Board shall prepare and promulgate rules determining those industries, enterprises and services whose employees, before going on strike, shall resort to conciliation, mediation and voluntary arbitration procedures to be established by the Board'. He added that since this had not been done by the Board, 'it cannot file a petition for the recognition of the Santurce Municipal Hospital Workers Union to go to arbitration'," "ET Article 7 of Act number 130 of the Sierra Sef-; penis is broken into two sections: 7(a) and 7 (b). Section 7(a) refers to disputes in hospitals; the one that ""peacefully refers to disputes in hospitals is section 7(h). Such section reads as follows: "(b) A strike or lockout in any factory, service, or! Institution, whether owned or operated by any agency or public utility of the Government of Puerto Rico, or owned or operated by any private person or private corporation, shall be deemed to be a strike or lockout in any factory, service, or institution, whether owned or operated by any agency or public utility of the Government of Puerto Rico, or owned or operated by any private person or private corporation.
Management for the extension of Parque Street A third part of the neighbors* would give up *their* land* for this purpose The Public Works Division of the Government of the Capital has been making efforts in the last few days to obtain the necessary land for the extension of Parque Street in Santurce. A third part of the landowning neighbors of said street who have been interviewed, according to the Public Works Division of the Municipality, engineer Salvador V. Caro, has agreed to give up the land free of charge. Caro informed that the metal gates will be removed and that those made of concrete or material that cannot be removed will be destroyed and replaced, at the expense of the Municipality. The enlargement will begin as soon as the negotiations for the acquisition of the land are completed, said Engineer Caro.
The President's biography How Captain Traman won the affection of soldiers.
■b sata fifth chapter of the biography of Harry S. TrunuMS, President of the United States, written by Franoaa Burns, tells several anecdotes that prove why "Captain Truman" was loved by the men of Seed 1M artille, ria during the first World War. Bor FRANCES BURNS NEW YORK - The boys from Kansas City, Mlsuri, who composed Battery D of the 120th Regiment during World War I, were always desperate to form a brawl. When they didn't get a chance to fight the Germans they became restless, but they kept life from being too monotonous by provoking a little excitement.
It was on a rainy night in early June, 1918, that the man in charge of the Boterie was placed in the hands of Captain Harry S. Truman by Captain John Thacher, who had been appointed Adjutant of the Battalion. -Capt. Thacher gave us the bleachers," recounted ex-Sgt. Edward Melsburger recently in Kansas City, "and then we pre । seated our new captain. The , Captain Truman then was not i much different from the man he , is now. Uepba glasses, he stood । very erect and spoke concisely. > "IF you will do for me the mi- - tad of what you have done for Captain Thacher, I will be satisfied," - he said and said goodbye to us ■ for the night.
i At about midnight he was awakened by a very excited ayu- - danta who exclaimed: - Captain, sir, you had better come to the barracks. A new Civil War has begun! i When Captain Truman arrived at the Battery barracks he found four men ready to be taken to the hospital. He spoke i to the others in a vigorous and senIient tone. - It will not be long before we go to the front," he said. -Most of you need lots and lots of sleep. Tomorrow morning we will find out what this is all about. But the next morning he stayed away from them. On the contrary, he sent for his officers and corporals and told them that he had to go back to work.
Tomorrow, the CGT unity will be resolved.
Both sectors of the labor organization will hold assembly There is pessimism as to success Colón's sector is opposed; Barreto's will send a commission By JUAN" MALDONADO Staff Writer EL MUNDO. Both sectors of the General Confederation of Workers of Puerto Rico will meet tomorrow, separately, in what is supposed to be a last attempt to achieve unity. The group presided over by Senator Ramón Barreto Pérez will use the auditorium of the Román Baldorioty de Castro School, while the group presided over by Francisco Colón Gordlany will meet in the auditorium of the Central High School in Santurce. The time that has been set for the work to begin is nine o'clock in the morning. Although it has been announced that the Cuban labor leader Mr. Lázaro Peña will be on the island to attend both congresses, the truth is that until yesterday afternoon there was no official news that he had left Cuba for Puerto Rico. Those who work for the unity of both groups with a view to achieving at the same time the unity of the working class of the island, figure that they have their hopes of success in Mr. Peña being present to preside, if an agreement is reached, what will be known as the Unitary Congress. The workers' leaders with whom we have exchanged impressions are of the opinion that the unity of both sectors will not be achieved in these congresses. They admit that there are in both" group" leaders" that an- ■ "so Ja union and have been working "fano "amente to achieve it, but "1 ml "mo time recognize that "in such conditions" actúale" 1" unity e" impossible, because there are differences" of criteria" that can not be solved in one day, but will need many weeks of political consultations, demonstrated in the clamor Óél Golón reader in the sense that the policy of the CGT is eliminated." "It should be noted" - it was not said - "that while it is true that members" of the Executive Committee of the cegettata group presided over by Colón attended the joint meetings held with the Cuban "delegates", it is also true that the president of this sector was never present, his comrades" being very careful not to commit themselves to anything related to unity. It is also good to point out that the attacks from one side to the other have not ceased and this has had to distance both sectors even more. s I Will propose union We can assure you that at the Congress of the Gordlany sector for young grandchildren a delegate, Mr. Juan Rivera Santo, member of the Executive Committee, will insist on the need for the union of both sectors. This proposition he will make on the basis ■ of the points published by EL MUNDO in yesterday's edition. Ca- . so that this proposal does not prosper >1 (Continued on page 14) :More lots ■ for schools recommended "" I ■ ( * San Juan School Board proposes to expand several* centers 1 The Office of School Management ■ of the Municipality of San Juan has recommended to the Department of Education the purchase of two lots for the expansion of schools in Santurce. The first of these is located - adjacent to another Municipality lot - at the corner of Ponce de León Avenue and J Acuña Street, at stop 25, and will be used to expand the Matlenzo Clntrón School. The other lot is located on Lolza Street, next to the Pe- ) dro Goyco School, whose expansion is also under study. As reported yesterday by the Interim School Director of the Capital. The other lot is located on Lolza Street, next to the Pe- ) dro Goyco School, whose expansion is also under study. The request has already been passed to the Department and, if approved, the purchase will be made from the allocation of half a million dollars made by the Insular Legislature for the acquisition of land for schools. j It was also reported that the Department of the Interior is already finalizing the plans for the construction of a 24-school in Las Palmas, in Barrio Obre1 ro, Santurce. The purchase of the site for this school has also been recommended to the Department of Education and will be covered by the same appropriation. Mrs. Gadea stated that the Junior High Schools will be expanded, preferably because they have the greatest congestion of students. |
The Transportation Authority alleges that it lacks constitutionality.
The statement reports that "an enormous flood of unemployed people will invade the nation and its territories as a result of the rapid removal of men who were serving in the armed forces. In Puerto Rico, some 20,995 men have already been discharged and it is expected that this figure will triple before the end of this year. The national authorities of the American Legion have been speeding up in Congress a program "that will remedy the serious unemployment situation that exists. The American Legion says in a statement on the general situation: "A serious unemployment problem will confront the nation within the next six months. | (Continued on page 14)
Anderson made plan to pay for sugar with price increase J - The Government would buy sugar from Cuba and Puerto Rico paying a dollar more per quintal. OAP will increase it by half a cent a pound.
NEW YORK, 18. (PU)-The sugar industry has heard that Secretary of Agriculture Clinton P. Anderson has prepared emergency legislative proposals that would make it possible for the United States Government to continue to buy sugar from Cuba and Puerto Rico at higher prices while maintaining domestic price levels. ' The Secretary's proposal con- ' tempers the 1946 reference harvests by paying one dollar more per । > hundredweight of sugar. I ( < Meanwhile, it has been reported thatL j the Department of Agriculture and < Ja Office of Price Management!j i i are raising the price ' . of retail sugar by mMlo J 'cent a pound. 1 I It has been estimated that the purchase of i
Jas Puerto Rico and Cube crops of 1946 will be Equal to the $225,000,000 appropriated for the similar program, in the year 1945, in addition to funds remaining from tas asig(Continued on page 20.) ¡
WASHINGTON, 18. (PU) - Representative Harold Knutson, who is a prominent member of the House Ways and Means Committee, today introduced a bill to repeal, in July first, the wartime increases in the Excise Taxes. The measure is designed to put vir<
King Alfonso's widow in Switzerland W'' : b 1 ■ 1 I - J|| ■ i fe former Queen Victoria Entente of Spain, widow of King Alfonso XIT1, who is enjoying a winter vacation in Gstaad, "ulza. This is the first time in many years that press photographers have been allowed to photograph the former queen of Spain. (Associated Press photo) | Legion expects serious jobs crisis in next six months i It is urging "joint action" in the nation and the territories*. - In Puerto Rico there will be more than 40,000 men* discharged* this year The national office of the American Legion has issued an urgent statement calling attention to the fact that the United States and its territories will face "a serious unemployment problem within the next six months," Mr. Lawrence J. Fenlon, executive director of the Legion's employment services, has urged "action.
Mayor Cíales was suspended from employment, salary The a*amb1eÍ8ta Ramón, Cabiya San Miguel formulated charge* The "eñor Miguel Rodríguez, Al-, calde de Cíale", has tlído suspended from employment and salary by the Asam-' hlea Municipal of that town, after presentation of A pitegn of charges subscribed by the assemblyman Ramón Cahlya San Miguel. In a letter signed to Mr. Juan Roble" Miranda, president of the Municipal Assembly, and which is dated January 16 of the current year, the Mayor is notified that he has been suspended from employment and salary by the Municipal Assembly in extraordinary session, "until the celebration of public hearings, when his removal or dismissal will be definitively resolved". In the resolution approved by the Assembly and containing the charges made against Mayor Miguel Rodriguez, the latter is asked to answer in writing the following accusations:- Why the money left over from the patron saint festivities was not deposited in the funds of the Municipality in due time; why the money from the auction of the (Continued on page 20.)
B O LETI N E S | I
3 tually in effect all tii, po" of 1942 and to reduce by one cln- - e caenta percent the excise taxes on ? i-| furs, jewelry" and toilet" articles. 1 o The war "rate" will now be fixed" n to be in effect for ' to approximately sel" me "e" des- ■- (Continued on page 5.) i
Yesterday filed suit to1 effect public* carriers of San Juan Contention raises fourteen points Ledos. Guerra, Rivera Zaya*, Rivera Cestero attorney* porteadores A lawsuit was filed yesterday morning before Judge Ricardo La Costa Jr. of the San Juan District Court against the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority, José G. Blotae, Administrator General; Rafael A. Buscaglta, Treasurer of Puerto Rico; Rafael de J. Cordero, Auditor of Puerto Rico; Antonio R. Barreta, Commissioner of Public Service; and Juan A. Farla and Enrique Cornier, in their capacity as members of the Public Service Commission of Puerto Rico, on "a declaratory judgment challenging, citing fourteen legal points, the constitutionality of the law creating the aforementioned agenda. The "plaintiffs" are fifty-four public carriers of the metropolitan area who claim to be owners of 116 motor vehicles and whose "lntere "eé, they point out, are affected in their capacity as owners and taxpayers of the People of Puerto Rico. The plaintiffs' attorneys are Miguel Guerra Mondragón, Rafael Rivera Zayas and Gaspar Rivera Cestero. The lawsuit filed yesterday with the signature of the news item in EL MUNDO reported several days ago in the sense that such action would be taken. I The fourteen points raised and on which the Court is requested to issue a declaratory judgment are as follows: < (1) That Act No. 126 of 1943, known as the "Puerto Rico Transportation Authority Act," is unconstitutional and is hereby declared null and void in the following respects: (a) That the Authority created by said Act constitutes a new executive department of the Insular Government; (b) That, even though the Authority was created by said Act, it is a new executive department of the Insular Government. 1 (h) That, even assuming that the Transportation Authority was not a new executive department, the powers conferred upon it constitute an improper delegation of legislative authority. i (c) That, even assuming that the Transportation Authority was not a new executive department, it is not a public end or purpose to dedicate a branch of government to the transportation of passengers by means of public funds. (d) In that the Transportation Authority has not been placed under the general inspection and control of the Governor of Puerto Rico. (e) In that the public funds of the Transportation Authority are not accounted for by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico. (f) In which the disbursements of the Transportation Authority are not authorized by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico and countersigned by the Auditor and the Governor. (g) In which the expenditures and disbursements of the Transportation Authority are not audited by the Auditor of Puerto Rico. I (2) That even though the "Puerto Rico Transportation Authority Act" is valid, said Authority (a) Lacks legal power to fix, impose and collect fares for the use of the services it renders to the public. (b) It lacks the legal power to delegate such rights in functoinmtento or in bondholders. (c) It lacks the legal power to organize subsidiary, affiliated or associated corporations. (d) It lacks the legal power to promulgate rules and regulations on rates, types and services of other public carriers. (e) It lacks the legal power to dictate orders to other public carriers. (f) It lacks the legal power to cancel the franchises of other public carriers. (3) That even if the "Puerto Rico Transportation Authority Act" is valid, the Authority cannot operate its business of transporting passengers without the franchise of the Public Service Commission and without the regulation thereof. (4) That the Transportation Authority, even if valid, does not have the exclusive monopoly of the business of transporting passengers in the city of San Juan or in any other part of the Island. In another part of the complaint it is alleged that "in accordance with article eight of the law creating the Authority, all monies of the company shall be deposited in banks recognized as depositories of the Island Government "but shall be kept in a separate account registered in the name of the Authority", and the disbursements of the Authority shall be made by it in accordance with the regulations and budgets approved by the Board of Directors of the Authority: that the Auditor of Puertb Rico does not Inter* (continued on page 10).
Accelerate zoning program I . ' I
Land Use Study Completed in 35 Towns Urban Area Data Gathered Will Serve to Set the* Guideline* for Future Construction In thirty-five towns on the Island, the Planning Board has completed its studies on urban land use. These studies lead to the preparation of a zoning map for each of the municipalities of Puerto Rico, which will follow the same pattern as the one recently completed for the city of San Juan. The Board's chief planner, Mr. Carlos M. Pasalacqua, reported yesterday that island-wide research on this aspect of the program will probably be completed by the end of the 1946-47 fiscal year. He estimates that all this work will cost the Government approximately $200,000. At the beginning, ae ohi had the economic cooperation of - the Federal Public Works Administration, continuing the contribution - of funds from the War Emergency Program. In July 1, 1945, $65,000 began to be used, ■ "signed by an Act passed ' by 1" Legislature, recommending ' for Legislative action, during the ' next "fiscal year, $65,000 adi- - nal and $25,000 more" for the "si-i guiding year, at which time this program will end. ! Mr. Pasalacqua added that the studies will serve "not only to establish zoning standards in all the towns of Puer- - lo Rico, "but also for all kinds of research on urban development, serving as a basis for all plans of this nature to be developed by the Planning Board. It will also be used, with great advantage, by Government agencies and private entities." I nes where this tra- , haj" has been completed, include the" most Impofhmtes cities of 1a Island. "Complete statistics have been re- ' rolled out," said Mr. Pasalacqua, "showing how urban land is being used, a phase of planning that would be impossible for the Board to determine without a thorough study of the land. Such information has been used by this body to fix those requirements necessary in future construction law, such as maximum lot area: width of front, side and rear yards: size of the "otare", etc. । 1 In light of the' carefully analyzed e "tadl "tlca", 1"" zonlflcaclón standards have been de-í finalized and will be enforced throughout Puerto Rico." ' San Juan and Santurce: The corresponding figures" "I । maximum occupied area of the city , of San Juan and of other" towns ' of the Island, are as follows: One" 3,í 716 acres of land form the maximum occupied area of buildings in . San Juan, including Santurce. This figure excludes the federated areas! On the basis of this "study," it has been determined "the percentage of the land on which building can be done." The area 1 occupied in San Juan. Including Puerta de Tierra, is 610 acres/ Santurce, 3,106. Buildings in different districts of Santurce cover an average of 33.4 percent of the lots, based on 30,07 in Condado; 36.36 in Barrio Obrero; 40.94 in-the Hipódromo development;; - 29.83 in the Las Palmas neighborhood; 39. 000 in Miramar: 23.92 in the Sagrando Corazón; 36.43 in 1a Terraza del Parque; and 26.88 in the Flora! Park. r Mr. Pasalacqua reported that ¿"these figures include certain areas] homogeneous, representative of residential neighborhoods". Also that , "in similar representative areas (Continued on page 20) ," he said.