THE DAILY WORLD OF ' THE BATON
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY: Fair weather. Winds from the southeast at 19 miles. High in San Juan yesterday was 85 degrees; low, 75. No rain in San Juan. No sign of a storm.
Entered aa second class mstter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R
PRICE 5 Cents
YEAR XXVIII
NUMBER 10658
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 27, 1946
Krug to attend Pinero installation;
! No Delay Expected In Confirmation; OAP Prepares Plan To Stabilize Prices
Expects hikes in many food items
The program is to be considered also by the Island Government Gilstrap will leave shortly for the U.S. All agency field personnel to be called to the Capital The Office of Price Administration will submit to the Government of Puerto Rico a plan to try to stabilize the prices of the most essential articles and foodstuffs in the lives of Puerto Rican families. The plan will be submitted, in view of line-item price increases, in accordance with the part of the new price control law that provides that increases in production costs must be recognized in the setting of maximum prices. Mr. Gilstrap and OAP's Price Executive, Mr. Frank Besosa, will leave for Washington in early August. They have been lia- 1 madoa to the federal capital to dis- 1 1 cutir loa detail" of the new statu- 1 to passed by the U.S. Congress. It is expected that am- ' boa officials will begin confe- 1 ranclas in Washington on August 5- 1 to. Mr. Gilstrap yesterday appointed a committee composed of Exo Frank Martinez, Director of the Legal Division; Pricing Executive Resosa: and Local Board Management Executive Samuel E. Badillo, "to plan and supervise a vigorous 'enforcement project to ensure compliance with the pricing and tenancy regulations". All OAP field personnel have been called to headquarters for a series of meetings beginning next Tuesday. The following is a summary of key aspects of the new federal price control law: xl) A board is created with powers to determine when price controls on certain articles and products should be reestablished or terminated. (2) Meat, le-, cherfa products, grains, soybeans, and cottonseed, with their derivatives, are exempted from all price controls until August 211 next, at which date they shall automatically revert to price controls, unless otherwise ordered by the' board. Among the articles covered by this provision are rice, butter, cattle feed, bacon. evaporated milk and hams. (3) Poultry products, eggs. petroleum, tobacco, and petroleum products are permanently exempted from all price controls, but the board has power to reestablish maximum prices thereon, if it should deem it any momcn-¡ to riesp w August 1946. 4) Tori Julos other regulations of the (Continued on page 24) |
The OAP is preparing a price-setting plan, in accordance with the provisions of the new control law, for submission to the Island Government for consideration. It expects changes in a number of areas. - The allocation for the School Canteens now amounts to 88,400,000. Perez yesterday signed the law to that effect, among other measures approved - - - - Secretary Krug promised yesterday that he will attend the Installation of Jesus T. Plñero as Governor of Puerto Rico. - - - - In message to Congress on OAP, President Traman urges consumers to resist exorbitant prices, and merchants to reoift their profits "to the extent that they are able to keep up with the price increases.
glée be intensified until Puerto Ricans are proficient in the language. - The President of the United States and the President of the Republic of Puerto Rico, Mr. Piftero, have already been appointed to the office of Governor of Puerto Rico. - It is already known that twenty-four ships sank on Bikini Island when the atomic bomb was hit by the submarine test. Ponce longshoremen will go on strike if the Government does not act energetically on the food crisis by August 1. - The Boston Circuit Court ruled in favor of the plaintiff workers of the Railroad Company, a claim for wages in the total amount of $1,289,466. 67.
Representatives of various sectors of public opinion expressed their opinion yesterday on the nomination of Piftero for Governor of Puerto Rico. - e* It is already up to twenty-four ships that sank on Bikini Island when the atomic bomb was hit in the submarine test. - - - Ponce longshoremen will go on strike if the Government does not act vigorously in the food crisis by August 1. s - - - The Boston Circuit Court ruled in favor of the plaintiff workers of the Railroad Company, a claim for wages in the total sum of 81,289,486. 67. - - The Mayor of Ponce suggests a
COMPENDIUM OF NEWS
meeting of the mayors. Commenting on Muñoz Marín's message, he says that the food crisis is not to be solved by one man from San Juan. j- T* - - For 2 hours "Municipal Assemblyman Manuel C. Gonsález, investigated in connection with the fianaaa ata endorsement, testified in Río Piedras. - es The PEG will build a series of rudimentary roads, using mechanical shovels, as agreed yesterday in a meeting held at La Fortaleza. - o Rio Piedras beat Corona last night in Olympic basketball and will play tonight in San Germán. - - - - r Jimmy Vernon defeated Ted Williams in the American League individual batting league. - ,- Island chess champion Rafael Ontron will participate in the national tournament.
, ", "... -- X- ■ ■ ■ - - - " 1 -- - j Pinero received the nomination with his characteristic modesty.
He was ron Manon Barr and Irwin Silverman at the time the news reached him. Shortly afterward he visited Krug to thank him for his endorsement INS Correspondent. WASHINGTON, 2" (INS). - The man appointed to the office of Governor of Puerto Rico, Don Jesus T. Plñero, told the International Service of the United States. Plñero, told the International News Service by telephone yesterday that he is "completely stunned" by the news.
Minutes later, however, the Resident Commissioner prepared to give the following statement to In Prensa: "I am deeply honored, and I accept with the greatest humility the designation given me today by the President of the United States. I want to share this honor with all the people of Puerto Rico. If this appointment is confirmed by the United States Senate, I will entrust myself to Divine Providence for guidance and I will ask for the cooperation of all the people of Puerto Rico to better serve the interests of both the Federal Government and the people of my Island. That statement, as well as the Jorma in which it was pronounced, are characteristic of the modesty of this Puerto Rican. Although he received the news at the Department of the Interior's Information Office, he refused the help offered to him by the newspaper editors who were there to write his statement. On the contrary, Plñero insisted that he be allowed to write his own statements and dictate them to the reporters. With him at the time were his closest colleagues at the Department of the Interior, Mason Barr, Chief of the Puerto Rico Division, and Irwin Silverman, Legal Counsel for the Department of the Interior.
The Engineer Roberto Sanchez VUella, Administrator of San Juan, who, according to the latest reports, "is given the best chance" of being appointed Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, has the best chance.
Truman urges consumers to resist exorbitant prices In message to Congress he says he signed the new OAP law reluctantly. If unsuccessful he says he will call Congress into special session By FELIX COTTEN WASHINGTON, 26. (INS)-President Truman sent a special message to Congress stating that he had signed the bill resurrecting the Office of Price Administration-OAP-"reluctantly." The Act establishes price ceilings that govern the
The President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, had a telephone conversation yesterday with Mr. Jesús T. Plñero, who was at the meeting on the crisis. Plñero, who was in Washington. Mr. Muñoz Marin congratulated Mr. Piftero on his appointment as the first Puerto Rican governor on property, and asked him to work as Resident Commissioner and with the strength of Governor, to obtain the necessary information for his appointment.
-June 30 on rents and products subject to control. Announcements will be made regarding the reinstatement of rents and prices at June 30 rates. The reinstatement of price controls in the United States will affect the proportion of U.S. exports of industrial products and grains to foreign nations. Tighter limitations on exports of many scarce processed products will be one of the first endeavors of the Civilian Production Administration. The President, again, as he did in his veto message of the first OAP Extension Act, attacks the Taft and Wherry amendments which call for price ceilings high enough to cover the various costs of production. Mr. Truman warns in his message that the new Act may not curb unbridled inflation, and declares that, in (Continued on page 24)
Liberal leader believes that power will be concentrated
Pinero's appointment is ephemeral triumph for Popular Party, says CPI says there is no reason to rejoice Capital Government messenger Truman, J: A. Krug and Pinero The leadership of the pala in several ds iui aocialea activities continued to expreaándoae yesterday around the appointment of aefior Jeaúa T. Pifiero as Governor of Puerto Rico. As of yesterday afternoon, Celestino Triarte and Bolívar Psgán, presidents of the Unión Republlcsna and Soclsllsllsta parties, respectively, had not responded to the invitation extended by EL MUNDO to express their opinion on Plñero's nomination. Inaertamós a,-continuación the expressions traafnltldaa yesterday to this newspaper from the various sectors of opinion: The President of the Liberal Party The President of the Puerto Rican Liberal Party, Mrs. Josefina Barceló do Romero, who has addressed on different occasions to President Truman urging him to appoint a Puerto Rican to the office of Governor, She conditioned that the person appointed should not be an active politician because, as she said, "as long as the present undesirable colonial regime subsists, the official representative of the American Nation in Puerto Rico should not be a flag bearer of any sector of Puerto Rican politics": "The appointment rie! Mr. Piftero for Governor of Puerto Rico represents an ephemeral triumph for the party in power: I say ephemeral, because it is my opinion that the concentration of power in one man in Puerto Rico, that is, in the head of the Popular Party, must ultimately redound to the detriment of the latter. "It is not the same that seftor Piftero had been elected by the votes of his fellow citizens, than to feel in the future obliged, not to the electorate as a whole, and if to the (Continued on page 17) PEG will build series rudimentary roads Thus it was agreed yesterday at the meeting initiated by the President of the Senate In the morning of yesterday the Prealdente of the Senate, aeftor Muftoz MaTin, held a meeting with the Commissioner of the Interior, seftor Mendez and, the Acting Director of the Emergency Plan, aeftor Mario Marrero. A plan was discussed and approved in principle for the PEG to build a number of municipal roads in rudimentary form by means of mechanical shovels in those neighborhoods where roads will not be built in finished form by the Department of the Interior within two years because it is not its turn during that time in accordance with the Municipal Roads Law. These roads made in rudimentary form, when their turn comes, will be built in a definitive way as the other roads of the Island, according to what was said yesterday. The purpose, it was explained, is to provide communication to the greatest number of barrels and work for the greatest number of people. The plan will begin to operate as soon as it is approved by the Superior Council of Emergency. It is believed that 400 kilometers of simple roads will be built per year. The plan, as expressed by aeftor Muftoz Marin, provides that the mileage in each municipality will be based on a ratio of the area of the municipality compared to the area of the Island, the rural population of the municipality compared to the rural population of the municipality and the number of municipal roads needed in the municipality eompa (Continued on page 24).
The second atomic test at Bikini l¡ ■ - " I
The photograph illustrates the terrible explosion of the woolly atomic bomb against the test squad on Bikini Island. Note the way it ad qulrlled the water column. The wnsura has not the name of the ship shown in the photo, towards Isqulcrd*" (Army and Navy photograph).
Grillasen calls for a meeting of Tos alcaldes Says food crisis is not to be solved by one man from S. J. PONCE. (By Erasmo Vando)-The Mayor of Ponce, seftor Andres Grillasca, declared today to EL MUNDO, । when commenting on the Idea exposed by , aeftor Muftoz Marin to the Alcal- । des of the Island in the sense that । these should be in charge of the dlstribu- । clone rie those basic foods ( acquired by the Government, that "ós- < te is not a matter to be solved by one man alone." "I believe," he added. ( "that this is a problem for which a group of mayors of the Island should be immediately convened to meet, to give the matter due consideration, and it should not be decided by a single individual in San Juan." The Mayor of Ponce referred to a telegram he sent to the director of the Supply Administration, Seftor Antonio Vlcéns Ríos, a few days ago, yrglendo the freezing of basic food stocks. "The telegram from seftor Muftoz Marín," he added, "cornibora ol telegram I addressed to sefior Vlcéns Ríos in which I suggested that the Government seize the provisions stored by the mayo- > rlstas, to be distributed to the con- । sum Id o res by means of a system of i coupons, using the alcaldías pa- i ra distribution. This was inclined to prevent the abuse committed by the i (Continued on page 24)
Arrived, to 23 ships missing in 2nd test Bomb blast lifted the Nagato and the Nevada and placed them together- - They were well separated. - Congressmen who observed the test poTgeórge dürno (ABOARD THE "PANAMINT", IN BIKINI WATERS), 26th -(INS). -Three observers sent by the U.S. Congress to witness the first two atomic tests in the Pacific today set aside their political differences and agreed that the third experimental test, to be carried out in the Pacific, should be carried out in the Pacific.
 The congressmen concerned are Edward V. Izac and Jack Z. Anderson. of California, and Dean M. Gillespie, of Colorado. The first two are members of the House Naval Affairs Committee and the third is on the Appropriations Committee of the same body. The three differ on the plan to share the secrets of atomic energy with the rest of the world, claiming that they can be revealed "as soon as an international agreement is reached" on the subject, while Anderson and Gillespie declare that these secrets should not be communicated until "all nations agree to renounce the use of atomic energy for war purposes. Meanwhile, a great black and oily slick of growing groporclones now laps the once blue and white waters of the Bikini lagoon, bearing mute witness to the destruction wrought by the underwater explosion of the atomic bomb. More than 24 hours after the explosion of the second atomic bomb in these waters, it seems quo (Continued on page 21)
Boston reversed judgment in railroad ¡ case [ - ; Resolves in favor of the ■ workers' claim for $1,239,485.67 - The Boston Circuit Court ■ ruled on the 25th reversing the Federal Court of Puerto ■ Rico in the case of the railroad workers against the Amer- - lean Railroad Company, and ruling that the benefits of the Federal Hours and Wages Act, which ' guarantees workers a minimum wage and double' compensation, are not waivable. The Boston de- . cision settles in favor i of the railroad workers a de- - manda in which they claimed $1,- ■ 239,485.67. 1 In August 1941, the workers filed an extrajudicial claim for back wages against the railroad company. The claim amounted to over one million dollars. On November 7 of that year. The parties agreed to settle the claim for seven hundred thousand dollars ($1700,000.00). This sum represented 44% of the total amount of the claim. The payment was made shortly thereafter. According to the Federal Wage and Hour Law, when an employer fails to pay in due time the minimum wage fixed by said law, it incurs the obligation to pay the amount owed and is also obliged to pay an amount equal to said debt as Indemnity, in addition to attorney's fees of the claimant worker. By virtue of the efforts of the directors of the Unión Obreros Unidos de las Ferrovial de Puerto Rico (United Workers Union of the Ferrovial Industries of Puerto Rico), by the lawyers Licenciado! Gutiérrez, Franqul and Ramos Antonin!, a lawsuit was filed in Federal Court in July 1942, claiming 81,239,485.67 (one million, two hundred and thirty-nine thousand, four hundred and eighty-five dollars and sixty-seven cents*), which represents 56% of the ( the amount of wages owed, plus the amount of the Indemnity of the workers who filed the ( said lawsuit. । The issue raised was that of j (Continued on page 24)
Chavez insists that English be mastered by the Puerto Rican polls At the Pro-Statehood Congress, he said that the greatest difficulty faced by the Island's demands for Statehood is not knowing that language.
PONCE, 26 (By Arturo Castro) -In his speech before the Pro-Statehood Congress, New Mexico Senator Dennis Chavez, referring to the appointment of Mr. Jesus T. Plñero for Governor of Puerto Rico. Plñero for Governor of Puerto Rico expressed quo -we must give her a chance to prove her ability", adding: "Let's show that here in Puerto Rico we know how to do things and let's prove that here in Puerto Rico we are prepared to be good Americans". The assembly of statehood supporters held the day before yesterday at the La Perla Theater in Ponce, with the largest turnout in its history, gave Senator Chávex a prolonged ovation when, at six o'clock in the afternoon, he made his entrance to the convention. In his speech, the New Mexico Senator, among other things, expressed the following: "Mr. President, my friends, friends of the United States, I am the first American Senator of the United States.
ricans of the United States: I was raised exactly as you were. - My ancestors went to Mexico, as your ancestors came to Puerto Rico. I have nothing ■ Anglo-Saxon about me. I am not Nordic. All the blood that runs through my veins is Spanish. The Spaniards who went to Mexico suffered thousands of hardships and sacrifices, but comb ■ Spaniards knew how to suffer. > "The last Viceroy in the region ' of Mexico was my' great-grandmother's brother, and although I am proud that my ancestors were Spanish, I am more proud to stand here as an American. "I believe that the welfare of the people of Puerto Rico lies in remaining । united with the United States, so having observed what happened in New Mexico, it is my opinion that the welfare of you lies in the United States. "New Mexico, as well as you (Continued on page 17).
Sen. Brewster awaits debate in committee.
Wants to know why rule to appoint mainlanders is abandoned Tugwell applauds appointment Commissioner was speaking last night on NBC in chain with Puerto Rico By Charlas McCabe United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 28. (PU). - Senator Cari Hayden, (Democrat, of Arizona), acting chairman of the Territorial Committee, said yesterday that the appointment of Senator Jesus T. Piftero to the governorship of Puerto Rico is a "great disappointment" to the U.S. Senate. Piftero for Governor of Puerto Rico, had been referred to him in the morning and that he proposed to discuss the matter with other Senators before deciding whether to hold a meeting of the Committee. Jesus T. Piftero, appointed yesterday Governor of Puerto Rico, has been invited to appear at * the meeting of the Senate Territorial Committee to be held Monday morning, when he will consider his appointment to the Governor's pool. * Senator Hyden added that at the moment he did not know what he was tired of. Many members of the Committee, including Millard Tydlngi and Dennis Chavez, Democrats, Allen J. Ellondor, Democrat, and Hugh Butler, Republican, were present outside the hall. Senator Owen Broweter, (R-Malno) indicated the possibility of considerable discussion in the Committee on Piftero's appointment, but did not indicate whether public hearings were planned. Most well-informed political sources believe that public hearings are unlikely to be held for two reasons: first, the pressure of business in the Senate and the desire of the speakers to return home by the middle of next week. The second is the traditional "congressional courtesy" that extends to members of both houses. Through this tradition, the integrity of the members of either chamber is never investigated unless there is a very special circumstance. Piftero told the United Press that Secretary of the Interior J.A. Krug has promised to be present at the inauguration ceremonies of the new governor in San Juan if the Senate confirms his appointment. The International News Service reports from all Chicago that the appointment made by the President in favor of Dr. Jesus T. Piftero to the governorship of San Juan has been confirmed by the Senate. Piftero to the governorship of Puerto Rico was praised by Rexford G. Tugwell, who will resign as governor. Tugwell, now a professor of political science at the University of Chicago, said he was "delighted" with Piftero's selection. He said, "The President has made the best possible selection." Tugwell added that Piftero is a popular man among his countrymen, and that he was elected by popular vote to the post he now holds as resident commissioner of Port Rloo in Wahlngton. | On the other hand, the United Press correspondent reports that Senator Owen Brewster, Republican of Maine, said the "Committee will probably want to give careful consideration to the appointment because it represents a change in U.S. territorial policy. This weighs heavily in the balance for the future of Puerto Rico and we want to know the extent of the wisdom there may be in discarding the rule of appointing mainlanders to the governorship of the Island." He stated that the Committee has discussed in detail the advisability of establishing the rule of appointing native governors. Browster said: "I never came to a de* flnltlva conclusion on the question." He said he had nothing to say about Piftero as a person. Soundman James O. Eastland, who opposed the confirmation of the appointment of Governor William Hastie of the Virgin Islands, declared: "I have nothing to say about Piftero. I never met him." He added that he did not know whether to vote for confirmation* (Continued on page 21) H