THE WORLD
HOT WEATHER FORECAST: Scattered showers and fresh easterly winds, No cyclones in this area and no indications of disturbance. Yesterday there were heavy showers in the eastern half of the island. Maximum temperature in San Juan: M, at noon. Minimum: 7A, at two o'clock in the 'ardo.
CciicimTtnal
THE MORNING
DIARIO DE
Entered as second class matter, Foot Office, Ban Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10630
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JUNE 29, 1946
-YEAR XXVII!
Insist with the Government to provide better hospital facilities.
' ■BBBBMMB' RBRM > ■■■■■ - Peace conference subject to the Trieste case being settled ' The problem was discussed yesterday at the Paris meeting ■ of ministers. - There is little hope i that the assembly will be held this summer By KINGSBURY SMITH PARIS, 28 (INS)- T "he Foreign Ministers of the four great powers took up the thorny Trieste problem today, the end of the , deadline within which-as proposed by James F. Byrnes- the success or failure of the Paris conference was to be decided. There was indication, however, that the sessions would continue for some time, although there is little hope that they will continue for some time.
There is little hope that a general peace conference in Europe will be convened during this session, when everything seemed to indicate the existence of a profound disagreement between Byrnes and Molotov, the American Secretary of State insisted that today's date be set for the adjournment of the present sessions if by this time the two sides should be able to reach an agreement. In such an eventuality, Byrnec suggested, the post-bellum problems of the defeated nations should be submitted to the Plenary Assembly of the United Nations. The extension of the time limit was attributed in the informed media to the surprise caused by the Soviet delegate's statements withdrawing Russia's objections to the return of the Dodean islands to Greece and to the border problem between Italy and France. | Molotov dropped a bombshell at the conference when he announced that he approved the plan for the settlement of the Detande-Brlga problem, while insisting that the agreement provided for the supply of electricity to Italy for the Alpine region in question. However, this spirit of appeasement on the part of the Kremlin was short-lived. When questions concerning the pact with Rumania were discussed, Molotov objected to a clause prohibiting discrimination in traffic.
Tugwell communicated with his wife yesterday Governor Tugwell communicated yesterday by telephone with his wife in San Juan. According to reports obtained by us Dr. Tugwell disclosed that President Truman asked him to retain the governorship for some time while the appointment is being made. It is therefore interpreted that the three months' leave of absence claimed by Dr. Tugwell has to do with the President's alleged request. Mr. Tuawell .intends to return shortly to the Island after assuming his position in Chicogo.
w gra W _ Tugwell reiterates his determination to go to Chicago after speaking with Truman.
to Chicago after talking with Truman; declares he has three months leave of absence.
Gov't To Make School Plan For Veterans
This was revealed by Muñoz to a committee of ex-soldiers who came to visit him. Pifloro, and the American lumberman, Jame" M. Mead, have been taking steps in the North. Mead, have been working with the New York Regional Veterans Administration, to which the Puerto Rico Veterans Administration office is attached, to get that agency to provide the requirements for the establishment of schools for veterans, This is what was informed by the President of the donated and Popular Party, Mr. Luis MuAos Marín, to a commission of World War II veterans who visited him last August at his residence in Isla Verde, as reported by the commission to EL MUNDO. The idea is, according to our informants, to undertake the construction of schools in such a way that all the requirements of the Veterans Administration for such schools are met, so that when they are finished they are approved by the Veterans Administration in all their parts. The commission that interviewed Mr. MuAos Marín presented him with several problems that in his opinion would have to confront the veterans of World War II. The commission was composed of the president of the Committee for the Second War Veterans Convention, Mr. José M. Tejada, and Mr. Rafael Vlora Medina, Mr. Antonio Ortls, Mr. Manuel Maldonado and Mr. Renato Lamboy. Mr. Tejada told EL MUNDO that, as offered by the President of the Senate, the Island Government will request that of the five hundred dollars authorized by the Veteran's Bill of Rights to each ex-soldier, for his education, a part, or all of it, be used to create the fund that, together with the contribution made by the Island Legislature, will be used for the construction of schools and the purchase of the necessary equipment for industrial and vocational schools for veterans. The aforementioned schools, according to our informants, would be established in different parts of the island. In these schools, veterans who take advantage of the U.S. government's curriculum for veterans, through which they receive free instruction while receiving pay while they study, will be able to study. Likewise, Mr. MuAoz Marin told the commission, as they told EL MUNDO, that the plan for vocational or industrial schools for Puerto Rican veterans would work in harmony with the CompaAla de Fomento, which could determine what kind of industries and (Continued on page 14)
It is insisted that Spain will have another government
Giral confirms that they are working on it on the basis of José M. Gil Robles Works in matter one of 5 Great Republican R e g imen already has the support of 15 nations in the UN By Amador Marín NEW YORK, 28. - The head of the Spanish Republican government in exile, Dr. Jose Glral, has admitted that the rumors that have been circulating that he is working inside and outside Spain for the formation of a provisional government based on Jose Maria Gil Robles Quiñones, a Spanish politician who headed the Catholic Faction of Popular Action and who took refuge in Portugal at the beginning of the civil war in Spain, are well founded. These exclusive declarations were made to the INS correspondent minutes before the departure of Dr. Glral by air to Europe. Persons close to the Spanish Republican circles have added that elements not unconnected with the diplomatic representation of one of the "Big Five" nations in Spain were actively concerned with the matter to the point of circulating cuektlonaries among the various Spanish parties to make known their respective political aspirations. In this respect, Dr. Giral maintained that no one can question the juridical authority of his government and that, protected by the legality that assists him, he will not cease until he establishes it in Madrid. The Gil Robles government, according to these informants, would be mainly composed of Catholic generals, representatives of the right wing and some republicans. They added that some prominent Spanish politician residing in Mexico would probably be invited to join the government. Dr. Glral referred to the attitude of the London government toward the Spanish Republican regime, saying that there had been no change in the English position of late, but claimed that "the Spanish problem is on the Spanish side," and declared himself puzzled by the conclusions which were adopted at the last meeting of the Spanish government, which was held in London, l - w - ' The first air link between San Juan and New York, which will make Puerto Rico's capital the main hub of the large volume of inter-American traffic, will be forged on Monday, July 1, when Pan American Airways inaugurates direct service over the 1,606-mile route. | Pan American Airways reported yesterday, in announcing the initiation of service, among other things, the following: I (Continued on page 13)
Bolívar Pagán agreed to attend meeting of political leaders ¡ (Continued on page 13)
The President of the Socialist Party, Senator Bolívar Pagán, agreed yesterday afternoon to attend the meeting of political party leaders, sponsored by Representative Celestino Iriarto Miró, President of the Progressive Republican Union, in which the Puerto Rican political leadership will strive to reach agreement on a candidate, a native of Puerto Rico, who would have been presented to the President of the United States, to fill the vacancy in the island governorship, caused by the resignation of Governor Tugwell. k Late yesterday, Mr. Pagán telephoned Mr. Iriarto to speak with him.
Iriarto, to talk to him about the matter. A few minutes later, both leaders met at La Ma- । llorqulna, in this capital, at five o'clock in the afternoon. Senator Pagán expressed to Mr. Iriarto his willingness to attend a meeting of leaders to try to choose a Puerto Rican candidate for the presidency who could be submitted to President Truman with the endorsement of all Puerto Ricans. As you know, Senator Pagán asked this Wednesday for a period of 48 hours to consider the invitation made to him by Mr. Iriarto for this purpose. (Pro-'. (Continued on page 13).
The polyphilic slatu" New paths towards old objectives
LUIS MUÑOZ MARIN
By BOB CONSIDINE Aboard the "Apalachian" Carrier, On Voyage to Bikini. %. (INS)i -Army and Navy officials today revealed chronological details of the most complex military and scientific experiment in living memory. A minute-by-minute exposition of the rare plans for dropping an atomic bomb on the warships massed in the Bikini lagoon - as detailed and complicated as the most detailed and complex Invasion plan - was outlined for the sweating members of the Press and Radio as they approached the scene of next week's test. A meteorological expert, erudite and studious, will set the whole plan in motion. It will be he who will press the button that will set the huge machinery in motion twenty-four hours before the bomb is due to be dropped. The state of the weather should be almost
Governor Tugwell tendered his resignation yesterday to President Tru- I man. He claims that Joño right to < tree mooes do leave of absence and is of the opinion that । the appointment of his successor will not have to be made until Sept. I - - - - - i i The Municipal Assembly and si si Co "sitó Popular do Penco adopted a declaration in ia in which they allege ( that Democracy did not suffer in the < soso of the municipal aeambloíata Ra- i món Rodrigues Maldonado. - José Giral confirmed the version that he is working on the organization of a new government for Spain based on José Marte Gil Ro- - o o The District Court of Ban Juan pe declared without Jurisdiction to hear the case of these pikes. The Puerto Rican Ateneo Puertorriqueño eonMsorajioy the te anniversary do-
A report is being prepared on the conclusions of the meeting of the Portaleña on the suburbs to be presented to Muñoz Marín. - Planning has conditioned the housing plan to be developed in Cataño," a private entity. Juan Báse Corales yesterday indicated to the Executive Committee of the CGT (Colón Gordlany sector) the five conditions** under which he will accept the position of Secretary General of the Scoter. - - - . - Senator Mead, announced yesterday that an investigation will be made into the profits made during the year. R M --- The Navy announces the manufacture of an airplane which can stop in the air. - Civilian Berrido will ask Justice for an opinion on the employees I ooctero in too municipalities.
By Luí" Muñoz Murín II In my recent stay in Washington, the observations and studies that I have been able to make there, complementing my long and anguished thoughts about the risks and necessities of the Integral life of our people, lead me definitively to the following conclusions, based on the facts noted yesterday. (a) Statehood is impossible for the present economy of Puerto Rico. If from our extreme poverty we were to extract forty million in federal contributions every year.
million in federal contributions every year, there would be no hope of being able to solve the problems that today, without this annual extraction of wealth, we are partially and slowly resolving. It may be, moreover, that statehood is Impossible from the point of view of the United States. (b) Independence, without special economic conditions, is also Impossible. The closing, immediate or threatened at arbitrary fixed terms, of the free market of the United States would produce a rapid and fatal destruction in our economic life, which would affect equally - or totally - the poorest peasant and the most opulent capitalist. (c) Independence with adequate economic conditions is, of course, entirely feasible for our people. (d) I am convinced that it is extremely difficult, if not totally impossible, to obtain from the United States the economic relationship necessary for the survival and development of Puerto Rico in the childbearing of the United States.
development of Puerto Rico in the delivery of a law offering Independence to the Puerto Rican vote. I believe that the economic conditions that the Congress could offer under the title of independence would not be those that our people need to survive and overcome the serious difficulties of their lives. And I believe that the economic conditions Puerto Rico needs for this are those that the U.S. Congress will not be able to offer under the title of Independence. (e) The economic conditions necessary for Independence to be feasible for our people must be at least the same as those we have now, with no fixed time limit (although they could have a limit that is not fixed and specific). Any improvement conditions must be in addition to those that already exist. The only substantial condition of improvement over those that already exist would be that Puerto Rico, having book trade with the United States, could also have book trade with other countries of the world. By being able to have book trade with other countries in the world in exchange for no longer having book trade with the United States (Continued on page 7).
Impressive is the plan for the atomic test at Bikini The ship that will be closest to the explosion with human beings on board will be the destroyer "Barton" no more than 13 kilometers away ■ ■ ... i
I perfect. The wind must blow in an easterly direction, at least fifty thousand feet, or the radioactive cloud will disperse or go in all directions endangering several hundred ships and thousands of observers. When the meteorologist gives the warning, the lagoon will still be full of human aircraft and ships that are not to be targeted. They will begin to fan out over the reefs, heading for the offshore positions that have been designated late in the afternoon of the day before the launch, and the launch itself is called "ho- . ra mike". A total of two hundred , forty-six shoulders, which will be the last to leave the atoll! The officers will carefully check that the atoll is intact and that it is in good condition. The officers will carefully check the number of these: The number of these men to be taken out of the atoll will be checked carefully and carefully by the officials, ¡presented by Admiral W. H. P. ij (Continued on page 24).
NEWS DIGEST
MuAos Marta told a veterans' committee that the Government plans a vocational or industrial school for soldiers. - Puerto Rican Charleo Roglor beat the Interoologtal shooting record. Rodrigues Olmo hit a double in three innings in Mexico's loss to Veracruz. The Final Series of Baseball A continues tomorrow in Mayagüez. - There will be no Fas Conference as long as the solution to the Trieste problem remains unresolved. - Interior has granted five more days, after July 1, for motorists to provide new license plates. - The Federal Government does not favor the partial liquidation of the FRRA's own shares.
The Federal Government does not favor the partial liquidation of the FRRA.
CSC to hear case of Instruction employees
Justice to be asked for opinion on those in municipalities Wrapped again law number 76 Department believes they should be appointed on a permanent basis The Civil Service Commission yesterday considered the situation related to the appointments of school employees under! The Commission agreed to instruct its chairman, Mr. Guillermo Nigagllonl, to seek a legal opinion from the Department of Justice. The CSC is interested in knowing whether the positions in question have been transferred to the Insular Government, by virtue of Act 76, and whether or not, in accordance therewith, if such transfer has been provided for, the positions belong to the Classified Civil Service and are subject to the Civil Service regulations, pursuant to the provisions of the aforementioned measure. Furthermore, whether the provisions of the Uniform Classification and Remuneration Plan are applicable to the employees to be appointed for the next year, in view of the provisions of Section 2 of the Act. This part of the statute is that which provides for the appropriation of one million five hundred thousand dollars for the Commissioner of Instruction to assume all expenses and requirements of public Instruction, which would have been assumed by the municipalities and the Government of the Capital next year, out of their school funds. This section adds that in assuming such expenses and requirements, the Commissioner shall follow the provisions of the School Law in force, as well as the rules and regulations of the Department of Instruction, adding: "Said Commissioner shall not allocate for the expenses and requirements of instruction of any municipality, a sum less than the proceeds of the school levy and 25 percent of the share corresponding to each municipality and the Capital Government, of the property tax for the fiscal year 1945-46." Should the school positions in question, such as the positions of; janitor and librarian in the schools, be transferred to the Insular Government and within the Classified Service, while subject to the civil service regulations, no permanent appointments may be made to fill the same. They may be filled with eligible personnel in the records of the Commission, or with temporary appointments that may be extended to the present incumbents, until such time as they meet the requirements or until there are personnel (Continued on page 14).
Municipal Assembly and Popular Committee reiterate that any Popular Party member who does what Rodriguez Maldonado did must be condemned.
PONCE, 28. (By Erasmo Vando,; correspondent)-Commenting on the editorial in which EL MUNDO criticized the attitude of the Ponce Municipal Assembly in relation to the case of Assemblyman Ramón Rodríguez Maldonado because of an article he had published in another newspaper, the President of the Municipal Assembly, Dr. J. Lanauze Rolón, delivered a statement in which he said that the Assemblyman did not suffer in the case of Assemblyman Ramón Rodríguez Maldonado, and the Popular Committee said that democracy did not suffer in the case of Assemblyman Rodríguez Maldonado. Lanauze Rolón delivered to the press a document that was approved by the Municipal Assembly and the leadership of the Popular Committee of Ponce and that bears the signatures of Mayor Andrés Grillasen, Alfredo Campos, José Aguilera, Hernán Fouquet, Hernán Fouquet, Manuela Manuela, José Aguilera, José Fouquet, José Aguilera, José Aguilera, José Aguilera, José Aguilera and José Aguilera. Hernán Fouquet, Manuela Colón viuda de Ayala, Joaquin Garcia, Joaquin González, Pedro Gutiérrez, Pedro Fortier, J. M. Garcia and Juan Cabrer. The document delivered by Dr. Lanauze Rolón reads as follows: EL MUNDO, in an editorial of more than 600 words, censures the Ponce Municipal Assembly for resolution passed against Ra-.
imón Rodriguez Maldonado. And EL MUNDO asks: In the name of what principles did the Ponce Assembly members act in this case? Was it certainly not in the name of the freedoms that sustain democracies among which stands out, as an essential figure of those same democracies, freedom of speech?" Allow EL MUNDO to use its columns to shed some light on this whole unpleasant affair. Unpleasant, because Don Ramon is a personal friend of ours and a great person. Don Ramon wrote an article in a newspaper that daily campaigns harshly and constantly against the Popular Democratic Party. In that article he does not say a single word about how much good the party has done. It sharply criticizes almost the entire oh.-a dol party, from the authorities to the Status Commission. He does (Continued on page 24)
It is of the opinion that the President does not have to appoint until the end of the leave of absence.
Tugwell's resignation is effective Sunday, June 30, and his duties at the University of Chicago begin Monday, the United Press has learned from an unimpeachable source that the resigning governor plans to spend about four months each year in Puerto Rico for an indefinite period of years in an academic capacity. The Governor will spend that time in Puerto Rico each year as Director of the Institute of Social Studies at the University of Puerto Rico under an arrangement worked out between Rector Jaime Benitez of the University of Puerto Rico and Rector Robert Maynard Hutchins of the University of Chicago. The position at the University of Puerto Rico will be without salary and will not imply a reduction in the $15,000 annual stipend paid to Tugwell in his position at the University of Chicago's School of Political Science. Tugwell told a United Press correspondent, following his conference with President Man at noon today, that he intends to remain in the United States for the entire month of July and will return to Puerto Rico for a month and a half visit around the first of August. He added that his wife and family plan "for now" to stay in Puerto Rico. Immediately after his visit to the White House, Tutwell drove to the Department of the Interior to talk with Secretary Krug about governance. After his talk with Krug, Tugwell returned to his room at the Statler Hotel, where he told the United Press correspondent that he believed that the appointment of the new governor would not be made soon. He said that, after a discussion with the Interior Department attorney general, he had discovered that, under the terms of Federal law, he was entitled to a three-month final leave of absence once his resignation as governor became effective. Therefore, Tugwell, technically, would remain as "governor of Puerto Rico, 1 * until September 30, thus giving the President three months to make the appointment of his successor. > Esteban Bird entered Tugwell's room and cordially greeted the Governor, bidding him farewell before returning to San Juan by plane.
by plane. Asked if he would have been connected with Puerto Rican politics during his four-month stay on the Island every year, Tugwell said, "It has absolutely no connection with politics." The Governor appeared in high spirits after his interviews with Truman and Krug, and spoke of his plans at the University of Chicago, where he will be intimately associated with "the scientists of Chicago. The Governor will spend this weekend at the residence of journalist Low'll Mellott, former Director of the United States Information Service, before leaving for Chicago by plane on Monday morning. Piftero's candidacy for Governor of Puerto Rico is "dead," largely because of the objections of Democratic National Committee Chairman Robert E. Hannogan and other Democratic officials that Piftero would be merely a "rubber stamp" of Muñoz Marin, and would lack the power of independent action required of a Presidential appointee. At this time, too, it is said that the Department of the Interior has no candidate for the governorship. In credible circles, I have been informed that Secretary Krug has a desire to "wash his hands" of the whole Puerto Rico gubernatorial question, and that, for the first time in several years, I insist that the Department of the Interior did not push any candidate for a Presidential appointee. In spheres lower than the Department of the Interior, there has been this (Continued on page 13)