THE WORLD
WEATHER BRIEF FOR TODAY-Generally good for maflaps, with a few scattered showers along the eastern seaboard. Partly cloudy this afternoon, with showers and thundershowers in the Interior. High in San Juan Ser, M. Sunrise today at 0:17 A. I sets at 6:04 P. M. No sign of thunderstorms.
clicitin
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII
NUMBER 10734
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 12, 1946
Entered as second clan matter, Poet Office, San Juan, P. R.
PRICE 5 Centavo"
Racket of rums reveals J. Palés Díaz
Large quantity of rum boxes for export subtracted from continuous Subtract liquor at docks, ships Mounted to $1,000,000 claims during fiscal year ended June Per Juan Martin" Chape! Editor of EL MUNDO One of the most important sources of income, and the one on which the Government of Puerto Rico depends mainly to defray the expenses of its support and to undertake new activities, is the tax on rums exported to the United States, the proceeds of which are returned in their entirety to the Island Treasury. During the past month of September, the Island Government collected, by way of federal Internal Revenue Taxes on products exported to the United States, the sum of $3,313,941.22, according to an official report of the Federal Internal Revenue Division in San Juan. This amount included the taxes on rum and cigars exported to the U.S., but the main amount corresponded to the taxes on the reds. Although the amount collected shows a slight decrease compared with previous months of the year, collections have been normal, considering that the maritime strike prevented all shipments from being made. In an interview held with Mr. Jesús Palés Díaz, head of the Federal Internal Revenue Division, he was informed that there is an abnormal situation that constitutes an acute problem to be solved, as far as the shipments of rumors are concerned, due to the fact that since the beginning of the war up to the present time there has developed what has been described as a scandalous "racket" which has caused great losses to the Puerto Rican producers and much inconvenience to the Federal Government, and which consists in the disappearance, in an alarming manner, of a great number of cases of liquor, either at the docks or on board ships. *Mr. Palés Días stated that these losses are not casual, but constitute theft during the voyage, or at the docks, due to the enormous number of cases that disappear, which leads to claims involving hundreds of millions of dollars annually that the Federal Government has to return for the federal taxes it has heard previously collected on the liquor that has been stolen or has disappeared in transit. . In addition to the number of boxes that disappear, there is also the problem of a large number of boxes arriving at their destination, but with cakes or many broken bottles. How they might use the contents of these bottles has not been determined, although it is presumed that some of the breakages are intentional. According to Mr. Palés Díaz, the greatest difficulty lies in ascertaining whether it is on board, or on the docks, or both, where these scandalous acts are committed. On the desk of the soft or Palés.speaks thousands of claims*. requesting reimbursement of taxes paid on liquor missing in transit. There have been shipments in which 000 boxes have disappeared, which suggests that there is a criminal hand behind it all. The Federal Department of Internal Revenue and its Chief in Puerto Rico, Mr. Palés Díaz, are taking the necessary steps to determine where such offenses are occurring. A new inspection system has been established at the docks, so that Customs Inspectors will verify that the quantities described in the official documents are actually shipped and that when the merchandise arrives on the mainland, Customs agents there will verify the quantities being shipped. According to reports, the companies are not able to verify the quantities that are being shipped.
Compendium of news
Bolívar agán accuses Muñoz Marín of having suppressed the Co- * Permanent Legislative mission. Ploó urged the community to know about the public works ." roaUsaroo. ~ ' - - - * The execution of the convicts was born sotó afielada to begin next Wednesday. ' p' * o " Local Board of Teachers do Guysma Would go on strike, on wage issue. ir , " O O O Continental firm is willing to buy tomato crop in Puerto Rico. rrt o a * TA reports losses on Toa projects. uf 1 * e * Senators Mitchell and Magnuson, U.S. Senate, have called for investigation of conduct of certain U.S. attorneys involved in Nurem-
Bolívar Pagán cradles MuAoa certificates to tea 41 independent guaguas still circulating in San Juan. - ♦ ♦ Due to insufficient water collection revenues, the RIA is prevented from issuing revenue bonds for the time being. ♦ ♦ ♦ " Prosecutor Domingo Candelario explains his Intervention in the Basilio Carrasquillo case. He says that only the OAP and the Police investigated the matter, and that he depended on the outcome of this investigation to file the case in the District Court. * ♦ * J. Pilé* Díaz denounces racket in the rums destined for export. - * ♦ Delivered the receipts of contributions of all the towns, except Guayama. * ♦ " ♦ Great interest in Santo Domingo to intensify commercial exchange with Puerto Rico.
Boston beat St. Louis, 6 - 3, to take the lead in the Series.
Joe Dobson, right-handed pitcher of the Boston Red Sox, took charge yesterday of putting his team in the lead of the World Series against the St. Louis Cardinals, 3 games for 2, by defeating them* with a score of 6 runs for 3. Dobson struck out eight St. Louis batters and allowed only four hits in the course of the nine innings. None of the runs scored by St. Louis were clean sheets. For the Cardinals starter Howie Pollet started on the mound but consecutive hits by Gutterldge,
Johnny Pesky, a fielder's cholee on DIMagglo's grounder and a pusher hit by Ted Williams were enough to send him flying off the mound.i Al Brazle relieved Pollet on the mound and stayed on the mound until the seventh inning. Beazley pitched the eighth inning for the Cardinals. In the first inning, Don Gutterldge, who played second base in relief of Bobby Doerr, opened the game with a' hit into the box for first. Pesky blew another RBI to the right field and Gutterldge (Continued on page 7)
Sentenced to 16 years in prison
Archbishop Alojzlc Stenlnac, sentenced yesterday by a Croatian court to serve 16 years in prison after being found guilty of collaborating with the Nazis. The archbishop was prosecuted along with other IB rellgioaoa, nuns and others accused of the same crime. The Pope has denounced in strong terms this trial. (Photo P. A.) Execution of Nazis to begin on Wednesday morning The convicts will hang from the noose for fifteen minutes* *i the last penalty e* applied d*. according to Army regulations By LOWELL DENNETT NUREMBERGA, 11. (INSI-Loz eleven former Nazi functionaries sentenced to death on the gallows by the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg* will remain hanging for fifteen minutes, 1 it was observed today, if the executions are carried out in accordance, with the respective regulations of the American Army. The military laws i
Military law provides for such a measure as a precaution, although - except in some cases - death occurs either instantaneously or within three minutes of hanging. The executions are expected to begin early next Wednesday morning, and are expected to last between four and five hours, to be carried out by the U.S. Army under the superintendence of the Allied Control Council in Germany. As explained by some doctors, generally the death of a hanged person occurs by fracture of the spine, when the trap on which the person to be executed stands is opened. However, if the knot is not well placed, or if the prisoner makes resistance at a certain moment before the trap is opened, the signs of life could continue for fifteen minutes. The former Marshal Hermann Goering and the former Foreign Minister of the Third Reich, Joachim von Ribbentrop, to whom painkillers have been administered to help them reconcile the suicide, will have to go to the scaffold without being under the influence of any drugs, since the above-mentioned laws of the American Army prohibit the use of sedatives during the twenty-four hours preceding the execution. If any of the prisoners should at the last moment manifest renunciation or incapacity to go to the scaffold by himself, he shall be carried or carried by force. The prisoners will wear black hoods and the execution will be carried out behind a curtain. The death sentence will be read to the defendants one more time before the trap will be opened* through which the eleven condemned criminals will go to the other world. Meanwhile, another INS dispatch reports that Joachln von Ribbentrop has sent a letter to Sir Alexander Walker - as reported today by a Nuremberg dispatch - asking him for a job for his son. Str Alexander has an interest in the firm of John Walker and Son, fa(Continued on page 6.)
JPicó in favorj of informing the community I ; He says the public should not be left ignorant in - regard to public works . Commenting on our editorial of : yesterday, on the uneasiness of the municipal ali caldea, especially as regards the announcement by the 11 Government of construction works, . which are not carried out, the president of . the Board of Plans, Dr. Rafael ; Picó,' authorized the following decla- ( rations: | "Not to give Information on the , construction projects of works , । of the Government, would be extremely peli- । 1 groso. It would be the denial of the public's right to know about these works, in their different stages, since they are suggested by the parliaments and agencies in the economic pro- ! economic program in a gene-1 , ral form, until the work is announced for auction, ' "Precisely the Board prides itself on having opened to public dia- , cusion, by submitting to vls- । tas. the economic program guber- . namentc.l, and by opening its minutes weekly- . nally to General Information. In this way every citizen can ' learn what he plans to do * his Government, and can exercise the constitutional right to endorse, protest, or suggest amendments to ; plans which may be had. "The procedure, moreover, affords ' a magnificent opportunity to municipalities, to manage the speedy - execution of public works projects approved by the Board, if ' these are not carried out with the pronf tltude which the municipality believes the work should te- ' ner. The procedure is ■ new in Puerto Rico. It is possible ■ that it has not yet absorbed the different stages in the formu- > laclon of a work, which Inevitably- - mind takes a serle of natural formalities in a democratic government such as ours, where works are not decided by one man. "Such a procedure begins with the recommendations of the departments, when the economic program is formulated. At this stage, mayors and legislators are also invited to formulate their recommendations, which are received by letters, telegrams and personal representations. In many cases, such demarches are also published, produ(Continued on page 7."
Senators Mitchell and Magnuson call for an investigation into the conduct of U.S. prosecutors in Nuremberga.
The Governor , ■ -- I will meet with minorities He will consult them on the legislative session, he said in his conference yesterday He intends to go to the United States Somers' visit. - Marchand's report. The automobile case Governor Jesus T. Piflero, in yesterday's conference with reporters, revealed his proposal to invite the members of the legislature with legislative representation to meet with him for an exchange of views on the matters to be submitted for the consideration of the legislative chamber, which is to meet in a special session in the near future. The Governor said he preferred to hold separate meetings with the minority representatives. 1 < A WASHINGTON The Governor revealed that he intended to make a trip to Washington at the end of next December, because he wished to be present in the federal capital for the opening of the new Congress. "But naturally, advlr-i, tló, my plans may change in - accordance with circumstances. If my presence for those days is necessary in the pal- I would remain here." i RESIDENT COMMISSIONER The Governor stated that he had asked Dr. Fernós Isérn to postpone his trip last week until he could see what purposes were being brought to Puerto Rico by the representatives of the Agricultural Credit Corporation. But in view of the fact that the said seflores had come to the Island for the purpose of holding public hearings in connection with the fixing of minimum wages for the sugar industry, Dr. Fernós Isern was planning to embark next Sunday morning. The Governor believed that perhaps the said representatives of the CCC were coming to Puerto Rico in connection with the demands being made for an increase in the price of sugar. SOMERS' VISIT c r The presence of Representative Andrew L. Somers in San Juan, Mr. Piftero explained, was due to an invitation from him. He and Somera - are old friends, and had adjoining offices in the national Lower House. Somers, said the Governor, was always very interested in Puerto Rican affairs, * and when Piftero was appointed Governor, the Democratic Congressman promised to pay him a short visit 1 (Continued on page 7)!
San Juan District Assistant District Attorney Domingo Candelapió, explained yesterday his participation [in the Basilio Carrasquillo case, which gave rise to the contempt proceeding against our Director, saying the following:* i "I have read the Information published by EL MUNDO in its edition correapondlente today, under the signature of its editor, Juan Martlnez Chapel, in relation to the debated matter of the acquittal by the Ilon, Judge Arcillo Alvarado, of the District Court of San Juan, of Basilio Carrasquillo Quiñones in two cases followed against him by El Pueblo de Puerto Rico for, two alleged Infractions to Law No. 31 of 1943, generally known as the Price Law. As is known, said defendant was convicted and sentenced to jail and fine in both cases by the Hon. Judge Victoriano Fernández, of the First Chamber of the Municipal Court of San Juan, and said defendant filed an appeal against the two sentences with the result expressed above. i The content of the referred information is substantially accurate and correct. However, there is a
The content of the information referred to is substantially accurate and correct. However, there is a basin between the months of September to March, and it is known that there are currently, although in a benign form, cases of influenza or influenza in different sectors of the metropolitan area and in some inland towns." "In spite of the benign type of most of the reported cases," the note adds, "it is a proven fact that an attack of influenza does not confer immunity against such disease and that the same may recur again and again. Furthermore, one of the characteristics of influenza is that, as it acquires pandemic proportions, its virulence increases until it becomes a serious disease, with a marked tendency to serious complications, especially pneumonia and other similar respiratory system affections. The Department of Health is prepared to deal with (Continued on page 7)
Great interest in Santo Domingo to increase trade here The director of Banco Agrícola expressed that the institution could establish links to ensure trade with Puerto Rico.
The sales manager of the General Farm Equipment Co., Mr. Angel R. Benitez, who returned a few days ago from Ciudad Trujillo, informed that in an interview held with the interim administrator of the Banco Agrícola e Hipotecarlo of the Dominican Republic, the latter expressed "a keen interest in intensifying commercial relations between Puerto Rico and the said country". Mr. Benitez expressed that "the agricultural and financial circuits of the country are very willing to cooperate with the Puerto Ricans, so that commercial relations with the Dominican Republic may increase day by day". Such is the impression he obtained during the aforementioned interview. The total capital of the aforementioned bank, as he explained, is $2, 119,825.42, and from the information obtained by
Benitez, the Institution is in a position to establish commercial ties that will assure the import and export exchange between Puerto Rico and Santo Domingo. "The island is experiencing difficulties in the supply of foodstuffs, especially during the crises that arise as a result of maritime strikes in the United States, from where we mainly obtain our supplies. There is the impression that the Island could now take advantage of the surplus food production available in the Dominican Republic, once the steps announced by the Island Government before the federal authorities are successful. To give an idea of the increase in the production of agricultural products, I was provided with the following figures corresponding to last fall: "During the past fall, according to figures from the Directorate of Statistics, the production of agricultural products increased considerably. The production of rice, which is a very important item because it is an integral element of our diet, was almost 56 and a half million kilos. The growth of this production has been gradual and can be seen by comparing it, year by year, with the previous year. The production of onions has also increased. The other products whose increase entitles them to a separate place in this note are: pigeon peas, corn, peanuts. It should also be noted the considerable increase in production (Continued on page 7).
Prosecutor says only the OAP and the Police investigated the case of Basilio Carrasquillo Candelario opposed the "non suit" because, he reports, OAP agent declared that Carrasquillo was the owner of the faithful business under accusation.
To our contributors We urge our* contributors to shorten their statements, letter" or articles. The enormous crisis "le pane! has reduced newspaper quotas to extremes where it is absolutely necessary to limit space drastically. We announce, at the same time, that, against all our desire, we will have to synthesize all those expressions which depart from this need for greater strength. After referring to two licenses and two patents issued in the name of Berilio Carrasqulllc Quiñones, by various government agencies and officials, all related to the operation of his business and all of which exist on the wall, on the outside of the counter, where everyone who enters the store can see them, he expresses himself as follows: "Many lawyers" believe that if they had been used by El Pueblo (Continued on page 7).
Health warns against possible epidemic outbreak of influenza Exhorts the public to take precautions and avoid contagion of currently existing cases. - Asks doctors to inform him Informs note from the Department of Health, in relation to a possible epidemic outbreak of influenza in the city of San Juan and other towns on the Island, that the Department of Health "believes it is appropriate to remind the public that this disease occurs more frequently in San Juan and other towns on the Island, that the Department of Health "believes it is appropriate to remind the public that this disease occurs more frequently in the city of San Juan and other towns on the Island".
He accuses Muñoz of suppressing a commission Bolívar Pagan says he has not convened the Permanent Legislative Commission. infestations: "Some time ago, it was reported that Mr. Luis Muftoz Murillo was summoned to a meeting. Some time ago, Mr. Luis Muftoz Murln called a meeting of the ('omlrión Legislativa Permanente, which was created by the Legislature itself, to discuss, know and listen to the people and all the affected Interests in those matters of vital public Interest, which it was necessary to consider in the Legislature when it met under any circumstances. (Continued on page ' 7) Izquierdo to summon fertilizer companies The Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, Mr. Luis A. Izquierdo, informed yesterday that he proposes to summon during the course of next week the representatives of the fertilizer selling companies and of all the agricultural entities of the country, with the purpose of determining the analysis of fertilizers to be used in Puerto Rico for the different crops. To this end, the study of the stock of raw materials on hand, in transit, or pending receipt during the months* of October, November and December is being completed. I Mr. Izquierdo was asked about the attitude of. His Department in relation to the battle for the island's tobacco-which, according to United Press correspondent Charles McInformaclón lie Cab" is being waged in Washington by the president of the Farmers' Association, José Ramon Qulftones,-the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce replied: "I am very much Interested in that matter, and can Indicate to you that since the 19th of September I prepared a Report on all aspects of this problem and forwarded it *1 Governor, so that he in turn could forward it to Wáshlngton."
The SIA is now prevented from issuing bonds, Insufficient "water collection revenues would not ensure liquidation Agency requests funding contribution Sewer program is reviewed; The Insular Waterworks Service," headed by "eftor Sergio Cueva* Buatamante, has requested a contribution of insular funds up to fourteen million dollars, in order to introduce extensive ' clone" and improvement" and build water mains" that will ensure i in the near future Revenue" that ' may allow the issuance of revenue bonds" to complete the j 22 million dollars in which the overall cost of its program is estimated. The overall cost of its island program is estimated at $22 million. Of the" fourteen million । dollars mentioned, the said agency , has received from the Island Government l so far, four million and mei dio, which it employs in various water abaíteclmlent" system projects. The lack of water collection revenues, it was reported yesterday, has prevented the SIA from announcing revenue bonds for the time being, since, in the opinion of the financial circuits, it would be difficult to place loans of this nature when they are not backed by revenues to ensure their liquidation. On the contrary, it was revealed yesterday that the SIA, as a public service company, has not achieved economic self-sufficiency which would allow it to raise funds for the time being through loans or bond issues, and must still depend on the assistance it may receive from the Island Government, until it achieves an expansion of its services which would provide it with even greater Revenues. Regarding the aqueducts, the program proposed by the Service to the Planning Board, for its inclusion in the next financial program of the Government, proposes an investment equal to the one requested last year, that is, 32 million dollars. From this item, it is projected the investment of five million dollars in the construction of individual aqueduct systems in the rural area of the lilac. The proposal also includes that the Island Government contribute, out of the total of the 32 ■ million requested, the sum of - [fourteen million dollars. The SIA would be launched by means of bond issues on income, which would be announced once the system is developed. The best proposals are to be made . with Insular funds, within the । shortest period of time, for (Continued on page 7" Delivered the' receipts on ; j Only Guayama is missing because the mayor asked for a review of the appraisal. Expressing that he had not read the published information, the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Rafael Buscalia, refused to comment yesterday on the accusation made at the assembly of the Mayor's Association, held last Thursday at the Ateneo, in San Juan, against the Appraisal Division of the Treasury Department, holding said agency responsible in part for the appraisal of the Treasury Department, The mayor of Fajardo, Mr. Dle-, go Jimenez, declared at the assembly that the municipality is currently owed $47,000, corresponding to fiscal year 1945-46, and that, while this is so, the municipality he heads "does not have the necessary funds to pay the taxes," and that while this is so, the municipality "does not have the necessary funds to pay the taxes," he said: The municipality, which he directs, "does not have the means to meet even its minimum needs". Another official of the Treasury Department stated yesterday that "this has been one of the best years that the Appraisal Division has had, having already delivered the receipts of all the towns, with the exception of Guayama, because the mayor of that city has requested a review of the appraisal of the properties of twenty heavy taxpayers". On the other hand, Rafael Buscaglla said that next Monday he will be able to authorize statements about what was expressed in the assembly of the Mayors' Association,
Allegedly going to parties with wives of Nazi leaders Mrs. de Schirach guest of honor Magnuson asks for investigators to be sent to theater in Europe SEATTL¿rw*¡h¡n f ton, 1! (PU)-Democratic Senator Hugh B. Mitchell, for Wáahington County, has asked for an investigation into charges that "scandalous indiscretions" have been committed by several members of the U.S. prosecutors' group in the proceedings before the Nuremberga military tribunal. The Senator claims that "scandalous indiscretions" have been committed by several members of the U.S. prosecution team in the Nuremberg Military Tribunal trials, and that they are being entertained in Germany by the wives of some of the accused war criminals. The said senator maintains that "their source of information is absolutely trustworthy and unsuspicious; and if these charges are true, it cannot but exert a depressing influence on the morale of the troops assigned for the post-war mission during the occupation in the direction of denazifying Germany." Senator Mitchell added that at one such party, "with champagne," American officers mingled with the wives of Nazi hierarchs on trial at Nuremberg, and that at one such party the guest of honor was the wife of Baldua von Schirach, Nazi leader of the German Hitlerite youth, who was sentenced to 20 years in prison. Senator Warren O. Magnuson, Democrat, of Washington, joined his colleague Mitchell in demanding an immediate investigation by the Senate Committee to Investigate War Matters. Mitchell has not disclosed the names of the U.S. officials involved in his indictment, stating only that they are members of the corps of prosecutors who heard the trials of the Nazi leaders. As an ex officio member of the Senate Committee to Investigate War Matters, Mitchell! said he had forwarded a confidential report on the case to Senator Harley M. Kilgore, Democrat, of Virginia, who is chairman of that committee. In that report Mitchell makes an "urgent recommendation" that the charges be thoroughly investigated. He said the committee will not enter into its investigation to determine the moral turpitude of the officers involved in the indictment, but will "examine all reports related to the scandal to see if the acts of our officers are influencing the performance of their official duties," Mitchell said. Mitchell's report referred to here mentions recent allusions made by Republican Senator Owen Brewster of Maine to secret information he had gathered from an Army intelligence officer indicating acts of misconduct between high-ranking American officers and German women. Also cited in the report is the specific case in which, at a drinking party, American guests mingled with the wives of Nazi men on trial before the Military Tribunal, and the guest of horfsr at one such party was Schirach's wife. In supporting his colleague's demand for an investigation of these facts, Senator Magnuson stated: "I join with Mitchell in his demand for* me particular investigation.