EL MUNDO 1 MORNING NEWSPAPER
40 PAGES 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
40 PAGES 5 Ctv". 2 Sections".
YEAR XXVIII
Let us support the men who made the Victory Loan possible,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 5, 1946
Entered u second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10458
Cia. Fomento to train its workers
Will build a farm for this purpose. Will acquire land in Hato Rey Cost of the project is *750,000.00 InduMrial program which has already been outlined by the agency management The Development Company will acquire an eight and one-half acre site northwest of the Eleanor Roosevelt neighborhood, in Hato Rey, for the purpose of locating its labor school for new industries and for its experimental laboratories. The cost of this property is estimated at $22,000, and it is the purpose of the Company to develop it.1 The total cost of the project, including the construction of the necessary buildings, is estimated at $22,IHK. The total cost of the project, including the buildings, is $75,000. The company has found it necessary intimately to send to the United States young people to train in various industrial procedures, so that they can take charge of the plants once the various industries which it now manages are in operation. The school will provide, as we were informed yesterday, this instruction and will also have the industrial laboratories necessary for experiments on new factories to be established. Among the studies and researches of importance is the utilization of porllorrlquefta raw material for the manufacture of various articles, as well as the use of the mineral resources available on the Island for industrial production for local use as well as for export. The Industrial program of the Development Company comprises an investment of approximately $13,000,000 additional, in the next six fiscal years, counting this agenda, until June 30 of the present year, with $17,500,000, which are being used in the development of its initial additions. The total appropriation, therefore, at the end of fiscal year 1951-1)2, will amount to some $30,500,000 if the Legislature approves the recommendations of the Planning Board for the next six fiscal years. At present, the Development Company has in operation the Vldrln Factory, for which it has provided some $3,000,000, and the cement factory, which has been in operation for several years. He is building a ceramics factory in Isla Verde, at an estimated cost of $1,200,000, and a paper mill in Cataño, and is developing a program for the construction of buildings for private industries and for the establishment and development of small and manual industries. Among his immediate plans are the construction at Pnnce of the weaving mill, which will cost $2.700,000, and another small plant for the construction of shoes in dl-t cha city, It is also proposed to establish a plant for the construction of Venetian blinds, at stop 10, Fernandez Juncos Avenue, Miramar, ~ The industrial program outlined by the Development Company includes, in addition, the development in the future of important activities related to the manufacture of miscellaneous industries involving an investment of approximately 412.400,000. as well as flour mills; installation of marble cutting and polishing equipment; manufacture of mefel horn utensils; hosiery factory; plants for the manufacture of aaJlcylate of eoda; the synthetic wood plant, at an estimated cost । $12,000,000; wood products factory and the food yeast factory. The laboratories and worker training programs indicated are intended, according to our information, to prepare the necessary personnel (continued on page 24).
MAC ARTHUR CLEANS NIPPONESE GOVERNMENT OF IMPERIALIST TYPES TOKYO, 4. (INS>- In an order that effect or twenty! of thousands of Japanese, the Supreme Allied Commander, Army General Douglas MacArthur, today banned from holding public office all those Japanese who are not in Japan.
those Japanese who participated in Japan's unraveling dream of world domination from holding public office. The vigorous purge is directed against anyone, including former prime ministers of the empire, who worked before or during the war or on behalf of Japanese imperialism through military, political or economic channels or propaganda. These citizens may no longer hold public office.
These citizens may no longer hold public, appointive or elective office. The order covers everyone from former Prime Ministers Baron Kantaro Suzuki and Prince Harukiro Higashi, to rank-and-file members of the Secret Police and civilian employees of the Government. General MacArthur's surprise order had a great effect and helped to put into practice the terms of the Potsdam Declaration made by the U.S., Britain and China.
The rice shortage problem remains this year.
LhIIiiiiikIc is of the opinion that in the free market the island would not get even half the normal supply. - What spokesmen say By CHARLES McTARK WASHINGTON, 4th (PU). - Since the first of October heavy year, commercial shipments of rice hR< l* lo" territories of the United States have been cut back from 40 per cent net of quantities reserved by the Government. The United States Department of Agriculture has already purchased 19,000 shingles from the United States.
Interior has already purchased shingles 1946 ■ Will send North one of its officials to expedite shipment The Government Supply Office, on the recommendation of the Department of the Interior, will formalize ron a penal Institution of the District of Colombia, Washington. *1 dhntratn for *1 supply of the" automobile license plates which । are to be used on the Island during the next fiscal year, Commissioner of the Interior, aeIñnr Orlando R. Méndez, informed । yesterday that said licenses will be in Puerto Rico for a certain period of time for distribution to the owners of motor vehicles, and he expects that they will be received in the island by May of this year. Mr. Méndez added that in order to finalize certain details of the contract and to activate the prompt shipment of this order, he intends to send Mr. Manuel G. López, an official of the Department's Automobile Division, to the United States in the near future. Mr. Lopez has served in the Department for many years, having been a member of the Automobile Division. 1 The new license plates will have blue back and rotor numbers, and their body will be yellow, and lately they have been "urged to purchase the item in the United States, especially because of the situation in the steel mills, and the strikes in the industry, The Supply Bureau" comu- । nicó si Department rie ln lnle-j rlor that the dates rie delivery offered- । cated by the bidders" continent- , les were Insecure, fluctuating a" j between six and eight months, which did not ( allow it to have these shingles" in ( the Island in time for its dlstrl- । mock. i Ln the above-mentioned penal institution is in a position to take over the contract, it being considered necessary to send a representative of the Department to finalize technical details in the manufacture of the tablets and to expedite their manufacture and shipment to the island.
The Department of Commerce announced that, in ? v after the first January riel rio JD4B, 38 percent of the production rio rice produced in the riel "ur mills, and 60 percent of the production processed in the California mills had to be reserved for the Government purchasing agency rie. The department's announcement stated: "The January 1 change represents a net increase in the amounts set aside primarily to facilitate Government procurement and the movement of rice to the Philippines and other Asian areas where food shortages exist. Commercial shipments of rice to U.S. territories after December 31 will not be deductible" from the quantities ordered to be set aside for the Government procurement agency." A spokesman riel Department ri." the interior said that ln cn situation regarding Atroz pata the HawaII and Puerto Rico and other possessions" "not e" much of a problem, at present." ¡ He continued rilclenrto that funciona-1 rjn" of the Department rie Agriculture I" have assured that there is ; "enough rice" available in "1 h Ubre market; that- the orj arrangement. (Continued on page 20.1- I
In making effective yesterday the ri toririad rie Transportation alleged that rio with Article X riel agreement network Iva rie the Union rie Drivers and and Annexed Branches rieclriló not Go to 1 lecretarla today sl the Admlnlsrarior rio 1a AT, Mr. Jose G. Rloli. did not resolve osle and other problenas raised". As announced yesterday atrio the President rie the Union, tortor Raimundo Lebrón, yesterday mlsuo was proceeded to the payment rie the cantitari rie $1.000 that so speaks offered -orno prize to the employees se(ún the collective bargaining agreement already expired. He also informed that the case of the "eftor-Pedro S "ga> Ta, who had to attend Court one day without being paid by the Authority the salary corresponding to that day, and that of Macimlno Guadalupe, who was given "a four-day punishment," were referred to in the case of the "eftor-Pedro S "ga> Ta, who had to attend Court one day without being paid by the Authority the salary corresponding to that day, and that of Macimlno Guadalupe, who was given "a four-day punishment," were referred to in the case of the "eftor-Pedro S "ga> Ta, who had to attend Court one day without being paid by the Authority the salary corresponding to that day, and that of Macimlno Guadalupe, who was given a punishment of four days,
Memoirs of Colonel Cordero Complaints to Colonel Sasawa cause more deprivations
Cn "ate chapter of his memoirs, Colonel Virgilio N. Cordero, Puerto Rican hero of the Philippine campaign, recounts further Japanese outrages - the Allied offdales imprisoned in a Formoea camp and how his complaints to the commanding officer resulted only in a reduction in the little food 1 ( supplied to them. By Colonel Virgilio N. Cordero of the United States Army (XIV) One day during the peanut planting season, Colonel Braddock, of our Medical Corps, was caught by a guard eating some peanut kernels. The guard asked the Colonel if he did not know that "theft is a very serious offense". The Colonel replied that he was not stealing, because the peanuts had been bought with money in savings, and therefore he was not stealing,
The Colonel replied that he was not stealing, because the peanuts had been bought with money in savings, and therefore were our property. The camp commandant's reply to this remark was a beating which cost Colonel Braddock two of his teeth. On another day, two young English officers, while working at their agricultural duties, were obliged to remain for more than an hour in an attitude of attention, for not working to the full satisfaction of one of the guards. When we had finished the day's work, the two English officers were ordered to report to the camp office, where a bulky corporal took charge of the corporal punishment of the officers, with the assistance of a Japanese born and bred in California, who was the camp interpreter. The two officers came away with bleeding faces, and one of them lost three teeth during the beating. It is clear that, after that brutality, the officers were hospital cases.
were hospital cases; but neither of them, of course, received hospital leave. By this time we were so accustomed to frequent and severe beatings that the thought of another beating did not stop us when the opportunity arose to add a little extra food to our miserable diet. Hunger dominated our thoughts, our feelings and our actions. With the onset of the dry season we began to suffer a new water shortage. This meant extra work for us. Twice a day - once in the morning and once in the evening - we were obliged to carry water to the Japanese kitchen and bathrooms, in addition to the water needed in our kitchen. The water was carried in a few i (Continued on page 18).
Prize case settled, no ; 1 f there will be strike on omnibus AT ! Authority paid yesterday to the Union 1o" thousand dúlarr* , dr bonus offered in agreement to the" empicado*. - The "oíros do* case* remain pending of "ohición r
Uñero that lo" employee" rie the Au- J te were entitled to receive rie acuer- i o that expired sel" mese" ago, the di- | y. Mechanic" number 1 rie San Juan (the strike that announced qtte ! ( Island exceeded ¡ again quota: of borrowing i Member" drl Finance Committee address "aludo to Puerto Rican people Informing that Puerto Rico aobrepasó otra" time the quota that was assigned to it for war borrowing-this time, on the Victory , । । Empréstito"-the chairman and ( other directors of the War Fi- j nance Committee, under whose aus- । pidos ae effected the campaign, auto r rizaron yesterday the algulente: j SALUTE: The War Finance Committee for Puerto Rico of the United States Treasury Department is proud to announce that the quota allocated to the island for the sale of ' । U victory bonds during the borrowing of ' , I" victory has been surpassed. Es- J ¡ t his success harmonizes with that which we obtained- 1 saw in our efforts in to,'two previous borrowings, éxl-1 f 1 to which we attained thanks to the es- * /efforts and hard work, sacrifices' * * ¡ personal and, tireless and, dlllgen-, c I I te cooperation of all the local dlrec- < , tors of the bond sale J . and their committees of volunteers in all- I । da Ja Island. Their honest and sincere assist- > tend" for this important , pa- * . i trlótlca task rie to finance victoria-¡J i'samente the war effort d" r i the United States" rie America vi- t will eternally vi- t vllrl as a shining- 1 i te example to all" r i peace-loving people in the world. c ii Our sincere Thanks and 1 ■ thanks will be extended by means of these lines to all the banks, post offices, the Press, radio stations, all churches, civic, professional and fraternal lp argsnlzaclons, Inaular Police Depar- c tment, public and private schools and aa- t | .(Continued on page 24.). c
The General Council of Unions of the Sugar Union meets on the 9th to decide whether or not to waive collective bargaining rights.
waives collective bargaining rights
4334 insane without confinement throughout the Island ■ Shh Juan rs the most affected city, with 598 without hospitalization Ponue makes number 2 with total of 294.
This was agreed at a meeting of ¡ the unions Each of the groups stated what it would be willing to accept They will ask for salary* to be retroactive ■ * * * Union of Barceloneta will sign pnr its own if it delays the agreement Pnr II AN MAIJJONADO Editor The General Council of the CGT Sugar Union will be convened soon to decide on the problem that has held up the negotiation of the collective bargaining agreement for the sugar industry workers, The General Council, in stating that it is the Union which has the exclusive right to these negotiations and that only the General Council can rescind said right, authorizes the Union to continue the collective bargaining of the agreement together with the Federación Libre de ios Trabajadores do Puerto Rico and the other independent unions. This decision was reached Thursday afternoon at the meeting held between representatives of the Sugar Workers Union and the Free Federation to exchange impressions after the incident that occurred during the first meeting of the Joint Consultative Committee. i For the Sugar Workers Union were present Messrs. Pglre i Vega Berrios, Monserrate Colón, Valentín R. Gallardo, Fernando'Alvar<fz, Juan Bernard González, Alberto E. Sánchez, Sergio KÁIlañ BAez and Armando Rivero. For the Federación Libro de los Trabajadores"! ds Puerto Rico, Messrs. Nlcoiáa Nogueras Rivera, Francisco Pas Gránela, Lula Sojo and Adolfo Burgos. Also in attendance was Mr. Benigno Ortlz, member of the Executive Committee of the CGT, which I chair, Mr. Barreto Pérez. Mr. Alberto Sanchez, who presided over the meeting, stated that the purpose of the meeting was to have a general change of opinion so that each side could present its ideas and clarify the facts, informing what each side wanted. Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera took the floor, stating among other things that "harmony was necessary and that everyone should come inspired by the best proposal to enter fully into the study of any matter that could be considered an obstacle to the collective negotiation of the agreement, with the best hope of reaching an agreement". He pointed out that "time is pressing and that the harvest has already begun in some plants. We are not authorized to ask any union not to cut the cane. We can only ask that the "alarios that are approved be ro- . troactive to the date on which the harvest began". He stifled for another meeting of the Joint Con- . sultlvo Committee to be called as soon as possible. "We are all morally committed to strengthen the joint front in the sugar industry to confront the bosses inside and outside the Sugar Producers Association," he concluded. Mr. Juan Bernard Gonzalez said that "it is true that for the workers the agreement is a concern, asking daily when it is going to be signed. There is no reason for us, at this time", not to be in a position to tell the unions" what is concrete". Mr. Francisco Paz Graneia stated that at the meeting celolirada at the Capitol "the representatives" of the" Independent unions Indicated to be satisfied with going united" to the contracting of the agreement. The only doubt that existed was that the Azucero Union claimed the right to be the only ones authorized for this negotiation. He emphasized that 1" motion presented by Mr. Prudencio Rivera Martines "was the fundamental basis on which I must rest the decision of the Union. This motion pursues the purpose of going - l" collective bargaining." He requested that this motion be considered. He clarified that "the representatives of the ¡FLT are here to join with you to work for the benefit of 130,000 cane workers." The motion of "eftor Rivera Martínez was read, and after the reading was finished, "eftor Podro Vega Berrloa, president of the Union, spoke. He said that the Union reels m" has the right to negotiate and that neither the Executive Committee nor the Joint Advisory Committee can decide on this matter, "since it is asked to waive that right. What is appropriate, he added, is to convene the Councils of the Dtatrl(Continued on page 24.1
General Eduardo Gomes passing through Puerto Rico
All peoples are affected, according to data from the Deplo. of Labor PONCÉ!, 4. (By Andrés J, MonIsIvoL - An oflclsl Report of the Deplo. of Labor, rendered to! ComltlonAdo rie SanlflAd (Ua" ago, reveals that 4..T34 person", Affected" of their" mental faculties", do not count on Ia dehlriA ho "pilAlIzaclón in Puerto Rico. The majority of these cases, which have been reported by our public health authorities, represent a threat to individual safety. The largest number of these cases corresponds to the city of San Juan, where Department of Labor investigation personnel located some 598 insane persons. It is followed by the city of Ponce, with 294 and in numerical order by Rio Piedra" with 272; Areciho, with 193; Cagua", with 141 and Mayagüez, with' ¡121. It is surprising to note that not one of the island's municipalities is exempt from this situation. The number of insane persons hospitalized in small towns fluctuates from 20 to 60, with towns such as San Lorenzo, with 69; Isabela, with 64; Lares, with 68; San Germán, with 62; Utuado, with 72; Vega Baja, with 67; and Yabucoa, with 69. The population with the least number of demented persons is Naeanjlto, with S, followed by Lag Marlas, with 7, and Villalba, with -15. Of these last figures, the number of cases per village is increasing at an alarming rate, according to the statistics of the DepArfAmento rie! Trebejo. ' l,A re|Ation by villages e" 1a following. - Adjunte" 29; AgitAris 29; Aguadl-'i Ha 81: ógitAs RtienA" 33; Aihnnlto 1 51; AñA "ro 19: Arecibo 193; Arroyo 17; Barceloneta 40; Barranqul- f tas 26; Bayamón 77; Cabo Rojo । (Continued on page 24.) | t
Kl Brigadier General Eduardo Gomes (center), who was defeated by General Eurlco Gaspar Dutra in the presidential elections held in Brazil last month, on his arrival at BoI rlnquen Base on Thursday, on his way to the United States. To the right of General Gomes is Lt. Col. William M Miles, acting commanding officer of Base Borlnqucn, and to his Ixquh-rda is Col. Natto Do" Res, of the Brazilian air force. Gomes and his eight" ncompiñantrs stayed overnight at Hase Borlnqucn and continued on their journey yesterday to Miami. They are headed for I nerte Leavenworth, Kansas State, for the purpose of attending the vlgéslmoséptlma beslón of the Army World and Staff College. (Army Communications Corps photo),
Nothing definitive as yet on the cemetery Government of the Capital "igur reario to pay what was asked for the" land* Naris definitive there has been yet in relation to the acquisition of the" land at kilometer 1.1 rie the road rie Rio Piedra" to the Sanatorio Insular, rionrie rl Municipio rie San Juan plans to build the new municipal cemetery, according to yesterday reported the Director rie Obra"! Public" riel Government of the Capital, engineer Salvador V, Caro. For this" land an estate of one hundred and four ropes its owners are demanding a pjecln that the municipal autnrlriartr" They consider excessive. The same to" dr setrcirntns dollars per cuorda. Tqda time that the Government rie Sanl Juan is not inclined to pay that "urna and the propiciarlos rie the estate have ln "lstlrin in esie price, it has dilatarlo the course rie Ihs conversations that have been rfecluanrio between the parle", According to revealed he señor Caro, the Municipality is in ¡ awaiting reply to enrrespon-! The nature of the counterproposal made by the Government । ri" San Juan to the owners of the property, regarding the price to be obtained for the purchase of the land, he refrained from informing us, as we questioned him.
Strike is prepared in essential industries throughout U.S. Two million more people will join the 411,000 already idle due to strikes. - Threatening communication system NEW YORK, 4 (PU) Negotiations between Labor and the ludii "lclA were at a standstill today, as the labor llricratn drafts its final strategy for tr to strike in the nation's lnritiAíriA" eaenclale". a iravá".
If the workers' strike that leadership has in mind is carried out, two million more people will join the 41,000 workers who are already idle on strike," Edgar L. Warren, head of the Labor ServicLLeadership, said in a statement. Warren, head of the U.S. Department of Labor's Conciliation Service, told reporters today that the Government is relying on the mediation of the Hrchna Investment Panels to prevent walkouts in the meatpacking, steel, electrical and shipbuilding industries. Further rir-ego, Warren says there are only two alternatives: to seize the factories, under the President's war plan, or to let the "huHgaa" run its course. Among other things, today there arose the threat of a possible blockage of the nation's communications networks by the partial shutdown of Western Electric, a company which manufactures 95 percent of the United States' telephone equipment. In this company, approximately 17,000 employees abandoned their jobs.
New S.J. market place in Martin Peña Yesterday the use of the grounds of the Colegio dr las Madres । - The new market place in San Juan will be built in Martin Peña, on a lot adjacent to the building where the office of the Inland Water and Sewage Service is currently located, having definitively decided to use for this purpose the grounds of the Colegio Las Madras, Esta Esta Esta, which is located on the site of the Colegio Las Madras. This decision was taken yesterday morning at a meeting held at La Fortaleza, attended by Mr. Elmer Ellsworth, Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Agricultural Company; Mr. Roberto Sanchez VIlella, Administrator of the Capital; Mr. Sol Luis Descartes, Mr. Elmer Ellsworth, Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Agricultural Company; Mr. Roberto Sanchez VIlella, Administrator of the Capital; Mr. Elmer Ellsworth, Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Agricultural Company; and Mr. Roberto Sanchez VIlella, Administrator of the Capital; Mr. Sol Luis Descartes, representing the Planning Board; Mr. Arturo Roque, director of the Agricultural Extension Service, and other officers of the Board of Directors of the Agricultural Company, and other officers of the Agricultural Extension Marketing Department. The construction of the new San Juan Market Square is expected to begin in late January or early next year.
Hawaii delegate in favor of two alternatives for Puerto Rico.
WASHINGTON, 4, (FU) -Hawaii's Delegate to the U.S. Congress, Joseph H. Farrington, told Piensa Unida today that he believes Congress should offer Puerto Rico the alternatives of statehood and independence. The delegate suggested, however, that if Congress decides to grant statehood to this Caribbean island, it should be preceded by "a period of trusteeship" as a full territory of the United States, Farrington said in response to a question from the United Press about his views on the President's recent message suggesting to Congress four alternatives for the solution of the Puerto Rican political problem. \ Farrington expressed his opposition to the so-called "dominion" status on the grounds that "it currently violates Ja fundamental policy of equal treatment. Farrington said, "It seems to me that two alternatives should be offered to Puerto Rico. One is statehood, preceded by a period of trusteeship, under the territorial form of government, and the other, independence. I believe," Farrington continued, "that if Puerto Rico is to become a state, it should first be incorporated as a territory, and continue in that capacity until such time as the people of Puerto Rico are prepared to assume the power of the state, and then, if it is to become a state, it should first be incorporated as a territory, and continue in that capacity until such time as the people of Puerto Rico are prepared to assume the power of the state.
(As you may note, Puerto Rico is now an unincorporated territory of the United States." The Hawaiian delegate went on to say that: "On the other hand, sl | (Continued on page 20.) i
noL ET1 \ EN
"ARAROTA, Florida, 4. (FU)-General Jonathan M. Wainwright told a banquet in this city last night that, in his judgment, the nation was "letting down its guard"; and he advised that "the United States should always be prepared for war." "As right as I stand here," Wainwright said, "if we fail to keep the conquered countries disarmed, it will mean World War III." Afla-j gave that at least a peacetime army of 900,000 hunger " " was needed for the occupied countries and garrisons in Hawaii and the Philippines. " " " " MUVPmSBORO, Illinois, 4. (PU)-An official of a wholesale merchant of this locality made the Imputation today that at Ln least Too.ooo llhras of sugar were piling up in a local warehouse, due to the rationing puntea embers. Jos Borgamlller
I said that the sugar contained in a 100-pound sack would be sufficient to supply the need of consumers in that area," but that the cesa owners could not get the points to buy it. " * * * RALEIGH, North Carolina,,, 4. i (PU)-Secretary of Agriculture,! Clinton P. Anderson, addressing - .lo" southern farmers, invited themI to cope "with certain he-i | chos basic," and not to depend on cotton as a basis for a" post , war economic prosperity. "This problem cannot be solved, in the long run, with price parity or export subsidies," Anderson told a group of farmer leaders at the College of North Carolina. "The North American al- ' godon is facing today ' 1" strongest competition 1 in its history," Anderson added. * He then went on to suggest to them that "eulti- ( (Continued on page JO.).