MARANA'S DAILY MlNDO
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY-Good weather until noon. Scattered showers with thundershowers in the Interior and over the northwest coast this evening. Light and variable winds, Highest temperature in San Juan yesterday, 94 degrees. No sign of thunderstorms.
¿cttcLÓnJinal
ARO XXVIII
NUMBER 10727 SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 5, 1946
Enterad as second clara matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
PRICE 5 centavos
Coffee price revision to be requested
President of agricultural entity takes to U.S. for such purpose Will attend table on sugar
In addition to participating in the round table meeting that the federal authorities will hold in Washington in connection with the Puerto Rico sugar issue, the president of the Farmers Association, José Ramón Quillones, who left yesterday afternoon for the mainland by air, will make arrangements in the federal capital related to the coffee industry, the taharn and fertilizer material for the manufacture of fertilizers on the island. Shortly before leaving, Mr. Quiñones expressed his confidence that the agricultural commission from the island to Washington would receive all possible attention from the U.S. Government and that it would try to find an effective solution to the problems posed by the farmers of the pals, through their representatives. Quillones will request the revision of the price of coffee, so that it may be raised to levels which will permit a "reasonable" income for the farmers and an adequate wage for the worker, and on behalf of the farmers of Puerto Rico he will also call for the elimination of the Office of Price Administration. As to tobacco, Mr. Quiñón stated, he will raise "serious" problems that have arisen lately and which, he said, could greatly affect agriculture and the tobacco industry. Referring to the coffee issue, the Puerto Rican agricultural leader reiterated previous statements to the effect that he did not explain the reasons for the control of the price of this grain, when currently the main articles of island consumption and imported by the Island have considerably increased their prices. j Expressed his satisfaction for the fact that the federal authorities had heeded the reiterated request of the farmers of Puerto Rico, in the sense that the matter of the revision of the price of sugar for the 1946 harvest and any aspect related to the sugar program for the 1947 harvest be discussed in a round table meeting, with the participation of all the sectors of the industry. Quiñones said this will be an opportunity for Puerto Ricans to expose the whole situation related to the Puerto Rico sugar industry and the high cost-of-living problem facing the people of this island. "In a matter such as this," he added, "all sectors together must intervene, since it is a matter * that affects each one of them directly and it is only fair that we appear together to achieve that Puerto Rico receives for its main product a reasonable fair price, which is in accordance with the present situation, as well as with the situations that may arise in the future and which are difficult to foresee. "I have absolute confidence that the authorities in Washington will put themselves in the best attitude to hear and study our allegations. I have no reason not to believe that Puerto Rico will be given full justice. This is an American territory, where it is produced by American workers and American capital, and from where our right to equal treatment with the sugar cane producing areas of Luíalona and Florida arises". o Mr. Quiñones reported that, the day before yesterday, he and the President of the U.S. Food and Agriculture Organization (Continued on page 22)
The food shortage is reaching its most critical period here since the '■farra.' > e o ♦ A petition for a revision of the price of insular coffee is among the proposals being taken to the United States by the president of the Agricultural Association. * A short-lived tremor was felt in Puerto Rico yesterday. - - - A program for the construction of libraries on the island is being drafted. o * e Only 6,000 quintals of tobacco remain to be sold on the island. - - - Vacancy in Health created difference between Piftwo and the Legislature, the Governor sustaining the candidacy of Dr. Marchand. a " e - War and Legion disagree as to period of military training for read Young men i War suggest sois mesest the Legion, four. " - " The labor delegation rale ol next Monday to Wáshlngton.
Compendium of news
The Interamerican Association of Broadcasters was constituted in the Congress of Mexico. It will defend freedom of speech. Puerto Rico is included in the Association. - It is alleged that Martin has not complied with the Plñero's order on school principals. Canales urges that all coffee collected be taken to market. - The PEG will start. at a cost of 9880,000, the first new hospital units to be provided to the Island. - The Homes Authority will ask for five million dollars from the next legislature. * * * Resolutions on the Island will be presented by Nogueras before the FAT convention. - e - Professional baseball season* opens today in MsyagUes, Caguas and San Juan parks. - Durocher rejected idea of going to Yankees.
Frowning faces for judgment day
With faces fit for a study in intcnaldud, seven of the Nazis indicted at Nuremberg" as war criminals listen to the verdict reading. Hana Frank, Wilhelm Frick and Julius Streicher (front, left to right) were sentenced to death. General Alfred Jodi, also sentenced to hang; Fran* Von Papen, acquitted; Arthur SeyHS-Inquart, sentenced to hang, and Albert Speer, sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment, appear in the background, in the same order. (Associated Press Photo)
Labor delegation leaves next Monday Delegates of the colonists will leave Wednesday for Washington The labor delegation that together with the sugar producers and cane colonists of Puerto Rico will take steps in Washington to achieve a readjustment of the sugar program that governed the 1946 harvest and obtain a deal on parity with the mainland producing areas for the next harvest, will leave next Monday ■ seven o'clock in the evening for the federal capital. Integrating said ÍFTégaelAn are the President of the Sugar Industry Workers Union, representative to the Chamber, Mr. Pedro Vega Berríoa; ol vice-president of the CGT sector headed by Mr. R. Barreto Pérez; and Mr. J, A. Clntrón Rivera. The group has decided to bring forward their trip to contact the CIO office in Washington. This one has communicated to the labor leaders of Puerto Rico that it intends to lend its cooperation to the labor delegation, for the purposes it is pursuing. The labor leaders will meet at the CIO offices with Mrs. Harriet Bouslog, representative of the International Longshoremen and Warehouse Union," which is presided over by Mr. Harry Bridges, and is an affiliate of the CIO. Mr. Vega Berrios informed yesterday that the first joint meeting of the delegations will be held at the offices of Resident Commissioner Antonio Fernó" Isérn on Monday, October 14. The labor leader also said that Dr. Fernó" Isérn will take the necessary steps to hold a round table on the price of sugar in Puerto Rico with the federal authorities. On the other hand, it was reported yesterday that the other delegate of the colonist sector, eeflor Pedro Nido, intends to leave for Washington on Wednesday to join José R. Quiñones, president of the Farmers Association. President of the Farmers Association. Mr. Quiñones left for the federal capital yesterday, Friday. As for the growers' delegation, a part of it is already in Washington.
War and Legion disagree as to training period. The former asks for a period of e¡H months; the Legion considers a period of four months is sufficient. - Incentives of modified plan 1 WASHINGTON, 4. ~ The American Legion Headquarters, which is now meeting in annual convention of some .3,000 delegates, in the city of San Francisco, California, have hastened - to contend, in authoritative statement, that four months' military training is sufficient for young men between 18 and 20 years of age.
. year," unlike the War Department, which insists on one year's training, although । with the modification that one half of that year be a short military training year and the other half a short military training year. The National Guard's "military training program," and the other half in service in the National Guard's "se-: j manal activities, or in the colleges through the Recorva's ' Office Training Corps -(ROTC), in advanced technical training, approved by the War Department, or in the "1 Ref serva's Enlisted Corps. - During the second* geis mese"' - of the training, the young men po- / drlan pursue their* normal civilian obje1 tlvos. - The War Department's new plan, modified in the form- - - mn Indicated so as to offer s characterlitlcs which will achieve the rea- - paldo of the nation, as the" Armed Ser- * victo" continue to hold- , nfend that it is essential to a proper- . cuate defense of the pal* the prior training of its youth, in order that, should a war emer- . gcncla of war, it will not be necessary । to prepare it, in haste, to launch it later to answer a possible attack, contemplates the training - by the United States Army" only - of one" i 726,000 young men, mentally and flsieamen- ■ tly trained, between the ages of 18 and 20. (The - number of young men to be trained by the Navy, under its own plan, is not known). 5 The modified plan offers another" 1 Incentives to youth and other] ■ Implicit elements of persuasion ■ to the nation, which refused, in ln-| 1 last winter, to sanction the plan ¡ , of compul-i sorlo military training of the Department of the Gue-, , ira, as requested of Congress, ¡ s in special message, by Presl- ; dent Truman, a plan which died in I committees, in the "eptagésl- . monono Congress. For example, the Government would provide scholarships at colleges and universities for a limited number of bright trainees, paying the costs of their advanced technical training. It is believed that the Navy would have to train, more or less, about 272,250 young men, if the new plan is approved, that is, about three young men for every eight in the Army. No mentally and physically able young man would be released from service unless he voluntarily entered one of the Armed Services" for a term of three years as a regular number in any of the three Services. The War Department's objective in making public its amended plan at this time is to gain public support between now and the convening of the new Eightieth Congress early next year. And the fact that the plan was made public, by the Secretary of War, Robert Patterson, from the platform pr" (Continued on page 7).
A tremor was felt in Puerto Rico After the first tremor, the movements continued for 18 minutes A seismic movement of short duration and strength was felt yesterday, at ten forty-five minutes past ten o'clock in the morning, in different parts of Puerto Rico. The tremor, according to the first reports received from our correspondents on the island, has not caused any damage or loss of life. In San Juan, the occurrence of the phenomenon was noticed by a large part of the population, and a minute later the call was repeated to our offices requesting details of it. The Weather Bureau reported that minutes" after the quake occurred, the telephone service was congested due to continuous" requests for information. An observer, who was watching the Banco Popular building in San Juan, a ten-story structure, reported that being on one of the upper floors, he noticed the short earthquake, because "it seemed to sway the building in a rapid movement. j The news received revealed that the phenomenon did not cause alarm to the population of the island, because of its short duration.
Resolutions on the Island before the FAT
The Puerto Rico Housing Authority will request no less than five million dollars from the next ordinary Legislature in order to continue at the current pace, during the next fiscal year, "its low-cost housing construction program. This agency understands that, if funds are not provided for next year, it would have to devote itself only to the continuation of studies and preparation of plans and specifications on works in progress, since no federal appropriation is expected until July 1948, and the funds approved for it have been committed. This problem was raised by the agency with the Planning Board, with a view to having the agency's funds committed.
Only six thousand quintals of tobacco remain to be sold on the Island.
Yesterday it was authoritatively reported that out of a total of 600,000 tons of tobacco produced in Puerto Rico this year, only 8,000 quintals remain to be sold. However, the sale price has not been uniform, fluctuating the general sale price between $942.00 and $28.00. The law to establish an orderly system for the planting and harvesting of tobacco has facilitated the sale of the product - stated yesterday a spokesman for the Association of Tobacco Harvesters-.
Tobacco Harvesters Association, however, there has been no harmony between the price at which the dealers and tobacco holders have sold tobacco at $1.00 Ib pound, and the "sweep" price at which the harvesters have sold it. However," the spokesman continued, "the law is subject to amendments and it is possible in the future to correct the deficiencies" it may have now. These amendments will be recommended to the next ordinary Legislature of 1947.
Nogueras will present to the national convention several petitions Cuban Sugar Research
FLT to call for unified labor foreign policy Today he will leave for ■ Chicago to attend as a delegate of the Free Federation of Puerto Rican Workers. - Mr. Nicolás Noguera" Rivera, General Secretary of the FLT, will attend the convention of the American Federation of Labor as a delegate of the American Federation of Labor. Three resolutions will be presented at the FAT convention by the federation leader, related to the Puerto Rican issue. The labor leader will be accompanied on his trip to the United States by his wife, Mrs. Berta C. de Noguera. The first of the resolutions to be submitted to the FAT by Mr. Noguera" Rivera is aimed at having the convention "express to President Truman its satisfaction > and appreciation for the nomination of Mr. Jesús T. Plftero to be the first native Governor of Puerto Rico. The same resolution advocates the introduction of reforms in our Charter to strengthen our internal regime and also to allow the election of our first executive at or before the next elections. The other resolution, which will be submitted to the convention by Mr. Nogueras Rivera, has the purpose of "authorizing the Executive Council of the FAT to convene a round meeting of the leadership of the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CI O) and of the Independent Unions" to consider the convenience of laying the foundations for a common foreign policy of the organized labor of the United States". On this matter, the aforementioned Puerto Rican labor leader reported yesterday that he had spoken to Mr. Roberto Watt, International Representative of the FAT, about the need to "unify the foreign policy of organized labor. Mr. Nogueras said that he had taken as a basis for addressing Mr. Watts in this sense, the existing division among the organized labor of the nation as far as international policy is concerned, which contrasts with the prevailing unity between the two political parties, in support of the foreign policy of the Wáshlngton Government. Mr. Nogueras said that Mr. Watts had replied to his communication declaring his sympathy with the idea and promising to bring the matter before the FAT Executive Council. The problem of the sugar industry in Puerto Rico, especially with regard to the price of the Island's crop, will be raised by the federation delegate to the FAT convention in its third resolution. In it, the FLT will ask the convention "to authorize the Executive Council of the FAT to conduct an investigation of the contracts for the purchase of Cuban sugar production by the CCC, in order to determine to what extent it has discriminated against Puerto Rico, and also to know what benefits organized labor in Cuba has obtained through these contracts". The FAT convention will be held at the Morrison Hotel in Chicago beginning October 7.
Homeowners Authority to request $5,000,000 from Legislature
It believes that this is the only way to continue the current low-cost housing program. - Raises the issue with Planning for a recommendation to recommend
The uncertainty as to the amount of the appropriation and the inclusion of other provisions in the government's financial program. The uncertainty regarding the receipt of federal funds during the next fiscal year is based by the Authority on the fact that the project for the federal low-cost housing construction program, known as Wallender-Ellender-Taft, was not approved by the last Congress. It is expected that the bill will merit approval in next January's Congressional session, and that the provision of funds to the states and territories will be effective July 1, 1948. By virtue of these federal provisions, Puerto Rico would receive about twenty million dollars, if the next Congress agrees to sustain the bill in the form in which it was left pending at the close of its last session. This situation, according to the Authority, suggests that a legislative contribution is necessary to continue the island's housing construction program during the next fiscal year, an allocation that has been estimated at five million dollars. It will be recalled that during the last special session of the Legislature, the Housing Authority was allocated $875,000, including $8150,000 for the Arecibo Municipal Authority's housing plan. These funds are committed, ""- (Continued an 1* page 22)
The food shortage in
food shortage in Puerto Rico is at its most critical period.
Pinero to Act Freely on Health Chief Appointment He has not yet chosen a candidate. - Says he would reorganize the entire Justice Department. The case of the school principals Quo the governor "will have a free hand" in the selection of the candidate to occupy the Health portfolio, the island's chief executive told reporters yesterday afternoon during an interview that he was giving to the press.
Stocks of rice and butter are running out as quickly as possible Retailers call for urgent action In several towns stands will be erected to express protest For R. Santiago Sora Editor of EL MUNDO In the opinion of spokesmen of the trade dctsl|j "t" di. In the opinion of trade spokesmen, the prevailing situation with regard to the shortage of several of the food items most in demand by consumers has reached its most critical period, with no such problem having been recorded in the world since the outbreak of the last world conflict. It "eftalaron yesterday the "femora" of qqa ]" prolongation of the prevailing maritime strike, which for the second time in the period of a mea has paralyzed lo" supply" of food to) P" 1 '; have such" consequence" that the Government is forced to take determinations of emergency to avoid that the population Insular "e find deprived of the most necessary food. Yesterday, the president of the Centro de Detallista" de Provisiones, seftor Ramón Nieves Alicea, made a "nrtliáis of the whole situation before a meeting do trader" of the metropolitan area of San Juan, convened to give knowledge "of the serious situation of the moment, and formulate - reeomendacionea qu'" lead to alleviate the threat that hovers over the traders" and "ohre lo" consumers, by the notable shortage of vivare" esenclale" in all the Insular market." Meanwhile," meanwhile, the Federation of Commerce, also aware of ¡a situation, formulated plans that in । his opinion could lend relief to the crisis that h" occurred. The following facts affecting all consumers and the retail trade were denounced yesterday in a survey held by EL MUNDO: It is feared that the delay in ios shipment" of rice will cause us not to have the grain to mnno in time for the next delivery, in the second half of October. Butter, an essential product for the preparation of the daily diet, is noticeably scarce in all the businesses in the country, and the current stocks of the Supply Administration, which have been reinforced by a small shipment of 553 frozen quintals to a firm in San Juan, are specifically reserved for the use of the bread and cookie industries, and for the use of government institutions, hospitals, clinics and businesses where food is sold. The butter situation continues to be uncertain, with the firm opinion prevailing that Puerto Rico will not be able to receive a "normal" supply until after next December. The "small reserve" of bacon held by Jos. merchants is running out, and in many establishments, this food is not for sale; the same situation prevails with regard to ham and other pork products. Stocks of beans are also minimal, chickpeas are scarcely to be found in the markets, and the problem of refined sugar remains unresolved, with few quantities available to consumers. Vegetable oil, which is a substitute for lard, was almost all seized by the sanitary authorities, when it was found that a large part of it was being bound with mineral oil. A small shipment received on the island last week is awaiting pricing by the GAP, which has delayed its distribution among the metropolitan area's commerce. The wholesale businesses are constantly being invaded by retail traders, in demand of products necessary for the development of daily operations, while in many towns, public concern is already being felt due to the difficulty of obtaining essential food items. Such concern is revealed by the" news received by EL MUNDO from towns such as Mayagüez, Sabana Grande, Ladas, Aguadilla, San Sebastián, and others. In some towns, such as San Sebastian, it has been announced that "public rostrums will be set up to protest the food supply situation. The Retailers Center proposed yesterday that in anticipation of the problem taking an even more serious turn, government representations should be made to the Department of Agriculture and the Interior in Washington, allowing Puerto Rican merchants to import freely from markets other than the United States, on direct routes, while this period of emergency prevails. He advocated the immediate suspension of refined sugar shipments to the United States until such time as the local market's participation in the production of this foodstuff is assured. The local trade "circles" (Continued on page 7)
with them. Mr. Jesús T. Plñero added that "the candidates are still in the same situation. Plñero added that still "the candidates" that "sound in the newspapers", and perhaps others that do not sound", are still under his consideration. He did not say specifically if the Popular Party has suggested or submitted candidates for the vacancy of head of the Department of Health, stating that in the recommendations of candidates" by party", "the Governor will have a free hand." Without foundation I Asked by the Governor if it was true that he had recommended prosecutor José C. Aponte, of the Court of San Juan, to fill the position of Attorney General, he answered that he had read a report to that effect published in a newspaper, but that the same "has no foundation." Law 79 Due to complaints reached his office to the effect that the management of the Department of Public Instruction to date Ignoring the opinion of the Department of Justice as to the interpretation of certain provisions of Law No. 78, the Governor re-'
Governor Plñero veiled that he had resolved "that "the latest recommendation of the Pro' (Continued on page 19)
Truman discusses U.S. meat shortage with his Cabinet.
After the White House meeting, there was no indication that any special measures had been taken to solve the problem facing the United States.
WASHINGTON, 4. (PU)~ President Truman discussed the meat shortage problem with members of his Cabinet today at the weekly meeting, but there was no indication yet that any determination was made as to measures which might solve the situation.
The Cabinet meeting was held shortly after the weekly meeting, but no determination was made as to measures that might resolve the situation. The Cabinet meeting took place shortly after the Department of Agriculture warned American housewives* that they must be resigned to continuing carnet shortages until late spring and perhaps into the summer of next year, and that they should be prepared for further price increases in January and others in April. Secretary of Agriculture Clinton P. Anderson, at the close of the Cabinet meeting, stated that the meat shortage was one of the subjects discussed," but that he did not know what political effect it might have, nor what policy the Government would adopt to remedy the situation; although he admitted having suggested measures to solve the shortage. The director of the Office of Price Regulation, Paul Porter, also attended the meeting. Anderson was of the opinion that the repeal of the meat price regulation would not solve the shortage, and, in support of his opinion, he pointed to what happened when the maximum price law was temporarily suspended. He stated that he was not "very concerned" about the political aspects of the current meat shortage. Meanwhile, Reconversion Director John R. Steelman said today that the current meat shortage is destined to worsen this winter, and that fats, oils and sugar will continue to be in short supply "for many months to come". These predictions were made in the agency's quarterly report to President Truman on the nation's economic situation. Their release came just a week after President Truman's assurances that meat shortages would be substantially alleviated in the near future. Steelman said that although American farmers would have the most abundant crop in the nation's history, "we are plagued by shortages of certain kinds of food and for certain items, the shortages will continue to worsen this winter. He said that farm commodity prices were yielding large net profits for farmers, which will remain at the present "high levels" and probably remain so well into 1947. In a separate Report on (Continued on page 7)
They allege Martin has not complied with Pinero's order He was referring to school principals. These signen insisting on demands The Law number 76, which transfers the public schools to the Department of Instruction, and which provides funds" to the referred Department to attend to the" needs of the" educational" center, still remains unclear as to the relations of the school principals, appointed by the mayors, in attending to these matters. It was reported yesterday that the school directors are studying this question, in order to raise the case before the courts of justice and that, if they have not yet done so, it is due to the intervention that Governor Piftero has been lending to the solution of the problem. As is known, the Department of Instruction has been handling school matters through the district superintendents of schools, without giving intervention to the school principals. It was reported that, as a result of a recent interview with Governor Plftero, in which several school principals participated, the chief executive promised days ago to study the matter and issue the corresponding administrative orders to clarify the existing divergences, and that, to that effect, he issued an executive order later on to the Acting Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Herbert H. Martin, and to the Auditor of Puerto Rico, ordering that "the opinion of the Attorney General be considered in regard to the participation of the school principals in matters pertaining to their charge. Said opinion gave this" funclonarlos participation in the discussion of matters pertaining to the" public schools of the Island. EL MUNDO has obtained information to the effect that, in spite of the Governor's executive order, the Department of Instruction has not conformed to the Attorney General's opinion, a situation which has caused it to be prt-ocu-(Continued on page 22)
O'Neill drafts program for library construction
The director of the Carnegie Library, Mr. Luis O'Neill, has drafted a program for the construction of libraries on the Island, which requires an investment of $407,100 during the next fiscal year. The overall program, for a period of six years, requires an investment of $1,880,350, of which this institution has $121,950, previously allocated. The balance would be provided by the Island Government after fiscal year 1947-48.
Mr. O'Neill has recommended to the Planning Board that funds be made available for a building attached to the Carnegie Library, at a cost of $60,000, to expand services in San Juan. As is known, the present building has not been enlarged and is insufficient to provide "normal services. It also proposes the installation of three air conditioning units, at a cost of $7,500, and improvements to the Hostos Library, (Continued on page 10).