THE
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY-Cloudy in the morning, showers in the afternoon. Light southeasterly winds. High yesterday in San Juan, M; low 7S. No storm indications.
£cl¿c¿mfinal
MORNING JOURNAL.
YEAR XXVIII s===
NUMBER 10741
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO SATURDAY, OCTOBER 19, 1946
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
PRICE 5 Cents
Crisis in bakery industry
If flour does not arrive soon, a large number of bakeries will close Case presented to Governor Piñero Governor Piñero offered his full cooperation to island industrialists A report on" the exlaten* elai of wheat flour on the island, made by the Puerto Rico Industrialists Association, reveals that if this product is not received within ten days, the bakeries of San Juan and many others in the towns of Puerto Rico will have to close their doors. The secretary of the Industrial Association, Mr. Vicente León, Jr. He reported yesterday that "the bakeries in the metropolitan area have been able to continue operating, very slowly, because their managers have agreed to lend each other small quantities of flour, but this situation will not last long. Stocks are practically exhausted, and the tahonas will inevitably have to close their doors at the end of next week, if they do not receive shipments of the product before that date. The same situation prevails in almost all the towns of the Island", This problem, and other issues related to the problems of the Puerto Rican Industrialists, was raised by the Association of Industrialists to Governor Piñero, in an interview. Mr. León said that the main purpose of the interview was "to offer the cooperation of the industry for the success of Governor Piñero's administrative administration, and at the same time to discuss with the chief executive the problems that weigh on the private industries of the country.
private industries of the pals". In connection with the reduced can-' tldados of wheat flour in the 1 , tahonas, Gov. Piñero Inform- 1 moved the committee, that he has received , reports by cable to the effect that there are at New On. leans and at Houston, vessels with cargoes of flour, rice . and butter, destined for Port Rk, ce; vessels which are expected to sail at any moment, of the end of the maritime strike. "W these nlve" do not . leave promptly bound for , Puerto Rico,",-, said Mr. Leon, . - "in time for them to be here before the end of next week, there will be no salv-. The Commission explained to the Governor the existence within the Industrial Association of a legislative committee which has formulated important measures for the benefit of the entire industry which, Mr. Leon alleged, "were never sanctioned by ex-Governor Tugwell". The Go* 1 bemador was offered a copy of the last in* । formof the committee, which he received : for his review and study. "The Go- . bemerator let us know "* *?- continued Mr. Leon,- "that he is din- 1 placed to co-operate with our legislative co ' mmittee,,, and very desirous of assisting in the passage of the industrial legislation necessary for the more rapid economic development of the pala." He said, also, that he was putting his wishes into practice, since he had recently sanctioned new tax exemptions for Industries, requests which were submitted to him by the Public Service Commission". (Continued on page 7)
Compendium of news
Travieso will take steps in Washington regarding the new Supreme Court Judge. - If flour does not arrive soon, a large number of mills on the island will have to cease operations. - The Employment Service, with its expanded powers, will continue to operate on the island as an agency of the federal Department of Labor. - The leadership of the various labor unions operating in the country yesterday announced its intention to seek the revision of the cost-of-living agreements. - The maximum loan to a veteran is of *4,000 Informa the VA. - The masters began their campaign in connection with the vacancy in Instruction. " - The Council's regulation to combat juvenile delinquency on the Island was approved. - New agricultural agenda that replaces the ASA will begin to operate in November. Federal Agriculture increases control over sugar cane. 0*0 They will discuss to take to court the case of the Agricultural Company, for the sale of groceries in competition with the coaaerdn.
Guagua ran over a. woman and broke in two a pole, in spectasulsr west on the Parado dies. - - - - Public Reñirlo authorized the suspension of operations of In Central Boca Chica. - - - The Civilian Production Administration authorized in WáshIngton building projects for Puerto Rico, covering a program of repairs to public buildings throughout the Ido. - ♦ ; The pro* feslonal baseball championship continues this weekend with 8 games between Santorce and San Juan, Caguas and MayagUes and Aguadilla and Ponce. - - - i Intercollegiate Games begin today in San Germán. One hundred and twenty houses will be destroyed to make way for the conotruedon of the first section of North Avenue, in San Juan. ♦ * ♦ £ ■ Piñero consigns in letter to the Chiefs of agendas, that the norm of the Government is to reinstate the veterans in the positions they had. I* Alindo Control Commission has called Colonel Burton Andrus to answer for the suiddl" of Hermann Goering. * ♦ " - Uetas the October payrolls" of the Insular magistracy.
1 QUOTED BY THE
Colonel Burton C. Andrus (right), security officer at Nuremberga Prison, has been called to answer for the suicide of Hermann Goering, by the Allied Control Council. Andrus is shown here as he announced Goering's poisoning last Wednesday shortly before the time appointed for the former Nazi leader to be led to the scaffold. (Associated Press photo - _ radioed from Nuremberga to New York.) ASA's replacement agricultural agency to operate in November It will be in charge of credit and supervisory facilities. - Dale B. Jacques appointed to head local agency in Puerto Rico By Charles McCARE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON. 18 (PU) - Dale B. .Tasques.-of San Juan. Puerto Rico, has been appointed by Director Dillard E. Lasseter, of the Farmers' Home* Administration, chief of operations of that agency, in Puerto R|co. -J-- i T n * J"--t-"-a- - -1 S ---■- . , - - - -
The said Administration merges into one agency all the credit facilities and services of the Agricultural Security Administration and those of the Emergency Crop and Food Loan Division of the Farm Credit Administration, in accordance with the statute approved for that purpose by the last Congress. This merger will become effective on November 1 of this year. The new agency will provide agricultural credit and field supervision for loans for direct or insured farm ownership and for production and subsistence loans. The credit and supervision facilities are extended only to those farmers who cannot get the loans they need at interest rates not exceeding five percent from banks, cooperative lending agencies and other responsible sources in their communities. In the future, the insured mortgage system will not be operated until the necessary funds* have been made available for that purpose. However, funds for direct loans are available from the Department of Agriculture appropriations for the year 1947. The purpose of the consolidation of the various agricultural schedules, which was carried out by act of Congress, is to improve services and, at the same time, to avoid duplication of efforts to aid agriculture. The head of the new agenda in Puerto Rico is confident that good work will be achieved through the new agricultural relief program.
1 1 " " " " ■" 11 ; Orgrhiizado el : consejo contra ; la delincuencia ' Reglamento de entidad * A "tá aprobado. Fields 1 goes to assembly in U. S. < ' Thursday was approved the rule- , ' ment which is to govern the Council to combat juvenile delinquency. The last meeting of the Planning Committee was held at the Department of Justice. - The last meeting of the Planning Committee was chaired by Mr. Perez de - - Jesus, Department of Justice, . > who in union with Miss Her- , - minia Acevedo and Lic. Fren- , । cisco Susonl Jr., president of the Co i leglo de Abogados, drew up said regulations. After dlscuptlr several í t matters related to the proble- , mas of juvenile delinquency it was agreed to delegate to the former head of Jua- ¡ ■ tlcla. licenciado Enrique Campos del . Toro, to attend the Convention on Juvenile Delinquency to be held at the Wáshlngton Clu- ! The former Attorney General Campos del Toro is keenly interested in the problems of juvenile delinquency, being one of the organizers of the Planning Council to combat and prevent child delinquency, which has been organized, and which has held a series of meetings in the Department of Justice. At the last meeting of said Planning Council, Mr. Perez de Jesus, Francisco Susonl Jr. and Miss Acevedo were appointed to prepare the regulations that will govern the Council to Combat Juvenile Delinquency. At the meeting held yesterday, these rules were approved. The name of the Council shall be Consejo Para Combatir la Delincuencia Juvenil, and its main task shall be to integrate all the movements of the different entities of the Island that fight to control juvenile delinquency in Puerto Rico. The central office of the Council shall be located in the Department of Justice, in the Bureau, Division or Office designated by the Attorney General. The group shall assume the responsibility of organizing, coordinating and carrying out activities aimed at preventing and combating juvenile delinquency in the Island, and shall take special interest in providing information that indicates, in objective and realistic terms, the nature of the problem of juvenile delinquency in the Island. In accordance with the regulation (Continued on page 7>
' "M" ass:::::;: " 'a: ''íM! ,! 1 ; '■asaz; 'zsst ;jw Col. Burton Andrus called to answer for Goer.ing suicide; inmates were served by Nazi prisoners.
Governor says manages shipments Explained yesterday how three unions, not informed, denied cooperation Investigated El Troche estate case Will avoid drastic measure in removal of houses!!! for North Avenue By E. Combas Guerra Editor of EL MUNDO The Governor has appealed to the President of the United States, to the Maritime Commission, to the shipping companies and to the unions of workers on strike in the ports of the metropolis, informing them of the seriousness of the situation in Puerto Rico due to the lack of supplies. This was revealed yesterday afternoon by Governor Piñero in his weekly conference with journalists. According to the Governor's statements, in Puerto Rico we have three of the foods considered basic for the Puerto Rican diet for a little more than two weeks, and the supply of the other foods is diminishing in such a way that at this moment it is practically difficult to obtain them" due to the shortage. "The government is doing everything in its power, constantly, and for some weeks now, to see that ships with supplies are sent from any port in the United States, so as not to lack essential foodstuffs," he said, adding that "we are facing a serious food shortage crisis." The Governor had hoped that the crisis would be resolved as far as Puerto Rico was concerned, at least, and he had almost succeeded in convincing everyone that two or three ships would be loaded for the island; But the latest news he received yesterday from Washington informs him that five unions, for lack of information on the reality of the Puerto Rican situation, refused to operate so that these ships would come to the island. "But we have not slackened in our efforts" - he said - "lie- ¡ vendo Actual reports to the unions < and the chairman of the committee of the i strike in the metropolis, to see if it is probable that in the same way ( that in another previous strike the Co- , strike committee cooperated in the sen- ( tido of permitting departure of ships ( loaded with provisions for ( starving countries in Europe, an exception is made । also for Puerto ( Rico, where the present situation re- ( sults similar." The Governor hopes to get Iss requests from the Island heard without di- ' laclon, after all Information 1 on the true reality is had in the United States, and the Department of the Interior is working hard in this respect, and ' the Governor expects that loaded ships will be leaving for the Island within a few days. He recommended the Governor to the people not to despair in the least and to rely on the efforts" which both the Island and Wáshlngton authorities are making to ship supplies to Puerto Rico within a few days. The Governor has also sollo!
The Anti-Gouging Committee yesterday authorized the following note: "The Administrator General of Supply, Don Antonio Vicéns Ríos, has been working and has prepared an insular plan for 1 maintaining price controls on basic commodities in the event that the Federal controls on those same commodities are removed. The Administrator General of Supply's plan will ensure the
Pacheco Padró has resigned his House seat for ABC I
The Office of House Representative Antonio Pacheco Padró authorizes the publication of the following notice: "The House Representative for District 26, Aibonito, Barranquitas and Comerlo, has sent the Honorable Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Jesús T. Piñero, through the Speaker of the House, Dr. Francisco M. Susonl, the resignation of his position as । member of the House of Representatives for the ABC. The resignation
__________ - ' i was presented at the beginning of October. s Mr. Pacheco Padró will continue to attend to all the affairs of his office until the end of this month, while awaiting the appointment by the House of Representatives of his successor. tltuto will be appointed by the Governor, in consultation with the leadership of the Popular Party, as stipulated in the Organic Charter. i At the local assemblies of the Popular Party to be held next Sunday in Aibonito and Comerlo, Mr. Pacheco Padró * i (Continued on page 7)
who upon joining the Army held the position of Chief of the Accounts and Property Division, in the Department of Labor, and upon being discharged, requested to be reinstated to his position, which was denied by the Commissioner of Labor. Mr. Rosarlo appealed to the Federal Court and Judge Robert A. Cooper ordered his reinstatement. The Governor of Puerto Rico, Don Jesús T. Piñero, upon learning that some veterans" were having difficulty in obtaining their former employment" in the government, has addressed a communiCsclÓn to all the Heads, Departments, agenda", commissions, au torities and other agencies of the Insular Government, in which he tells them! "It has come to my knowledge that different" agencies of the Insular Government have denied the reinstatement of veterans in their former positions in said agencies. I wish to state strongly that the policy of the Insular Government should be to reinstate veterans who have left their former positions for Ingre (Continued on page 18)
WASHINGTON. 18 (PU)J The Civilian Production A<imlnlstraclon has flooded the authorization of projects that are not for vlvlende, in Puerto Rico, which are to cost some *850,000. The Facilities Review Committee of the aforementioned Administration is approving 64 new building projects throughout the United States, which will have a total cost of *11,968,128, which have been rejected by decisions of the CPA deputies in the field. At the same time, the aforementioned Committee denied authorization for another 241 projects that would have cost more than twelve million dollars. The Puerto Rico authorization was in favor of the Puerto Rico Department of the Interior, with offices in Santurce. The authorization covers a public health and safety repair program and the maintenance, repair and alteration of 1,400 concrete public buildings throughout the island, including schools, hospitals and rural medical centers, all of which are used by Puerto Rican veterans. Such projects have been approved only because they are essential to the public welfare.
The Island Government will maintain price controls As OAP abandons them, the AGS will maintain them. - Vicéns Ríos has already prepared the corresponding program.
The AGS has already prepared the corresponding program for imports by wholesalers, allowing them the reasonable profit margin to which they are entitled and at the same time assuring consumers of the largest quantity of supplies at the most reasonable prices that present circumstances permit. As soon as any action is taken by the Office of Price Administration abandoning the controls on basic articles, the Administrator General of the Secretary of State shall issue the corresponding regulations so that at no time shall the prices of those essential articles be left free and the people be threatened with inflation of an alarming character. The articles which will remain under control, bletl by federal or insular action, will be the following: rice, lard, lard, bacon, ordinary hams; codfish; triso and corn flour; milk in all its forms; coffee; sugar; meats; garbage; soap; tomato sauce; jerky; potatoes; onions; and any other article which may be considered necessary to keep within the control of - eclos. (Continued on page 7).
- Piñero states that the Government's policy is to reinstate veterans in positions they held i He addresses a letter to agency heads saying they should reemploy them in positions of equal status and pay, if the previous position is not possible 1U? JUAN MARTINEZ CHAPEL Editor of EL MUNDO In many of Jos departments and agencies of the Insular Government, certain veterans have been denied the positions they held when they were called to serve in the armed forces of the Nation. The courts of justice have had to compel several department heads to replace these veterans, the latest case being that of veteran José R. Rosarlo, r- -- - - * * * * *.
v JESUS T. PINERO
Ij, APC authorizes building projects for the Island This is a program of repairs to public buildings. - The authorization was made in favor of the Department of the Interior.
The loan to the veterans is $4,000.00. They are only entitled to this maximum. The Veterans Administration yesterday authorized statements to clarify certain aspects of the provisions of the Veterans' Bill of Rights relating to loan contracting, hospital confinement and the payment of physical disability pensions. In order to clarify certain doubts in this regard, the VA reported the following: "Once a veteran has availed himself of a loan for the maximum amount to which he is entitled, i.e. *4,000, he cannot again participate in this benefit, in accordance with the provisions of the Veteran's Bill of Rights. "A veteran shall be confined in a hospital %a,|a,|or contract of the Ad-
miniatry& for as long as required by medical wclencla and the nature of his or her illness. A veteran will not be discharged, until his medical treatment has been completed. "A veteran who has taken out a loan guaranteed by the Veterans Administration may make payments in excess of that provided for in the agreement and pay it off before its maturity date. A veteran who receives a pension for a physical disability incurred in the service may have part of his pension sent to his wife and children if they do not live with him because of disposition. Similarly, a veteran's pension may be sent to his relatives if the former soldier is not mentally competent to make payment. F^ 1 ***"*""^ 1 i '-ir ' -ii '-ii '■ ii i i ." " * * -rx. Opened in N> Y. Autursal Banco de Ponce i NEW YORK, 18. (PU)- The Sucuronl of the Banco de । Ponce in this city celebrated the opening of said offices. Twenty visitors," including many perennials । outstanding" in banking and commerce attended the event i where refreshments" and drinks based on rums from . Puerto Rico. Numerous canaaata filled with tears adorned the premises. The president ' of the banking institution, P. f J. Rnaaly. assisted by several employees, welcomed the visitors. L-i. i
[Cattle influx to macelos W TTTT of U.S. faces the 1 threat of congestion '| on railroads Pork trades at $23.00 in Chicago Butter price । down yesterday in Chicago. - | Meat prospects I NEW YORK, 1R." (PU)- The [- largest shipment of gnnaI du, on any Friday of the corrlenV te year was moving today toward lo" pnI tios of slaughter d? the maleeI r zone, offering the promise that I on the tables of the nation there will be | meat, next week. Early prices, however, indicated a sharp rise this morning, although how much this will be reflected in menu prices for chops and pork chops could not be determined. Hog prices rose to record levels immediately after the President ordered the removal of price controls on livestock and meat; but yesterday, prices fell sharply, and today, they are rising again. The American Meat Institute reported today that most of the beef on the hoof that is now moving through the slaughter yards this week will reach retail butchers as early as next week. The Institute explained that it takes from ten days to do" "emana" for a bull arriving at the" slaughterhouse" in Chicago "e become blftequet. on the tables of Jas family" or d" lo" restaurant", in the city of New York. The movement of meat, however, is threatened by management on the railroads, which could delay both the flow of cattle to the market and of meat to the consumer. In connection with this congestion, railroad and railroad and railroad company officials have reported a severe shortage of cattle cars in the West. A large percent of the animals sold this week have been transported by truck; but for the long trip from western farms to eastern markets, rail transportation is necessary. The Chicago hog market opened today with a quotation of *23 per hundredweight of meat - a dollar higher than yesterday. East of St. Louis, prices today were three dollars to three dollars fifty cents higher than yesterday. In IndlanápoUe, hog prices have held steady, at *23 a hundredweight. At Omaha, Nebraska, hog prices were up 25 to fifty cents at the beginning of the day, reaching a high of *23.50. In Sloux City, Iowa, the asking price was a dollar higher than in (Continued on page 7) Travieso to make representation on a new judge His visit to Washington is reported to be related to Supreme Court vacancy It is reported that the visit to Washington of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, Martin Travieso, is reported to be related to the visit to Washington of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, Ledo. Martin Travieso, is related to the appointment of the new justice of said court, where there is a vacancy since Ledo. Jorge Bills Córdova Díaz resigned The appointment of Ledo, Botinquen Marrero to the position of Supreme Court Justice, is expected at any moment, since Governor Jesús T. Piñero recommended him as the only candidate of the Popular Democratic Party for said position, having no opposition from any sector. The Ledo. Borlnquen Marrero also appears as a candidate in Ja terna submitted by the Bar Association. It is expected that President Truman will make the appointment during the current month, before the Supreme Court resumes its hearings, which will begin on the fourth day of next November. Judge Travieso and Judge A. Cecil Snyder, also a member of the Court, will be back in Puerto Rico on that date. Both are in the United States" to attend the Uniform Legislation Conference, which this year is being held in the city of Philadelphia.
* It is told how information was withheld "about the executions Instruments of which Nazis were deprived 1 It is revealed that the surveillance and isolation of prisoners was not so severe. 18. (TNS). - Colonel Burton C. Andrus, commander of the Nuremberga prison, was summoned today to the inquiry board to answer for Hermann Goering. He is to appear before the commissioners appointed by the Allied Control Council to direct the executions of Nazi prisoners sentenced to be hanged by the International Military Tribunal. It is understood that the Russian com*. missionary insists that a full report "on the security measures observed" at the prison prior to Goering's "suicide" be given. The Russian co* missionary also demands an explanation of . the presence of so many Aloman"" at the Nuremberg prison" where Jos. war crimes" prisoners were being held. The Allied commissioners met privately to hear preliminary reports on all the practical research carried out so far. The meeting took place in the Palace of Justice where the judges of the International Tribunal used to meet. In the meantime, Klnsburg Smith sends a dispatch in which he reports that the responsibility for Goering's suicide was not communicated to the world hours before the execution of his colleagues falls on the shoulders of the Allied Control Board which was in charge of monitoring the carrying out of the death sentences. To date, no satisfactory explanation has been given for the commission's actions. Rumors that its members debated for hours about whether or not to hang Goering's corpse as a means of saving face are unconfirmed. Here is the way in which Goering's suicide was prevented for more than a few hours from being made public. eight correspondents chosen" by ("orteo to attend the executions ! on behalf of the Press and* । of the world radio were thus* ! put under guard at eight o'clock on Tuesday night" (two o'clock in the afternoon, New York time) and kept" ! Incommunicado by the authorities. without being given an opportunity to send their information until after six o'clock on Wednesday morning (midnight New York time). After we had been placed under guard, extensive security measures being taken, we were not allowed to visit the condemned prisoners' gallery in the Nuremberg prison and immediately returned, still under guard, at about 10:15 p.m. Tuesday night (4:15 p.m. New York time) to the room in which we were confined in the Tribunal building. Goering was discovered dead in his cell at about 10:45 p.m. (4:45 p.m. New York time). A few minutes earlier. Colonel Andrus stated that there was not so great a risk of the information being leaked, but added that in any case the matter was beyond his control. We immediately asked if we would release her immediately after the executions. He replied in the negative, explaining that we would only be released at about six o'clock in the morning (midnight New York time) and that, despite the fact that the last of the Nazi leaders to be executed was pronounced dead at twelve fifty-seven o'clock in the morning (ten fifty-seven o'clock on Tuesday night New York time). At midnight ("el" in the afternoon New York time). Colonel Burton C. Andru", security officer of the North American Army at Nuremberg prison, came into the room where we were being held and said he was going to make a startling announcement. Goering is dead," he declared solemnly to his correspondents. He committed suicide in his cell by taking poison and was found dead at ten forty-five o'clock past the meridian". Colonel Andrus added: "I would like to be able" to leave "allr now to send the news, but tos representative" of the allied commission of control have ordered me not to allow publicity to be given to fi this Information until they are also announced Ins execution""""". He revealed in secret that the "execution" would be verified at about one o'clock in the morning (seven o'clock in the afternoon Tuesday New York time). At that time we told Andrus that the delay in announcing Goering's death would lead to misinformation being given, since the news that the executions had been carried out was likely to be received even before the criminals were released and unless a preliminary announcement of his suicide was made, he was going to be imprisoned.