THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY: Mostly clear along the coastlines except for short showers 2am. Light to moderate showers over the mountains this afternoon. High in San Juan yesterday was 83 degrees. No sign of a storm.
Cclidan
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII
NUMBER 10665
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST S, 1946
Entered aa second class mstter, !, Post Office, San Juan P. R
PRICE 5 Cents
Pinero to take office Sept. 3; to be sworn in here before Judge Travieso
The fate of the language bill is discussed Ninety-four days "e met yesterday of having been sent Traman - The provision of the Organic Carla There is diverse opinion as to how to compute the ninety-four days By ANGEl7cRUZ CRUZ Editor of EL MUNDO Yesterday marked the ninety-fourth day of having sent to the President of the United States the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico, for his consideration, the bill of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico that provides for the teaching in Spanish in the public schools of the Island, For this reason, numerous persons close to the Island Government and to the Teachers Association of Puerto Rico were discussing yesterday whether or not the bill would become law after the ninety days that the Organic Law of Puerto Rico grants to the President of the United States to approve or veto a law submitted to him by our Island Legislature, it being considered that according to the Organic Charter, if the President neither specifically vetoes a bill submitted to him by the Legislature of Puerto Rico nor signs it, but allows the ninety days in question to expire, by express provision of the Organic Charter, the bill becomes a law. To this effect, after explaining the procedure to be followed for a bill of the Island Legislature to pass to the consideration of the President of the United States, *1 Puerto Rico Organic Act provides, in its article 34, the following: "If the President of Jos United States approves the bill, he shall sign it and it shall become law. Provided, that the President of the United States shall approve or disapprove a bill submitted to him under the provisions of this section within ninety days after it has been submitted to him for his approval; and if he does not approve it within that period, it shall become a law as if he had specially approved it. The Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico, Mrs. Haydée F. de San Miguel, told EL MUNDO yesterday that she did not know whether the language bill had become law or not, stating that the clause of the Organic Act that speaks of the "ninety days of having been submitted for its approval" was subject to interpretation. Mrs. San Miguel could not tell us whether the ninety days began to run when the bill was deposited in the mail or when it was received by the President, or at any other time. She did say that the Executive Secretary deposited the bill in the mail on April 30 of this year, ninety-four days having passed since the bill was deposited in the mail. On the other hand, the President of the Puerto Rico Teachers' Association, Mr. Luis Mufllz Souífront, said yesterday that, according to his understanding, he had doubts as to whether the holidays within the ninety-four days after the bill was filed in the mail.
|!| PARTICIPATE j|| THE INSTALLATION j k 1 1 " íiSSi > ■ The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, Mr. Martín Travieso, who has been invited from Wáshlngton pura to administer the Oath of Office to Mr. Jesús T. Piftero as Governor of Puerto Rico. A committee is created to illustrate the crisis. It was one of the several agreements adopted at La Fortaleza last night at La Fortaleza, the meeting of Government officials convened for the purpose of examining how the plan against aglotism, implemented on July 30, is working out. \ After discussing various aspects of the plan, the following agreements were reached, according to the official view:1- The General Administration of Supplies will invite to join the Citizens' Emergency Committees appointed by the AGS in each locality to help in the implementation of the plan, and the following agreements were reached, according to the official view:1- The General Administration of Supplies will invite to join the Citizens' Emergency Committees appointed by the AGS in each locality to help in the implementation of the plan.
On the rise i paralysis in the city Ponce Yesterday there were eleven cases reported, and one more is thought to be suspicious Monday cleaning campaign begins Health agents met with Mayor to discuss the plan PONCE, 2, -(By Andrés Jorge Montalvo)- reports authorized by the Public Health Unit indicate that to date there are eleven cases of Infantile paralysis, in addition ' to one suspicious case Reported , by Dr. J. Lanauze Rolón. The cases that have appeared are located in the Caribe neighborhood, Guaragua, Cañas, on the corner of Mayor and Aurora streets and in Ponce Beach. Health officials admit that the polio outbreak is quite serious. On the other hand, the people are extremely alarmed and are constantly asking for reports from the EL MUNDO newsroom in this city about the true status of the epidemic. Yesterday there was a meeting in the office of Mayor Grlllasca, Drs. Ramon A. Rios, interim head of the Public Health Units; Antonio Acosta Velarde, Director of District Hospitals; Engineer Mr. Juan Figueroa and Miss Cebollero in order to consider a plan aimed at combating the epidemic. The municipal authorities and the officials of the Sanitation Department reached an agreement to begin an Intense Public Cleaning Campaign । next Monday. On the other hand, the Commissioner of ■ Health of Puerto Rico, Dr. Anto- i nlo Fernós Isern, told EL ( MUNDO, yesterday, that according to statistics , which are in his Department, in ( Ponce there are nine positive cases of poliomyelitis and two other sos- ( (Continued on page 24) ,
Rules to be enacted soon to govern application of law 5 Treasury must return excess liquor tax paid in S4, but merchant must keep the merchandise in his possession.
In the extraordinary session held by the Legislature last July, the House bill S was approved, which became law 5 when signed by the Acting Governor on the 24th of that month. This law amends the beverage law passed at the last Ordinary Session by lowering the taxation of distilled spirits to $4, correcting an error made during the passage of the previous law. The new law 5 authorizes the Treasurer of Puerto Rico to refund to liquor merchants and manufacturers the amount paid in excess of 34 per gallon of distilled spirits, but the refund will be made, according to the law, to the persons who have in their possession, the liquors on which they have paid more than $4 of tax; Many wholesale merchants,! who have sold liquors for which they have paid more than the $4 of tax.
Many wholesale dealers who have sold liquors for which they paid more than the $4 per gallon tax have requested the Treasury of Puerto Rico to make public the scope of the new law and to regulate in a simple manner the manner in which it will be applied, making it easy and clear the procedure to be followed to make the refunds authorized by law. The wholesalers and manufacturers say that the retailers are demanding from them the refund of what they paid in excess of the $4 per gallon, when the excess they charged to the retailers was paid to the Island Treasury from whom they cannot claim it because they do not have the merchandise in their possession. j Some retailers have expressed that they are claiming from the wholesalers to whom they paid the excess of the 34 per gallon, because in the Tei (Continued on page 24)
NEWS DIGEST
Hilero will become governor of Puerto Rico on September 8. He will be sworn in before Judge Travieso at La Fortaleza. Krug to attend installation ceremonies. ) - They are converting atomic energy into a powerful benefit to mankind. The first experiments will be done on cancer. - o - A strike was taken in the shoe industry in the United States * - * José Esteban Saldada, Puerto Rican, has been decorated for the services he rendered to the Army as a translator. Last night the poet Fernando Torregrosa passed away. President Traman vetoed the project by virtue of which the Federal Government would put the Nation's oil reserves in the hands of the States. ... Cabrera lost Game in Torreon's victory over Veracrus, 11-4.
San Juan beat Arecibo in Olympic bat-l lonceet, 42-40. The Municipal Assembly withdrew the confidence of Assemblyman Ramón Rodrigues Maldonado. - - - The retailers of Caguas took to the streets yesterday in protest against the food crisis, - - - The Civil Service has already approved the first group of temporary employees who will become permanent employees. Sixty in all appear on the approved list. I The Transportation Authority must pay Eladio Lausell for damages caused by a bus in the amount of 88,700. - * - t In Ponce yesterday, eleven cases of paralysis were reported, in addition to another suspected one. Originally Sanidad reported the existence of nine cases. - ' ' I Yesterday marked ninety-four days of having been sent to President Traman.
I do to President Traman the Language bill passed by the Island Legislature. President Traman has ordered a general reduction in Government spending to the lowest level for the next twelve months. - De Hostos yesterday blamed the OAP and the Department of the Interior for the rice shortage on the island. Veterans and policemen fought a gun battle in the state of Tennessee. Twenty people were wounded. The Mayor of Ponce moves to delay until the 19th the start of classes due to the outbreak of Infantile paralysis. Senator Austin retired to represent the United States at the United Nations. FAT will organize its own Political Action Committee. ... Committee Created to Enlighten the Public Against Agiotlsm.
- Traman calls for i reduction of expenditures Orders lowest possible level within the next twelve months Predicts deficit in the coming year ! Has sent specific i instruction to each of the departments WASHINGTON. 2. - The instructions given yesterday morning by President Truman to the heads of all departments and agencies of the Federal Government to reduce the expenditures of such departments and agencies" to the lowest possible level' within the next twelve months are frankly unequivocal. The President has directed that Government expenditures be reduced to the bare essentials if the forces of inflation are to be combated. At this point, the President states that even Indispensable expenditures have a tendency to help these forces. 1 Mr. Truman adds: "We must do something in our power to lessen inflationary pressures. And one of the most effective means of accomplishing this is by reducing Federal expenditures." The President goes on to describe the present situation in his letter as "a very serious one" and indicates that "a substantial deficit in the' budget for the coming year is in sight." The President suggests that Government officials review the official policies which will influence the determination of the spending budget for the year 1948, and advises them to keep these rules in mind when submitting estimates of their needs to the Bureau of the Budget (qua e "U annexed to the White House). In addition to the letter of reference, President Truman informed the Press that he had sent specific instructions to a number of department heads. Such ] Instructions gave orders to the ( Secretaries of War and Ma- । rial and to the Chairman of the Maritime Commission ! Maritime to reduce their । expenditures suztanclally below i the amounts they have t already planned to spend during the current fiscal year. i Mr. Truman also told reporters that Federal public works must also be reduced, postponing lot i commitments for new projects and construction on existing projects for as long as possible. Agencies involved in public works have been instructed to keep their programs within earmarked limits. I
Two brigadier generals, both born in Port Raul Esteves (center) were among the first to hower, when Chief of Staff of the Army Befell is Chief of the Military Department of the An po than Eisenhower, in 1915. Bessell and Esteves, with Elsenhower to Borinquen Field, under a downpour, the character of the mimicry clothing that was
Hav appropriation of $1,750,000 for homes Governor Perez signed law to that effect. -New measures approved The Government of Puerto Rico has an allocation of $1,750,000 "to be Invested in the development of low-income housing projects for low-income families." Acting Governor Manuel A. Pérez today signed P. S. 18 (Act No. 18), which allocates said amount for the referred purposes. The Governor also signed P. de la C. 7 (Act No. 17), which appropriates 37,500 to pay for the operation, functioning and equipment expenses of a pump boat (flre boat) acquired by the Puerto Rico Island Fire Service. Act No. 18 directs that the following amounts be allocated to the following housing authorities to be invested in the development and construction of housing for low-income families: To the San Juan Municipal Housing Authority .... 3575,000.00 To the Municipal Authority on Homes of Ponce 3150,000.00 To the Municipal Authority on Homes of Mayagüez .... 3150,000.00 To the Puerto Rico Homes Authority 3875,000.000 It is hereby provided that the Puerto Rico Homes Authority shall invest the amount of 8150,000 in the construction of housing projects for low-income families in the Municipality of Arecibo.
Shoe industry shutdown feared Manufacturers allege OAP attitude must be responsible NEW YORK," Spokesmen for the shoe manufacturing industry (mostly located in the New England states) predicted yesterday in this city that shoe manufacturing will be reduced, that shoe manufacturing will be reduced by 50 per cent within a week and almost completely paralyzed within a month as a result of the refusal of the Office of Price Administration to take out of its control or to increase the prices of hides, skins and shoes. The OAP's refusal was adopted by the agency in Wáshlngton yesterday, Thursday, following a conference with industry representatives. As leather stocks have been exhausted, 250,000 workers in the shoe industry will be out of work by the end of next month, according to industry spokesmen, unless the OAP reconsiders its action on maximum prices for the material. An OAP official in New York said yesterday that the agency has no authority under the new price control law to remove leather, footwear and shoes from price ceilings.
The Frenchman said that the vote would not be unanimous because he did not believe that the French Premier, Georges Bidault, would be willing to serve as permanent chairman of the con- ! frenclave. ! The Soviet Union opposed the proposal that France/ as the host of the current conference, should serve as its permanent chairman. The New Zealand proposal was seconded by Great Britain, Holland, Brazil and Australia. In view of this, the Soviet Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, Andrel Vlshinsky, promptly stood up to defend the original plan for a rotating chairmanship, to be held successively by the four great powers. VI-1 .shlnsky stated that the rotating method had worked well at the United Nations Conference in San Francisco, California, and added that it was only natural that the Big Four should guide the deliberations of the conference because, in the long run, the foreign ministers of the great powers would bear the responsibility.
De Hostos blames Interior and OAP for rice shortage
Argues that the island was deprived of the opportunity to acquire quantities to meet the country's needs at a reasonable and equitable price.
The president of the Chamber of. Mr. Fillpo L. de Hostos, reiterated yesterday that the OAP and the Department of the Interior on¡ Wáahlngton, are responsible for the shortage of rice on the Island. To this effect, Mr. De Hostos said: "With a criterion that can only be attributed to lack of vision and total ignorance of reality, the regional pricing office in Washington is determined to deprive Puerto Rico of the opportunity to acquire the rice it needs to cover its needs until the new harvest, at the end of September. "The fact that both that office and the Department of the Interior at Washington are today busily seeking, and to date without success, the rice necessary to cover our deficit, represents a tacit admission of the crass error of judgment and judgment committed by both in stubbornly refusing to know that we had every reason to insist that there was no short-grain rice on the mainland market necessary to meet our needs and that, as a result, it was absolutely essential to have the rice we needed to meet our needs.
It was absolutely unthinkable and urgent to raise the maximum price of rice on the island to the level of the cost of long-grain rice still available, at that time, in the United States. Even when confronted with overwhelming evidence, they insisted on giving a new postponement in the solution of the matter, which resulted in the expiration of the Price Control Law and the market going through the roof, pclván (Continued on page 24).
The Acting Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. H. A. Martin, called yesterday afternoon to the Acting Governor, in connection with a telegram he received from the editor of the newspaper "El Dia", of Ponce, suggesting the postponement of the opening of classes in that city, for August 19, in view of the epidemic outbreak of Infantile paralysis that has arisen there. Until yesterday at half past four o'clock
Eisenhower arriving last night in Aguadilla
i-... .....
Rico, William W'. Bonnell (on the Left), and Luiz nahidar to the General of the EJércfto' Dwight 1). Klnende Ion Katadon Unidon arrived last night in Aguadilla, Tillan. Estevez so graduated from West Point at the same tlomotron high ranking officers, agualdaron the arrival which explains the stains that give ana uniforms worn pnrn the war in the jungles. (Photo EL MUNDO).
Russia advocates rotating chairmanship in Rules Committee France announces that Bidault "would only accept a permanent chairmanship with the unanimous vote of the assembly. By' KINGSBURY SMITH PARIS 2 (INS)- In the Rules and Procedures Committee of the Peace Conference, the French delegate today asked the New Zealand delegate to withdraw his proposal to nominate France for the permanent presidency of the conference. The delegate claimed
Atom's energy used for medical purposes First experiments will be done on cancer. Other ailments to be applied By FRANCES MUSIC 1 OAK RIDGE, Tennessee, 2 (INS)-Atomic energy today became a beneficial agent ¡for mankind when radioactive Isotopes of carbon were delivered by the Manhattan Atomic Project to the nation's experimental laboratories for therapeutic use. 1 The substances in question - the first to leave the atomic bomb-producing laboratories at Oak Ridge for peaceful purposes - are tiny aggregates, the size of peas, of carbon of atomic weight 14. These small quantities of the carbon isotope are enough to open new horizons for medical and biological research. The isotopes - whose chemical behavior has earned them the name of "atomic spies" - can be traced in plant or human bodies thanks to their radloactlvl. 1 dad. By the light they shed on the causes of diseases, they indicate the appropriate treatment of these diseases. The Manhattan Project, a major factor in the development of the atomic bomb, has announced that isotopes will be used in research related to cancer, dlabetls, photo-synthesis, carbon deposition in teeth and bones, as well as in connection with the utilization of fats by the human body. Barnard Hospital in St. Louis, Missouri, received the first shipment of Isoto1 (Continued on page 24).
From Ponce they ask for a postponement of the reopening of the school year.
In the afternoon, the Department has not considered the situation as a reason to extend the start of classes in the southern city by a few days. The Commissioner informed that the Acting Governor called the head of the Health Department, Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern, but has not informed him (Martin) of Dr. Fernós Isern's opinion on the matter.
Krug will be present at the ceremony Oath-taking will be held in the halls of Fortaleza Affairs q. occupy the Governor State Department entrusted him speech will be heard in 24 languages By JEAN~ VAN VRANKEN WASHINGTON, 2. (INS). - Secretary of the Interior Julius A. Krug announced today that he will attend the inauguration ceremonies of Puerto Rico Governor Jesus T. Piftero. The ceremony has been tentatively set for September 3. The date for the swearing in of the first native governor was arranged between Krug and Piftero as the day that best coincided with the plans of both founders. In addition, it was noted that being the day after Labor Day, the date will be followed by a long holiday weekend. | Chief Justice Martin Travieso has been invited to preside over the ceremony, which will be held at La Fortaleza, and to administer the oath of office to the new governor. WASHINGTON, 2. (PU)- Governor Travieso, accompanied by Undersecretary of the Interior Oscar Chapman, spent 20 minutes in the Forteleza. Oscar Chapman, spent twenty minutes in conference with President Truman at the White House, after which he told reporters that he intended to act as President Truman's "personal representative" in the Island Government. "Krug is expected to fly to San Juan on September 2, and to return to Washington on September 4. It was said that the Secretary originally hoped to be able to stay longer on the island, but at present he does not think he will have to leave Washington for more than three days. The Interior chief leaves on a two-week trip to Alaska next week and has trips to Hawaii and the Southwest lined up for later in the fall. Krug has expressed his desire to study as many of the territories and projects under his administration as possible by visiting them. Since his inauguration in March, however, the Secretary has had to stay in Washington, except for a brief visit to the Caribbean territories when William Hastie was inaugurated as governor of the Virgin Islands. The Department of the Interior said it is not yet known who will be included in Krug's entourage. It was reported that Edwin Arnold, head of the Territories Division, will probably attend the ceremony. The Department also informed that every effort will be made to include in the entourage those officials who have something to do with Puerto Rico and who have not had the opportunity to be on the island for an extended period of time. The Department of State will also be represented at the inauguration. This department has a great interest in Puerto Rico due to its location as a link between the Americas. In addition, the Inauguration of the Island's first native governor is viewed with great sympathy by Latin America.
Meanwhile, Piftero said he still has in mind to visit Alaska and Hawaii, in conjunction with the House Military Affairs Committee, which leaves Washington on August 10. However, Governor Piftero announced that plans for such a trip would be cancelled if his duties as Resident Commissioner are not completed next week. At present, the Governor is very concerned about the rice supply crisis in Puerto Rico and is engaged in discussions with other officials regarding a possible solution. His legislative duties in the U.S. House of Representatives would end today with the recess of the Sixth Congress, if that were to occur. Yesterday, President Truman -nM§ informed the Press, in his confe- !'s rencla, that he would like to attend the inauguration, but was not sure if official business 9H 1 WAshington would permit. Piftero informed the Press UnÍ*fl| that he "greatly doubted" ptdl der making his projected trip Alaska and Hawaii, as a member tfl Committee on Milltarei Affairs <- B House, prior to his inaugUH4MÍ ll l. (Piftero's plans arriveglM * ta the stage of undergoing the (Continued on page 84)