THE WORLD
40 PAGES 5 ctvs. 2 Sections
40 PAGES 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DIARIC DE
LA MACANA
YEAR XXVIII
NUMBER 10507
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 23, 1946
Entered a" second cía** matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
We are grateful to the shoulders of those who made possible the Victory Loan.
THE CANDIDATES SUGGESTED BY MUÑOZ MARIN The President of the Senate and of the Popular Party, Luis Muño* Marín, reported yesterday that prior to the approval of the concurrent resolution fixing the position of the people of Puerto Rico on the status problem, he was consulted from Washington as to the candidate or candidates he would suggest to be considered for the governorship of Puerto Rico, and that in response to such request, he submitted the names of Jesus T. Plflero, Resident Commissioner in Washington; Cecil Snyder, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court; Esteban Bird, Executive Vice President of the Ponceño Credit and Savings; and C. F. Baldwin, head of the Political Action Committee of the < IO. Mr. Muño* Marín "lijo Sue if the projects" nprobaos recently approved in relation to the governorship, are approved definitively, any of these candidates* could go to the electoral tlckot in the elections to decide which citizen the people wish to democratically recommend to the President of the United States to be appointed Governor of Puerto Rico". Any other candidate who was endorsed by 10% of the voters who participated in the last elections held in Puerto Rico or any of the candidates endorsed by the existing political parties on the Island could also be considered, according to the provisions of Senate Bill No. 190, which was recently approved by the Legislature.
I Nido explains farmers' opposition He says closed shop and "check off" are undesirable practices Explaining the attitude of the Farmers' Association, in opposing the approval of a legislative measure* aimed* at authorizing the inclusion in the collective bargaining agreement* of the* closed shop* clause* and the* check off* quota* count, the president of the Colonists' Secp>r and vice president of the Farmers' Association, Pedro P. Nido, yesterday authorized what he called the "check off" clause. Nido, . authorized the following yesterday: I "In opposing "e i utoi do* loy's proyeci toa, e "ts Agrii cultora* Association does so for reasonone* of > great peto. The right of every* worker* to work which will enable him to free his livelihood from discrimination of any kind is not only a constitutional right," but also a matter of hu.1 (Continued on page 19).
Senate Bills Nos. 90, 91 and 91 were passed.
Bolivar Pagan says they cast a shadow over judges and courts Arjona warned against effects Géigel Polanco and Dr. Figueroa express their views Tm heated" debate" in which participated Senators Bolivar Pagan, Leopoldo Figueroa and Leopoldo Figueroa. Leopoldo Figueroa and the floor leader of the congressional majority. Vicente Géigel Polanco, approved last Thursday night Senate Bill 90, which prohibits "the public action known in equity as the action of the "ntrlbuyer in the courts of Puerto Rico" and which "eliminates from the jurisdiction of said* court the pending proceedings" in which said action is exercised"; and Senate Bill No. i. 01, which amends section four, section four, section four, section four, section four, section four, section four, section four, section four, section four, section four, section four, section four, section four, section four, section four. 01, which amends section four of the "Act to Define Injunctions" approved in 1906, "as amended on April 23, 1927. Bolivar Pagán, in two extensive ~ dtacuraos, fought both measures! expanding on their legal, moral, social and political aspects, and denounced them as unnecessary, unconstitutional, and as "a cynical attempt to close the doors* of the courts of law against the citizens,"j "These bills* cast a shadow against the Puerto Rican* magistrates" who preside over our trl-i hunalea and who were confirmed by the Senate that our people elect, these bills* take away certain resources from the jurisdiction of our judges and force the* citizens to resort to the Court of Appeals. Bolívar Pagán said in one of his paragraphs. - Senator Arjona Siaca expressed his fears that the law would affect - the citizen's right to appeal ■~|1 appeal for declaratory judgment, but Senator Géigel Polanco <U0 that, the leglslatlvo sentiment was otherwise and that he could assure that the right to seek declaratory judgment was not impaired!'.... His Interpretation of the statute, in this ~ respect, was taken to the "records" at his request. Figueroa argued that the statute could have a legal scope, but that the "text clearly vetoed that it was political in scope. Taking the text of the bill in his hands, he said that if he went out into the street and asked the first person he met what the scope of the law was, they would immediately identify on it the name of Thoma* Fennell and his Agricultural Company. In the course of his lengthy speech Figueroa again insisted that the bill tended only to win with the votes of the majority of the parlamen--tarla Jo" lawsuits that have been lost in court. The speaker pointed out many of the errors that in his opinion were being made by the lords of the parliamentary majority and ended by saying that all these things "you do with the Empire of force but not of reason. - 7 Healer Géigel Polanco conté*, told Dr. Figueroa e i an exten "o diicurio, and among other* thing" he said that the work of the government cannot be exposed to be paralyzed by the whim of taxpayers who - sometimes Bolamente pay contributions for the cigarette they smoke, nor "be at the expense of the" dsriilone" of the courts that by error, by wrong Interpretation or by passion, can paralyze Igobrs of this government." "This legislation, Géigel asserted, "leaves safe the right of any taxpayer who is actually affected," but tends to Prevent the paralysis of the work of the government which is for the benefit of all." When the two bills were voted on in the third reading, they were approved by the Senate with a vote of 13 to 2.
Households Plan Would Need $17,851,160
The Puerto Rican Liberal Party ■ is to request from President Tru- - mi and Acting Secretary of the Interior, Oscar Chapman, the nomination of a Puerto Rican for the governorship, as well as for the Commissioner of Instruction. The United States Congress will also be asked to act promptly in accordance with President Truman's recommendation on the political status of the island. This was agreed to by the leadership of the said collectivity, meeting yesterday at the Ateneo - de Puerto Rico, in an Juan. The assembly, which was attended by about four hundred delegates from all over the island, was presided over by Mrs. Josefina Barceló de Romero. At the presidential table were Mr. Luí* Pérez Maj. toa, vice-president of the party; Mr. Félix Oehoteco, Mr. Yuya Sány ches de Fleming, Mrs. Angelita Vlzcarrondo, Mr. Lorenzo Caballea Gandía,
23. (PU)-EI national American Legion Ambassador John Stelle said today that unless veterans get the treatment they deserve, "serious or critical consequences may result. Stelle pointed out that 13,000,000 veterans" of the world's doa gueiras have more than fifty million immediate family members, "who are in the greatest sympathy with respect to aus problems." Stelle added: "Take this as a warning, it seems. The improper and ineffective treatment of these veterans, under the provisions of the laws already on the statute books, could have serious and critical consequences. WASHINGTON, 31 (PU)- Agriculture Secretary Clinton P. Anderson today joined Representative John Phillips, Republican of California, in urging a full investigation of the alleged "rocket" of sugar rationing coupons in Southern California. If there is any evidence of further sales of sugar, I would
If there is any evidence of more sugar sales, I hope they (the investigators) will get to the bottom of it," Anderson said. A recent OAP investigation led to the grand jury indictment two days ago of the agency's tree funolonalee in Loa Angeles for accepting a 99,000 bribe for giving sugar coupons. - " " " " WASHINGTON, 13 (PU) - An official of the Bureau of the Budget predicted today that the recommendation on future Federal wage policy in the territory* will have from thirty to forty r^gin-, typewritten. He added that such a document could be sent to the White House within a month, but "° P u <*° e'tohlecer a fixed date- - * * * * * WASHINGTON. 21 (PU) - In speech in the House of Representatives, resident commissioner Pl. flelro spoke of the second conference of the Caribbean Commission
BULLETINS
Five projects are already approved by the Planning Board They will provide 5,032 new homes । Development of the Borda estate in Isla Verde will cost $9,558,14-0 The plans of the San Juan Municipal Homes Authority for the construction of hamlets in the metropolitan area involve an investment of $17,8,51,160. The Planning Board has already given its approval to five projects known as San Juan' Bautista. Puerta de Tierra, La Per-I la, Las Casas and Borda. In the latter, it has authorized the acquisition of land. These five hamlets will provide some 5,032 housing units, according to the plans outlined to date. The work will be carried out with Island and federal funds, the latter to be obtained through loans authorized by the Federal Housing Authority. The petitions "e are filed with that agency. An appropriations bill currently before Congress is expected to pass, providing funds* for the federal agency for a vast program of low-cost rental housing construction in all states* and territories. The San Juan Bautista project will be located on Fernandez Junco* Avenue and will consist of 348 housing units, of which 114 will begin in the first phase of the project. The total cost of this project is $31,382,000. The* first* 114 units* will be started at a cost of $325,000. The Planning Board has indicated that full funding is available to bring the project to fruition. The Puerta de Tierra project will house 484 families*, in an equal number of units. The cost will be $32,043,102, and $31,280.00 has been allocated. This farmhouse will be located on Fernandez Juncos Avenue on land" to be turned over to the Authority by the Army and will be used during the war emergency. Another hamlet in San Juan will be La Perla, where 800 homes will be accommodated at a cost of $2,489,540. No funds* have yet been allocated.
Liberals ask Truman for a Puerto Rican governor I The same recommendation is made regarding the Commissioner of Instruction. - Assembly in San -i Juan yesterday considered the situation of the Party.
Inocencio Blanco. Juan Marchand, and Antonio Qulró* Méndez. On the stage "others were present were Rafael Rodríguez Pacheco, expresldente de l" Cámara, doctor Octavio Jordán, Mi- 1 guel Acevedo Barreto, Manuel González Seljo, Santiago Iglesia* Silva, Manuel Marchand, Vicente Qulllnchlnl, Rafael Valle* Santo*. Víctor Cordero, representative Ernesto Cádiz, Luí* A. Archllla, Joaquín Rovira, Manuel Berrios, Antonio Montero, Mrs. Paula Peña de Rloi, Luí* Muñlz and José Gelpl. The "añora Barceló referred to the work of "recon "trucclón of the party in all the orders that became indispensable after the registration of the same". He said that in "u way of seeing, "every liberal was ■ convinced that it speaks that man- ■ tener en pía al partido y "e tenia >,té an su porvenir," He concluded di(Contlnúa en la página 24)
He included in the House record the letter sent by President Truman to the co-chairman of the Conference for the United States, Charlee W. Taus■ig. Piflelro said he believed it was significant that in other parts of the world, dependent people are fighting against a great power for a basic right, while in the Western Hemisphere, such a right can be waived. Sloe m meet in poa, around a table to discuss their* proi blems. ■ . - * e f| WASHINGTON, 33 (PU) - Lm i four big company* manufacture. > tire companies today discussed the demands of the rubber workers affiliated with the CIO, without flatly rejecting them, but without making a counteroffer. Reproaentante" of 1 both* parties -Held today a ' session in their negotiations, which - was devoted, according to reports, to the - statement of the position of the ) companies.
The APC has banned the use of alcohol extracted from sugar cane for the manufacture of whiskey, gin and other beverages.
! Legislature session to continue until March At the last minute it was agreed to discuss and approve the budget There are fears of a change in the governor's office Purpose e" to prevent a new executive from making amendments in items Although the intention of the leadership of the Popular Party and of the Legislature was to close the present legislative session definitively on the last day of this month, everything indicates that the House" will continue for some" more days next month. some" more days of the next month, because at the last minute it was agreed to approve the budget, for fear that there may be a change in the government and the new executive may object" and fail to approve items" that the leadership of the majority Party believes indispensable to be included among the" ordinary* government budget for the next fiscal year 194647. As *e "abe, in the* pre*budget* bill* the Governor may disapprove any item or part thereof, and the remainder of the bill upon "being signed "e becomes law, aln it has to go back n the Leglalature, which has to be Informed of the* disapproved* items, but *ln no power to act 1 in any way, except by pre "enting new amend- 1 rio bill. The leadership of the People's Party e*t" MmMderanóe hr conVenTeñ-T da not to close alne die the aealóni and "olly decree a rece "o until a date before April 15, for al e* convenient to have another meeting aln the need that it have to aer called by the Governor. Section 33 of the Charter prohibits either House from adjourning for more than three days without the consent of the other, which makes it lawful to adjourn until any date not later than April 15, by mutual consent of both legislative bodies. It is understood that "eftor Muñoz Marín encourages the purpose of moving * the* United States* early in the month* of March, there for the 5th, and that he prefers that the legislative "e "tion have a recess and not that it be adjourned. (Continued on page 24) School principals call for the need of a united front for the defense of campuses The* principals of the public schools* of San Juan and Santurce, in the last meeting of their nucleus, expressed the sense that there is a need to have the* parents, the Press, the radio, the Police and the* civic and governmental organizations "in a united front for the defense and improvement of the school." i In a note signed by its president, Mr. Luí* Homero Rodríguez, the San Juan nucleus of principals warns that the schools of this city "suffer from the intrusion of strange and undesirable elements in their* surroundings* and even in their* own buildings*, a condition which can become a ! 1 of such a nature that it can per- । judlcar lo* bueno* propórito* de f ra de la eicuela". To this difficulty with which *the teaching *plants are confronted . ""e add others of a mot ral and civic nature the" which the" main" । le" wish to bring to the attention ( of the community to be able to conju- , rarla" in time". P "eftor Rodriguez explains that । lo" main"" of the capital have . had the cooperation of father", j autorldade" municipal - Insular . and other" agencies and Inatltudonea. But this cooperation "has "gone offered mostly in thing" matter, le" and has "ldo also a little disjointed." - "IF these entities," he says, "tu' saw a full understanding of and the difficulties confronting the 1 schools, they could unite their* di. 1 "If these entities," he says, "would fully understand the difficulties faced by the schools, they could unite their efforts to help and the community could benefit. 1 "The eacuela to "be the means of 1 defending and preserving our society requires an understanding on the part of the "members" ■ of that society. This is the prl- ; (Continued on page 24)
Another grant for veterans' studies Veterans may attend educational institutions in foreign countries Will receive payments under new law Ex-soldiers will also be paid for correspondence courses Under provisions of laws recently approved by President Truman, Puerto Rican veterans will be able to study in foreign educational institutions. They are also authorized to take correspondence courses. The Veterans' Administration has received from the Veterans' Administration the regulations relating to the provisions of Act 346 of the Seventy-eighth Congress, by virtue of which "veterans" eligible for the educational benefits provided by said Act may study in foreign educational institutions approved by the Central Office of the Veterans' Administration in Washington. The Regional Veterans' Office informed that "veterans interested in studying in a foreign country" should select the institution they wish to study in and consult with the Veterans' Administration Central Office in Washington as to whether or not it is approved. Appropriate arrangements with the foreign institution must be reported and a letter from the registrar or other authorized official of the institution stating that he or she has been accepted as a student for a particular course under the provisions of Act No. 346. The veteran must make, on his own initiative, the necessary arrangements with the Department of State to obtain the necessary passport and visa to enter the foreign country in which the selected institution is located. "Veterans wishing to study in Canada, Newfoundland, Mexico, Texas or Guatemala do not need a passport. E" nee'sarl " provide** passports to be able to study in the" other palst* ex i trsnjero". I "When applying for a passport, the Iranian sailor must present a letter from the authorized official of the foreign institution stating that he/she has been accepted as a student. The State Department does not, at present, issue passports for study in Japan, Germany, Austria, and Korea. "The first payment to the veteran for subsistence will take from three to four months after the date on which the institution informs the office of the United States diplomatic or consular service nearest the institution that the veteran has been enrolled at the institution. For this reason, it is necessary for the veteran to provide the necessary funds to cover his or her personal expenses during the first three or four months of his or her stay abroad. The" subsistence" payments" are retroactive to the date on which the veteran began (continued on page 24).
The prospects for the supply of rice on a scale" sufficient* pa- , to meet local demand are not ■ very flattering." A"! reported . yesterday the president of the Provisions Retailers" Center, Mr. Ramon Nieves Allcea, Mr. Nieves indicated that the congressional representative" । । । of the prin- । do- । do- । do- । do- । producers* of the ur and oeate of the United States* conridei ran the rice situation of said pals alarming and have demanded ■ from the Commissioner of Agriculture. . Clinton P. Anderson, a readjustment ■ in the* quota* for export to enable the nation to have gra- - no in reasonable cantldade*" for domestic demand. He said that "- i have reported an alarming *|. . tuaclon in regard to a general shortage of grain in the United States," which could lead to a "rebsji "uitan- ■ cl "l of export reserves . which could consequently affect Puerto Rico." - I He reported "1 Mr. Snow" Allcea |<that he has received information from "de.
With respect to the Tie- ; eras Authority, the Governor recommends the creation of a position of Assistant Director Elerutlvo and alalinas reductions in In Division of Title V, for the aggregate". It is recommended, on the other hand, the establishment of a new division for the administration of small landowners' farms and for the inspection of homestead farms. Following is the full text of the special budget message sent Thursday night to the House" by Governor Tugwell: ' ! "Honorable members of 1a Legislature: I am sending you the appropriation for the" administrative" expenditure" of the Land Authority" in accordance with )n" provisions of Loy i 197 of 1942. I am sending also * lo* prosupuoBt for rio fun1 expenditure (Continued on page 24).
1 Prospects for rice supplies are not very flattering President of the ('entro de Detallistas is that pure joint action is needed to prevent the undermining of the Puerto Rican quota ' I - - - - -
>Wá "hlngton to the effect that the members of Congress for the states of Louisiana, Arkansas, Texas, California and South Carolina - have demanded from the Commissioner of Agriculture a readjustment of the export quota, lamenting in a communication the situation of (Continued on page 24)
H \ J The Agricultural Company's plaintiff, "eftor Jo "é Suárez MartL ' nez, has not yet been able to furnish the " bond ri" ten thousand dollars which he "". ' ftaló al Juez La Costa Jr. al dictar ' the preliminary Injunction against the - Company and designate "Indico de ' ést* al "eftor Federico Lopez del 1 Valle. Yesterday "> He reported that "eftor Suárez had disposed of all "u " capacity par* par* bail cuon- * do consigned the first d" four
Del Valle as he left Casa Blanca " - MMI ■ ■ -- । - A U sá" ' General Pedro A. de! Valle, who played a glorious part in the conquest of Oklnnwh, is seen here as he was leaving the White House in Washington after his conference with President Truman on Tuesday of this week. Our eompa| trlota was accompanied by Senator Dennis Chavez, who is backing him as In Island's gubernatorial candidate. (Associated Press Photo). lili ■ - - - - - - - -- - - . - Tugwell sends message on special budgets Recommends creation of Assistant Director position for the Land Authority" and some reductions in the Title V Division Proposing a $49,349 rehnin in the Land Department and $2,675 in the" expenses of the Industrial Commission, and an increase of $62,140 in the Lottery Administration and $30,1170 in the State Insurance Fund, Governor Tugwnll sent Thursday night to the Legislature a special message containing the operating expenses of the agencies for the fiscal 1946-47 fiscal year. i not included" in the general government budget.
(Yunara approved for schools $1,456,000.00 Postponed discussion of taxpayer litigation bill. It was not possible to discuss in yesterday's session of the House of Representatives, Senate Bills 90 and 91, which, as reported in the last issue of EL MUNDO, were the subject of discussion at a public hearing recently convened by the House Judiciary Committee. S. P. No. 90 is to limit the scope of taxpayer lawsuits and No. 91 is to amend a statute to restrict the scope of injunctions against the administration of public statutes. Ln discussion of both pro- . yertos was postponed to the : evening session, as Rep. Irlarte said he wanted to argue against them and had to leave the House before i two o'clock yesterday afternoon to' ! attend a meeting of the Te- * rrltorlal Committee of his party. - The House resumed its work ' yesterday at twelve-thirty tart of, 23 of its ■ members being present. It was reported that the Sena- । do speaks Imparted "u approval ■ to the P. riel S, 85; to determine the (Continued on page 2¡4) ¡
i 1 Suarez Martinez has been unable to ' 1 ; post bond of SI0,000.00
thousand dollars which, in the n-.umo proceeding, was required by the District Court. Suarez owns a farm in Corozal, which is worth between five and six thousand dollars. Persons" aware of the "itu"-i clone that confronts "hour the de-! principal upon being asked for a new bail, for ten mi! dollars this time. They reported yesterday that the 1"" pro-! abilities of Suarez to provide it for st "ere are only múy re(Continued on page 24) |
Measure causes alarm among liquor dealers here Mr. will call urgent meeting of the Rum Institute for hiñes Could mean ruin of industry APC explains honeys are needed to make more industrial alcohol I WASHINGTON? 22~(TNS> - The Civilian Production Administration yesterday banned the use of alcohol extracted from sugar cane in the manufacture of whiskey, gin and other alcoholic beverages. The Administration explained that the restriction was imposed to provide a greater quantity of honeys, from which the alcohol is extracted, for use in the manufacture of alcoholic beverages. The agency said that the honeys are urgently needed to increase the production of industrial alcohol and also as allmenlo for livestock. A ban on the use of cane alcohol for whiskey, gin and other alcoholic beverages came into effect today by order of the Civilian Production Administration. This agency said that this action, combined with the recent order limiting the production of potable, grain alcohol," will reduce the production of alcoholic" beverage" in a "commendable" manner. । A spokesman for the Civilian Production Administration said that the production of alcoholic beverages may be reduced to 50 percent; that the country has decided to alleviate shortages in sugar-based "liments used for livestock and other industrial products, such as resin and plastics," which are derived from sugar cane and sugar cane alcohol. The "only" exceptions to the order of the Civil Production Administration are alcohol from sugar cane imported or stored under "it, before 12:01 A. M., tonight, alcohol from sugar cane imported or stored under "it, before 12:01 A. M., tonight, alcohol from sugar cane imported or stored under "it, before 12:01 A. M., tonight, the alcohol that is in port to be re-shipped abroad, and the imported sugar cane alcohol free of taxes for industrial purposes. IN NAN JUAN' As soon as we received *1 above cable no" piísimo" "n communication with distillery" of San Juan, and of|- ¡ cíalo" of the Institute riel Ron and I" ) Asociación ri" Productore" de Azú- ; car. The president of the Institute of Rum, Mr. André" Barceló. rie Are- ¡ ribo, declared that the order of 1* Federal Civil Production Administration is of such importance for" the liquor industry of Puerto Rico that it should immediately convene a meeting of the Institute to consider the matter and take a decision. Institute, to consider the matter and take the appropriate measures. He stated that the Puerto Rican industries feared that the recent restriction in the United States on the use of grain to obtain alcohol for the manufacture of spirits would have repercussions on the Island, but not in such a rapid manner. The president of the Institute of Rum added that if this measure were applicable to Puerto Rico, it would represent the ruin of the Island's liquor industry, and at the same time he said that it would be a discrimina- tion of a discriminatory nature, be committing a discrimination against the Industrialists of the pal*. According to him, he said, the Industrialists of the mainland -- have been allowed to produce for five days a) month, adding that if this were done with the rum manufacturers of Puerto Rico, the Industry could "ostenerae, in view of the fact that the productive capacity of the distillery" of Puerto Rico is now quite large. | He concluded by saying that he would call a meeting of the Institute for Monday in San Juan. An official of one of the San Juan distilleries, with whom we spoke, also said that it was his opinion that, as on the previous occasion, when the use of alcohol obtained from the cane for the manufacture of rum, the island would be allowed to continue to manufacture rum in a regulated manner, and by allocating a limited amount of honey for this purpose. He added that they will meet with the directors of the distillery to discuss the problem.
The persons to whom we spoke were unaware that the order reported in the International News Service cable had been issued. The president of the Sugar Producers' Association, Mr. Marcelo Oben, took note to communicate and discuss the matter immediately with the firm, some of whose owners are also sugar producers and who will be affected by the new APC di "potency.