THE NONDOOR
48 Piginu 5 Ctv>. 2 Seccione"
48 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
lomeo to the mano whoo Melarono d Borrowing from the Victoria.
Beopaidemoo possible d Ei
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MAY 4, 1946
Entered oa second elaaa matteo. Post Office, Ban Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10574
AFF chief explains rate hikes
He says salaries and fuel prices are higher He hopes it will not be permanent Lucchetti summarizes the history of the Authority he heads By *R. rTvERARANTIAGO EL MUNDO Staff Writer Three hundred ninety-five thousand, seven hundred eighty dollars ($395,780) would cost consumers the proposed increases of the Puerto Rico Waterworks Authority in its electricity and power rates, if such increases were finally decreed or imposed on consumers throughout the Island. EL MUNDO readers are already aware of the details of such increases, as the newspaper published them in its last Thursday edition. In terms of the common citizen, who uses electric current to light his or her home, and keep the radio, heater and electric refrigerator working, the proposed increase implies six (8) cents for every dollar now consumed in electricity. Of the aforementioned amount of money -8395,780-, $351,244.20 would be for the Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority, and the other $44,535.80 would be for the Insular and Municipal governments, in accordance with the Law creating the Authority, which provides that 8 percent of its gross income be distributed among the municipalities and 5 percent be paid to the Insular Government. The aforementioned amount of 8395,780 is broken down as follows: 8120,680 increase over the residential rate! 875,500 increase on the commercial rate;! 847,000 increase in the electric rate; 8136,000 increase in the wholesale power rate; 87,000 increase in the street lighting rate; and 89,600 increase in other electric service rates. What are the reasons for these increases and what are the additional funds that the River Springs Authority wants to derive from the proposed unexpected increases for? In order to try to get answers to the above two questions, we requested an interview with the Director of the Authority, Engineer Antonio Lucchottl. In his spacious office, furnished with sober elegance, in which the air conditioning eliminates the discomfort of tropical perspiration, we spoke with Mr. Lucchetti for more than three hours, after having submitted to him a written questionnaire of seven questions, which he answered in a comprehensive manner. Mr. Lucchetti placed the responsibility for the necessity, according to him, of the proposed general rate increase on two expense items in his general budget. These items are: a) An increase of 8215,000, in salaries and wages, agreed upon last year, in satisfaction of the demands of the Union of Workers and Employees of the River Springs Authority, an increase which was opposed by the Island authorities with jurisdiction over these matters, and b) An increase of 8,215,000, in salaries and wages, agreed upon last year, in satisfaction of the demands of the Union of Workers and Employees of the River Springs Authority. (b) An increase of 8338,000 -which may ultimately result in. 8220,000, in the cost of fuel oil used to run the Authority's steam plants. L (Continued on page 32.)
NEWS DIGEST V
OAP has recommended a reduction in the price of cement manufactured in Puerto Rico. Dr. Berra Chavarry's office will decide on veterans' banner rolls and their eligibility to study. Intense opposition from labor and industrial organizations, as well as from housewives, against the increase in the rates of taxes and electric power. At the Army and Navy Club, Wiahlngton, Luis F. Cuchi, described the insular contribution during the war. A new airline, the Puerto Rico Air Transport, inaugurates the Ban Juan-New York service on May 18. Muñía Bouffront calls for prompt action on the appointment of the new Commissioner of Instruction. The Director of the Veterans Affairs Service left for Washington. He heard the case against the accusation of wounding Airman Louise Patton. He reports that there is only -haatM of triso for II days. Ur-I
gen to island tahonas that ocono-1 mieesi flour available. It has been suspended the agreement of the assembly do chófereo held in Salinas, by virtue of which the entity quedabr. affiliated or CGT chaired by Senator Barreta Péres. José Alonso Albita, heir, with his brother Tereco, of the fortune left by Mr. Manuel Alonso Espino, said yesterday that he would not bring his money to Puerto Rico because the Inheritance Law imposes a tax equivalent to two thirds of the inheritance. * The director of the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority reopposes the increase in wages and salaries and the rise in fuel prices due to the increase in the electricity and electricity rates proposed by the Authority. Several restaurant*owners* are considering the idea of closing their establishments, in order of number, one day a week. It was suspended the sentence to Leonardo Véle*, who pleaded guilty, as the author of the collision of ¡la Parada 15, in which perished if young Federico Lopez Curet. i To take charge of the base
The Puerto Rican hero, Commander Marion Ramires, arrived yesterday in San Juan to take charge of the Santomás submarine base. The law creating the Insular Police was studied yesterday, to see in what way the allocation assigned to that corps in the budget could be distributed. * Roñé Soltero broke the Central American tide of the Réntalo Juvenil. Today is celebrated at the university stadium the track and field match between the Estrella* Militare* and the University team. The Juncoe can win tomorrow the amateur baseball championship in group B. New York Yankees will play 14 training games next February in Puerto Rico. Explanations considered unsatisfactory* were given* by the* ruaos in connection with the attack on American planes*. The Chancellor's oil in Paris is headed for failure, owing to the attitude of Ruola; a serious riot breaks out in Alcatraz prison; the Araba Committee has sent an ultimatum to the British Government.
Commander Marion Ramirez on the Island.
This photo shows the moment in which relatives of Commander Marion Ramirez de Arellano, of the U.S. Navy, received him at the Navy pier in San Juan, on the occasion of his arrival on the Island. From left to right are: Mrs. Ruth Ramires de Arellano, political daughter of Mr. Rafael W. Ramirez de Arellano, professor of the UPR, who appears in the background; Commander Ramirez de Arellano and his wife or son; and the silk wife of Mr. Rafael W. Ramires de Arellano. The ñifla and the child in front, are children of the spouses, Lic. R. W. Ramirez and Ruth Ramirez de Arellano. _
Appointed chief of submarine base at Santomás His performance during the war won him several decorations 1 At 8:3 o'clock yesterday morning, Commander Marlon Ramírez de Affnano, hero of the Submarine War, arrived in San Juan, aboard the carrier Ariel, whose exploits were rewarded with numerous decorations, among them, the Legion of Mercy and the Legion of Honor. ( I Commander Ramirez de Arella- । no, was accompanied by his wife, Myi'e Ramirez do Arellano, and his little son Peter, and his parents, Mr. Rafael W. Ramirez do Arellano, a professor at the University of Puer- ( to Rico, Mr. Rafael W. Ramirez do ( (Continued on page 32.) L
Definition of educational policy expected soon Muñiz believes there will be prompt action on appointment of Commissioner and then Administration will take advantage of opportunity to draw up policy WASHINGTON, D. C.-(SEM)-The clarification and definition of the educational policy to be followed in Puerto Rico, as soon as the new Commissioner of Instruction is appointed, in regard to the teaching of English, is expected by Lula Muñiz Souffront, president of the Teachers' Association, after the appointment of a new Commissioner of Instruction, is expected to be made soon.
the Teachers' Association, after conferring here with high-ranking officials of the administration. Muñiz was accompanied by doc-¡ tor Pedro A. Cebollero, representing the insular teaching profession, to explore the official thinking' on legislation pending before President Truman from the Insular Legislature which provides for public instruction to be conducted in Spanish, although conslde(Continued on page 32.)
- , - ■ ।.... ■■■ - jta* ' Flooding on a street in Santurce Is due to a clogged ditch, explains the Aqueduct Service The Administrator or Chief Engineer of the Aqueduct and Sewer Service, Mr. Sergio Cue. vas, informed yesterday that his agency is finishing the storm sewer project on Linda Vista Street in Santurco and that the recent flooding is not due to the construction of the collector, but to the fact that there is a ditch to facilitate the drainage of rainwater and that it is obstructed. This," said Mr. Cuevas, "is a job for the Municipality of San Juan or the Health Department," Cuevas explained that the project currently being completed by the Aqueduct Service consists of the installation of a collector to carry the rainwater from Lolzg Street along Linda Vieta Street to discharge it into an open ditch that will then discharge it into the San José Lagoon with the help of a water pump located near the lagoon. At the beginning of the construction of the works, the flow of water from the excavations was excessive and by means of pumps it was poured into the ditch without causing damage to the property or causing any protest; this ditch is full of mud, and its effective capacity has been reduced by approximately 75 percent. On the other hand," said the Aqueduct Chief, "the ditch in question has a capacity in excess of the volume of water pumped during construction, so the recent flooding is due to other flooding," said Mr. Cuevas. As is known, the Linda Vista neighborhood has been protesting in recent days against this flooding.
Veterans' pension claims will be decided here Serra Chavarry's office has been delegated for that task. - Also to be decided on eligibility to pursue education
The director of the Regional Veterans Office, Dr. Jaime Sorra Chavarry, informed yesterday, while commenting on the expansion of all the agency's operations, that his organization has been delegated the authority to finally act on pension claims of Puerto Rican veterans. The Puerto Rico Regional Office has also been delegated, he said, "the responsibility for determining the eligibility of veterans to study and train under the provisions of the Puerto Rico Cert.
~ years of the Veterans' Bill of Rights." These funds were being executed by the central office of the Administration in Washington, and their transfer to Puerto Rico is part of the program of desentrsllzacton of services provided by the District Office of the VA in New York, with which Puerto Rico is affiliated. Under the new procedures, a veteran must file his or her pension application at the Regional Office headed by Dr. Sena (Continued on page 24).
The director of the Veterans Employment Service, Mr. Osear L. Bunker, will leave tomorrow for the United States to discuss with the officials of the U.S. Department of Labor the plans for the expansion of this program on the Island. Mr. Bunker will also discuss ways to achieve "greater and better employment opportunities for licensed servicemen". As of April 30, he is speaking to the Veterans Employment Service (VES) offices operating in Puerto Rico, an organization he describes in WASHINGTON.
Cuchí describes in Washington island contribution to war In a speech delivered at the Army and Navy Club, he surprised officers by reporting there were 60,000 Puerto Rican soldiers in Puerto Rico.
WASHINGTON. D. C. - The Commander of the Puerto Rico Department of the American Legion, Mr. Luis F. Cuchi, in a brief speech delivered last Tuesday here before the American Legion National Officers' Club at the Army and Navy Club of Washington, outlined the war effort of the people of Puerto Rico in World War II and urged the support of the American Legion national organization for the approval by Congress of a plebiscite bill containing all the alternatives: statehood, independence and dominion. Mr. Cuchi requested the cooperation of the prominent members of the Legion to use their influence with Senator Tydings to recommend a bill containing all the alternatives. The other speaker was the Panamanian Minister in Washington, Seftor VIllarinl. In attendance were numerous Army generals and colonels stationed in Washington, and national leaders of the American Legion, including General Marky, Republican Senate candidate in the state of Maryland; Lynn Stambaugh, Past National Commander of the American Legion, and member of the Export Import Bank; William T. Comer, Director of Coordination and Planning of the Veterans Administration; Colonel H. Odum, legal adviser to the Veterans Administration, and Colonel H. Bunker to discuss plans to expand the American Legion Office in the state of Maryland.
Bunker to discuss plans to expand Veterans Affairs Office
total of 41,843 veterans. Of this about 27,000 have not yet been placed and are therefore receiving unemployment compensation guaranteed by the Veterans' Bill of Rights. It was reported by Mr. Bunker that unemployment in Puerto Rico is a chronic problem. "The wages or salaries normally paid on the island are extremely low," he said, "compared to what is paid to veterans who gain employment on the mainland. The veterans of Puerto Rico consider that any placement they earn on the mainland is very low compared to what is paid to veterans who are employed on the mainland.
General Peter Harris, Adjutant General of the War Department, World War I; and Chairman of the National Legion Committee for the Care of Orphans; Captain Eloy Alfaro, Minister of Ecuador; Egbert Burns, Deputy National Adjutant of the American Legion; H. D. Shapiro, Medical Consultant to the American Legion; John Lewis Smith, member of the National Finance Committee of the American Legion. Major Cuchi's presentation made a great impression on those present, many of whom were unaware that Puerto Rico had given 60,000 men to the nation and that Puerto Rican regiments had served in Europe, (continued on page 32).
Flour supplies for 21 days only
This is reported by the U.S. National Millers Federation. The National Federation of Millers, to which the Puerto Rican Association of Millers is affiliated, yesterday notified the president of the latter organization, Mr. Santiago Piñeiro, that "the mill" of the United States, which is affiliated with the Puerto Rican Association of Millers, will have to use as little flour as possible when making bread, that "the mills" of the United States today only have supplies of wheat for twenty-one days, and with them they have to meet the domestic needs of the tahoneros and families of America, Puerto Rico and other possessions of America, because the wheat of the new harvest has been harvested." Mr. Piñeiro, who described the information as "extremely discouraging," made a public appeal, through EL MUNDO, for "all the Puerto Rican Industry that uses wheat flour to make the greatest possible effort to avoid, in the coming months, an improper use of the quantities in stock, limiting its operations to that" most urgent needs of the population." "The information transmitted by cable by the National Millers Federation," adds Mr. Piftelro, "reveals that supplies to Puerto Rico will be limited to very minimal quantities during the next 21 days and that, once these are over, and the wheat reserves of the United States mills are exhausted, it will be necessary to wait until the mills resume their operations at the beginning of June, with the wheat of the new harvest. The emergency has worsened and we hope to coordinate a plan of action, among all the mills, to ensure that the population does not suffer great sacrifices due to the lack of wheat and other foods derived from flour". The communication from the National Millers' Federation is transcribed as follows: 'The mills of the United States today have only a twenty-one-day supply of wheat, and are unable to meet the domestic needs of the people of the United States.
The country cries out against an increase in River Source rates.
Rent control established Law passed declares state of emergency in connection with housing Sets cases in which there will be eviction Duties of property owners.-New office in Agriculture Aysr st dló a dló a conocer ti texto Integro de 1a ley "to declare the existence of a public emergency in connection with the problem of housing and the leasing of buildings for business, commercial and industrial purposes; to provide standards for the fixing of reasonable rents; to regulate the lease; To establish an action for damages in case of the collection of rents in excess of the provisions of this Act; to determine the cases in which eviction may be promoted; to provide that eviction proceedings which do not comply with the terms of this Act shall be suspended during the emergency; to establish certain duties of the owners of rental properties; To create within the Department of Agriculture and Commerce the Office of Price Administration of Puerto Rico and to determine its functions and powers; to allocate funds for the operation of said office; to confer jurisdiction on the District Courts in appeals for review of the rules, regulations, orders, and determinations of said Office; To empower the Executive Council of Puerto Rico to determine by resolution the effective date of the provisions of this Act as to each of the classes of rental properties; to stimulate the construction program by exempting from the provisions of this Act the buildings to be constructed in the District of Puerto Rico; and to provide the Executive Council of Puerto Rico with the power to determine, by resolution, the effective date of the provisions of this Act as to each of the classes of rental properties.
OAP SUGGESTS LOCAL CEMENT PRICE REDUCTION According to information obtained by EL MUNDO, the local office of the OAF, which is headed by Mr. Sam Gilitrop, has recommended to the controlling office in Washington a reduction in the price of cement manufactured in Puerto Rico. The island factories have been informed of the action taken by the OAP. The recommendation has come as a result of investigations carried out by OAP on the island during the last few months. Muñoz and Cuchí gave agape to legionnaires Explained problems of veterans and status of Puerto Rico WASHINGTON, (SEM) - A cocktail party was held at the Puerto Rican Government office in Washington in honor of the American Legion Chief of Staff in Washington. The invitation was extended by the President of the Senate, "eftor Luí" Muftoz Marin, on behalf of the Legisl "lat!va Status Committee, and by "eftor Lui" F. Cuchi, Commandant of the Puerto Rico DeCirtament of the American Legion, on behalf of the said Department. Also in attendance, representing the Legislature's Status Commission, were softors Luis Muftoz Marín, Vicente Gélgel Polanco, Celestino Triarte, Leopoldo Figueroa, Bolivar Pagán and Antonio Pacheco Padró. Representing the American Legion at the event were the Commander of the Department of Pto. Rico, Seftor Luis F. Cuchí; W. A. Andressen, Executive Secretary of the Rehabilitation Committee; Elbert Burns, Assistant National Adjutant; Dana C. HUI, Legal Counsel; Edward B. Novak, Chief Vocaclonal Division; H. D. Shapiro, Chief Medical Consultant; Harry F. Wayden Jr. representing the National Legislative Committee; Ralph Chapman, Chief Contact Division, Rehabilitation Committee; Charles W, Stevens, Deputy Director, National Rehabilitation Committee; Elliot Hayes, Deputy Director, Public Relations Committee; J. Keys, Public Relations Committee." M. .1. O'Gara, Deputy Director, Employment Division," A "l "tleron also met with Emilio Colón, Chief of the Puerto Rico Government Office in Washington, D.C., and Emilio Colón, Chief of the Puerto Rico Government Office in Washington, D.C., and Emilio Colón, Chief of the Puerto Rico Government Office in Washington, D.C. Government of Puerto Rico in Washington, D.C.; Sol DeCarte, Economic Committeeman of the Legislative Status Committee; Teofilo Maldonado and Alberto Guerrero; and Charle McCabe and Le "lle Highley, representatives of the United Press and Associated Press, respectively. Commander Cuchi explained to the attendees the problems facing the "veteran" portorrlquefto" and urged the "re "adoption of (continued on page 32).
Alonso Espino's heirs will not bring fortune to the Island ■ José Alonso Albite says the Inheritance Law > would amount to a two-thirds tribute. ! His sister Teresa is married to Manuel Espino.
' By J. ARNALDO MEYNERS EL MUNDO dló cuenta da las ges- ■ tienes que ha venido realizando desde Buenos Aires, Argentina, el seftor Manuel Alonso Espino para localizar en Puerto Rico a los hijos de un hermano suyo que acaba de morir en el Brasil, dejando una fortuna do más de dos millones de dótares. Yesterday afternoon, the editorial office of this newspaper was visited by Mr. José Alonso Albito and his partner Mr. Manuel Espino, both from this capital, who, according to what they said, happen to be the persons object of the Inquiry and the beneficiaries of the large inheritance. Mr. Alonso Albite and Mrs. Teresa Alonso Albita (Manuel Espino's wife) are the only two children of the deceased millionaire in South America. The visitors informed us that it was through the information that appeared in EL MUNDO that they learned of the death of their father and father-in-law respectively. Through them, one of our editors obtained the background and details of the interesting history of the deceased, which abounds in .(Continued on page 32.)
! < f* wL. I í MUMgflk * JOSE.
Industrialists and workers are against measure Organisms of loa doa sectors, believe Unfair the public pay more Laa housewives condemn action AFF workers go to discuss c a a a o to ask for higher wages Port R. Santiago Bom Editor of EL MUNDO Strong opoelclón "to reglitró ay "r in circle" economic", lndu "trlale", commercial#" and worker", and enters the" ama" of cata, against the announced increase of the" tariff" of light and electric force, increase qua"- dlacutlrá in a public vlata announced by the Authority da Fuentea Fluvialea, for the new of the maftana of the 10 of next May. The River Source Authority proposes to increase the rate of the electric light and power supply, in one rate for residential and domestic lighting; for commercial and other commercial lighting; for public lighting; for public lighting in rural districts; for wholesale electric power service to municipal franchise holders authorized to distribute and sell electric power within the urban area of a municipality; for irrigation and industrial power purposes; for the sale of wholesale power for general purposes; and for the supply of electric power to industrial facilities. Public reaction, expressed as a result of a survey conducted by EL MUNDO, is against an increase in the current rates of the River Source Authority. In contrast, it is in favor of the Government liberalizing the current rates and offering, at a minimum cost, not only light and power, but also other public services which it currently monopolizes. For the General Confederation of Workers, sector presided by Francisco Colón Gordlany, "the increase in the rates of electricity and electric power at this moment is a clear impediment to the healthy purpose of economic-social reconstruction, and constitutes a further attack on the means of life of the people". The Federación Libre de los Trabajadores de Puerto Rico did not express an opinion, through the voice of its Secretary, Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera, because he is ill. We know that the Council of Unions of the Electric Industry, affiliated to the FLT, will have to express its views at its next meeting. It was reported that when discussing the amendments to the collective bargaining agreement between the referred unions and the River Source Authority, the possibility of an increase in wages and salaries, based on the new rates to be implemented, will be considered. "Consistent with our criteria on public administration matters," said the Federation of Commerce, "we do not oppose an increase in electric rates throughout the Island if it is not amply justified before public opinion." According to the Farmers Association, "the electric and power companies, as well as the water utility, should not derive benefits from the consumers' pockets. These services should operate in such a way that only those who use them pay what is fair and reasonable for their maintenance ■ and operation". The Industrial Association expressed that "there is no need to argue that the organization is flatly against this increase. Anything that is detrimental to the industry is detrimental to its natural development". Mr. Vicente Leon Jr., secretary of this Association, expressed that, although he is not in a position to make a comparative study, the Association is in principle opposed to any increase. This organization will go to the public hearing to express its opposition to the new rates. The following are the statements made by several organizations of the public on the proposal of the Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority to increase the rates for electricity and electric power: Francisco Colón Gordisny, president of a sector of the CGT, declared that the increase that the Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority is about to decree in its rates for electricity and electric power is yet another attack on the livelihood of the people. It is alleged by the Authority that it is necessary to increase the rates in order to offset the industrial operating expenses due to the increases in the price of fuel (continued on page 24).