THE M&N DO
Governor should be leaving for Washington shortly.
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY-Partially cloudy, with fairly scattered showers. High in San Juan yesterday, 7", 0.01 inch of rain was recorded. No sign of thunderstorms.
Uicion
JOURNAL OF
YEAR XXVIII
NUMBER 10748
THE MORNING
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO SATURDAY, OCTOBER 26, 1946
Entered m second class matter, Post Office, flan Juan, P. B.
PRICE 5 Cents
Relief boats destined for Isla Rico are still delayed.
The Governor reported, "Unfortunately up to yesterday, although we had permission from several striking unions with main offices in New York City, in each case there were inconve- 1 nlents, because there were other unions on strike where the ship was located, and these unions formed quotas so that the workers of the others would not risk bankruptcy," adding: "Up to yesterday none of the ships had left. The last unions that behaved in this way belonged to ship captains. But in spite of all the inconveniences that arose, I continued to fight. The soAor PlAero did not think it was necessary for him to go to Washington to personally make the arrangements for the shipment of foodstuffs. "He said that this is a matter for the U.S. government, but he said it was not necessary for him to go to Washington to personally make the arrangements for the food shipment.
The Puerto Rican veteran, as reported yesterday by Dr. Jaime Sorra Chavarry, director of the regional veterans' office. It is expected that, with the visit of these officers, a new impulse will be given to the program to provide more vocational training for Puerto Rico's veterans. As you are aware, Governor PlAero, shortly after taking office, received a visit from high-ranking VA officials, according to arrangements he made in Washington, among whom was Mr. Nelson. These officials are all members of the Division of Education and Vocational Rehabilitation of the Administration's offices in New York, to which the regional offices of Puerto Rico are attached. During their stay on the island, the visitors will be guests of Governor TI Aero. The visiting committee is headed by Dr. William A. Glllerist, with Dr. Ivan Nelson, Dr. A. C. Dlgelow and Dr. James E. Dlgelow. Dlgelow and James E. Seay (continued on page 7).
t■ ,,, , 1 News Digest
Mufles Marin comments on the organization of the new Independence Party. He attributes to it tactics that ora hindered the United States. He says no final status can be requested on behalf of the votes obtained by the Popular Party. "Coffee is now selling at 48 cents a pound - eight cents more than last week. - - - The second trial (for murder) against Fernando Quifloneo Jiménez continues to be heard in Humacao. - The representative Leoncio Sentadla asks for action of the Administration of Supplies to face the food crisis. - Bolivar Pagan, a sonador, does not believe it is necessary to amend the law against the illegal carrying of firearms to facilitate the registration of boobs in the federal registry. that George Holliday, an official of the Chamber of Commerce, upon his return to the U.S. predicts that even after the maritime strike, Ida will face a difficult food situation, and Arjona Sisea blames his own party for the division in Un i*i i a leu ■ a la IndaMndanciR. He comments on statements made by Susonl and reminds him of the Arecibo agreement. - '■ e e e e e Agüen delayed ships "la allvin destined for te Island. Pi-
Aero hopes that the critical situation will improve within a few days. He does not consider it necessary for him to go to the U.S. - e - Today the last ship to leave for the United States. The island is cut off by sea from the United States, and more than two thousand dock workers are unemployed. - The shipment of asúcarea from the island to the United States has been going on without major difficulties. - Federal Interior is trying to get a transport to send food to Puerto Rico. e - - The Spanish Embassy in Washington repudiates the attitude of Trygvio Lio, and says that it knows nothing about Rapada, - Today begins the celebration of Navy Day. The public will be able to visit the destroyer "Ellyron". sao Cancionera puts his Invicto to the test tomorrow against Bachiller. ... flan Juan and flanturce defend their leads in serles against Mayagües and Ponce. asa Final elimination of track and field today at the University. sea Four officials of the 1st Veterans Administration in Washington will arrive on Monday. They will be guests of the Governor.
Although the situation is critical, Piñero believes there is no need for him to go to the U.S. now. By "E COMBAS GUERRA Editor of EL MUNDO. New inconveniences in the U.S. ports have caused the delay in the shipment to this Island of ships loaded with supplies. This was revealed by Governor Jesus T. PiAerc in his conference yesterday with journalists. The "gestione" to speak
GOBBBWADOB PIÑERO
V.A. officials arrive Monday; will be guests of Piñero The program to provide training facilities for veterans is expected to get new impetus Four high-ranking officials of the Veterans Administration will arrive in Puerto Rico Monday afternoon from New York to establish relations with the agencies of the island and federal government that directly or indirectly have to do with the development of the program of education and rehabilitation of veterans.
Russia against review of UN veto power Requests removal of Cuba's request from agenda By GEORGE DURN0 NEW YORK, 25. (INS) - The Soviet Union today requested that Cuba's and Australia's proposals for a review of the veto power enjoyed by the five great powers in the Security Council be removed from the agenda of the United Nations General Assembly. Andrei Vyshinsky, delegate As Russia, declared that the abolition of the veto in the Security Council would be "a terrible blow to the young united nations charged with maintaining peace and security". Speaking before the fourteen-nation general committee, Vyshinsky added that "the spirit of solidarity" demanded that the papers on the veto be withdrawn. Sir Hartley Shawcross, of the United Kingdom, said his country was in favor of retaining the right to vote but warned that in his view, the Committee lacked jurisdiction to prevent the Assembly from discussing the papers from Cuba and Australia. Shawcross added that it would be "unwise" to alter the UN Charter but admitted that the way in which the veto had been used had brought the Security Council into "serious disrepute. The British delegate asked that the whole matter be the subject of "a full and wide-ranging discussion" in the Assembly, as requested by the US delegation. Paul Hasluck of Australia was then seated unopposed so that he could present his government's views on the right of veto. Austro(Continued on page 7) Asks AS for action on shortage L. Santaella Leon Representative Leoncio Santa" lia Leon, of the city of Ponce has addressed a telegram to the Adml nlstrador do Suministros, soAor An tonlo Vlcen" Rios, in which he urges him to enact "some clear provision to trade for 4u< compro if the Government cannot resolve the conflict of the shortage of goods". In his message, addressed through EL MUNDO, representative Santa" lia León states the following: "There is an offer from brokers on Ponce for butter at 840.50, and for pink beans at 17-114 cents There is an urgent need for morcan(Continued on page 7j
Even after the strike, there will still be a lack of groceries
Chamber of Commerce official analyzes current reality The U.S. itself is affected. There is not enough rice or butter. Beans outlook By R. Santiago Som Editor of EL MUNDO Quo lo situation for Puerto Rlce ao prosonta Uncertain, not only now on the occasion of the maritime strike, ai that once roauolto the conflict, mainly due to the Inautlciencia of vfveroa in the market of Eatadoa Unido", and the fact that a large quantity of allmontoa in the U.S. railroads' mills and warehouses, which were destined for the lala, have had to be liquidated" because of the threat of damage, Mr. George Holliday, an official of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce, who returned from the mainland yesterday morning, told EL MUNDO yesterday. I -'The' statistics in my possession show," said Mr. Holliday, "that Puerto Rico has only received during the months of September and October abaatecimlentoa of vlverea for the general consumption of monea do tree weeks. Satas oxlstencia", anto the prolongation of the maritime strike, a"! as the reiervaa that ao were in the warehouses of the country, are practically exhausted". Even if the maritime strike were settled immediately, Mr. Hollyday said that we would begin to receive new shipments by the beginning of November. "The problem is compounded by the fact that," he said, "it is difficult for us to obtain nursery stock in sufficient quantities to meet the normal demand of our population. "We will need," he continued, "from four to fifteen hundred thousand quintals of rice, a quantity which, according to my information, cannot now be acquired in the United States. If the picture, as for butter, is discouraging. Lilac will need not less than five to six million pounds of this product. The lard is being quoted in the U.S. at a high price, which is between 45 and 55 cents per pound, representing such a level of own o! that the product would have to reach in the Island the price without pro- < pedents of 70 to 75 cents per pound < ü retail". Mr. Holliday noted that there was a marked inflationary trend in the U.S. nursery market, and that, since the Island was forced to buy from that market, staple commodities would be priced at unheard-of levels for the consumer. In addition, it was pointed out that for the next few months the national production will be insufficient, in the main items, to supply the continuous and accelerated demand, especially from the continental consumer, such a tendency will be reflected on the Island, producing notable shortages in supplies. - Regarding beans, he said that in California, which su- . (Continued on page 8)
' No final political status can ' be ' requested on behalf of the votes , given to Partido Popular, Muñoz says.
Puerto Rico will thus be cut off by sea from the United States 10,000 dock workers out of work Reports offered by shipping companies and Labor unions By L. Sánchea Cappa Editor of EL MUNDO Today, when the only steamship remaining in San Juan sails for the United States, the threat that Puerto Rico will be cut off from the United States by sea will become a tragic reality, with the additional problem that more than 10,000 maritime workers will be without work; The steamship "Twilight," owned by the Porto Rico Lino, which was the only one remaining in the port of San Juan receiving cargo for departure to the United States, will weigh anchor today, and if the strike continues in the northern ports, it, like the others, will be paralyzed in its port of destination. All the shipping companies that operate ships on the routes that connect the island with the United States reported yesterday that the totality of their vessels was yesterday in various ports of the United States, affected by the maritime strike. The Bull Insular Une, the Port of Rico and Linen, the Waterman Steamship Co., 1 and the Lykes Brothers announced yesterday the total paralyzation of their ships, with the exception of the steamship mentioned, which leaves for the United States today. The absence of ships from our ports results in a stoppage of dock work, and as a result of this stoppage the men employed by the shipping companies in this work 1 have been becoming unemployed gradually, since the beginning of the stoppage on the United States docks. Reports furnished by the 1 various labor organizations rovo- - lan that a number of their respective members, amounting in all to ' the sum of over 10,000 men, 1 were out of work yesterday, throughout 1 the Island. * The Union of Dock Workers, which is presided over by Mr. Juan B. Garcia, reported by the voice of Mr. Juan B. Garcia. Garcia, reported through the voice of its president and secretary, Mr. Carlos J. Recelo, that no less than 2,800 of its members had been left without work until yesterday in the port of San Juan. In the ports of the Ibi la the number of workers employed is estimated at no monkeys (Continued on page 8).
the port of San Juan. 1 But, I ask, who or what is to blame for this? The Puerto Ricans who militate in the movement aimed at the formation of a new party to support, advocate and defend the ideal of independence, ablertamen- i te, without oscillations or tortuosities, 1 militated until yesterday in the Partido : Popular. Without prejudice to this affiliation in our party, exercising the citizen's right to think clearly and to act in harmony with their criteria on the program of the collectivity, partially in line with the personal criteria of some directors of the Party, they were expelled from the Party. They were subjected to an implacable fulmi- ¡ nation. The sentence that threw them out of the house that they had helped to raise, like everyone else, was not preceded by the granting of an opportunity to be heard and to defend themselves against the accusation made against them. The decree of irradiation was an unwarranted decision without prior trial.
The irradiation decree was a úkase issued without a prior trial. Although Russia, Germany and Holland are producing beet sugar in 1948 for the first time after the war, and despite the greatly increased production in the Caribbean areas, the overall production is feared to be some sets of millions of tons less than the total quantity needed to meet the demand. The bleakest point in the whole sugar picture, however, is the prediction made by those circuits well acquainted with all the affairs of this industry that the present shortage - though not so acute - will persist until 1949, and that, indeed, the present restrictions on sugar consumption, world-wide, will persist until 1949.
In Corozal is operating the > artificial flower factory '- ■ ■III lili ■ I I * It is of Kaplan Brothers firm, whose radius of action - reaches abroad. - 230 Puerto Ricans are working. ó Will establish additional factories on the island ° Por™ RrSANTUGO~SO8A । EL MUNDO Editor - Puerto Rico will become, within the next three to four years, one of the world's best known industrial centers in the manufacture of artificial flowers, according to Mr. Monroe J. Kaplan, director of the Kaplan Brothers firm, in the city of San Juan, Puerto Rico, yesterday.
i- Brothers, of the city of Nuoyar or York, who operates in Corozal the first plant established on the Island, dedicated to the manufacture of ornamental flowers. i- Mr. Kaplan made to EL MUNDO a detailed analysis of the progress achieved in Puerto Rico 1 in the manufacture of flowers, using raw materials that form diverse materials, especially colored paper cuttings. "Our firm is a private company । well known in financial circles all over the world," said our interviewee, "and has no relationship whatsoever with the Industrial Development Company or with any organization on the Island or abroad. Its operations are covered by its own resources and its radius of action extends not only to the United States, but also to other countries of the world. United States, but to other countries of the world". I . Numerous young Puerto Rican women are working in the first plant built by this firm on Co- : K rozal. Some 230 youngcltao, convo- I nlontomonte trained by the em- < [- prose in ol arto of making । '■ artificial flowers, so earn alii the 1 i- livelihood. This factory pays the pro- i i- sonto an average on Jornales do i 3100,000 annually, and performs oper-
The factory pays an average of $3,100,000 per year in wages, and performs export operations estimated at half a million dollars a year. Mr. Kaplan said that, in order to encourage the investment of Puerto Rican capital, long-term leasing contracts have been established for standing buildings, or buildings constructed by some investors, according to the designs and specifications submitted to them by the company he directs. "This assures," he said, "permanent benefits to Puerto Ricans, since the firm provides them with a secure income, as a lease fee, for an undetermined period of time". "The corporation's plans," he added, "will go even further. We already have in the pipeline the construction of another plant in Toa Alta, which will begin operations in a few weeks, as well as ten to twelve additional factories, the plans for which are being finalized. "Each of these industries will employ an average of 200 workers, to whom our specialized personnel will offer the necessary training, paying them while they learn. We maintain, at the same time, acceptable rates of pay, and at present, we are engaged in discussions with (Continued on page 7)
' Arjona blames his party for । the division created within i pro-independence forces [ Reiterates Arecibo agreement íwas an úkase dictated without prior trial. - Alludes to i Speaker Susoni's statements Senator Rafael Arjona Slaca (opular, at-large) commented yesterday on Speaker Susoni's statements regarding the founding of the Independent Party. The statements of Arjona Slaca are the following t "Dr. Susoni is right. It is a disgrace, an immense disgrace, which reaches the magnitude of a great moral tragedy, the division of the partisan civic forces of our country.
m ; ' ■ " kj I 1 SENATOR AKJUNA blAUA
Fears production will not meet demand for sugar this year The bleakest point in the whole picture is the prediction that the present shortage "will persist until 1949, ruling control By BILL "wIDDER International News Service Correspondent. NEW YORK. 25. (INS)-A worldwide sugar production for 1948 of just over twenty-seven million tons is considered by industry experts to be a sure indication that the demands for sugar in the current year will not be able to be met.
léi i ni ■"il i a "bmMI Will open new VA offices in 8 towns Are contact offices to expand orientation and assistance work The Veterans Administration informed that eight new VA contact offices will soon be established to expand the orientation and assistance service to Puerto Rican veterans claiming benefits under the provisions of the Veterans Bill of Rights.
veuva uc vetrutova uu vcttífliiu. The new locations will be established in Rio Piedras, Fajardo, Cayey, Barranquitas, Vega Baja, Cabo Rojo, Yauco and Bayamón. Mr. Vicente Reyes Fitzpatrick, head of the Veterans Administration Contact Division, informed yesterday that the mayor of Yauco has temporarily offered a locale in the municipal building to house one of these ¿offices. At the same time, it was revealed that the mayor of Cabo Rojo is making the pertinent arrangements to acquire a location in that city. The Veterans Administration is arranging for the premises that will house this agency in the other towns mentioned. > The Administration's Contact Division has offices in San Juan, . Ponce, Mayagüez, Arecibo, Huma- . cao, Guayama, Caguas and Aguadilla, i Another Contact office is located in Santomas, from where (Continued on page .7) ■Does not believe it necessary ; to amend the law on - gun carrying 1 After informing an editor : ours that tomorrow, Sunday, the i ' Socialist Party is to hold in l ' San Juan a meeting of orlenta- , political orlenta- , cion, like those which it has seen- । i n has been holding said party in ; The senator Bollva* Pagan was questioned on the question of the registration of arms in < the federal registry, and he considered that a problem had been created < on the matter, as to the possibility of a person being < denounced for the crime of carrying a gun, and then alleged in court that he was carrying it in those mo- l (Continued on page 7) j
Interior tries to get a transport 'Negotiations for i shipment relief ship were broken off yesterday í Rice shipper blocked J shipment rice Island labor leaders in U.S. appeal to unions By CHART.ES MrCABE United Press Correspondent. WASHINGTON, 25. (P.U.)-A spokesman for the U.S. Department of the Interior said today that negotiations aimed at getting a relief food ship loaded for Puerto Rico have broken down, and that at present the situation is unfavorable for getting food shipped to Puerto Rico unless the maritime strike is settled today, 26 days after it broke out, with no shipments to Puerto Rico or any other territory of the United States. (Last night in New Orleans. commercial ship crews, on strike, refused to allow the Victory "Belgium" to be loaded with relief food for Puerto Rico. Captain Anders Paulsen, of the Strike Committee, said his Union had ruled that the "petition was invalid," in view of the fact that the ship would be carrying only about 2,700 tons of food, and that the remainder of the cargo - some 10,000 tons - would be commercial goods. Captain Paulsen said that the shipment "is not so necessary" for Puerto Rico, since the island has had the benefit of foreign companies. The Water- , man Steamship Company said it could not move the ship without the permission of the Union), The Interior spokesman added that all efforts of that department are now directed toward securing a military transport for emergency food shipment to Puerto Rico. This morning, Resident Commissioner Fernos said that "the whole emphasis (of the efforts) should now be on getting a military ship." Prior to last night's agreement in New Orleans by the striking seamen affiliated with the American Federation of Labor, the Seamen's Beneficial Association, affiliated with the CIO, had agreed to load emergency food supplies for Puerto Rico from one of the Gulf ports, provided the striking FAT seamen also agreed (continued on page 8).Continued on page 8) No difficulty in shipping sugars Creese maritime strike does not affect because it is for the Government The Sugar Producers Association reported yesterday that Puerto Rican producers have not experienced "great difficulties in continuing the regular shipments of our sugars to the United States". Questioned yesterday by the APA Secretary, Mr. Jesus. María Ríos, if the maritime conflict in the U.S. ports was an impediment to the transportation and unloading of sugars produced on the Island at the destination ports, he said that "up to now there has not been any inconvenience, and, although I consider it very risky to ship sugar under the current conditions, those shipments destined for U.S. ports have been unloaded without any kind of inconvenience". Mr. Rios explained that this product is destined for refineries on the continent, and that our sugar is pledged in its entirety to the United States Government. It is understood that ol fact that oote product is rationed throughout the Nation, and that : ol Federal Government exercises a con- < trol or ' these shipments, is the < reason why so facilitated ou : transportation and unloading at the ] docks of destination.
The popular chief repudiates tactic that attributes to - independentifltafl Creates difficulty to the U. S., affirms 1 or - 9 Insular status is a mutual problem of the Island and the U. S., declares * By Juan Martinn Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO A Hollcltud of this newspaper, ol President of the Partido Popular DemoI crético y dol Senado Insular, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marlr, expressed yesterday I, that "it is a violation of the word ' given to the people to use the offices and the victory obtained through the Populares votes in the last elections to manage Independence or any other form of political status." He believes Mr. Munoz Man rln that Independence is not dlfl- " cll achieve it from the United States ° if the people, in a plebiscite, vote ' for it, and that "the tactic of creating" ' le difficulties for the United States at International conferences, is useful to those who are in diplomatic contro" ' venies with this na" g ction." He also expressed his satisfaction for the fact that the new Independent Party, whose disguised existence had been pointed out by the leadership of the Popular Party since last February in Arecibo, has been "openly" given. The manlfostaclones Integras of Mr. Muñoz Marin, with respect to the founding of the new Partido Indepondontista n are the following: "I am satisfied that the new party, whose disguised existence was pointed out by the leadership of the Popular Democratic Party in Arecibo since last February, has been openly founded. Now there is no longer any room for confusion. The two camps have been demarcated. The Par" II tido Popular slguo Blondo the Par" tido Popular with all com" o promises on foot, including its com" h promiso on political status; and Iob enemy parties of the Partido i. Popular are all known clearly, without disguise, as enemies of the Popular Party. The demarcation is not in terms of Independence or non-independence, nor in terms of any other form of political status. The two sides are between those who fulfill and those who repudiate and violate the commitment made to the people. The clear commitment, thousands of times repeated, that was made to the people, was that their votes given to the Popular Democratic Party would not be interpreted as a "commitment" to the people. Democratic Party would not be interpreted - or used in any way in favor of a political status, whatever it may be, but as an endorsement of the intention that it is the misi mo people who can choose directly" - mind with their votes what political status they want for their future. It is ■ to say that in naming those votes, neither Indo- - pendency nor ostadity, nor any other form of political status, can be sought, but rather to work for a broad-based bloc that will give the people the greatest opportunity to choose and decide. It is clearly a violation of the word given to the people, by which the people voted and elected governors and mayors, to use the power and victory given by those votes to manage independence, as it would be to manage any other form of political status. When it comes to vote in the pío" biicito, that's the time, as Dr. Suso" ni has rightly said, for everyone to act according to his conscience. Since February, in articles published in EL MUNDO, I described the then disguised movements, - now open, - as the "New Coalition" dedicated, like the Old Coalition, to fight the Popular Democratic Party. The electoral help that the "New Coalition" will be able to give to the Old Coalition, with or without the purpose of doing so, will be extremely limited. On the other hand, the damage it can do to the people of Puerto Rico, the damage it can do to the independence of Puerto Rico, if that is the decision the people make, can be incalculable, not because of the votes it gets, which will be few, but because of the tactics it has already begun to develop with respect to the United States. I explain here what I have said many times before. Independence is not difficult to achieve from the United States, if the people in a plebiscite vote for "11. What requires the most responsible care is the task of obtaining that Independence, or any other political status, be offered to the vote of our people under economic conditions that will permit the life and development of the people, that will guarantee against a collapse of the economy. that will make it possible for Independence or any other status the people choose to be lasting rather than a collapse of the economy. For ob(Continued on page 8)