THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY-Generally fair weather except for scattered showers in the interior of the island; moderate easterly winds, 14 to 19 mph. High yesterday in San Juan, M: low 71; rain yesterday, 017 in. No sign of a storm.
£d¿c¿m7¿nal
MORNING DAILY/k
PRICE 5 Cents
YEAR XXVIII NUMBER 10699
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 7, 1946
Enter aa "econd cías" "atter, Post Office, San Juan. P. R.
All shipments to Island stopped at New York and other ports; San Juan-bound vessels to be stopped.
Sugar workers go to world union The movement for that accomplishment was announced by leader Harry Bridge" Portor Ricans and > Cubans in favor of the union.
U.S. WOULD RETURN THE GOVERNMENT TO THE The U.S. would return the government to the Germans Byrnes raised aye" the situation demanding in addition the elimination of current demarcation foxes STUTTGART. ñNSn=~ÉTs.""""rh United States" made h-> a vibrant statement of the pal" in relation cor. Germany, in which it demanded that the ' ne" of occupation f be abolished, reduced the allied armies j returned the oobernnA of Germany to the German people themselves.
To the points my deitacsiüá of the secretary's speech üyrne"; "It "would not be of benefit to the German people nor to world peace, ú q. Germany becomes a pawn or a partner in a military struggle for control of power between East and West. The "barrier" of the "four zones" of Germany is much more difficult to overcome than those between the normal "independent" states. The time has come when the borders between zones" must ■ be considered" as an "indication of the area" to be occupied" for security purposes by the" forces of the" occupying powers, and not as isolated economic" or political" boundaries of unity. We are in favor" of the economic unification of Germany. If complete unification is impossible to achieve, we will do everything in our power to achieve the maximum possible unification. Germany must have a chance to export product" (Continued on page 24).
JAMES F. BYRNES U.S. Secretary of State.
Same move would be made in connection with longshoremen to support Hawaii NEW ORLEANS, 6. (PU)-Labor leader Harry Bridge announced today that he is planning to unite the sugar workers of the world in a movement to increase the sugar industry, which, he said, could lead to a complete strike in the sugar industry throughout the world at some date in the future. He said that "the preliminary conference in New Orleans was attended by representatives of the Cuban and Puerto Rican sugar workers," having agreed to "coordinate efforts" to obtain a minimum wage of 6 cents an hour, for which the Hawaiian sugar workers, who are on strike, are now fighting. Bridge, who is president of the International Longshoremen's and Warehouse Employees' Union, said that sugar workers in the United States will be invited to participate later in the movement to combine "the full economic and political strength of the sugar workers of the United States, Hawaii, Cuba and Puerto Rico. Miguel Díaz Félix and Félix Pérez, member" of the Executive Board of the Cuban Federation of Sugar Workers, and Juan Sáez Córale", Puerto Rican labor leader, conferred with Harry Bridge", promising him "financial, moral and political support" for the sugar workers. and political support" for the "workers of Hawaii: said" the "anti-Latino leaders" pledged that the Cuban and Puerto Rican sugar workers will not allow the sugar cane plantation and mill owners and sugar speculators to break the Hawaii strike. Bridges also informed that Lombardo Toledano, president of the Latin American Federation of Labor, has declared himself in "complete" agreement with the "action of the conference". The Pacific Coast Longshoremen's labor leader also stated that the requested wage increases could be granted without raising the retail price of sugar "one single cent. He went on to say that additional conferences "will have to be held" before the coordinated machinery for enforcing labor demands can operate, adding that the "blueprint" would probably be ready by September 30. The Latin Americans have classified... (Continued on page 24).
South branch, part of express avenue to go to public hearing
Suggestions will be accepted to modify the map approved a few months ago. - Includes from Martín Peña to Río Piedras exit.
The Planning Board will submit to a public hearing the final map of the projected "venida expreso, southern branch, included in the regulatory plan of main public roads of the San Juan metropolitan area, approved a few months ago by the Planning Board. The view pu-
.I Farmers ! will pay a visit to the' t Governor i They express satisfaction i that the Island's Executive is a farmer ¡ With the purpose of paying him a courtesy visit and offering him cooperation for the success of his activities as Chief Executive In- ' su lar, the Farmers' Association yesterday requested an audience with the new Governor of Puerto Rico, din 1 Jesús T. Piftero. It was reported that the full ' board of directors of the agricultural entity intends to visit the Governor on a date to be designated by him. An authorized spokesman for the Association said that it is the purpose, furthermore, to personally express to the Governor that it is his intention to visit the Governor at a date to be designated by him.
The public meeting will take place in the first auditorium of the College of General Studies of the University of Puerto Rico, at two o'clock in the afternoon next Friday. This projected highway will extend from the Martin Peña bridge, following highway number one, to the junction with the military detour in Hato Rey, continuing said detour to the Rio Piedras exit towards Caguas. South of the Martin Peña bridge, where it begins, a widening of highway number one will be built, diverting its trajectory to join the aforementioned detour almost directly, avoiding the forks that currently exist in front of Broadway Street in Hato Rey. The Board's chief planner, Mr. Carlos M. Passalacqua, informed yesterday that the purpose of the hearing is to obtain the suggestions that the attendees may wish to offer, with a view to modifying the prepared plan. > The road will consist of two special "important" designs for rapid transit, at its intersections with Eleanor Roosevelt Avenue, and where it will intersect the projected Central Avenue, south of Auxilio Mutuo. These will be at-grade intersections, with routes designed to avoid unnecessary crossing of vehicles traveling in opposite directions. Also, with the cooperation of the Federal Highway Administration, another center has been designed for this road, for the distribution of vehicle traffic at the intersection of the avenue with the road leading to Caguas, at the Rio Piedras exit. This design includes a modern bridge, with a route for x vehicles underneath, which will facilitate free transit. The project is among the works to be carried out by the Federal and Island Governments, with combined funds. A V Ti " Ti
Compendium of news
All shipments at New York and other U.S. ports indicated for Puerto Rico are stopped due to the seamen's strike. Local seamen's unions are without instructions due to the strike. Loading and unloading operations continue. Vessels leaving the island and arriving on the mainland will be stopped. The United States yesterday called for the "cleanup of the German domarcation and the restitution of the government to the alo- - - - - The roneo produced to the lela in August the sum of H. ese Judge Suáres Garrlga, of San Juan, yesterday upheld the validity of the IMS price law. - Captain Edward Rickenbacker arrives in San Juan today with a large delegation of U. S. businessmen, officials and journalists. * The uniorrepublican commission which visited Rickenbacker yesterday expressed V - d
that it will cooperate cordially with the latter. - The PEG is ready to begin the program of construction of "C" type units. - Filllus has secured for the island a market of two million boxes of rum per year. - Dietiata assures that the rice brought by AGS is more nutritious. - The south branch of the Martin Peña to Rio Piedras expressway will go to public hearing. Planning makes study on urban land; expects to finish it by June M. - - - - Farmers will visit the Governor to offer cooperation. - - - Another 2 suspected cases of polio are reported. - - - - Arrest of ex-looter Carvajal ordered again, as one of his bondsmen withdrew bail - * - - / Luis Rodriguez Olmo reappeared with the Veracruz Azules and gave one hit in three innings in his team's win over Rojeo, o-a
Fifty-six prominent civic and business leaders will arrive in San Juan today, Saturday, at about 1:30 p.m., from Miami, Florida, aboard one of Eastern Air Lines' four-engine "Sllverllners," with Captain Eddie Rickenbacker, president and general manager of the company leading the delegation. The delegation, representative of many of the major cities served by Eastern, is receiving a trial run of the non-stop service Eastern will inaugurate next Monday, September 9, between Miami and San Juan, with 56-passenger four-engine aircraft.
Local unions with no orders yet Several ships are traveling to the country. They left before the strike began What the shipowners report In San Juan and on the island, cargo operations continued yesterday By Lula Sánchcs Cappa Editor of El. MUNDO Indication" that 1" strike that broke out last Thursday in the" port" of United" States" "e extended to Puerto Rico did not exist yesterday. "According to information gathered by this editor. However, the prevailing feeling in the maritime workers' centers and among shipping company officials is that the effects of the strike in the nation will have a notable repercussion on the port movement and the island's import-export trade. The unions of seamen and dock workers in Puerto Rico affiliated with the American Federation of Labor and the CIO had not received until yesterday specific instructions as to the attitude they should take, although the maritime unions said there was a likelihood that the unions in Puerto Rico would be instructed to show solidarity with the strike in the nation if it continued for some time. According to Daniel Butts, agent in Puerto Rico of the Seafarer's International Union and the Pacific Merchant Marine Union, and Kenneth Washington, agent of the UMN, no orders have been received so far to stop shipping in Puerto Rico. The office of the International Longshoremen's Association has also received no instructions regarding the Puerto Rico port strike. Mr. Butts and Mr. Washington said that the immediate effects of the strike on the island are that the ships in the ports of Puerto Rico will be unloaded and loaded for their respective ports in the United States, where they will be paralyzed by the striking unions. "On the other hand, some shipping companies in Puerto Rico were yesterday awaiting reports from their home office as to the possible effects of the strike on the island, while others have already cabled their U.S. offices to request reports. (Continued on page 19)
In August, rums gave wsemr Puerto Rican reputable brands remain strong in the market.
During August, the Internal Revenue Service credited the Puerto Rican government with $4,493,045.90 in taxes on products made in Puerto Rico and exported to the mainland. This figure represents, mainly, taxes levied on exports to the United States of distilled spirits," principally "roñe" del pal". Of the above amount, only $29,537.54 corresponds to federal taxes on cigars, resulting, therefore, in a balance of $4,464,508.36 credited to the Insular Treasury from taxes collected on rums exclusively. EL MUNDO hnhln anticipated rum revenues, corresponding only to the first 28 days of last August, according to Planning figures, at just over three million dollars. This figure remains at the monthly revenue levels of the past six months, and although whl "key production in the U.S. has begun to increase, at the same time, the U.S. economy has been growing at a slower pace.
Producers work for all sectors: Jesus M. Rios
He explains that the united front action is oriented towards obtaining benefits for the entire island. - Management history
The secretary of the Sugar Producers Association, Mr. Jesús M. Ríos, explained yesterday that the management carried out in Washington by a delegation of the entity in representation of the various sectors of the sugar industry of the Island, is not directed towards the achievement of benefits for a single sector, but for the whole group and the palate in general. To this effect, the "eftor Rio" said:-.
Rickenbacker arrives today with a group of notables from the USA.
The light Silverllners, which will operate on the San Juan-MIaml route, will offer a service of approximately five hours to Miami, where it can connect with the 56-passenger Sllverllner's non-stop service to New York, Chicago, St. Louis, Memphis, Atlanta and other major cities. The first 56-passenger Sllverllner aircraft to begin regular service will lift off in Miami at 7:30 a.m. (Eastern Standard Time) next Monday and arrive in San Juan at 1:45 p.m. (Anti's Standard Time), llas). On the return flight on (Continued on page 24)
"In order to present to the Washington authorities the disadvantageous situation in which Puerto Rico was placed by the contract signed in Havana on July 16 for the 1946 and 1947 Cuban sugar harvests, a united front was organized by the CGT Sugar Union, the Sugar Producers Association and the Island Government. A meeting was held with the new Resident Commissioner, Dr. Antonio Femó" I "ern, who agreed to be the spokesman for Puerto Rico in the battle that was beginning to avoid a new discrimination against our people. At that meeting with Dr. Femó" a "i "tieron lo" señorea Pedro Vega Berilo", Ramón Barreto Pérez and Ramón Alvarez Conde, in representation of the Slndl(Continued on page 19) PRICE OF SUGAR WILL INCREASE WASHINGTON, 6. (PU)A spokesman for the Office of Price Administration" said that the retail price for "fúcar also zeiáa Increased soon. He added that, the exact amount of the increase has not yet been decided, but that it is expected to be more than a penny a pound.
l; . "J* v 'Mr Jw r A * J m ¥ £ £ b jH BU i dMI Hr ■ JI W Hbm Lo" marine" w" meet at the loen! of "u international union at Rnltlmore after leaving lo" ships aurtoa in that bay, eatabhxslendo their picket headquarters, with Army cots" to sleep between ol" eight-hour shifts assigned to the pickets. He has not reported that the strike of merchant seamen" has covered all the ports and . mbnrc "cions of the~ United States. (Photo by r. A.)
La Fortaleza open to all Puerto Ricans: says Pinero Received yesterday a uniorrepublican commission headed by Iriarte. - The latter expressed his desire to cooperate with the Governor cordially "The doors of La Fortaleza were opened on September 3 and will remain open at all hours for all Puerto Ricans of good will". -said yesterday Governor Jesús T. Piftero to a delegation of the Republican Union, presided over by Mr. Cele "I tino Iriarte, director of said political group, who came in the afternoon to greet him and to offer him their most sincere cooperation for his
"ir- o nrsiuvsmtv -- ... . government work. 1 " I Shortly after noon din arrived at the Palace the uniorrepu- ■ . bllcana delegation, alendo received and regalia-1 . given by the new Governor. After lunch, they met in the office of the chief executive. Insular, where Mr. Irlartel . spoke on behalf of the dlrerrlón of . his Party, responding lnmedl"-| । lamente Mr. Piftero o con frases i । de agraderlmíento por la roopera- . dón ofrecldale. At the end of the se- ( . flor Piftero, the members of the uniorrepublican delegation gave him a warm applause. Seftor Iriarte expressed to one । of our editors that "Mr. Piftero's pa- , words aggravated us to all." Immediately I । added that "we are sure that । Seftor Piftero is full of the best intentions and in tune with that - sentiment we have offered him all 1 ' our cooperation." "From his brief" remarks said" a moment ago, we have 1 the impression do that the Governor 1 will have to take counsel with us on several occasions, and we may at times concur. We do not mean to imply that he will always accept our advice or that he is obliged to do so. Not at all. ' We have come out of 1a Fort"-| ( loza completely satisfied," and f no" damo" realize that he needs everyone's cooperation and we do not vapios him to bargain for that <¡ cooperation. । "We did not attend the inauguration ce- x remonies at the ' templete; but the whole country knows ,. the reasons we had for it. However, this did not mean that we were going to become a stone in the road, on the contrary; we will be sincere, cooperators of the good government that the governor Plflero announces and proposes to make. (Continued on page 24).
Judge Suárez believes that the price law is valid He rejected the challenge of three merchants and sentenced them to jail Judge Tullo Suárez Garrlga, of the District Court, declared that the challenge to Price Law number 31 of 1943 made by the defendants Ramón Camacho García, Victoriano Marrero and Jesús Abréu Benitez was dismissed. It will be recalled that upon hearing the cases of these defendants last week, Judge Suárez Garrlga declared their challenge to said statute inadmissible in principle. However, and in view of the fact that attorneys Antonio Qulrós Méndez, Angel R. Díaz, Pedro Amado Rivera, Rafaél Currá" and Luí" M. Pagán, offered him additional pleadings "on certain questions of law raised, he left "In effect his resolution, to resolve, after seeing the" pleadings, the challenge raised. Also d""JÓ pending" Judge Suárez Garrlga's ruling on the" case" of the three" defendants, whose evidence he heard, Yesterday, verbally, Judge Suárez Garrlga ruled against the challenge, stating that in his opinion. "the federal law of 1946 had validated the" regulations" that "were promulgated by the Federal Law of 1942, which were to "u Judgment those that were incorporated here in our law of 1943." Resolved osa question, he found (Continued on page 19).
The PEG ready to start the program units of type 'C'.
For the construction of a single 'C' type public health unit, with an emergency hospital, $198,000. For the construction, reconstruction, enlargement and equipment of municipal hospitals, $400,000 "The Public Works Design Committee has completed the 'plan' and specified the 'work' to be done, having estimated the cost of each public health unit at $26,000. The estimated cost for the municipal hospitals vnrla according to the bed capacity of each, in the form "1guíente: Dr ten beds. $36,650; of 16 ca(Continued on page 21) |
The director of the Emergency Program, Mr. Manuel A. Perez, informed yesterday that the plans and specifications are ready to undertake the program for the construction of type C public health units and the construction and improvement of municipal hospitals. He added that the sum of $630,000, provided for by Law 323 of May 15, 1945, will be invested in these works, and that the agency will start these projects in the next day. In addition, the plan for the location of these health units and centers has been delineated. "Law 323 of May 15, 1945". -The "eflor Perez- 'a "ig- । na $630,000 for the conatrucclón public health units and municipal hospitals, "egún la siguiente
Shippers notify Puerto Rico I Believe Truman will have to appeal r the Nation's armed forces Detained shipments to troops Labor leaders stand firm in refusal to operate By CHARI ES hThERROLD Cnrresponsal dr .United Press WASHINGTON. 6. (PU) - The worst maritime strike in the history of the United States has immediately affected shipments to Puerto Rico from the port of New York, while President Truman has called upon the nation's armed forces to operate the ships with a minister for the American troops overseas and overseas exile, which are paralyzed by the strike prevailing at all the ports of the country. The" shippers in the contlnen- , have cabled importers in Puerto Rico that they" were 'unable" to ship the goods purchased" on the" date" previously set" due to the maritime stoppage. The Bull Line reported that the "Cape Mohican," which was scheduled to sail last night, is "1 presently laid up in the port of New York. The cargo to be carried by this ship includes livestock. The Waterman Line said the strike has stopped the departure from New Orleans, with general cargo, of) Victory ship "Haiti." In contrast, the New York and Puerto Rico Line succeeded in dispatching ¡t two steamships with cargo on Thursday, just hours before the strike began. These steamships are the Cape Sebastian and the Sampan Hatch. These three companies have steamship sailings scheduled for the eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth of this month. Meanwhile, the leaders of the two striking seamen's unions, affiliated with the American Federation of Labor, have maintained their refusal to authorize the operation by their striking members of the ships loaded with million tons of relief supplies for the American occupation troops abroad. The maritime strike, declared in r protest against a decision of the Wage Stabilization Board, ■ has threatened to sweep away the Truman pro- ■ gramme on stabiliza- - clon of Wages. A senior government official said today that the administration may be forced to loosen wage controls immediately in order to settle the strike. Emergency measures to resume the flow of cargo are being studied urgently by Government experts, while the observable "eftale" indicated an indefinite prolongation of the maritime strike, in which the 500,000 United States maritime workers are involved. The Maritime Commission has infer- > mado that the strike has completely paralyzed" the" I clone" in the" port" of 1" eosta ■ of the Pacific, Atlantic and! ' Gulf. He added that 705 ship" ectan i immobilized" on the east coast, including 548 American and 157 ex t ran jero". ' In New York harbor, 344 ships are idle, of which 238 are American; and three foreign ships managed to leave port before the strike broke out. Ships arriving from abroad in New York harbor are still being handled, however, among them the Victory "Wilson," from British ports, with 1,476 "ol1 given. White House Secretary of Pren "a, Charles Ron, told the" perlodlita" today that the maritime strike is still in the hands" of the Department of Labor. (Yesterday, the President said as much, adding that he would intervene personally- , mvte in the dispute, il as! as he was asked). Meanwhile, labor union leaders today predicted that the general strike of truck drivers, which has paralyzed the transportation of consumer goods in the metropolitan area of this city, will be resolved on Monday, reducing the movement of trucks j (continued on page 24).