THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY - Partly cloudy with scattered showers along the coast this morning. Cloudy with occasional showers in the afternoon. High in San Juan yesterday, M degree*. Sunrise today at* 8:18 am and sunset at 8:21 pm. No indication* of tornporal.
- MORNING NEWSPAPER ■ f
YEAR XXVIII NUMBER 10713
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 1946
Enterad ao second otara ma' te. Post Offloo. San dUM, P" B.
PRICE 5 Cents
Veteran's cottage at Isla Verde
Fonfrias says construction will begin within two weeks There will be a total of 200 houses They will use materials from the Army and Navy The president of the San Juan Homes Authority, Sen. Ernesto Juan Fonfrias, informed yesterday that "in all probability, construction will begin within the next two weeks on the construction of a temporary housing project for Puerto Rican veterans in Isla Verde. Fonfrias added that the agency over which he presides has authorized the bidding process for the construction of this project to contractor H. I. Hettinger, "who has been preparing to begin the project as soon as possible. This farmhouse will be built using Army and Navy surplus materials obtained by the Home Authority. These consist of dismountable wooden huts, which will be dismantled and moved to the project site to provide the necessary housing. Using these materials, some 300 dwellings will be built, which will be rented exclusively to veterans, and will form a 20-acre farmhouse. The property is located on Insular Highway 57, and previously belonged to the Government of San Juan. On other aspects of the agency's program, Senator Fonfrias told EL MUNDO that he expects from one moment to another the final order from the Army for the reinstatement to the Authority of the land owned by him in Puerta do Tierra, which was temporarily ceded to the Federal Government during the war period. "We are well advanced in our efforts to secure the return of these lands," he added, "and we expect the final order in the next few days. The authority already has the funds to build the house, which will be located on this site and has the final studies and plans for the construction work". Mr. Fonfrias also said that despite having studies and funds for some projects, the program has been hampered by the high cost of construction materials. "This is delaying our plans," he said, "and this is a situation beyond our control. The construction of the bridge over the Bairoa River, on the Rio Piedras to Caguas highway, has continued to be delayed mainly due to the critical shortage of construction materials. This bridge is to be built under the auspices of the Department of the Interior, but due to the lack of essential materials, especially steel, the project has not been able to be carried out, as reported yesterday. It is not known exactly when this work will begin. Its completion will depend on whether the rules for obtaining materials are liberalized and steel can be obtained in sufficient quantities for the entire project. The original bridge at this point on the Rio Piedras to Caguas highway was destroyed several months ago, as a consequence of the incessant rains. The Department of the Interior proceeded to build two provisional detours, one on each side of the destroyed bridge, through which vehicles travel on their trips to and from Caguas. I
Compendium of news
President Truman yesterday dismissed his Secretary of Commerce, Henry A. Wallace, for the speech he made in Madison Square, censuring the foreign policy of the United States, and reiterated his confidence in Secretary B yenes. - * * * * * General closure of leo puesto* do caraos in the nation. There is also a morning closure of the restaurants. * The final elimination of the tramway has been accepted for the month of September. The Government would take to court the case of the citizenship of Puerto Ricans living abroad, if the cea* - -Honors now being made fail. 7." - - - - / Acquitted of the crime of deeacatoo to J8W Veray, in the District Court do Apia * dille. - o - Lack of ana in all homes in Camuy and in the public schools - - - a - The lack of materials is delaying the construction of the bridge over the Bairoa River. r ÜS
Already interviewed 20,748 of the veterans. - "- - Plan on land acquisition* for schools is being studied. - a - Student elections end today at UPR. - - Femando Quiñones Jlménea was sentenced yesterday in federal court to eight years in prison for carrying weapons and ammunition while charged with a felony. - - - During yesterday's independence act at the UPR, the students* raised 1* single-starred flag, holding it aloft until* 8 P. M. A veterans' home will begin to be built in Isla Verde. - a - The Progressive Republican Union will hold its district assemblies in Aguadilla on September 23rd. - The Land Authority will distribute, on September 29th. 8288. 7407 among the workers of the Cambalache Central Factory and the proportional benefit farms of the Cambalache and Ran Vicente Projects.
The Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Jesús T. Plñero, has approved a recommendation. Plñero, has approved a recommendation of the' Transit Committee that the electric tram service in the city of San Juan be definitively suspended on September 30, "The recommendation - official note - was approved by the committee at its last meeting, held on the 18th of this month at La Fortaleza, with the vote in favor of all the members of the Committee who attended said meeting. The memorandum . The memorandum on the matter transmitted to Governor Plñero states that all the difficulties that caused the postponement of the tramway have been solved.
They agree to eliminate the tramway definitively on Monday 30
The Transit Committee has also recommended to the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Orlando Méndez, who is himself a member of the Committee, that on October 1, the day after the termination of the electric streetcar service, the tracks be lifted and the long-delayed repair of Avenida Ponce d* León between Paradas 11 and 23 be started. The memorandum to Governor Plñero was signed by the chairman of the Transit Committee, Mr. Elmer M. Ellsworth.
PRIOR TO THE RECALL | 1 - - - --- - - - - - - -
Bllo Secretary of Commerce of the United States. Henry A. Wallace, whose ■ New York speech, in which he censured the foreign policy leaves Administration, culminated yesterday in his impeachment by the President. This photo was printed a few days ago, when Wallace arrived at the White House, at Traman's invitation, to discuss the crisis created by Traman's remarks at Madison Square Garden. (PA photo)
The Government would take the citizenship issue to the courts
Pinero reports that such a step is in mind if the steps now being taken fail. - Talks with the Venezuelan envoy
The delegate of the Puerto Ricans residing in Venezuela, Mr. Juan Serafin Diaz, who is on the island making efforts to resolve the situation through which more than 300 compatriots have been living for many years in that country, due to the provisions of the Immigration Law, held an interview Thursday afternoon with Governor Pinero, (
Mr. Dlsz. who was entrusted by the Puerto Ricans residing in Maracaibo affected by said provisions to meet in the Island with the authorities on the matter, expressed yesterday to have obtained "a pleasant impression of his interview with the Governor, who testified his best intentions for the problem to be solved in a favorable way for all those affected". "Governor Plñero gave me a minute account of his numerous representations for the correction of the discrimes contained* in the federal statute, representations which he made when he held the office of Resident Commissioner at Wáshlngton. Now in the office of Governor. (Continued on page 22)
jÉleccionesen' -I - 1 I I PR end l in hov i|- - r day ! Independentistas are going to ( submit amendment on ■ - Council Presidency । * - Today the elections to appoint the Student Council of the University of Puerto . Rico, elections which began last Monday. Once the 26-member body is elected, the student* -- will meet in its first meeting, scheduled for next Monday, at which the candidates for the presidency will be nominated. The president, for the first time since the Student Council was founded, will be elected by the student body directly, in a special election. (The Indopendent students, who nominated their president, William Fred Santiago, for the presidency of the council, as reported yesterday by junior Juan Mari Bras, will seek a motion at next Monday's meeting to the effect that the by-laws of the organization be amended before it becomes a nomi(Continued on page 22)
Truman Dismisses Wallace; Forbids Officials to Speak Against His Foreign Policy
Meat stands close nationwide General strike emerged with product shortages, price controls Threaten restaurant closings Sen. Wiley indicts OAtP. Will call for total elimination of agency By LEE~ HANNIFY WASHINGTON. 20. (PU) - The shortage of food, coupled with the rotrovoralon of the price controls on food in restaurants, as decreed by the Office of Presidential Administration, prompted demands today for the Congress to anticipate the abolition of the OAP long before it is scheduled to do so. Alexander M. Wlloy, R-Wisconsin, hailed the OAP for its "arbitrary" action in ordering restaurants to return meat prices to June 30 levels, despite the high cost of meat. "Your action will deal another blow to the stomachs of the American people, as your controls on meat have resulted in a shortage of the commodity," Wlloy wrote in his letter to price chief Paul Porter. -This is one of the reasons, among others, why I will urge, at the opening of the Eightieth Congress, that your agenda be abolished immediately. As the statute states, the OAP expires next June 30. Senator Robert A. Taft (R-Ohio), an influential leader in the congressional arena, has already been outspoken in favor of the elimination of all controls except rent control, as early as April 1, 1947. Wiley's attacks on OAP are triggered in the midst of these other developments. 1.-The Department of Agriculture halted all meat shipments for export in an effort to conserve as many supplies as possible* for the comfort of the American people during the "lean months ahead. Merrill Glllo, head of the OAP's Restaurant Pricing Division, said the agency is inclined to consider a price increase for restaurants, which would show that such a move is warranted. "If you offer us sufficient evidence," Gllle said in an interview, "OAP could grant the restaurant an increase beyond that requested on the meat. Haata the pretent, said GUI*, the Restaurant Industry Advisory Committee" has not presented evidence to prove that its* (Continued on page 22)
The committee has not presented evidence to prove that its* (Continued on page 22) "has not been able to prove that its* (Continued on page 22) "has not been able to prove that its* (Continued on page 22) "has not been able to prove that its* (Continued on page 22) "has not been able to prove that its* (Continued on page 22) "has not been able to prove that its* (Continued on page 22) "has not been able to prove that its* (Continued on page 22) "has not been able to prove that its* (Continued on page 22) As announced, Governor Plñero met with reporters at 4:30 p.m. yesterday afternoon. During the course of the conference he was asked about the version published by columnist Walter Winchel, to the effect that within a few months a rupture is expected between him and Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, answering that he has read what Winchel says but that "I do not expect to have ruptures with anyone nor do I invite them". Regarding the last declarations of the Attorney General, Mr. Enrique Campo* del Toro, published* by EL MUNDO, the Governor said that he expects to have a serious con(Continued on page 7)
serious. Following the jury's verdict, rendered a few days ago, Judge Cooper set yesterday's date for Quiñones Jiménez' sentencing. After the jury's decision, the defendant, through his attorneys, Benlclo Sanchez Castaftp and Rafael Martinez Alvarez, requested a new trial and the suspension of the verdict. When appearing before Judge Cooper yesterday for the reading of the sentence, Mr. Sánchez Castaño argued his motions, which were objected to by U.S. Attorney Francisco Pon*a Foliú. Sanchez Castaño argued yesterday that if the defendant's sentence were to be read yesterday, he would be prejudiced in the hearing of the murder case that will be heard in the Humacao District Court in the near future. The defense attorney argued that "the judge had told his defendant that he was sentencing him in the case on the Humacao District Court, which is not before you". The defendant repeated his allegation that he needed a new trial because of the statements made* (Continued on page 22).
Independence act was yesterday celebrated at the University
Students raised the Lone Star flag. - Professors took part in a rally. - Rector announced that there will be no punishments
By ANGEL CRUZ CRUZ Editor of EL MUNDO From six o'clock in the morning until six o'clock in the afternoon yesterday floated on the flagpole of the University of Puerto Rico, the lone star flag, hoisted by a commission of students of the University Independence Society in commemoration of the Grito de Lares, whose ephemeris was celebrated yesterday by the unl-.
veranarlos. The* students*, during the whole day, stood guard next to the flag to prevent the university authorities* from lowering it to raise the flag of the stars and stripes, as is customary every day. At eight o'clock in the morning, in front of Don Ramon Baldorloty de Caatro's building, the students held an Independentsta rally in which five professors and new students spoke, all of them openly in favor of independence. The professors who spoke were Dr. Margot Arco de Vázquez, Oavaldo Ramiros Torres, and softoreB Francisco Matos Paoli, Roberto BlaBcoechea Lotta and Domingo Marrero, The students who spoke were William Fred Santiago, Juan Marl Bras. Angel Cruz Cruz, José Miguel Tejada, Carlos Carrera Benitez, César Vélez González, Yolanda Torres, María Rosarlo, Jorge Luis Landing and Julio César López. While the rally was being held, attended by several hundred students, a commission of the Independence Society visited the rector, Mr. Jaime Benitez, residence, to invite him to address the independent students. The rector, according to the committee that visited him, declined the Invlta(Continued on page 7) 1
Pinero will convene the Chambers; will ask for elimination of Commenting on Winchel's phrase he says he does not expect ruptures with anyone nor does he invite them. - He is waiting for Campos del Toro to confer with him The Governor of Puer7oRÍco. "seftor Jesú* T. Plñero, announced yesterday in *his weekly conference with the Press his purpose to summon the Legislature to a special session which will probably "e held during the course of the present month. He disclosed that during this weekend he will consider "obre the date he thinks most convenient for reu.
dfl ■ :,í ' Bl A THE GOVERNOR PINERO
Quiñones Jiménez sentenced yesterday to eight years in prison.
Cooper Imposed four years each for carrying weapons. - Suspended one of the sentences. - The case will go to Boston Court. Eight years* in prison, in total, was imposed yesterday by U.S. District Court Judge Robert A. Cooper on Fernando Quiñones Jiménez, "who a federal jury found guilty on two counts of carrying weapons and ammunition while charged with a felony," and was sentenced to eight years in prison on two counts of carrying weapons and ammunition while charged with a misdemeanor.
T-a TA to distribute "263,740.97 among workers Sum covers operations at Cambalache Factory and 2 benefit projects Announcing the result of 1a* operations at the Cambalache factory and the* proportional benefit farm* of the Cambalacho and San Vicente Projects, the Land Authority indicated that it will begin distributing on September 29, 1946, among the workers* of the factory and the Ib* farms of both projects, a total of #263,740.97 and $41,220.84 among the settlers of the Cambalache factory. The following is the complete text of the official note rendered to that effect by the Land Authority, "On September 29, 1946, the distribution of benefits to the workers who worked in the Cambalache Factory and in the Proportional Benefit Farms of the Cambalacho and San Vicente Projects will begin. The amount to be distributed amounts to $122,342.27 for the workers of the Camba Ache Proportional Benefit Farms; $106,398.70 for the workers of the San Vicente Project Proportional Benefit Farms and approximately $35,000 for the workers of the Cambalacho Factory for a total of $263,740.97. The amount to be distributed among the workers of the Cambalache Factory is equivalent to a bonus of ten cents" for each dollar of wages earned by them. If we take into consideration that the minimum wage paid at the Cambalache Factory was $3.52 per day or $.44 per hour, the bonus to be granted is equivalent to at least an additional income for the worker of $0.35 per day. The Puerto Rico Lands Authority shall also distribute among the Colonists who milled their cane at the Cambalache Factory, the sum of $41,220.84, at the rate of 6 cents per quintal of total sugar produced, which represents a bonus of 11-3|4 cents per ton of cane milled. These bonuses will be distributed among the workers and settlers* of the Cambalacho factory, after deducting the Authority, as a cost, all operating expenses, including the payment of taxes, depreciation and interest. The Authority also earned as a reasonable return on its invested capital the sum of $98,750 or 5 percent of its investment in the enterprise. < This very satisfactory result has been made possible in large measure by ' the determined cooperation and effort given by the workers to the company in its first year of operations. h (Continued on page 7) I
The sum of $800,000 is available to avoid delay in the first stage of the school program The Department of Instruction and the Planning Board are studying the possibility of establishing a two-year program for the acquisition of land to be used in the construction of schools in different municipalities of the Island, and in the program of second rural units and vocational agricultural education. For this purpose, an appropriation of $800,000, approved by the last two ordinary legislatures, will be used. Luis Rivera Santos, head of the Board's Division of Industries and Services, said yesterday that the idea of establishing a two-year plan to carry out this program has arisen to ensure that land is immediately available for the location of the preferred education center. "This will also prevent," he added, "the government from investing funds in land that will not be used within two years. This plan will favor a certain number of municipalities. He reported that previously, the Department of Instruction had "submitted to the Board 307 projects for the purchase of land in 28 municipalities," and that the funds allocated were insufficient to cover all the needs of the IbIb. The purpose, he explained, is to have already purchased land for schools, which will certainly be built during the first two years, thus avoiding delays in the development of the first stage of the school program. At present, an appropriation of $500,000, approved by the last Legislature, is available for these com- , prg transactions. This sum will be invested in the purchase of land to locate schools of all types and for vocational agricultural education. Also, $300,000 approved by the previous Legislature, which by express provision of law must be devoted exclusively to the provision of land for second rural units, has been appropriated. It is very likely that from the $500,000 appropriation, the Government of San Juan will be able to obtain $100,000 to cover the cost of the land where the new 20 (alone* school will be located, in the La* Palma* neighborhood. San Juan's E "colar board has been geatlone* a cato reapoeto. Interviewed are 20,746 of * the veterans There are currently about 25,000 receiving weekly compensation A total of 20,748 World War II veterans, who are currently receiving compensation for example, have been trained by the U.S. Veterans Administration during an interview conducted by the federal agency for the purpose of extending the benefits to help them reestablish their status as veterans of World War II: The announcement was made Friday by Mr. John J. I. O'Brien, regional director of the Interagency Regional Office for the Americas, to help them readjust to civilian life and see the reason they have been unable to find suitable jobs. O'Brien, regional director Inter! The report provided by Mr. Gonzalo Philippi, chief of the Administration's Unemployment Compensation Readjustment Division, reveals that 31 percent of World War II veterans receiving unemployment compensation have been receiving this benefit for 19 consecutive weeks or less; Thirty-seven percent have received the benefit for 20 to 29 weeks; 22 percent have received $20 a week for 30 to 39 weeks; and 10 percent have received the benefit for 40 weeks or more. There are currently about 25,000 employed veterans who are eligible for unemployment compensation benefits, according to the President's Office of Unemployment Compensation (continued on page 10).
President Reiterates Confidence in Secretary Jlyrnes Explains Determination to Press Full text of statement authorized by White House yesterday By PRESS WASHINGTON, 20 (PU)-President Harry Shlppe Truman today dismissed his Secretary of Commerce, Henry A. Wallace, at an excited press conference. Thus has culminated the deep disturbance prevailing among the President's official . The President's official family, since the ousted Secretary attacked the present foreign policy of the Truman Administration at Madison Square Garden, New York, on Thursday, by putting the American delegation to the Peace Conference in Pa1 rio, over which the Secretary of State is presiding, Francis Byrnes, in a very awkward position with respect to the nations participating in the Peace Conference, especially with respect to Russia, whose policy of expansion and "iron curtain" Byrnes has been confronting with great force for the past six months. Thus i also leaves the Presidential Cabinet the last remaining left-wing novo- ■ qulord in it of te- . two shoulders close to the late i President Roosevelt quo Truman has been changing, one by one. Henry A. Wallace is the aegun- ! go member of the original Cabinet ( of Roosevelt to be removed by , President Iruman, Harold L. Ickoo having ■Ido the primoró. And the method of "u dismissal e"" bró the form do tina request for resignation, also as in the eaao of lekes. Wallace's resignation was not long in coming. An hour after the President announced that he had requested it, it arrived at the CaaaiBlanea. At the aforementioned press conference, Traman was clearly the least excited person. About an hour before the son' saclonal prooldon- ' clal pronouncement, the journalists flooded the executive offices. Most of them awaited some foreign policy statement from the President. None anticipated that this morning's conference would turn out to be so dramatic. When reporters arrived at the President's office, they found him smiling and ovldontomonto be serene. One reporter noticed a long statement on his desk. The reporter asked the President to read it slowly: the President laughed and said he would do so. Simultaneously with Wallace's dismissal, President Truman prohibited all Executive Branch officials from making public statements contrary to his Administration's foreign policy. President Truman warned reporters that his statement might be "good" (in the journalistic sense), inviting them to take careful note of it. There was a chuckle as roeopclonlsta WIL liam Simmons Introduced the last arriving reporters to the presidential heel and then said, in a loud voice: "Could you mo> OT, a po< ' u,to hacla ,a iHUlot* dtr A reporter asked: cia the left?" There went the laughter. The President read his statement in a serla voice and signed it, and a few seconds after the reading began, all the reporters were dumbfounded. Their greatest surprise, however, came when the President came to these words of his statement: "Today I have been able to WaUaco that I am resigning from the Cabinet. And the conference ended with the traditional phrase, "Bleachers, Mr. President, as news of your resignation rushed to the White House telephones. In announcing his historic resignation, the President reiterated his complete confidence in Secretary of State Byrnes The President reiterated his full confidence in Secretary of State Byrnes, whose firm attitude toward the expansionist policy of the Soviet Union received a formidable endorsement, Shortly before his sensational announcement, Traman had spoken by telephone with the resigning Secretary, Wallace, informing him that he was leaving the Cabinet, (Continued on page 7) Osuna Mentioned for Instruction News from Washington indicates that Dr. Jose J. Osuna, dean emeritus of the College of Education of the University of Puerto Rico, is being mentioned there for the post of Commissioner of Instruction:ión.