THE
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. % 2 Sections
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
MORNING DAILY
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, APRIL 20, 1946
Entered aa second olara matter. Poet Office, San Juan, P. R. R
NUMBER 10560
YEAR XXVIII
"ld*moo to the men who made " J Victory Loan.
The President is said to have offered Krug to appoint Pinero Governor of the Island.
Two status bills will be presented
One will contain formula on the holding of an island plebiscite The other will have to do with the economy In Washington it is believed that Chavea will intervene in favor of Statehood WASHINGTON, D.C. (SEM)-Senator Millard E. Tydings, Chairman of the Senate Territories Committee, expects to have in his possession within the next ten days the draft legislation on the political status of Puerto Rico, the drafting of which has been entrusted to the Joint Legislative Committee presided over by Luis Muflo" Marín. The decision to prepare these measures is the most direct consequence of the conference held with Tydings last Monday by Senator Muñoz Marin, which was also attended by Senators Samuel R. Quiñones and Crux Ortlx Stella. Other members of the commission who did not attend were out of the federal capital. Although the same assignment was given last year to the commission headed by Muñoz Marin, there are, however, two new points in the development of this new political activity on Puerto Rico. First, something that is considered very important in the island circuits is the fact that two bills on the political status of Puerto Rico will be presented, instead of one as last year, sponsored by the legislative delegation. One is solely on the political problem in the, containing a plebiscite formula for the people to vote on which form of government they prefer between Independence, Statehood and Dominion, but containing, in addition, a clause to the effect that the result of the vote shall not take effect until appropriate additional legislation implementing the future economic relations between the United States and Puerto Rico is approved by both parties. This, as will be seen, is quite similar to the procedure followed in the case of the Philippines. Both measures, according to ¡ MuAos Marin, would be submitted to the approval of the people in special votes. The task before the legislative delegation is not so much now, as to the political aspect of the problem, as to the economic aspect. The political aspect, the plebiscitary measure to consult the Puerto Rican people, is here considered a simple and easy thing, containing, as it has already indicated, the provision that the resolution finally passed by the people shall not go into effect until agreement is reached on the economic relations respective to each form of status proposed and favored by the votes of the people. The really difficult task for the delegation will be as soon as the delegation begins its work, in detail, on the economic relations, which will be agreed upon by the people.
DETROIT, 1" (PU)-The Federal Government announced today that it has broken up a black bag scheme which is the largest in the history of the Office of Price Administration, amounting to some three million dollars. The scheme consisted of a black-marking scheme in which approximately eight thousand used automobiles were sold at markups of up to six hundred dollars over the maximum prices set by the OAP. Federal authorities have charged 81 persons, residents of Michigan, Kentucky or Illinois, with having purchased automobiles in Detroit for resale in the southern shores of the southern states of the United States. Such persons bought and resold, at prices above the maximum, used automobiles, and employed numerous individuals who would even go house to house, inquiring if they had used automobiles which the gang could buy. - WASHINGTON, 19. (PU) - W Secretary of State, James F. Byrnes, invited Russia to begin negotiations for a $1,000,000,000,000 loan A spokesman for the Department of State, James F. Byrnes, invited Russia to begin negotiations for a $1,000,000,000,000 loan.
A spokesman for the State Department said that the United States understood that all the issues of vast economic scope involved should be discussed during the negotiations, including the settlement of Russia's 110,000,000,000,000 leases and loans to the United States.000,000 of leases i and loans- the Soviet participation in the North American-sponsored IIbr" trade program and its membership in the International Bank and the Monetary Fund established under the Bretton Woods agreements. * * * * * ' MIAMI, 19. (PU)-The Williamson expedition suffered another setback today - which may have resulted in the death of > loo three protagonists in the dramatic search for the Mocte- . branch treasure, thirty milliona in gold,: buried at the bottom of the sea some ■ W meters deep. Once again, it seems that the curse that Moctesuma placed on handing over the treasure to Hernán Cortés in 1520 is having its effect. While Williamson, Parsons and Lilley were working last night at the bottom of the sea with high-pressure drills on the coral reef covering the galleon "Sani ta Rosa," the air compressor ducts broke, cutting off the vital air flow. By
BULLETINS
i luckily, the three men had enough air in the reserve tanks to be able to rise to the surface of the sea; so they have been forced to abandon operations until the replacement part arrives in three days' time. PARIS, 19 (PU)-In diplomatic circles in this Capital it is said' that the esimAola question will not be discussed at the Can cilleras Conference to be held here, but< that discussion of it will be given on the table for the subsequent meeting to be held in London, and at which Russia will not be present. In the spheres of the exiled eapaAoles it is not surprising that the Security Council in New York has not accepted the Polish resolution to break off relations with Spain unanimously. Many Spaniards in Paris consider that the charges that the Government of Generalissimo Fran- 1 i co is a threat to the country are exaggerated. They stress that the , Intervention of Poland has rebounded, strengthening Fran- ■ co's position. The general opinion maintains that the Initiative to throw । Franco from power has to start from > Spain itself, cora de aflamar " (Continued "n page 22).
Muñoz wants Iriarte to go to Washington.
To this effect he held a telephone conversation with the URP leader a short while ago Several measures are already being worked on The popular leader prepares memorandums for the Legislative Commission WASHINGTON, D. C. (SEM)- Luí" Muñoz Marin, president of the Puerto Rican legislative commission that is here in negotiations on the political status of the island, has strongly requested from Rep. Celestino Iriarte, president of the Republican Union Party,
Celestino Iriarte, chairman of the Republican Union Party, spokesman for the State and minority representative in the delegation, to ■" Wáshlngton to share in the work of the island's legislative commission as soon as possible. Muñoz Marín considers highly desirable the presence in Wáshlngton of Representative Iriarte, according to h" Reported here in authorized circles". Although Iriarte considers himself well represented here by Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa, a member of the Senate and of the legislative committee, the fact that Iriarte is the head of the Republican minority and the only Republican member of the Insular House has been taken into account, in view of the work that the committee is to begin immediately, as "s ol fio fio proparar' two bills, one covering the political aspect and the other the economic aspect. Iriarte, however, has informed MuAoz, in a conference they both had by telephone, that if he could come to Washington now, he would do so no earlier than April 25 or 26, date for which he would have enough time to do so. Mjjftoz Marin has already begun work in his apartment, at the Mayflower Hotel, on memoranda which will be the basis for the general discussions of the full delegation, when it meets with all its members present, and for the final preparation of the preliminary drafts on the status. Millard E. Tydlngs, chairman of the Senate Territories Committee, expects to have the drafts in his possession by April 25 at the latest, in order to study and discuss them beforehand with the members of the Puerto Rican commission and its senatorial committee. Although it seems difficult for the delegation to have the two important measures requested by Tydlng ready in time, both Muñoz Marín and the other members are making an effort, in an intense compilation of reports and data, much of which is already on file with MyAoz, to have the work completed by the date preliminarily agreed upon with Tydlng, that is, April 24-25. Tydlng" has asked the delegation to "speed up his work" since only by acting extremely fast could he "get it done" (Continued on page 22).
De Hostos arranges shipment of 400,000 sacks of rice to the island
Chamber of Commerce President has been meeting with Agriculture in Washington on an ongoing basis, raising the island's crisis.
By CHARLES McCABE WASHINGTON, 18 (PU). Fllipo de Hostos, president of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce, protested vigorously today against the regulation recently established by the United States Department of Agriculture that the importation into Puerto Rico of Uruguayan beef jerky is to be discontinued for an indefinite period. De Hostos said that the action was taken by the Department of Agriculture and the Combined Food Board, as a measure to conserve products destined for the European areas, and that however, under the present plan the entire supply of Uruguayan jerky will be purchased by Great Britain. He further informed the President of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce that the officers of the Combined Food Board are "sympathetic" to the request made by him that the importation of beef jerky from Uruguay into the Island should be continued, and added that the said "office" of the Board is "sympathetic" to the request made by the President of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce that the officers of the Combined Food Board are "sympathetic" to the request made by him that the importation of beef jerky from Uruguay should continue.
Island, and added that the said "oficíale" "will study the situation". De Hostoe warned that none of the officials of said agency, with whom he has spoken, knew the reasons for which the order excluding the shipment of the product destined for Puerto Rico was put into effect. De Hoetos explained that the importation into the country of beef jerky from Uruguay, Argentina and Brazil had begun at the beginning of the century, and that the consumption of the product had increased during the war period. He said that the increase in consumption was due to the shortage of codfish that the Island suffered during the war, indicating that the tasajo meat is used in Puerto Rico as a substitute for codfish. The President of the Puerto Rican Chamber of Commerce pointed out that the imports of tasajo during 1945 amounted to 7,200 tons, while during the "normal" time, before the war, the imports were around 1,000 tons per year. In addition, De Ho "to< said he was making a huge effort" with (Continued on page 22)
Gromyko sets out views of the Soviet
.... ¿"BUL & * - *xjB ' ' ' '
Andrei A. Gromyko (Isqulerdo). d announced that the Government aovietk to keep open the UK case, and right E He Times praises the census for the hemisphere Points to the population problem on the Island.Editorial Comment WASHINGTON. D, C. (SEM) - For a country like Puerto Rico, the problems arising from its population increases should be paramount, relegating others to secondary importance, the New York Times said in its Monday editorial column, referring to the projected general census to be taken in 1950 throughout the American hemisphere. "A complete economic and social picture of this hemisphere could provide a basis for further cooperative action. Partly this would tend to the elimination of the old economic and psychological barriers between the nations of the New World," says the newspaper, pointing out the importance of the aforementioned project. The full text of the editorial reads as follows: "The simultaneous census of the twenty-two nations of this hemisphere, announced for 1950, must be something more than a mere collection of statistics" to "make the" curious. According to Dr. Halbert L. Dunn, of our own cenio" office, such" as agriculture, natural resources, trade, health, housing," education and standards" of living "will be covered, in addition" to population. Some of the Latin American nations are not up to date in their census work. Ecuador reportedly has never conducted one. Bolivia took its last census in 1900. Now the governments of these and other countries of the South are realizing the value of the greatest possible knowledge about their land and people.
Russian delegate to the UN Security Council, while I Ico could not accept the decision adopted by the Council on April 4 i Iran until May 1. At center is Alexander Cadogan, of ( Edward R. Stettlniu" son, U.S. delegate. (Photo P. A.) _ ( 1 The Rector asks Truman to appoint the head of Instruction ; He emphatically points out to him* in cablegram* that the Island's ! educational process is suffering for lack of an incumbent in the Department By J. MARTINEZ CHAPEL Editor of EL MUNDO The campaign initiated by lo" Messrs. Muñoz Marin and Jesus T. PlAero for President" Truman to appoint the person to replace Dr. Jose M. Gallardo as Commissioner of Instruction of the Island, a position which has been vacant since August of last year, gained great momentum during the past "emana. As will be recalled, the
As will be recalled, the candidate of the directors of the Popular Party and of Governor Tugwell for the aforementioned post is Mr. Mariano Villaronga, who was recommended by the former Secretary of the Interior, Harold L. Ickes. Mr. Villaronga's appointment is being held up by the National Democratic Co- । mmittee because he lacks the endorsement of the Puerto Rico Democratic . Democratic Committee of Puerto Rico, which, . according to Miss Maria Campos, , member of the National Committee' for , Puerto Rico, has not proposed any other , candidate for the position than seAor Ramon Mellado, a member of the Faculty of the University of , Puerto Rico. Mr. Jaime Benitez, Rector of the University of Puerto Rico, believes that the delay in appointing the Commissioner of Instruction is seriously harming the system of public instruction on the Island and, without indicating the most suitable candidate to carry out this task, has sent a cablegram to President Truman, expressing that the situation is untenable and that the appointment of the next commissioner should not be delayed any longer. The text of the cablegram from Rector Benitez to President Truman is as follows: i "In discharge of my own educational responsibility and as Rector of the University of Puerto Rico, responsible for the training of all public school teachers, I respectfully and emphatically request that you not delay any longer the appointment of our next Commissioner of Instruction (Continued on page 22).
| Pérez approves more works in 1 se" municipalities Signed several appropriations bills, for schools and parks The Acting Governor, Mr. Manuel A. Pérez, has signed the following" bills, approved" by the Island Legislature in ■u last regular session: P. C. 43, (Act No. 342), allocating $10,000 so that the Commissioner of the Interior may acquire by purchase or by compulsory expropriation the land," its accessories" and necessary" furniture" and build an athletic park in Toa Baja. (Act No. 343.) allocating $10,000 for an athletic park in Toa Alta. P. of the C. 69, (Act No. 344), for the completion of 1 is channeling works of the Patillas Creek, in the municipality of Patilla". P. S. 119, (Act No. 345), appropriating $10,000 for the construction of a four-alone school in the Bejuco mud of Isabela, P. S. 608, (Act No. 347), appropriating $10,000 to build a cemetery in the Yahuocas neighborhood of the municipality of Adjunlas. P. S. 639, (Act No. 348), appropriating $5,000 for the construction of a 2-classroom school in the Candelaria (Macún) neighborhood of Toa Baja. P. S. 760, (Act No. 349), allocating $7,500 for the construction of an athletic park in Aguas Buenas.
P. S. 394 (Act No. 350) to exonerate the Barranquitas Baptist Academy and its land and property from the payment of all taxes. P. 439 (Act No. 351), appropriating $3,000 for the construction of a fence around the Eugenio María de Hostoa School in Coamo. Legionnaire's Day will be celebrated tomorrow Tomorrow, Sunday, at ten o'clock in the morning, the "Legionnaire's Day" will be celebrated throughout the island by the American Legion Post. In San Juan the event will be held at the Santurco Central High School at ten o'clock tomorrow morning. | At the ceremony, Colonel Miguel A. Muñoz will be awarded the Department's distinguished service medal in recognition of his work during the national emergency. - The' act that "- held in San * Juan e "tá alendo sponsored by the k Puestea Núm". 1, 24, 28, 41, 65, 71, 81 and 94. More than three hundred veterans who will be sworn in at the ceremony.
! Freight increase between Puerto Rico and Mainland Postponed
Reconversion Director Snyder explains the rule to be followed. Wants Maritime Commission to have time to hold hearings * BY JEAN VAN VRAÑKEN International News Service Correspondent WASHINGTON. 19. (PU)-The Director of Rerehn W
order" will be" for the" private" shipping" company" to" resume" operation" at" the" now" prevailing" rate" before" filing" a" request" for" a" rate" increase". At the same time, Snyder urged the War Shipping Administration to persuade the private companies to withdraw the application now pending action. If the shipping line operators refuse to withdraw their request, then the War Shipping Administration is directed to postpone the effective date of the increase for at least four months to allow the U.S. Maritime Commission time for a hearing and an appropriate proceeding (on the matter). The War Shipping Administration is also directed to "refrain from participating in proceedings in support of increased rates. The Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion, which Snyder directs, reported that the Office of Price Administration and the Departments of Interior, Agriculture and Commerce were opposed to the increase in maritime rates. The Director of Reconversion has also ordered that discussions be conducted between the private company and the government agency concerned in the matter prior to public hearings. ... No M will consider any increase (Continued on page 22)
MUÑOZ MARIN SEES C. JASPER BELL WASHINGTON, 19. (INS) The President of the Senate of Puerto Rico, Luí" Muflo" Marín, held a short conference this morning with Representative C. Jaaper Bell, Democrat, of Mi "uri, on the problem of the political status of Puerto Rico. The conference with the chairman of the House Insular Affairs Committee" Bell, is part of the program of the Puerto Rican Status Delegation, aimed at getting Congress to take an interest in the Island's political problem. Muflo" Marín reported that he had paid a "short visit" to Representative Bell, mainly to inform him of the action the Senate intends to take, as offered by Millard Tydings, a Democrat from Maryland, who is Chairman of the Senate Insular Affairs Committee. Representative Bell will be away from Washington for several days, but Muflo" has made arrangements with him to meet early next week for a broader conference on the problem of Puerto Rico's political status.
Treasury works on revision of revenue estimate for 1946
The work is expected to culminate in a higher estimate. - The original estimates amounted to $55,430,000, including $17,180,000 in rum.
The estimate of General Fund Revenues of the Government of Puerto Rico for the fiscal year 1945-46 which was prepared by the Treasury in December of last year amounted to $55,430,000. This revision is expected to result in a higher estimate than previously calculated. The estimate made by the Treasury Department in December 1945 is as follows: Customs, $1,750,000; Federal Internal" Revenue, $17,180,000; Alcoholic" Beverage, $6,600,000; General "Arbitrio", 500,000; Property Tax, $350,000; Income Tax, $■'.6,000,000: Inheritance Tax. $200,000; Victory Tax. $400,000; Ingreeó" Va : rio", $450,000. Total $55,430,000. It will be noted that the highest "estimated" figures are for Federal "Internal" Revenue and Income Tax. The latter figure is more or less equal to the total amount collected for the year.
total amount collected in the last two years. The Federal Revenue Situation (Continued on page 22) Squadron maneuvers began yesterday Mitscher's command operates in waters off Culebra Island WASHINGTON, D. C. (SEM)-The little Squadron is operating in the waters off Culebra Island. (SEM)-The small island of Culebra, Puerto Rico, will again become this weekend the center of naval training operations for the twenty-seven warships of the new American Eighth Fleet, which have again chosen the Puerto Rican tona for their first maneuvers of the recent war. The fleet will operate under the command of Admiral Mac A. Mltscher and will cover exercises in the Atlantic Ocean and the Caribbean as part of the training program that Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Chester W. Nlmltz has planned to keep the Navy ready to go to war at any time. Miticher gained great prominence in the news during the war, directing with great success the operation of the 58th and 38th Forces in the Third and Fifth Fleets in the Pacific. His inalgnta ship will be the "Franklin D. Rooeevelt", sister ship of the "Midway". The Attorney General and the Auditor General of Puerto Rico, Luis Negron Fernandez and Rafael de J. Cordero, authorized the following declaration of the "Franklin D. Rooeevelt" to operate in the Pacific. Cordero, authorized the following statement: "The Department of Justice, through its Acting Attorney General and the Auditor of Puerto Rico officially declare for the information of the public, the following: "That since September 1945, at the initiative of the Auditor of Puerto Rico, a new plan of collaboration between both entities has been coordinated for the attention and dispatch of the Audit matters related to Irregu(Continued on page 22),
Appointment expected soon
Truman's promise was made during a White House luncheon Believe appointment soon to be made Villaronga President surprised that his name is not in Senate By CHARLES McCABE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 19. (PU)-Authoritative congressional source told the United Press today that President Truman, at a recent White House luncheon, agreed to the suggestion of Secretary of the Interior Jullu" Albert Krug that Resident Commissioner Plflero succeed Tugwell as Governor of Puerto Rico. The source said he did not know when the White House would announce the nomination, but added that it is expected soon. The "well-informed" people believe that the only possibility of the move being interrupted would be a move to the contrary by some "powerful" Senatorial figure, which, at this point, is not expected to happen. The aforementioned congroalonal source also said that Secretary Krug called at the White House to discuss the vacancy in the position of Education Commissioner of Puerto Rico, and that the President was concerned that the nomination, in this case, would not have been sent to the Senate. The cited source understands that the President told Krug that he had approved Mariano Villaronga's nomination sometime in February. As will be recalled, earlier this week, the United Press quoted informally that Villaronga's appointment had been held up due to opposition from the Democratic National Committee and the senators Chavez and Johnaton. The cited congressional source also said that sending Villaronga's nomination to the Senate is, at this time, "merely a matter of course." Prensa Unida learned from other sources that Ramon Mellado, according to Informado, ora ol candidate favored by the Democratic National Committee 1, sent a radiogram to Mary Campee, a female member of the Democratic National Committee for Puerto Rico, requesting that her nomination be withdrawn as a candidate. The "well-informed" people believe that Governor Tugwell has definitely agreed to join the faculty of the University of Chicago, in the new Department of Political Science, specializing in Research, on July 1, although he may have some connection with Puerto Rico, remaining on the Caribbean Commission as an American fellow. It is understood that the name of Jesús T. Plflero for the governorship of PuertO|Rlco has grown consistently since some time ago, when Muñoz Marin wrote a letter to Oscar Chapman, who at that time was acting as Acting Secretary of the Interior, suggesting four names for the governorship, among which Plflero's name headed 1" Ilota. It is also reported that, later, Muñoz Marin wrote to President Truman, recommending Plflero specifically, although privately he said that he did not object to the appointment of Esteban Bird, Cecil Snyder or C. B. Baldwin, director of Publh cldad of the Political Action Committee of the Congress of Industrial Organizations. The "people" in the know say that Chapman "sold" the Plumber-Krug nomination, but that it was not until the meeting on Tuesday, April 9, that the Interior Department reached a final decision on Plumber, which was the day M* floz Marin arrived in Washington, which was marked by a conference attended by Munoz. Tugwell, Krug and Plflero were present. After this meeting. Muflas Marin told the United Press that the governorship as well as the vacancy in the Department of Education had been discussed, but he did not discuss any details. According to the above-mentioned congreaional meeting, Secretary Krug, shortly after that meeting, had an important meeting followed by lunch with President Truman, at which he told the President of the "declsJono" agreed upon at the above-mentioned conference. And he reports that the ProalJ Continued on page 22),