THE DAILY MONDOrE OF tA MACANA
2nd EDITION 2 Sections
40 PAGES 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
YEAR XXVIII Did you dance in "a car? Are you sure that nnv aatiii not t| ene damage that will cause accidents?
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JUNE 8, 1946
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10609
AEG is asked to be liquidated
It is alleged that this would liberalize maritime operations. California Senator raised the matter in view of possessions By R SANTIAGO SOSA Editor of EL MUNDO Efforts are being made to rescind the executive orders which established the War Shipping Administration, transferring all its functions to the jurisdiction of the U.S. Maritime Commission. This would allow the rules restricting the operations of the U.S. merchant fleet to be further liberalized until its functions reach normal peacetime levels, according to information received yesterday in San Juan, however, However, it was reported that although all efforts are aimed at eliminating the government from the maritime transportation business, "there are some cabotage services to U.S. territories (including Puerto Rico), which apparently will have to be maintained by the government until new freight rates are approved to compensate for these commercial routes." The measure providing for such objectives is contained in the provisions of House Resolution 6496, known as the Naval Appropriations Bill for FY 1947. It was reported yesterday that recently the United States Senate declined to consider a point of order raised to the effect that such a provision, not carrying with it an appropriation of funds, should not be inserted in an appropriations bill. The Senate Rules Committee, it said, agreed to the provision, inserting it into the naval appropriations bill. It argued that the effect of the bill would bring about economy and efficiency in the operation of the merchant fleet. Title 11 of House Resolution 6496 provided, among other things, for the transfer of the agency to the Maritime Commission, which is authorized to take over all functions, property, personnel, and surplus funds of the War Shipping Administration, the latter agency to be terminated on June 30, 1946, and finally liquidated on December 31, 1946, if the legislation is approved. He also reported that last week, in commenting on the provisions of the naval legislation in the Senate, Senator Sheppard, of California, in his oral report, raised the question of shipping in the territories, in the following terms. "One of the items which we have cut back greatly is that of freight charges for private vessels operated by the Government. The effect of the reductions we are making will be to oblige the Commission to terminate the chartering of private vessels by the first of August of the present year. The other limitations we have imposed in the bill, on the amount of funds which may be expended for various operations, are designed to get the Government out of the shipping business sooner than the War Shipping Administration intended to do. "There are some cabotage services to U.S. territories which apparently will have to be maintained by the Government until new fleet rates are approved which will make those trade routes compensatory so far as private enterprise is concerned. In the main, however, the Committee believes that we could move more rapidly than we demand (Continued on page 24.)
At the Mayflower Hotel, in Washington, the President of the Insular Senate, Mr. Lula Mufloz Marin, called on the American writer Abel Plenn, author of the book "Wind In The Olive Tree", which revolves around the situation in Spain, and which has been included in the Report of the United Nations sub-committee on the regime of General Franco. The photo was impressed as Mufles was examining Plenn's work (Photo by the Puerto Rico Office in Washington).
Krug will not intervene in Government purchase of Telefonica Secretary of the Interior said he could not force the sale of the properties and asked for a full report on the case By JEAN VÁÑ VRÁÑkEN International News Service correspondent
WASHINGTON, 7. (1NS)- James Curry, legal advisor to the Government of Puerto Rico, said today that U.S. Secretary of the Interior J.A. Krug has refused to intervene in the negotiations between the island's Communications Authority and the Puerto Rico Internal Revenue Service.
U.S. mills have cancelled practically all the orders they had pending for the supply of wheat flour to Puerto Rico, and have announced their intention not to ship the product for the time being because they have been forced to close their doors, informed yesterday Andres Catlnchl, Importer of flour to the Island. Mr. Catlnchl said that if any shipment of flour is received in the next few days, it will obey "small" orders that were in transit. "There is no possibility that the situation will improve immediately," he added, "since the difficulty lies in the fact that the mills have liquidated their stocks and do not have any flour until they are supplied with grain from the new harvest. He also explained that recently a new order was issued by the U.S. Government giving wheat mills 21 days to dispose of all their stocks, reserving the remainder for the Government. This caused all stocks to be exhausted before the stated period. "There exists in many states," added Catlnchl, "a situation analogous to that of Puerto Rico. Many bakeries have also closed their doors, limiting the national production of bread and wheat products." This situation will prevail until the end of June or the beginning of July, when wheat will begin to be harvested in the agricultural areas of the United States, according to our informant. The trial of General Mihailovich BELGRADE, 7. (INS) - On June 10, the trial of the famous Dradja Mihailovich - leader of the Chetnlcks guerrillas - who is accused of having collaborated with the Nazis in his eventful participation during the war period, will begin.
do na .én-
' tlonal Telephone and Telegraph 1 Corporation." Consultant Curry is in this capital this week seeking the assistance of the Department of the Interior in renovating Puerto Rico's telephone system. A primary objective of this project is the purchase by the Government of Puerto Rico (through its Communications Authority) of the private telephone company's properties on the island. Irwin Silverman, Acting Director of the Bureau of Territories and Insular Possessions of the Department of the Interior, and consultant Curry conferred with Secretary Krug yesterday. Curry reported that, at that meeting, Secretary Krug had said that his Department could not intervene to force the sale of the Telephone Company's properties to the Communications Authority. He added that Secretary Krug did, however, request that a full report on the case be submitted to him. Curry went on to report that if the Island Government is unable to purchase the properties of the said company, the only alternative is to build a competing telephone system (from the private company). He went on to say that tentative plans are for the expansion of the government-owned telephone system now operating in the central part of the Island. He explained the spokesman for the Auto(Continued on page 24.)
NEWS DIGEST
Mullos Marin held an interview on Puerto Rico, including the gubernatorial case, with the Democratic National Committee aide. - Senator Fonfrlas assures that the elimination of the slums will be a "task" of the Government. - In several Italian provinces disorders have broken out, in demonstration of displeasure for the elimination of the monarchy. - The order on the weight of bread will be challenged in court. - - - Reorganization of the Student Services, University of Puerto Rico agenda, has been requested. - - - Cancellation of wheat flour orders from Puerto Rico. Eo-
 I Planning will adopt ■'uniform standards for the construction of schools in the urban area. > On motion of the United States, seconded by England, the United Nations assembly postponed consideration of the Report of its sub: i committee on the case of Spain. - - - - A committee of the House of Representatives will investigate the conflicts on the sea front. Yesterday i there was stoppage in loe mills of the PaI cíflco. i On the 12th will be discussed by Planl- - flcaclón the Bonus map of - the Capital. - - ♦ Double loser maflana in Coa- " mo is eliminated from the Berle Final of the ■ South, in Double A baseball.
i Monterrey maintained its three-game lead in the Mexican League. Mexico lost, one for nil. Barandilla defeated Arecibo and Ublflas defeated Yauco in the Free Basketball Tournament. - The Secretary of the Interior, Krug, has refused to intervene in the Telefonica case, saying that he cannot force the sale of the company's properties to the Island Government. The return of all merchant marine operations to private shipping companies is still in progress. Yesterday the Federal Court dismissed the complaint filed by the GAP against a group of trofl- ; cantee in construction materials.
Muñoz examines work on Spain.
House Committee to investigate
Elimination of* slums will be a public 'issue' Senator Fonfrías assures.- The House will raise the issue before the Legislature There will be a meeting upon Muñoz's return A plan will be sought to solve the problem of unhealthy housing When the next Legislature meets, the problem of eliminating slums and the low-cost housing construction program for low-income families throughout the island will be a government issue," Senator Ernesto Juan Fonfrlas, who recently returned from the United States, told EL MUNDO yesterday. Fonfrlas said that during his visit to Washington he discussed with Senate President Luis Mufloz Marín the scope and progress of the efforts he had been making as President of the San Juan Homes Authority. "By mutual initiative," he added, "a meeting will be convened upon Mr. Mufloz's return to the island of all the housing authorities in Puerto Rico, the federal agencies involved in these programs, the Board of Plans, the construction agencies, the Puerto Rico Housing Authority and the Puerto Rico Housing Authority; the construction agencies of the Government, such as the Department of the Interior and the War Emergency Program, in order to devise a vast program of action to solve the slum problem and to assure our immediate participation in the plans of the National Housing Authority which are contemplated for the post-war period." One of the main issues to be discussed will be the Island Government's contribution to the housing construction plan. Mr. Fonfrlas said that there is an intention to raise, through legislative action, the funds deemed necessary to undertake the most urgent projects with the help of the Federal Government. "Another important point," he added, "will be related to the way of going (Continued on page 24).
Muñoz Meets With Democratic Committee Aide; Discusses Governor's Case
Action postponed in UN on Spain case The postponement was made at the request of delegates from U.S. and England Poland in favor of breaking relations Numerous Spanish Republicans-watched the course of the meeting By AMADOR MARIN NEW YORK, 7. Evatt, Australian delegate to the U.N. Security Council and chairman of the sub-commission on the Spanish case, declared in a strong voice before the full Council that the Report prepared under his direction "is a realistic application of the preceding U.N. declarations" condemning General Francisco Franco and excluding him from the concert of democratic nations. He said that in view of the evidence provided* it was incontrovertibly clear that the question of Franco's Spain is not simply a question of the independence of the Eipapolan nation but a problem that transcends frontiers and creates a grave danger for the world and urged that the recommendations of the tripartite note signed by the United States, Great Britain and France last March be applied in practice. In a firm tone and pointing his index finger at the large audience that followed the deliberations with rapt attention, Dr. Evatt affirmed that although Franco is not a threat at present, there is no doubt that he is a potential threat and urged the members of the Council to put into practice the recommendations of the subcommission or others that could lead to the desired goal, which is the elimination of Franco and the return to the Spanish people of their own destiny. In support of his statements, Evatt quoted verbatim words of the late President Roosevelt and former U.S. Secretary of State Cordell Hull, Roosevelt having said that "fascism could not survive in any form once the world war ended", while Cordell Hull stated that "fascism and democracy cannot coexist in the world", it could be said that Dr. Evatt gave tacit recognition to the Spanish Republican government of Dr. Jose Gira! He mentioned it several times as such, although he noted that the sub-commission was not recommending any particular form of government for Spain, but rather a regime that would be freely elected by the people and capable of carrying out the recommendations of the tripartite declaration regarding the reestablishment of civil liberties and the declaration of a general amnesty for the faithful. He emphasized that the subcommission should not be left unfulfilled in its recommendations if Franco were simply replaced by another general who would leave things as they are. In response to the criticisms raised by Madrid, Evait (emphasized that the subcommission speaks 1 (worked "objectively and legally").
- Sullivan is in favor of appointing a man sympathetic to the program of the present Administration, but says he has no influence on appointment WASHINGTON, 7. (PU)-Puerto Rico Senate President Lula Mufloz Marin told the United Press that he had a "very satisfactory" interview with Democratic National Committee aide Gael Sullivan. The Puerto Rican spokesperson said that Sullivan, who
Sullivan, who handles most of the appointments for the committee, had "a very good picture" of things in Puerto Rico, he said. He added that the aforementioned aide's attention was drawn to the fact that high political appointments should be made on a different basis from political appointments, as I heard from Postmaster General Mufloz Marin seemed generally confident that "things would work out well" (such were his words), v that Resident Commissioner Fihero will win the nomination for governor of Puerto Rico, (Meanwhile, International News Service correspondent Jean Ven Vranken reports from Washington that the Admlnl* (Continued on page 24 i
RECRUITMENT WASHINGTON, 7. (Pü)-The debated draft deferment bill was set aside, tomK rakishly, by the House of presenters, today, to begin debate on legislation granting final Ucence pay to men formerly in the service of the armed forces. Dwight L Rogers, D-Florida, who had previously obtained the signatures of 218 Congressmen to clear the House Military Affairs Committee of the bill because it had not yet passed.
Over two million dollars paid veterans in mavo I ■ - * Thirty-one thousand eight hundred and seventeen former soldiers received compensation payments.One thousand five hundred and thirty under treatment The Veterans Administration reported yesterday that the new Adjudication Division, whose functions were made independent of the office at Wáshlngton, has begun to receive the first cases of claims, having reviewed, during the month of May last, 104 ca-
The Regional Office for Adjudication, whose functions were made independent from the Wáshlngton office, has begun to receive the first cases of claims, having reviewed, during the month of May, 104 claim cases, having reviewed, during the month of May, 104 cases of claims already 1. awarded. Regarding other activities of the Regional Office for Veterans headed in San Juan by Dr. Jaime Serra Chavarry, this agency reported the following: We give below other figures representing the main ac- i tivities carried out by the Veterans Ad- ■ mlnlstration through the Puerto Rico Regional Ofltina: Vocational Rehabilitation and Instruction Service: By virtue of Federal Law No. 18: The number < of applications received up to May 31 I, 958. Number of veterans < undergoing vocational guidance, 190. Number of veterans whose 1 training has been interrupted or discontinued, 60. Number of veterans receiving training, 243. Under Act No. I 346 (Veterans' Bill of Rights): The number of applications received through May 31, 12,618. Number of veterans whose eleglblll* । tity for educational benefits is-u t is still under consideration, 211. Núm-1 mber of veterans receiving adies- i tramlento. Number of veterans whose training has been interrupted or discontinued, 556. Number of payments authorized for subsistence, 1,764. 1¡ Medical Service: Number of applications for physical examination filed, where examinations were 'pending on May 31, 293 Applications filed and examinations performed during the mee, 348. Number of applications for hospitalization received during the month of May, 1,851, Applications handled during the month, 1,885. Applications pending on May 31, 0. Number of veterans pending admission to hospitals on May 31, 0. Veterans confined in hospitals: Number of veterans receiving medical treatment in hospitals on May 31, 1,530. 1.530. Patients whose illness was service-acquired, 13. Patients whose illness was not service-acquired (continued on page 24.)
The Planning Board has set June 12 as the date to discuss and approve the zoning map of the territorial jurisdiction of San Juan. Said map divides San Juan and Santurce, up to its municipal limits, into thirteen construction districts. It is expected that the Governor will quickly give his approval to this document, which will be effective immediately. The Board has been preparing abundant information for the public on the nature of each of the districts included in the map. Special attention will be given to the areas destined for residential, commercial, industrial and public uses. A vast section of San Juan and Santurce is occupied on the map by the area of the suburbs, which are spread out in the vicinity of the entire city. These areas appear cía-1 I slflcadas to be improved, median- 1 i te In execution of projects públl-( (Continued on page 24.) I
Serious disorder has broken out in several provinces of Italy In N á p o 1 e b the Police are losing control of the situation. - Armored cars are on the streets. - Change of government postponed
By Fdward Klerr ROME, 7 (INS)- In various parts of Italy today there were popular disorders in protest against the abolition of the monarchy Rome Naples and Pisa - pro-monarchist centers - were the cities where the largest demonstrations in favor of King Humbei to In Naples one was killed and wh were wounded when a bomb was thrown against a group of four hundred Thais gathered in front of the Church of St. Anthony. This disorder in Naples was followed by scenes of increasing violence as the day progressed. In that city a serious clash occurred when several thousand anti-republlcanoi agitators paraded in protest against the separation of southern Italy.
Southern Italy in protest against the result of the referendum that deposed the dynasty. As the demonstrators refused to diso rorxe the police were forced to use firearms, killing one aotaadu and wounding several civi>e". On the buildings that marginalize the" main streets of Naples "o see large posters addressed to I-umrerto that read, "We love you. Don't go away. Come here." The Ministre tai interior, Giuseppe Romlta. socialist leader to whom Je originally corresponded to announce lo" results of the plebiscite. pro< "gave to issue orders to all loa prefects to the ends that they adopt energetic to suppress disorders and give all possible ia píete tion to the members d" Ja royal family that leave the country and "if same to their goods. In Rome, there were numerous clashes between the police and pro-monarchist demonstrators. Young Italians chanting "Viva Humberto" detillaroned for Corsican Humberto, "n the heart of the ca(Continued on page 24.)
They will contest validity of CSP's order on bread weight The FLT and Bakers Union drowned, Txdo. Hipolito Marrano, intends to file the case before the island and federal courts.
By LUIS F. RANOHKZ CAPPA EL MUNDO Editor The orddn issued by the Public Service Commission, through the Public Service Burea. The order issued by the Public Service Commission, through the Bureau of Weights and Measures, by which the tahoneros are allowed a two-ounce reduction in the production of bread rolls, will be challenged before the insular and federal courts, as reported yesterday by Mr. Hipólito Marcano. Mr. Marcano has been studying the scope of the authorization given by the CSP to the bread manufacturers, in order to establish if it complies with the provisions of Law number 13 of April 1917 regarding the manufacture of bread. The undersigned expressed that he has received from the CSP a certified copy of the order of the Bureau of Weights and Measures granting a tolerance in the weight of bread, which is being studied by him.
'<lo studied by it in light of the provisions of the aforementioned law. The legal capacity of the Negocia-: do to decree a reduction in the weight of bread will have to be discussed by Mr. Marrano in court, in representation of the ¡Union de Panaderos de San Juan, the Federación Libre de los Trabaja¡doras and the consumers. The possibility that the bakers' attorney will resort to the Federal Court to also challenge the determination of the OAP setting the maximum price for bread made under the provision of the CSP and its Bureau of Weights and Measures, was announced by Mr. Marcano, stating that he will invoke the jurisdiction of said court with allegations that the federal agency has violated an Insular law, and exceeded the authority granted by the federal agency!*(Continued on page 24.). 1
Plans shall adopt uniformity in school construction.
The Planning Board shall adopt uniform standards to govern the construction of public schools in the urban areas of Puerto Rico. Such standards are to be discussed by the Board at its June 14 meeting, it was reported yesterday. A committee of government technicians has been studying this matter for the past several months and has drafted a final "Inform" that will establish the basis for the adoption of rules that will cover the development of the school construction program in all urban areas.
urban areas. The final report to the Board was drafted by the head of its Urban Development Department, Mr. Luis Rivera Santos, and by Engineer Telesforo Carrero, head of the Engineering Division. The regulations will be extended to buildings for elementary, Intormedlaa and higher schools. The capacity of these new facilities will be determined taking into account the present urban population, the number of students and the influx of students from rural areas.
conflict on the waterfront; Yesterday there was a strike on the Pacific.
Unions still in vote on strike announced for 15th Message to Traman from FAT leaders In New York harbor large demonstrations were held yesterday By PHILIPS PEK WASHINGTON, 7 (INS), - A pledge made by the American Federation of Labor to assist the Government in keeping the U.S. Merchant Marine in service during the maritime strike of the Congress of Industrial Organk zadonec was threatened today by the temporary stoppage of the International Marlneroc Union, an affiliate of the Federation. The American Federation of Labor officials told the White House last week that their Seafarers' Union would not strike on the Pacific Coast and that their Longshoremen's Union would not stop loading and unloading on the eastern coast of the United States during the strike announced by the CIO for June 15. In spite of these promises, these unions held meetings to study the advisability of going on strike, while the heads of the Maritime Union of the CIO waited for the Government or the shipowners to take the initiative to resolve the impasse in the negotiations. After interrupting work yesterday to attend meetings and vote in favor of a strike if the government tried to provide the ships with the necessary personnel, the maritime workers returned to their posts. The American Federation of Labor's Unlóp do Marinoroo announced today that arrangements are being made for its members in New York Harbor and other Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico ports to vote to strike in a timely manner. Five thousand New York maritime workers were affected yesterday by the temporary work stoppage. Meanwhile, the Pacific Marlneroo Union has announced through its New York office that a work stoppage will take place on the West Coast of the United States at 3 p.m. today, New York Daylight Saving Time. As to the vote to be taken in New York on the strike, the vice-president of the Seafarers' International Union said it was unlikely to take place this week. He said that if a strike is declared, it will not begin until after a month has elapsed, in accordance with the 30-day truce provided for in the Smlth-Connally Act. The leaders of the Seafarers' International Union and the Pacific Mariners' Union - both affiliated with the American Federation of Labor - have stated that the strike plans of their respective unions have not been prepared in any way to show solidarity with the National Maritime Union of the CIO, which they claim is dominated by the Communist element. In a message to President Truman, the Chiefs of the American Federation of Labor have stated that "There is no identification" between the two"" union""" groupings, but they add, very expressly, that the members of the American Federation of Labor "will consider any attempt to use the National Marine, the Coast Guard and the Maritime War Administration to doll ships" with naval personnel under the clauses" of" labor" contracts" as a conspiracy to undermine and deirtrust the gains" of labor within the Merchant Marine." United Press Dispatches Indicate qu" yesterday ■" held in New York harbor large demonstrations, in which thousands of waterfront workers participated. The workers, affiliated with the American Federation of Labor, attended several meetings in tax qu" the' possibility of a strike declaration was discussed. This action began to be taken precisely ten days before the date which has been set for the beginning of the national strike on the waterfront, in which six unions affiliated with the Congress of Industrial Organizations and an independent union intend to declare a work stoppage in the maritime activities of the United States. Meanwhile in Pittsburg, Fk ladelfia, the United States Federation of Musicians authorized a strike.(Continued on page I)