THE WEATHER
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY: Clear to partly cloudy. Light showers, quite scattered, along the north and east coasts in the morning. Scattered showers in the Interior in the afternoon. East-northeasterly winds, light. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 80; low, 89; rain, traMS.
40 pages 5/
LA MARANA DIARY
YEAR XXVIII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, DECEMBER 28, 1946
Entered a" second class matter. Poet Office, San Juan, F. R.
NUMBER 10810
Help fight tuberculosis. Purchase Christmas sollos.
New hotel will have 12-acre lot
All" the" readjustment" "1 fourth economic program of the Insular Government, which is being prepared by the Planning Board, have been completed" in accordance with the fund" disbursements approved by the last special Legislature, and the plan awaits only the Governor's feign action sohr* some appropriations bills awaiting his signature, to be submitted to him on December 31 next. This was reported yesterday by Mr. Francisco de Jeans, the head of the Board's Finance Division.
Compendium of News
Yesterday, a shipment of 70,000 sacks of rice arrived on the Island, coming from the Pacific. - National Association of Manufacturers predicts inflation and unemployment for 1947 as a result of any general wage increase. - * * The teachers' assembly yesterday considered the status case. Approved report of Committee on recent strike; discerned vote of confidence in President and Board of Directors. Today concludes its work. - * - . The discussion of the minor clauses is almost over, now the APA and the Sugar Union are about to negotiate on wage increases and closed shop. - - - - i* Automobile manufacturers conduct a census of customers. They say that the high prices have caused the list of customers to decrease considerably. * * * * LlberattMn the rules on school construction. " t - Dr. Eduardo Garrido Morales is the Director of the Division of Hospital Facilities- " " " - * In all, the special legislative session hlso appropriations for the amount of M,838,004. - '
। sum increases the eco| nomic program of the Government, The Compartía de Fomento Industrial and the Hilton Hotel Corporation signed an agreement to build in San Juan a hotel valued in the sum of 88,000,000, - - - - The Chief of the Veterans Division of the Insular Government, Colonel Miguel A. Mullos, prepares the program of his office. - " - "It is alleged that there was an ultimatum by the Russians to a U.S. ship. State official alleges that he was misinterpreted in giving the news. * Ponce defends its lead in the Professional Baseball League with the games starting at El Castillo, with the Aguadilla Sharks in second place. Estado" Unidos reconquered the Davi" Cup. (President Guzman intends to resign from the presidency of the Baseball League. The tahoneros are being consulted on whether or not to go on strike, after the AGS authorized yesterday to increase the price of bread by only 1 cent per loaf. The industry is talking about the possibility that the increase - effective today - could be 2 cents. * * * Health reports that the typhoid outbreak in Guaynabo has been con' tmlled.
The Hilton Hotel Corp. reports that it will spend $3,000,000. It will have an eight hundred foot spa. The Hilton Hotel Corporation has signed an agreement with I" Compabla de Fomento Industrial nar.i the construction of a modern hotel, which will be located on a strip of land of twelve ropes", in the "Immediación"" of the fort of San Jerónimo. The firm of McCann, Erickson Corporation, which serves the Compafila de Fomento -Industrial, reported yesterday that it has begun surveying the land and topographical studies of the area to be occupied by this new hotel. | The land" to be occupied is in the northern section of the Condado inlet, between the Hotel Nor- ! manole and the fort of San Jeronimo, and extends southward to the border of the" property now occupied by the Navy, where they locate a number of residence" for office workers. They also adjoin the Escamibron resort, from the vicinity of which they extend northward to the east along the Atlantic coast. ! The McCann Erickson agency yesterday unveiled the details of the project, announcing that "the construction of this new structure is one more step taken by the Com- - partía de Fomento for the development of the tourism industry and for the stimulation of private capital, and for the stimulation of private capital 1 toward analogous enterprises in those" points of the Island that are considered appropriate" to provide greater lodging facilities to tourists, businessmen" and visitors to the pals, in whose projects the Compafila can offer economic contribution, according to the aid plan that it is putting into practice". f The preliminary studies announced include the construction of a building with a capacity of 300 rooms, which will have a balcony with a view of the Atlantic, and with "air conditioning. The work of filling the coast of the Condado lagoon will be continued, to match the work carried out in the strip occupied by the State Navy. In addition, a spa of approximately 800 feet in length will be built, which will face the sea, and the open spaces will be conditioned by providing a modern swimming pool, some cabaftas, gardens, roads and tennis courts, making the exterior natural ornamentation so that the project offers the aspect of a tropical hotel. It was also reported to EL MUNDO that "five architectural firms have been invited to submit their preliminary projects, from which the one that will serve as the basis for the final project will be selected. Among these five firms there are three of them, as the company maintains the criterion of giving the largest participation in the preparation of the preliminary project to the country's architectural firms. The other two firms (Continued on page 24)
- By $8,838,004 increases the Island Government's economic plan । To the same amount reaches the total of the, 1 appropriations made in special session. - Most of it is for salary increases
According to figures obtained" by the ■ Board, the new appropriated" outlays amount to $8,838,004. figure ■ which will be deducted from the balance of i fund" in the Te "oro Imular. for the ■ fiscal year beginning July 1, 1947, This figure will be - increased to the total outlays i of the Government, for the present fiscal year. This, which was . 880,676,208, will now rise to $89,- - - 514,212, which figure includes the" $8,838,-; . 004 approved at the special legislative' session. The largest appropriation of funds" ¡ approved corresponds to the salary increase for public employees. The additional compensation to be paid, for the term from the approval of the law until June 30, 1947, involves an expenditure of public funds amounting to $84,060,620, followed by the contribution for the General Supply Administration, of $3,500,000. This amount will be invested in the program for the purchase of basic necessities. Other important appropriations are as follows: $875,000 to cover deficiencies in the classroom construction plan and for the acquisition of land for the years 1945-1946. 8275,000 for the development of the Martin Pefia canal project and port improvements. The sum of $33,784 provided to the Communications Authority, to increase the salaries of its employees, until June 30, 1947, $38,000 for the new San Juan Municipal Court: $28,000 for the construction of a second floor to the National Guard armory: the "nara" fund (Continued on page 24).
High prices threaten car sales
Manufacturers take census" fearful of losing customers Uncertainty over possible strikes* Cannot calculate exact production for period longer than 1 month By Roy .1. FORREST Press Correspondent l'nlda DETROIT. 27 (PID - The automobile fahrlcintel is closely watching sales trends to determine how many prospective customers are being thrown out of the car and truck buying market-which is a tremendous market-because of high prices . Fears that the current inflated automobile prices have already made serious inroads into the market of potential customers are a major factor in the tussle between the manufacturers and the United Automobile Workers union, affiliated with the Congress of Industrial Organizations, over wages. Sales managers, who were oplmlitaa a year ago, are now reporting that a growing number of people are finding car prices too high and have stopped ordering new models. However, this trend has not yet assumed alarming proportions. Granted that the public has the power to purchase them, automobile manufacturers estimate a market of automobile buyers amounting to 15,000,000 to 21,000,000 units, despite the fact that the automobile industry will have produced only about 2,150,000 cars and some 40,000 trucks in 1946. The manufacturers admit that the prices of their automobiles must go down; but at the same time they claim that the trend will be in the opposite direction, and they concede that further increases in wages will be granted to the Oalf union. (As is well known, the Union has set its target for such increases at 23 and a half cents an hour, or 17.5 percent). The OAU's demands for raises amount to 99.40 cents per worker. The number of employees in the industry at present is nearly 700,000, so that such wage increase demands involve an additional expense to the manufacturing companies of some W,500,000 a week. The labor union contends that the mill breakers will make immense profits in 1948 and 1947 at prevailing prices, basing this prediction on the volume of production it assumes there will be in the coming year. For their part, industry spokesmen contend that the 1944 yield v. men. ".u is in no way a Mrtidum-| bre, because of the possibility of a, strike in the Steel Industry, sometime in January, and the prospects of continued shortages of materials. The "Ward" reports on the Auto Industry, which gives the industry statistics, say that the best observers believe that the auto workers' union will wait to see the results of the steel workers' negotiations over their demand for a 10 to 15 cents an hour increase before pressing their own demands. A shortage of iron and steel, resulting from the recent 17-day strike in the bituminous coal mines, has forced the Ford Motor Company, as is known, to announce a plant closing from December 24 to January 2. Spokesmen for the automobile industry indicate that even if the demands of the steel and auto workers are settled, there is the possibility of a new strike in March at the coal mines, called by the union headed by John L. Lewis, if a new labor agreement has not been reached by then. (Continued on page 24).
Garrido Morale* in E. U. Public Health.
I SBr 'y ■ ■ ■ JH a Dr. Eduardo Garrido Morales Former Commissioner of Health dr Puerto Rico He is the Director of the Division of Hospitals The Island is entitled to an annual allowance of $2,500,000.00 The United States Public Health Service" announced yesterday the appointment of former Puerto Rico Health Commissioner Eduardo Garrido Morales, M.D., to the position of program director of the Division of Hospital Facilities" of the United States Public Health Service, He will also act as a consultant to the "antivenereal and antituberculosis programs" to be carried out in Puerto Rico with funds to be contributed to the Island Government as determined by Act 725 of the last Congress;e Dr. Raymond A. Vondqrehr, M.D., authorized the following statement: "The United States Public Health Service, which has been cooperating in recent years with the Insular Department of Health through grants" for general public health work, venereal disease control and tuberculosis, will soon begin a new cooperative program to provide adequate hospital facilities to serve the entire population of the island. "Under the provisions of Act" 725 passed by the United States Congress" during the month of August. 1948, Puerto Rico is entitled to an annual appropriation of approximately two and a half million dollars for a period of five years, to be invested in the construction of general, mental, tuberculosis, chronic, and related facilities. In order for a State or territory to qualify to receive funding for the construction plan, a full inventory of all the facilities must be made.
The industry had asked for a 2.5% increase in the U.S. wage hike, and the teachers' union considered that it would be a good idea to increase the U.S. wage hike.
I I I I Teachers considered to see status case I ('.undena anti-professional attitude during the teachers' strike Elected several of its directors Discerned a vote of confidence to the President and the Board of Directors By DARIO CARI.O Editor of EL MUNDO I I I Before the annual assembly of the Puerto Rican teachers' union, which has been held since Thursday in Hato Rey. the problem of the political "status" of Puerto Rico was raised yesterday. The reaction of the assembly was in favor of the termination of the present state of colony in which the political life of the pal develops". The issue was promoted by the vice president of the Teachers Association, Virgilio Brunet, in a speech he gave, making a general call to the teachers "to make a valuable contribution to the solution of the political problem. The delegate of the University, Dr. Julio García Díaz, took part in the discussion, inviting the delegate to clarify the changes and to assume each one's position of responsibility in the face of the problem. Like Mr. Bruent, Dr. Garcia Diaz declared that the Teachers Association has to face the political situation of the pala. The teachers' assembly ends its work today, Saturday. Morning session The teachers' assembly resumed its work at half past eight yesterday morning, with brief words by the president of the Local Board of Teachers of San Juan, Mr. Camilo Delgado Cuevas. The vice president, Mr. Virgilio Brunet, then gave a long speech, making a history of the Association, from its organization to date and also making an outline of the activities "te the entity in the various stages of its life, to conclude ron a summary of the work that in his opinion the Association should perform in the near future, Referring to the period between 1941 and 1948, during which the current preslden,te, Beftor Luis Mufilz Souffront, has headed the Association, he praised the activity of the president. The assembly welcomed this praise with visible enthusiasm. Brunet declared, referring to Mufilz Souffront, that he was "the man of the greatest energy and enthusiasm that he has known in the presidency", adding: "To his enormous effort, to his dedication to work, to his fervent love for the Association, we owe, in great part, the triumphs achieved in the last six years, the Golden Period of the Association". । The "status" ' In his speech, Mr. Brunet addressed the problem of the "status" of Puerto Rico, saying that the teachers, all united in the Association, could contribute powerfully to solve our sovereignty problem, just as in Hawaii the teachers' association of that pals has achieved from the National Education Association of the United States a pronouncement in favor of statehood as a formula for solving the political problem of the aforementioned islands. The speaker also made reference to the fact that a congressional commission has declared that it also favors statehood as a solution to the "political status of Hawaii. I "What the teachers have accomplished (Contlnued on page 5.)
School construction liberalized APC announces changes to current restriction. - The Civilian Production Administration, headed by Mr. Ramon Mantener, reported yesterday that it has liberalized the restrictions on the construction of buildings for primary and secondary schools. The information received by Mr. Montaner, from the Office of Temporary Controls in Washington, states the following: "The loosening of the "aeration procedures to pave the way for an increase in the construction of facilities needed for primary or intermediate schools throughout the country", was announced today by the Civilian Production Administration. The new policy adopted by the CPA will allow the approval of these constructions, provided that the current classroom facilities are insufficient to provide full instruction to the school enrollment in a daily session. "In order to provide the maximum number of critical building materials and laborers for the rapid development of the veterans' housing program, the Veterans' Housing Program will be approved by the Board of Trustees; In order to provide maximum critical building materials and workers for the rapid development of the veterans' housing program, the CPA generally approved school construction only when the available facilities were insufficient when daily school sessions would be held in the same building, "The CPA indicated that the new liberalized interpretation of Order Number One on the veterans' housing program, promulgated in keeping with the policy of establishing a practical balance between housing and non-housing construction, has been made possible because of the increase in the number of students per day in the same building.
Drastic police reorganization continues in New York City
The changes in that Corps now cover five districts of the Metropolis. - Commissioner of Correction, Dr. Amoroso, resigned yesterday.
NEW YORK. 27. (PU)- The drastic reorganization of the New York City Police and Prison corps, resulting from Mayor O'Dwyer's campaign against petty gangsters, gamblers and racketeers, has gained great momentum. The ramifications of the shake-up have spread to the city's five boroughs, as a result of ratiroa - forced" and otherwise - transfers, promotions and demotions. Mayor O'Dwyer's aforementioned onslaught against vice "was spurred by the murder, as yet unexplained, of the poll worker.
elucidated, of the Republican poll worker, Joseph Scottirregio, on the day of the last congressional election, and by the recent attempts of big gamblers and professional gamblers to 'fix' athletic contests to derive immense profit." The latest to leave New York City government was Dr. Peter F Amoroso, Commissioner of Correction, whose department moved a convicted "fixer" of college basketball games from a prison cell to a position of trust at Bellevue Hospital. The name of the trusted employee was mentioned offhand in connection with the attempt to "fix" the National Football League championship game between the Chicago Bears and the New York Giants. "Mayor O'Dwyer said that he "suggested" to Amoro "o that he resign, and that he promptly filed his request for retirement. To protect Dr. Amoroso's right to retire, O'Dwyer said he would be given a one-month position in the Department of Hospitals. O'Dwyer and the Commissioner of Police and Prisons, Arthur Wallander, began the shake-up in Police and Prisons earlier this month because they were dissatisfied.
Colonel Muñoz prepares program for his division
Colonel Miguel A. Muñoz, head of the new Veterans Division attached to La Fortaleza, was sworn in a few days ago and is currently working to organize the new government agency. When asked yesterday about his program of activities, Muoz informed, through the Fortaleza Information Office, that he is currently drafting his work plan, the details of which he will make known soon.
For days now, Colonel Muñoz has been negotiating for an appropriate location to establish his office and holding interviews with agencies in charge of programs for the benefit of veterans. He is also studying a budget for operating expenses and coordinating the work to be done. For this reason, it was not possible yesterday to obtain specific statements on the plan to be implemented soon.
Bombardier fires five-inch rockets ■ * - ■ ■ ■ . ■ ■ . . . " ■ fixed j* r . bu , Do" rocket" five-inch" rocket" depart diaparadoa by the U.S. Navy's Mitchell TB.I bomber, headed for its target in the first ground test of I* new weapon, prepared not only for ground targets but also nara air combat. The test took place at Naval Gunnery Station Inyokern, California. The Navy explained that the new weapon gives the bomber aircraft the firepower of a cruiser. - (Photo by Associated Press).
Pinero to go to U.S.; proposes Buscaglia as interim Says garages are lacking to cope with abuse of official cars. - He talks about the problem of the port of Aguadilla At the beginning of yesterday "u conferencia "semanal ron 1o" perlndiita", Governor Jesus T. Plfiero reported that he has signed the following bills, approved by the Legislature in the last extraordinary session: Senate Bill No. 12, allocating $8,000.00 to the Minimum Wage Board to increase its personnel and purchase equipment; House Bill No. 10, amending the Inheritance Law to exempt from the payment of taxes donations made to charities and charitable organizations; House Bill No. 10, amending the Inheritance Law to exempt from the payment of taxes the donations made to charitable organizations and charitable organizations; House Bill No. 11, amending the Inheritance Law to exempt from the payment of taxes the donations made to charitable organizations and charitable organizations.
to allocate, from any balance or remnant of the appropriation appropriated in Act No. 495 approved on April 29, 1946, the sum of $28,000.00 to be used for the construction of a second floor in the building that is being built with federal funds for a garage on the grounds of the Puerto Rico National Guard located in Puerta de Tiería. The Governor stated that he had held a conference yesterday morning with representatives of a fertilizer factory, the Commissioner and the Deputy Commissioner of Agriculture of Puerto Rico, discussing the problem of the shortage of fertilizer. Mr. Plñero said that although there are raw materials allocated for the manufacture of fertilizer, he did not have much confidence that they would be received, so it is prudent that the available fertilizers be used in such a way as to reach all the farmers. 1 The Governor having been informed that an agenel" spoke yesterday of the news that President Truman had announced that he would recommend to the new Congress the passage of a law that would allow Puerto Ricans to decide by plebiscite the form of political status they desire for the Island, he said the following: a good sign of progress by the President "o-i Itclter e"" law. I look forward to hearing from the President's mouth that message in the Congress." In connection with the abuse of official cars by some Government officials, the Governor stated that he was aware that many cars were being misused, and said he had in his possession the numbers of the cars that had been misused, and added: "It is impossible to regulate properly the use of Government cars if there are no facilities for them to be kept in working order. It is necessary to have garages for not less than 500 automobiles and to keep a record of each road. To try to do otherwise would be to do things by halves. Many official cars are being misused because they are not kept in Government garages. "I have been trying to get the PRRA garages, at stop 8b, but they are occupied." Asked if the Governor was aware that there is currently a regulation that was promulgated by former Puerto Rico Auditor Patrick J. FltszlmmonB, to control the use of Government automobiles, Mr. Pifiero replied that he was aware of the regulation, but that without garages to store the cars, it was not possible to enforce it. The Governor announced yesterday that he will leave for the Federal Capital on New Year's Day, and that he has recommended to the Department of the Interior the name of Rafael Buscaglla to replace him as interim Governor. In Washington, the Governor will manage the appointment of Lula Negrón Fernández as Attorney General of Puerto Rico ■ and that of Judge Borlnquen Marrero to fill the vacancy on the Supreme Court. The sefior Pifiero also stated that he will not make, during his perm"- । nence in Wáshlngton, which will be of (Continued on page 12) i i*/
BORDER OF MEJICO AND U.S.A. CLOSED NOGALES, Arizona. 27. - (PU). - l4 "s U.S. border authorities announced today that the Mexican border is again closed to the importation into the United States of Mexican cattle, but there has been no immediate explanation of the decision. i 1. the border had been closed on June " through October IR, because of suspicion that foot-and-mouth disease might be present in Brazilian cattle imported by Mexican ranchers. 6,050 head of cattle were rlista" to cross In border, between today and Tuesday. i A shipment of rice arrived । the Island yesterday CóiistH of 70,000 "aco" come lew from the West. - Another shipment is expected Yesterday the first mud from the Pacific coast docked at the port of San Juan, after nearly three months of total absence of supply from the ports of that zone to Puerto Rico. The steamship that arrived at the port during the afternoon hours was the Brigham Victory, owned by the American shipping company Hawaiian, whose representative on the island is the San Juan Mercantil Corp. The ship arrived loaded with 70,000 sacks of rice consigned to several local merchants, including the General Supply Administration. It also brought on board a cargo of food products and canned fruits. The total tonnage brought by the Brigham Victory is 8,000 tons. The steamer sailed from the port of San Francisco, California, several weeks ago, at the end of the strike dispute that prevailed for nearly two additional months" after the Atlantic coast strike was settled. As reported yesterday by Mr. A. Conde, an official of the San Juan Mercantile Corp., another steamship consigned to said company, coming from the Pacific ports, sailed for the island on December 22, with another cargo of food products for the island and other items. It is expected to arrive in Puerto Rico on the 5th of January next. The steamer is the Central vlc- ! lory, also owned by the EmnreatjhjliiWiarican Hawaiian, and before sailing for the Island loaded at the ports of Portland, Seattle, San Francisco and Los Angeles. San Francisco and Los Angeles. On the other hand, for the first" days of January awaits the MacCormick Steamship Co. shipping line, the i (continued on page 24) and
I - ■ They consider that agreement * on strike is in force Viccita explains how the new authorized price scale was calculated Bread will be worth from today 13c. a pound Santiago Pinero was making a tour yesterday through tahonas of the Capital L" Administration do Sumini "1ro. that directs rl Mr. Antonio Virón* Ríos, decreed yesterday an" administrative order authorizing an increase of one cent in the selling price of bread to lo" consumers, to take effect Immediately. For that reason. I" pound d* bread as from today, will begin " to be sold to the public at the price of 13 cents. The following scale of prices has been established, for the sale of bread, per pound of 16 ounces: Wholesale, to deliverers, 10 and 1|2 cents"; to retailer", taken at the panadeóla. 11 cents; to retailer*, delivered at his* establishments, 11 1|2 cents: to the consuming public, 13 cents; and per half pound, 7 cents*. The Association of Industríale", through the voice of its secretary, Mr. Vicente León, Jr., informed EL MUNDO that the president of the Association of Tahonero", Mr. SanHago Pfftero, / en<ej'ado of the resolution of the Administration of Supplies. was making a tour of all the bakeries in the metropolitan area, consulting about the previous determination to go on strike. He said sefior Leon that tacitly, the agreement to go on strike throughout the industry is still standing, since the tahonero" assembly held lately had established an increase of two cents per pound, as a condition for not decreeing the strike, the Government's determination being contrary to such an agreement. Last night an urgent meeting of the Board of Directors of the Tahonero" Association was expected, to announce the final agreement of the board regarding the situation the industry is going through, according to the one cent agreement decreed, Mr. Leon also expressed having received numerous calls" and communications from different parts* of the Island, asking for information on the 1* sltuaclnón. He added that in many cases, upon learning of the 1" action of the 1" Supply Administration, he has been informed of the desire of these companies to cease operations, considering that a penny a penny is not enough to compensate them" for the losses they allege have been occurring in the past few years, The increase granted to the new bread prices is in accordance with the demands* established* by the Tahonero* Association of Puerto Rico, presided over by Mr. Santiago Piftero. This request has been made on the basis of an increase of two cents per pound. Mr. Vlcéns Ríos expresses that. examined the petlclones in his possession, which include others of "runos and tahonas, "we have enronirado an aran discrepancy between lo* different estimates submitted", for what has *ldo necessary to make through the Board of Salarlo Mínimo a study d? coBtes of production. oue servir de base to Ucear to the" conrluilones more Juilas." A summary is made of! study of 1a Minimum Salt Board, as a result of! analysis of roste" of nroducclón of eight bakeries, "localizada* in different" site" of the T "1a and of different importance." The* conclusions obtained" from the ISMB study are as follows, as reported by the senior VIcén": "The average production cost obtained is $.0935 per pound and is based on an average flour cost of $12.52, which Jo considers lower in relation to the current market, which fluctuates between $13.25 and $13.75 CIF per pound, and is based on an average flour cost of $12.52, which Jo considers lower in relation to the current market, which fluctuates between $13.25 and $13.75 CIF per pound.25 and $13.75 CIF per 200 lb. block" of quality flour, and which the Administration determines to be $13.70, based on an average cost of $13.50 CIF, and an average additional cost of hauling and other" of 20 cents" per hundredweight. "Considering an increase of $1.18 over the cost per hundredweight of the flour taken as a basis in the verified study, or equally considering other alleged small increases and taking into account that the "Industrialists themselves are generally direct distributors "1 consumer with a share of their production, and that they obtain the greatest benefit from such sales, as well as other less important grounds, which we consider reasonable, the Administration concludes that the average cost of 10 cents per hundredweight is the same as the average cost of 10 cents per hundredweight of the flour taken as a basis in the verified study. The Administration concludes that the average cost of 10 cents per pound of bread is the "average cost at" which the Administrator takes as a basis for resolving the request submitted. Mr. Vleéns Ríos concludes by stating that "in light of these studies and the evidence presented, taking into consideration factors such as the needs of the inhabitants of Puerto Rico, the prevailing wages and salaries, the price of raw materials, and mainly the increase in the price of flour in the supplying market, he determines that an increase of one cent per pound of bread is reasonable and, for these reasons, establishes the sales scale for the aforementioned product. 4 "