THE WORLD DAILY MORNING NEWSPAPER
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY-Clear to partly cloudy with scattered showers. Moderate to fresh easterly winds along exposed coastlines. High yesterday at San Juan, 81. .14 inches of rain recorded. No indication of tropical disturbance.
EMPLOYEES LEAVE- Washington, 29, (PU)-A total of 495,000 employees were furloughed from federal pay during the year ended September 80, leaving 2,154,888 in office, according to reports furnished today by the Civil Service Commission.
YEAR
XXVIII
NUMBER 10783 SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 1946
Entered aa aoeond elaae matter* Poet Office, San Juan, P. R.
PRICE 5 Cents
Case against Lewis denied dismissal; . Coal reserves depleting rapidly.
Expect an 80c. % increase in sugar.
Would be per quintal, in the middle of the 194-6 crop No indication as to 1947.
Sack shortage acute; would affect forthcoming production WASHINGTON, 28. (FV'- Se producer"! and eoMC^ r ®¿ B p S. a hi'.: "FM " WHrt."■""" comlll.Md. rwWW.nt. An* tonlo Tornó" Inrn revoló today oua to the Department of Agriculture 1a speaks XM eetá finishing the work of preparón of the contract and that a draft of the contract should ponlble within data or eight dlar P Previously Fernóe had a. erlto the Department eollcltando information "obreja ftHjStamíñ! cantrato in quo the Department has been working for vario" moao". . The contract which will cover the Puerto Rican sugar crop of 194? will also contain £"P® ,1C 1* nee "obro a revision of the price which M vlono paying for the 1948 crop. So oapora that eiaa dlsposidonee oatipulon an increase of about "0 cent" for every 100 do how much "ora the increase in the over Articulo" of the 1947 crop, will offer ia usual equality with the meadows that -" pay for the Cuban crop do íw. Although there was no speculation as to the price it has in mind for 1947, it has been specified that the contract will fix a price "not less than the highest price paid for the 1947 crop. Informed sources said that the Department of Agriculture is expected to make the draft of the Puerto Rican contract for 1947 available to the labor unions representing the workers in the Puerto Rican sugar industry. It was indicated that this action would give the unions a timely opportunity to make their plans on wage emendations for the industry's workers. Representatives of the Puerto Rican sugar producers said today that the recent lack of control over the manufacture, delivery and use of cotton and cotton sacks will have no effect on Puerto Rico's shortage of sacks for packing astear. The controls lifted by the Government have limited the sale and use in the United States of jute imported from India. The repeal of those restrictions will not affect jute sales, since India ships all of its jute goods within world-wide export quotas. Puerto Rican sugar producers said that the shortage of sacks is so acute that some mills will not have enough if the coming harvest is large. An industry spokesman said ''everything seems to indicate that there will probably be a shortage of almost a million bags. Producers are making every effort to get used bags from refineries in an effort to alleviate the shortage.
Pan American Airway" has reduced its round-trip fare from San Juan to Mio* mi to 8191.48. # f Senator Mánde" offers to continue the geetionea in favor of the port of Aguadilla. Describe ¡ mo roalisadas .va anta Interior st annual during a period do 8 ** The Association of Tahoneros Reports daMMOolego on the ceno do ja Industry with sMtlvo of the delay had in the autorimelón do an increase in the nmdo of the # . XI Bar Association appointed m with Ramiros Pabón and olProPones defends its leadership here Army and Navy play this traditional match of La ara Barceló ask ios teacher" to return to "their la-
News Compendium
Suspended" the" classes at the University from noon today, Saturday. - The studies for the Banturce sewerage system have been completed by an engineering firm. - Mariano Villaronga, dean of General Studies at the University of Puerto Rico, was appointed yesterday by Truman as Commissioner of Instruction of Puerto Rico. - o - Expected increase of 88 cents per quintal of sugar for half of the 1948 crop. Acute shortage of sacks for packing product. - The strike is estimated at 3,000 teachers, including more than half of those in San Juan. Mufli" will ask that there be no reprisals against those who do not attend classes on Monday. - o - A large shipment of butter arrived; however, there are complaints" from the public that it is not for sale. - The Court denied yesterday the dismissal of the contempt case against John L. Lewis, alleging that he had already made a declaration of guilt by refusing to call off the national miners' strike. In the meantime, the coal "reserve" is rapidly depleted.
Mariano Villaronga appointed Commissioner of Instruction.
Dr. Fernós Isern says that the appointment responds to the democratic principle of allowing the island to govern itself.
warmington 29 (PU)- President Truman appointed Marlano Villaronga to the post of Commissioner of Instruction of Puerto Rico. Villaronga, from the beginning, was Harold I Ea*ñusvo's nominee for Commissioner of Instruction of Puerto Rico.
from Harvard University, class of 1941, and since that date, he has held the deanship of the University of Puerto Rico.This appointment is a consequence of the official efforts of the Government of Puerto Rico, which has been raising the urgent need to fill such an important position, and came after the visit of the Chancellor of the University of Puerto Rico, Jaime Benitez, to this Capital, where he held an interview with the Undersecretary of the Interior, Oscar Chapman, making him see that the delay of such appointment was lowering the morale of the teachers on the Island. In addition, the newly appointed Resident Commissioner, Dr. Antonio Fernos I "érn, had been urging the appointment of Villaronga, as well as the appointments to the other two vacancies in the Puerto Rico Government - one on the Supreme Court and the post of Attorney General - and in connection with this matter, he had an interview earlier this week with Acting Secretary of the Interior Rex Leo, with whom he discussed these appointments. Commenting on the appointment of Villaronga, Fornós said: "I am very pleased with this appointment. It is in line with the policy outlined by the President to make appointments to important posts in the Island Government, in accordance with the democratic views already expressed by the President.
MARIANO VILLARONGA Commissioner of Instruction in connection with the self-government for Puerto Rico". He then added that "Villaronga has been recommended by all the leaders of public opinion who are in the majority on Puerto Rico, and, furthermore, with this in mind, the candidate, no doubt, is worthy of --- appointment (Continued on page 19).
democratic
Méndez to continue efforts in favor of Aguadilla port Announces those already carried out in the North before the federal Department of the Interior. - Points out the need for joint action by the interested parties
The soundman Bernardo Méndez, of Aguadilla, declared yesterday, in a communication that he addressed to us, that he favors that the Insular Government offers the Federal Government the immediate construction of the breakwater and the necessary breakwater for the construction of the Aguadilla dock, so that the Federal Government commits itself to dredge the port, as a means to accelerate the necessary works in the port of the city of Aguadilla.
the port of Aguadilla. "We intend to continue these efforts for the good of the district," added Mr. Mendez, "and we would be grateful if you would continue to encourage the 'joint action among all interested persons' proposed in your article of November 28, to bring to a successful conclusion the development of the Aguadilla port area. Senator Méndez expressed the following about the steps resumed to crystallize this project: "On the occasion of a trip I recently made to the United States, and taking advantage of the appointment of the current governor, Mr. Jesús T. Plftero, I visited with him to visit the port of Aguadilla. I visited with him the offices of the Department of the Interior in Washington and we focused on the Aguadilla wharf problem. "We argued there that it was the duty of our government to solve problems of the future and we demonstrated that we did not claim federal aid without first contributing, within the circumstances and economic resources of the People of Puerto Rico, the maximum effort of our Insular government but that it was necessary for them to manifest their interest in the problem so that our Legislature would feel confident that । (Continued on page 2)
Shipment of lard arrived in Puerto Rico However, there are complaints from the public that it is not for sale Two vessels from ports in the United States, the so-called "Noon Day" and "Cape Hattera", arrived in Puerto Rico during the first day of the week, brought to the island a large shipment of lard, amounting to 1,837,209 pounds, which was consigned to the Supply Administration and to commercial lard importers. It was reported yesterday, therefore, that there was sufficient lard in the possession of the Government and of the commercial importers to supply the demands of the retail trade and to meet the needs of the consumers. Notwithstanding this situation. EL MUNDO has been receiving complaints from "dlitlntaa part of the Island that there is a shortage of "ate essential item for the population. The Supply Administration only received about one third of this shipment, or about 865,000 pounds. This agency filled stockpiled reserves," having inielado the distribution. In the metropolitan area of San Juan, the most important "refrigerator" have large quantities of the product, dtspueitai. for sale. It was reported yesterday that "ata mantaca was obtained at price" Indino" in the U.S. trade, a ve" eliminated the control of oréelos by federal action and that *e (Continued on page 7.)
Classes at the UPR suspended as of noon today
The information director* of the University of Puerto Rico, J. M. Toro-Nsnrlo, Lic. Toro-Nsnrlo, auto i i rizó yesterday late the algulonte information: "In attention to the fact that the course" i of the first semester have ended vlrtualmonte and that it would be undesirable to submit the students of oata University to exams in the state of prevailing tension, and in consideration of the lack of facilities that confronts the university as a result of the work stoppage, the University Board ordered today (yesterday) the suspension of classes in the faculties of Rio 'Piedras, from noon do
tomorrow (today). The "uipen-lón only excludes the curio" of extramuros on the lila. Lo" exam "i so poipon "8 for ol aegun* do aomoitro and opportunely "o avilará el horario de loi mlgmoi. "Lai funcionar! admlnlitratlva" of the University will continue as usual. In the resolution approved to that effect, the University Board states that 'in no way can the prolongation of the citation be allowed in any way that is contrary to the climate of serene objectivity that must prevail in the study' of unlveraitarloa and that is more than (continued on page 7).
This photograph was taken last Monday, when the president of the United Miners of America, John L. Lewis, was on his way to the Federal Court at Wahlngton, before which he was arraigned yesterday on a contempt of court charge. Judge Goldsborough yesterday denied dismissal of the case, saying Lewis pleaded guilty by refusing to call off the miners' strike, as a result of which U.S. coal reserves are being rapidly depleted. (Associated Press Photo)
The public pickets lan residence* bolipul operators there SABANA GRANDE. (By Samuel Irizarry, correspondent). - Sabana Grande, "the capital of the bolipul", is currently in a state of uncertainty because of what happened to the winners" in this clandestine game. Hundreds" of people" awarded" the" last" three" numbers" of the Santo Domingo lottery jackpot satan plqueteando la" realdencla" of the" banker"". The police have been on the move, fearing unpleasant events, during these last three days. It is said that one of the bankers, perhaps the largest of all, with a total of 404 hancae, was taken late at night to a neighborhood in Sabana Grande. Should the bankers have to pay the prizes and after returning the money collected from the sale of all the tickets, it is estimated that they will have a loss of more than 8300,000.00. Prize-winning personnel from all the "ur" towns in the "ur" area. "e have permanently located in Sabana Grande waiting for ie 1ei to pay. The danger eifrlha in that these gentlemen are in aggressive attitude, claiming that they can not lose their money. With the problem that has been created, the clandestine business is on the verge of collapse in this jurisdiction. Hundreds of people live from this business and many are the ones who have become rich. The people eitá to the eipectatlva. in eipera of loi results, since ion. many loi that not "e hide to say that I read you has lacked the reipeto to the"" authority"" by publishing"" flyer"" as "I d" a legal game "e tratara.
triarte and his wife will attend GOP National Committee session Both leave today for the United States to join Republican Committeeman Eduardo R. Gonzalez in Washington, D.C.
The President of the Progressive Republican Union Party. Ledo. Celestino Triarte, "nldrá hoy sábado harta los Estados Unidos acompañado d" mu esposa, la señora Ana María Valdé" de Iriarte, Cnmmlteeman "señor Eduardo R. González, en Wáshlngton, D. C. y "Commltteewoman" d "l Partido Republicano Nacional en Pto.
ol purpose of joining the Committeeman, Mr. Eduardo R. Gonzalez, on Wáshlngton, D. C. and to attend, as he informed, the first session to be held by the National Republican Committee in said city on December 5, next, on the occasion of the victory achieved by said Party in the last eongressional election. The Ledo. Triarte has designated Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa to assume the Presidency of the Party during his absence in Washington. The General Secretary of the Party has notified this designation to all the members of the Territorial Committee and the President and Secretary of the Central Municipal Committees, as well as to the Government agencies. It was reported yesterday that once in Washington, the delegates of the Republican Union Party, chaired by Mr. Iriarte, will begin a series of interviews with the most prominent leaders of the National Republican Party, and with prominent members of the next Congress, to discuss matters related to Puerto Rico. Among the most important are the agreements approved by the Territorial Committee of the Party, on Buenas Buenas Water, on congressional action with respect to the recommendations contained in the Bell Committee Report, and a prompt solution to the political "tau" of the Island, on the basis of statehood. Mr. Eduardo R. Gonzalez will be in Washington tomorrow, where he will meet with the Triarte spouses to outline the preliminary rules for the best success of the plans to be carried out in the national capital. As is known, Mr. Gonzalez has been conducting interviews with Republican leaders in the last few days, dealing with matters entrusted to him by his party's leadership in San Juan. STREPTOMYCIN FOR CIVILIAN USE * WASHINGTON. 29 (PU)- The Civilian Production Administration declared today that beginning next month it will distribute streptomycin for civilian use through normal commercial channels. This drug, a product of war, is now being used extensively in the treatment of tuberculosis and was previously distributed only through the Armed Forces. For the past three months, streptomycin for civilian use was available only through hospitals and sanatoriums. The Civilian Production Administra- । clon said i that beginning in December I manufacturers would be able to dlstrl- i flee the drug like any 1 other. He also said that it would de- i sign the total amount that f each auplldor will be able to dlstrl* < flee for civilian domestic । and export use. He added i that no eatahlecldo ] quotas have been eatahlecldo ] yet. The Department of Commerce will control export quotas. - -... । .- i
DR. BATLLE PRESENTED HIS RESIGNATION YESTERDAY Dr. Fernando A. Battle whose appointment to the position of Director of Health and Welfare of the Capital, has been discussed from the legal point of view because he is a foreign citizen, has presented his resignation from his position to take effect as soon as the acting Administrator of the Capital designates a person to whom to hand it over. As reported by the Comíalo* nado de Salud Dr. Juan A. Pono, Dr. Bstlle accepted the appointment as Director de Beneficencia to help the Administration of the Capital to solve a problem that had arisen for the time being; but as soon as he learned that objections and criticisms had arisen, he immediately offered his resignation. He met for several hours yesterday with legislative leaders A !m late in the evening, and after a lengthy conference with loa loglalatlvoa leaders, Governor Riflero authorized the aigulent statement"! regarding the teachers' strike movement: "The Gov. poaltion should leave no room for doubt. It does not involve any threat or any intention that could be a threat to anyone's dignity. The statement which I have made that the Government will do its duty by not admitting a strike against Búa fundón"! as a Government, must not be interpreted in any other way than as an affirmation of its duty. The Government, which is already completing its studies on the problem, read will make the greatest juatida poiibl", as to au level of IngreaoB. to all" loa am* pisado! publica," Loi who took part in the conference to which we make mention were, in addition to the Governor, the preildent" of the Senate, aeflor Lula Muñoz Marin; ol prealdente of the House, Dr. Franclaco M. Suboni; the Island Auditor, softer Rafael do J. Cordero; loa roproaentantoB Hcendadoa Ernesto Ramos Antonini and Benjamin Ortis, and ol ooflor Gul. llermo Nlgagllonl. president" of the Civil Service Commission. The conference oatOB sefioreo was extended from five o'clock until seven o'clock in the evening, at which time the Governor authorized the above statement. Owing to the prolongation of this conference, Mr. Plftero suspended his conference with the press until next Tuesday afternoon at half past two o'clock, 1:00.
It is estimated that three thousand teachers are unemployed.
In San Juan there are more than 375, more than half of the total number Muñiz will ask for no reprisals New" support" for the movement initiated by the teachers The Teachers' Association would not welcome the Government taking reprisals" against the" teachers" who on Monday" did not "go to work" in the schools. The president of the Association, Mr. Luí" Muflí" Souffront. He reported aver that he would take measures repreiilva" by the" authorities, for disobeying the order to return to the" classrooms. he raised the problem to the Board of Directors of the Association of Mae "tro". in order" to resolve on the action to follow in M Mufllx Souffront. said that the Association recommended the Government not to take rspreialla" against the" strike". The management of the organization believes that the authorities will follow that recommendation. In the meantime, reports continue to come in about the strike movement. Some received yesterday indicate that in various parts of the island teachers who were on strike have resolved to return to their school activities on Monday. In several "eicuela" d" San Juan, yesterday vlerne", Day of the Tree, teachers" on strike went to "a" school" to "celebrate the holiday with their" students". It is estimated that half of the teachers went on strike in the capital. On the other hand, as received information expressing that the strike movement "has been joined by new" teachers. From Guaynabo, the "teachers" communicate that they have decided to go on strike, "out of dignity," in view of the "word" given" by the Governor'. The local "Junta" of teachers" initiates a counter-strike movement, inviting "their" colleagues on strike to return to "work" on Monday. This is the case of the Catafto Board, which informs this Editor. It is estimated that there are currently around three thousand teachers in the unemployment movement in San Juan, spread throughout the island. The" reports" received" by the Department of Education and which" are "calculated to indicate the situation on Tuesday," the first day of the strike, reveal that at the beginning of the movement on the aforementioned date, approximately 1,500 teachers were on strike; that in 32 towns the situation was normal, with no teachers on strike; and that in three municipalities the strike was total or almost total. The official list of the Department, in relation to the number of teachers on strike on Tuesday in each town, is as follows: Aguada, 37; Aguadilla, 114; Agua" Buena", 80: Aibonito. 8: Afta "co, 44: Arecibo, 73: Bayamón, 18: Cabo Rojo, 66: Cagua". he: Camuy. 10: Carolina. 46: Cayey. 148; Cidra, 5Í; Corozal, 38; Fajardo, 55; Guánlca, 61: Guayama, 8: Guayanilla, 17: Guaynabo, 6: Humacao, 125; Itabela-Quebradilla", 45; Junco", 37; Late", 80: La" María", 34; La" Piedra", 16: Lolza, 60; Luquillo, 26: Maunabo, 28; MayagUezHormiguero", 155: Orocovl", 61; Rio Grande. 38; Rio Piedra", 84; Sabana Grande, 15; San Germán, 129: San Juan, 375 (number eatimated for the present situation, or aea half of the capital's magiíterlo): San Sebastian, 61: Trujillo Alto, 13: Utuado, 100 (approximately); Villalba, 29; Yabucoa. 28: and Yauco. 82. This indicates that on Tuesday a total of 43 towns were on strike, total or partial. Guaynabo "e , (Continued on page 7.)
Court upholds trial of mining leader
New York teachers ask for a minimum wage of 82,400
They are also asking for an increase of one hundred and fifty dollars a year for a period of eight years* The entity defends the state retirement fund.
By OTTO E. 8TURM NEW YORK. 29th (PU). Mandating a minimum salary of 82,400 a year*" for each teacher, plus" an annual increase of 8150 for a period of eight years," approved a
a resolution "n yesterday by the New York State Teachers Association. The resolution, passed at the convention's final meeting, states that the agency will continue to make every effort to ensure that this type of salary is provided to every teacher in New York State. The resolution also invited the Executive Council and the Secretary General of the Association to implement legislation to include all theaters "in the professional category in accordance with their experience. The convention expressed its "definite opposition" to any move to extend federal or special legislation to include the New York State Teachers' Retirement System. A resolution passed on the matter stated that "the New York State Teachers' Retirement Fund has the prestige of being a well-established agency capable of fulfilling its obligations. Assuring that thousands of school children and adults have been victims of auto accidents.
(Continued on page 7)
Judge says Lewis pleads guilty
Goldsborough rules that free speech is not involved - Federal Judge T. Alan Goldiborough refused this morning to file and dismiss the contempt case against John L. Lewis, ruling that the Government's failure to specify criminal contempt was not sufficient cause to dismiss the case. The defense of Lewis, led by Joseph Padwav, moved for dismissal of the contempt case on the allegation that the Government sought to prosecute Lowls civilly and criminally, through the contempt charge, if he had been given "adequate notice" of it. Judge Golsborough, reviewing the defense arguments for dismissal, also said that the free speech issue was not "a matter for serious consideration" in the case. The Union had previously argued that the restraining order issued against it and Lewie by the federal judge violated their right to freedom of speech. Judge Goldsborough declined to make a formal ruling on whether the Norris-LaGuardla Act was applicable to this case, saying it did not apply. The Judge reviewed the history of the law, recalling that the authors never attempted to have the Government restrained from using the remedy, stating that an exemption for the Government was not included in the statute because of political considerations. Judge Goldooorough added that "it is perfectly clear that, under the Norris-LaGuar-dla Act or under the Clayton Antitrust Act, the Court has no right to restrain a labor union from undertaking any action which would operate against the public interest. (Yesterday, Thanksgiving Day, the only development in the coal crisis was the statement by a Coal Industry spokesman that the mine owner would be willing to negotiate directly with Lewis under a two week truce in the present strike. Lewis, for his part, was silent on this proposal; but he doubted that he would accept it, on condition that the miners return to work, temporarily, unless they get the increase in their wages they are asking for.) Meanwhile, as reported by the International News Service from the highly industrialized city of Pitsburg in the state of Pennsylvania, the nation's coal reserves were being depleted so rapidly today that there was nationwide unemployment due to the closure of the bituminous coal mine. The Solid Fuel Administration has just reported that some two million tons of coal are being consumed daily, and that available stocks of the fuel are only enough for 27 days. The United Press continues to report that Judge Goldsborough declared that John L. Lewis has in effect pleaded guilty to contempt of his court by refusing to call off the national coal strike. The Judge expressed that opinion, at the continuation of the trial, on the defense motion to dismiss the contempt charge. This statement by Judge Goldsborough was another frank indication that he intends to rule against Lewis and his Union. As the battle between Lewis and the Government continues, the strike continues, threatening the nation with industrial paralysis. The greatest threat to industrial production today is the possibility of an embargo on freight on the railroads, as no industry today could escape the effects of such a pass. In Clevsland, the New Yon Contra! reported that the daily average of freight trains has been reduced from one hundred and eighty to thirty-nine. In the western division of that railroad, which extends from Buffalo, N.Y., to Chicago and St. Louis, 3,000 workers have been laid off. In another division of the same company, service has been suspended. Coal supplies for heating purposes average two weeks' consumption, but in the western part of the nation, immediate emergencies have developed. In Utah, schools have been closed," replacing classroom work with radio programs. Servirte International News correspondent William Zimmerman, interpreting Judge Goldsborough's ruling that the Norrls-LaGuardla Act does not apply to the contempt case underway, says that "in view of Judge Goldsborough's subsequent ruling that the Norrls-LaGuardla Act does not apply, the conviction of Owls for contempt of court is imminent. (Continued on page I)