THE MUN DO
Congress meets today in special session
2nd EDITION 2 Sections" 38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
JOURNAL OF
. THE MACANA
YEAR XXVIII --Traffic signals are for the safety of all -Obodescámoalas.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MAY 25, 1946.
Enterad ss second elaas matter, Post Office, Ban Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10595
U.S. is on the brink of chaos: Train strike spreads throughout the country.
Bakers' strike continues On the 18th day of the strike no more conciliatory steps were taken yesterday - Clinics receive a refusal Bakers' Union did not accept invitation to authorize manufacture By Lula F. Sanchez Cappa Editor of EL MUNDO The strike conflict that has kept bread on the table of the inhabitants of San Juan and Santurco for 18 days continued yesterday without any settlement between bakers and bakers in sight. Having exhausted the last appeals by the Island Conciliation Service, the Service of Insular Conciliation, the government officials in charge of taking under their consideration the worker-staff-baker disputes, yesterday found no other way to put an end to the disagreement and therefore to the shortage of a vital food such as bread. Yesterday went by without any effort being made to bring employers and workers together, while the crisis that has increased due to the shortage of bread in office institutions, such as hospitals and clinics in the metropolitan area, became evident, when several of them sent letters to the Bakers Union asking for their cooperation in order to supply them with the amount of bread destined to the diets of their employees. In communications sent to the Union of Bakers, the Jullá Clinic, the Boascoochoa Clinic and the Torn Andes Garda Clinic, asked the bakers to allow the bakeries that currently supply them with bread, to produce the necessary quantities for the consumption of their patients. The administration of the Clinics Jullá says in its letter to the bakers that "this Institution is an institution for the treatment of mental and nervous patients, most of whom are veterans: the absence of bread on their plates has provoked protests from the patients who do not accept the reasons given to them to justify not serving it to them in their meals". He concludes by requesting the Union to allow the bakery "La Puertorriqueña" to produce 100 pounds of bread daily for the consumption of their patients. In similar terms, the other two medical centers mentioned above request both to allow the bakery "La Puerto-Wlquofta" to supply the amount of bread necessary for the consumption of the patients. The bakers replied to these institutions that "the Union truly regrets the situation that has arisen, but due to the reckless or intransigent attitude of the bakers, who have refused to submit the matter to an arbitration committee, the bakers are forced not to return to the bakeries until our justice is guaranteed, which is the people's justice". La Fortaleza reported yesterday that although Governor Tughoun had been reporting on the bread strike, nothing had occurred yesterday to indicate that a motion would be adopted to arbitrate the matter, but that the bakers were forced not to return to the bakeries until they were satisfied that the people's justice had been served.
Admiral Giffen severely reprimanded by Navy chief Investigation revealed disappearance of aircraft parts valued at S3Q,000 while senior officer headed the 10th Naval District WASHINGTON, 24th (PU)- The Senate War Investigation Committee announced today that five naval officers, including a vice admiral, have been reprimanded or reprimanded as a result of the Navy's official investigation into the disappearance of aircraft parts valued at S3Q,000 while the senior officer headed the 10th Naval District WASHINGTON, 24th (PU)- The Senate War Investigation Committee announced today that five naval officers, including a vice admiral, have been reprimanded or reprimanded as a result of the Navy's official investigation into the disappearance of aircraft parts valued at S3Q,000 while the senior officer headed the 10th Naval District.
"The Committee published a letter from the Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State's Office in San Jijan, Puerto Rico, stating that the disappearance of aircraft, valued at ' 830,000, in San Jijan, Puerto Rico. The Committee published a letter from Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal disclosing the contents of "letters of reprimand in my harshest terms" from him, the Navy's harshest form of administrative discipline, to Admiral Robert C. Giffen and Captain Frank E. Weld. Giffen commanded the Caribbean Sea Frontier, as well as the Tenth Naval District in San Juan, Puerto Rico. Accompanying the Navy report, on which Forrestal based the action taken, the Secretary said that the conditions discovered by the Navy's investigation "reflected unfavorably on the performance of duty" by Giffen. The principal adviser to the Committee, I (Continued on péging S3.) 1
Vice Adm. Robert C. Glffen
Measure Introduced to Revise Sugar Quota System The bill would amend and extend the Sugar Act of 1937. Puerto Rico would have a quota of 853,775 tons. - (PU)-Senators Joseph O'Mahoney and Edwin Johnston filed a bill today to amend and extend the Sugar Act of 1837, revising the quotas for the supply of sugar on a pro rata basis, after sugar regains surplus proportions. Senator O'Mahoney said it was his opinion that "there is no possibility of a surplus of sugar.
Several plants have already completed milling Guarnan* Machete among) the first. Several mills have already finished milling sugarcane for this harvest. The first to conclude their activities this year were the Guarnan and Machete mills. Pasto Viejo, Lafayette, Agulrro and Pellejas have finished the cane harvest. Guánk" and Santa Bárbara are expected to finish in the near future. On the other hand, the special representative in the Island of the Corporation of the Agricultural Cotton reported that all "a" factories have signed the contract of sale of the sugars of 1946. The forms requesting payment of the increase continue to arrive at the offices of the agency in the capital, and they are immediately sent to the central office in Washington for the purpose of sending the corresponding invoices. It is expected that by the end of the month all applications for this first payment will have been received and that by the middle of June all farmers and laborers will have received the shocks. -
He also explained that his bill has been drafted with the assumption that quotas will continue to be suspended for several years. (As is known, because of the sugar shortage, the quotas established under the 1937 Act were suspended by Presidential order in 1941.) Senator O'Mahoney went on to say that the significance of his bill lay in the establishment of a stabilization program for the domestic sugar industry in the event that surplus supplies were reestablished. The bill recognizes a sugar quota of 982,000 short tons for the Philippine Islands in accordance with the trade treaty recently enacted by Congressional legislation for the rehabilitation of the Philippine Islands. The measure also provides that the Philippine quota shall be allocated on a pro rata basis among the other sugar producing areas until the Philippines is able to produce sugar. Senator O'Mahoney said only 1,300 tons of sugar were expected to arrive in the U.S. from the Philippines next year. The O'Mahoney-Johnston bill also proposes to revise the entire current quota system in the event that world sugar production reaches surplus levels. The new quotas are calculated on the basis of annual consumption of (Continued on page 22)
NEWS DIGEST
United States plunged into chaos as a result of the thrones strike. National life is gradually coming to a standstill. The Bolea will not open today, Saturday. Eisenhower called urgently. - - - Yesterday "a presented on to the Senate a bill to revise the whole system do "mote" uuearoras. Boy m meet 1% dlaa do strike in the manufacture of bread. All conciliatory efforts are at a standstill. Yesterday oe reported several arrests for damage caused in oflciñas postholes on the Island. - The Governor approved the Baking Regulations, which were submitted to the Planning Board . All moni-
i dpal school property will pass to the Insular Government - according to law number 78 which ra-'' * The transportation of cargo in canoes does not operate under the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission. I - - - - In the local morondo there is a shortage of foodstuffs derived from wood and cereals. I - - - . On June M June will begin at the Tapia Theater the exhibition of the Compañía do Fomento. .i ose ' - The electrical industry workers are preparing to demand higher wages in a long-standing agreement. -j . e e e e o Loe supplies of butter for civilian consumption remain very llmlta- " two ono the United States.
। The cegetlsta do Colón Gordlany sector will hold its annual convention tomorrow in Mayagüea. - " I Lanler, Martin and Klein left for Mexico. - Pereira and Luna rejected Ponce's offer. that, 1 Today oo Olympic track and field games are being held in Mayagiles, that Eastern Air Unos will begin passenger service between the United States and Puerto Ileo on the southern route, eos Pan American Airways will begin direct flights to New York no later than July 1, with four-engine planes for 4" passengers, s s s Miguen tomorrow the Double A baseball series.
'Times' stresses seriousness of situation i Food shipments to k Europe are now paralyzed : Repercussions in France crisis A g r ic u hura Federal fears complete chaos if strike is prolonged NEW IORkTTSTTiNS) - Com m ounting the railroad strike that na outbreak nationwide, ol morning newspaper "New York Times' declares on its editorial page, that such a strike is "nothing short of a national catastrophe." "If it lasts only a few more days - the strike will have disastrous effects on the national economy, the population of the cities will be deprived of food", and continues: "It is demonstrated, once again, that certain organizations, especially private ones, have been polarized by Congress to paralyze the American economy, and that they will use their power to achieve their objectives". According to ol "Timos', *1* Aiminlstraclón national has jusívlu an auplno and snubbed role er e t" matter. President Truirarv allowed the decision of his Board of Inquiry to be rejected without endorsing it and without making a clear and public statement of the likely consequences. The rail strike is having major repercussions in other parts of the world. Shipments of nurseries to Europe have been delayed and, according to authorized cloners, every day that the strike continues, more and more people will die in the areas where the strike is taking place because of starvation. According to dol International Service > News, in Paris a spokesman for the Ministry of National Economy aftmt not v that the carbon' k and railway strikes in the United States* hnbrá* do seriously affect ai i o" te bl slow economic trim of Fruncía. (Continued on page 22) Governor Tugwell approved zoning rules Plans must be published in the Press before they go into effect Governor Tugwell approved zoning regulations to be adopted by the Planning Board. Said approval was issued by the Executive on May 22nd. The full regulations will be published by the Planning Board in the next few days, as required by law. These provisions contain all the restrictions that will prevail in Puerto Rico regarding the use of urban land and the development of future buildings. Even though the regulations were approved by the Executive Branch, the Law establishes that they will become effective thirty days after they are published in the Puerto Rico Press. For said date, it is necessary that the San Juan Bonus map is also in effect, without which the regulation could not be implemented. The map of reference divided the territorial jurisdiction of San Juan in divisions of the construction area. This map is now under final study by the Planning Board, having been translated into various amendments resulting from the last public meeting held. Its final promulgation will be made by the Board once it is definitively approved, waiting for the return to the Island of the President of this organism, Dr. Rafael Picó. The organization of the office of the Construction Permits Officer is also being accelerated by the corresponding agencies. This official was recently appointed by the Governor of Puerto Rico and will be in charge of the execution of the new provisions to be implemented. His office will be attached to the Department of the Interior.
WASHINGTON, 24. (PU)-Genel ral Dwight D. Eisenhower, Chief of Staff of the Army, desisted today from a short vacation which he was spending on the Georgia coast, and returned to the coast of Georgia.
Georgia coast, and re-1 1 gressed to Wish ington to consider the national ■ nal crisis caused by the railroad strike. Eisenho- . wer was 11a- - mended to Wish 1 ington by the * Secretary of . War, Ro - bert P. Pat- ■ terBon, to ' ' ' participate j in a -conference of > emerge n c i a * on the ai- '
■ 8| ■ ' "?■, -*, - ,"£?. BHr ■Hr
' tuation. So- General Eisenhower . both the Army and the Navy are collabor- > rating in alleviating the effecta of the criaia, ■ transporting the emergency cargo with ; the aid of avionea. The Navy ordered all of its commanders in the United States to
Officials of the departments of the Interior, Audit and Treasury are meeting this morning with the collectors of internal revenue of the San Juan district, for the purpose of discussing the system to be followed in obtaining new motor vehicle licenses. The purpose is to analyze the plan established by the new law, thus facilitating a quicker process in the collection of the fees for new license plates and in the delivery of these to the applicants. These conferences will be extended to other districts starting Monday. The new procedure establishes the filing of petitions for license plates and the payment of the fees at the Internal Revenue offices. The new Law establishes that "every owner of a motor vehicle shall pay to the Internal Revenue Collector's Office of his residence the duties corresponding to him, and the Collector shall issue the receipt in quadruplicate. The original of the receipt shall be sent by the Collector to the Collector in quadruplicate.
The original of the receipt will be sent by the Collector to the Collector's office for preparation and other official forms to be filled out. 1 1 Mr. Luis Soler, manager of Pan American in San Juan, announced this late yesterday, after having contacted the company's headquarters in Miami - on which the San Juan office depends - and in New York, i In reminding Mr. Soler > ¡quo an official of Pan Amo- * rlcan stated, some ' two months ago, that the company was ready to inaugurate the new route "the minute it was certified" by the Civil Aeronautics Authority, The company has made new commitments with respect to the equipment then available for the new international routes it is serving, which require a new reorganization of all its services, apart from the unavoidable test flights between San Jose and San Francisco, and the new routes it is serving, which require a new reorganization of all its services, apart from the unavoidable test flights between San Jose and San Francisco, which require a new reorganization of all its services, apart from the unavoidable test flights between San Jose and San Francisco.)
: Journalist describes parties given to Krug in P. R. f Describes the one at El Yunque, where the champagne was left over, as a five-course lunch.-* ¡ Tugwell's, more select, but without champagne ¡ i . . 1 . . . . . _
NEW YORK-The article reproduced below has just been published in the "New York World-Telegram. World-Telegram . Its author is one of the permanent columnists of the paper, and one of the journalists who accompanied the United States Secretary of the Interior, Julius A. Krug, on his trip to Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico. . It says the Edson article as "Igue: . SAN JUAN, P. R.-Having been in office two months, the new Secretary of the Interior, Julius . A. Krug, paid a quick visit to > this part of the world to bring him closer to some of the joys and joys of his Division of Territories and Island Possessions. . Of course, all the local politicians wanted to make a good . Impression of the new secretary. . . of the new secretary, Members of the Puerto Rican Legislature did the honors at a luncheon on the first day of the week. Gathering in a beautiful little spot on a mountain called "El Yunque," they had a meal that cannot be written about. In the U.S., that meeting could be called an i
In the United States that meeting could be called a political oyster soup, but this one was somewhat different. It was a little more than a hundred people. They climbed up to the flat roof of the summer house to show off the view over the hills to the sea in the distance. Champagne and cocktails were served under the hot midday sun, then the group gathered to discuss the main business of the day: a party. Tables were set up on the terraces, with the more important politicians taking the best seats in the shade while the less important ones sat in the sun. - It was only a light five-course lunch. He started the lunch with a cake, which looks like the Puerto Rican version of a tamale. > It's a month- < .cía de harina de mai¿ filled with arel- i .tunas y pasas y pedacitos de car- < no y sabe Dios qué mée, wrapped i una hoja de .plátano y hervido 1 hasta cocerse. That forms two pia- I ¡toa in one. but on top dol ' 1 (Continued on page 22.) 1
l General Eisenhower was urgently called in to find out how many members of the
to find out how many of the personnel under his command had experience in railroad work. The commanding officers have been instructed to report on their investigations within twenty-four hours. This may constitute the preliminary aspect of a possible order for Government personnel to be made to handle some trains. The Navy Air Transportation Command and the Naval Transportation Service put all available aircraft on standby to transport emergency cargo and mail. The Navy began recalling 1,000 reserve pilots to active duty to serve on the air transports. At ten o'clock this morning, President Harry S. Truman will address the nation via radio. His speech will be broadcast over the entire radio network. The chief executive canceled his trip to Oklahoma, where he was scheduled to attend a Governors' Conference on Monday. Truman will also address Congress at a special session, tomorrow, Saturday, at 4 P. M" called exclusively to consider the labor disputes affecting the life of the nation. Truman is expected to ask Congress for new powers to deal frankly with the crisis. - a
Am PA WA to start direct flight to New York by July 1. It will open with a daily flight in seven hours and will be extended to three daily flights, with four-engine clippers for 40 passengers Pan American World Airways will start its new direct service from San Juan to New York and vice versa no later than July 1, and the company expects to be able to start transporting passengers on this new route before that date, if necessary.
The local grocery market is experiencing a shortage of corn-based foods, according to a report yesterday. In addition, other cereal-derived foodstuffs have begun to be in short supply. Such a situation has been noted by the fact that the restrictions imposed on the use of wheat, corn, rye and other products in the United States have been continuing to tighten, and have had an effect on the production of the continental mills and, consequently, on exports abroad. Reports gathered in the local trade also reveal that for the remainder of 1946, the situation will continue to be critical as regards fats and oils, As to 1 meat production, it was revealed ¡that no austanclal improvement in the present levels is expected. 1 The same situation will prevail, according to the report, with respect to the production of milk and bus- । derivatives for the export market to Tala. ' i Regarding the mnlz and ' (Continued on page 14) 1 ■■ ' 1 Eastern will begin its 1 service at once ¡ Eastern Air Linos will inaugurate I "Immediately" an air service between sixty of the most important cities 1 of the United States and Puerto Rico, according to a cable from the President and general manager of said company, Mr. Eddie Relckonbachor to Governor R. G. G. Tugwell, 1 The said cable was sent to the Governor, Mr. R. G. Tugwell, 1 The said cable was sent to the President and general manager of said company, Mr. Eddie Relckonbachor to the Governor, Mr. R. G. Tugwell. Tugwell, 1 The aforementioned cable reads as follows: i "In accordance with the authorization granted yesterday to Eastern Air Lines to immediately inaugurate a direct air service of passengers, mail and packages between sixty of the most important cities of this country and San Juan, we intend to develop this service to the maximum, please inform the founders and citizens of San Juan and of the entire island". I
Truman urgently convenes his Cabinet Railroad strike gradually paralyzes the life of the nation Stock Exchange will be closed today If the strike lasts 73 hours a civil insurrection may break out WASHINGTON, 24. (PU)-Pro* Bident Truman has urgently called together the members of his Cabinet to discuss at Casa Blans ca the nationwide conflict over the railroad strike. The President called a conference of the State Judiciary after his aide Steelman walked out of the conferences he had been holding with representatives of the two Brotherhoods of Ferrari" rivers to seek a solution to the strike. Steelman was pessimistic about a possible solution to the problem. The most serious tranapot* ¡taclone crisis in the history of the United States is progressively paralyzing, with chaotic consequences, the nation's commercial and industrial relations. The general strike enacted throughout the railroad service of the United States is already affecting some forty million inhabitants, and it is reported that the strike, which is proceeding with complete success according to union plans, has brought about an almost total collapse of rail transportation throughout the nation's railroads. ! A dispatch from Chicago reports that the United States is facing the most serious railroad industry conflict in recorded history, which threatens to provoke a serious food shortage, especially in the big cities; a conflict which deals a severe blow to industry and the national economy. The New York Stock Exchange Board of Directors has decided to close the stock exchange on Saturday (today). The announcement was made just minutes before the end of the session, and the decision was due, according to the same news source, to the tense situation caused by the railroad strike, which meant that many of the bourses were unable to reach their destination. Hundreds of thousands of travelers on the 227,000-mile rail network were left homeless by the strike, unable to find transportation to their destinations. This situation has taken on such a character that possible clashes and acts of violence have been reported. Mail and other essential services have been reduced, but a stagnation of the industry seems inevitable if the strike continues. A last minute dispatch from Washington said that the National Post Office today authorized a drastic reduction in mail services while the emergency caused by the strike lasts. The instructions make exception* rlón of the mail of first clear and of the postcards. Even first class service has been limited to one pound. Chicago Assistant Postmaster General Gael Sullivan predicted that the strike "will provoke a civil insurrection that will be difficult to quell" if it is not ended within 72 hours. Reports from Chicago indicate that the American Meat Institute has authorized a communication saying that the nation will be short of meat within the next four days if it is forced to depend on supplies now in storage. The Institute says that in some areas there will be no meat within the next two days. Spokesmen for the institution warned that trucks cannot take the place of thrones in transporting cattle to the slaughterhouses. The effects of the conflict were felt quickly. In a few hours, scurrying mills and other industries began to close their doors in the United States, while thousands upon thousands of workers were forced to abandon their jobs. . - In Chicago, thousands of friends took to the streets like tm(Continued on page 23).