WEATHER FORECAST FOR ROY. - Scattered showers. High temperature yesterday in Ran Juan, Mi A rain shower fell. Sun rises today at A. M. and sets at - :9R P. M. No sign of storm.
YEAR XXVIII NUMBER 10706
Governor reduces Fortaleza cars.
Will better regulate the use of those possessed by the Insular Government Does not believe the session of Chambers urgent Will recommend increase of numbers and salaries in the Insular Police By KLIREO COMBAS GUERRA Editor of KL MUNDO Governor Jeaúa T. Plftero is studying the way to make[ a better regulation for the use of the automobiles of the Insular Government, and, perhaps because justice begins at home, he revealed to reporters that only yesterday he had given instructions for three of the automobiles for the Palace service to be sold and delivered to the Automobile Bureau. The Governor will now be left with three official automobiles: one seven-passenger and two smaller ones, and he will have to use his own. "If you give me a little time, I believe I will find a solution to this matter," the governor told reporters. The first conference held by the first Puerto Rican governor was well attended, and it was generally conducted in Spanish, despite the presence of continental correspondents. It was conducted in the most cordial terms; it seemed more like an exchange of impressions. After the conference, the Governor gave gifts to the journalists and the get-together lasted until about half past six o'clock in the evening. The Governor began the conference, which took place in the Gardens of the Palace, thanking the journalists for the attentions they have had for him, and Game began to tell about the trip he had just made through several towns of the Island, as well as to give details of the observations he had made in different government institutions, factories and industries of the Government, and private, schools and historical monuments. With regard to the latter -that related to historical monuments- Governor Plftero expressed great feeling with respect to certain details he had observed in San Germán related to the Porta Coell event. "It was with great regret that I saw the crack in the front part of it, and di-, cm that it was not because of the tern- [ blores. If very soon the Federal or Insular Government does not take care of restoring it, we will lose one of the monuments of which we should all be proud. I will do everything in my power to see that it is restored. "And I also saw with regret a building that has been built taking away the view of the Convent of Porta Coell, it is a bomb park built by the Civil Defense. I hope that the civic spirit of San Germán rises in Ira and is maintained until that building disappears, or rather that eyesore - because it looks like a drawer. I believe that in San Germán there are other better places to build a bomb park." With loa Socialists Questioned about his impressions of the visit that hl- 1 dora the representative delegation of the Socialist Party, hours before, j Governor Plftero manifested 1 that he had had a "very pleasant" change of Im- | pressures. And he added: "I hope, often, to have! eamblo of Impressions and counten- ] cies with leaders of the So- 1 ♦ Continued on page 24) (
Our Gratitude ' EL MUNDO wishes to make public expression of its greatest gratitude to the distinguished public men, lawyers and people in gene| rol who have made generous demonstrations of ■ solidarity with us on the occasion of the process for alleged contempt established against our Director by Judge Arcilio Alvarado. Such demonstrations prove to us, ad nauseam, that we are not fighting alone for freedom of the Press in Puerto Rico and that we can rest confident in the unwavering support of the people for the defense of that glorious principle. I _ AS suspends sale of butter to retailers i e v e r Alicea foresees a criBÍM. - There is rice until October 15 The Retailers' Center* of Provlslone", presided over by Mr. Ramon Nieves Allcen, called the attention d* authorities to the fact that he has received news to the effect that "provisions stored on ships in the port of New York, destined for the Island, and which are liable to be damaged, are being offered for sale on the wharf, according to information supplied to him by ! importing houses of the Island." Mr. Nieves Alicea advocated for "prompt action on the part of the authorities to provide means of transportation, using federal vessels, so that these shipments of provisions, so necessary on the Island, may be moved to the dock and not continue to be offered for sale." He also said that large shipments of potatoes are being lost [ on these vessels. "If a satisfactory settlement to this maritime strike does not emerge," he continued, "or means are not found quickly to transport these supplies to Puerto Rico on federal transports, we are exposed to a food crisis within the next 15 days." "I have been informed,'' he continued, "that the Supply Administration has suspended its sales of butter to the retail trade. In an interview I had yesterday with Mr. Vlcéns Ríos I was able to ascertain that the situation with regard to this product is too critical. The Supply Administration has suspended its sales of butter to the retail trade, which indicates that once the stocks held by Ina retailers are exhausted, this basic commodity will not be available. The small reserves held by the OS have been earmarked for InstltU; Government clones and hospitals, and to meet any emergencies in industries which, like bread and cookies, use butter as their main raw material. "As far as rice is concerned," Mr. Vlcéns informed me that there is only enough in stock to cover the next distribution, that is until October 15 next, which indicates that this does not represent a problem for the time being. Nor is the wheat flour situation a problem, since the Supply Administration informed me that there are stocks for a period of four weeks. But considering that butter is essential in the processing of wheat flour products, a new problem undoubtedly prevails in this respect. "In the opinion of OS, there is a new problem in this respect.
Strike has partly extended to Island NMU agent instructed to stop ships Short stoppages at San Juan v Ponce Will unload only those leaving from U. S. after noon L* maritime strike prevailed in the ports of the notion that it was extended yesterday to Puerto Rico, when the President of the National Maritime Union sent the agent of that body, in a letter to the President of the National Maritime Union! sent to the agent of that body, on the Island, Mr. Kenneth Wá "h-¡ Ington, a cablegram informing him "that the National Council of the UMN agreed to parall-1 zar all cargo ships and pa-1 sajoros in all ports, from 12 o'clock on September 13." j The cable adds that "no vessel should be allowed to leave its port, except the tnn-l keros that traffic in rivers and In- 1 go"". According to instructions received by Mr. Wá- ¡ ahington, "all those vessels sailing from ports in the nation after twelve o'clock on [ yesterday, September 13, will not be unloaded in Puerto Rico and will be grounded." Mr. WAshlngton said, however, that those vessels which have sailed from United States ports before this date, if they were not loaded by strikebreakers or if their crews are not composed of strikebreakers, will be unloaded in the ports of the Island and may return to the United States, where they will be laid up," Meanwhile, two temporary stoppages of maritime labor occurred yesterday on the Island. These ■ ( stoppages occurred yesterday morning at the ports of San Juan and Ponce, with unloading work being paralyzed for several minutes on the ships Cape Sehastian, Sampan Hitch and Cape Canaveral, out of San Juan; and । Cape Harrow and Costal Guide, out of Ponce. The strike arose when the maritime workers learned of a cable received by the NMU offices in San Juan and Ponce, in which Mr. James Curran informed them that the National Council of the NMU was to discuss the possibility of a general strike, to begin at eight o'clock yesterday morning. F1 ca- ( ( ble was interpreted by the trl- , pulaclonrs of the vessels , mentioned, to the effect that । the strike had been extended to- [ to Puerto Rico and they abandoned their . labors". When Mr. Wá- 1 shlngton learned of this action, he informed the workers in San Juan that they should return to work until final instructions were received, and later the labor leader went to Ponce to do the same. The workers returned to work immediately. Mr. Wahlngton then communicated with Mr. James Curran by international telephone, and was informed by him that "there is no action to be taken in Puerto Rico at this time. After these stoppages occurred in the morning, the NMU agent on the Island received in the afternoon, two cable communications," in one of which he was informed that "no ship will be stopped outside the continental United States. "It is signed by Mr. James Curran. The other communicates (Continued on page 7) Another increase in the price of TahoneroR bread will be asked for. They will ask that a rise of 2 ctR. more be recognized The Puerto Rico Industrialists Association intends to advocate, before the Office of Price Administration and the Administration of its Ministers, for an increase in the price of bread of two cents per pound. This was reported yesterday by the Secretary of said Association, Mr. Vicente Leon, Jr. Mr. León informed that in the next few days the owners of the bakeries will meet to discuss these demands. He added that "an increase has been decreed in the price of flour, paper, butter and other products" essential to the industry, which the tahoneros have to absorb" and that they have increased the "cost" of making bread. Also that, "in San Juan as well as in other" towns of the Island, increases have been decreed in the "type" of "wages" for the "workers of the bread and cookie industry. It is the intention of the Association of Industrialists to establish its" de- ¡ manda" at 14 cents" a pound of bread. At the present time bread is sold at twelve cents a pound, and is made in 16 ounces. As will be recalled, the Public Service Commission revoked its authorization to prepare 14-ounce bread, which was sold at ten cents a pound. Later, the price per pound was raised to twelve cents per pound," which is the prevailing price at the present time, The Aaoclaclón d" Industríale" ln(Continued on page 24.) 't
News Digest
The contempt case against our Editor is reverberating in the United States, * * * In WAshingtnn In consider similar to that of the "Miami Herald - tried by the Wáahlngton Supreme Court, with acquittal for the paper and its Editor. * * * * Plftero has asked that Puerto Rico be the headquarters of the International Air Organization. Mexico has also asked for it. Head Office in Montreal to decide*. * * * AGR will arrange for federal permission to import beans. - - - Jobs Bureau will - be expanded to provide greater service to veterans, - - - - Be expects that meat will be missing from the U.S. national table for a period of 6 weeks to two months. - - - ITPR. student veterans defeated a resolution on status. - - - Yesterday began in Ponce the murder trial against Domingo Emmanuelli for the death of his stepmother, Cecilia Días is Emmanuelli, in Coamo. - - - The number of child parAllsia cases in Puerto Rico is increasing. * ♦ - LaGuardia will recommend the.
। food control in the United States. i * * * * * Construction permits were discussed at a meeting. - The Supply Administration has suspended the sale of butter to the retail trade because of the shortage of the commodity. Until October 15 there is rice on the market - - - - The tahoneros will ask for a new increase of two cents in the price of bread. - - - - The bus owners ask that a neutral committee study the issue. - - - Intermediate League continues its tournament today. - " - José Basura received honorable mention from the National Boxing Association. * * * The maritime strike has been extended in part to the island, following instructions received here yesterday by the NMU agent. * a " When the return to work of the FAT seamen in Ran Francisco - some 48,000 - was in sight, after the Government had granted the requested wage increases, the CIO seamen, some 200,000 in all the United States, went on strike".
THE WORLD MORNING NEWSPAPER
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 14, 1946
Entered a" "econd cl""" matter, Post Office, San Juan, P- R-
PRICE 5 Centavoi
Steelman amendment to wage policy does not yet end stoppage in U.S. maritime activities.
Jobs Bureau to be expanded.
। Pinero offers minorities part in Gov.
Bunker received from Rtle Washington the proper authorization to do so The present personnel will be increased This will investigate what opportunities there may be for veterans Work has begun on an expansion of the services provided to veterans by the U.S. Employment Service," said yesterday the director of this federal agency on the island, Mr. Oscar L. Bunker. Mr. Bunker said he had received the corresponding authorization from the headquarters in Washington, D.C., to immediately implement the expansion plan in Puerto Rico. "We are issuing the appointments", he added, "to the new personnel to be utilized in our central offices and district offices in San Juan, Ponce, Mayagtlez, Caguas and other towns. Caguas and other towns. These positions approved for Puerto Rico will allow us to investigate more extensively in the field and bring a greater number of employment opportunities to Puerto Rican veterans. As noted, as many as 25,000 former members of the armed forces have been receiving the weekly reinstated pay, appearing on the lists of the Federal Bureau of Employers with preference for placement, according to the terms of the federal laws that cover them. So far, only 6,465 veterans of the second war have been placed by the Intervention in Negotiation under the direction of Mr. Bunker. He explained that the main mission of the new official would be to investigate in industries, projects, trades, agencies, etc., "what jobs are vacant and how likely veterans will be to fill them in order to place as many as possible. "These investigations will enable us to extend our service," he added, "and will offer us a magnificent opportunity to extend our radius of action to the greatest possible number of populations." i
The ¡departure of these parties of the Eorlaleza was regrettable, he said He promises that the cuso C.onferenrió yesterday ron large delegation of the Socialist Party Yesterday, " at 2:30 P. M., arrived at La Fortaleza the delegation of the Socialist Party after being invited to lunch by Governor Plftero, presided over by the president of the party, Mr. Bolivar Pngán, and was composed of 39 people from the various island districts. The Governor, who was on a trip around the Island, could not have time to attend to his guests, who had lunch at 2:30 p.m., attended by the Governor of the Island. M., attended" by the Governor's Acting Secretary, Lic. Victor Gutierrez Frnnqul and the military aide, Lieutenant Burgos. The latter explained that due to disturbances in the vehicle in which the Governor was traveling, he had been delayed in arriving, against his will. At* 3:30 p. M , when o] n|. । muerzo locaba n xu finally, the Governor arrived, offering excuse" par xu Involuntary delay, expressing xu satisfaction for the visit rie lo" Hrierex socialists. i xeftor Bolívar Pagán so addressed the Governor in these terms: "This ex unn commission riel Puerto Rican Socialist Party, which comes here to greet very cordialmenta the Governor rio Puerto Rico. । By mandate of the agreement of our political bodies, and for well founded reasons which it is not necessary to recall now, we have been away for some five years from the Government, and we return to the island today with rejoicing. We return as Socialists, and as Puerto Ricans, stripped of all kinds of passions and prejudices. We do not" rinmn" account rio the constitutional function of the office of Governor within the" principles" ' rie the Organic Law which governs us, and we are confident, by your" ! (Continued on page 24)
In a letter addressed to the Governor, they state their case and request that the committee study the evidence of both parties.
In a letter to the Governor, Mr. Mateo Hernandez, President of Omnibus Unidos, wrote to the Governor to request the appointment of a neutral committee to study the situation. The letter reads as follows: "Since my multiple* occupations have prevented you from answering our letter and our telegram, in which we asked you to grant us the favor of an en- ♦ revísta to give you a personal and general outline of our situation, we now turn to this public medium to give you a picture of the situation we are going through. I have the honor to address this letter to you in my capacity as interim president of the Omnibus Unido Association, which is made up of the vast majority of the owners of independent buses that during the war solved the problem of passenger transit in the San Juan metropolitan area, In making this assertion, we do not base ourselves on the fact that between the end of 1942 and the end of 1945 we carried on our shoulders the weight of 66% of the people who daily used public vehicles for their daily chores. While this was happening here in San Juan, the Transportation Authority, with its arms crossed," did not import or manufacture a single bus to provide public service. Our "guagua" represent a ln- | version that exceeds $71,000 without taking into account the value of our "gn-¡ rajo" and "talleros", The Public Service Commission knows this. And it knows that our buses have served the country as factory workers, which means big profits for the workers and big "profit" for the Treasury, in the form of contributions and taxes. By means of arrangements made by the Public Service Commission and the Transportation Authority, the latter is preparing to obtain the exclusive monopoly of passenger transportation in San Juan, and has set a date -May 7 of this year- to put us out of business. In doing so,/
That it would cause an economic waste exceeding $700,000. 2. That it would bankrupt bus owners, many of whom have debts contracted to buy their vehicles. 3. ! 3. That "e was dismissing from their eo¡locations to hundreds of workers, on whom thousands of people depend. That the Island Treasury was losing an annual income of not less than $500,000. 5. That it was paid with an injustice to the men who during the critical days of the war did not render public service which the Autoirlriad de Transportacion did not or would not render. We are prepared to state that the Transportation Authority was not created to exercise a monopoly. Governor Tugwell's message in the Le(continued on page 28)
By LEK WASHINGTON, 13. (INS)-Flo-rello La Guardia, Director General of the UNRRA, declared today that "the hopes of the world" lie in the creation of an international food control board. La Guardia, while receiving today the "representative" of the Press, revealed that he recommended the establishment of an international agency in charge of buying the world's "surplus food" to "distribute it" to those "most in need". La Guardia added: "We will undoubtedly encounter opposition in the United States and other countries where large farmers fertilize and plant and harvest in the eeroale market. The Director of UNRRA was ah", had to comment" esped ¡
rie jhstlcln court. On June 3, 1946, the United States Supreme Court reversed the contempt conviction of the "Miami Herald" and its director, John D. PennckampJ Justice Stanley F. Rceri, delivered the Court's opinion, which was unanimous. The Miami Herald was fined $1,000 and Pennckamp $250 after being cited for contempt by two County Circuit Court judges for the publication of two editorials and a cartoon. editorials and a cartoon in 1944, j and which were alleged to have offered an "unfair and false inI form of the" proce-j Idímiento" of the Coito," and to have offered,! in addition, it was alleged, "false Im-j ■ puFnelonos against the Court V its [judges," The raso was brought before¡ ' the Supreme Court rio Florida, the cuaU ' upheld the convictions. The newspaper's attorney stated [ that he could not be "proel-' ¡ pited to disgrace" for showing disdain for the law and the community. He added that the right n eo-, to mount situations of that natura-' leza was guaranteed by the li- ¡ berlad rie Press. The" cases riixeu'tirios by the editorial and ln caricature of) convicted newspaper involved accusations of prohibited gambling and several rape cnsos. The lawyers who appeared t " represent the judges of cir- । cuit calmed the material as "outrageous'' and as "outrageous'' and as "outrageous''. "outrageous'' and as an attempt , to "disrespect the Court,'' . [Judge Reed, in his decision, stated that the danger to the fair administration of justice that the lower court feared "did not have immediate clarity and necessity for the court's decision.
The Guard will recommend food control in U. S.
I fleos "on the continuation of the 'relief shipments to Yugo-! eslnvia merely n saying that he believed 1 that the State Dept. le1 ned had a good grip on the situation, Ln Guardia recounted his conferen [ ' dns with the" maríscale" Stnlln and TI- 1 । to and said that in conversation with Stnlln "we put the whole" ln* letter" on the mosn." Asked qu" rilo his opinion on Marshal Tito, Ln Guardia replied, "pi "fl*. lio not hnblar do ól until low termínndó the ntlxlón of the UNRRA " ! The former mayor of New York also revealed that he will ask for an international fund to be set up to support the nlfms for which the U.S. Exiles have an initial grant of seven hundred thousand dollars.
Our case has repercussions in the United States,
The Director of El, MUNDO, Mr. Pablo Vargas Biidlllo, at the moment in which he received a court order summoning him to appear next Tuesday, September 17, to answer for the contempt of court charged by District Judge Arcillo Alvnrado on the occasion of an editorial in which El. MUNDO commented on the acquittal ruling of said magistrate in a case of overpricing". (Photo EL MUNDO) They believe it to be similar to that of the Miami Herald 91 False accusations against the Court were alleged. Washington Supreme Court acquitted the newspaper By ( HABLEN McUABE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON* 'PU> In the "Miami Herald" case, which jurists in this city find similar to the action taken against the newspaper EL MUNDO, Rio Snn Juan, by an insular judge, the principle was established that a newspaper may criticize the procedures" of a court in the case of the "Miami Herald," which they believe to be similar to that taken against the newspaper EL MUNDO, Rio Snn Juan, by an insular judge, the principle was established that a newspaper may criticize the procedures" of an insular judge.
CASES OF PARALYSIS CONTINUE TO APPEAR The case of Maria Rodriguez, 2B years old, resident of Colonia Santiago, Nauta Isabel, was confirmed as a positive case of Infantile parAIIsU, according to the Report* of the Bureau of Epidemlolo- ! gy of the Department of Health. Other sel" suspected cases were hospitalized yesterday, pnrn obser| vaclun, i" namely: Ecfdle Arroyo Baez, age 2 uño*, resident of barrio Mnjuguns. of Matinnbo; Adrián Cartage-* nn, 22 "ños de edad, residente en el Barrio Obrero, do San Juan: Gladys Cancluno, 12 aflos de edad; Luí" Antonio Ortlz, de nn nfto de edad; y Luis Alfredo Véle", de 20 mCses de ednd, residentes en Ponce; y Juan A, Otero, do 3 nftos de ednd, residente en el barrio (Inlltos, de Cíale*. Subsidy will be used to increase production Survey among manufacturers* of construction materials In order to obtain all the necessary information to be submitted to the Federal Housing Authority, so that the manufacturers of construction materials on the Island may receive the benefit of the subsidy determined by a recent Act of Congress, the Puerto Rico Industrial Association is conducting a survey among manufacturers of construction materials in Puerto Rico.i 1 On this matter, the Secretary of the Association, Mr. Vicente Leon, Jr., expresses the following to all the Industrialists interested in the program: ) 1 "It will be recalled that some time ago it was reported that federal legislation was being proposed to grant subsidies to manufacturers of building materials for the purpose of encouraging the manufacture of building materials for the construction of housing, especially for veterans, and other essential buildings. "In connection with this federal program, studies have already been made locally as to the need for local industry, since the program covers Port Rl (Continued on page 24).
CIO Seafarers go on strike nationwide Union went on strike when another 200,000 unemployed across U.S. were scheduled to work. FAT members call on shipowners to sign off on increases WASHINGTON, 13.-Reconversion Director John R. St "elman, President Truman's chief adviser on labor issues, said the union's "top adviser to President Truman"!Truman's chief adviser to President Truman on Labor matters, last night amended the Administration's policy of stabilization and wage stabilization to permit payment of the wage increase demands of the 43 affiliated maritime unions of the American Federation of Labor in the Pacific, which were on strike, while the National Maritime Union, affiliated with the Congress of Industrial Organizations, which has 30.1MX) affiliate" in New York City, is only on strike demanding that its" seaman" be put on a par with those of the West Coast FAT rie, in Jos wage & earning, henceforth. The Director of Reconversion acted after the Labor Day Stabilization Board refused to approve the striking seaman's demands on the grounds that it would violate President Truman's stabilization rules. Steelman's order authorized the Government agency to pay prevailing wages in the industry. Under this amendment, as noted by the International News Service, in Wahlngton's "dispatch, the" private" shipowner" will be able to implement on "his" vessel" the "increase" in "wages" required" by the FA1 and, ! then, the Maritime Commission will be able to make "slmllare" payments on the vessel" owned by the Government. The reaction of Harry Lundebarg, Chairman of the FAT Maritime Strike Committee, to the Government's decision to allow the payment of the increased wages, was to declare, as reported by the United Press from San Francisco, that the maritime strike will not be suspended, despite the Government's new decision, unless the shipping companies agree to the increases demanded. Last night Lundeberg met with representatives of the Pacific Shipowners' Association and with Frank Foile, president of the Maritime Employees' Association. Lundeberg stated that, "All we want is written acceptance that Jos will pay increases." Lundeberg called on the elements"" of "u organization to consider the íu1h formu1h presented by Steelman. He said that if Steelman's statements, broadcast over the radio, were true, it proved that the organization's struggle had been justified. But a new maritime dispute over wages dashed the United States' hopes of reaching an industrial pnz in favor of Steelman's decision, when the CIO's workers - some 1,000 nationwide - went on strike, this morning.(As is well known, these seamen won in July, in an agreement with their shipowners, wage increases five and ten dollars higher than those contracted by the CIO seamen). So, just as 43,000 seafarers in the West were flying to return to work under the new conditions by strike, the powerful National Maritime Union, [presided over by Joseph Curran,] called a strike of its members. The aforementioned union leader Curran said last night that the new [ vision of the Government's policy "on extabill[zation of wages" [ "and a deliberate creation of [ inequldade", providing different wage rates for men" doing the same work on the same class of ship"."A United Press dispatch, dated Washington, reports that the United States Maritime Commission met this morning for two hours, but deferred further action on the question of granting the same wage increases granted to the striking CIO seafarers on the FAT, with which xe has resolved the 9 rilsx strike they held against jl"" nnrm¡m ri"' stabilization rie jor1 nwb's riel Government, A spokesman for" said Commission rijo, after d* I" 1 meeting, that agency "awaits lo" aoonteelmlentos." It was indicated that the Commission is waiting to see if the CIO and the eastern coast shipping line operators are to negotiate collective bargaining agreements that would equalize their wages.