THE DAILY WORLD OF THE BATON _
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY: Scattered light to moderate showers over eastern and central Puerto Rico today in the morning with scattered showers over the eastern and central mountains in the afternoon. High yesterday: 8á| Low: 79. No sign of a disturbance.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 20, 1946
Entered a" second elan matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10651
YEAR XXVIII
Let's help the Police in their difficult mission.
Muñoz Speaks At Population Forum
No one has proposed that je postpone the battle for freedom, he said Imbalance in birth and death Economic, social, and educational aspects of the problem are discussed Por Ante! Crui Crin Editor of EL MUNDO Senate President Lula Muflo" Marin last night denied that anyone in Puerto Rico, to his knowledge, has proposed that Puerto Ricans postpone their battle for freedom to make way for the battle for production, by rejecting a premise that he described as inaccurate in a question put to him by one of the attendees at the public forum on the population problem sponsored by the Puerto Rico Public Health Association under the direction of the Deputy Commissioner of Health, Dr. Angel M. Marchand. Marchand. The question put to Mr. Muflo" Marin alluded to the fact that he had said that the struggle for freedom should be postponed in order to give way to the struggle for production. When the question was put to him, Mr. Muflo" Marin asked: "Who is it that has proposed that the 'struggle for freedom' be postponed? No one, as far as I know, has proposed it. I have said that, in addition to the struggle for freedom, we must fight for production if we do not obtain the special economic conditions that Puerto Rico needs under any form of government to be able to sustain itself. Freedom, no matter how pretty the words may sound, will never be entirely real if Puerto Rico cannot live without the help of another foreign country. Mr. Muflo" Marin attended the public forum on the population as a spectator. As soon as the organizers of the event became aware of his presence there, Dr. José N. Gándara stepped forward to the microphone and invited Mr. Muflo" Marin to the proscenium. To another question posed to the President of the Senate, he replied that "the observation that the increase in income per birth of the population is almost always an indication that the birth rate will decrease is uhliocho". He further stated that political power is a form of organizing economic power, adding finally, that "in Puerto Rico the problem is that in seeking to expand political power we run the risk, if we are not very careful, of destroying our economic means". Dr. José N. Gándara, made the presentation on the subject that dealt with the population problem of Puerto Rico, with regard to the approach to the problem, leaving the possible solutions to the problem for the following day. The first speaker of the evening was Mr. José L. Janer, who spoke about demographic characteristics. He stated that from a demographic point of view, our population problem consists of reestablishing a biological balance that was broken before the end of the last century, when mortality in our island began a gradual and continuous decrease that has been maintained up to the present without being accompanied or followed by the birth rate. He also assured that with an average figure of approximately 40 deaths per 1,000 inhabitants per year, during the last quarter of the last century, our mortality has gradually decreased until reaching a value that has been maintained up to the present without being accompanied or followed by the birth rate.
Piñero Insists on Recognition of Full Citizenship Formulates objection on that basis to bill requested by Justice By JEAN VAN VRANKEN l WASHINGTON, 19. (INS) - Puerto Rico's Resident Commissioner in Washington, Jesús T. Plflero, today expressed his displeasure over a bill approved in committee this week that would establish provisions whereby naturalized U.S. citizens residing overseas could retain their citizenship. The Fisher bill, favorably recommended by the House Immigration Committee, amends the Citizenship Act of 1940, which provides that any naturalized citizen residing abroad for five years after the effective date of the Act loses his or her citizenship. The validity of the Citizenship Law was extended until October 1946. Mr. Pifio- , ro was then confident that its provisions would be extended for at least one more year. The Fisher amendment, however, directs all naturalized citizens to re(Continued on page 23) 1 p The scope of the tenancy legislation 1 The author of I I I I I I i the law, Senator Vicente I Géigel Polanco explained yesterday the scope and operation of the Tenancy Law. Géigel Polanco, author of the legislation, said the following: "With the resolution adopted on Tuesday by the Executive Council, the Puerto Rico Tenancy Act becomes fully effective. The statute covers four types of rental properties: (1) dwellings, (2) buildings dedicated to business, commercial and industrial purposes, (3) lots on which dwellings or buildings belonging to the tenants of such lots are located, and (4) buildings leased to the Government and its agencies and instrumentalities, 1 Effective Date.- The Tenancy Law has been in force, as to dwellings, since July 1, 1946, by virtue of the "this- ( ' lution approved by the Executive Council on June 30, 1946, in accordance with the provisions of Article 27 of the Statute. As for the other ti- , । pos of rental property, it governs ' . as from July 17, with 'arre- * glo to the resolution adopted by the i (Continued on page 13)
" - - - i By CHARLES MCCABE - United Press Correspondent I " WASHINGTON, 19.- (PU)- In,. - Authoritative source it has been learned that - e. Secretary of the Interior of the > United States, Julius A. Krug. ■ threw the full weight of the Depar- - tment of the Interior behind f his recommendation that ol Pre- - - sldonto nominate Jesus T. Plflero > Governor of Puerto Rico. It is understood that, although the Democratic National Committee and other sources oppose the nomination, it will be made shortly, thus clearing up the complicated and confusing situation that exists since Tugwell assumed his new duties at the University of Chicago on July 1.
Last night he commented on the forum on the population problem. Muflo" Marin said that no one has proposed that oo postpone freedom to give way to the battle for production. - - - If granted by the - AG8 a demand made by the Association of Threshers ** n auan " M caB * there is sure to be a further increase in ol price of bread. - - - - DDT, according to experiments conducted by the Third Air Force and the Army, destroys leo mosquitoes 90 per cent. " - - - - Plans approved the program to erect provisionally 300 houses on land of the Borda estate (Loba road) for former soldiers, * s Commissioner Bifloro insisted that the portorriqueflos be recognized as American citizens by birth. t e e Among other measures approved by the Senate was the P. of 8, 15 j*ra lowering the salaries of the prosecutors of Ponce and Humacao, respectively. I
Senator Vicente Géigel Polanco explained yesterday the scope and operation of the Tenancy Law. - I - - Sonador Páseoslo García reiterated that there is an exodus in lee fila* of the Sindicato Asucarero in the Humacao district. Be" The Rehabllltadora Commission has finished its functions on the Island. The affairs of the Commission pass to the Jurisdiction of the PERA. - Dr. Philips Gorlin says there are no cases of anthrax in Pones. He confirms the existence of a case of infantile paralysis. - - - - - - - The seven-game series between the Puerto Rican National Team and the Brooklyn Rickey's ninth team begins this afternoon. - James A. Farley has been in San Juan since yesterday. He will not leave the Island until next Tuesday. God is away from politics. - - - At the Chamber of Commerce it was disclosed yesterday that the stock of rice on the island amounted to ISO,900 tons, including 00,000 tons sold to the AGS. I ; - I
It is believed that there will be another increase in the price of bread. It will happen if the demand made by the bakeries of San Juan is granted. Industrialists explain their situation after the strike in S. J. By R. Santiago Sosa Editor of EL MUNDO Circuios related to the bread industry revealed yesterday that they are making representations to the Government authorities to allow the bakeries to fix a reasonable price per pound on the basis of obtaining a reasonable profit after determining the cost of production. It is argued both by the Association of Industrialists as well as by the tahona owners that there has been a considerable increase in the cost of raw materials used in the preparation of this basic food; an increase has been decreed in the current and electric energy rates, having been raised, in addition, the rate of wages when the last strike in the city of San Juan was solved. The concession by the Supply Administration of this demand, which has been discussed as a possibility for the industry to continue in normal production, would mean, it is believed, another increase in the price of bread, with the possibility of this being raised to 14 cents a pound. The Secretary of the Puerto Rico Industrial Association, Mr. Vicente León, Jr., informed yesterday that "the bread industry is going through an uncertain situation at the present time". He explained that the stability in the price of bread depends entirely on price controls in the United States. "A determined price can only prevail," he said, "if the price control law now being discussed by Congress is reestablished. It is quite possible that this situation will soon cause bread to rise in price above the twelve cents fixed by the Supply Administration. He explained that "1 Seflor Leon said that wheat is trading at 14 and $5 per sack above the rates prevailing at the time of the OAP; that butter, another important ingredient in bread, has reached unprecedented prices, and that yeast, paper and day rates have been rising in the last few weeks. "The industry considers it much more reasonable that the Administration (continued on page 24)
> Krug made full endorsement of: the candidacy of Jesus Piñero i Last-minute pressures prevented the president from announcing the appointment the day before yesterday. An agricultural entity is now fighting for James R. Bourne.
i Last week, Krug told the United Press that he had reservations about Piñero's candidacy because of opposition from "minority groups" in Puerto Rico. This second time, Krug has reportedly endorsed Plflero in the White House. The first time he reportedly did so was when he (Krug) assumed his new position as Secretary of the Interior; but he is believed to have withdrawn his support for Plflero when the National Democratic Committee raised strong objections to him. i Meanwhile, Plflero remains completely cool on the issue.
NEWS DIGEST
The electric tramway will be suspended as of August 1S. Junior will be withdrawn from the "match" with Cascabelito in the moflan* races at Las Casas racetrack. - Luis Raul Cabrera lost another game in Mexico. - They confirm that Secretary Krug has made a frank endorsement of Plflero's candidacy for Governor. A U.S. agricultural body is fighting for the nomination of James R. Bourne. The Administrator General of Supply, Mr. A. Vicens Rios, told the House yesterday that he has already placed orders for four staples, and that the Government will seize those held by importers if they refuse to sell them to retailers. i The bill to control price controls is still being discussed at the meeting.
Government will seize commodities if importers do not sell them to retailers.
Ammunition monopoly investigation
ir ■ V / L JHÍk * v . - ■ A- -1 - ."....Mn-knllA "Ia MtinlAlrt.
W 1. a. i- lannUrda "niríe" the aeflora Vanetta Seretes, her mens of Louis Soreles, manager of le office of the municlo "S monopoly. 1 mléñtrís ere expu*sado of le Senate in Wáshington by the sergeant Harley Hilton, for having she "ñrJÜdn B in kiu su^írofisScScStre le declaradón that in le investigation of the operations of said monopoly was lending the "K HaU company Investltadá. In the photograph on the right, Jean Batea ai centnj) and 1 a seflora Flea nor L. H*l'l (right), both former secretaries of the monopoly, listen to the* testimony of a witness before the Mead Committee, m enflore Eleanor d" ml on the left was not identified. (Photos Associated Press.)
Salary reduction for Ponce, Humacao prosecutors Senate agreed yesterday. - At 11:45 a.m. the Senate met yesterday under the presidency of Senator Nsgrón López and in the absence of Senators Arjona Slaca, Barreto Pérez, Córdova Chirino, Dávlla Monsanto, Figueroa and Muflo" Marín. j The House reported having accepted the amendments introduced by the Senate to P. de la C. 6 (Beverage Law). S. 11, appropriating to the Department of Health $200,000 for malaria control; S. 12, authorizing the Attorney General to appoint additional employees in the San Juan Property Registries; S. 13, substituting the word "Jornadas" for "Jornadas"; S. 13, substituting the word "Jornadas" for "Jornadas"; S. 13, substituting the word "Jornadas" for "Jornadas"; and S. 13, substituting the word "Jornadas" for "Jornadas". 13, substituting the word "Jornales" for the words J'Sueldos para funcionarlos y empleado" de emergencia" in the budget of the Justice; S. P. 14, appropriating $150,000 to add to the line item for the support of Public Health Units in the Department of Health; S. P. 15, lowering to $150,000 the line item for the support of Public Health Units in the Department of Health; S. P. 15, lowering to $150,000 the line item for the support of Public Health Units in the Department of Health. 15, lowering the salary of the prosecutors of the District Courts of Ponce and Humacao from $5,000 each to $4,500 and converting the Assistant Prosecutors of those courts into Prosecutors; S. 16, appropriating $1,750,000 for the development of low-income housing projects for low-income families; S. 17, appropriating $100,000 for the development of low-income housing projects for low-income families; S. 17, appropriating $100,000 for the development of low-income housing projects for low-income families; S. 17, appropriating $100,000 for the development of low-income housing projects for low-income families. 17, appropriating $100,000 for the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce to invest in the purchase of seeds, fertilizers, insecticides and fungicides to be distributed free of charge to small farmers. On motion of Senator Garda ir, the following motion was adopted: "That the Secretary of the (Continued on page 21)
- The Senate agrees to examine the increase in AFF rates. On a motion by Géigel Polanco yesterday, the Senate agreed to entrust the investigation to the Permanent Legislative Committee. - 135,000 for scholarships
I s At 5:20 p.m. yesterday afternoon, the Senate resumed its work. Samuel R. Qulflonei presided and Senator Muflo" Marín was present. The House reported having accepted the amendments made by the Senate to P. of C. 6 (Beverage Law). The bill passed to the Governor for his signature. They were approved in second and Farley will be in Puerto Rico until the 23rd He declines to speak on, Island Governorship.Away from politics By ANGEL CRUZ CRUZ Editor of EL MUNDO At 3:15 o'clock yesterday afternoon arrived in San Juan, in a Pan American plane, the former Postmaster General of the United States Post Office! James A. Farley, who is now President of the Export Division of Coca-Cola, arrived in San Juan yesterday afternoon in a Pan American plane. To greet him! The San Juan postmaster, Mr. George P. de Pase, and several Coca-Cola officials in Puerto Rico went to the airport. Through the mediation of Mr. Tho' mas Aitken, Jr., manager of the McCann-Erickson Company, we had the opportunity to talk for a few minutes with Mr. Farley, who was one of the strongest political leaders in the Democratic Party when President Roosevelt was alive. (Continued on page 4)
House Bills 7, 8 and 9 were passed on third reading. Bill 8 was amended by appropriating $60,000 for scholarships" for various professions and $75,000 for the study of medicine. Senate Bills 8, 18 and 19 were also approved on second and third readings. A proclamation of the Acting Governor was read extending the call to authorize amendments in the budget of the Department of Instruction regarding School Lunchrooms. A petition of Senator Garcia requesting data on employees and salaries of the General Assistance of Puerto Rico was read. ( I Mr. Géigel Polanco presented and the following motion was approved: I (Continued on page 13)
Among the projects approved by the Board of Plans at its last meeting were the construction of a 200-home hamlet by the San Juan Homes Authority, on Loiza Road, at a cost of $300,000, and the development of a housing program by the Department of the Interior, involving an investment of $19,000. The following is the list of public works approved by the Board: Construction of a Veterans' Home: Project of the Capital Homes Authority, for the construction of 200 temporary housing units for veterans > (Continued on page 21)
Prosecutor Noriega repudiated ruling and ; incident occurred in court r i He said he is losing faith in institution ' of the Jury.-This one prepared to resign en masse. " Acquittal of Luisa Lanauze caused incident r By ERASMO VAN DO - Correspondent of EL MUNDO ' ponce 19 - Yesterday a heated Incident arose in Court ■ 4 'nrpsidlda* by Judge R. Gadea Picó, and in which intervi- - ! d ? Gadea, the prosecutor Luis A. Noriega and several mlem11 bros of the Jury when the representative of the Public Prosecutor's Office expressed his displeasure with the v i.. "
In the case of Luisa Lanau1 ze, who was charged with having charged with the sum of $5,332 belonging to Antonio Carbone, in whose residence she worked as a maid in June 1945. Prosecutor Noriega prosecuted Juan Baez Toledo, 17 years old, as co-perpetrator of the robbery. Claiming that he feared that the case against Baez would have the same fate as that of Lanauze, prosecutor Noriega asked the Court to dismiss and close the case. The request was denied by Judge Gadea Picó. During the discussion that took place, and which became more heated as the affected parties intervened, prosecutor Noriega expressed that in spite of the respect he had for the Jury, "I am losing faith in the Institution by leaps and bounds". Apparently annoyed by prosecutor Noriega's statements, several members of the Jury loudly expressed their intention to resign en masse. Judge Gadea Intervened (Continued on page 24)
- * k. ■ ■■■ LUIS A. NORIEGA Ronce Assistant District Attorney
DDT destroys mosquitoes by 90%, reveals U.S. Army.
EDGEWOOD - DDT recently reduced by 90 percent the mosquito population in the Egewood araenal area where the insecticide was applied. A short" night ago" two" entomologist", stripped" to the waist, exposed their torsos to the bites" of the moaqultoa. In a period of nine mlnutoa Bolamente received eight bites, although ae altuaron in the vicinity of a son* marshes* that normally is highly infested with mosquitoes. Twenty-four hours before DDT was sprayed from a C-47 plane in the air, the two men were standing in the same place.
The two men stood in the same place and during the same period of time received a total of 72 bites. This* test and the results of another" "were recently made public by the Third Air Force and other Army officials after a two-day demonstration" spraying DDT from the air. The tests were intended to support the Army's contention that its newly initiated war against mosquitoes will sharply decrease the potential for malarial infeo* clone" in the Army's" ln "talaclone" across the Nation.
Vicéns Ríos put it this way yesterday before the Chamber On the other hand he already placed orders for the purchase of four food He is not in favor of subsidies He says that for now he does not need more allocation. He explained the crisis The General Supply Administrator, Seflor Antonio V icé ne Ríos, told the House of Representatives yesterday that the Administration is prepared to seize the staple products held by the importers if they refuse to sell them to the "retailers" and that "his office has already placed orders for the purchase of at least four staple products that are indispensable for the feeding of the people. x The House agreed on Thursday night to summon Mr. Vicéns Rio" to appear before said legislative body and explain the measures he was putting into practice to avoid the situation created by the shortage of food and the rise in the prices of basic necessities. Before Mr. Vicéns Ríos began his presentation, the President of the House, Dr. Francisco Susoni, said: "It is good for it to be known that Vicéns Ríos has not been summoned to prosecute him but with the purpose of cooperating with him. This is one of those "acts" in which, due to exceptional circumstances, one of our executives is summoned here. The House of Representatives is satisfied with the work that the Administrator of . The House of Representatives is satisfied with the work that the Administrator of Supply has been doing and supports his actions. The majority floor leader, Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonlnl, explained that this was not a time for deliberations or debate and that the House would limit itself to listen and ask questions to the Administrator and then enter into debates and deliberations, if deemed necessary. Mr. Vicéns Ríos began by stating that the situation prevailing in Puerto Rico is a reflection of the situation prevailing in the United States due to the cessation of price controls. He expressed his appreciation for the emergency measures adopted by the Executive Council to prevent the dislocations. He stated that the issuance of the order validating the regulations of the Office of Price Administration prevented the dislocations in Puerto Rico. । "The market in the United States is raising prices hour by hour,' he said, and explained how the mango that was priced at $18 is now being priced at $26 and $34. About rice, he said that the situation was truly critical, because on the continent there are almost no stocks and the trade, due to the confusion in the prices being quoted there, has not been able to place orders in time. He referred to his Administration's order authorizing the trade to buy at the high prices prevailing in the United States, guaranteeing it a reasonable profit on such prices. Explaining the measures adopted with a view to avert the current crisis, Mr. Vicéns Ríos said that he has tried to obtain food for three or four more weeks. He said that the stock of rice on the Island is enough for two to three weeks, but that the Administration has managed to place an order for 50,000 lackeys in the United States and another 5,000 sacks in the Dominican Republic. As an immediate measure to solve the problem of the rice shortage, he affirmed that the Administration will seize the stocks in possession of the importers if they do not sell it to the retailer" when through the presentation of coupons. Regarding fats, he said that a quite reasonable quantity is expected to be received but at prices much higher than those fixed by OAP. Regarding wheat flour, he said that he could be confident of continuing to receive regular shipments. He insisted once again that any action taken by the Insular agencies could be null and void under the expected federal legislation. (Other products expected to be received shortly, he reported, are beans from Chile, chickpeas from Mexico, flour from Santo Domingo. Regarding imports from Santo Domingo, he said that "we are now in a better position to import flour and other products from the neighboring republic, since UNRRA has cancelled its orders in that country". Numerous representatives asked questions of the speaker, among others, representativesB Celestino Irlar. (Continued on page 21.)