THE WORLD
40 PAGES 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
40 PAGES 5 Ctvs. >■, - 2 Sections
DIARIO de
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
Let us support the men who made possible the Empréstito do la Victoria. "
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, FERERO 2, 1946.
Entered u second ela "a matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10486
La Costa appoints Fennell trustee and orders him to return funds held in the U.S. to Puerto Rico.
A prediction by Muñoz Marin Asked about the bill filed by the Chairman of the House Insular Affairs Committee, C. Jasper Bell, to have the Comptroller General of the United States audit the accounts of the Insular Authorities, "The President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin made the following comment yesterday: "I believe that before laws of this kind can be passed by Congress and signed by the President of the United States, the question of the political status of Puerto Rico will have been resolved".
C.S.P. to insist on tramway substitution Agency chairman explained 'yesterday advantages of electric buses
Must Show Cause Denying Public Service Jurisdiction Aqueductos Reiterates That It Will Not Be Submitted As stated in amended motion that * was approved by the committee.
The Chairman of the Public Service Commission, Mr. Antonio R. Barceló, Jr., told EL MUNDO yesterday that the PSC intends to insist that the trolley service be substituted by the bus service. When asked by one of our editors, he replied that it could not be determined at a glance whether the substitution would be advantageous, nor how long it would take to make the change. "The matter of substitution," he said, "should be thoroughly discussed. We believe it should be thoroughly considered by both the Transportation Authority and the River Source Authority." Mr. Barceló added that before taking any action of this nature, it is imperative to conduct technical studies to determine the advantages or disadvantages of the project." When asked about what substitute service he would recommend in case it was agreed to eliminate the trolley he stated, "In all the places in the United States where they are being used, the electric buses, it has been demonstrated that it is the means of metropolitan transportation with the greatest acceptance by the public. Of course, in this case, the studies would have to determine if these buses can be advantageously installed here." Mr. Barceló explained that the (Continued on page 24.)
After considering an amended motion for special appearance filed by the Servicio Insular de Acueductos the day before yesterday in connection with the complaint filed before the Public Service Commission by Messrs. Juan Marchán Slcardó and Maximino Lugo, Challenging the SIA, the PSC resolved to admit said motion, considering that the same, except for one sentence, is identical to the other motion filed by the respondent on January 21. The PSC issued an order sustaining another order promulgated on January 25 for the Insular Aqueduct and Sewer Service to appear no later than February 4 to show cause why the Public Service Commission does not have jurisdiction over the dipper, as alleged by the STA. The motion for special appearance filed before the Commission by STA attorneys James E. Curry and Federico Tilén reads as follows: "The respondent, Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Service of Puerto Rico, specially appears and without submitting to the jurisdiction of this Honorable Commission, respectfully requests permission to file an amended motion, in accordance with Resolution number 23, approved on January 23, 1946 (Continued on page 24.).
Veterans will have special medical and surgical service Local office reports on approval by the President of the law to that effect. - Personnel will be out of Civil Service
The Director of the Veterans' Bureau, Dr. Jaime Serra Chavarry, reported yesterday that he had received notification from the head of the Veterans' Administration in Washington, General Omar S. Bradley, of President Truman's approval of the law creating a department of medicine and surgery within that organization. "We are waiting for the rules to be drafted in Washington," said Dr. Serra, "so that we can determine the standards to be followed in Puerto Rico in keeping with the provisions of the Act." Dr. Serra added that one of the main objectives of the new statute is to make it easier for the Administration to appoint doctors, nurses and dentists to provide services to veterans. These personnel were previously subject to the provisions of the Civil Law, and had to adjust to the salary scales established by said law. Now the Administration will be free to contract these professional services with complete freedom. This measure, as explained by Dr. Serra, was considered judicious, especially due to the difficulty of obtaining professional personnel to provide medical services to veterans.
The national representative of the American Legion in Puerto Rico, Mr. José Cantellops, also received notification from the organization's offices in Washington of the approval of the law. He was told that "the statute contains much of what the American Legion has been advocating for years regarding the reorganization and improvement of the level of medical and hospitalization services provided by the Veterans Administration," and that "however, all aspects are not entirely satisfactory. The principle of preference to the veteran in the provision of these services is not contained in the text of the bill, "This point was protested by the American Legion when the bill was before the Senate Finance Committee for consideration. It is generally known that both the Administrator and the Acting Surgeon General were present, having expressed their consent that such a rule of preference should be observed. The Committee, however, was of the opinion that it was inappropriate to attempt to amend the bill in view of the. General interest of prompt action by the Senate of so lm(Continued on page 24.)
B O L E T I'N E S
WASHINGTON, 1. (FU)-Scrutator Theodore G. Bllbo, Democrat of Mlslslslpf. told his Northern oolegaa today that if they "keep meddling with us Southerners," the Democratic Party will be permanently divided. The powerful Mississippian poquefian man took the floor for the second day in a row of his threatened "80-day obstruction" against pending legislation to outlaw discrimination in employment on the basis of race or religion.
(FU)-It was learned today at the War Department that dependents of soldiers of all ranks, serving in Nltremar, will be permitted to visit them when accommodations are available, provided that soldiers are willing to remain at least one year longer in the service, beginning with the arrival of their relatives. "WASHINGTON, 1. (FU)- Violence broke out today in La Grange, Illinois, around the "General Motor Company's Electric Division. The police reported that two automobiles were
I overturned* when the pickets on strike stopped a back-to-labor movement, led by two veterans. - JERUSALEM, 1. (PU)- The Arab High Committee called today for a twelve home strike, Saturday, in protest against the granting of Immigration certificates by the British Government to a thousand quintente" Jews, usually in Palestine. PARIS, 1. (PU)-Today it was learned in this capital that agents of the French Government have discovered evidence that treacherous officers of the French Army and big business men" conspired to bring about the French military collapse, (Continued on page 24.).
CSP has set Cordero believes hearing on SIA unnecessary for Monday's Bell project.
Says Auditor has power to examine all Authorities Explains Agricultural Co. house Does not approve expenditures but can audit disbursements, he states
The Auditor of Puerto Rico, Dr. Rafael de J. Cordero, considers it unnecessary for the Comptroller General of the United States to audit the accounts of the Insular Authorities, as provided in the bill submitted to the U.S. Congress by the Chairman of the House Insular Affairs Committee, Mr. C. Jasper Bell. It maintains that "the Auditor of Puerto Rico, as the founder appointed by the President of the United States, is authorized to examine the accounts of all public Authorities and companies". x When a reporter from EL MUNDO questioned the Island Auditor yesterday regarding the Bell bill, filed as an amendment to the Puerto Rico Charter, Mr. Cordero made the above statements, adding that "I do not know the bill in its entirety, so it would be a little difficult to enter into a complete discussion of it; As far as the personnel I have - said Dr. Cordero - this office has been examining the accounts of all the Authorities and public companies." The Auditor stated that "in my opinion, what is appropriate is that I be given the additional personnel that is 1 needed to make these examinations with more regularity and fecuencla. There is a likelihood that I will introduce a bill appropriating funds for this purpose in such a way as to enable the services of accountants to be engaged and the cost of such examinations to be borne by the Authorities." . Mr. Cordero confirmed the Information of EL MUNDO in the sense that an examination of the accounting books of the Compela Agricola has been ordered by his office to investigate the disbursements and the purposes? of the same, but added that "the work has had to be suspended because the offices of that agency have been closed while the case is being decided in the Courts." He assured that as soon as the Sindico was appointed, the account examiners of the Audit Department would return to their work of Investigation. (Continued on page 24.)
Sugar Shortage Problem Unresolved
A shipment of cigarettes is expected today It is the first shipment of 3,500,000 packs of two local brands Seventy million cigarettes that make a total of 3,500,000 packs of twenty straws each, will arrive in Puerto Rico from today to next Tuesday. This was reported yesterday to EL MUNDO by Mr. Luis Santaella, president of the commercial firm R. Santaella Hermanos of this plaza. When a reporter of this newspaper questioned him yesterday about the shortage of cigarettes that has been noted in San Juan and the Island, Mr. Santaella answered that "there is no reason for such shortage. When asked to expand on his statement, he informed that "during the first two weeks of January we distributed as many cigarettes as during the entire month of December. This being so, there is no justifiable reason for there to be a shortage of cigarettes either in San Juan or on the Island." Mr. Santaella added that aboard the steamer "Cape Nome," of the Bull Insular Line, ■ expected in the early hours of this morning in San Juan, comes a large shipment ' of "Chesterfield" and "Spur" cigarettes." In addition to this seizure is expected Tuesday the balance of three and a half million packets aboard the steamer "Cape Sebastian," of the Porto Rico Line. "The cargo of seventy million cigarettes is sufficient to meet the local demand for cigarettes. (Continued on page 24.).
Retailers blame the situation on the Government and prepare suggestions.
Yesterday the problem of the shortage of refined and raw sugar in Puerto Rico's retail stores remained unresolved. The small stores in the metropolitan area were practically sold out, with the consequent disruption for housewives. The president of the Retailers Center, Mr. Ramón Nieves Alicea, announced that he intends to submit to the authorities a plan to avoid the shortage of this vital product, if the price fixing is not definitively resolved today. He advocated "a solution that would allow retailers to supply themselves with sugar, through a mutual agreement between the OAP, the mills and the retailers". Mr. Nieves Alicea was working yesterday on the drafting of his suggestions, which he will make to all the parties involved if the problem is not definitively solved in such a way that housewives can be supplied with the product in the early hours of Monday. The Retailers Union "The sugar shortage is the result of the lack of organization of the authorities obliged to solve a [problem which, like this one, concerns the Government", informed yesterday the president of the Puerto Rico Retailers Union, Mr. Manuel Borrero. Mr. Borrero stated that "the refineries, pending the increase of half a cent per pound, have paralyzed sales" and were imitated by the hoarders, solely responsible for the shortage of sugar in the local market". "The fact that the inhabitants of Puerto Rico," he added, "have to stand in endless lines to get (Continued on page 24.)
PONCE, (By Andrés Jorge Montalvo) - Last night a rally was held in the Muñoz Rivera Plaza to protest against the wholesalers and the OAP. Luciano Delgado, president of the Retailers League, José Luis Canjiano, sacre-, tarlo, Ismael Quiñones, Pedro Juani Fortier, marshal of the Ponce District Court, Juan Varela, Mayor-Andrés Grillases. Saloipón Rosarlo, Ellas Barbosa, of the CGT, Salvador Rivera, of the Panel of Pre-; dos, and the Representative to the Chamber, Leoncio Santaella León. All of them exposed the existing situation in this city in relation to the shortage of basic necessities and the alleged conditions imposed on them by the may-' ristas when making their purchases. Representative Santaella made accusations in general:' against the wholesalers and specifically men-, donated the easo of the merchant F.' Zayas y Cia. who "denied me the
WhIf'í 9 ■ V i bur II 91 ES ' ir ÜS ? Mr. Thomae A. Fennell took the Oath yesterday as "Indian of the Agricultural Company shortly after hearing teaignadn by lúes Ricardo Ia Costa, Jr. and receiving from him Inetrucclonm" "obro how he is to manage the Company. The photograph shows the moment when the magistrate took the Oath to Mr. Fennel (on the right). Photo EL M UNDO).
Sugar price increase was officially authorized - L- - N ■ - N ■■ Office of Director of Stabilization announced yesterday that a half-cent per pound increase has been approved. OAP to set effective date
By CHARLES McOABE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 1. (PU).-The Department -of Agriculture officially announced the termination of a tentative agreement with Cuba, under which normal shipments can be made between Cuba and the United States of the 1946 sugar crop, pending final neaodadnns on the break contract. The
BUMS" W" 'Vil" into ' "IIU pin, Will see on the 8th the case against Mayor Barreto I His lawyer studies the order of the Supreme eon views to an appeal The lawyer José Rafael Gelpl, drowned of the Mayor of Mayagüez, so they can 1st calls for yesterday to EL MUNDO, which is studying the resolution of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico to see if the case is appealable, and then resort to the Court of Appeals of the Circuit of Boston. The resolution to which Mr. Gelpl refers provided that there is no place for the posting and admission of bail for the - issuance of an autó do "super- ■ sedeas" and the mani dato should be referred to the Municipal Assembly of Mayagüez for compliance with the resolution of the Supreme Court of December 13, 1945 ordering the Municipal Assembly to hear and decide on the charges filed by the Governor of Puerto Rico against Mayor BaI rreto. . The Gelpl defendant appealed to the Supreme Court requesting that the mandate not be re-mandated to the Municipal Assembly. He requested the posting of a bond and the issuance of a writ of supersedeas so that the Assembly would refrain from hearing the charges until the appeal was filed. j Yesterday it was announced that the hearing for the criminal case brought by the Department of Justice against] Mr. Barreto in the Municipal Court of Mayagüez for alleged Violation of Article 92 of the Penal Code, has been set for February 8. Mayor Barreto is accused in this case of having leased land and the public square for the exploitation of pikes without having held an auction in accordance with what is determined by the Municipal Law. He is also accused of having failed to pay the Tax on the total amount of the tax.
The Department's official written statement was in the nature of an official written statement from the Department. Meanwhile, the office of the Stabilization Administrator, Judge John C. Collet, again today officially authorized a half-cent increase in the price of refined sugar per pound. It is officially estimated that the purpose of this increase is to enable the Commodity Credit Corporation to buy the 1946 Cuban sugar crop and sell it without loss to the U.S. Treasury. Collet declared that the increase in the price of sugar will be effective on a date to be announced by the Office of Price Administration. . In the sugar picture there are somewhat nebulous upward movements, but the overall outlook remains bleak, as the Commodity Credit Corporation still lacks authority to buy the 1046 Puerto Rican and Hawaiian crop. Information sources expect that some congressional action will be taken next week on the granting of such authority. Under the tentative arrangement approved by Agriculture today, Cuban raw sugar, as it is produced, is being shipped to the United States, under the Commodity Credit Corporation, at the price of $3.675 per 100 pounds (put on the ship), in Cuba, in com- 1 paraclon with the $3.10 per 100 pounds, corresponding (Continued on page 24.)'
Santaella invites violence if OAP and AGS don't act in Ponce
He invited "1 people to swear him in. -Suggests cooperative to dispense with wholesalers; they will publish a list of their sales.
He said that "I have told them that I did not have any and I was looking at it in their establishment". He said that "I have several times, through my writings in the Press, pointed out to the fun- [ Continued on page 24.
I _ -- ! McCarran harasses Ickes and Ickes retorts by calling him a mummy.
(PU)- Harold L. Ickes said today that his doubts about continuing as Secretary of the Interior have been resolved by Senator Pat McCarran, Democrat, of Nevada. Sen. McCirran said reclaimingly that: "The West would be happy" if Ickes were to resign. In a formal statement on the issue, made at a press conference, Icke said that "Senator McCarran, once again, has made my life like a man of my dreams.
Once again, has made my life as Secretary of the Interior worth living." And. he went on to say, "I <- thank . you for your recent comment that the West-meaning Senator McCarran-would be happy if I resigned, because my doubts । about continuing here have been resolved." Ickes did not elaborate on his "doubts" about continuing in the pues| .(Continued on page 24.). 1
In appointing yesterday afternoon the General Guarantor of the Agricultural Company, Thomas A. Fennell, Trustee of the aforementioned company, Judge Ricardo La Costa, Jr., of the District Court of San Juan, ordered the appointment of an attorney to serve the C.A.P.R., who is admitted or practicing law, as well as the appointment of an attorney to serve the company, who is admitted to practice law by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico and who has not less than five years of practice in the Puerto Rico Bar. It further requires him to transfer without delay any funds held by the Agricultural Company outside the Island and deposit them, together with the other funds, in a bank in the city of San Juan and in the name of the "Sindicatura do Compañía Agricola do Puerto Rico". Further on, the Court imposes upon Mr. Fennell a bond of five thousand dollars to enter into office as Trustee and instructs him to draw up an inventory of all the properties of the C.A.P.R. deUé" "aJte-MM -* * * ... .4 J 1 ' .... _ _ _ the Clerk of the Court within ten days. He/she shall also keep accurate and faithful accounts of all acts and transactions, which shall be filed with the Clerk of the Court and a copy thereof shall be served to the attorneys of the parties. According to the administrative organization of the District Court of San Juan, the Sindicatura de la Compartí" Agrícola will have to file any motion on its activities before Judge Marcelino Romany, who is now in charge of the motions room. Yesterday, Francisco Gastambide Arrillaga, Esq. took the necessary steps to post bail for Fennoll at the District Court. The Instructions issued by Judge La Costa on the judicial administration of the Agricultural Company are as follows: "Having heard the motion of the plaintiff requesting the appointment of a trustee to protect and conserve the properties belonging to the co-defendant, Compañía Agrícola de Pto. Rico; and having heard the parties, who agree and consent to the appointment of a trustee without prejudice to the raising by the defendants of any legal question as to the legality of these proceedings, and having been submitted by the parties the names of several persons to be appointed trustee, among whom is Mr. Thomae A. Fennell, against whose candidacy the parties have submitted the names of several persons to be appointed trustee, among whom is Mr. Thomae A. Fennell, against whose candidacy the plaintiff has submitted the names of several persons to be appointed trustee. Fennell against whose candidacy the plaintiff has made no objection, the court hereby appoints said Thomas A. Fennell as trustee to hold office so long as the order of interdict issued by this court in this case is in full force and effect and until otherwise ordered, the trustee herein appointed having the following powers:
I 1. To take and keep possession of all property belonging to the Agricultural Company of Puerto Rico; to protect, care for and maintain said property, it being understood that in those cases where there are shady crops he may cultivate the existing plantations in such a way that they yield the greatest possible benefit, as well as harvest those crops that during the time of his incumbency are harvested; To maintain in good condition and working order all machinery and equipment belonging to the Puerto Rico Agricultural Company, as well as any other movable, immovable or movable property belonging to said Company. To employ and dismiss from time to time and at its discretion all workers, servants and agents that may be necessary for the conservation and custody of the assets of the co-defendant Puerto Rico Agricultural Company and to appoint an attorney admitted to practice law by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico with at least 5 years of practice in Puerto Rico. - ' ' " ■ '' T ' 4
Median in settlement case.
Goldsmith, notified of Thursday's i ñipase, is intervening APA does not accept withholding of dues.
Sugarmen and settlers also do not accept ''closed shop" The Federal Conciliator, Mr. Charlee A, Goldsmith, is Intervening in the negotiations which have been going on between the Sugar Union and the Aturar Pro- í ductors Association, for approval of the draft agreement which has been submitted by the workers to the employers. When the talks were suspended on Thursday afternoon when an impasse was created due to the failure to reach an understanding on the closed shop clause demanded by the workers and not accepted by the bosses, Mr. Goldsmith was informed of this problem. According to reports gathered by EL MUNDO, yesterday Mr. Goldsmith held interviews with both sides and another one is scheduled for Tuesday morning, hours before the meeting called by the Sugar Producers Association to discuss this matter and the "chek off" clause that the bosses do not accept either. Since *1 Settlers Sector of the Farmers Association does not accept the closed shop and check off clauses either, it is believed that representatives of this sector will be invited by Mr. Goldsmith for the interviews to be held. APA will not accept the "check off" The Sugar Producers Association will not accept the clause of the draft agreement that has been submitted for consideration and discussion by the CGT Sugar Union and two Independent unions and which provides that the employers "will withdraw weekly from the salary earned by the workers. This clause provides that "weekly the employer shall deliver to the person designated by the Union for these purposes, the amount of money retained in this form for membership dues". It is further provided in this section appearing as subsection A of the' "general provisions", that "upon written notice from the Local Union to the patrons in its jurisdiction engaged in the exploitation of the Sugar Indus, tria and forming part of the contracting unit", the amount referred to shall be withdrawn. The announcement to the effect that the APA will reject this system, which is called "check off", was made to the members of the Union and of the independent unions participating in the negotiations, by the Chairman of the Labor Committee of the Association, Mr. Fernando Villamil. The announcement was made before the suspension of the discussions on the agreement, when the impasse arose because the APA did not accept the clause providing for the "closed shop." Mr. Vlllamll invited the workers' representatives to continue discussing the agreement, leaving pending the provision on the closed shop, alleging that "there is another clause that we do not accept and that is the one that refers to the "check off", that is, the amount that the employer must withhold from the worker's salary, for the quota assigned by the Union." Mr. Villamil did not argue the APA's reasons for not accepting this clause. The representatives of the Union have announced that "we will not give an inch in our request to include the withholding by the employer" of 1" the amount corresponding to the worker as a quota assigned by the unions." We have not been able to be informed ai the meeting called for Tuesday by the president of the Sugar Producers Association, will discuss, together with the closed shop clause, this petition of the workers to accept the "check off." On the other hand, the board of directors of the Colonos Sector of the Farmers' Association was summoned yesterday to a meeting for Tuesday, at (Continued on page 24.)