THE WORLD
40 PAGES 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
40 PAGES 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
D1AR1C OF THE MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
ttespald*4ios to the men who made the "Victory Loan" possible.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 16, 1946
Entered a* aucond ola** matter. Pnst Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10528
Language Caucus - l
Acting Governor's veto of Arjona bill to be discussed today Muñoz does not want festal action Will decide whether to re-approve measure over executive veto ' The 4a "taladoras of the Populai; Democratic Party will meet in eaucua today to consider numerous" pending matters, among them" the veto of Acting Governor, Manual A. Pérez, to Senate Bill 51, by Senator Rafael Arjona Siaca, providing for "the exclusive use of the Spanish language for education throughout the entire republican eacuela", ü . At the PDP caucus meeting, held on Thursday, this situation was considered as Vlcenty Géigel Polanco reported the Governor's veto of the language bill. The PDP legislative leadership has not yet resolved whether or not the measure would be passed again over the governor's veto, so that it would be submitted to the consideration of the President of the United States, as provided by the PDP Charter. Senators Géigel Polanco and Arjona Siaca expressed their support for the measure to be passed over the veto of the Governor, according to our Reports; it was further indicated that the President of the Senate and of the Majority, Senator Ulus Muñoz and the President of the Senate and of the House of Representatives, Senator Arjona Siaca, were in favor of the measure being passed over the veto of the Governor, according to our Reports; majority, Senator uls Munoz Mating requested that the matter not 1 ■e passed with fes- ' tlnation, as he personally ' - wished to give further study to the bill itself ; and to the problem in ' general posed by the Governor's veto of Ja measure on the Spanish * -nance. It was to Indi- ( cyclones of the President of the Senate * that it was resolved, in accordance with 1 our reports, to postpone until today, Saturday, the discussion of the matter in the caucus of the popular legislators. SB BULLETINS NEW YORK, 15 (PU1-Twenty youths claiming to be American Communists were arrested* -n moments while carrying placards bearing anti-Churchill legends, in front of the. New York City Hall, inside which Mayor O'Dwyer was presenting the former British Premier with a gold medal for "distinguished public service. Churchill led the motorcade from the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel to City Hall under close police guard. When the police intervened to prevent the hostile demonstration, a commotion ensued, during which two women were dragged* to the ground. The police de- . held thirteen persons charged with promoting disorder, the remainder being released. The placards read: "We want peace. Churchill wants war.'* - - - - - WASHINGTON, 15. (PU)- Secretary of State Byrnes told a press conference that the United States and France are still exchanging communications on the situation "in the country, and that there is nothing new to add. The Secretary declined to answer questions about Iran. He said, moreover, that he did not intend to submit the Manchurian issue to the United Nations. .. '.. - ATLANTIC CITY, 16. (PU)-Today the Council of UNRRA met, (Continued on page 18).
TIRES WILL NOT BE RATIONED According to our reports, numerous people insist on hoarding tires, taking from' the 'bolo*', launched by some irresponsible person, to the effect that these 'will have to be rationed soon. The OAP has already officially stated that this version is absurd and that there is not even the remotest intention of such rationing. So let those who like to listen to rumors take note.
The Department of the Interior spores legislative allocations amounting to $700,000 for the completion of the Arecibo port works, and $5100,000 for the same purpose in Ponce. The Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Orlando R. Méndez, informed that such allocations are necessary to finish the works that have been projected in both ports. In Arecibo, an inner dock will be finished, which will allow the arrival of ships to the Ponce pier, and the works of the seawall will be completed. Mr. Méndez said that the preliminary phase of these projects has been carried out by the Department. A few days ago, the works for the preparation of the designs related to the works in Areclbo were auctioned, and the firm Frederick Sneers was awarded the contract. The auction for the works in Ponce was also awarded to the firm Frank Rullán, Associates, of Santurce. The aforementioned allocations are contained in two bills submitted for the consideration of the Houses. It is certain that both bills will merit the approval of both bodies and the Executive Branch, as reported. Dr. Rafael Picó returned to 8118 works as head of the Planning Board Dr. Rafael Picó returned yesterday to his functions as president of the Planning Board. Said Board held a special meeting yesterday, considering several public works projects, among which the following were approved: Reconstruction of buildings for school dining rooms, in the urban area of Rincon. Construction of a bridge over the M "racuta Creek, on Insular Highway 58, in Carolina. Construction of the Cacao municipal road, which includes the construction of a bridge over the Toro Negro River, in Ciales. Purchase of land by the Land Authority, in the Palma neighborhood, in Utuado, for the aggregates program. Construction by the PEG of two classrooms for schools in the Duey bajo neighborhood, in San Germán, and two other classrooms in the Hato Puerco arriba neighborhood, in Areclbo. Reconstruction of several streets in Areclbo, general repairs to the municipal cemetery in Santurce. Acquisition of land in the Tolta neighborhood of Cayey for the construction of a middle school building. Reconstruction and repair of Robert and Monslta streets in Santurce. ;
The Lottery Business The charity fund and agents' benefit
By JUAN MARTINEZ CHAPEL In the following article, the last in the series of three written by our fellow editor Juan Martines Chapeí, he discusses the contrast between the funds produced for charitable purposes by Is Lottery, and the profit of the agents. There is a black market in the sale of tickets of the official Puerto Rico Lottery, due to the tolerance of the Police, negligence of the Lottery Bureau and greed of Lottery agents. The resale of tickets at illegal prices " a problem that is limited to the city of San Juan. The Police, with a little interest in the matter, could easily put an end to this practice that takes place only during the mornings of the drawing days and the afternoon and evening of the day before each drawing.
and the afternoon and evening of the day before each ordinary draw. When the tolerance of the Police ends, the sale of overpriced tickets will end. The law that regulates the operation of the Lottery in Puerto Rico is Law No. 212 of May 15, 1938, which replaces Joint Resolution No. 37 of May 14, 1934, which created the official lottery. The aforementioned law 212, which is currently in force, establishes that tickets may only be sold by the Director, his agents and the street vendors dependent on them, and further establishes that the street vendors "shall be appointed by the agents with the approval of the Director:' and requires that in order to prove their status as vendors, the agents and street vendors must carry an identification card, which they must show to the Director, and that the agents and street vendors must carry an identification card, which they must show to the Director.
The Legislature requires that in order to prove their status as venders, the agents and peddlers must carry an identification card which they must show to anyone who wishes to verify their identity. As can be seen, the Legislature placed in the hands of the Director all the powers and all the responsibility concerning the sale of tickets. The agents are agents of the Director and the traveling salesmen are dependent on the agents and the appointment of these salesmen must be approved by the Director. With these powers, when the negligence of the Lottery Ne "ocient ends, the sale of overpriced tickets will end. As stated in a previous article, the government allows an excessively large profit on the sale of tickets, amounting to about 22%. The Lottery Bureau, by regulation, has tried to divide the profit equally between the agent and the seller; but the agents- " (Continued on page 24.)
PDP Majority decides not to file more public funds appropriations bills in the current session
Hundreds of taxpayers paid yesterday The Bureau in charge of the tax on active income haátag 12 M. There was a tax return for $150,000.00 The lowest registered paid only 8 ctvi. - The payment was ordered By R. Santiago Sosa Editor of EL MUNDO Up to twelve o'clock last night it was expected by the Treasury Department that no less than 25,000 taxpayers would file their Income Tax returns and contribute to the Erarlo, taxes which are estimated at a little over $16 million. The Bureau of Income Tax of the Department of the Treasury, which is headed by the Director, Mr. Santos Ramirez, had its busiest day of the year. Hundreds of taxpayers from all parts of the island invaded this government agency from the early hours of the morning to swear in their respective declarations and pay the amount of the tax that by law corresponds to them. We visited the office during the morning hours, to observe the work of organization implemented by Mr. Ramirez, which allows a quick attention to all taxpayers and avoids, as much as possible, the agglomeration of people at the payment windows. In the afternoon, taxpayers of all types began to stream in: doctors, lawyers, farmers, farmers, co. merejante", public employees, trade teachers, dentists, engineers, members of the armed forces, officers of the Uniformed Forces, and employees of local industries and banks. In the first hours of the night, the proportion of visitors was increasing, repeating the process of swearing the declarations, receiving the forms, issuing receipts for taxes and collecting the contribution. These services were offered to the public until late in the evening. The lowest tax we observed yesterday was eight rentavos, which was paid by a taxpayer from Santurce. The highest contributions fluctuate between one thousand and one hundred and fifty thousand dollars. Last year the lowest individual contribution was one cent and the highest was 5140,000. The highest corporate contribution during that year was just over half a million dollars. We interviewed Lt. Efrain Coello, 245th Infantry, at the time of his deposition. Coello was a former star player on the Vega Baja basketball team. He was attended by examiner Roharto Martinez, who reviewed and swore him in. Coello was pleased because he did not have to pay any taxes. For Fernando Brau. lio For naris it was very laborious to fill out all the boxes on his return, "Tired last night of so much detail," he said, "I hired an accountant and he did all the work," he said.
Legislation to provide facilities for Puerto Rico's rum producers to take their product to the U.S. Free Trade Zones, and from there re-export it to a foreign country, will be approved by the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico, upon recommendations of the Island Treasurer, Rafael A. Buscagiia, Esq. Buscagiia. i According to reports -pbtenldo* by El, MUNDO, the Legislative Assembly of the Partido Popula* has already given its approval to the measure recommended by Treasurer Buscaglia for the aforementioned purpose. P. C. 717, which is in accordance with Article 29 of the Internal Revenue Law, is the one which takes up the Treasurer's recommendation. Once this measure is approved, rum exporters will be able to take their products to the free trade zones of the United States, without paying taxes, when this is done "with the purpose of being exported from there to a foreign country". According to Treasurer Buscaglia's explanation of the measure, due to the difficulties for shipments from the Island to foreign countries. Native industrialists have been deprived of being able to sell part of their rums in foreign markets. By transferring the rums * to the U.S. free trade zones, with no taxation, from these zones 1* it will be easier to ship them to other countries. This will increase the export of rums, open new markets for this product and contribute to foster the development of the industry on the Island, providing more employment opportunities, according to Treasurer Buscaglia. The bills signed by the Governor¡ The Acting Governor, Mr. Manuel A. Pérez, approved on Thursday two bills allocating funds for the construction of vocational trade schools - Industries in Cayey and Utuado. He also signed two bills, one of them allocating funds to continue the preparation of a map of the Island of Puerto Rico and the other allocating funds to build and provide housing for vocational agriculture instructors in the Second Units. The Acting Governor, on the other hand, vetoed three bills. The bills approved are: P. of S. 140 (Act number 21) , appropriating 55,000 for the Board : of Planning to "continue Its work relative to the preparation of a map of 1a Island of Puerto Rico, : showing 1as demarcations । of the limits of the municipalities of 1a Island and of their respective barrios." P. of C. 8 (Act number 22) by appropriating 892,000 for "the cons- ' (Continued on page 24.)
Iran will appeal its case with ! 1 Russia to the Allies , Slíab himself took decision. Before the । American Senate is asked which Council to remain in permanent session.
TEHRAN. (IN. "U The Iranian War Minister, General Ahmad, revealed this afternoon that the Shah of Iran himself has taken 1* decision to appeal to the United Nations Organization regarding the attitude of the Soviet Union towards Iran. The Minister also announced that the Red Army has massed troops and military equipment at the gates of Teheran, which constitutes a definite threat to the nation. Minister Ahmnd stated, finally- -mind" that all relevant precautions have been taken ।. The correspondent ,of the lni lni ternaclonal News Service, London, i John Camsel! reports from that - capital that Iran's decision to ¡ take its case with Russia before the . The UN Security Council is interpreted in parliamentary circles as meaning that there is a likelihood that the British Foreign Minister, Ernest Bevlon, may well try to attend the Council meeting, which will begin in New York, on the 25th of the current month. Political observers believe that Bevln could bring the matter before the Security Council in such a real and definitive way as to decide not only the future of the U.N., but of world peace. Both in parliamentary circles and in official administrative spheres, there are growing indications that Great Britain is definitely determined to oppose any Munich-style compromise on the Iranian question. Diplomatic circles believe that this resolute attitude against Russian appeasement in this crisis is based not only on Britain's anxiety about moral principles but also on the fact that Britain's vital interests are much more affected by the Iranian incident than in the case of Poland when Hitler provoked a British declaration of war by invading it in 1939. Meanwhile, correspondent William Theis of the International News Service reports from Washington that leading Democratic and Republican senators on the Upper House Foreign Relations Committee held a conference today with Secretary of State James Byrnes, and shortly thereafter called in Congress for the United Nations Security Council to be in constant session during periods of diplomatic crisis. The Chairman of the' Committee, Democratic Senator Tom Connally stated that he and three of his colleagues had met with the Secretary of State, in the latter's offices. Connally and the other members of the delegation refrained from commenting on the issues discussed at the conference. Connally was joined by Republican senators Arthur Vandenberg and Warren Au "tin and pro-gre*i "ta Robert LaFollette. Connally said|
■ Democratic Senator Welter George was on the list but was unable to concur. Vandenberg used 1a pblabra in the Senate, after returning from the meeting ron Byrnes, and asked that ' ei Council dr Security be kept in constant session, "as long as ¡ ' there are difficulties standing." He nhs-í - had, sil] however, dr answer - all Ins questions snbre e! alenn- ' ce of the conference held at rl 1 1 1 State Department. Connally pointed out that they spoke Idn to visit : ■ ¡ Secretary Byrnes on their own Inli dative,' the members of the Foreign Rrln- . dones Committee not having been asked to move- , sen to the State Dept. ( Vandenberg, Republican delegate , n the.Vandenberg, Republican delegate to the current U.N. meeting in London, said it was "a fortunate fact" that the Security Council was not meeting "day by day and hour by hour" to deal with critical issues such as those which have arisen during the last few weeks. I pointed out that he was not criticizing, complaining or 4ra- । i (anding to influence the* recent > problems of the Department of Es- ■ tate, but was merely formulating an "observation, academic" i for future consideration. Vanden-[ , berg made these Unexpected remarks as a "postscript" to the official dls- . course he delivered . two "emanas ago, in which he called for . the development of a firm policy ! with regard to Russia. He explained that . his interpretation of article twenty- ¡ - (Continued on page 24.).
On motion of Senator Bolivar Pagan, the Senate agreed at last night's session to request by cable from the Government of the Dominican Republic information on the Puerto Rican worker Rául Chardón, who, according to information received here, has "been the victim of a bloody repression carried out in Ja Central Romana as a result of a state of strike. A resolution presented by Senator Barreto Pérez was also approved to request the United States Department of State to request from the Government of the Dominican Republic information on the events that took place in Central Romana, which resulted in the imprisonment of Raúl Chardón. The Senate approved on third reading the "Igulente" bill: P. S. 96, to pay the "Inipectore" Chemists of the Public Service Commission the amount owed to them for the services rendered during the years 1942-43 and 1943-44. | P. S. 299, to allocate the amount due to them for the years 1942-43 and 1943-44.
They are jubilant to hear of the end of the strike.
.>,4 > vi ¿ K aB c wi F . * * * ■ * B S B ' This* workers dr the Automobile IndustryUHca afllladna to the CIO and employee* at a General Motora-an Detroit plant receive with jubilation the announcement of the termination of the strike which tnvn them idle* for a long time. The workers* are gathered at the picket line office. All* General Motors workers have returned to work. (Photo Frenan Asoclndn )
A concession to promissory notes of the Banco de Fomento will be exempt from payment of taxes; it was agreed by the Popular Chuqiis The bonds, promissory notes, mortgage bonds, ohllgaclone* , credit notes and certificates of deposit" of the Banco de Fomento de Puerto Rico, will be exempt" from payment of all kinds of taxes, according to a legislative measure which was approved by the caucus of the legislators of the Popular Democratic Party. The bill, which has House number 727, also provides that the Banco do Fomento is authorized "to issue and sell and pledge bonds, promissory notes, mortgage bonds, credit obligations, certificates of deposit and any other evidence of debt, including securities for the consideration thereof. A provision is included in the bill, however, whereby the total of outstanding obligations at any time, in respect of which the good faith and credit of the bank has been pledged, "shall not exceed ten times the amount of the principal and surplus" of the bank. The tax exemption is established by] Article 5 of the bill, which reads as follows: "Article 5.-In order to facilitate the raising of funds by the Banco de Fomento de Puerto Rico to carry out its corporate functions, all securities issued by the bank, as well as the income derived from such securities, shall be exempt from all taxes imposed by the Insular government or by any political subdivision of the People of Puerto Rico.
Senate requests reports on a Puerto Rican imprisoned in Sto. Domingo , ' * - " I It was reported in the Upper House that the worker Raúl ¡ Chardón was wounded in a strike at the Central ¡ Romana. - Projects that were -
-The amount of fifty thousand dollars for the construction of a concrete bridge over the Rio Prieto de Lares River, 1 > P. S. 297, to allocate the amount of forty thousand dollars for the " ¡conitruir two" kilometers of road on the Río Piétro road in the Municipality of Lares. t P. S. 393, authorizing the Municipal Assembly of Manati to include' I in "its budget for the 1946-47 fiscal year, the amount of four hundred and forty (440) dollars ' to pay for professional services" rendered by Dr. Emilio Cumpiano. P. S. 380, amending title ] of the Act creating a Construction Board. . - P. C. 50, to amend title i of the act appropriating five hundred mH 1 dollars for the acquisition of land and lots for urban and rural schools of the Island. r P. C. 599, to authorize the Municipal Assembly of Utuado, Puerto Rico, to include in the budget of the Assembly, the revenue estimates of the Assembly of Utuado, Puerto Rico, to include in the budget of the Assembly of Utuado, Puerto Rico.
Neither shall the sale of lots or government lands be approved Popular Caucus has so decided - It is intended to finish legislative work in the next ten days Not to approve legislation of any kind that provides for the sale of lots or lands in general, property of the People of Puerto Rico, to any person or institution whatsoever, is one of the new legislative rules that the parliamentary representation of the Popular Party in the House and Senate has drawn up. The "agreement to that effect was approved in the caucus held Thursday afternoon by the PDP legislators. According to our report, the agreement was based on the consideration that the sale of land by the island government to private institutions or individuals is contrary to the public policy of the dual island administration, as it relates to the acquisition of land by the government to implement the program of social and economic justice. In keeping with this agreement, no bill providing for sale of this nature will receive majority approval in the Legislature this session. With the end of this week, another new rule also adopted Thursday by the legislative leadership of the Popular Party takes effect, by virtue of which during the remaining days of the legislative session, no more bills will be filed providing for public fund appropriations, except in eiceprlonele cases in which the caucus determines it. "The purpose of this measure,"- a majority legislator informed our editor yesterday-"is to be able to determine as soon as possible how much the total appropriations proposed in all" the" bills" already filed amount to, and to see how this compares with the funds available" in the Island Treasury." It was explained that ""it is the desire of the congressional majority to pass legislation that ""e ne. resite. for which there are fondmrdlsponlbles and to avoid the passage of measures which, although good" can neither '"er implemented" nor signed by the Governor because there are insufficient funds to carry out the fíne" expressed" in Id" bill."" At present, the "Ignacione" bills presented in the House and Senate exceed by several million dollars the estimated revenues for the Island Treasury for the next fiscal year 1946-47. The President of the Senate and of the Popular Democratic Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, has proposed to begin today a series of individual conferences with each one of the legislators of the different representative and senatorial districts, with the purpose of discussing them. with the purpose of discussing with them all the proposed legislation for their respective districts and to determine which are the preferable measures, among those already presented, for the need and convenience of the different urban and rural communities of the Island. The legislative leadership is still determined to speed up the work of the Houses with the purpose of closing the Legislature within the next ten days, so that the committee on political status can move to Washington immediately after the Legislative Assembly finishes its work. The House did not meet late yesterday. Almost immediately after the House had resumed its session yesterday, it adjourned so that the representatives could attend an honorary champagne which, by agreement of the Speakers of both Houses, was offered in the Speaker's office, Dr. Suson, to the French delegation to the Caribbean Conference. A motion was "tried in the House that the consent of the Senate be solicited, to request (Continued on page 2.)