THE NUN DO
40 pages 5 ctvs. 2 Sections
40 PAGES 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
Let's support the shoulders that made the Victory Loan possible.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 1946
Entered a" second class matter, Post Office, San Juan. P. R.
NUMBER 10500
. Chavez favors lie the appointment of M. Villaronaa
Ordinances of municipalities are approved Among others are those of Yabucoa, Carolina, Coamo and Villalba Executive Council announces hearing i fierran cases in Villalba and in । the Monacillos neighborhood will be discussed The Executive Council approved yesterday i the following: Ordinance of the Munl- 1 । clpal Assembly of Yabucoa Imposing an additional I contribution on the pro- ( ■ piety of 38J100 dal 1 percent ■ for the soatenlmlento del hospital 1 - municipal, a relief room and) । other charitable services. Ordinance of the Carolina Mu- i nlclpal Assembly authorizing < transfers of $",934.89 between I . items of the loan of $33,000 । . made in 1941, and of $0.78 between par- i । tlds of the loan of $3,181.22 ha- j - choked co.ntra the Revenue by concep- i i i to to of contributions in the years of 1 , 1942-44. ( ■j Ordinance of the Munl- r ' clpal Assembly of Carolina Imposing a 1 contribution of 181100 of 1 percent in 1946-47 for the support of the municipal hospital and ' । other charitable services. ( I Ordinance of the Munl- < ' cfpal Assembly of Coamo Imposing an additional contribution of 20|100 of ' . 1 percent for the support < . of the municipal hospital and other charitable ser- f vices. c Ordinance of the Municipal Assembly of Villalba imposing an additional contribution of 251100 q of 1 percent for the same purposes. The Executive Council agreed to ce- । lebrar public hearings on the 26th day of c February on a request to c that a parcel of land in Villalba i be declared of public utility ¿ and (Continued on page 24)
Puerto Rican friends, the Senator says, have recommended it to him.
Reiterates interest in Island issues
Says Interior Change Helps Pedro del Valle's Candidacy
By JEAN VAN VRANKEN ■ fe Córro "pon "ai da INS * WASHINGTON. 15. (INS) - Senator Dennii Chávez, Democrat, of New Mexico, said today that he will support the appointment of Mariano Vlllaronga as Puerto Rico's Commissioner of Instruction. Chávei said that although he did not personally know Vlllaronga, one of the deans of the University of Puerto Rico, who is reported to be under consideration by the White House for the post, he has been assured by Puerto Rican senators that he is a man prepared for the position. As a member of the Senate Insular Affairs Committee, Chaves is one of the most active congressional leaders on Puerto Rico issues. The New Mexico Senator said that two very important issues - his fight for a reasonable labor standards bill and his daughter's marriage - have taken his attention away from Puerto Rico issues for the time being. Chives announced that he will soon begin work on a project on the political status of the island, reaffirming that statehood must be included in the forms of government offered. He also said he strongly supported the candidacy of Commander General Pedro del Valle for governor of the island. "I have reason to believe that nél Valle is very Importante ten la sideración oficial de Washington." Chavez also assured that "the changes occurred in the Department of the Interior may make the nomination of the General possible". He assured that he "does not know anything about the possible visit of Del Valle to Puer-' to Rico".
Trtinian comments on Pauley case and discusses Ickes f WASHINGTON? 15. (PU) - President Traman told reporters today that Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal originally suggested to him the nomination of Edwin Pauley for Under Secretary of the Navy. Forrestal told reporters that he still expects Pauley to be confirmed by the Senate, despite the furor caused by the Tie Pauley controversy with resigned Interior Secretary Ickes. "Pauley is a burn man," said Trufnani, describing Pauley's work on the German reparations as one of the best jobs he has ever done. Questioned as to whether he felt that Ickes' statement that he could not remain in an Administration that expected him (Ickes) to perjure himself impugned his (the President's) integrity, Traman said he did not believe Ickes would have dared to do such a thing.
Pointing out that 40 percent of the water supply is wasted monthly - and offering his agency's services to prevent that waste - the head of the Insular Aqueduct Service, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, yesterday authorized the following statement: "I wish to point out today the habit of those who enjoy water and waste it. This habit has taken on such magnitude in Puerto Rico that it is already a negative factor in the solution of the general water problem. Actually, the bad habit of wasting water would not be so bad and its consequences so serious if while a few can afford to pay more for the improper use of water, the many would have the opportunity to pay less for the proper use of water. But the majority of our population, scattered in the distant quarters of the Island or huddled in the suburbs of the cities, still have to turn directly to the rivers or streams; they still have to go to the natural springs of the mountains to get water.
WASHINGTON 15. (PU) - The investigation being conducted by the House Special Committee on Food in connection with the Ib food shortage appears likely to be extended until next week, as witnesses for the Department of Agriculture said their testimony would be delayed. A spokesman for the department said they would discuss with representatives of the Industry enante ■ the butter shortage, before making final recommendations to the Committee. - - - - WASHINGTON. IB. (PU) - Representative Ralph E. Church, Illinois Republican, predicted today that veterans would hold a march on Wáshlngten unless the Government aligedisposition of surplus property. Church told him the Spending Committee 4 of 1a Lower House ■uo Toa veterans are "delaying the march on Washington in the espérense that the Government ac- * loaré now. "Ye trust that sinn awaiting for some time That the Government and its Cor-.
. poration of War Property will do something to elitni11 nar "I file. In the way this is being carried on now, it is simply a legal theft of the money of the people before," Church said. 1. WASHINGTON, IB. (PU) - President Traman today received <os i new recommendations made to him by two western senators to replace Ickes. The President exchanged impressions with Senators Hugh Mitchell, Democrat, of Washington; Glen Taylor, Democrat, 1 of Idaho, and James. Murray, Democrat, ■ crete, of Montana. Taylor claimed । to have recommended James P. : Pope, former senator for ei es- - tate of Idaho and at present - member of the Tennessee Valley Authority. Mitchell said he fa- ■ vored the Secretary of Labor, i Lewis B. Schwellenbach, former ■ ¡senator for the state of Wishingi ton. Murray expressed himself to the effect that both gentlemen were 1 acceptable to him. r: - - - - .I NEW YORK, IB. (PU) - An.
BULLETINS
_í. Explains change in wage rule President Harry S. Truman Prices to be adjusted to wages.
The Office of Economic Stabilization is reestablished under Rowles Washington" 15. <pu>.- Truman announced last night the modification of the formula governing the relationship between price taz" and wages to permit wage increases within certain" limits and announced the reestablishment of the Office of Economic Stabilization, whose director will be Chester Bowles, now head of the Office of Price Administration. In a statement authorized by the President, he explains that the first of these measures is taken in order to permit wage increases within certain limits and that any industry which finds itself in a critical situation because of an approved wage increase may have a corresponding price adjustment without the necessity of waiting for the trial period to pass.1 Furthermore, the President explains in his statement that increases 1 which do not correspond to this general policy cannot be approved without exposing the workers and the public to the danger of an in- 1 (Continued on page 24).
Cuevas reports 40% loss in monthly water production
- ; ■ - - ... ■ I ¡ SI A chief points out how the waste occurs. - My entity offers services for conMiniidorex economy.
i veer of Impure water or to the plu-' ■ mas public to obtain water: i more or less pure. To the peasants with half-health Puerto Rico is saying meanwhile, । that it is necessary to increase agricultural production and they make their effort confident of the future; to the workers with their burden of hopes becoming a reality is' warned of the need to Intensify industrialization and they! know that "u government is a guarantee of justice. But it is the peasants, the workers and the middle class who need that part of the government's responsibility which concerns general services to be carried out in the same short time in which production must grow. The Aqueduct Service's part of the responsibility is the water supply. And it is significant that while we grapple with the problem of producing pure water for all, we must pause to consider the waste due to the bad habit acquired by a considerable part of our population.
The "Constellation" of the Transcontinental Western Airlines, carrying 28 movie stars, landed today at La Guardia airfield, failing in its attempt to set a new transcontinental record for commercial aircraft. The time was eight hours and thirty-eight minutes, from Burbank, California, non-stop; compared to the record set on February S, also by a "Constellation" plane, of seven hours and twenty-seven minutes, at the inauguration of the new non-stop transcontinental service from Los Angeles to New York. Howard Hughes, famous for his round-the-world flight and TWA executive, commanded the aircraft. - WASHINGTON, IB. (IN8) - Congress today extended the term of the congressional committee investigating the Pearl Harbor disaster until next June 1st. The extension is intended to give the Committee additional time to conclude its hearings and to submit its report to Congress.
Douglas, Schwellenbach and Mahoney are among the candidates to replace Ickes at the Interior Dept. Interior
Taxpayer would not be able to challenge laws or acts of insular agencies Courts limited on injunctions Could only grant them after final judgment of unconstitutionality
No suit challenging the validity, legality or constltuclonality of any law or act of public administration, "on the ground that the plaintiff, either as an individual or as a representative of a taxpayer," shall be brought or continued in any court of Puerto Rico, suffers or may suffer damages by virtue thereof", according to Senate Bill Number 90, I filed on Thursday in the Upper House by Senators Vicente Gélgel Polanco, Ernesto Juan Fon-' frías and Luis Alfredo Colón, should said measure become law. 1 The bill, which was briefly reported by EL MUNDO in yesterday's edition, contains a "Statement of Motives" in which the purpose of the authors of the measure is expressed. Said part of the pro- 1 yecto reads as follows: । "In recent years a practice has arisen whereby the legality or constltuclonality d- laws and acts-1 clones of public administration) is put in litigation by persons who have not suffered any real damage as a result of the" same, and who allege the right to sue merely by virtue of the fact of being a taxpayer". This practice gives rise to a multiplicity of suits, hinders public administration, and sometimes) compels the courts to consider the administration of a law before" such administration has been perfected, whereas if the suit were postponed until some actual injury is suffered, the courts would be in a position to decide on the basis of fact rather than conjecture."The "Explanatory Memorandum" goes on to state that "the Puerto Rico Legislature believes that as of this date the island courts should follow the rule of the United States Supreme Court, expressed in the case of Massachussett" v. Mellon, 262 U. )S. 447 " The following are reproduced in the text of the bill at (Continued on page 19) Physicians' Opposition to Two Bills: Dr. Morales Alleges Lowering of Standards of Medicine on the Island Senate Bills 8 and 9 "are intended to "lower the standards" achieved in the practice of medicine in Puerto Rico," and if the Medical Association is "opposed to authorizing the authorization of the practice of medicine in Puerto Rico," it would be "to lower the standards" achieved in the practice of medicine in Puerto Rico," and if the Medical Association is "opposed to the authorization of the practice of medicine in Puerto Rico," it would be "to lower the standards achieved in the practice of medicine in Puerto Rico.The "foreign doctors to be authorized to practice in the Island without having to validate their degrees, not for fear of the competence of such doctors," and if considering that "it would not be proper to give a number of foreign doctors authorization to practice here, without requiring them the same requirements as native doctors," said yesterday the president of the Medical Association of Puerto Rico, I Dr. Luis M. Morale". The" authorized statements 1 by Dr. Morale" "on the bills presented" for the consideration of the present Legislature, were as follows: "The Medical Association of Puerto Rico, conscious of its great responsibility with respect to the health of our people, has always endorsed every just and reasonable measure to improve the medical services in this area. But the Medical Association of Puerto Rico has always opposed, and continues to oppose, any legislation such as that included in Senate Bills 8 and 9, which not only does not solve or improve the problem of medical assistance to the people, but could cause serious harm to their health. । By means of this" do" bill "e pretends to lower the" standard" I achieved in the practice of medicine in Puerto Rico. The best guarantee; indeed, the only guarantee the people have that they are not handing over their health and their lives to an incompetent hand, is the I .(Continued on page 24) 1
Washing of the streets begins next Monday Government of the Capital received the equipment ordered for cleaning The director of public works of the Government of San Juan, aeftor Salvador V. Caro, received yesterday part of the equipment ordered to improve the service of public cleaning of the capital. Said equipment consists of five dozen four-wheeled trucks, with two tanks each, for the municipal road workers in charge of sweeping and cleaning the streets. Also received was a wheeled unit for washing the roads, which has a capacity of 2,MX) gallons of water. "We have been organizing the public clean-up campaign," - said Mr. Caro yesterday, - "and for that purpose we held a meeting on Thursday night with all interested persons," among whom were representatives of the government, civic organizations and the general public. It was explained to all the organization that we have been doing, for a greater success of this work." The street washing service" will be started by the municipality on Monday" morning. Mr. Caro said that the washing of all the streets of San Juan will begin in the early hours of the day after tomorrow. The carts will be distributed by zones, each one in charge of a municipal miner. This equipment," he added, "will make it possible to provide a more efficient service in sweeping streets. Once the tanks have been filled, the garbage will be placed in "zafacones" in each area, which will be picked up by the public garbage trucks. In other words, it is our intention to ensure that the garbage in the streets will be collected by these trucks, thereby increasing the efficiency of the public cleaning service. |
In the case of the "tavo" per quintal is not reasonable, two of the main distributors indicated that they have been supplying sugar without the orders in process indicating that there has been a notable decrease. | It was reported yesterday that, as a result of negotiations that have been taking place before the OAP, related to the revision of the prices fixed for this product, ""'action is expected from this agenda in the next few days, There is enough sugar in the warehouses of the" distributors in San Juan and the hope that the OAP will readjust the prices fixed. Jados,-after an interview i 1 held by the affected merchants" with dlchn office,- has motl- ■ ivated that the sale dql product has continued, even though al- ■ gunoa merchant" feel re- ■ ¡ml "os to continue negotiating with . this product if the situation | | is not satisfactorily resolved. As of yesterday, the OAP had not ac- - cloned on this situation. i, In relation to the threat of the wholesalers to reduce their sugar comi- - pies because, they allege, the margin of 15 cents per quintal is not sufficient, the President of the Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Flllpo de Hostos, explained that the margin of 15 cents was not net, but gross. From this margin 1 i hruto, of 15 cents per quintal i of sugar, said Mr. de Mostos, . had to come the cost of aca- . rreto from the wholesaler's warehouse to .the retailer's store. The President of the Chamber of Commerce stated that within the San Juan area the cheapest that can be obtained is 10 cents per quintal per carload, which reduces the margin to 5 cents per quintal. | (Continued on page 24)
Pinero urges approval of agricultural extension funds Before House AMgnRcione* Committee 1" he made the charge that Puertb Rico had been discriminated against -J ■ I
By JEAN VAN VRAKEN International News Service Correspondent WASHINGTON, 15-(INS)-The favorable recommendation of a total appropriation of $408,000 for agricultural extension work in Puerto Rico under the provisions of the Bankhead-Jones Act was urged from the House Agriculture Committee by the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico, Mr. Jesus T. Plftero. Plftero. At a meeting of the Committee, the Commissioner made the charge that Puerto Rico had been the victim of discrimination within the terms of the law. He stated that originally the Island had been granted $88,000 per year for this type of work. An additional amount of $40,000 was to be added each year until the total authorized amount of $408,000 was reached.
- । passed lieutenant, which authorized additional funds for the extension service, Plftero added, because it was claimed that the Island was entitled to the $408,000 previously allocated, Plftero emphasized that in fact the budget committee has recommended that Puerto Rico be allocated only $104,000 this year. Piftero said, "This meager appropriation is requested despite the fact that Puerto Rico was excluded from the benefits of the Bankhead-Flannagan Act {because this aft would have received in appropriations the $408,000 authorized." Plftero told the committee that "Puerto Rico's needs for extension service are greater than those of any other part of the United States. He gave force to the statement with figures relating to the high birth and death rates, high literacy rates and poor school attendance.
Homma weeps as he listens to his wife declare
a'THWf H I H The tantalizing genera! Japanese Masaharu Homma (lx qutarda) covers his face with a handkerchief and weeps in the "wing of the court that tried him as his wife (right) testifies on his behalf during his trial as a war criminal in Manila. As is already known, Homma < was found guilty by the military tribunal and sentenced to death by firing squad. (Fofo P. A3
i In San Juan, delivery of sugar orders continues Two of the main distributors reported yesterday that there has been no noticeable shortage. OAP price action expected i Representatives of sugar mills in the San Juan metropolitan area have continued to deliver orders for refined and raw sugar for domestic consumption. Even though some wholesale wholesalers are reluctant to work the product, claiming that the profit margin set by the OAP of 15 cents per ton is too high.
! The technicians of the Planning Board who studied the development of urban roads in Ponce, Mr. Paul V. Schumm and René Paitan, rendered yesterday a broad report to the Board, containing their recommendations. The chief planner, Seftar Car' lo" M. Pasalacqua, stated that this" functionaries included with ' their written Report, a pre ' liminary dlsefto of the" proposed urban avenues of Ponce. "The report," he added, "gives great importance to the entire development of Ponce's surroundings, that is, the immediate and future expansion of the city. No alteration has been recommended to the design of the first metropolitan bypass, which will soon be built by the Department of the Interior, with combined funds from the insular and federal governments. This road is included in the complete plan of all the prlncl-i pata" roads to be built in the Ponce metropolitan area. The aforementioned technicians recommend a substantial improvement of the entrance to Ponce from the Juana Diaz road. They propose a direct entrance to the city, which includes the construction of a new bridge. At present this entrance is very irregular, with a) curve in this part of the road that gives access to the town. It has also indicated the advisability of providing several direct accesses to the beach, from highways 36, 2, 3 and 1, including another bypass road, which goes around the intensely built-up area of the city, which in part extends along the west side of the Portuguese River, that is, between the river and the city, then extending in a circle through the southern section of Ponce, south of the railroad track, as explained by Pasalacqua. The need to provide greater facilities in the surrounding area, which will result in the orderly growth and expansion [of Ponce, a function that will be achieved, in a very effective manner, with the construction of the bypass road that has been previously studied by the Board and the Department of the Interior, compared to what prevails in the United States," he said. He asserted that "Puerto Rico is born- 1 high the help of that agency and of all the" that tend to e "tlmúlar instruction and to raise the level < (Continued on page 24) |
Ickes suggested the former for vice-presidency Curtan published that Truman and Secretary Ickes crossed paths Wallace's departure anticipated Paulev resists call for withdrawal of his Senate nomination.
WASHINGTON. 15 (INS.)-It was reported today that President Truman was considering the nomination of Supreme Court Justice Douglas to succeed H>*ld Ickes as Secretary of the Interior. When Dou* glas was chosen for the post, Secretary of the Interior, it was the person whom the resigning Minister Ickes had endorsed as a candidate for the nation's presidency in the election campaign of 1944. Ickes was the generalissimo of Douglas's election campaign on that ticket and talked the late President Roosevelt into including Douglas's name on his famous list of possible candidates. He spoke to the late President Roosevelt to include Douglas' name on the famous list of possible vice-presidential candidates. When the latter's candidacy failed, Iek®" then endorsed, for vlcepreslden1 te, Henry Wallace, now iSecretary of Commerce. Secretary of Labor. Lew!" ! Schwellenbach also figures loImo as one of the possible candidates" for Secretary of the Interior, along with lo" name" of the Democratic foreman, Joseeph Omahoney. In the event that Justice Dougla" is appointed, Schwellenbach would then take his seat on the Supreme Court. Meanwhile, United Press Bureau Chief Lyle C. Wilaon in Washington sends from the national capital the following report on the question of former Secretary Icke's resignation, revealing for the first time President Truman's letter accepting his resignation - which was not provided to the press by the White House - as well as another letter from the former Secretary to the White House. The chances that Edwin W. Pauley would be confirmed as Under Secretary of the Navy, according to "Old Cicat®. ro's" awakening upon leaving the President's Cabinet, lie in tatters. "The "Old Cycat" is none other than Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Icke, who will step down as Secretary of the Interior today, having turned his cannon on President Truman and his advisors in a manner never before seen here. The immediate result was a growing doubt as to whether the Senate would follow the President and consent to Pauley's appointment to the Navy post. It was the differences" which arose between Icke" and Truman over Pauley's qualifications which caused the "Old Cyclone" to resign in a heartbeat. i After a change of letter" on the subject of the resignation and ! a conference with the Press in which Ickes foresaw no future for aeftor Truman other than trouble", there was i,uevo" Angulo" in the controversy. This" consisted in the distribution to i reporters of A group of letters which ran between the resigning presidential cabinet member and the President. They could be shortened and paraphrased, but <on so ¡Interesting" that "arla a pity. Here they are, as 'bequeathed to me from the mlmeographer of the Department of the Interior; White House, Wáshlngton. February 13, 1946. Dear Harold: I have before me your letter of February 12 in which you tender your resignation as Secretary of the Interior. This letter leaves me only one course of action. I therefore accept your resignation, effective upon completion of official work on Friday, February 15 next. I also consider that this terminates all your other governmental activity. In accordance with law, "eftor Oscar L. Chapman, Deputy Secretary, will serve as Acting Secretary of the Department of the Interior. With my" best" wishes," Yours sincerely, (fmdo.) Harry Truman. To the Honorable Harold Icke" Secretary of the Interior, Washington, D. C. Secretary of the Interior, Washington. Feb. 13, 1946. Dear Mr. President: I deeply appreciate the generosity, kindness and goodness shown in your ear (Continued on page 34).