THE DUNDO
2nd EDITION 2 Sections
40 PAGES 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections".
LA MACANA NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXVIII
Insist with the Government to provide better hospital facilities.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY JUNE 22, 1946
Entered M second elaaa matter. Foot Office, San Juan, P. B.
NUMBER 10623
Russia assumes conciliatory attitude at Paris Conference of Ministers; Trieste case remained unresolved yesterday.
Vice Admiral William R. Munroe (left) was greeted by Commodore E. B. Nixon on his return to San Juan yesterday from a trip to Wahlngton, where he served temporarily, Chief of the Caribbean Sea Frontier Munroe has just been decorated again, being awarded the Distinguished Service Medal and the Gold Star equivalent to a second Malon of Merit. Accompanying the Admiral was Mrs. Munroe (Tenth Naval District photo), . 11 1 ' ' ' 1 M ,
Majority of voters favor tobacco quota system * I Agriculture indicates that ninety-eight out of every one hundred votes cast favor the law. - In Culebras only one person can vote In the Department of Agriculture and Commerce, the agency conducting the referendum among the tobacco farmers, it was reported yesterday that the situation in the voting was in the sense that out of every one hundred votes cast "ninety-eight are in favor and "only two against putting into effect the law providing for the establishment of a quota system for the production of tobacco on the island. No polling place may be closed before next Monday.
HA bill extends town of San German; ' ■ _ ' . "T*" p It will extend it through western sector, housing there a hundred families | The hamlet to be built by the Puerto Rico Homes Authority in ■ ¡ the town of San Germán will permit, as the Planning Board has expressed, "an extension of the town by its western end." This a property of undulating topography with a surface extension of 11.97 cuerdas. In giving its approval to these works, which will house one hundred families, the Board has expressed the following: "The Department of the Interior has made the preliminary layout of the San Germán detour for the Insular Highway No. 2, by two different routes. Route No. 1 crosses the property where the aforementioned hamlet will be located, and route No. 2 passes to the south of the railroad track. In making the recommendation on this project of homes in San German, this Board has considered that for the benefit of the projected hamlet, which is located in a very appropriate area for this purpose, it will choose the route that passes to the south of the railroad, and another that does not confluence with the proposed hamlet, for the definitive layout of the referred deviation. "The proposed density for the present project will be 18.7 families per string. In the same project, 2.15 cuerdas of land* have been provided for a park and community center. | The street system will consist of two local streets with 7 meters of road surface and 13 meters of easement, connecting Insular Road No. 2 (exit to Mayagüez) and Calle Colón in extension with Callo Contra! with the proposed hamlet. In addition so (Continued on page 24)
The election shall be held at four o'clock in the afternoon, unless the number of farmers authorized to participate in the election has been exhausted. The number of harvesters eligible to vote ranges from one to over one thousand in the tobacco towns. In Culebra only one person can vote, and in Cabo Rojo two or three. There are other groups of towns in which those entitled to participate in the referendum are less than ten. The Commissioner of Agriculture, Mr. Luis A. Izquierdo, yesterday expressed his appreciation for the way in which the municipal boards of elections have been working in all the towns, and highlighted the cooperation that the Insular Police have been providing. Lot of members of these boards, although they have been constituted as government officials, do not receive any remuneration for their work in this election. Mr. Izquierdo indicated that he was "greatly satisfied" with the work of the members of these boards and the contribution of the Uniformed.
The U.S.-registered merchant ships covering the routes from New Orleans and other Gulf ports to Rio do Janeiro and other South American ports; from those Gulf ports to the South and East Africa and to Madagascar; and the routes from the Pacific ports to the British Isles or Ireland and to the Havre and Hamburg area, may in advance load and unload at the ports of the Island of Puerto Rico, as notified to the General Administrator of the Puerto Rico Industrial Development Company, Mr. Teodoro Moscoso, Jr.
NEWS DIGEST . ' (
Sea Juan has heard included as a point of oséala do American merchant ships going to South America, ol Pacifico, Africa and the nona dol Havre and Hamburg. - o - Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa explains why he was obliged to stay with the Commission of the ■tatuó and relates geottonoo quo he did with his own peculio. - - - The Employees Federation believes that the pension case should "wait until the regular legislative session. s s - The Island Auditor points out the dubious practices and errors of the Island Government Employees Association. - The Puerto Rican women, veterans of World War II, are now receiving the unemployment rompenzaeló*! 888 weekly. ■ - - The Chicago A Southern Airline intends to inaugurate service in
Fort Meo in the fall 4o ootei aAo. J 7'* * .¡ The town of San Germán m to be extended by ol west with the Home Authority project which oe will develop, there f ,,,! Severe criticism was made before a Senate committee on hoopltalarloo.centers now serving Puerto Rican ex-soldiers. - ' ' ' । The sales of surplus gue 1 rm will be investigated by the U.S. Department of Justice. ■ I - - - - Yesterday oe unveiled the plan' allied . for the control of Japan, for 86 years . . Preference will be given to veterans in the procurement of agricultural equipment . - Olmo drew a blank in the game Mexico lost to Nuevo 1 1 Laredo, 8-1.
--- . । ■"■ - "and 11 - ( । With the new allocation of 81,- * 500,000, Inotrucclón proposes to re- । stop school buildings throughout the island. - - - < Club Deportivo Arecibo eliminated, Barandilla and in turn entered । the Serio Final do Baloncesto Ollm- । pico. * ... I 1 This afternoon there are Olympic ] track and field playoffs at the , University. I ( I * * * ' |1 Boston Sox lost- ( ron their seventh Game in eight oa- ■ lides. ¡1 Twenty-eight divorces decreed yesterday ¡ Judge Marrero. Thirteen remained pending. Russia has assumed an attitude of ( conciliation at the Paris Conference of ( Ministers. < - - - - - < Health advises that for now, 1 while the Incidence of po- 1 limleíltl", travel to 1" < city of Miami, Florida, should be avoided.
Auditor believes there is danger to Savings Points out the* dubious practices and mistakes of the Employees Association There is little reserve for losses Attacks loans given with little collateral and the system of By Juan Martinez Chapo! EL MUNDO Editor dubious practices and erroneous procedures that are being used in the operation of the loan business of the Savings and Loan Fund of the Employees' Association of the Island's Government, threaten the security of the employee's savings, for having given it to the loan, reported yesterday Rafael de J. Cordero, Auditor of Puerto Rico. "With more than 83,827,900.00 in outstanding loan pending payment, on June 30, 1945, the Aaoclation had a reserve of Bolamente 818,550.38 to make up for the probable loss. Good administration would have mandated the maintenance of a reserve approximately ten times as large as that which now exists," continued Mr. Cordero. "Although the Aaoclation contends that it has lost out on bad debt because it has established less than $320,000, because it does not take into account the fact that a number of outstanding loans do not have the necessary collateral, an examination of the Association's account by the Auditor's Office's Examination Division showed," Mr. Cordero reported today. He added that the unsecured loan will most likely result in a significant loss to the Association in the coming year. Since they have not provided the necessary reserve for the eventuality, as advised by the sound and conservative practice usually followed by institutions engaged in the lending business, the savings of 16,000 government employees, which have been put up in the loan, may be directly affected. At present, loans are granted only to employees who are covered by the Act and, according to the actuarial report just completed, less than 7,000 of the 16,000 permanent employees may be directly affected by the loan business.
WASHINGTON. 21. (PU) - As the House Appropriations Committee was considering the request made by military authorities for the construction of a hospital in Puerto Rico to serve veterans of both wars, as well as patients of the Veterans Administration, the War Department submitted a formal statement in which it made a vigorous criticism of the hospitals in Puerto Rico under contract to care for veterans. The document states "that the Chief of Medical Services of the Veterans Administration in San Juan, points out many incidents where it has been necessary to forcibly destroy equipment in some of the hospitals that have contracts to treat veterans, because such equipment was archaic, and was in extremely dirty, germ-ridden conditions". It was also reported that the tes-
San Juan is included in new merchant marine routes Numerous American ships bound for ports in South America, Africa, the Pacific and the Havre and Hamburg area will call at the island.
AV ñbona a 81 . "i boncuas unemployment pay All served during the war with Army or naval forces Eighty-one* Puerto Rican women who served" a the Armed Forces are receiving 820 weekly unemployment compensation, "ogún informó ayer ol doctor Jrm" Sorra-Chavarry, Regional Director of the Veterans Administration;. The week ending June 1, 81 women veterans received payments totaling 31,620, according to Dr. Sorra-Chavarry. In the week ending June 8, 71 Puerto Rican women received a total of 31,420 in unemployment compensation. "These women veterans," said the Administration's director, "are as entitled to receive unemployment compensation as any Puerto Rican veteran. Dr. Sorra-Chavarry stated that any Puerto Rican woman who served in the Army or the Navy and who is unemployed may appear at the Veterans Administration offices to apply for unemployment compensation.
Acting Acting United States Maritime Commander, Raymond S. McKeough, on letter received at the office of the Indian Development Company. I From the letter addressed to Mr. Moacoeo by Mr. McKeough, dated Washington, D.C., May 31, 1946, extract the following: We refer to your letter of April 16, 1946, concerning the report of the Trade Route Subcommittee on Recommendations for Recommended Foreign Trade Routes* and Type of Vessel Required by the United States Merchant Marine for Poot War Traffic. "I am enclosing a copy of the Commission's report regarding the recommended foreign trade route and the type and type of vessel recommended for traffic under the U.S. flag. You will note that Section I eapoeifies oacala" in Puerto Rico. The letter from the Chief Executive Officer of the Industrial Development Company, dated April 16 of this year, which was addressed to the Secretary of the United States Maritime Commission and to which Mr. McKeough alluded, requested said Commission the inclusion of Puerto Rico in both directions as an intermediate stop on Commercial Routes No. 20, No. 15B and No. MA and 26B. It was stated in said communication that: "It appears that Puerto Rico is included only on Route 19A for the recommended cargo service from the Gulf Ports with 'Privilege' of call on the Island. This service, which appears to have been established (in the Report of the Subcommittee on Commercial Routes - report above and issued dated November 1, 2001), is included only on Route 19A for the recommended service of cargo from the Gulf Ports with 'Privilege' to the Island.
By JEAN VAN yBANKEN WASHINGTON, 21. (INS)-The Feminist International League for Peace and Freedom today called upon all chapters of the organization throughout the United States to urge the appointment of Jesus T. Piftero as Governor of Puerto Rico. Piftero as Governor of Puerto Rico. In a letter to League leaders in other cities, Heloise Brainerd and Ottllie Slgnell, who are members of the League's Puerto Rico Committee, said: "We strongly urge Mr. Jesus T. Piftero, Resident Commissioner, to become Governor of Puerto Rico. Plflero, - Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in ol because the people of Puerto Rico selected him to represent them, and because he is in sympathy with the economic and political program that Bill is carrying out, which is the program for which the people voted". And they continue, "We understand that President Truman is under considerable pressure to 'appoint other people who do not re-
In a report presented before a Senate committee, archaic equipment is mentioned, which is in a state of extreme filth, infested with germs, and in a state of extreme disrepair," they continue: "We understand that President Truman is under considerable pressure to 'appoint other people who will not re-appoint them.
Itlmonlo rendered by the funclona1 rivers "on this matter, was supported by "other members of the medical profession" in Puerto Rico. The document revealed, atlemá" that from July 1940 to January 1945, some 56,000 Puerto Ricans had been drafted into the" armed forces, indicating that this number, plus the 14,000 survivors of World War I, made a total of 71,000 veterans in need of medical care from the Veterans Administration, d The War Department memorial said that "the" need for the War Department's "Admlnnistration of Veterans. The War Department memo states that "the need for the Veteran's Administration" in the field "is more acute" than in any other field, primarily because of the lack not only of the services" the Veteran's Administration can provide for hospitalization, but also because there are not the necessary facilities in the hospitals serving veterans under contract".
They will investigate surplus sales operations ( ■ - í They will not only prosecute distributors who made false statements but veterans who violated regulations The American Legion reports that the U.S. Department of Justice is preparing to conduct an investigation into the distribution of surplus war materiel in the various distribution zones.
nal distribution. Particular attention is being paid to the shakeout of those distributors who have taken advantage of veterans' priority rights to obtain, through fraudulent declarations, surplus materials for sale. The investigation, it was reported, will affect not only the "dh'rij buldores, but also those veterans who have violated the regulations in force. It is reported 1 that in some cases "illegitimate means have been adupted for veterans to trispasen to distributors of surplus materials"', ri The Port R'co Chapter of ( te American Legion reported yesterday . that the War Exudan>ltes Administration has requested 1" coI operation of the various czpitui los of the organlza< lón, in the seni tldo that the Investigation qu" . announced will cover all lo" . distribution centers. 1 On the other hand, it was added that the ■ Speaker of the U.S. House of RepteI sentants;, softer ■¡Sam Rayburn, has dealgned a co ) mmittee of five members" to in- ■ veítlgar the dtepoilclon that" "e has made of this" materiale". reaolu- . clon that" had au origin in the" de- . mandates of the American Legion. . This committee is chaired by , r< presenter Roger C. Slaughter , of Montana. Emphasis will be given in this investigation, it was Indicated, to the treatment . given to veterans* at , the sales which have been held , to date. The committee will be empowered to appoint investigators and to call witnesses. The committee shall be reminded of the possibilities of (Continued on page 24)
The Department of Instruction expects that the major part of the appropriation of $1,500,000,000 made available by the Legislature to carry out the purposes of Act 78 of 1946, from July 1 onward, will be expended for the repair and maintenance of school buildings. This matter is included in the plans outlined by the Department to implement the aforementioned legislation. It is further its purpose to appoint in each municipality an assistant to the school superintendents to govern the local implementation of the Department's plans, including the clothing and routine maintenance of schools. The Department of In"-j trucclrtn advances that these assistants to lo<j superintendents of schools shall be (Individually assigned to a category and shall earn a salary commensurate with the importance of the school district and the work to be performed. In due course, these assistants shall assume responsibility for all school property and administrative work, relieving the school superintendents of such duties. The assistants shall be appointed by the Commissioner of Education upon the recommendation of the superintendents. While these appointments are being made, the school superintendents will designate one of their present assistants or a school principal to assume the responsibility of the school superintendents who will be in charge of the assistants to be appointed by the Department. On the other hand, it is reported that; ( from now on, the superlQ-i school tenders" will sign all proposals for appoint- ( Continued on page 24) h Plan for control of Japanese Rrgirin for 25 afiox is disclosed. U. S., England and ; Russia study project* L By HOBKRT~Ñ1XON WASHINGTON, 21. (1NS). - The , U.S. government" royeló, ,¡ today plañe" for" a treaty cuaui-|. । partita which would have twenty-five aftp" ¡ ¡ I of force, for the control of the Ja- 1 pón and as a guarantee against it rv 1 , birth ofi Nippon militartemo. The text of the paper, copies of which have been sent to the United Kingdom, China and Russia, is paralleled by a similar document presented by the Japanese at the Conference of Foreign Ministers held in Paris on April 29. The proposal prescribes the asteólement of a con j trol commission of the four powers to < ¡exercise the Inspection and control ' of Japan at the termination of the Allied occupa- 1 clon. The acceptance of Jar I । provlnclaa of the treaty shall be "e- * * eaenctel condition for the fear- ' ' ¡nation of the Allied occupation ' of ' Japanese territory." Under the terms of the agreement, Japan will be prohibited from manufacturing, producing or importing any material related to atomic energy except under conditions approved by the four powers. - 1 Japan shall also be prohibited from . "The "manufacture, production or impor- 1 ' tation of military equipment" This category includes all ' ¡ arms, ammunition and other war materiel, warships of all types," as well as all aircraft, aeronautical equipment and anti-aircraft defense equipment. All the facilities and military installations, including naval bases such as depots and fortifications, are to be eliminated. A State Department spokesman reported that reaction to the proposed treaty had been favorable in both Great Britain and China but that nothing was known of Rwanda, which had previously rejected a similar treaty proposal for Germany.
Feminist League of the U.S. urges Pinero to be appointed governor Recommendations of the entity follow the line drawn "n memorial of the Puerto Rico Office, after consulting Muñoz Marín I
The recommendations of the League 1. *1 The recommendations of the League 1 have been made after a me-, * morlal submitted by the ' Puerto Rico Office at Wáshlngton, which ' was drawn up in consultation with ol pre-l - Bident of the Senate of Puerto Rico. Lute Muñoz Marín. The memorial "> 1 1 I refer to the appointment of Piftero 1 "the only means of giving Puerto Rico a more complete measure of democracy under the present legislation." Mrs. Brainerd and Mrs. Sígn "l point out that the problem "calls for immediate attention to be given to President Truman ucglen i do 41 the appointment of Commissioner Piftero for Governor of Puerto Rico. - It has also been requested of the ■ matriculation of the most prominent feminist or- ■ ganizations of te na'¡clon, that they write to the Prealdente in ■ connection with the appointment of the ■¡Commissioner of Instruction of the la- ' la. Attached to the above letter is ln-j I (Continued on page 24).
Italy's colonies problem passes to Special Commission - Battle won by Press right Ministers to meet again today in Informal session PARIS, 21. (PU)- Foreign Ministers" of the four great powers failed to reach any agreement on the future of Trieste or the Tu" goeslavla frontier during their Informal session held today. They agreed to meet again tomorrow in the same form. The Secretary of State, Janea F. Byrnea, was unable today to find a solution to the underlying disagreement over the Trieste problem at a secret meeting of the Big Four Foreign Ministers, and until tonight he made direct representations to the Soviet Foreign Minister, V. M. Molotov, in an attempt to bring about a modification of the Russian position. The particular attempt made by Byrnaeus to solve the problem of the fate to be given to the prized Adriatic port was held at the hotel where the American Secretary of State resides, where he arranged a lunch with the Soviet Foreign Minister. Molotov attended * 1* lunch accompanied only by Andrei Vtehinaky, vico-mlntetro of the Foreign ruto, and an interpreter. With ByrneB were Benjamin Cohen of the State Department and the Interpreter, Charles E. Bohlen. Today's session of the Big Four, which lasted two hours and fifteen minutes, was Informal in character and was held in a friendly and propitious atmosphere as a result of the agreement reached yesterday to postpone the settlement of the Italian-Cwtenlal Westlon for one year. On the other hand, the International News Service's Leon Pearson reports the following: A major obstacle to the holding of an immediate peace conference was overcome last night by the Council of Foreign Ministers of the "big four" when they agreed in principle to postpone for a year the discussion of the controversy over the future disposition of the colony. The foreign ministers of the United States, England and Russia earlier agreed to withdraw occupation forces from Italy where there are Anglo-American forces and from Bulgaria where there are Russian troops within 90 days after the signing of the peace treaty with the Soviet Union. The first concrete progress at the resumed Parliamentary conference was achieved by the Secretary of State, James F. Byrnos, and the Secretary of State, James F. Byrnos. James F. Byrnos, and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Vyae cheslav M. Molotov, both indicated implicitly that the forces of their respective countries would remain in Europe for purposes other than occupation. Byrnes, strongly supported by Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg, Republican of Michigan, won the battle against the British Foreign Secretary, Ernest Bovin, on behalf of freedom of the Press in giving an account of the proceedings of the conference. Bevln has tried, despite Byrnes' objections, to cloak the proceedings of the conference in a cloak of secret diplomacy. As a result of Byrnes' victory in allowing the press to continue to be allowed to report, the American people will continue to receive news of the American point of view on the drafting of peace treaties. The Big Four ministers accepted a proposal by Byrnos that a special commission be appointed to consider the elimination of the problem of the Italian colonies from the peace treaty with Italy. According to the plan, Italy will be asked to relinquish all sovereignty over its former colonies in the peace treaty, and the question of settling the disposition of these colonies will be postponed for a year. The removal of this obstacle to agreement on the text of the treaty was made possible when Molotov took the initiative in proposing that the American deferment plan originally submitted at last month's conference should prove satisfactory. On that occasion, however, Molotov insisted that there must be a final solution to the colonial problem. The agreement also signifies a change in Molotov's attitude that there must be an agreement between the big four on all the important issues relating to the peace treaty before a peace conference can be held. Although the con(Continued on page 7) cueitlon of the con(Continued on page 7),
Dr. Figueroa attacks tourism allusion
Explains why he was forced to stay with the Status Committee Recounts efforts with his own money Insists he was wrongly humbled by Senator Ty Dings about his attitude within the Legislative Status Committee.i Legislative Status Committee, Senator Leopoldo Figueroa has made the following statement: "If any doubt could remain in anyone's mind that I did not let my timely protest be heard in the Commission in Washington, as I demonstrated in my previous article, it will suffice for me now to relate the attitude I assumed in the last session held in Washington, when the preparation of a new bill was proposed. I had no time to immediately object to the formula and raise the legal question that such an action would mean acting against the legislative mandate of the commission and 1° q a * a*^ 0 -- I immediately returned to Puerto Rico and had the Legislative Assembly convened for an extraordinary session, with the purpose of amending the Concurrent Resolution that gave life to the Status Commission, thus changing its anti-colonial purpose and assuming the unpatriotic responsibility of sacrificing the two permanent, dignus j and final solutions to the status of our pite- 1 bk. The proposition, apparently pro- 1 cedent of funcionarlos of the administration, failed to prosper in the face of attacks from Jos seftores Irlarte, Patan and me. If this is to be a political tourist, it is indeed a new meaning of the word tourism, which is a political neologism, I hope that those of us who are no longer young in the civic struggles of our people will note it. As for "why we did not abandon the commission and remained in Washington, enjoying vacations paid by the pocket of the people", I want first of all to remember that, fortunately, I have two pots, the one that has permanently produced me in the past and produces me enough to live on the pot and not in politics, allowing me to travel on vacation when I wanted or want, without resorting to public funds and yes to my own peculium. Thus, in 1915, when, together with the great Do Diego, I went to the Antilles to form the Antillean Union, it was not the public funds that financed the trip, neither the great patrician Do Diego nor myself, but our own resources, which we put at the service of the great, high and noble Ideal, which I then considered viable and which I have seen vanish and become unrealizable with the passing of the years. After this, 24 years ago, in .1929, I went to Madrid on a high Masonic mission, before the Grand Council of the Order, and I also did so at my own expense, and upon being exalted to the 31st, 32nd and 33rd degrees of Masonry, I raised before the Supreme Council of the Grand Orient of Spain the anti-democratic state in which Governor Mont Rellly had placed our Island, having succeeded in having the Supreme Council of Madrid address the Supreme Councils of North and South Charleston demanding that they intervene with then President Harding so that he would impose on his representative in the governorship of Puerto Rico the cessation of the anti-democratic state that existed on the Island under his government. And I also succeeded, when President Ha* ding was exalted in September of that year to the thirty-third degree of Freemasonry by cable of the Supreme Council of the United States and the Supreme Council of the United States.
Naval chief returns to San Juan