THE MUN DO
40 PAGES 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
40 PAGES 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII
Let's support the men who made the Victory Loan possible.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, APRIL 27, 1946
Entered ae second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
NUMBER 10567
Coffee Crop Policy Granted
Ceremony was held at the Department of Agriculture yesterday afternoon Pays $18.75 for a total of 25 quintals Premium is calculated at a cost of 5 percent of quintal, pilado basis ' At Ib office* of the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, Mr. Lula A. Izquierdo, president of the Board of Directors of the Coffee Insurance Corporation, yesterday personally delivered to the farmer Manuel Hernández Díaz, of Morovis, the first crop insurance policy in the coffee industry of Puerto Rico, issued by the Coffee Insurance Corporation. After having received the policy from the hands of the executive director of said Corporation, Mr. Angel Manuel Martin, the first farmer to take advantage of this type of insurance offered by the Government, Mr. Díaz Hernández, said to an editor of EL MUNDO who asked him about the coffee crop insurance, that "this is the first firm step taken by the Island Government to rehabilitate the decadent coffee industry of Puerto Rico". At the delivery of this first policy, there were present, in addition to Messrs. Diaz Hernandez and Martin, Commissioner Izquierdo: the specialist *in coffee, of the Agricultural Extension Service, Mr. Emilio Vales; the director of the Río Piedras Experimental Station, Mr. Arturo Roque: and the Superintendent of Insurance, Mr. Lorenzo J. Nos. Messrs. Izquierdo. Roque and Nos, are members of the Board of Directors of the Coffee Insurance Corporation. A native of Gurabo and resident for about 20 years of the town of Morovis, Mr. Manuel Diaz Her. nández. is owner of a rustic farm of 17 acres, located in the Monte" Llanos neighborhood of the latter town. He insured with the Corporación del Seguro del CaM a total of 25 quintals of coffee. The Atea on the farm planted with this product, about eight cuerdas. The policy issued yesterday bears the number one, and is signed by Mr. Izquierdo in his capacity as President of the Board of Directors of the Corporation, by Mr. Arturo Roque, in his capacity as member of the Board, and by the Executive Director of the Corporation, Mr. Angel M. Martin. The policy has been in force since April 10, 1947, the date on which the insured filed his application and paid the full amount of the premium, even though the policy was issued late yesterday. For the twenty-five quintals of coffee he insured, Mr. Diaz Hernandez had to pay a sum of $18.75 per quintal of coffee insured, based on seventy-five cents per quintal. Crop insurance is effected on the basis of five per cent. per quintal of coffee, p|. side basis, with a value of fifteen dollars per quintal. The farmer insures "the crop in production, produced or to be produced, but not harvested" on the farm. According to the policy, in the event of loss due to a cyclone, hurricane or hurricane force winds, during the time the insurance is in force, the Comoros will be insured. (Continued on page 24).
WASHINGTON. 28. (FU)- Thomas Fennell, director of the Puerto Rico Agricultural Com- "neo, made a brief visit to Wáshlngtan, where he discussed government problems in Muftoi Marin. Ellsworth saw other government officials. At the present time, he is making efforts to secure ships to develop the Island's fishing industry. He has discovered, however, that those used on the east coast of the United States are not suitable for these purposes, since the refrigeration system they are equipped with is based on ice. Possibly Fennell will make a trip to the west coast to buy boats that have the proper refrigeration system for use in Puerto Rico. - - - - NEW YORK, 26 (PU) - your A temperature today, at three o'clock h afternoon, ora the following: New York, M degrees: Chicago, SW, Washington, 88 and Miami, M. NAPERVILLE. Illinois, 28 (PU)-An indictment for manslaughter was brought today against W. G. Blaine, 88-year-old engineer, of the Burlington line streamline railroad, who SO shot through two ssflale* of danger, and crashed the train he was running into the rear delivery of another passenger train, of son, killing 48 persons or injuring
The murder indictment blames Blalne for carelessness and negligence. * WASHINGTON, 28th (PU) - The United States cotton crop in 1948 was the smallest since 1921. As just announced by the Department of Agriculture, the latest reports show that 9,016,000 bales of cotton were deposited during that year, as against 12,280,000 in 1944, and an average of 12380,000 during the period 1984 to 1943. - (INS) - In official circles it was reported today that the English Government has approached the other great powers, proposing that they give their assent to Italy holding a plebiscite to decide whether the monarchy should continue in that country. According to the English proposal, the plebiscite would be held simultaneously with the Italian general elections, on the second of June next. - WASHINGTON, 28. (IN8) - The American Government has announced that it has received a note from Russia replying to the American demand for information on the alleged Soviet maneuvers in Manchuria to achieve economic sales.
B O L E T I N E S
!t would not make the contents of the note public at this time. . . - BOSTON, 28, (INS) - Senator Chapman Revercomb, Republican of West Virginia, tonight sharply criticized "a wrongful act of the State Department" for interfering in the political affairs of Argentina. The Southern Republican Senator said that interference by the State Department in the internal affairs of another country creates ill will. He declared that "thanks to an erroneous act of the State Department, this nation tried to interfere in the internal affairs up to the day of the elections held by the people of Argentina. "Be knows the result" - he said. "The Argentines. Justly resentful of this act of unwarranted meddling, they unequivocally defeated those candidates supported by our State Department. Revercomb spoke at a luncheon hosted by the New England Conference of Republican Women's Leaders, held at the Boston City Club. - - - HANNOVER, 28. (PU)- Two members of the British General Staff perished and seven others were seriously injured as a result of a curtain of flame which suddenly engulfed the headquarters of military headquarters at Hanover.
Senior member of the Supreme Court
I ||U I ■
Kl Associate Justice Hugo L Black, who became the senior mlemhro of the Unldoh Supreme Court upon the death of Chief Justice Harlan F. Stone, poses in the library of his chambers shortly after announcing Stone's death in the Court's chambers on Tuesday nnsado. Black will preside over the Court's sessions until Stone's successor takes his seat. (Associated Press photo)
Medals Awarded to Selective Service Board Members
The first to receive it was the Governor, in a ceremony held at the UPR Theater. - Congressional Distinction for Citizens
At the University Theater yesterday afternoon, a ceremony was held to present diplomas and medals, which the United States Congress confers as a form of recognition to all personnel who have worked for two or more years, without remuneration, in the Selective Service.
Numerous citizens of the towns of the district of San Juan, who for their services have earned the recognition of the Government, received certificates of merit from the hands of the Director of the Selective Service in Puerto Rico, Colonel Harry F. Besosa. In addressing those present, Colonel Besosa spoke of the contribution of resources made by Puerto Rico to the war which has just ended, and of the work done by those citizens who were chosen to keep the complicated machinery of the military selective service in good working order. The act was initiated at two forty-five minutes past two o'clock in the afternoon. Colonel Luis B. de la Vega, who acted as master of ceremonies, introduced Sertor Francisco Paz Gránela, who delivered a brief address. Governor Tugwell also made a brief speech, stating that "it is now time for just recognition to be given to those who have worked so unselfishly on a mission of such importance." The Governor was the first to receive the Congressional medal, which was pinned on his chest by Colonel Besosa. Upon calling on the Governor to receive the official distinction, Colonel de la Vega explained (Continued on page 24)
Muñoz guest at Abe Fortas' home Explained Island situation to Braden, Taussig and Senator Mitchell - Luis Muñoz Marín was a guest at the home of Abe Fortas, legal adviser to the Government of Puerto Rico, in the company of Sprullle Braden, assistant to the Secretary of State; Senator Hugh B. Mitchell, Democrat, of Washington, and Charles Taussig, chairman of the Anglo-American Caribbean Commission. After lunch, Muñoz took the opportunity to explain Puerto Rico's political situation to these prominent figures*, as well as to other guests. Meanwhile, Ernesto Cadiz, representative of the Liberal Party in the Status Commission, told the United Press that "we have already finished our work in relation to the project that will be submitted, I want to say that I feel satisfied with the way in which we solved the problem," he said.
Interviews with people affected by North Avenue ' I
They have proceeded to the valuation of lots in the section to be built They are also beginning the appraisal of houses List of the owners whose properties are to be expropriated By R SANTIAGO SOSA Editor of EL MUNDO The Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Orlando R. Méndez. - Mr. Orlando R. Méndez. in accordance with Law number 32 of March 19, is going to build the first stage of the North Avenue, in the capital city, starting from the Guillermo Esteves Bridge and continuing along the shore of the Condado Lagoon, the road will cross Wilson Street, through a densely populated section south of said street, to end at De Diego Avenue, at its intersection with López Landrón Street. The development of this important project has been made possible by the approval, also on March 19, of Act number 36, which reaffirms the acceptance by the Island Government of the benefits of the Federal Highway Relief Act of 1944, and authorizes the Commissioner of the Interior to carry out the necessary agreements with the corresponding federal agencies. The approval of these laws and others more similar, secures a contribution from the Federal Government for the Insular road program, amounting to $3,000,000, for the first year of the governmental program, and which will be matched with another sum already provided by the Insular Government, according to Law number 36, recently approved. Of this first $6,000,000. the Department of the Interior and the Federal Public Works Administration have agreed to set aside $1,208,390 to cover the total cost of the construction of North Avenue. On July 18, 1943, the Planning Bureau officially released its master plan of major thoroughfares for the San Juan metropolitan area. Among these is Avenida Norte, the construction of which has been emphasized for several years. The road has been projected to have its origin, from the section known as Punta Las Marías, to end at the Esteves Bridge. For the time being, only its first section will be built. The Planning Board expressed, in its regulatory plan, that "this avenue not only serves the traffic originating at Punta Las Marías, but also decongests the densely populated urban area (Continued on page 24.) Case of indeterminate sentences studied - Three were dictated by Alvarado and Suárez Garriga. In San Juan By Juan Bautista Tagán EL MUNDO Staff Writer When Judge Arcillo Alvarado was asked yesterday about the action to be taken by the judges of the San Juan Judicial District Court, "regarding the sentences that have been dictated under the terms of Law No. 295. of indeterminate sentences, put into effect by them, jln which is in force. - The court stated that "we are carefully studying the matter. Since only three sentences - two by said judge and one by Judge Julio Suárez Garriga - have so far been issued in said court under the requirements of said law, Judge Alvarado specifically referred, when saying "we are", to Judge Suárez Garriga and himself. This law, not having obtained in the House of Representatives enough votes to become effective immediately - two thirds of the total of said body - could not be put into effect immediately. However, since the Department of Justice sent to the District Judges and prosecutors a circular letter informing that the law was already in effect, Judges Alvarado and Suarez Garriga acted in accordance with such instructions. Judge Alvarado sentenced Julio Roblea Cha ves to an "indeterminate" penalty of 3 to 8 years imprisonment, for the crime of malicious arson. He also sentenced José Alfonso Ramos to 1 to 5 years of imprisonment, for the crime of first-degree burglary. Judge Suárez Garriga sentenced Carmelo Colón Viera to 5 to 14 years of imprisonment, for the crime of attempted arson. According to Judge Alvarado, it is possible that these defendants will be summoned again to appear before them and their sentences will be amended. It is also possible that they will be left standing, reduced (Continued on page 2)
United Nations condemns General Franco's regime; Agreement was unanimous
Tobacco production to be adjusted here The Governor signed the bill directing the fixing of a quota Appropriations for numerous works Oirán medidas fueron sancionadas con firma del jefe del Ejecutivo Governor Tugwell extended his approval to the following" bills: P. of S. 280 (Act No. 443) amending the "Agricultural Refining and Letter Milling Contracts Act". P. S. 394 (Act No. 444*) ordering the Commissioner of the Interior to proceed with the construction of a road in the Fránquez neighborhood of Morovis. P. S. 507 (Act No. 445) authorizing the Commissioner of the Interior to construct a municipal road in the Pasto Viejo neighborhood of Aibonito. P. S. 691 (Act No. 446) allocating $8,000 for the Commissioner of the Interior to authorize the completion of the construction of the Guanajlbo de Hormiguero road", P. S. 713 (Act No. 447) allocating $114,000 to the Municipality of Caguas for the acquisition of land to be dedicated to the elimination of slums. P. S. 772 (Act No. 448) amending Article 2 of Act No. 70, approved on December 6, 1927, regarding the Public Service "Compartía". P. S. 824 (Act No. 449) appropriating the amount of $10,000 to defray the expenses incurred by the representative Commission of Puerto Rico, to be appointed by the Governor of Puerto Rico, related to *1 Medical Congress, to be held in Puerto Rico. P. S. 825 (Act No. 450) appropriating $35,000 for the completion of the Sabana Hoyos road, in Arecibo, and P. S. 293 (Act No. 451) appropriating $2,000 for the construction of a wooden suspension bridge from kilometer 126 and em- ! palme with the site called "El ! P. S. 418, (Act No. 452), amending Article (a) of Act No. 31 of April 24, 1945, entitled "Act to Create the Puerto Rico Agricultural Company". I P. S. 425, (Act No. 453), amending Act No. 125 of May 7, 1942, entitled "Act Creating the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority". P. S. 525 (Act No. 454). 1 appropriating $25,000 for the construction of a 6-classroom school in the Saint Just neighborhood, in the Jurisdictions of Carolina-Trujillo Alto (Continued on page 24.)
In an action tending to help four public servants," who are "on the per "onal their "friend", sent yesterday morning to the Governor the telegram which follows, urging him - as an act which "is only just and proper for the people of Puerto Rico to provide for their decent retirement in old age" - to sign four bills. approved by the Legislature at its last session, providing for the life retirement of Dr. Manuel Quevedo Baez and Seniors Manuel G. Nln, Martin Erguí and Joaquin A. Becerrll. The following is the telegram: "Before your consideration and to be signed by you are four bills, unanimously approved by the recent session of the legislature of Puerto Rico, the purpose of which is to grant retirement to Seniors Manuel G. Nin, Martin Ergui, Joaquin A. Becerrll and Doctor Manuel Quevedo Baez. In connection with these projects, the theory has been advanced that they constitute a privilege, and that (Continued on page 24.)
transit. The Chief of the Uniformed requests that the personnel of the transit service be assembled and be instructed to stop these violations of the law, and that the corresponding action be taken in each case. In his order to the District Chiefs and Zone Inspectors, Colonel Roig asked them to send him, during the next six weeks, every Monday, a list of the infractions reported in relation to vehicle traffic in the San Juan area, specifying the name of the offender, the number and owner of the vehicle and the place where the infraction of the law is registered. The General Headquarters yesterday to the "District Chiefs and Foremen" of the whole Island and Vieques, the following telegraphic dispatch: "Increase in 99% of the automobile accidents" in last March in relation to previous months is alarming. Intensify the campaign of frémito until the objective is achieved".
Independence with free market is false, believes Soltero
He accuses Muñoz Marin and the legislative group of persisting in delaying the solution to the status issue.
Rafael Soltero Peralta, member of the board of directors of the Pro Independence Congress, authorized the following statements: "Mr. Mufioz Marin and his legislative group persist in confusing the people and delaying the solution of our political status. Now, like someone who discovers a fourth dimension, they come up with a fourth formula for the problem of our sovereignty: "Independencla with a free market". This is a new and covert resource to prevent or hinder the recognition of our Independence. . "Reasons? Statehood is an impossible thing, and the legislative group knows it. The so-called "dominion" (in the new "Associated People" project) is a formula incompatible with the republican system of government of the United States; besides, Puerto Ricans have already realized that "dominion" implies the continuation of the colony, because it reserves to the United States the supreme power to continue governing Puerto Rico, and therefore, it is not a definitive solution to the problem. The true dilemma does not escape the most ignorant: in a house, either the inhabitants govern themselves, or they are governed by someone from another house. There is no middle ground here. "If this is so, what is left for Mr. Mufioz Marin and his legislative group of that three-headed project he presented in the spring of last year? He is left with only one naked truth: that the only possible alter-
The only possible alternative is independence or colony. Faced with this reality, the Puerto Rican commission, inspired by the senior Mufioz Marin, battered by the turbulent sea of inconsistencies and contradictions, is looking for a new port where to dock the dismasted ship of its colonialism. And now they are looking for a new label: independence with a free market. "In due time we will make an analysis of this new legal showcase designed to surrender the rights of our people. But we warn them not to be fooled. Independence with Ubre market is a new lie to the people. In the proposal of the legislative group there is no such thing that can be called a Ubre market between Puerto Rico and the United States. What they advocate there, and what they have been advocating for a long time, is the "status quo" or continuation of the present suffocating economic regime. (Blessed be God!) And that is what they intend to harmonize with Independence. Such a proposal means, no more and no less, an independence on parchment, covering up the rivet of the presen, te economic vassalage that stifles our people. "Why don't you tell the truth to the country, as you were telling it to them when the power still does not speak to them, cornered in the fatal barbed wire of the vested interests? Tell the truth. Say frankly that you are for an Independence of nom (Continued on page 24.)
i Triarte intercedes on behalf of four public officials He asks the Governor to sign the bills that provide for the lifetime retirement of Dr. Quevedo Baez, and Messrs. Ergui, Nin and Becerril Breaking for the first time the ice of his absence of official relations with Governor Tugwell since the end of 1941, when the Central Territorial Committee of his party agreed to no longer maintain relations with La Fortaleza, Representative Celestino Darte Miro, president of the party, said that he was not in official relations with Governor Tugwell since the end of 1941, and that he was not in official relations with La Fortaleza.
.".M \ jSa , ■HW > ííMMHb / wHH Dr. Manuel Quevedo Báes
Police ordered to tighten ¡vigilance on traffic laws The Chief of the Uniformed issued instructions to this effect yesterday, including an editorial in EL MUNDO about the lack of discipline in the buses.
The Chief of Police has addressed to the" District Chiefs " ln "pectore" of zone, Including" the editorial of EL MUNDO, entitled "Hay que dlídpllnar las guagua"", so that they note the criticism that the editorialist* exposes regarding the attitude of the Police in front of the" different" violations that are alleged to occur in relation to the traffic laws.
w w-e -mi Iiilíni-' - Picó to preside over a meeting in New York He was invited by the Association of American Planning Officials The President of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, will preside over the session on airports of the Association of American Planning Officials, which will take place at the New Yorker Hotel, in New York City, at the beginning of May. The invitation to preside at this session was extended to him yesterday by Mr. Walter Blucher, director of the Association, and was accepted by Dr. Picó. You did such a magnificent job in chairing the session on airports during our planning conferences last May," says Mr. Blucher in his communication, "that I am going to emphasize your good service and ask you to chair again the sessions on airports at the next meeting of the Association. The session is scheduled for May 6. The planning officers will also discuss, over several days, matters related to the national construction program, and present and future planning work. In the session on airports the day's speakers will be Seniors John D. Hunter, Jr., of the Civil Aeronautics Administration, and George (Continued on page 24.) Muniz pushes bill on language By JEAN VAN~VRANKEN WASHINGTON. 26. (INS.) -Luis Mufilz Souffront, president of the Puerto Rico Teachers Association, told reporters today that he was urging the Department of the Interior and other officials to recommend to the President approval of the bill providing for the teaching of Spanish in the public schools of Puerto Rico. The referenced bill was approved by the Puerto Rican legislative bodies over the Governor's veto and is now before President Truman for consideration. Senior Mufilz Souffront explained that the bill was not an "anti-English language" measure. And he asserted that, "because of the relations that exist with the United States, the Portorrlquefios wish to learn as much English as they can" as (Continued on page 24.)
A Committee is proposed to investigate The paper to that effect will be submitted to a vote on Monday afternoon It will be approved by a large majority Russia insists that it be broken up at once, without further investigation By George Durno NEW YORK. 26. (INS) - The Security Council of the United Nations met this morning at" 11 o'clock and 8 minutes, unanimous agreement being reached among its delegates that it was bent on morally condemning "the fascist Government of Spain." The delegates came to the session divided on how to deal with Franco's Eipafla. Russia begins the struggle for a collective severance of diplomatic relations" with Madrid. The Anglo-American bloc does not want the appointment of a subcommittee of five to study the accusations against Franco. Poland, France and Mexico agree to the appointment of the committee but say they must make specific recommendations" for action to be taken. French Ambassador Hnnrl Bonnet and Lt. Col. Hodgson of Australia [ had breakfast together in an ea. force to agree on the final wording of the paper. Chairman Hafes Afls, immediately raised the Spanish question at the opening of today's session and gave the floor to the Australian delegate. Hodgson said that he had met with the delegates from France and Poland and was pleased to announce that an agreement had been reached. He then read out a paper calling for the appointment of a sub-committee to investigate "1 the Frankish regime is creating international friction and threatening the peace and security of the world. In the event that such a fact is established, the Committee should recommend what action the Council should take. The paper took specific note of the Security Council's "moral condemnation" of the Franco regime in accordance with the San Francisco, London and New York statements. The subcommittee will be instructed to submit its report "as soon as possible". The Mexican delegate, Rafael de la Colina, moved that the vote be postponed until three o'clock Monday afternoon so that all delegates could consult with their governments. The Council accepted the Mexican motion. The Brazilian delegate, Pedro Leas Velloso, took his seat at the Council today with a bandage over his nose and part of his forehead. Last night he suffered a slight accident while riding in a taximeter. His colleagues congratulated him for escaping with so few injuries. I The Chairman then presented a Report of the Credentials Committee of the Council, which was approved without discussion. The meeting was then adjourned until Monday at three o'clock in the afternoon. It thus transpired that after several weeks' discussion the United Nations Council reached agreement today in sixteen minutes on the method of dealing with the eapaphic problem. The paper calling for the appointment of the Investigating Committee will not be put to a vote until late Monday; but it is considered that it will at least be approved by a vote of (Continued on page 24.)
ContulfOR on Riflero WASHINGTON, 28. (FU)-United Press has learned that the National Democratic Committee is consulting with persons knowledgeable in Puerto Rican political ee> supper, for the purpose of having nase to auatanelar its position as to the candidacy of Jesus T. Plfiero for Governor. It is believed that Coa Blanea is acting to clarify Plfiero's position before the National Democratic Committee regarding his candidacy. Meanwhile, it is spied that action will be taken in the near future on the nomination of Mariano VUlaronga for the office of Commissioner of Education, and the forwarding of his name to the Senate; which it is anticipated will be made as soon as President Trumsn resumes his duties, after having taken a short vacation aboard his yacht "Williamsburg". Truman is expected to be back at Casa Blancs next Sunday.