THE WORLD
- 1 WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY: Fair weather with some showers on the coasts during the morning and scattered showers over the interior and northwest coast in the afternoon. The high yesterday was 88 degrees. The sun rises today at 8:09 a.m. and sets at 8:8" in the evening. There is no sign of a storm.
CcUcLonJínal
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII NUMBER 10693
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 31, 1946
Entered aa second elate matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
PRICE 5 Cents
Another threat on U. S. labor front.
Wage dispute has arisen in national maritime industry Govt. asks FAT to state case - A stoppage would affect nearly 500,000 workers. - Union .holds election By CHARLES H~HERROLD 1 WASHINGTON. 30 (FU)- A 1 dispute "over yards in ,1a in* I dustry maritime, appeared today as the number one threat. both ( as regards the prevailing peace on the labor front and the ' Government's . wage stabilization program . . Government officials feared that the announced ' strike of seamen and longshoremen affiliated with the American Federation of Labor and the Congress of Organized Industrialists might also ' disrupt the Government's plans to divert freight from the railroads to the ocean carriers. The Wage Stabilization " Board, moving cautiously- 1 t" in the maritime crisis, has solid- i all of the unions affiliated with the c FAT to file a statement c of facts supporting its claim- 1 eiun for a reconsideration of the 1 adverse ruling rendered by it in c connection with increases in r wages. I The crisis arose around 1a t reduction in the increases decreta- < de by the JES. Yesterday this matter < took a more serlo turn, as I lis unions of the FAT received pledges of J endorsement from the cela unions of the i CIO and of yna Independent, with I whose adhesion it dl.6 body to the < Maritime Unity Committee. Joseph Curran, chairman of the , National Maritime Xtnlon of the CIO , and co-chairman with Harry Bridges of the CUM, pledged a "c>en percent endorsement" of the Pacific Marine Union and the International Yachtsmen's Union, both FAT affiliates. The CUM further indicated to the Wage Stabilization Board that its adverse decision on the FAT cases would be considered a rejection of "job rejection and spontaneous refusal to crew the birwi" unless remedial action was taken immediately. The FAT and the CIO, together. gl decree the strike, will paralyze the entire American maritime movement, dragging down more than 500,000 workers. The two FAT unions are conducting a vote among their members to determine whether they favor a strike in protest of the ESB decision. The Board disapproved wage increases for FAT seafarers that were $5 and $10 per month more than those set on June 14 for the CIO-affiliated unions. The scales approved by the Board provided for a pay increase of $17.50 per month for all physically trained FAT union seafarers, an overtime increase of $1.00 per hour, and a reduction in the workweek from 56 to 48 hours. Identical rates were approved for the CIO unions. In contrast to this decision, the FAT seafarers' employers have resolved to pay $22.5 more per month to those on the Pacific coast and $27.50 more per month to those on the Atlantic coast. The Board's disapproval of these higher pay rates led to heated protests by Harry Lundeberg, president of the Pacific Seamen's Union. Lundeberg immediately demanded reconsideration in a telegram to John R. Steelron, Director of Reconversion. The Wage Board will require Lundeberg to submit the specific raimes he possesses in support of his claim. (Continued on page 24.)
He commented in Washington on the battle in favor of revising the price of insular sugar to level it with that recognized to Cuba. - ♦ - El Lodo. Samuel R. Quiñones says he does not wish to be, is not, nor will be a candidate for the presidency of the Bar Association. - - - Elisa Mora de Gadea was appointed yesterday as San Juan School Director. - - - Wage dispute threatens the national maritime industry - * - The bishop forbids priests to participate in certain public groves. - e - The number of Puerto Rican veterans who have already exhausted their unemployment compensation has risen to 5484. - e - The challenge to the price law was denied in principle. - e - A program of more sequels is being coordinated; it is determined ubiHa "ataña* a annatrtyl*>.
Compendium of news
Mayagüez judge and prosecutor did not attend No interruption, as work in the Court - of the aforementioned district ¡ MAYAGUE'Z."(By Ricardo VI- ; llamll).-The information published ! in the Friday edition of EL 1 MUNDO, on the front page, in re- i lation with the holding of a meeting of judges and prosecutors cited by Mr. Muñoz Marin for ¡ pa "ado Wednesday in Isla Verde, mo* ' tivated the fact that attorney R. Ramirez Pabon, judge of the District Court, during today's morning session, issued in open court a warrant for the arrest of the EL MUNDO correspondent agent in this city who subscribes this information, to appear immediately before the session room of said court to state reasons, if any, why he should not be punished, for which he should not be punished for contempt on the occasion of the referred information, in which it is indicated that "in the District Court of Mayagüez the hearing of an important case of great public expectation, which was scheduled for that day, was suspended so that the judge and the prosecutor could attend the meeting," informing said officials that they did not attend this act. Immediately after being notified of the order, I appeared in court and after hearing the accusation, I explained to the court, through my attorney, Mr. Mario Baez Garcia, that I had knowledge of said information a few moments after being notified of the arrest warrant issued by the Court, and that it was not transmitted to EL MUNDO by me. I further added that the Information authorized by me bears my name and that of the city of Mayagüez in the heading. The Court proceeded to issue an order for me to rectify the information on the front page of EL MUNDO, for which it set a 24-hour deadline. I clarified, through my lawyer, that I could request a rectification from the newspaper's management, but that I could not commit myself to have it published on a specific page of the newspaper and within the deadline set by the Court, since it was the Director's responsibility, and I could not impose on the Director what he should do. Nevertheless, I promised the Court to call EL MUNDO, ' in San Juan, immediately after the hearing was over, to make the requested acla- ' ration. The prosecutor Felipe Marchand then abun- , dó then in the manifestations of . Judge Ramirez Pabón, presenting, at the same time, a complaint for contempt [ against the Director of EL MUNDO, । and requesting the Court to issue an order for him to appear on September 4, at 9:00 a.m., to explain the reasons why he should not be punished for contempt. The Court so ordered. i Editor's Note: Regarding the previous information of our representative in Mayaguez, we must clarify, and this we would have gladly done with contempt proceedings and without contempt proceedings, because it is our duty, " that the writer who obtained the reports of the meeting held at the residence of Mr. Muñoz-Marín made the mistake of confusing the Mayaguez courts. The judges called to Isla I Verde were the mu- -! nlclpsles judges, and it was in this Court where - the work was interrupted. The I call to San Júan of these judges (Continued on page 24.)
The General Convention of the Holy Name is on Monday J, at Ponce. - ♦ - They will establish here rural planning norms, in tune with the study made by the JP officials. - e - Lady elected Queen for a Day, arrived at the lela yesterday. - - Veracruz was defeated by Puebla, 5-8 losing Max Lanier. - Campanero is a great favorite for the Labor Day classic. Health reminds of danger of chicken contagion; advises not to take children to Plñero's inauguration. ' x - - - - The Judge and the Prosecutor of the District Court of Mayagüez did not attend the meeting held at the residence of Mr. Muftos Marín. * * * Today the new Santuroe's new plaza de mamado will be inaugurated.
San Juan School Director
Mrs. Elisa Mora de Gadea Picó has been appointed School Director of San Juan. Mrs. Gadea Picó had been occupying this position on an interim basis for some months, since it became vacant due to the resignation of Mr. Miguel Meléndez "Muñoz.
Three new countries admitted to UN membership
Unopposed, Sweden, Iceland and Afghanistan join the organization. Albania and Ireland among those rejected. Gromyko-Johnson Debates By~ED ALLEN LAKE SUCCESS, NEW YORK 30 (INS) -- The United Nations Security Council last night rejected applications for membership in the organization from five countries. It approved the applications of Sweden, Iceland ganistan without opposition. The United States and Britain voted against the applications of Albania , and Outer Mongolia , although the two delegations denied that they had "vetoed" the applications, as the two countries failed to achieve a majority vote in the Council. The other countries rejected were Transjordanla. Portugal and Ireland, which, although they obtained majority votes, had their applications "vetoed" by Russia. The Latin American delegates - i Mexico and Brazil - who are parti- j darlos of the principle of admitting ¡ all countries qualified for j it, voted along with France, । Poland and the Soviet in favor of Al- ( banla and Outer Mongolia. Chl- i na, the other power of the big five i also supported Mongo- ( Ha but abstained from voting on i Albania. Australia which wants admissions of new members to be discussed in the General Assembly abstained from voting on all applications including the three that were approved. The Netherlands joined the United States and England in opposing the admission of Albania and Mongolia. The votes Egypt abstained from voting on Albania and Mongolia. The votes were: Albania - five against, three in favor and three abstained. Mongolia - six against, three in favor and three abstained. Ireland - nine in favor, one against and one abstention. Portugal - eight in favor, two against and one abstention. Transjordan eight in favor, two against and one abstention. Sweden - ten in favor, none against and one abstention. Afghanistan, ten in favor, none against and one abstention, Iceland, ten in favor, none against and one abstention. The vote followed a lengthy debate on a U.S. motion calling for a postponement of the decision on Albania. France, China and the United Kingdom stood in front of the United States supporting Russia that the question of postponing the decision was "substantive" and therefore subject to the veto. The US plan that would have avoided having to vote against the Albanian request was defeated. After the vote on the (Continued on page 24) Advised not to take children to inauguration failed to recall danger of polio infection. - Expects fewer cases In connection with ln- - fantile paralysis, the Health Department । reported yesterday that this disease occurs essentially in the summer and autumn months, beginning to re- ■ gister a large increase in the number of cases with the month of July, reaching a peak at the end of - August, to gradually decline during the month of September, and then return to normal. This fact is beginning to be noticed in Puerto Rico and the Department of Health expects that the number of cases registered during the rest of the year will be lower. The Department of Health, however, wishes to remind the public," the note adds, "that although it is not known exactly how this disease is transmitted, the theory is that infantile paralysis is transmitted by more or less direct person-to-person contact due to the transmission from one to another of the virus found in nasal secretions, not only from clinical cases with paralysis, but also from abortive cases who do not present any paralysis and even from persons, called by* allor passive, who, although in apparent good health, harbor the virus in their nasal secretions and can transmit it to others who develop the disease in its paralytic form. "For the above reason, the Department of Health has been recommending to the public that in order to reduce the risk or danger of their children contracting the disease, they should prohibit them, not only from visiting sick people, but also from frequenting places where there is an agglomeration of strangers, since some of them may well be carriers of the disease, even though they may be in apparent good health. It is considered advisable to call the attention of the public to this measure, which is undoubtedly the most important to prevent infantile paralysis, especially since it is the most important measure to prevent infantile paralysis, especially since it is the most important measure to prevent infantile paralysis, especially since it is the most important measure to prevent infantile paralysis.
The battle began in favor of the revision of the price of insular sugar to level it with that fixed for Cuba.
There was confusion at Peace Conference aver 8 Incident arose when Yugoslavia did not heed warning President President managed to impose order Molotov launched attacks against Greece. - Iran expresses gratitude to Russia By PIERRE HUSS' FARIS, 30. (INS) - Soviet Foreign Minister Vlacheslav Molotov today openly accused the Atonas government of being anti-democratic, saying that "Greece receives help from foreign troops who bear the real responsibility for the situation there". Molotov stated that the insistent claims of Greece against Albania at the Paris Conference are intended to conceal the "terror" prevailing in Greece and to cover up the facts surrounding next Sunday's plebiscite to ensure the return to the throne of King George II. Speaking before the plenary session of the Faz Conference, Moiotov stated that Greece's territorial claims against Albania tend to promote conflicts in the Balkans and added: "Greece presents these claims against Albania on the eve of the Greek plebiscite, when it is immobilized by terrorism and with its democratic organizations completely suppressed". The Russian statesman specifically accused the government of stifling democratic activities, such as the sale of the oppositionist Press in the streets, and also accused the Athens regime of provoking popular violence. Molotov declared that the Greek people might well react violently, against a Teglmen that "needs foreign support to maintain its prestige". This is the second time that Molotov has indirectly referred to the presence of British troops in Greece on the eve of the plebiscite. Earlier he had already referred to the fact that "Greece receives the help of foreign troops". Molotov's accusations arose from the fact that a Greek delegate had proposed that the plenary session of the Conference should consider the advisability of asking the Council of Foreign Ministers of the Great Powers to consider the Greek-Albanian Itorlal dispute. On this occasion, Molotov said: "The Soviet delegation is of the opinion that the Conference will not allow itself to be used as an instrument to cover up the terror existing within Greece. "The Conference will not allow Greece to cover up by means of such a maneuver the facts surrounding the plebiscite and to ensure the reestablishment of the monarchy." Molotov pointed out that the United Nations Security Council will be dealing with Ukraine's complaint about the Greek situation "because it is the Council's responsibility to look after security. And he added: "But the Greek delegation is in a hurry to present here its annexationist claims in order to create the atmosphere of confusion and unrest which it lacks for its" designs on the eve of the plebiscite". Molotov ended his invective by accusing Greece of being the only Balkan pals "where a misgovernment exists". He then called on the Council to reject Greece's demands, which he said were aimed at dismembering "a pals (Continued on page 24.)
Warning to priests by the Bishop Prohibits participation in certain acts. By order of the Bishop of San Juan, Monsignor Jaime P. Davls, a circular letter has been sent to all the priests of the diocese, prohibiting them from participating in those public acts in which ministers of various religions participate. in their capacity as such ministers. Monsignor Davis, according to the circular letter, considers that this could encourage confession and religious indifferentism. The communication, issued by the Bishopric's Chancellor-Secretary, Monsignor Rafael Grovas, reads as follows. "Considering that the participation of ministers of various religions, in their capacity as such, in public religious acts, is a cause of grave spiritual harm to the people, (Continued on page 24).
80,000 to 100,000 people are expected to inaugurate Pinero. Such is the estimate made by the Insular Police, which also expects "blockades" in the Capital. - The distribution of the Force is made on the spot.
From 80,000 to 100,000 people will attend the parade and inauguration of the new governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Jesús T. Piftero. Piftero, are the estimates made by Police Headquarters. District Chief José Martínez is of the opinion that the Esteves and Martin Peña bridges will be clogged and that people who have left early from distant towns of the Island to see the parade and attend the inauguration will not be able to attend due to the natural traffic congestion. Yesterday a conference was held between the Interim Chief of the Uniformed Forces, Captain Guillermo Arroyo, and the District Chief of San Juan, Saturnino Rosa Velez, regarding the force that will take part in the parade and inauguration of the new governor.
parade and inauguration of the new Governor. To these ends it was decided to distribute the following force; 100 guards under the command of district chief Juan R. Blanco, will take part in the parade; 20 motorcycle policemen will escort the Governor, and 30 will be in charge of keeping the route that the Governor will follow clear and will maintain order in the vicinity of the pavilion. District Chief Captain Saturnino Rosa Velez will maintain 138 guards in the 138 precincts from San Juan to Isla Verde, and 79 guards will also be brought from the Island, who with 66 from San Juan will be dedicated to public order and traffic surveillance, for a total of 433 guards who will be on duty in the Capital next Tuesday, this being the largest ever known.
Halsey discusses deployment of ships
K W \ R- w w w, /j ■f WJ, / \ Jí ■"r US®* J - ** * ■ B x J i.
Fleet Admiral William F HhIncv, who told reporters in Wáshlngton that "we will go where we please best...anywhere in the world," while discussing the deployment of U.S. warships. The Admiral cited the press conference on his return from a 28,000-mile air tour of Central and South America. (Associated Press Photo)
Krug, Chapman, Other Officials Arrive 3
Journalists will also come for Pinero's inauguration. -Cinematic Views of Ceremony to be Taken
By CHARLES MCCABE United Think Correspondent WASHINGTON, 30. (PU) - Final plans have been completed for Washington visitors to Governor Piftero's inauguration; and, according to those plans, an official will transport Secretary of the Interior, Julius A. Krüg, and Governor-ebn-signed, Jesus T. Piftero, while three other non-officer planes will transport the members of the inaugural party. Two of these planes will take off from Washington National Airport and the third from Washington National Airport.
The third will take off from New York airport. The official plane, in which Piftero and Krug will be passengers, will arrive at the Isla Grande airport in San Juan on the morning of September 3, shortly before the inauguration ceremonies begin on the steps of the Capitol. The plane will be a four-engine Mntlna aircraft, which will depart from the Air Transportation Command terminal in Washington, D.C., sometime on September 2. The other passengers on this official plane will be: Mrs. Krug; Representatives James Domengeaux of Illinois, a member of the House Insular Affairs Committee, and Melvin Price of Illinois; Assistant Secretary of the Interior Oscar Chapman and his wife; Director of the Bureau of Insular Territories and Possessions Edwin Arnold; Chief of the Bureau's Puerto Rican Division Mason Barr; Governor Piftero's children; Creekmore Fath, special assistant to Secretary Krug; Carlton Skinner, Director of Information, Department of the Interior; Charles Taussig, American co-chairman of the Caribbean Commission; and correspondents from the United Press, International News Service, Associated Press, and Columbia and National radio stations. The twin-engine plane carrying Piftero's "intimate friends" and associates, as well as other journalists, will depart Washington National Airport at 8 a.m. on September 2. (Continued on page 7)
A total of 5,434 Puerto Rican veterans have exhausted by Monday their right to receive unemployment compensation because they have already received $20 weekly checks during the 52 weeks provided by the veterans' benefits law, according to Dr. Jaime Serra Chavarry, regional director of the Veterans Administration. Dr. Everett L. Gardner, chief of the Unemployment Compensation Readjustment Division, said yesterday that the number of veterans exhausting this right is increasing greatly every week. Mr. Gardner, revealed that as of August 20, 1946, 18,345 Puerto Rican veterans of the
The challenge to the price law was denied. Suarez Garriga did so in principle but gave term for pleadings Ventilated cases of alleged violation It is alleged by Congress repealing law of 1942, I annulled) legislation here When thirteen cases were heard yesterday for alleged violations of the Prices and Supplies Law, before Judge Julio Suarez Garriga, District Court, the law was challenged by all defense attorneys. The challenge was made mainly by attorneys Antonto Qulrós Méndez, Angel R. Díaz, Luis M. Tagán, Rafael Currás and the counsel for the defense. Tagán, Rafael Currás and Guillermo Píerlulsi, on the grounds that, "our law of 1943 having been copied from the law of 1942, approved by the Federal Congress to control prices, when the same Congress repealed by virtue of its law of July 30, 1946 the law of 1942, the new law is null and void and does not give jurisdiction to new courts to hear these cases". The defense attorneys further argue, contrary to the contention of Assistant District Attorney Domingo Candelario, that Section 18 of the Constitution is null and void and does not give jurisdiction to the courts to hear cases. - in the sense that section 18 of the 1946 federal law saved the provisions of the '42 law, by leaving in effect the regulations promulgated under it, that "it is not possible to amend a statute that no longer exists and that in their opinion is what "e intends to establish now". Judge Julio Suárez Garriga declared in principle and in all cases, "ln place the challenge, "oríenlendo that le. That the new 1943 law did was to incorporate the regulations promulgated under the 1942 law, and being in force, according to section 18 of the 1946 law, they have legal validity. Nevertheless, Judge Suarez Garriga gave all parties involved in the thirteen cases until next Wednesday to file pleadings on the issues raised. The cases to be resolved were those of Jesús Abreu Benítez and José J. Velázquez; Ramón Camacho García and Victoriano Mai rrero Figueroa. All of them were denounced; , for violation of । price regulations. X As the pleadings offered were pending, all these cases . were also pending resolution next Wednesday. Quiñones says he is not a candidate for president Drowned must act tomorrow to elect the best man, says 1 Samuel R. Quiñones said yesterday that he does not wish to be, is not, nor will be a candidate for the presidency of the Bar Association, which will meet tomorrow in Mayagüez, in its annual assembly. To that effect, I expressed to Mr. Quiñones the following: "I wish to state publicly the same thing that I have already privately stated to several dear friends and colleagues who have approached me to propose that I accept to be nominated as a candidate for the presidency of the Puerto Jileo Bar Association: "I do not wish to be a candidate, nor am I a candidate, nor will I be a candidate for the presidency of the Bar Association. I had the high honor of being elec- ■ ted president of the Colegio de Abogai dos for two consecutive terms: first by a large majority, and the next bath by unanimous I (Continued on page 18)
5,434 veterans have now exhausted unemployment compensation
Gardner stated that 4,432 veterans who were earning $20 a week in unemployment compensation have enrolled in school and are now earning subsistence amounts. Similarly, 2,250 veterans who were receiving unemployment compensation have been employed," although they do not lose their right to return to this benefit if they lose their jobs for cause. Another 6,229 veterans stopped receiving unemployment compensation for other reasons.
Island Officials Participate In U.S. Capital Efforts In U.S. Capital, CCA Requests Quick Action CCA Assures All Efforts Will Be Made On Puerto Rico's Behalf By CHARLES McCABE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON. 30. (PU) - A strong struggle has begun to assure the Puerto Rican sugar industry a price at least equal for its 1946 and 1947 harvests to that granted to the Cubans under the floating clauses of the Cuban-American contract recently signed in Havana. A Puerto Rican industry strategy committee met in New York on Thursday of this week. A deal equal to that received by Cuba for Puerto Rican sugars is currently being pursued by Puerto Rican officials, including Governor Piftero. Present at the New York meeting were J. Brooks Ken., president of the Puerto Rico Sugar Producers Association, Fernando Villamil; vice president of that association, Jaime Annexy; Manuel del Valle of the Eastern Sugar Associate; O. B. Frazer of the Fajardo Sugar Company; Guillermo Cabrera of Central Coloso, Incorporated; and Dudley Smith, Everett Wilson and William Recu of the Association's Washington office. Smith, usually spokesman in the federal capital for the Puerto Rican sugar growers, said that the purpose of the meeting was to discuss pending adjustments to the contract for the sale of the 1946 sugar crop to the Food Credit Corporation, as well as other matters. Smith reported that the above-mentioned group made a decision to ask the CEC to take "medid" fnmedlat""" to adjust Puerto Rico's income from the sale of its 1946 sugars to the same basis as the price to be received by Cube. The Cuban producers, under the contract just signed by Secretary of Agriculture Anderson at the presidential palace in Havana, are protected by five separate moveable clauses providing for increases in the price to be paid to Cuba under the following provisions: (1) By a decrease in the entry tax on Cuban sugar: (2) By an increase in the maximum price of raw sugar in the United States of 4.865 cents per pound: (3) By an increase in the maximum price of raw sugar in the United States of 4.865 cents per pound: (4) By an increase in the maximum price of raw sugar in the United States of 4.865 cents per pound: (5) By an increase in the maximum price of raw sugar in the United States of 4.865 cents per pound: (3) By an increase of two per centum or more in the food cost index, or in the Cost of Living Index, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the De* parliament of Labor; (4) By increasing the price paid to Puerto Rico for its sugars (excluding payments made under je! Sugar Statute, 1937, as amended); and (5) By । the purchase of substantial quantities of sugar by the United States from foreign nations other than Cuba at higher prices" than those paid to Cuba. On this point, Smith said that "recent trends indicate that the price index "ublrA 'o sufficiently to give Cuba a substantial benefit under this portion of its contract." Added the aforementioned Puerto Rican sugar spokesman that officials of the Food Credit Corporation" have assured representatives of" the Puerto Rican industry, in informal conferences, that "every effort will be made to treat the Puerto Rican sugar industry as favorably as Cuba's under the new contract." Smith added, however, that these federal officials had indicated that it would not be possible to make such adjustments until the time came to begin negotiations for the sale of the Puerto Rican sugar industry in 1947. In this regard, Smith stated that members of the Puerto Rican Industry Strategy Committee believe that such adjustments should be made at this time, and that he has arranged for a meeting with CEC Sugar Division Director James H. Marshall to be held on September 4 to discuss this issue. On the other hand, the United Press reports that J. Brooks Keyes, president of the Puerto Rico Sugar Producers Association in New York, told the United Press today that "IF we do not get justice, when we begin negotiations with the Food Credit Corporation next Wednesday in Washington on prices for the 1947 sugar crop, we will appeal to the new Piñero administration to join us in the fight to put Puerto Rico on an equal basis with Cuba." Sugar spokesman Keyes explained that, thus, theirs will be a campaign not only of the sugar producers, "But of the Government and the entire island of Puerto Rico, (Continued on page 24).