THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY: Partly cloudy. Moderate showers in the Interior and on the North and West coasts of the Island this afternoon. San Juan recorded 1.48 inches of rain yesterday. The maximum temperature was 84 degrees; the minimum was 75 degrees.
DAILY LA MACANA
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 10, 1946
Entered aa second claaa matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R
PRICE 5 Cents
YEAR XXVIII
NUMBER 10672
AE says it has no insurance debts
Cites phrase from own actuarial report in support of assertion Repudiates again Cordero's attitude Board of Directors says Auditor wants to produce panic By JUAN MARTINEZ CHAPEL Editor of EL MUNDO. The Report of Ion Directors of the Aioelaclón de Empleados, .approved lately as a reply to the communications of the Auditor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Rafael de J. Cordero, concerning the state of the Association, describes Mr. Cordero's attitude as a campaign "to produce panic among the 16,000 employees and to sow irrepressible hatred and violent contempt against the directors of the Association". The Report of the Directors of the Association copies part of Mr. Cordero's communiqués, published in EL MUNDO, in which he stated that the financial state of the Association was critical. Then the Directors of the Association state in their report: "In the newspaper EL MUNDO of June 19, on the front page, another communiqué is published under the title "A debt is imputed and, after repeating more or less the same data and conclusions, the Auditor of Puerto Rico insists on the precarious situation the Association is facing, - In the next day's edition, and on the front page, another communiqué from the Auditor of Puerto Rico is published under the title "$1.143,000 IS THE (DEBT OF THE ASSOCIATION)" and in the body of the same the statement is constantly repeated that the claims for overdue policies and for the refund of dues constitute debts of the Association which is in a precarious situation: and that, at the same time, the savings of the employees are at risk for lack of the necessary reserves. (As may be appreciated, the qua- . dro presented by the Auditor of Puerto Rico before the public opinion is gloomy, desolating. The words and concepts are repeated: "bankruptcy, insolvency, economic disaster, precarious situation, funds are at risk, debts of the Association, lack of reserves," "$663,674.00," $1,143,000. Everything has been done to produce panic among the 16,000 employees caught in the cataclysm, and to sow irrepressible hatred, violent contempt, against the Directors of the Association. Total discredit is the moral balance of the public campaign of the Auditor of Puerto Rico. Although it is not necessary to make any effort to understand that it is a campaign, nevertheless, it would be useful to demonstrate that the Auditor of Puerto Rico proposed, from the beginning, to develop a publicity plan on the contents of the report, with the purpose of achieving a public opinion favorable to the recommendations and conclusions contained therein. It is evident, as we said before, that upon suffering the first impact of the news and communication of the Board of Directors rejecting the conclusions and recommendations related to the Association, their displeasure was unbridled in the campaign that we have partially reviewed up to this point. The proof of what we have just explained is established by the last paragraph of the June 5 letter signed by the Auditor of Puerto Rico accompanying the Report sent to all the agencies and entities interested in the study, except the Association, which we copied: "In the meantime, I would be grateful if you would consider the report as a confidential document. The Committee is preparing a series of press releases to inform the public in an orderly or intelligible manner about the salient observations in the Report. "Sincerely yours," (s) "Rafael de J. Cordero, Auditor of Puerto Rico and Chairman Committee for Study of Pension SysDirectors of the Association, (Continued on page 22)
COMPENDIUM OF NON-TR I C I T I E S
Ptflero reported that an agreement had been reached with the Navy to make the necessary improvements to the Isla Gran Airport. The Navy will not transfer any part of the property to the Island Government at this time. " * - A shipment of butter and another of rice was received. echo Chief Arroyo orders not to grant truce to merchants Infractors. ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ Language Project is already at the White House. ♦ ♦ ♦ - Thousands of Puerto Ricans in exodus to the United States. - - - * Public Service waits for days to pass before acting on the Federal Court ruling regarding the IndenendlAntaS buses.
Barreto Perez to intervene in favor of employee" of dining halls. * The Board of Directors of the Employee's Association of the Insular Government continues to refute the actuarial report. Maintaining that it does not owe a cent for insurance" i and claims that the Island Auditor, Cordero, has made a campaign to sow panic among the employees and create hatred against the Dlrectoree. o o o o The Legion estimates that the" veterans" here will receive one" $7,000,000. - * - The numbering of houses in Santurce began yesterday. ♦ - * After Thursday's tremor, M "y "f4ios lived new hours of im-
-ledad when "e spread the rumor that a typhoon would destroy the city from twelve o'clock at night to" two o'clock in the morning. - * - Sentenced in San Juan a group of traders". that Portilla asks the public to define itself in relation to the tramway. " - e Rodriguez Olmo denied in Mexico that he is negotiating reinstatement in the Majors. * ♦ * Pasquel declared that In Liga Mejicana will resume its Raids on Players of the" Majors. - * * * Arecibo defeated Corona in the Olympic tournament. * * * Naranjito plays tonight with the South team in the second game of the olympic volleyball series.
TRUMAN'S LANGUAGE PROJECT
WASHINGTON, I. (PU) - A spokesman for the Department of the Interior reported today that the Puerto Rican legislature's bill on Spanish language instruction in the public schools of Puerto Rico, together with the department's recommendations, is already at the White House for action by President Truman. Although the law gives the President M days after receipt of the bill to act on it, it is believed that Truman will make an early decision on the measure. The Interior spokesman declined to disclose the nature of the department's recommendations, "until the President acts on them." Hospitalized yesterday another case of paralysis On the other hand warn of 10 suspects in several towns of Island The girl Maria Dolores Arroyo Canales, one year old, resident of San Bernardo do Rio Piedras street, was hospitalized yesterday at the Bayamon District Hospital 'as a new positive case of Infantile paralysis. Another 10 suspected cases were reported yesterday, as follows: PONCE: Francisco Vazquez, 13 years old, resident of the Machuellto neighborhood; CAROLINA: Jose Caraballo, 38 years" old: COMERIO: Angel Robles, 10 months old: DORADO: Podro Nieves, resident of the Espinosa neighborhood; LOIZA: Esteban Vargas, residen, te on Calderon Mojica Street? LAS PIEDRAS: Federico Mateu, resident at José Street. Celso Barbosa; Luis Medina Santana, resident of Ceiba neighborhood; PATILLAS: Doris Colón, 4 years old, resident of Muñoz Rivera street; RIO PIEDRAS: Juanita Silva Molina, resident of Baldrlch urbanization; TOA ALTA: Margarita MoJW, 11 years old, resident of Rio Lajas neighborhood. The Department of Health's Bureau of Epidemiology reports that the nine suspected cases hospitalized on Thursday continue to be under observation, with no confirmation having been reported until late yesterday.
Hundreds of students did not apply for admission to basic courses
There are more than 2,000 applications pending, of which 1,200 have been accepted. In Mayagüez, however, there are 200 seats available, according to UPR.
Several hundred students who have applied for admission to the University of Puerto Rico to study basic courses will probably have to remain outside the institution due to the lack of accommodation facilities, according to data provided yesterday by the University Information Office. According to these data, there are more than 2,000 applications pending, of which only 1,200 have been accepted for the Rio Piedras schools, which is considered the maximum admission capacity. In Mayagüez, where basic courses will also be offered, there is only room for 200 students, divided into five sections of 40 students each. The Mayagüez sections were opened by the University in an effort to solve the enrollment problem created by the increased number of students applying for basic courses this year. Enrollment, according to the University's Interim Registrar, Stella M. de Pagán, has multiplied this year by fifty percent. Last year, 817 students enrolled in the basic courses. This year they have applied for well over 2,000. The problem of enrollment in the basic courses in Rio Piedras
has worsened even more, since the students who come from nearby towns" to Mayagüez do not want to go to Mayagüez, but want to study in Rio Piedras schools," claiming that they already have a "home" here or that their relatives are in the process of moving to Rio Piedras. Since the 1,200 seats available in Rio Piedras are already filled, the new students who are arriving from towns near Rio Piedras are given the opportunity to go to Mayagüez, where the 200 seats available there have not yet been filled. However, every year a certain number of already accepted students do not attend the University, so those opportunities are given to the most deserving students who applied for admission after the regulatory deadline, or "ea last July 15. Those who applied within the regulatory deadline, and fulfilled their admission requirements, were accepted. The problem has arisen with those who applied after that date, most of whom are high school students who graduated in the summer. The growing number of veterans admitted, many of them without Index (Continued on page 22)
A shipment of butter was received
450,000 pounds were 1 distributed by island importers themselves 27,600 sacks of rice also arrived Vicéns believes the crisis has been averted as to a possible shortage According to Inform" the General Supply Administration," by the steamship Columbia Victory, several importing and packing plants received some shipments of butter, about 450,000 pounds, "which have been delivered to the island.000, pounds, "which have been distributed by the importers themselves from" submitting distribution lists to the General Supply Administration, which has tried to ensure that all the towns of the Island receive some butter and has ordered "these importers to set aside a small quantity to attend to the institutions of the Government, hospitals and charities, and for" any eventual case in which a municipality has" been omitted. "The quantities received," the note adds, "are not sufficient to meet the demand and necessarily many merchants, wholesalers and retailers, will not be able to receive any quantity until additional quantities arrive to meet the demand generated. "The Administration has not yet received direct imports of butter and it has not been possible to establish a system of distribution that will satisfy all. Work is being done on the classification of the trade which has been registered, by virtue of the provisions of AdmlnUtratlva Order No. 82, as a first step for the distribution alaterna which will be necessary to establish, if the shortage of "unünl "tros originating from various causes is not resolved shortly and in the meantime the Admlnlatraclón receives the verified purchases, which will be very shortly. In the meantime, what z" has determined as an objective in this first* shipment is that in each town there be some butter at the price" fixed" in one or another store, if it is not possible to serve it in all, "By the steamer Emerald Knot - further announces Mr. A. Vlcens Rios - 27,600 sacks of rice, 1,800 sacks of onions and 11, "08 cartons of evaporated milk arrived. | The supplies of rice and mann (Continued on page 22)
Piflero reports arrangement with Navy } to improve commercial facilities 1 at San Juan base airport
63 died in area Cabrera, Sto. Domingo Only one doctor, Dr. Garcia, has not slept since quake struck Navy aid arrived in time There was a moment of great emotion when naval group left town By MÍLTON CARR Pren"" Unid" Correspondent CABRERA, Dominican Republic, 9. (PU)-The American steamer "San Carlos" unloaded critically needed medical" 1 " material" last night in this quake-stricken area where 64 people died or disappeared and 131 were injured in last Sunday's disaster. Dr. Virgilio Garda, of this town, declared that within a radius of ten miles of the town 39 bodies have been recovered and that 29 are missing, believed dead. The National Police headquarters in this town revealed that 26 persons perished as a result of the sea wave which struck the nearby town of Arroyo Salado, in the community of Bajio. The Navy relief team was the first to arrive in the area, which has been isolated since Sunday, and residents say the tremors have continued at minute intervals since the violent earthquake four days ago. It is estimated that more than 50 tremors have occurred since then," with one occurring while the relief team was on the ground. The town of Cabrera, which stands on rocky cliffs overlooking the ocean, escaped Sunday's sea wave and weathered the quake much better than the surrounding villages. Only a few thatched huts went to the ground and fewer than a dozen of its 400 inhabitants were injured or bruised. The greatest loss to the town was the small stock of medicines that were damaged. Navy Medical Lieutenant Joseph E. Delmonlco. of Syracuie, New York, found the town "in antiseptic bandages" and other "material" necessary to treat 131 wounded and bruised" who were concentrated in the town. Many of them showed injuries and fractures suffered during the collapse caused by the earthquake. Some" patients" have (Continued on page 22) New cleanup campaign organized here Capital city government is organizing more trucks to carry out work The government of San Juan is organizing a general public cleanup campaign, which will begin on the" next" day. The director of the Public Works Division of the Government of San Juan, Mr. Salvador V. Caro, said yesterday that a conference has been held with the authorities of the Sanitation Department and another government agency to secure the greatest possible cooperation for this work. Caro added that in addition to the 24 heavy trucks that make up the municipality's regular fleet, additional equipment from the Emergency War Program and the Department of the Interior is being sought. The San Juan government trusts that both agendas will provide "sufficient" trucks for transporting the "trash" to the municipal crematorium. "The campaign "* will straighten - said Caro - "to the cleaning of yards, callejone" and "otare" yermo". The Municipality is very interested in starting this work as soon as possible. The program is well advanced. I am confident that this will be an important factor in the prevention of disease, especially the spread of polio. There will also be a general campaign to educate the people of San Juan regarding the disposal of garbage and refuse. The day before yesterday, the director of Public Works" met with the officials of the Sanitation Department of the Department of Health, to finalize the details" of the public hygiene plan. Mr. Caro expected to meet yesterday with the Acting Governor and director of the PEG, Mr. Manuel A. Perez, to obtain his cooperation as well.
11 - - - - - - ASKS FOR THE TRANVIA SUSPENSION TO BE APPLIED The Transit Advisory Committee met again yesterday, having resolved to recommend to the Governor that the stoppage of the electric tramway service in San Juan be postponed until the Public Service Commission can complete the procedures and requirements of the Law to fix and order the date on which the stoppage of said service is to be effected. The numbering of houses in San Juan and Puerta de Tierra has been completed, as reported yesterday by the Director of Public Works of the Government of San Juan, Mr. Salvador V. Caro. Mr. Caro said that the "brigade" performing this work began yesterday, the numbering of houses in Santurce. "All the houses in old San Juan, as well as in Puerta de Tierra," he added, "have their numbers clearly placed in a visible location. This work is being carried out by the Government of San Juan with the economic cooperation of the Emergency War Program. The purpose is to finish the numbering of Ponce de León Avenue and then continue it in other sections of Santurce, always giving preference to the main avenues. The project of numbering the hamlet had been in the pipeline for several years.
The greater one seized the people when in the last hours of the afternoon of the day 8 began to circulate the version that the authorities of the Base Borlnquen had ordered the quartering of soldiers and sailors because they had news there that a thunderstorm or typhoon "* approached Mayagüez and to destroy it the city from dore of the night to two of the dawn. The version came to take hold of the public arena in such a way that many people" of the greatest responsibility visited the Police headquarters, only to be informed by the district commander, Captain José R. Vázquez, who had no news whatsoever regarding the version. Nevertheless, < the version continued to circulate to the point that Captain Váz- 1 quez, the representative to the House Eudaldo Báez García and the prosecutor Baldomcro Freyre, communicated with the" autorldade" militare" and civilians of Punta Borinquen, the For- < taleza, and the Headquarters of the । Police, in San Juan, corroborating in these sources that there was no news regarding the typhoon or thunderstorm, < The rumor continued to spread. Many families remained vigilant, being countless people who moved to Corro 1 Las Mesas, to the Colón Clamp and । to other high places in the city, 1 spending the night there. Many merchants" left, their (Continued on page 22) .
Portilla asks people to define themselves regarding tramway.
He personally is against the elimination of the electric trolley and believes that the matter should have been discussed first in a public hearing.
José Portilla, a representative to the House of Representatives, said that the elimination of the electric trolley should have been submitted to the people of San Juan in a public hearing. It is my opinion," he says, "that the electric tramway should not be eliminated because it is a public necessity, and when public services are necessary, it does not matter the loss in weight" and cent" that it may cause to the corporation that administers said enterprise. The fact that the River Source Authority loses $59,000 annually is no reason or justification for the elimination of the electric tramway service. If the River Source Authority had put a little interest in improving and modernizing this means of transportation, I am sure that by now, instead of losses, it would be making a profit. We have an example of this today when Mr. Bloise took charge of the Transportation Authority, which had almost useless buses and today has one of the best transportation organizations of any state in the Union".
Mr. Portilla suggests the following: 1.-A well organized campaign, justifying the non-elimination, in the Press of the country. 2.-A radio campaign. 3.-Rallies in public squares. < 4.-A manifestation directed to the Governor of Puerto Rico, so that he intervenes in this matter. 5.-To address the Permanent Commission of the Legislature to intervene and investigate and recommend what needs to be done so that the electric streetcar is not eliminated. "As representative of the first precinct of San Juan, I have thought it my duty to address every parent to take an interest in a matter such as transportation, which is so necessary. This means of transportation is the only one that enters the center of San Juan and on rainy days there is no other service that can be offered to the poor neighborhoods such as La Perla, La Marina, Puerta de Tierra and to all government employees, who by eliminating the tramway would have to walk on foot under the rainy weather.
Distress in Mayagüez after the quake on the 8th
"■■■■■■■■■■IMM jji. 1 ■■ rvnTrirVi Ir 11 B| E "U photo was taken on the beach at Mayagüez shortly after the tremor that inar cuhre this bridge unusable: second" later Jándolo uncovered. The tidal change occurred in less than five minutes. This was enough to cause the greatest alarm in Mayagüez.
A version circulated about a typhoon that would devastate the city.
Many people of the city and of the beach slept outdoors in high places of Las Mesas and in the Plaza de Colón For RIÍ ARDO VILLAMIL Correspondent % " MAJAGUEZ, 9. - The hours of anguish that the population of Mayagüez lived yesterday, when the news was spread that the sea was retreating immediately after the seismic movement occurred in the morning fertilized the field so that the slightest version of danger increased public anxiety, thus, the uncertainty of the public.
Veterans here will receive $7,000,000 East in the estimate of the American Legion. - The American Legion yesterday praised President Truman's approval of the bill providing for final leave pay to veterans of the last war. It was described as a triumph for the organization. The commander of the Department, Dr. Ramon Rulz Nazario, has asked all posts to cooperate with the veterans in the preparation of forms for the payment of these benefits. The Legion estimates that Puerto Rico will receive six to seven million dollars to cover these accumulated leaves. In this regard, the Legion authorized the following yesterday: "The Puerto Rico Department of the American Legion announces that the signing by President Truman of the legislation providing for the payment of final leave to veterans of this war constitutes a great legislative victory for the organization. It is expected that some "els to seven million dollars will be collected for our veterans as a result of this legislation. "The Department of Port RI-¡ co contributed to the passage of this measure. Two weeks ago the Department's ox-commander, Mr. Luí" F. Cuchi, sent a cablegram to "enator Elbert Thoma," Chairman of the Senate Military Affairs Committee, ur-; glendo the passage of the bill ■ and appealed to American Legion posts on the Island to send messages of support. "The new Department commander, Dr. Ramon Rulz has urged of all local American Legion agencies to lend their cooperation to the" veteran" in preparing form" for the encashment of his" accumulated" leave." "Legion officials in Puerto Rico will meet with Army and Navy officials to obtain information regarding the payment of this leave. As soon as this information is obtained, it will be forwarded to all posts so that the Service Officers may be placed in a position to render such important service to the veterans. "The posts should prepare themselves to render to the veterans who are serving in their respective towns this most important service. They must inform the veterans" that this service will be rendered to them in due time. With this legislative triumph, the American Legion has once again demonstrated that the American Legion is the most important service of the veterans.
But Island Government will have authorization to make improvements Pinero requests Naval Hospital In New York succeeded in solving delay in , shipments of butter By Jran Van Vranken National News Service Correspondent" WASHINGTON, 9. (INS). - The Resident Commissioner of Puerta Rico in the United States and governor-confirmed, Je "ú" T. Plñero, disclosed today that the Navy Department has given the Island Government the go-ahead to improve the commercial air facilities at the San Juan base. After holding a conference yesterday with Navy Undersecretary John Sullivan and several high-ranking officials, Plftero said the Navy is not prepared to release any property to the island government. He added, however, that "they see the need to improve the commercial facilities at the airport, and I have no doubt that a suitable agreement will be reached to accommodate the Navy and the private flight. Although full details of the conference could not be obtained, in anticipation of a statement by the Navy, it is expected that the arrangements agreed upon will include the addition of another entrance to the airfield for a commercial airfield. In addition, the Island Government will likely receive authorization to build a new "structure" for commercial passenger use. Plftero said that the arrangement will be an appropriate temporary measure until the government has completed the internal airport. The Resident Commissioner also said he has discussed the possible disposition of the Naval Hospital in San Juan. On this point, he said that he had heard that the Navy had plans to abandon the hospital because of the lack of personnel to keep it in operation. Plftero suggested to Undersecretary Sullivan that the hospital be transferred to the Veterans Administration for the hospitalization of veterans. The Commissioner said the Under Secretary did not comment on the Navy's plans for the hospital. Commissioner-Governor Riflero also disclosed the settlement of another Puerto Rican problem - the delay in a shipment of butter to Puerto Rico. Piflero met with exporters who have been holding up the shipment in New York harbor due to a price dispute. The Commissioner* informed that the exporters have agreed to ship the butter immediately, with the understanding that the Island Government will pay the penny per pound difference between the cost of the product to the carriers and the maximum price allowed on the Island. Exporters have been talking about buying butter at 31 cents per pound, while the maximum price in Puerto Rico is 30 cents. The shipment consisted of 260,000 pounds of lard. 450 barrels of salted bacon and various other preserved pork products". The "solution to the rice shortage problem in Puerto Rico has not yet been achieved," said Plftero. The Department of the Interior, the Department of Agriculture and the Office of Price Administration are working quickly, however, to get shipments of this vital grain moved to the island within the next day. A substantial supply of rice, stored in Army commissaries, is available for Puerto Rico, but arrangements have not been completed to ship it to the Island. Attention was called to the fact that the Army rice has been treated to protect it from insects and moisture, and therefore may not be to the taste of consumers. Plftero left for New York today to confer with officials of the Veterans Administration regarding vocational schools for returning Puerto Rican soldiers. The Veterans Administration in Puerto Rico is under the jurisdiction of the Regional Office in New York. The Resident Commissioner reported that he is urging the Veterans Administration authorities to establish vocational schools in the island. The facilities for vocaclonal instruction in Puerto Rico are limited," he said (Continued on page 22).