THE WORLD
/ 44 Pages 5 Ctvs. 3 Sections
44 Pages 5 C tvs ' 3 Sections
D1ARJO.DE LA MAÑANA
YEAR XXVIII
Mr. Motorist, don't try that grace, someone else killed himself with it,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SUNDAY, JULY 14, 1946
Entered as second cImb matter, Poet Office, Ban Juan, P. B.
NUMBER 10645
Registered in NY 30000 Puerto Ricans
Government Office says it issues 20 carnet* daily ■ _ _ _ s Has sent cases . to the "G-Men" A Spaniard posing as Horicua had birth certificate By Juan Ocasio One" 30,000 Puerto Rican" have "Ido unaccounted for to date by the Identification Service of the Office which the Government of Puerto Rico maintains in New York City and which operates under the direction of the Puerto Rico Office in Wáshlngton. Mr. Salvador Torres Mazznrana, who is in charge of the agenda, is of the opinion that the identification registration system for Puerto Ricans arriving in this city is very effective in counteracting the illegal acts of many Hispanics who, identifying themselves as Puerto Ricans, have tried to take advantage of the privileges of American citizenship to travel freely throughout the nation and to obtain employment. The office has placed in the hands of federal authorities many who have tried to obtain their identification card as Puerto Ricans by using false representations. Recently, Mr. Torres Mazzorana brought to the attention of the Federal Bureau of Investigation the case of a Spaniard who obtained identification documents from the Bureau, using the name and a birth certificate of another person born in Puerto Rico. The names of the protagonists of this case were not revealed to us since the FBI is currently conducting investigations into the facts, which occurred as follows:' A Puerto Rican couple arrived on the mainland some years ago and the man registered in the address book in 1941, issuing the co-certificate. The marriage separated and the lady remarried to a Spaniard. Shortly thereafter, she obtained a copy of the Puerto Rican's birth certificate from the population registrar of the town where her former husband was born. The document was given to the Spaniard, who, accompanied by his photograph, took it to the office of Mr. Torres Mazzorana, obtaining another identification. Information provided to the office by a sister of the Puerto Rican made it possible to discover the case. When the files were searched, two copies of the same birth certificate were found, signed by the same population registrar, although the documents contained different photographs. As soon as the federal agents became aware of the case, they set out to find the imposter. The lady was found and the case is under investigation. Some Latinos come forward with offers of money to get documentation that identifies them as Puerto Rican. Cases of this nature are usually also reported to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. However, in spite of the requirements established by the bureau and which must be filled out satisfactorily by all applicants before they are issued an identification card, the agency has to be cautious since Latinos who for some reason want to remain in the United States resort to many "illegal means to obtain identification as Puerto Ricans. According to Mr. Torre" Mazzorana, the applicant is required to present his birth certificate and to appear with a witness who has known him for at least two years. Both applicant and witness are thoroughly investigated. The applicant and witness are also required to appear with a witness who has known him for at least two years.
LONDON, II. (PU) - Radio Brussels announced today that Hungary has disbanded the organizations of the child listeners and the Catholic Youth, at the request of the Russians. BOMA, IR (INK) - A German commander, August Schiffer, and two Austrians will go to the scaffold Monday in the city of Leghorn for the murder of five Americans and two British prisoners of war. The convicts were convicted at Ñipoles in January pa- - sado. " - e LONDON, 18. (INS) - The Embassy of Yugoslavia in this capital declared today that the reports to the effect that an attempt on Marshal Tito's life has been made are "completely false. The alleged attempt on the life of the Yugoslav State had been announced in unconfirmed dispatches from Rome. ♦ - "
STOCKHOLM, 18. (PU) - Report! arrived" in this capital from at least eight different points in central Ib Sweden They indicate that projecllea crossing the eapacloa are encouraging speculation that the Russians are conducting experiments with flying bombs, on a large scale. lots official authorities are still examining the fragments of half a dozen mysterious objects that hit Sweden, last week, and which, extraofidalmente, have been declared bomb" or meteor." - -. * (INS) - Arthur Grelser, ex-gauleiter naai of Poland during the occupation of this country by the Germans, today implored Pope Pius Twelve to "save him from the uatibulo". Grelser, who has been sentenced to death, alleged that he had acted on Ritiere's orders to show no mercy to the Jews. The convict sent messages likewise to Anthony Eden,
BOL ETí NE S
Britain's former foreign minister, and to Alfred Duff Cooper, British ambassador to France, asking them to intercede on his behalf. - WASHINGTON, 18. (PU)-The Senate Anlgnaclone" Committee resolved to prevent the United States from using UNRRA funds in those pulses which refuse to give free access to American journalists in order to obtain information as to the manner in which relief supplies are distributed. Style" Bridge" nenator, Republican, of New Hamp "hlre, describes the" move as an attempt to penetrate through" "the iron curtain of Russian censorship." PEIPING, China, 18.(Pü)-Chinese police today entered the Spanish Consulate, formerly the Spanish Legation,' and took away half of the property moved (Continued on p. 5 S.S.)
The new Board of Directors of the Chamber of Commerce
ft ft A ft a - : ft JL ft- Ja * J " 4 MI I S7I ■ I í A 1 ? tea"., jsWR y aft ■ El? - V Q B -- ' t WV f ' !4 7 O * V B W ¥ k V ' ," ' 5 Di "* S Q ¿¿y' 1 n wk - I > w ílMs " VI k - ftK "B , jm wCH w "hia mMIBW Rj ■' ■ ML ' ■ -%. Hi W i } ' ': ■ Members of In new Board of Directors of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce. Front row, left to right: Isabel Cabanlllas, Secretary; John W. D." Bruycker, treasurer; Flllpo L. de Hoatos, president; Benigno Trigo second vice president; Luis Marcano, director. Second row: Desiderio Alvares; Manuel Sun Juan; Fernando Rodríguez; Manuel Martínez; Emiliano Fol; Sebastián Kcheandía; Camilo - Dominguez and Frank Ballester. Third row: Francisco Castagnet; Eduardo Barroca; Víctor Hraegger; RaJ fael Vidal; Arturo Gólgel and Pedro Pitá.
Two questions of law in " - ¡i transit case The lawyer Charles H. Juliá raised on Friday before Judge Francisco Monserrate, of the "fifth wing of the Municipal Court of San Juan, a question of law which, if resolved in his favor, would practically annul section 17 of the new Automobile Law, since said article, according to his thesis before the court, is of a directive and not mandatory nature. Section 17 is the one that provides that every driver of a motor vehicle, when traveling on public, municipal or island streets or roads, must do so with due care. Mr. Juila told the Court that the law does not establish any sanction for violators of this article, so it must be considered as directive. Mr. Juliá was defending Mr. Rnmón Miranda Morro, who was denounced for violating two provisions of article 17 of the Automobile Law when his automobile (Continued on page 12).
I Federal Agriculture believes that coffee can regain its importance It expresses that the coffee agriculture of Puerto Rico will improve if the recommendations made on the conservation of soils are followed WASHINGTON, 13 (INS). - The federal Department of Agriculture stated today in a" statement appearing in the reviata devoted to the experiments" being conducted in the development of coffee in Puerto Rico, that coffee can once again become an important crop on the island if the" practices recommended by the soil conservation system are followed.
soil conservation system. Emery A. Telford, an expert in soil conservation, "uelos, who is in charge of ooservation studies in the city of Mayagüez, reported the following in the August issue of the magazine "Agriculture in America," which is ptíbllca by the department: "The Soil Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of \griculture" and various agendas has demonstrated that caté can grow without considerable soil erosion." Telford attributes the decline of the Puerto Rican coffee crop to soil depletion, as well as to the hurricanes that hit the island in 1999 and 192*. Significant work carried out by the Fixperlmental Agricultural Station of (Continued on page 12).
Byrnes achievement : at Ministers' Conference I t is due to him the ' wide fortna ' in which the public has been informed " By LEON PEARSON i FARIS, (INS). - IF Woodrow > Wilson were alive, point her to - Paris and surely exclaim: "At last - open agreements, to which he has openly arrived." The" ministers" of the Big Four have suffered many disappointments" and failures, but they have succeeded in keeping the public Informed about each and every step taken" along the way. There has been such detailed reporting of the intimate talks at the Luxembourg Palace that Parle's diplomatic corps are rubbing their eyes in amazement and the correspondents' corps are rubbing their hands with delight. This policy is not only a change from Wilson's days. It is . a drastic change from the" day" when the । Moscow Conference was held last December. At that meeting of the Big Three, reporters were not even allowed to discuss the agenda, let alone the agreements made. In Paris," there is no censorship, But, more important, there is a deliberate plan to give the Pregj "a full detail of everything that goes on. The man responsible for this policy is the United States Secretary of State, James F. This does not please Soviet Foreign Minister Molotov one iota. The President of France, Bldault, is indifferent. England's Foreign Minister, Bevln, complained one day of having awakened to find himself "dunked in the Piensa." There are two'reasons behind the policy of open-handedness to the Press, sponsored by Byrnes in Paris. The" same" "on: 1-He believes । that ae serves the public better, by giving it a direct Report of the ver- ' dad of what is going on, than by making j the public imagine things. 2- He believes that in day" of decisions (Continued on page 5 S.S.).
The president of the Federation of Employees* of the Island Government, Pastor Lozada, points out the* reasons on which the entity bases its petition.
The Government Employees Federation has requested the Homes Authority that public employees be given priority in obtaining homes. Explaining the Federation's purposes, the president of the entity, Mr. Justo Pastor Lozada, expresses the following: "In view of the dire situation faced by hundreds of low-paid employees of the Insular Government regarding living facilities, specifically referring to messengers, janitors, nurses, clerks and other personnel in the lower budget lines, whose salaries fluctuate between $420 and $1,500 a year, the Federation of Insular Government Employees has approached the Sohre Puerto Rico Homes Authority requesting that it give priority to obtaining homes for the employees of the Insular Government.
Homes Authority of Puerto Rico requesting ■ priority for a certain number of these employees in obtaining housing in the Authority's । homes projects. Among the many reasons which ml- ■ litan in favor of this preferential treatment, the following stand out"; They are persons of moral solvency, ron a source of income 11i mltada, but permanent; their incomes are of the type of Income of families for whom the legislation has been - passed which has made possible the construction of low-income housing: legislation i which responds to an im- . The legislation responds to an im- . extendable need of our community, - humane work of vast soi cial scope; on these employees depend > numerous (amillars with mlsr (Continued on page 12i
The Civil Service ComlakV yesterday gave an account of the call for examinations issued during the last few weeks, for the purpose of obtaining personnel to fill vacant positions in the Government. At the same time, the Commission reminded interested parties that applications must be filed as soon as possible and no later than the last date previously determined. The calls for which applications for admission to the examination are being received, as follows
The number of exams that have been announced by the CSC and the last date in cana ca
and the last dates for the filing of applications, are: For pharmacists, July 24; chemists, July 31; agronomists, August 5; bacteriologists, August 12; and lawyers, August 12. . In addition, the Commission has issued the following open calls in connection with which it will admit applications until the needs of the service are filled; Medical officers (all cias); nurses (all classes); dentists, and medical technicians.
Requests adoption' of plan on; schools.
Chief Statistician* of the Dept. Instruction speaks about it at a forum It would cost a total of "43,000,000.00 Suggests that the cooperation of the U.S. Government be requested. Expressing "us doubt" as to whether in the coming aftoa the Insular treasury will have sufficient" Income" to allocate to public Instruction more than $18 million annually, the chief eatadistico of the Department of Inatrucclón, Mr. José Vázquez Ortlz, stated, in the course of his presentation at the forum "obre el alaterna eicolar held at the University under; lo" auaplcloa de la Aaoclaclón de Maestro", that "we believe it is absolutely indispensable to obtain the economic cooperation of the Insular Government", in order to develop and complete the school contracting program" in Puerto Rico. Beftor Vázquez Ortlz. made reference to the grants and aid made by the Federal Government to the State and Territory for schools, as well as to educational institutions, concluding that this "is a precedent that can and should be exploited for the benefit of Puerto Rico. "We believe" - he added - "without fear of being mistaken, that by putting before Congress in a scientific manner what the needs of Puerto Rico are and demonstrating the lack of sufficient resources" on the part of the Government to meet them, "we can duly achieve" if not all, a great part, of what the Island needs and deserves. We must also remember that the United States is one of the signatories to the Charter of the United Nations, in which all signatory nations accept as a sacred obligation to ensure with due respect the educational improvement of the inhabitants of all the territories of any of them and to assume the responsibility inherent therein. In addition, there is great interest in the Congress of the United States in assisting the states and territories to extend, intensify, and improve their systems of instruction. This is evidenced by the large number of bills which have been introduced in the Congress for the purpose of achieving these ends. Almost all of these bills include the U.S. territories, and many of them specifically mention Puerto Rico for assistance. It is essential to convince to the point of exhaustion that we need aid, the amount of aid, how we are going to use it, and, above all, how we are going to use it. (Continued on page 12.) I
The Senate approved the OAP bill; it is now before the House.
The second series of trials of pro-Nazi "E" the second series of trials against former Vichy ministers are resumed in Paris By GAULT McGOWAN VERSALLES - It was not plans or projects for the European peace conference which brought to Versailles this afternoon "a select group of Parisian officials, but the beginning of the second series of trials against Vichy ministers, collaborationists, admirals" and colonial officials who were close to Marshal Petain's regime. The peace conference will take place in the great senatorial hall of the Luxembourg Palace; the former "alon of the throne of Queen Marie de Médlcl. Nobody wants to risk at the present time to put the name of Versailles on a new peace treaty. However, it is indeed an appropriate place for a peace conference and not among the "hot streets of Paris". But with Versailles, like Geneva, unable to host a world conference, the French have brought their trials here against Vichy elements, where it is hoped that there will not be the scandalous scenes that occurred at the trials of Petain and Laval, since a high court of justice has been appointed in accordance with the constitutional precept, assisted by a jury of twenty-four members, selected in accordance with the provisions of the law. The first in the list of the defendants is now Jean Berthelot who is accused of having done more "technical collaboration" than anyone else during the time he was Vichy's Secretary of Communications. It is alleged that he was a liaison point for communications between Hitler, Petain and all the" other collaborationists. The French hope to conclude within days the hearing of his trial. Among the other defendants are four admirals from Madagascar, the vlchylsta governor of Cayla and the former Prime Minister of the Vichy government, Pierre Etienne Fland. In contrast to the Nuremberga trials which the smiling Jacques de Lille, France's assistant director of information, today described as "Institution" -Iob trance "*" they are confident of terminating doco pro(Contlnued on page 5 S.S.)
KRUG SEES PINERO'S SELECTION FOR GOVERNOR WITH RESERVATIONS WASHINGTON, 18 (PU).- Secretary of the Interior Julius A. Krug informed Premie Unida that he expected a nomination shortly for the post of Governor of Puerto Rico. He added: "We have to select an unthinkable candidate, since Tugwell will be returning to the University of Chicago." The Secretary indicated that the position has been offered to several people, whom he did not mention, but that for various reasons, they have not been willing to assume the responsibility. Regarding the possibility of nominating a Puerto Rican, he said, "It is very difficult to find a Puerto Rican who is acceptable to both groups of opinion on the island." He added that Plftero has "a lot of support" from Puerto Ricans, including the backing of In legislature. Krug also said that "the minority gruíais have very strong feelings" about Piflero, and indicated that he had his reservations about whether Ptfiero would be the best selection. White House announces Army plans to ask Truman for authorization WASHINGTON? 13 (PU)- The White House announced today that the U.S. Army plans to ask President Truman to authorize raising the age of conscription from 29 to 34 years of age by September 1, the date on which the temporary suspension of the draft program will expire. The proposed change in the minimum age for conscription will bring into the ranks of the Army many thousands more citizens to complete the quota of voluntary recruits. Military sources reportedly want to insure against a possible decline in volunteers by extending the age of eligibility for military service. More than 800,000 men "have volunteered" since the War Department began recruiting for a million men, but the continuing need for new recruits to replace veterans in service has forced Congress to keep the Selective Service Act in effect. The Army has noted that the influx of "volunteers" will probably not be enough to keep the Army's authorized 1,500,000-man ranks full. San Juan district chief Secundlno Velez held interviews with the owners or managers of the buildings on the corners of Fortaleza-San Justo, Fortaleza-Tanca, Brau-San JiiSto and Brau Tanca streets, and obtained their consent to place iron arms on said buildings by the Fountains Authority (continued on page 5).
New division in Instruction will direct School Canteens.
It was created by law number 328 of 1946. - The personnel will not be affected by the Civil Service
Classified, nor are they covered by the Retirement Law.
Act No. 328, approved on April 15, 1946, organizes the administration of school cafeterias in Puerto Rico and creates in the Department of Instruction a Division of School Canteens, under the direction of the Commissioner of Instruction. In its explanatory memorandum, the law declares that "it is the desire of the People of Puerto Rico to promote by all possible means the physical, mental and social improvement of the school children attending school cafeterias. Among the duties of the Division are to select and appoint all canteen personnel, and to promulgate rules and regulations for the administration and management of these school feeding centers. In addition, it has the duty of administering and accounting for the school feeding centers.
Iillzar, in accordance with the" laws vl- ■ gentes, all lo" funds which are a "ig- - ned for school canteens by i the Insular Government, and those which i are made available by the , Federal Government, associations, soi cies or individuals. It shall also purchase, store and dlstrli bulr all food, equipment and I materials that ie acquired for ' use of this program. Under the Act, the employees of the School Lunchroom Food Distribution Agency shall continue to be part of the Division of School Lunchrooms. i The Division shall be empowered to establish a system of purchasing and payment, as well as a section for storage and distribution of all- > mtntos, without being subject to these com- (Continued on page 12).
The vote was sixty-two to fifteen As passed it has littleaa chance of tenei Truman's approval By EULÁÍlE~Mc~b0WBLI. WASHINGTON. 13. (PU) -After a tumultuous session, the United States Senate early Saturday morning passed the remnants of the tattered bill*' aimed at reviving price controls, by a vote of 62 to 15. The measure, as has been "tested, represents a" drastic reduction in the "authority" available to the former Price Administration Office. It also exempts from control of numerous items "included" in the legislation which expired on June 30 last The legislation now goes to the House of Representatives, which can either pass it immediately "as passed by the Senate or send it, for reconciliation, to a conference committee of both houses of the legislature. The lower CA is likely to take action on the bill today, as that body is scheduled to meet today to vote on the bill authorizing a loan to England. Administration leaders are confident that the House will give preference to the price controls legislation. In the view of legislative chamber leaders, the Senate-passed OPA bill has little chance of escaping President Trump's disapproval. We leaders are confident that the Conference Committee will remove those Senate amendments that eliminate price controls on meat, poultry, eggs, oil, tobacco and other items. Some officials who support the President's attitude when Truman vetoed the earlier Price Administration bill said today that they would support the Senate measure as long as the weakening amendments were removed. The Senate floor finally forced the measure's approval at about 2:00 a.m. today, Saturday morning, with shouts of "let's vote 'yes'" from the floor. Forty-one Democrats, twenty Republicans and one Progressive voted for the legislation. Four Democrats and eleven Republicans voted against it. On the other hand, it is reported that although the measure removes from the effects of the price controls meats, poultry, eggs, butter, oil and petroleum products, etc., observers believe that there is a 50 per cent chance that the bill will pass out of the Conference Committee in a form acceptable to President Truman. It will be recalled that the President in his message to Congress on Thursday called for "e passage of a practicable measure, and that the Director of Reconversion, John R. Steelman, issued the warning that a delay in the implementation of a price control law may lead the people of the United States" to a state of acute deprtilon. In "u last inference with the Press the vterne", President Truman stated that he could not say what aeltud aeumlria in connection with Ja legislation Mata it was under "u consideration, in a definite form. The Senate defeated a bill to increase rents by five percent next March, but an amendment would allow the OAP to have jurisdiction over rents in those states and territories of the United States which already have their own rent control system in place. (Puerto Rico has a Rent Control Law, passed by the last Legislature. The implementation of the measure was accelerated by the extinction of the OAP upon the expiration of the legislation that created it and gave it force on June 30). Meanwhile, in the House of Representatives, five Republican representatives tried to revive the revenue control issue. Clare Boothe Luce, R-Conn., initiated the move by requesting unanimous House con" sentiment to approve rent control for a one-year term. Once Speaker Sam Rayburn denied her consent, Rep. Boothe said she would reintroduce her motion whenever she had the opportunity to do so until the Chair agreed to give it passage. The U.S. House of Representatives is scheduled to vote today, Saturday, on the proposed 13,750,000,000,000 loan to Great Britain, which (Continued on page 3).
Amadeo objects to Aponte's attitude regarding habeas corpus
Says it "intimidates" the "inmate" and that "this has never been done by prosecutors. - Points out case in which U.S. Supreme Court annulled regulation.
In relation to the statements made by the San Juan District Court Prosecutor, José C. Aponte, in the sense that he will have to investigate the origin of the wave of habeas corpus petitions being filed by inmates of the San Juan jail and the prison, Dr. Santo" P. Amadeo, a professor at the University of San Juan, said that he will have to investigate the origin of the wave of habeas corpus petitions that are being filed by inmates of the San Juan jail and the prison. Amadeo, a professor at the University of Puerto Rico Law School, made the following statements yesterday: "If I did not know my distinguished friend and colleague, Prosecutor Aponte, I would say that the purpose of "u" demonstrations is to restrict the constitutional right of incarcerated persons to have access to the courts to determine, through habeas corpus petitions, whether they are being held illegally incarcerated. But, indisputably, one possible result of his demonstrations is that the prisoners, most of whom are ignorant, will not dare, even if they have the right, to resort to the courts with habeas corpus to claim their right to personal liberty. "The practice of prisoners to make allegations themselves in re-
The practice of prisoners making habeas corpus claims themselves, or through the mediation of a fellow prisoner, has been sanctioned by the U.S. Supreme Court and by state courts. In none of these jurisdictions have prosecutors made investigations of prisoners for filing habeas corpus petitions in the manner announced by my dear friend, prosecutor Aponte. If these prisoners commit a crime by filing habeas corpus petitions, then the prosecutor is perfectly within his rights to prosecute them criminally. But it is extremely dangerous, and to the serious detriment of the prisoner, to intimidate him with investigations and possible prosecutions.