THE M&N DO DIARIC DE LA MANANA
38 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
38 Pages 5 Ctv". 2 Sections
DAILY
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
Bespeldomos a: los,hombros que hicieron posible "il Empréstito do la Victoria.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY APRIL 13, 1946
Entorod as second tUm matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10589
New method of delivery by SIA
Bill Now Pending Before Acting Governor Would Lower Rates for Service Sewer Reform Studied in Santurce Slum Area If House Bill 797, now under consideration by Governor Tugwoll, becomes law, the basic price of water throughout Puerto Rico will drop from 5.8 cents a cubic meter to 4.5 cents. This was reported by the director of the Insular Aqueduct Service, Mr. SerKlo Cuevas Bustamante, when asked by an editor of EL MUNDO, to comment on the statements made by the Examiner of the rates of said agency, Mr. Rafael Rivera Zayas, published in our last Thursday edition. Mr. Cuevas added that, in accordance with the provisions of the valid measure, the tariff will most probably be made on a descending scale, instead of an ascending one. With respect to the poor rates, he explained that the same rates as originally recommended would prevail, and that they are subject to the final determination of the Examiner, Rafael Rivera Zayas. The referenced project is based on new methods for the supply of water to municipalities and governmental agencies. (Because such free water service "varies every year, in proportion to the public need, and to the generosity of the Board of Government of the CIS," the obligation is replaced, by means of the bill, by one that imposes on the CIS the monthly payment of a specific sum of money fixed by law. Such sum will not be susceptible ( of changes, do according to the ( circumstances. I understand that "this new me- t all afianzarla the aco- i nomic stability of the SIA. since it would put it i to function on strict bases- t amount economic, charging to be- । so da fees for all ol served < it yields." He also informed yesterday that both the SIA and the Examiner, Rafael Rivera Zayas, "are attentive to the final action of the Acting Governor regarding this project. The final 1 determination of the water rates, submitted to the aforementioned Examiner and discussed in public hearings, are at a standstill, pending the action of the Acting Gov- ' (Continued on page 22.)
PORTLAND, Oregon, 12. (PU)- Portland and Puerto Rico should agree to solve their respective shortages. That is the view of Juan Rodrigues Pou, Puerto Rican businessman, who is visiting this city, buying lumber for his building materials business. Mr. Rodrigues Pou said that in San Juan, where he has his home, you can get all the Scotch whiskey you want, but you can't get lumber to build homes. The Puerto Rican businessman did not suggest that we exchange our lumber for San Juan whiskey: however, our thirsty lumber dealers might consider the idea, if they wanted to put it into practice.
TA acquires Central Plazuela The acquisition by com' pra of Central Plazuela and the property owned by the heirs of Mrs. Aúrea Balseiro Vda. de Georgetti, was agreed yesterday by the Board of Directors of the Land Authority. The TA will pay for these properties the sum of $2,581,000. Said amount, as reported at the agency's offices, is subject to rectification in several of its items. These are those destined to the purchase of the cattle, the warehouse, the plantations and the land. The transaction will be submitted next Monday by the contracting parties to the San Juan District Court for approval. _
To consider a contract with the Agricultural Credit Corporation for the purchase and sale of the 1946 sugar crop, the General Board of the Sugar Producers Association met yesterday morning at its offices in San Juan. Because at the time it was about to discuss the contract it received a new copy, which amends in several respects the contract it was to consider, the Board agreed to declare itself on a permanent basis, and for this purpose appointed a committee to study the new contract. On Monday the appointed committee will report its findings to the Board and will again discuss the scope of the new contract before making a final decision. Examined yesterday ol new contract slightly by the Board, are our Reports that could be noticed the existence of some points on which the Asoclaqlón will ask for amendments and others that do not need clarification. Among the points which have not been found to be clear, as has been stated, is that which has to do with any increase which may occur in the maritime floats, which, as originally indicated, will be borne by the Credit Corporation. This part of the contract, as so interpreted, does not appear to say what it (Continued on page 22.)
WASHINGTON, D. C. (SEM)-Governor Tugwell will return to Puerto Rico at the end of next week, after he has completed certain arrangements with the University of Chicago, which he will join next June, as reported here. Tugwoll is confident that at any moment he will be sent to the Senate by President Truman, the name of Jesus T. Pifloro, presently Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico. Pifloro, present Resident Commissioner of the Island in Washington, with his nomination for Governor of the Island. Pifloro thus became the first Puerto Rican governor by presidential appointment, and the successor of
CARLOTA AMELIA, Virgemo, II (PU) - The U.S. Marine Corps Board of Inquiry has been conducting a month-long, intensive investigation of alleged irregularities in the Marine Corps base, including the sale of Government-owned drinking water to distilleries during periods of drought. The investigation is now nearly completed, and it is reported that high-ranking officers whose names have not been disclosed are involved. - NEW YORK, 11. (INS) - Moscow radio said today that all Russian newspapers paid tribute to the late President Franklin D. Boosevelt, declaring that "he instilled courage and encouraged our hopes in Russia's most tragic hour during the last war. - (INS) - - ATHENS, 11. (INS) - Athens paid tribute to President Franklin D. Boosevelt with a requiem mass celebrated by Sergeant Arsobicpo Damasklnes in the Athens Cathedral. The Greek Government omitted today a commemorative stamp, with the effigy of the President. A guard of
The "Missouri", which was anchored in the bay of JMdlo, was paraded through the streets of the Greek capital. Admiral Kent Hewitt laid a wreath at the grave of the unknown Greek soldier during the ceremony. * BUENOS AIRES, 12. (INS) - Argentina today made an omission of stamps honoring the memory of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. This is one of the many events to commemorate the first anniversary of the death of the late American president. A runway leading from Argentina's main port, Buenos Aires, to Esesa airport will be named after Boosevelt and a monument in his honor will be erected in Buenos Aires itself. Both President Edelmiro Barrel and high-ranking government officials will attend a Todéum to be sung in the Buenos Aires Cathedral in memory of the late President. Later another ceremony will be held at the Inter-American Economic Institute. - - - WASHINGTON, U. (FU)-The
BULLETINS
Governor expects to return late next week He is finalizing certain arrangements now with the University of Chicago. - Expects Pifiero to be appointed shortly to the governorship.
Tugwoll after five years of the disputed American professor having occupied the governorship. In the official Island circuits, I do not share here the optimism with which Tugwoll has revealed to his friends the proximity of Piflero's appointment for Governor. Piflero, however, continues to maintain the utmost reserve and in the same attitude is ol president of the Insular Sonate, Luis Mufloz Marin, who discussed this matter with Secretary Krug during the one-hour conference he held with him upon his arrival in Wáshlngton last Monday.
President Traman gave his approval to legislation allocating 8258,727,000 to provide 100,000 temporary housing units for veterans. These new unldsdes will bring the number of temporary housing units to 282,000, which will be provided for veterans. oes WASHINGTON, 11. (PU) - Representative George R. Bender, Republican, of Ohio, today proposed that veterans be given the highest priority for the purchase of surplus property owned by the Government. Bender said the "outrageous" way veterans are being treated can no longer be ignored. At present, veterans are given preference in purchasing, after federal and state government agencies. o o * LONDON, 12. (PU) - British Prime Minister Bichard Clement Attlee today paid tribute to the late President Roosevelt, calling him "a great shoulder whose wise and upright leadership contributed so much to the victory of the United Nations. o " " " -OOCHOW, China, 12. (PU) Chon (Continued on page 22.).
Perez signed the Inheritance Law yesterday.
Believes new measure establishes a fairer means of taxation, Conferenció con Negrón, Buscaglia' Treasurer estimates it will produce no more than the law which expired yesterday at The last activity yesterday afternoon of Acting Governor, Seftor Manuel A. Perez was to sign House Bill No. 837 "to impose taxes on inheritance taxes," and the bill was passed by the House of Representatives. 837 "to impose inheritance and gift taxes; to establish certain definitions relating to inheritance and gift taxes; to determine the manner in which the taxes herein imposed shall be assessed and collected and to fix the rates thereof; to establish the exemptions and credits corresponding to such taxes; to fix certain obligations to all persons required to pay such taxes and to those persons who make gifts; to authorize the Treasurer of Puerto Rico to adopt rules and regulations for the administration of this Act". As this law is of an emergency nature and begins to take effect today, and by express provision of the law, its provisions have retroactive effect to March 22, 1946, and shall be applicable to all donations made on or after that day. Yesterday morning, the Governor, Mr. Pérez, held a conference in his offices at La Fortaleza with the Acting Attorney General, Mr. Luis Negrón Fernández, and the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Rafael Buscaglia, in which, according to our reports, several bills approved by the Legislature and pending signature by the Executive were discussed. Among the bills that received the most attention was one that changes the system and rates of taxation of inheritance and gift taxes. As we have been informed, the Acting Attorney General recommended its approval without reservation, and the Treasurer of Puerto Rico also reported favorably, with the proviso that the new law would not produce notably greater revenues to the Treasury than the law heretofore in effect. After this conference, the Acting Governor, Mr. Manuel A. Pérez, decided to sign the bill in the belief, according to persons close to him, that the new law establishes a fairer means of taxing inheritances and donations.
The status committee will insist that a measure similar to the Tydings-Piñero bill be approved.
VA services expected to be decentralized Gen. Bradley promised quick action to Legion chief Will benefit veterans here Washington office services would be provided on the island A quick decentralization of the services provided by the Veterans Administration is expected as a result of a lengthy conference held between VA Director Gen. Omar S. Bradley and American Legion Director Sen. John Stelle. The commander of the Puerto Rico Chapter of the Legion, Seftor Luis F. Cuchi, reported yesterday that "such a promise was made to Seftor Stelle at the aforementioned conference". The measure is expected "to be of considerable benefit to Puerto Rican veterans, since, on the occasion of such orders, the services previously rendered by the Central Office in Washington will be rendered locally. As is known, the problems related to the guarantees of loans to veterans, and the payment of compensation for studies, functions that are now in charge of the Regional Office on Puerto Rico, directed by Dr. Jaime Sorra Chavarry, have already been solved. The offices of the Legion on Washington have been insisting that the number of hospitals and clinics that operate on a contract basis be reduced, insisting that they should only be used for emergencies. On the other hand, they have insisted on the establishment of contracts for the payment of medical services to those physicians interested in working on a fee-for-service basis, especially in determining the physical disability of veterans who have claims for compensation pending before the agency. It was reported that General Bradley has given favorable consideration to such claims by the American Legion. Municipalities are authorized to eliminate the six per cent. They will not have to include this allocation in their 1946-47 budgets According to an amendment introduced to the Municipal Law of Puerto Rico by Act 294, signed the day before yesterday by the Acting Governor, the municipal governments are authorized to readjust their budgets for the 1946-47 fiscal year, eliminating the six per cent. allocation with which they contribute to the Special Fund for the purchase of medicines for municipalities, and allocate it to other local services. Article seven of the aforementioned law, as amended, reads as follows: "The municipalities shall have pioneer legislative and administrative powers, in all matters of a municipal nature, and which are related to works, instruction, welfare, public order and security, police, jails, asylums, hospitals, hygiene, ornament, street maintenance, park openings, construction regulation, properties, property, public works, public works, public works, education, charity, public order and security, police, jails, asylums, hospitals, hygiene, ornament, street maintenance, park openings, regulation of constructions, properties, municipal taxes and revenues, public roads, water supply, public lighting, sewage, urban transportation, cemeteries, markets, slaughterhouses, butcheries and all kinds of institutions, services and other activities of benefit to the municipality in general and for its promotion; Provided, That these powers shall be exercised subject to the laws of Puerto Rico and of the United States and to the ordinances of the Public Service which were in force, and no ordinance, resolution or agreement incompatible with said laws may be adopted; and provided further, That the Sanitary Service in each municipality shall be in charge of a sanitary officer or inspector appointed by the Commissioner of Sanitation of Puerto Rico and whose salary shall be fixed by law; and all expenses of this *er(Continued on page 22.)
The American Legion announced that $8501,106.00 was paid to 25,053 World War II veterans during the week ending April 4 by the Unemployment Compensation Division of the Veterans Administration. The American Legion also reported that some 513 veterans obtained jobs during the month of March through the offices of the Federal Veterans Employment Service throughout the island. These veterans have been employed with the cooperation of Federal Agencies, Island Government and private entities. The American Legion further reports that "the cooperation of the community at large in the arduous but patriotic work of obtaining jobs for unemployed veterans has greatly improved.
This situation," during the nearly five years he has been governor of the island. Tugwell, a New Republic contributor, was invited to comment on Wenzell Brown's book, "Dynamite on the Threshold" - a book that has been hailed as a "sensational revelation about Puerto Rico. Tugwell's statements, in his article, are more than a criticism of Brown's treatment of Puerto Rico; they constitute an explanation of the Puerto Rican problems, as Tugwell knows them, in comparison with Brown's, who "made no case for Puerto Rico." "The portorrlqueftos," writes Tugwell, "have a habitual cipaci(Contlnued on page 22.)
Truman pledges to follow a policy that Roosevelt had proscribed.
"There may be need for secondary changes but the objectives will be the same," he said at yesterday's tribute to FDR at Hyde Park
By ROBERT NIXON HYDE PARK, N.Y., 12 (INS)-President Truman today solemnly pledged his Administration to carry forward the foreign and domestic policies of his predecessor Franklin D. Roosevelt, wartime President of the United States. Standing in the doorway of the old Roosevelt manor house, and a short distance from President Roosevelt's grave, Truman declared that his program is "to carry forward the principles and the policy, both foreign and domestic, which Franklin D. Roosevelt sustained. There may be a need to make minor changes in the face of unforeseen circumstances, but, fundamentally, the objectives remain the same". The nation's chief executive traveled by plane from Washington to pay a heartfelt and eloquent tribute to the great liberal President who led the United States to victory in the last devastating world war. Roosevelt's death was commemorated on this first anniversary by the dedication of his tomb and library as national monuments. During the wreath-laying ceremony at Roosevelt's grave by the current President Truman, Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, his widow, "stood by his side. In paying her verbal tribute to the late President, Truman declared
Truman said: 'In the field of foreign policy, President Roosevelt's guiding dictum was that our Nation, in good neighborliness, should play an active, intelligent and creative role in the relations between the United States and the United States, and that the United Nations should play an active, intelligent and creative role in the relations between the United States and the United States.
As signed by Acting Governor Manuel A. Perez, Act No. 295 provides for the establishment in the courts of Puerto Rice of a type of indeterminate sentence in connection with the parole system. The new law provides that when the courts sentence a prisoner to serve a sentence for a felony that does not carry a penalty of life imprisonment, they shall fix an indeterminate sentence and shall not set a specific limit for the duration of the sentence, but shall order the prisoner's confinement for a term that may in no case be less than the minimum term provided by law for the crime committed, nor more than the maximum term provided for said crime; providing, further, that in those cases in which the law does not provide for a specific term of imprisonment, the courts shall order the prisoner to serve an indeterminate sentence for a term that may not be less than the minimum term provided by law for the crime committed, nor more than the maximum term provided for said crime; providing, further, that in those cases in which the law does not provide for an indeterminate sentence, the courts shall order the prisoner to serve an indeterminate sentence.
Japanese women cast their ballots Japanese women cast their ballots while other citizens take their turn at the polling station in Yotsuya, Tokyo. The elections, held on Wednesday, were to select members of the new Japanese Diet (Parliament). This is the first time in history that a Japanese woman has held the electoral franchise. (Associated Press Photo)
T ugwell condemns U.S. treatment of Puerto Rico He says he is ashamed that his country did not make an effort to do something for Puerto Ricans. - Island Would Be Lost In Presence Of Separation, He Says
NEW YORK, 12. (P.U.) - Writing in defense of Puerto Rico in the weekly "New Republic," the Governor of Puerto Rico, Rexford G. Tugwell, declared today: "I sometimes feel ashamed of my country for not having taken sufficient pains to do something for the Puerto Ricans, other than to extend them the relief of a handout and to use them for political advantage." The Governor affirmed that he feels humiliated "for not having been able to change, to a considerable degree,
(PU)-Ex-periment* indicating the existence of a cancer-causing virus has been outlined* before the American Chemical Society by Dr. Roger J. Williams, of the University of Texas. The man of science stated that these experiments were begun in 1942 by Dr. Alfred Taylor, who has been cultivating the virus in eggs under incubation. The first experiments were inconclusive, but, in subsequent experiments, Dr. Taylor obtained "dramatic evidence which seemed to establish the question of the virus in the affirmative," as Dr. Williams stated, "Rats infested with the virulent material developed cancer promptly at the site of injection. These malignant tumors were transplanted into other rats and may have spread continuously. Dr. Williams stated the ho(Contlnued on page 22.)
Courts authorized to establish indeterminate sentencing type
In the case of a maximum or minimum term, the sentencing court will set the maximum or minimum term. This means that in a case where the maximum term of imprisonment provided by law is ten years and the minimum term is one year, the judge, after considering the merits of the case, if the defendant is found guilty, will sentence him to serve either from three to five years, from four to six years, from six to ten years, and so on. Once the convict has served the minimum term fixed by the sentencing court for the crime committed, he will be under the jurisdiction of the Parole Board, which may release him on parole, when it is reasonably convinced that the desired favorable moral change has been initiated in him, and, a (Continued on page 22.),
As reported by Commission Chairman yesterday Muñoz discusses with the Press the problems facing Puerto Rico He alludes to industrialization program He would have favored the initiative of private capital in new works By FaulHARRISON WASHINGTON. 12 (PU) - Puerto Rico Senate President Luis Mufloz Marin said in a press conference that the Status Committee will insist that Congress approve a plebiscite bill similar to the Tydlngs-PIAero project, which defined economic conditions in light of different forms of political status. Mufloz stipulates congressional action "within a reasonable time. Acceptable economic conditions, he continued, would be those that would allow the industrialization of the island and raise living standards, enabling the population to prosper under any form of political status; but he declined to estimate the time such industrialization would take, saying, "I would be playing with the fate of the people if I tried to set a time limit. The Status Commission will be complete within the next few days, then it will be able to put pressure on Tydlngo and Boll to open audlonclM on the Tydings-PIfloro measure," said Mufloz Marin, adding that he hopes to see Truman before then, He said he hoped to see him for a few moments today, in view of his intention to go to Hyde Park, New York, where Truman and other officials will stay for a short time to pay tribute to the first anniversary of Roosevelt's death. Asked about who will be governor of Puerto Rico after June 30, Mufloz declared: "I don't know," he said, "I don't know" because the Popular Democratic Party is backing T. Popular Democratic Party backs Tugwell, but in the event of a vacancy in the governorship, it would back "someone who corresponds to the mandate of public opinion. When asked by a reporter if Tugwell would "eorrespond," Mufloz promptly replied, "YES." Describing the finer points of the present industrial program, Mufloz pointed out that the situation in Puerto Rico is different from the traditional practice in the United States, whereby private enterprise takes the lead in industrial development. Government initiative is paving the way for industrial progress in Puerto Rico and setting an example to private industry to prove that business can thrive on the island. Mufloz described the industrial activities of the Island Government as needing to show its duty to the people, rather than to follow a socialist doctrine. Personally, he would have favored that most of the enterprises owned by the Government had been initiated by private capital to stimulate investment, which would have implied the change of the present loy. Mufloz said, moreover, that he envisions the possibility that the for-profit industry could operate under private enterprises. But the main problem," he said, "is the political status solution to eliminate uncertainty on the part of private investors, who are often cautious when it comes to new ventures. Mufloz Marín believes that atomic energy will be a future boon to Puerto Rico's industrialization. Puerto Rico is a poor country," said Mufloz, "inhabited by people whose democratic sentiment motivates their desire for self-government. The Puerto Ricans, therefore, differ from the majority of other peoples, whose independent objectives stem primarily from economic causes. Discussing the relative independence of other countries, Mufloz pointed out that "England is just as bad off (economically) as Puerto Rico". Mufloz said that the maintenance of the colonial system by the United States does it no good abroad and that it has a demoralizing effect on the people of Puerto Rico. Details of the Commission meeting According to cablegram received by (Continued on page 22.).