THE WORLD
2nd EDITION & I 2 Sections
38 PUinu 5 Ctva. 2 Sections
DIARIO DE
THE MANAMA
YEAR XXVIII '
Let us support the shoulders that made the Victory Loan possible.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MAY 18, 1946
Enterad aa oocond elasa matter, . foal Office, San Juan, B.
NUMBER 10588
President Truman ordered embargo of U. S. railroads late yesterday afternoon.
5 More Ships Planned En Route From Island
Truman Veto Finds Atmosphere in Congress Almost all opinions support the attitude assumed by President Tydings declined to comment He has not yet decided whether to introduce the bill relating to the plebiscite By JEAÑ~VAÑ~VRANKEN X International News Service Correspondent WASHINGTON, 17 (IN8)- Congressional commentary today hailed President Truman's veto of two Puerto Rican bills providing for a plebiscite on the island political status question and for the nomination of a gubernatorial candidate in the event of a vacancy in that office before a political problem is solved. Senator Owen Brewster, R-Maine, a member of the Senate Territories Committee, vigorously supported the President's action, calling it "wise and justified." The Senator declared that the two bills were not calculated to be helpful, adding that "they reflect the extreme liberal policy that tends to get out of control in Puerto Rico." Long an opponent of Governor Rexford Guy Tugwell, Senator Brewster asserted that while he "does not question Tugwell's sincerity, the state of Puerto Rico's political and economic development does not need the policies being implemented in the island. Senator Brewster went on to say that "the appointment of a new Governor for* Puerto Rico will be an act of great significance"; adding, next, that he doubts the wisdom of appointing a native of Puerto Rico to the office. "The Governor should represent the United States Government, not the Government of Puerto Rico," the Maine Senator also said. The Senator said, however, that he believes that Puerto Rico Senate President Lula Muñoz Marin is "an intelligent and resourceful leader. He also stated that Senator Brewzter was "not likely" to see Congress act on the Puerto Rico political issue in the spring. Senator Tydings declined to comment on the President's veto. Tydings said he has not yet decided whether or not to file the recently surrounded plebiscite bill under his jurisdiction. Rep. C. Jasper Bell, Chairman of the House Insular Affairs Committee, D-Mlsurl, said of the vote, "I believe the President took the correct position in sustaining Governor Tugwell's veto because the two bills are definitely contrary to the Charter. Other members of the Committee on Territories have supported the vote.
Lewis leaves the conference
■ I I I ' I I I I I gHF 111" . -' ¿ -*S. John L, president of the United Laborers* of Mln*s, **te do do te conference *1 declaring himself a rocky in negotiations that m cited his raehaoo of a* dem*nd* formulated by loa obrara* aobra Deny exemption to new industries.
AGWI to convert C-2 ships with more facilities Each to carry 150 passengers Herald Tribune reports high demand for passage in Puerto Rico The New York Herald Tribune, in its Wednesday, May 15, 1946, edition, published an article stating that the AGWI passenger and cargo steamship line, of which the Puerto Rico Line is a subsidiary, plans to convert five new C-2 ships into combination passenger and cargo ships for use on voyages to Puerto Rico. The translation of the article is as follows: "The Atlantic Gulf West Indies Lines Company plans to convert five new C-2 cargo ships into combination passenger and cargo ships for use on luxury cruises to Puerto Rico, Cuba and Mexico before the end of the year, it was learned yesterday. Applications have been filed with the Maritime Commission for the purchase of five ships recently launched or under construction at the Consolidated shipyard in Los Angeles under the provisions of the Surplus Ship Sales Act. The ships fall under this law because they were started before the end of the war. Lewis D. Parmelee, president of the AGWI Lino said that specifications have been finalized to provide accommodations for 150 first-class passengers on each of the ships as soon as the commission approves the applications. Most of the other amenities that luxury cruise ships have will be built into the ships, he said. He said the ships will have luxurious lounges and smoking rooms, spacious dining rooms, a swimming tank and ample space for recreation on the outside decks. The ships will be used on an alternating basis on the company's services to Port Rleo and the Havana yacht, (Continued on page 22).
Governor Tugwell overrules on his own an island law and disallows exemptions recommended to him By JUAN MARTINEZ CHAPEL - ELMUNDO Staff Writer The Legislature of Puerto Rico, for the purpose of encouraging the establishment of new industries in Puerto Rico, passed a law in 1919 exempting from taxation all properties declared new by the Public Service Commission, by resolution subject to the approval of the Governor. This law of 1919 was onmen-
The referendum to be held by the Department of Agriculture and Commerce among the tobacco growers of the Island, so that they may determine whether or not they want the adoption of a systematic adjustment plan for the planting and production of tobacco in Puerto Rico, will be held for six consecutive days next June, according to an official announcement made yesterday. The Commissioner, Mr. Luis A. Izquierdo, has sent a letter to all the tobacco growers' associations on the Island, asking them to submit to the Department lists of gentlemen who are willing to act as delegates of the Commissioner in the holding of the referendum. The boards which will intervene in the election will be composed of five members each, and as they are to act in more than 60 municipalities, it will be necessary to select more than 300 persons to form the same. The Commissioner has informed that although he is requesting the lists of names of candidates for the boards, he naturally reserves the right of final selection of the persons, since he officially delegates to them the responsibilities which fall upon him in accordance with the law authorizing the referendum. The Department of Agriculture and Commerce is actively working with the cooperation of the Agricultural Adjustment Agency and the Department of Agriculture and Commerce.
The Department of Agriculture and Commerce is actively working with the cooperation of the Farmers' and Agricultural Adjustment Agency and the Department of Agriculture and Commerce, as authorized by Act 16 of 1925, Act 40 of 1930 and subsequently by Act 194 of May 14, 1936. This law is in force. All these laws provide that any person, partnership or corporation that establishes an Industry that is declared new, by the Public Service Commission, shall be entitled to be granted a tax exemption, for the purpose of protecting and stimulating the birth of the same, the tax exemptions granted cannot be granted for a period of more than 10 years and are subject to the approval of the Governor. Since the law to protect new industries and exempt them from property taxes came into effect, the Public Service Commission has declared hundreds of industries as new, and all of their developments have always been approved by the Governor. But since Rexford Guy Tugwell has occupied the executive mansion, none of the resolutions passed by the Public Service Commission declaring industries new have been approved by the Governor. It is to be noted that the Public Service Commission, before declaring an industry new so that it may enjoy exemption from taxes, holds public hearings, where any person who objects may appear, and the mayors of the municipalities where the industry is to be established or is established are summoned to express their consent or opposition, since an exemption from taxes on property most affects the municipality. Also summoned and heard are the Treasurer of Tuerto Rico and the Attorney General Gensnu During the administration of Governor" Tugwell, the Public Service Commission has declared new industries exempt from the payment of taxes to 1* Ceramic Company of Puerto Rico, dedicated to (Continued on page 22)
TRUMAN OPPOSES WASHINGTON, 17, (I. N. SJ-The pro lid into Truman stated today cattgóricamonto qu* "ira opuosto a quo ir cancel loi precio* mákimoi fijados a los productos do primera necesidad. The President, who made the statement in response to a question from a reporter, did not elaborate on his remarks.
Government agencies' cars to pay license plates
The new automobile law exempts from this tax. -The amount must be deposited, according to Interior, on July 1st.
The agencies and authorities of the Insular Government will have to cover the amount of the tax on the motor vehicles they use, "starting next July 1. It is the opinion of the Department of the Interior, as reported, that all those vehicles belonging to these dependencies, which circulate in the Island without paying license fees, must deposit the amount of the same *1 to resume these fees on July 1. Section "F" of Act 279 of the last Legislature, known as the Automobile and Transit Act, provides that "motor vehicles owned and used by the Government of the United States, by the Departments of the Insular Government and by the Municipal Governments of Puerto Rico shall be exempt from the payment of these fees.
of Puerto Rico shall be exempt from the payment of the fees prescribed by this Act, but shall be registered and licensed as provided in this Act. It is estimated that the order of the Department of the Interior will affect approximately 600 government vehicles belonging to the following agencies: the Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority, the Communications Authority, the Puerto Rico Aqueduct Service, the Puerto Rico Housing Authority, the Puerto Rico Development Company, the Puerto Rico Lands Authority, and the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority. The previous law, repealed by the new statute, exempted government vehicles in general from the payment of these fees. The legislative action only established such benefit for "vehicles of the federal, state, and local governments" (Continued on page 22).
Twenty-four hour balance sheet: 101 accidents; 5 dead; 70 injured, will you be the next victim?
This is in advance of the declaration of a strike It is also likely that the use of transport planes will be resorted to. Arnold is to assume command Indications are also that the Government will soon occupy coal mines WASHINGTON, 17 (PU). - President Harry S. Truman, in an action which was generally believed to be the only practical alternative left to the Administration, in view of the impending general strike of railroad workers, which was to begin tomorrow, without any sign of a settlement of the disputed issues, before the time set for the strike, ordered a late seizure of the railroads, to be carried out by the Army. Meanwhile, a spokesman for the U.S. Army Air Force said today that the Air Transport Command is considering plans to take over operation of cargo and passenger services in the event of a railroad workers' strike. The planes that the Air Transport Command plans to use for these services belong to private airlines that have no# determined routes". The spokesman said that President Truman has called in General Henry Arnold, commander of the U.S. Air Force - currently under arrest - to take charge of this phase of the transportation during the pool blockade. The Army has reported that all available air transports will be used in this activity. Aircraft that are in use by private companies*, with routes and* stables, are not being considered* as part of the* and" that the aforementioned airlines are operating at full capacity on domestic services. The spokesman reported that one thousand planes would be used for* 1* transportation of "limentoa" during the emergency, if the railroads were paralyzed. It is estimated that these 1,000 planes would have a daily capacity of 4,250,000 ton-miles. Meanwhile, the majority of Congress coolly received the suggestion of the Civilian Production Administrator, John D. Small, that the Congress should declare the strikes illegal for a period of one month. This proposition is opposed both by Congressmen who favor strict labor legislation and by those who favor the workers in their demands. The general reaction is that strikes cannot be stopped by simply passing a law prohibiting them. United Press correspondent Raymond Lahar reports from Washington that President Truman's unsuccessful efforts to put an end to the bituminous coal mining strike give the impression that the result has been that the government is seizing the mines as well. Officials related to the workers' problem in the Government say they see no other alternative than seizure, but expressed doubts that even this measure could fail in their attempt to end the strike. The Government's first attempts to end the conflict failed, and so did the formula outlined by President Truman himself, which was rejected last Thursday, when both Lewte and O'Neill rejected the proposal that the strike be submitted to arbitration proceedings. President Truman's concern over the impending railroad workers' strike has bravely postponed consideration of the coal industry dispute for a long time. The Executive still has eight days to take whatever action it deems most appropriate, since the truce decreed in the strike expires on May 26. President Truman will go to Liberty City, Missouri, on Monday, where he will be honored with an honorary doctorate degree at William Jewel University, and he may not take any action on the coal strike until his return. (Continued on page 22)
Trouble in the litigation chamber
Backs Arabs
Egypt's Foreign Minister Euftl El Sold Pasha, who last Tuesday told the Chamber of Deputies in Cairo that his government "and the nation denounce the Palestinian report and support the Palestinian Arabs". (Associated Press Photo)
A "master" has been appointed in the CA case The purpose is to accelerate the processing of the case. - Federal Court Judge Robert A. Cooper yesterday appointed Clemente Rulz Mazarlo to act as "special master" in the injunction petition case against the Communications Authority, brought by the Telephone Company. The CA filed a motion requesting the appointment of the "master" in order to expedite the processing of the case. In the motion, the respondent argued, among other things, that in view of the fact that Judge Cooper "will be leaving on vacation next May OS, with another Judge taking the bench, such change could affect the outcome of the lawsuit; that if the restraining order and the injunction were omitted, the development of several public activities of the government and the execution of some of the most important laws of the Legislature would be affected". (Continued on page 22)
Despite Cordovés Arana's hard work, there is a backlog of cases They ask for another judge to be appointed Lawyers consider the situation detrimental for the litigants By José Ufret Editor of EL MUNDO The backlog of work and cases pending before the civil litigation chamber, presided over by Judge Rafael Cordovés Arana, has caused a movement among the lawyers, has provoked a movement among the lawyers of the district of San Juan, to request the appointment of an Interim Judge to cooperate with Judge Cordovés in the arduous work to be done, until the law creating the District Court of San Juan can be amended to create an additional Judge to attend to said section. The law that created the District Court of San Juan provided for the establishment of four sections: criminal, extraordinary appeals, family relations, and civil litigation. A judge was appointed to hear cases brought before each of these sections, with the exception of the criminal section, for which two chambers were created. Prior to the reorganization of the court, the judges changed chambers every three months. When the court was reorganized, numerous cases were pending before judges Marcelino Romany, Emilio S 4 Belaval and Ricardo LaCosta, Jr. For the new position of Judge of the Civil Litigation Section, Rafael Cordovés Arana was appointed, who has been acting "with great zeal and diligence", According to the opinion of all the lawyers with whom we have had the opportunity to talk about the problem created in said section of the Court, notwithstanding the efficient work that the aforementioned judge has been doing, the contentious section is full of cases and it is the opinion of the lawyers that the problem will not be solved until another judge is appointed to share the work to be done with Judge Cordovés Arana. As the calendar for the month ended on the 15th of this month, he speaks pending (Continued on page 22)
By José Ufret Editor of EL MUNDO The accumulation of work and pending cases before the Civil Litigation Court, presided by Judge Rafael Cordovés Arana, has provoked a movement among the lawyers of the San Juan District, to request the appointment of an interim judge to cooperate with Judge Cordovés in the arduous work to be done, until the law creating the District Court of San Juan can be amended to create an additional judge to attend to said section. The law that created the San Juan District Court provides for the establishment of four sections: criminal, extraordinary appeals, family relations, and civil litigation. A judge was appointed to hear cases brought before each of these sections, with the exception of the criminal section, for which two chambers were created. Prior to the reorganization of the court, the judges changed chambers every three months. With the reorganization of the court, numerous cases heard before Judges Marcelino Romany, Emilio S 4 Belaval and Ricardo LaCosta, Jr. remained pending. For the new position of Judge of the Civil Litigation Section, Rafael Cordovés Arana was appointed, who has been acting "with great zeal and diligence", according to the opinion of all the lawyers with whom we have had the opportunity to talk about the problem created in said section of the Court, Notwithstanding the efficient work being done by the aforementioned magistrate.... the contentious section is overloaded with cases and it is the opinion of the postulants that the problem will not be solved until another judge is appointed to share the work to be done with Judge Cordovés Arana. As the calendar for the month ended on the 15th of this month, it speaks of pending (Continued on page 22)
The situation regarding cargo space on the docks has been resolved Si* informs that the congestion that was urgent last week has ended and no plant will have to stop its shipping activities.
The situation at the island's docks has improved "greatly" in the last few days, which implies that "no sugar mill on the island will be forced to stop its activities for lack of storage facilities," according to reports obtained from official circuits in San Juan. i Last week, as you may recall, it was announced that the San Juan docks were experiencing a problem of cargo congestion, due to the large amount of cargo being received. In 15 days , so speak received by ol port of . the capital alone, about dn- । account thousand tons of articles , Imported. This situation did not prevent for a few days the receipt of sugar at the San Juan docks, from plants that ship their sugar through this port.
The problem has been solved by assigning ships to transport sugar to the continent. So far in May ■ more than twelve ships have left the island, carrying sugar destined for the United States. The storage problem faced by the Ponce refineries has also been solved. These industrial plants have obtained । additional facilities in the provisionlonal- . amount, and until other ships arrive to load sugar at that port. It was reaffirmed that, after the month of May, there will be no difficulty at the docks, since the central factories will have concluded their milling and there will be enough ships available. - I On the other hand, the representative of the
NEWS DIGEST
President Traman yesterday afternoon ordered the seizure of loo forrocar riles. - There are plans to put five navm mi the served to Puerto Rico. - The President of the United States, who is the only one in the United States to have a vote in the United States, has been in the United States for the first time. Byrnes returns with no tangible results. Federal appropriation for roads in te Island os Wlíjte - - - - Five assemblymen from Barceloneta resigned. # In total 1166 passed the CSC exams. - - o ■o will sustain the original accusation of assault and battery against Eudaldo Bieso.
against Eudaldo Bies Oarcia. - - - So will organize here Association of the officers of. the Caves explains the plan to give water to te eons, rural. The situation of cargo space at the docks has been fixed. They expect to collect 87,000,000 in ma- > yo for rum. There is a problem of backlog of cases in the court of law. - The court will pay for the payment of the fees for the agendas inoulareo. New wave of robberies arises in 1a sona of the docks. - Cabrera and Planchardón Quiñones hired by the Veneras. - Cari all* has opinions on the
Congress oottlonen Truman's veto on *1 plebiscite issue in Puerto Rico i Mafiana opens 1a serious final Doblo A del Norte, between Juncos and Vega Baja. In Ponce, Coamo and Mercedita play in the South final. - ... - - The women's olympic miniatures at the Sixto Escobar begin ** ... ... - ... - ... - ... - ... - ... - ... - ... - ... - ... - ... - .... - ... - ... - ... - ... - The ... - The ... - The ... - ... - - The tobacco referendum will be held in June. coa Governor Tugwell has overturned, on his own, the law that exempted new industries from taxes.
"Home rule is the goal": Krug
In speech yesterday at Hastie's inauguration < formulated that policy.
Pro-private capital investment He referred to aspiration of territories in establishing controls
CARLOTA AMALIA, Virgin Islands. 1?. (PU>-The following is the address of the Secretary of the Interior, Jullua A. Krug, delivered at the Inauguration of the new Governor of the Vlrgenea, William H. Hastie, in Carlota Amalla, yesterday, at 3 o'clock in the afternoon: "It gives me great pleasure, on the occasion of my first visit to the Vlrgenea, to join with you in the Inauguration of four new Governors. This was both a joyous and solemn occasion. One to invent the new rules and to review the new policies on the democratic administration of the torrltorloa under the jurisdiction of the United States. The U.S. Congress is the policy-making branch of the new democratic government. The Department of the Interior and the Governor of the Virgin Islands administer the policies set by Congress. Congressional policy has been to assist the people of the Virgin Islands in helping the people of the Virgin Islands to help themselves. Congress believes that the most effective action to solve your problems is not that which is conceived in Washington, but that which is inspired and developed within the Islands themselves. The Department of the Interior has the primary responsibility to see that the Governor is a shoulder that understands the problems he will confront, a shoulder that can get along with the people he is to govern, a shoulder with the intelligence and imagination to carry out with you a constructive program for the advancement of the Islands, further helping the people by the process of putting them in a position to help themselves. It is also the policy of the United States Government to consider the aspirations of the people themselves in the territories by establishing governmental controls. The eventual achievement of self-government for the territories is the fundamental goal toward which our policy is directed. The governance of the Virgin Islands is a challenge to the skill and wisdom of any man. I don't have to catalog for you a number of excellent reasons why William Hastio will make a great Governor. Governor Hastio has at his disposal what no other governor before him had at the beginning of his term of office: a thorough knowledge of the social and economic problems of the territory and an understanding of the people themselves. This knowledge was acquired during his work as Assistant Solicitor of the Department of the Interior, and, later, during the 25 months he was a judge in the U.S. District Court here. Your affection and enthusiasm for William Hastie, expressed through communications to Congress, the President of the United States and the Department of the Interior, as well as in comments in your newspapers, have demonstrated your approval of his appointment. This manifestation has given us the impression that Governor Hastie's appointment is the next best thing to his possible selection by popular vote. In his capacity as Assistant Solicitor of the Department of the Interior, Governor Hastie had (Continued on page 22)