THE MlN DO
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY-Generally fair weather in the morning, with partly cloudy skies, scattered showers and possible thundershowers in the afternoon. The high in San Juan yesterday was 84. There was .62 of an inch of rain. No sign of a thunderstorm.
CclicionJinal
MORNING NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXVIII
NUMBER 10769 SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 1946.
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, Han Juan, P. R.
PRICE 5 Cents
Piñero calls for decontrol of r ¡ " ' - 5 r price sugar *T' ■" . - ' \ -
* II,-" I . .1 ¿III '¡.! . j. He strongly denounces inju.U fa M. economic situation / Calls for action to correct the problem He announces the beginning of negotiations with the United States Government _ "Today I wish to speak to you about a Bolivian matter," Governor Jesu* T. Pinero said yesterday to the peliodlstas during the afternoon conference, in very serious tones. And he continued: "It is about a matter that because of its gravity or implications prevents me from talking about anything else. It is about the avalanche of decontrol that there has been recently in all items, with the exception of sugar and rice." Immediately, the Governor preceded to read a document that he has sent to the Federal Administration, explaining the situation prevailing in the pals as a result of the increase in the price of staple products, and which Mr. Plftero considers "of clear Injustice against the entire population of Puerto Rico," and requests that the price established for sugar be corrected or decontrolled and increased in proportion to the rise registered in the price of food articles of general consumption that are purchased from the metropolitan market. The document delivered to journalists by Governor Plftero, after having read it himself in energetic tones, is the following: "The lack of control of the prices of the products we buy in the United States, while the control over the price of sugar continues, has created an intolerable situation of economic injustice against Puerto Rico. The price of $5.28 per quintal net fixed for Puerto Rico sugar for the 1947 crop is only 81 percent higher than the price prevailing in January 1941. The prices of the principal articles of general consumption in Puerto Rico have already risen much higher than that. Suffice it as an example to examine the wholesale prices on the Island reported by the "I Insular Department of Agriculture for the following items: Product Price January 18H Arros Blue Rose 943 Blue Rose Rice 3.45 Corn Flour - 2.14 Wheat Flour 2.30 Small White Beans 4.81 Idaho White Beans Red Beans 7.03 Pink Beans 3.08 Evaporated Milk 2.47 Butter 7.34 Ham 1831 Bacon 15.39 Potatoes 1.16 Cod - 17.62 Price Percent October 30.46 increase 9.05 isn 8.75 137 7.50 . 350 <38 ITT 13.00 182 12.18 97 14.50 83 13 00 227 6.40 159 38.50 . 261 <37.00 127 35.20 129 4 22 264 44.80 154 "It is well to clarify that the above figures do not show the full magnitude of the increases. The prices used correspond to October 30. Since then, additional increases have been recorded. Today the Press announces a probable increase of 2 cents in the price of rice. Large quantities of long grain rices are also being imported which cost about 2 ote. more per quintal than the rices commonly consumed in Puerto Rico. The combined wholesale price of beans promulgated by the General Supply Administration is 816.50 per quintal (Continued on page 21).
Discussed a plan to establish a veterans' vocational center in Cayey at Camp O'Reilly. Sugar producers object to OCA's decision to keep some 40,000 tons of sugar stored here. They say it violates the contract. - Reed or Butler likely chairmen of Senate committee to hear territorial matters. * The reduction of taxes and government expenditures and the investigation of two shortages - housing and food - are among the cardinal objectives of the legislation proposed by the Republican majority in the United States Congress. The bakers are threatening not to resume bread making unless the price of the product is increased. The food situation is still critical, since the basic items have arrived in little or no quantity. The local PPO does not yet know the price of the shipment; sporadic notification from Washington. A mission composed of 75 Dominican Rotarians and their wives arrived yesterday in San Juan. The legal issue that gave rise to an incident between Judge Itamirrs Pabon and the Attorney General is before the Supreme Court, and will be discussed next Monday, at the time of a hearing.
Compendium of News
habeas corpus of merchant imprisoned for refusing to sell butter. - * - I41 Junta da Planea foresees a delicate fiscal problem which the Legislature must face. It has not included in its "eH-year program appropriations for certain speclsles laws beginning with the year 1948. Examines the lack of funds for then. Details the services affected. Organisan c, I ilca dental at St. Patrick's, a lir General Motor Manager estimates that it will not meet all demand for new cars until the year 1949. - Connally yesterday defined the United States' post - - - - - - - - Roy Imports Irvin and Doby Debut at the Escobar: Harvey. of Aguadilla, on Caguas. Tod William" was selected Most Violated Player in the American League. - - " Police proceeded yesterday to arrest in Hollywood hundreds of strikers who were picketing." i - - - - An outbreak of political rebellion against the head of the British Labor Party arises. - ♦ - A woman gave lus quintuplets in Syria.
The food situation is still critical. i
- 1 Basic staples of the island diet have not yet arrived Total shortage of butter and rice Quantities of canned juices and cattle feed have arrived The first food items in greatest demand received on the" last" ships arriving in the Islands - except potatoes and onions. - are so insufficient for the consumption of the population, that at present, even though part of these shipments have been distributed, the problem of food shortages remains critical. Information obtained yesterday from the Chamber of Commerce shows that up to yesterday, the importing trade has received only 5,500 cans of butter, 9,895 sacks of beans, 7,809 qulntals of wheat flour and 4,730 gallons of vegetable oil as part of the cargo of eight ships in port. These quantities make up the first "sumlntotro" of staples imported into the country after the resumption of the maritime stoppage. In contrast to large quantities of potatoes and onions in possession of the importing merchants and local distributors, there generally prevails throughout the Island an almost absolute shortage of wheat flour, butter, arróf, bacon, ham, and grains, supplies <gfe announced to arrive in the country in the course of the next week. The wheat flour received so far does not allow the bakeries to resume the production of bread, because it is very small, v the other quantities of important supplies have been distributed with such speed, that they are also practically exhausted in retail stores? Yesterday it was announced that you Cape Faro. dd the Lykes Line, disembark at Ponce quantities of wheat flour and rice, and that once this operation is completed, pass it- to Mayagüez and then to San Juan, to deliver Quantities of both products. Also expected, from Sunday to Monday, are shipments from the South of the United States, with larger quantities of both products, as well as butter and other food". The fact that canned food and canned products were on the docks at the ports of origin has caused preference to be given to these shipments, in order to decongest the port warehouses, as explained. It is for this reason that the bulk of the shipments so far received are mainly canned jufos, vegetables, meats, fruits, peacao and milk. Also considerable quantities of poultry and livestock feed. The Chamber of Commerce supplied the following list of the products so far received in the various ships arriving on the Island after the solution of the last maritime stoppage, and although no quantities are specified, the review of the same, made by our editor, shows a great deficiency of the most important basic items, except onions and potatoes, in favor of canned food: Monte Arnabal. Monte Arnabal, from Spain, arrived on November 1 with a cargo of nougat, Wnos and Spanish cider. The Columbia Victory, from Tampa, arrived Nov. 5, with canned grapefruit juices, jellies and canned meats, and the Smcoe Park, from Tampa, arrived Nov. 5, with canned grapefruit juices, jellies and canned meats. The Smcoe Park, from Montreal, unloaded on November 6. 302 barrels of codfish and a quantity of whlskev eácocé". The "INO", from Curaçao, brought achiote, Dutch beer, brandy and canned fish. The "Cape Borda", from New York, brought 4,200 sacks of beans, beer, malt, cookies, canned meats, cereals, cheese, cigarettes, eggs, poultry and cattle feed, fruit, fruit juice, vegetables, pasta, powdered milk, olives, onions, smoked herring, vegetable soups, vegetable oil and pearl soap. The Coastal Ringleader, which arrived on November 11, carried butter, fruits, vegetables, cigarettes, eggs, poultry and livestock feed, canned juices, refrigerated meats (continued on page 7).
Supreme Court issue provokedMayagüez case
Merchant sentenced for refusing to sell is asked to be released from jail Case to be heard next Monday Ruling would have repercussions in numerous proceedings already heard and pending By Rafael Torres Córdova In a few days the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico is expected to put an end to the controversy that has arisen in the lower courts throughout the Island in relation to the interpretation of Law No. 228, of May 12, 1942, (Insular Supply Law", as amended by Law No. I 493 of 1946). The case has been presented to our highest court by the Mayagüez lawyers Enrique Báez García, Oscar Souffront and Enrique Aleáraz Casablanca through the filing of a "Habeas Corpus" petition in which the petitioner is the retailer Monserrate Irizarry, who is currently serving a three-month sentence in the Mayagüez District Jail. The legal issue to be elucidated by the Court is whether it is a public offense in Puerto Rico for a merchant to refuse to sell an article of basic necessity, in accordance with the provisions of Administrative Order 8 issued by the Administrator General of Supplies on September 8, 1942, pursuant to the powers conferred upon him by Act No. 228 of May 12, 1942, as amended. As it is of public knowledge,* the legal issue involved in this case was the one that gave rise to the incident that arose between the Attorney General of Puerto Rico and the District Judge of Mayagüez, Hon. Radolfo Ramírez Pabón, the former maintaining that the fact of refusing to sell does not constitute a crime and the latter's criterion being totally contrary to such doctrine. In the writ of habeas corpus filed before the Supreme Court, the petitioner's attorneys allege that on August 14, 1946, the Mayagüez District Fiscsl filed an accusation against Monserrate Irizarry charging him with violation of the above mentioned laws and administrative order because he refused to sell to América Romero Castillo a quarter of a hectare of land * despite the fact that the defendant had sufficient can(Contlnued on page 24)
General Motors won't supply demand for cars Says manager Keating won't attend until 1949. No material DETROIT, Michigan? 15, (INS) - The emergency in supplying the cars he orders will continue until 1948. The 1948 so-called "model" cars will differ little from the current 1941 models. The 'cheap' cars will not be put on the market until after 1948. The authority responsible for this" manifeitacfenes c" Mr. T. H. Keating, general sales manager of Chevrolet, the major division ofda General Motors Corporation. Kéatlng told press correspondents at a conference: "As far as we can see, we may not be able to catch up with the demand for new cars for at least another year and a half. Even though we are producing at the rate of 1,000 cars a year more than our nearest competitor, "Our new models will be on sale by mid-December. They won't be much different from the cars we're making now. "Whether we are making money or not, I don't see the possibility of a price reduction" according to the current situation when we have".a shortage of materials. "We have postponed - but we haven't our plans to build a new, lightweight, low-priced car in Cleveland. But or an economic cataclysm not" that we could" do in that direction as long" as we have insufficient materials to make the cars" we have been ordered to make." Keating said that big industry is genuinely concerned - about the enormous demand it faces "because if there's a shutdown or an economic cataclysm we won't be left holding the bag." For example, he said, General Motors has large quantities of cars in the United States.
Republicans enunciate goals for congressional legislation; they were approved yesterday by the House Judiciary Committee.
I Connally says and E. U.S. favors veto right Says, however, it should be used only in exceptional cases Comments Australian paper Defines responsibility of all Security Council members By GEORGE DURNO INS Correspondent NEW YORK. 15. (INS)-Senator Tom Connally said today that the United States opposes amending "at this time" the veto right of the five great powers, but conceded that the right should be used "only in very exceptional cases". Speaking on behalf of the U.S. delegation to the Political and Security Committee of the U.N. General Assembly, he laughed. Connally said that this issue should be resolved in the Security Council rather than in the Assembly. According to the U.N. charter, the "big five" - the United States, Great Britain. France. Russia and China - have the right to veto Security Council decisions. This privilege has been the subject of many attacks by small nations. Referring to the Australian proposal that the Assembly would go on to recommend specifically that the big five "refrain" from resorting to the veto except in cases of actual aggression, the American delegate insisted that this was a matter which "should be considered first by the members" of the Council. The "enator did not mention names. but indirectly attacked the Soviet Union for having repeatedly used the veto in matters susceptible* of peaceful solution. "I wish to state," said Connally, "that the members of the Security Council do not in fact represent their own governments in the Security Council. They represent the entire membership of the United Nations. Their right to vote is not a personal power. They are not entitled to cast their votes on the basis of petty* or nationalistic interests". Connally said that in the eyes of history all members of the Security Council "have a responsibility to perform their high duties in the interests of international peace and in the interests of the United Nations organization as a whole. Any member of the Security Council who fails to perform these high functions has a proper conception of his duties and responsibilities". The American delegate said that the United States considers the principle of unanimity among the great powers to be "of the greatest importance to the success of the United Nations. He added that it was for that reason that the United States felt that the Big Five should discuss among themselves the limitation of their right of veto before the General Assembly made any determination in that respect. The delegate then referred to the possibility of a repetition of the case where one of the Big Five decides to "go for a walk" by making its absence at the "time" of a vote constitute a veto. "The problem of the abstention of a great power," he said, "(Continued on page 24"
Calls for guidelines to the E j ec u ti v e a n d Jan Chambers. - The Planning Board made a specific recommendation that both the Executive and the Legislature carefully study the public finance and expenditure picture and set a guideline for the Board's action.
by only recommending funds to cover expenditures for a number of important special laws during the first year of the fourth economic program, i.e., 1947-48, without making any additional recommendations for the following five years. The Planning recommendation, as explained at a press conference held on Thursday under the chairmanship of Dr. Rafael Pico, and with the assistance of member Sol Descartes and the head of the Finance Division, "enor'Franci "co de Jesus, will affect the future of important government programs, which would operate for an additional year, if the problem is not solved, such as the Bel Café Rehabilitation Commission, for which $800,000 is recommended: the elimination of ticks in cattle. with $600,000: Instruction expenses to municipalities, with $1,500,000; the ad-iclonal appropriation of $900,000 for the" school canteens; the" $350,000 for the nursery schools; the $275,000 appropriation for the" milk stations; the $400,000 for the construction of neighborhood" roads; ef socio-economic" study plan, with $300,000 a year; and other programs such as the Department of Cooperatives, with $50,000; the office of the Inspector of Cooperatives, with (Continued on page 7"
- Sugar from (CA * i. r ! will remain in : warehouses here s Producers believe this is a violation of í contract. Villamil speaks 0 >. Forty thousand. tons of sugar, which constitute the remainder . of the production of the. The island's production during the last harvest, which was scheduled for shipment to the United States under the contract signed by the island's producers with the Foodgrains Credit Corporation, will remain at the island's ports and at the sugar mills by virtue of a decision recently adopted by the agency. i Mr. Fernando Villamil, vl- ? executive cenreaidente d" the APA, s reported yesterday that he had received in- - formes some days ago Indlcatls vos that Ja CCA proposed i discontinue the shipment of sugar- .. car from Puerto Rico. Mr. Villamil then communicated with Mr. Maximino Vazquez, the Puerto Rican official of the above-mentioned agency of the Federal Department of Agriculture, and Mr. Vazquez informed him that he had received from the agency in Washington information indicating that the sugar remaining to be exported from Puerto Rico to the United States by the CCC would not be exported. . In a telephone communication which Mr. Villamil subsequently had with Mr. Dudley Smith, representative in the Federal Capital of the APA, the latter informed him that he had no knowledge of the action proposed to be taken by the CCC. But yesterday Mr. Smith sent a cable to the APA in which he reported the agency's decision, saying that the reason given for the action was that "the CCC proposes to leave in Puerto Rico a reserve of sugar for shipment when it deems it convenient, possibly as early as January 1. According to Mr. Villamil, if the measure announced by the CCC is implemented, the sugar industry will be confronted with the possibility of considerable losses due to the retention of 40,000 tons of sugar at the plants and at the ports of the island, which, according to the contract with the CCC, are to be shipped to the nation. The APA leader pointed out that this sugar, which will remain stored on the island, will suffer a considerable decrease during the period it remains in storage, to the detriment of the producers. He further added that the sacks in which this sugar is packed are urgently needed" by the industry to pack the sugar to be produced in the next harvest of 1947 and that to be used in time they must be in the possession of the mills early in the coming year. ' He further indicated the vlcepresle dent of the APA that the products1 (Continued on page 7).
Reed or Butler to chair Territorial Affairs Committee It is the Senate Public Lands Committee, which in the reorganization would be responsible for hearing all Puerto Rico matters.
By CHARLES MCCABE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON. 15 (PU). - The chairmanship of the Senate Public Lands Committee is likely to be filled by Senator Clyde M. Reed, Republican, of Kansas, or Senator Hugh Butler, Republican, of Nebraska, according to authoritative sources. The United Press informant said that the peremptory decision was arrived at during a meeting of the rudder Committee .let" Republican senators, held
in the Senate "office building" yesterday. Senator William Langer, Republican, of North Dakota, who "e mentioned in early speculation about the chairmanship of the Public Lands Committee, was definitely out when he was offered a lesser committee, according to the informant. Other names that were mentioned during the Steering Committee session for the chairmanship of the Public Lands Committee, which will handle land issues within the congressional reorganization, were Chan Gurney, R-South Dakota, and Eugene D. Robert A. Taft, R-Ohio, said yesterday that he was "100 percent" behind the congressional reorganization measure passed by the Seventh Congress. Earlier, House Republican leader John W. Martin of Massachusetts had come out strongly in favor of reorganization. Reed and Butler have been mentioned for the chairmanship of the Public Lands Committee because they are natives of the West and because they enjoy considerable leadership in the Senate. Reed has been in Congress since 1939, while Butler's service dates back only to 1941. Gurney has the same seniority as Butler.
Police am etrigger shooters observed.
■ ■ ■ ■■ " IByMM te - .1-W- w ¡ í V7wuLreSSHHHi iJ zfc® L A V / i m - i m - WT f' 1 of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FB I) in Puerto Rico, Mr. A. C. Fchlencker: Island Police Chief Colonel Salvador T. Ralg. and Virgin Islands Police Chief Walter C. Rogers watch a squad of machine gun sharpshooters during a recent practice. The sharpshooters received instruction in classes held at a camp outside Bavamon, which ended the day before yesterday, Thursday. (Photo E LMUNDO)
Plans believe Legislature Tahoneros threaten fiscal problem with not making bread
They insist that the price of the product be increased. - IJcgnrá * shipment of flour on Monday The probability that Je" tahonas of 1a metropolitan area and of much" towns of the I "la, which will have to receive the" first deliveries of flour from i Monday n Tuesday, -with the arrival to the Island of do" emharcaclone" with increased quantities of the product.
vníMiunuv.i i i l va ivian ur l l l । determine a stoppage in the elaboration- । not resolved the" demands .1 of the industry "obre a reasonable increase in the price of this food, In made known yesterday, in statements made to EL MUNDO, the * president of the Association of Tahoneros, Mr. .Santiago Plftero. 'j -"('orno the fallonas nn can ope- , car at a loss," - said Mr. , Plftero, - "and as no Individual . risks losing in any commercial em- . prose, when such loss ' can be remedied by action of i . the authorities, there is the purpose! not to relnitiate the elaboration def I bread if the Government does not act quickly-! ,amount, increasing the price of _! product." j He added cl softor Plñoro that the!! . tahoneros have suffered an obll'¡gatorto stoppage, in Ins last weeks, . which has caused consi- . .! derablo" losses to the industry. "It is not raJzonahle that'now that the opportunity presents itself J J to ¿oanudate the tra-j ¡ ¡sues ert the whole island industry! . of bread, we continue to endure the ¿consequences of a problem which, j t t ¡s like that of reasonable pricing ni product, has been due re- . solved for some time. The level of prices of raw materials and materials used by the industry has risen, almost doubling in some cases. The . butter is quoted at unprecedented prices; wheat flour has risen in the U.S. market, as well as yeast, and as for paper, it is quoted at almost double its normal prices, and there has also been an increase in the number of employees. I (Continued on page 7) i - - - _ "T" ! The head of the Food Section of the Office of Price Administration, Mr. Jorge Bartolo-, ■ mel, reported yesterday that the price of rice has not yet been set. He reported yesterday, on the iníor- ■ maciórv published in the sentid* of ■ that a new increase is expected - in the price of rice, that as of -- now "no specific snbe i by Ja OAP local, the nature of the ■ hike announced." He added that the announcement on the price will be made by his office "as soon as official notification is received from the central office in Wáshlngton", ' The announcement "on the probability of the increase mentioned above, as reported by EL MUNDO, came from an ' OAP spokesman in Washington. The increase is expected to represent an ' Iza in the price of the Puerto Rican consumer to ' twelve or thirteen cents per llb~ra of ; । short grain rough rice, and i á fourteen or fifteen cents for ' short grain packet rice." It was also reported yesterday that ■ there is the purpose of announcing the new price of grain in the Island, - once there are sufficient" quantities to be distributed among all the retail trade. i
Tax reduction is of the cardinals To investigate housing, food shortages, according to yesterday's agreement Discussed Senator Bilbo's bill to avoid more than two terms to President WASHINGTON, 15 (PU)- The House Republican Steering Committee, acting straight toward the realization of several of the fundamental objectives of Republican congressional action, as enunciated in the recent election campaign, agreed yesterday on the new days of the overwhelming victory of the Republican Party. unanimously, that one of the cardinal points of the coming legislative session "will be the reduction of twenty per cent of the present taxes on salaries, wages" and incomes, and that another of said "cardinal" points will be the reduction also of the Government's "expenditures" in order to balance the budget. Making part of its legislative action program the promise of Republican Representative Clarence J. Brown, Ohio, at the dawn of victory, that "we will open (the sessions of Congress) with a prayer and close with an investigation", the aforementioned Steering Committee agreed to manage an investigation of the two shortages that most burden the nation: the housing shortage and the food shortage. Twenty-four hours before the Republican Steering Committee meeting, Congressman Harold Knutson, Minesota, who will chair the next House Ways and Means Committee, anticipated that as soon as the House met on January 13, he would file the bill to cut the individual income tax by 20 percent (see yesterday's edition of THE WORLD). In order to balance outlays and revenues, in view of the Republican determination to cut individual taxes by the amount already mentioned, the House Budget Committee also decided, at its meeting yesterday, to make substantial savings in budget expenditures, consistent with the promised reduction, on the basis of data provided by Congressman John Taber, Republican, of New York, who will be chairman of the Congressional Budget Committee. A spokesman for the House Budget Committee, in announcing this other agreement of that body, explained that "while new spending for national defense will be appropriated," he said, "new spending for defense will be reduced to what is strictly necessary," and that the House Republican Budget Committee, at its meeting of reference, "delved into the provinces of parHdarism and the most pressing controversies of a "serious" nature, in reaching its agreement on the budget.The House of Representatives has entered the provinces of parHdarism and of the most extreme controversies of a "cla), by agreeing to oppose the passage by the Senate of the senatorial act of Theodore G. Bilbo, the present Democratic senator from the State of Mississippi, when Congress meets on the third day of January. The aforesaid Committee has already taken action on the charge made against Bilbo by the National Institutions for the Advancement of the American Negro that he sought to intimidate the colored voters in his election. The Committee will meet again tomorrow, Saturday, to make a final determination on the matter. It was not made clear how *1 House Republican Steering Committee will handle the challenge to Bllbo's senatorial act, since it is the exclusive province and jurisdiction of the Senate as to all matters relating to the election and tenure of its members;" but it is understood that the said Steering Committee will facilitate its agreement by appropriate notice to the senatorial committees concerned with these matters. * Another nationally polarizing political "agreement" adopted by the Steering Committee was to submit a bill to the next Congress to limit the tenure of the President of the United States to two presidential terms of four years each. It will be recalled that this has been a subject of much public controversy since the late President Kuo "evelt accepted the nomination for a third term in 1940, at which time the then Postmaster General of the United States and chairman of the Democratic National Committee, James A. Farley, cut short his long tenure as President of the United States. Farley, severed his long cordial relations with the President, withdrawing from the two high political posts he held, because he had been in outspoken opposition to Roosevelt's breaking the American tradition that no President of the United States should serve for more than eight years. The Helm Committee also voted unanimously to "support the savings act passed by Congress at its last session; that all" controls by the Government should cease, "if as 1"" special powers granted to the President and another* function" for war reasons. "They discussed the plan for the central vocational center of the country, and the plan for the State of the Republic, and the plan for the State of the Republic.
Veterans' Vocational Center Plan Discussed In Cayey
At the meeting held yesterday in Fortaleza, in connection with the Government's plans to provide more and better vocational training facilities for veterans, a project to use Camp O'Reilly for the establishment of training centers for veterans in different trades was discussed, It was reported that the officials of the New York office of the Veterans Administration, who are not visiting, and who were at the meeting yesterday in Fortaleza, expressed praise for the idea, saying that the camp offers unlimited opportunities for training.
The camp offers unlimited opportunities for the vocational training of veterans. A study made by the Department of Instruction reveals that the camp facilities could offer training opportunities to more than four thousand veterans in vocational courses, entering as boarding and day students. It is estimated that two hundred married veterans and their wives could be housed at the camp for the duration of their studies. The Department of Instruction, through Colonel José E. del Toro, who before joining the Army, had been a member of the Army's Veteran's Training Department for more than a decade.