THE WORLD
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
Ü1AR1C EU
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
Let's back the men" who made possible ...I Victory Loan.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY APRIL 6, 1946
ZlnMNU a" secund class matter. I'<mt Office. San Juan, F. R.
" NUMER0 10549
Prices for Puerto Rico sugars.
The colono will receive the approximate amount of $4.86 for each quintal The participation of the centrals Form of computing the prices including the payment of subsidies.
By Dorio Corlo Editor of EL MUNDO In view of the fact that numerous sugar farmers still do not have a clear idea of what price they will finally receive for their sugar, and on what basis the sugar mills will charge for the sugar cane product, this editor has approached the agricultural and office circles in San Juan closely related to this subject for clearer reports and explanations. Officials of the Farmers' Association and the Agricultural Credit Corporation explained that the sugarcane growers will receive for their sugar produced before February 10, when the price increase went into effect, a basic price of $3.46 per quintal, free at the side of the ship at the island's ports, plus a subsidy amounting to 87.5 cents, according to the offer.5 cents," as offered by the Secretary of Agriculture, Mr. Clinton P. Anderson, on sugars manufactured on or after February 10. will receive, over the previous base price of $3.46, an increase in price equal to .385, plus a subsidy amounting to .62475. In the case of a farmer whose canes milled on or after February 10 have produced one hundred quintals of sugar, the corresponding sugar mill shall pay to such farmer the 65 quintals corresponding to such farmer, as follows: 65 multiplied by $3.46, or । ¡Q24.9O: plus the amount corresponding to the increase in price, or $25.025, making a total of $249.925. The settler will receive, in addition. in conoepto do subsidy on the total of the den quintals of J sugar which his canes produced, an amount Equal to 100 multlpii- ' cado for 62 475 cents, or 1 $82,475. The grand total to be reclaimed by this settler would then be $312.40; 1 in other words, the approximate amount of $4.86 per quintal of sugar. This same settler, if his canes, milled before February 10 produced the same quantity of sugar. or one hundred quintals, the final price he would receive would be as follows: 65 quintals, which is the farmer's share, multiplied by $3.46, or $224.90; and a subsidy of 87.5 cents, on the total of the hundredweight, which represents the additional sum of $87.50; making a grand total to be received by the farmer for basic price and subsidy, amounting to $312.40; in other words, $4.86 per hundredweight of sugar. It should be noted that the settler will pay the same final price. Indu- 1 ing the subsidy; on his sugars produced before as well as on or after February 10, 1946, the date on which the increase in price for sugar came into effect. The case of the corresponding plant, with respect to this settler, is as follows: The share of this plant in the quintals of sugar produced by the settler's canes on February 10, 1946, is 35 quintals. Therefore, the price to be received by the plant in this case for those 35 quintals is computed as follows: 35 multiplied by $3.46, or $121.10; plus a subsidy of 15 cents per quintal of sugar produced by it, or $15; which makes a total to be received by the plant/ amounting to $138.10, on the 35 quintals that correspond to the one hundred quintals.
Legislative Appropriations $81,315,050
Among the bills approved by the Legislature pending the Governor's signature is House Bill 839, presented by Messrs. Ramos Antonlnl and Ortiz, at the request of Mr. Muñoz Marín, "to create the Regulatory Board of Public Service Authorities". If the bill is signed by the Governor, the Regulatory Board created by the law will be composed of a Chairman, with an annual salary of $6,000, and two associate members, who will receive a per diem of $10 per day or part of a day they devote to the work of the Board. The" three" shall be appointed" by "1 Governor, with the advice and' consent of the Senate, for a term of four years. The board shall have the power and duty to fix and determine the maximum, just, due, equal and reasonable prices, fares or charges to be established, demanded, demanded, charged or collected for any service rendered or furnished by the following bodies: (a) The board shall have the power and duty to fix and determine the maximum, just, due, equal and reasonable prices, fares or charges to be established, demanded, demanded, charged, charged or collected for any service rendered or furnished by the following bodies
BULLETINS
Chambers exceeded the recommendations of the Executive $20 million ! For improvements was set at $11,488,075 million.
The general expense budget was increased by $4,039,457 The preliminary result of the latest legislation approved by the Legislature, which is carried out by the Finance Division or the Planning Board, headed by Mr. Francisco de Jesús, reveals that the total appropriations approved by both legislative bodies amounted to $381,315,050. The Legislature exceeded the $20,453,579 recommended by Governor Tugwell, when he approved the fund for the various governmental services. The Executive Branch recommended appropriations, for the next fiscal year, amounting to only $60,861,471. The appropriations approved by the Legislature. - The appropriations approved by the Legislature, most of which are under the Governor's conderation, are broken down as follows: Operating expenses corresponding" to fiscal year 194546, $461,424. Included in this figure are projects for the payment of debts contracted by governmental departments" and agencies" and not liquidated; project" covering deficiency"; and the payment of debt" attracted", not liquidated" for lack of funds", to workers", Individuals and miscellaneous organizations. Expenditures or" operation of the Government, or se", the general budget of expenditures of all its agencies for the fiscal year 1946-47, $46,088,410. Expenditures d" operation of governmental organizations, for the mlamo $ fiacal year, appropriated by virtue of special layer projects, $9,313,318. Public works program for the next fiscal year, $17,258,575, exclusively for construction works. Contributions to public enterprises, $8,153,798. Total, $81,315,505. The following is the breakdown of the expenditures proposed to the Insular Legislature by Governor Tugwell, for the fiscal year 1946*47, amounting to $60,000,000, (Continued on page 22).
The creation of a regulatory board is still pending.
The impression prevails in official circles that the Governor will approve the bill to that effect - Could modify agency rates.
Public agencies: Puerto Rico Transportation Authority; Puerto Rico Water Supply Authority; Puerto Rico Communications Authority; Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Service. The Board shall have the power to alter, amend, modify or repeal any rate, rate, fare or charge" now in effect which are not just, due and reasonable, It shall have the right at all times to inspect the bills, records, maps, documents or data it deems necessary, Provided, That .This Act shall not be construed to dissimlnulr or impair the duties, obligations and responsibilities of the Public Service Commission. The" decisions of the governing board are appealable to the San Juan District Court in a timely manner.
DETROIT, 8. (FU) - A strike in the bituminous coal mines today seriously affected the steel industry, while the automobile industry reduced its activity because of the lack of metal, and a strike by one hundred and thirteen truck drivers halted the work of 11,006 employees of the Briggs Manufacturing Company, ** The strike by these thirteen truck drivers caused the closing of the Plymouth assembly plants of the Chrysler Company. Within hours, $300 workers were forced off the job at the Plymouth plant, while 2,000 were forced off the job at the Kerch plant, according to Chrysler officials. The development of these new strike disputes increased the number of workers out of their jobs in the nation's auto industry to 116,000. The Brlggs Company's heavy vehicle drivers, affiliated with the C. l" O. Automobile Industry Laborers" Union, reported that they were talking about striking in protest at the Chrysler plant.
The workers have gone on strike in protest against a violation of the preferential clause, which is granted to the most senior employees of the Company, as stipulated in the collective bargaining agreement. Meanwhile, anchor workers set up picket lines along the commercial entrances to the port of FHgdelfla. These solid picket lines are threatening a complete shutdown of port operations because members of other unions are refusing to cross the picket line to return to work. . , , . WASHINGTON, 5. (FU) - Administration leaders in Congress today gave priority to the housing issue for Senate consideration next week. Two legislative measures will be voted on: one relates to the immediate procurement of $700,000 low-cost homes for veterans, to be built by the end of 1947, and the other would establish a long-term program to stimulate the construction of more than 1,006,000 homes all year for a decade.
-|**A decent home and a suitable living environment for every American family" is the keynote of the policy, the leaders of the ■ Administration believe that the long-range measure will pass the Senate with almost no discussion and virtually no change. J - - - - - ISTANBUL, 5. (INS) - The American ship "Missouri" 1 anchored today in the Bosphorus, in front of the Dona Bache Palace, to deliver the mortal remains of the late Turkish ambassador to the United States. Meamet Unir Ertegun, who died in Washington two years ago. This is the first visit by a North American battleship to the Bosporus in recent days and years. i - - - - - i MOSCOW, 5. (IN8) - The American ambassador to the Soviet Union, General Walter Bedell Smith, told a group of journalists today that he had been "eni sung" of his more than two hours' interview with the marlacal Joseph Stalin. The General m refrained from (Continued "n page 22.)
WAS AN ASSISTANT TO MADAME CURIE.
- . or He ■ / MUMU' ; Dr. André <1. Richard, a French radiologist who has practiced his profession in hospitals in Ponce and who has been Invited by the government of Colombia to visit again see said pala, where he resided twenty years ago. Dr. Richard will be a guest of the Radium Institute of Bogota, where he will give a series of lectures on radiology. Born in Chateau-Thlerry, he was a member of the Faculty of Medicine of the ñorbonne and assistant to Madame Curie, in Paris. Dr. Richard will leave for Colombia at any moment. State stops trip of four children to the Island They are Spanish and were coming from the Philippines to go with an uncle of theirs here WASHINGTON, 5th (PU). - The State Department revealed that the restrictive quota will prevent the four Spanish war orphans, currently living in the Philippines, from joining their relatives in Puerto Rico for a term of at least nine months. (The "little refugee" children, Má- ¡ xlmo, Jaime, Jesús and Maris de ¡ Lourdes, aged sixteen, fourteen, five and three years old. These were born in the Fl- 1 liplnas, whose parents died during the Japanese occupation, and their closest relative is an uncle, Jose Suarez, a tobacco farmer and hungry Puerto Rican Negro, who for more than a year has been trying to untangle the diplomatic skein: (Continued on page 22.) Tugwell will arrange for the appointment of a governor.
Tugwell will arrange for Pinero to be appointed governor if he retires on June 30.
Elimination of the suburbs is delayed.
The first phase of that program here depends on congressional action (Congress now appropriated about $10 million).
The first phase of the government program for the eradication of slums throughout the island is pending congressional action on the bill that assigns funds to the Federal Housing Authority, informed yesterday the chairman of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Picó. "The Island Government," he added, "has done its best to ensure the success of this vast program. Dr. Picó said that "the island's allocation is not enough to fully address the island's slum problem. This is of such magnitude that, in order to house in permanent residences located in healthy places the entire population of Puerto Rico that resides in slum areas, the Government would need more than one hundred million dollars. The Chairman of the Board of Plañifivaivaólón also explained that "in addition, there is another problem, which is the maintenance and upkeep of the homes that are built. In many cases, the income derived from renting these houses is so low that a government subsidy is necessary to be able to maintain them". On the general outlook of the program, Dr. Picó added the following: I am informed that the Senate Appropriations Committee has favorably recommended the bill that would make it possible to continue the slum eradication program. The federal bill would provide Puerto Rico with funds, in the form of grants, that would serve as the basis for obtaining loans from bank lenders and could be made locally. This new subsidy pool will be a very favorable factor for the success of the program, since such funds will guarantee the loans to be obtained. "(Continued on page 22) Insists on the increase in the price of bread Piñeiro replies
price of bread Piñeiro responds to Nogueras' statements, flour has gone up $2.00
The president of the Association of Tahoneros, "eftor Santiago Plftelro, insisting that the price of bread should be increased, replies in the following way to a" statement authorized by the Secretary of the FLT: "In the newspaper EL MUNDO of date two of the current, appears an article to > base of Infirmación y protesta del seftor Noguera", where he opposes, and advise the people to oppose with uflas y diente", the increase in the price of bread in Puer- , to Rico, requested by the Asocia- : clón de Tahonero" before the Board of I Price Administration". In one of his paragraphs, Mr. Nogueras states that "the increase of 90 cents per 200 lb. bag does not justify our petition. I must clarify and remind the friend that when the price of 10 cents" per pound of bread was fixed, flour only cost $7.60 for 200 pounds up to $9.60 which is the price today; not" $2.00 has been increased in each sack and not 90 cents, as he affirms. The gentlemen who have been serving on the Price Administration Board up to the present are aware of this fact. The said gentlemen are also aware that the labor force today is not the same as in 1943 and that the bakers' wages have been raised from $3.00 and $3.50 to $4.00 and $4.50 in several bakeries, which represents a dollar more for each sack of flour produced; paper and butter have also been increased. Let our friend Nogueras know about it (Continued on page 22).
Military parade will parade hov at 10:00 A. M. Army Day will continue -elebrándoie this afternoon. Trumnn to speak today Troops" and weapons" of the 65th Infantry Regiment and the 18th Reconnaissance Cavalry Squadron will parade through the streets" of San Juan today, at 10:00 a.m., in the Army Day parade that the Military Department of the" Antilles has organized to show the people of Puerto Rico the 'weapons" and equipment that the Army possesses on the island. The parade, which will include the 48th Ground Troopers Banquet, in addition to the men* cloned combat equipment, will be the main event of the Army Day celebration, which will continue this afternoon with displays to be held at Fort Brooke, Camp O'Reilly and Borlnquen Field. Specific radio programs will also be broadcast by the Armed Forces Radio Service over station WKAQ. At 4:30 p.m., the SFRA will broadcast a radio drama entitled "Untitled" by Normal Corwin, and at 7:00 a.m., the Army Day "Command Performance" program featuring stars Bob Hope, Blng Cro" by and Frank Sinatra will be on the air. The President will broadcast his Army Day address on WKAQ and will be tuned into Puerto Rico today at 10:00 p.m., the culmination of the day's celebrations. The President proclaimed April 6 as Army Day to pay tribute to the veterans of World War I and II. According to breaking news information, the Airborne branch of the Antllla Military Parliament will demonstrate B-29 Superfortresses and B-17 Air Fortresses, which together destroyed entire cities in Germany and Japan in the last stages of the war. The parade will be organized at the Department's "General Headquarters" on Crlato Street, then it will return to the site along Alien Street, parade down Ponce de Leon Avenue to the official pavilion on the steps of the Capitol, and then to stop 9, where it will return. P-38 and C 471 aircraft will fly over the units as they parade in front of the bandstand, where Brigadier General W. W. Bessell, Acting Governor Manuel E. Perez and a group of island dignitaries, military officers and heads of patriotic civilian organizations will be present. General Bessell will begin the Army Day program with a message to the crowd expected to gather in the vicinity of the Capitol to witness the parade. The message will be broadcast to Puerto Rico's radio listeners over the wire service, (Continued on page 22.) i
1 of S. 321 (Act No. 272) and P. ' of S. 322 (Act No. 273). The Acting Governor also approved the following bill: P. S. 437 (Act No. 266) providing for the creation of the Parole Board. P. S. 219 (Act No. 287) authorizing the Yauco Municipal Assembly to include in its budget the sum of $561.57 to pay certain "debt". P. S. 246 (Act No. 26R) repealing the law to "require the public" to "provide" a license to be issued by the Department of Health, etc. P. S. 393 (Act No. 274) authorizing the Manati Municipal Assembly 1 to include in its regular appropriation the sum of $440 to pay for professional services. P. of 1a C. 540 (Act No. 275) to transfer to the Department of ■ the Interior, J.M. Cabrero Street, San Sebastián. 1 P. S. 554 (Act No. 276) ' amending the Act prohibiting 1 the carrying of arms. P. S. 697 (Act No. 277) authorizing the municipality of Utuado to pay the sum of $197.55 that it owes for medicines and materials acquired, - The Governor has not taken action on the bill allowing the importation of foreign doctors. - Another" bill" signed" "on: i S. P. 422, dUponlng that the i Board which" dlrlg" the Puerto Rico Office at Waahlngton shall conat" 5 member", fixing the term of ééto" and how they shall be appointed", and allocating $150,000 for expense" of operating said Office in fiscal year 1948 - 47, and one hundred thousand dollars annually in afftoz sub"(gulent". P. S. 92, authorizing the Pueblo of Puerto Rico, "us agency" and subdivlrione" political, include-, do municipality" and the Government of the 1 (Continued on page 22.) 1
WASHINGTON. 5. (PU) - Nine men were killed yesterday when Navy planes, flying over the 2,000-ton carrier "Tarawa," bombed the observation tower off Culebra airport, Puerto Rico, the Navy Department reported. One of the "Tarawa's" planes, it is reported, accidentally dropped a 600 or 1,000 pound bomb on the observation tower, where new officers and crew members had been bombed.
New officers and officers of the
< Al l ■ I ■ I I - ■ i \ A-¿A. BL After taking the corresponding oath of office before the Ran Juan Judicial District Court, the new president of the Tax Court of Appeals, Juan A. Feria (center), was sworn in yesterday. Mr. Faría appears in the photo surrounded by the two associate members of the Court, Enflores Antonio Romero and José Cast ero Guardiola. (Photo EL MUNDO).
The Governor also signed yesterday the measure creating the Board of Freedom under the Word.-Regulation on the use of motor vehicles Acting Governor Manuel A. Pérez signed yesterday several bills, approved in the last session of the Island Legislature, which amend or add articles to the Puerto Rico Land Law. All bills" "on the" "Igulentea: P. of S. 281 (Act No. 269); P. of S. 318 (Act No. 270); P. of S. 319 (Act No. 271; P. of S. 319 (Act No. 271).
Faría was sworn in and sworn in yesterday New president of the Tax Court praised by judges Constituted "in bank" the Court of the Judicial District of San Juan, the four judges, Emilio S. Belaval. R. Cordové" Arana, Borlnquen Marrero and Arcillo Alvarado, the new president of the Tax Court of Puerto Rico, Ledo. Juan A. Farla. In addition, a large number of colleagues and individuals spoke at the ceremony. After the oath was taken by Judge Cordové" Arana, Judge Belaval spoke first, who highlighted the intellectual and moral merits of the personality of the new President of the Tax Court. He said that it was an honor for Puerto Rico to appoint Mr. Faría. Judge Marrero followed, who expressed himself in more or less the same terms, finally declaring that he was proud that his successor in the Tax Court had such high qualities. Rafael Rivera Zayas spoke on behalf of the Bar Association, expressing the rejoicing of the organization and endorsing the words praising the personality of the new judge. Mr. Farla, who was congratulated by all, said that he was "deeply grateful for the words" said "about my humble per "ona", and that upon occupying "his new position, "I hope not to disappoint the hopes" of his "friend", compa(Contlriúa en la página 22)
Bomb kills 9 in the vicinity of Culebra
men were watching the bombing maneuvers being conducted on a target card near the tower. The Navy Department reports that it has ordered an investigation to determine responsibility for this accident. The names of the victims have not been released by the Department of Marin until the next of kin have been notified. The carrier "Tarawa" is holding maneuvers in the Caribbean.
This is revealed by the Governor's intimate source It is understood that the President will not act without consulting Tugwell Tugwell is very reserved Chaves' absence affects General del Valle's chances By CHARÍjÉS~McCABE United Press correspondent. WASHINGTON, 5. (P-.Ü.) - Official sources disclosed to the United Press today that Resident Commissioner Píftero is favored by Tugwell as his successor as Governor of Puerto Rico, should he leave office on June 30. Earlier this week. Tugwell strongly hinted that he might remain as governor beyond that date if President Truman so requested. Otherwise, on June 30 he will leave for the University of Chicago. One of the sources closest to Tugwell said today that the Governor has decided in Piftero's favor as governor, and that he will nominate the Resident Commissioner, neither Tugwell nor Plano, however, declined to comment on this information. Other sources stated, however, that Truman had long ago decided to do nothing about Tugwell's successor until conferring with the present governor. According to this source, the President wished to understand Tugwell's court to ask for his views on the cueathlon, although this did not necessarily imply that the President would follow such views. According to people familiar with Island affairs, Plftero is also Muftoz Marin's choice to replace Tugwell as "acting" governor during the period between Tugwell's "departure and the permission of the Puerto Rican people to vote on his selection for the position at La Fortaleza. Lately, General Del Vallo has been less mentioned as a possibility for the governorship of Puerto Rico. Some attribute this to the fact that Del Valle's main supporter, Senator Dennis Chavez, is currently away from Washington as a delegate to the International Labor Organization conference in Mexico City. Most speculation about the governorship is converging on Piftero. The President of the Senate of Puer. to Rico, "efior Muftoz Marin, embarked at San Juan, this week's mlércolea, on board the steamer "Cape Sebastian," of the Porto Rico Line, which should arrive in New York on Sunday night or at dawn Monday. It is not yet known here whether the Popular leader will leave for Washington: but the probability is that he will do so as soon as possible, having expressed in San Juan his] intention of being present at the hearings which the Senate Committee on Territories and Insular Possessions proposes to hold soon on the bill of dependence of Senator Millard E. Tydlngs. It is expected that with the arrival of Muftoz Marin in Washington, followed by other members of the Puerto Rico Legislative Committee to raise the political status issue, activities on island affairs will accelerate. It is believed that the question of whether or not Tugwell should remain in office after June 30 should be one of the first to be clarified, for the purposes of the geationes qu" to be made around the "status". Governor Tugwell has been very active in this capital, holding interviews and meetings, some of which have been very close.
THE REPORT OF THE RATE COMMISSION In the Sunday edition of this issue of EL MUNDO I will publish the full text of the Report rendered by the United States Rate Commission on the economic problem of Puerto Rico and its relation to the political situation. It is a document of great importance, the reading of which should undoubtedly be of great importance. '