THE MON DO
36 Pages 5 Ctva. 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 Ctva. 2 Sections
DUR10 OF IíA MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
Entered as second elans mstter. Post Office. San Juan. P. B.
NUMBER 1946$.
Let us support the men who made the Victory Loan possible.
Empréstito de la V
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY JANUARY 12, 1946
Munoz Against Political Strike in Democracy
Says it is inadmissible instrument for a government of the people Addresses comments to engineers "Democracy," he says -cannot act on the basis of coercive action" _ The President of the Senate, "eftor | -Luis Muñoz Marín, withdrawing"" to proposals d" strike that as In* form are to be made at the Asamhlea of the Colegio da Ingenieros to be held today, declared yesterday that' -ma_=political strike is Inadmissible 'for a government that has received; the Indubitable demacré-! tica del puehfli", Here is the text of Mr. Muftoz Marín's statements: । . "There has been talk of certain possible propositions to be made at a meeting of the Engineers' Association.! As the said professional group is .a respected group: as a large part of it and probably all-, harbor no Intention of harm, but of hlen and cooperation in the great task of our people, I think it my friendly duty to point out to the Engineers certain basic principles. "There is talk of considering strike propositions. I must say with _ entire clarity that strike polj- - tictes Inadmissible for a government which has received the Indubitable democratic approval of the people. If the government were to allow its course of action to be varied by the actions of minorities, however respectable they may be, it would cat- Blessedly nullify all the significance of the votes of an entire people in a democratic decision. "In eato I make the diatlnclon clear between what is the "action" of¡ jnlnorlaa and what is the advice or criticism of minorities, or of Individuals. Democracy cannot, by nullifying itself, act on the basis of coercive actions of groups. Democracy can never, without risking its own fence, "put itself" to the criticism of groups, nor to the criticism of individuals. In all that is advice or criticism, however wrong the advice may be and however unjust the criticism may be, democracy is obliged by its very nature to protect and even to facilitate the right to give advice or to criticize. In everything that is action of a coercive nature, democracy is obliged, in order to protect the right of the electorate and by its very nature, not to admit actions of a coercive nature. "For example, I believe that, although Governor Tugwell, who has defended against all odds the basic rights of the people of Puerto Rico to self-government, naturally makes mistakes, his general line of conduct earns him the support of all the liberal and progressive forces of Puerto Rico; but I understand that those who think differently have the unequivocal right to express their differences with the reasoning that seems fair and adequate to them. I believe that the recent speeches of Governor Tugwell, except for two or three phrases inadequately expressed and therefore misunderstood in their intent, constitute a recognition of the numerous virtues which - without having them all, as no people in the world possesses - the people of Puerto Rico possess.
Denies Union has right to exclusivity | Colon sector alleges that right belongs only to CGT Perhaps Goldsmith will act pro-unity Free Federation will not attend today's meeting of the Joint By JUAN~MALDONADO EL MUNDO Editor Leaders of the regetlsta sector presided over by Francisco Colon Gordiany, Esq, by questioning yesterday the right of the Sugar Union to negotiate exclusively the collective bargaining agreement for the 1948 harvest, declared that "such right does not exist, since it was the CGT which participated in the workers' elections, and once divided, no one knows which of the Inspectors acquired that right. In addition to this, it should be noted that it was the General Confederation of Workers that went to the elections, and not the Sugar Union, and therefore the right belongs to the CGT and not to the Union itself. The point to resolve is which of the two aectorea has that acquired right, so that aea the organization in al which has the right to the exclualvldad, but never an organism as the Union". It was reported yesterday from another source that it is probable that the Federal Conciliator, Mr. Charlea A. Goldsmith, to intervene in this situation, (Continued on page 10) Money is requested to improve 4 । airports Ir Committee Planning Board a u giere 850,000 for each The Airports Committee and the Planning Board recommend that an appropriation of $200,000 be approved for the reconditioning of the Mayagüez, Areciho, Santa Isabel and Salinas airports. These airports were transferred to the Transportation Authority by the Army in a ceremony held Thursday at La Fortaleza. The purpose is to invest $30,000 in each of these airports, according to the distribution of funds contained in the draft regulatory plan to be discussed by the Planning Board in public roads. The total airport program, which involves investments for 25 airports, would cost W,785,000. $1,280,000 would be invested in the purchase of land: $4,973,000 in construction; $2,150,000 in buildings and $40,000 in remodeling work. Other airports that would have to be remodeled, once transferred to the Transportation Authority, are those of Dorado, Vieques, Culo Ibras and Isla de Mona. The plan proposes an allocation of $30,000 for each of these.
Veterans on verge of losing a privilege In May expires law containing clause ordering reemployment The Selective Service Act of September 18, 1940, the eighth provision of which was designed to give reemployment to veterans of World War II in those positions they served in civilian life in Government agencies, will cease to operate on May 16, 1948, and there is a probability that the Act may be repealed before that date. This has been reported to the national committeeman of the American Legion in Puerto Rico, Mr. José Cantellops, by the director of the Legion's Legislative Committee, Mr. John Thomas Taylor. Taylor adds that "unless prompt action is taken, the men discharged after the repeal of the law will lose their reemployment rights, committing a grave injustice to these veterans. He also indicated that his office "has drafted a bill to continue reemployment benefits to all temporary members of the armed forces, which was introduced in the Senate and the House simultaneously. It was referred to the appropriate committees, which, following the usual procedure, requested information from the departments of the Government. "Once this legislation was filed, prompt action was requested of the chairmen of the congressional committees to which it was referred. Telegrams were also sent to all the Legion departments of those states from which the members of the congressional committees came, urging them to communicate immediately with their reappointed senators and presenters. In addition, discussions have been held with heads of departments and agencies in an effort to get them to activate the submission of requested reports. Congress has so far taken no action on any of the bills, and the territorial and state chapters of the Legion have been urged to communicate with their respective representatives to that body in order to secure passage of the Indian legislation.
. Washington announces guideline Will protect U. S. interests against nationalization.
By John Relchmsn . INR Correspondent _ WASHINGTON, 11. (INS). - The Secretary of State is determined to act in order to protect American Interests overseas wherever and however they are threatened with loss by the increasing nationalization of Inadustries. The Secretary's point of view was clearly demonstrated in a protest presented by the American ambassador in Warsaw, Arthur Bliss Lane, to the Polish government concerning its recent decrees on nationalization. Lane informed the Secretary that he objected strenuously to the nationalization to the extent that it affected American-owned property since it was all done before these owners had had a chance to inventory it. Lane backed up his protest with the threat that he would oppose the granting of any loans by the United States to Poland until the situation was remedied. - The United States policy in this case, he said, was nothing other than a general procedure.
Htetk B B Vl ARTHUR BUSS LANI . U.S. Ambassador to Poland, who has made representations in defense of U.S. interests against industrial nationalization in Poland.
The U.S. has made representations in defense of U.S. interests against industrial nationalization in Poland. According to a spokesman for the Secretary of State, it boils down to this: the United States has no objection to the nationalization of any property by any government. That is within the powers of any sovereign state. But when it comes to property belonging to Americans, Jos owners must be equitably reimbursed. In addition, as in the case of Poland, they must be consulted and informed as to which of their pre-war property still exists and its present value. This last condition is said to be especially important in war-torn areas, where property may or may not have been destroyed by bombs. The trend towards nationalization is spreading in many parts of Europe, particularly in Australia and the Balkans. In those regions, in a general sense, the shoulders of businessmen have not been allowed to inspect their properties, and they are thus unable to give the Secretary of State the opportunity to give the government the necessary information.
NO INCREASE IN PRICES OF MEN'S CLOTHING
WASHINGTON, 11 (FU)-Chester W. Bowles, Administrator of the Office of Price Control, today made an emphatic statement that there is no plan to allow increases over the present price ceilings on men's suits and overcoats, and that the manufacturers of such clothing have no justification for holding up their stocks of clothing in anticipation of higher prices. Bowles made the above statement in response to the report that clothing manufacturers are holding back their stocks in the hope of higher prices, a holding back which will help or add to the serious shortage of shoulder clothes.
The number of policemen on duty in the Capital has been reduced while the population is registering a noticeable increase.
Puerto Rico included in the program sponsored by General Bradley The Puerto Rico Chapter of the American Legion has been communicating with the national offices and members of the Congress regarding the approval of a project for the construction of a veterans' hospital on the island. Such a hospital would have a capacity of 1,000 beds. President Truman recently approved a veterans' hospital construction program. This program will provide 19,172 additional beds in 20 ho "plWlea, one in each of the 20 "election" states. It is hoped, as reported yesterday at the American Legion, that Puerto Rico will benefit in future congressional appropriations by being provided with the necessary funds to build a hospital for exclusive services to veterans of World War I and II. Puerto Rico's demands are included in an official resolution of the American Legion, approved at its last convention. The resolution was presented by the island's delegation to the convention. The program is drafted, according to information received in San Juan, including this need for the citizens of Puerto Rico. The American Legion has been informed by the national offices that "delaying tactics of Congress in the" discussions of a $158,000,000 appropriation for the new "hoapltale" program for v*-. teranoa has "been cause for Major General Paul R. Hawley, head of the Veterans Administration medical service, to threaten recently to resign." He demanded from Congress his endorsement of the new hospital program sponsored by the head of the Veterans Administration, General Omar N. Bradley. The Legion has also been informed that "the present policy of the Veterans Administration rests on the location of the new hospitals, and the Legion has been informed that "the present policy of the Veterans Administration rests on the location of the new hospitals. Mayor does not comment, claiming that the Administrator of the Capital. Mr. Roberto Sanchez Vllella, has refused to recognize the Union de Empleado" de Hospitales.! affiliated to the sector cegetlsta presided by Francisco Colon Gordiany, in the offices" of this labor organization was announced yesterday "that there will be strike in the Municipal Ho "pital of Santurce ai Mr. Sanchez Vllella Instate in au attitude." According to the information that was supplied yesterday in the offices" of the sector, "for more than three months that the Union of Employees" of Hospitals of the Capital has been fighting for the Administrator to recognize it as a fair labor organization," It is added that "on two" occasions" Mr. Sánchez Vllella has replied with a letter" refusing to recognize the Union, alleging that he will discuss separately, with the employees", any claim that they" have". Last Thursday "more than 200 workers of the Municipal Hospital of Santurce met -according to the information provided- "and agreed to request an arbitration before the Insular Conciliator in accordance with Law number 130, so that in the term of ten ten days this problem of the recognition of the Union is solved, or else there will be a general strike in all the activities of the hospitals of the Capital. According to the ofidal Information authorized by the cegetiste sector presided by Colón Gordiany, "another of the agreements was to declare non-grata Mrs. Cristina Tirado d" Villafafafte. who "' has earned the enmity of all o" workers and employees of the Municipal Hospital." 8* adds that "the immediate dismissal of this employee will be requested." Continued on page 30).
Believe Pan American granted New York route Aeronautics decision delayed by delays in various departments! Washington." <pu)- The Civil Aeronautics Board is concerned about delays in other departments which are preventing it from issuing a decision assigning new routes to U.S. carriers. This was learned today by the United Press. The Board's future decision will determine a major expansion of air services throughout the Hemisphere. This decision was reached by the CAB a "long" week ago, having been circulated for comment to the Departments of State, Guertra, Commerce, the Navy, the Post Office and the Treasury. Our informant told us that, until all "comments" have been received from these departments, the Board's decision cannot be sent to President Truman for his final approval before it is made public. Speculation has already been made in this capital that the Board's statement has been sent to the President: but the United Press has learned that this is not the case. It is understood by currently reliable sources that, as now drafted, the decision is in accordance with the wishes of the Department of the Interior, in that it grants Pan American Airways a direct route between New York and I (Continued on page 2':)
' adding that "this is a signal to" 1 the people "to prepare for the 'hearings to be held in May, in order ■ that they may not be forced to carry on their shoulders a- parle of", provided d* the cost" marltl- ■ moa for Puerto Ríen." The order stated that the auJldíenclas will relate to "the le'Igalldad rie the freight", regulations-¡ 'l faetones and practice"" of 1as rates 'iprojected for January 14, in vlr-! ' i tud rie the" which would retain the' ' maritime surcharge rie war rie ' 25 percent, plus an increase of¡ [Postwar rie 5 percent at least, on torios the articles" em'Iharcadas to the Island from the confinen >. - .! The" increases proposed by the" r shipping company" which preslan "er-¡ , ) vice on the Island were approved ñ by the Emhar-' p Administration rie War, but violently opposed by Ptftero and funclonjnarlo" of the Department of the In1 terlor. i The announcement of the Ma- - rltimate Commission on the hearings to be held in May on the "Bull Insular Line," - "Lykes Line," "New York and Flo. a Rico Steamship Co." and "Waterman and Line." । (Continued on page 20>
Chavez and Bell do not favor the inclusion of the Island in the 65c salary. They communicate this in letters to the President of the Chamber of Commerce, who sent them a report on the situation of the industry here.
By ENRIQUE RAMIREZ RRAU Editor of EL MUNDO ; 1 On December 24 last the pre' "idente rie the Chamber of Commerce. The Chamber of Commerce President, Mr. Flllpo rie Hostos, wrote to Representative C. Jgsper Rell, informing him of the whole situation of the needle industry, alleging that it would suffer "a disaster" if the amendment to the Hours and Salaries Act, currently before the Congress, were approved. his letter that. knowing the interest that Mr. Jasper Bell has shown in the affairs of Puerto Rico, he informed him of the disastrous consequences that the legislation would have for Puerto Rico by increasing the minimum wage in the In- - needle industry to 85 cents an hour. Mr. De Hostos said in his letter, "Congress will surely re- - cord that when that law was originally passed in 1938 - "- it nearly bankrupted and eliminated one of the most - important industries: the water industry, and seriously affected all the other local industries, causing severe unemployment and hardship," and that its effects "were not so disastrous," he said.
|rpn as disastrous as had been foreseen, it was because the Admlnlstra- . rior rie Hora* and Salarlos ril- erstood entirely rie the havoc" that i such application would rie cause in ■ the local lnriu "tria, so it was in i ' (Continued on page 20.)
WASHINGTON, 1! (PU)- f'ortavocM of the Department of the Interior and the rice business in Puerto Rico, agreed this afternoon that the rice outlook has gained considerable clarity, and expressed confidence that the Department of Agriculture will order the island to be reinstated in the list of beneficiaries of the Government's rice reserves. * WASHINGTON. 11 (FU) - The Fell Harbor Disaster Congroslonal Investigating Committee today reported that several days before the Japanese attack on Fell Harbor, the Flying Squadron of the Flying Squadron of the Flying Squadron of the Flying Squadron of the Flying Squadron of the Flying Squadron of the Flying Squadron had been flying over the island.
I The Flying Squadron of the Price Administration I - ~~mr - "riT ~ *- - - -*B 1 I WP K In its campaign against the black market and reads violates clonen of even rules, the Office of Price Administration has its "Flying Squadron," composed of the gentlemen shown in this photograph, who will be in action again next Monday. First row, from left to right: A. Cabrera Renvenuttl; F. W. Schuck; Pedro R. Roger; Lula F. Perez; J. A. Rodriguez; Rafael M. Castrlllo, and Ramon Bonilla. Second row, same order: I<eonides Guzman; Julio E Diaz; Jose M. Padilla; Carlos 1 Guelts; Julio Z. Rios and Enrique 0. Rios. -(Photo by EL MUNDO).
i Pinero invites preparations for May freight hearings : The Puerto Rico Office yesterday filed a vigorous protest against the increase. - Position 1 of the Island is ation 1 By । United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON. 11-(PU)-E1 Resident Commissioner of Puerto 1 Rico, Mr. Jesus T. Plflero, hailed the suspension of the projected au1 mentó do lo" cargo freights decreed by the Maritime Commission, saying that it "constitutes a victory for the people rie Puerto Rico" and i
The sugar case will be presented to the Governor. Villamil will explain to him the situation created by the lack of the subsidy. The Board of Directors of the Sugar Producers Association met yesterday "to consider the situation related to the payment of the subsidy for the 1946 sugar crop, since the Com- ! dlly Credit Corporation lacks the power to make the payments, it was explained. The Board agreed to make the following statement to the Secretary of Agriculture through the voice of its representatives in Washington.- The Association is fully aware of the need for sugar in the United States to the extent that it has had to be rationed, and that while the Association is willing to prevent interruption of Puerto Rico's sugar supplies, it is nevertheless under an obligation to protect the interests of its members, The sugars which have been shipped to the Continent in accordance with the action that may be taken by Congress, either by maintaining the subsidy policy or substituting a price policy for it, do not have at present any guarantee as to the payment of the subsidy. "The Sugar Producers' Association is also aware of the necessity of placing sugar from the 1946 crop on the market, and that these sugars are also subject to the risk of not obtaining payment of the subsidy.
bulletins  -
. m American, Admiral ■ William F. Halsey ordered his i shock force leading to the felling of Wake, to "sink every ■ Japanese ship he found," The re- ■ velation was made by Admiral Huai band E. Kimmel, whose fleet eopor- * ted the treacherous impact of the Japanese ata' que. 1 WASHINGTON, 11. (FU)- Tonight was officially confirmed the ' news circulating in the North American capital. of the overthrow of President Lescot, of Haiti, and the ' information obtained indicates that order reigns in Haiti.
Many areas lack protection Captain Arroyo estimates that he would need one hundred more guards in S. J. They now serve 204; before they served 300 The problem of lack of agents becomes more serious during the night By ENRIQUE RAMÍREZ BRAU Editor of EL MUNDO One of the duties of the Press, in any civilized community, is to fly because there is adequate protection for life and property. It is the duty of the Press to point out the polygons that may exist and how to deal with them". Considering this situation and knowing how, for lack of police action, a Capono was able to establish itself and take over the Cicero neighborhood in Chicago a few years ago; and also studying the traffic problems in Sen Juan, which are more difficult to solve every day, we decided, at the Director's request, to make a tour of all the areas of the capital city and to observe, personally, the existing deficiencies. From 1930 to 1940, the census taken on the island by the federal authorities showed a population of 1,869,255, or 544.2 inhabitants per square meter. From 1930 to 1940, a ten-year period, there was a 21% increase in the number of inhabitants of Puerto Rico. With such a ratio of 325,342 inhabitants per square mile, the population of Puerto Rico increased by 2,031,938 in 1945. San Juan, the most populous city, with 208,053 souls, without counting the floating population that of cas! all the towns of the Tala, daily comes and goes, has no police force other than 1a vigilante, quo 281 guards and officers Inclusive. Practically life and property in the Capital, the seat of our government, has but a ridiculous protection. . In the investigation we made, we were able to find out how this force of 281 men was distributed, which we will immediately indicate: 1.- At the San Juan Command, there are three chiefs, a sergeant and six guardsmen, all 10. 2.- Puerta de Tierra: one sergeant, one corporal, three lance-corporals and fifteen guards, total 20. 4.- Santurce, Parada 19: one chief, five sergeants, three lance-corporals and thirty-six gusrdlas, total 45. 5-Lolsa Street, one chief, one sergeant, rin" corporal, tro" l "nce-corpo- , ral" and seventeen guards, total 34. 8- Barrio Obrero, one chief, two sergeants, do" corporal, one lance-cor-poral, and eighteen guards, total . 7.-Capitol, one corporal, and nusve guard," total 10. 8.-Green Island, one lance-cor- pearal . and nine guards, total 10. 9.-Motorcyclists, one Chief, two sergeants. one corporal, one corporal, one corporal lance, and nineteen guards, total 34. The grand total of the force Including "u" officers is, as we have said, 281. of this number there are but 204 guards. In. Puerta de Tierra, we are informed, there are six guards on regular street duty. Every twenty-four hours there are but two guards on duty. At Lolza Street there are twelve guards on regular service, viz. four guards on each eight-hour shift. In Santurce, there are fourteen guards" covering the whole of this extensive district. The ratio of guards in this service is 4.5. In San Juan, in the regular street service, there are thirty-six guards, or twelve guards for each eight-hour shift. There are only eighteen motorcyclists, distributed as follows: ten on the day shift; seven on the night shift; and one motorcyclist in the early morning. There are only fourteen men in the Barrio Obrero precinct who serve. With this meager number of warriors is that they cover the twenty-four hours of the day, at the rate of four guards every eight hours". The service problem is more acute at night. The San Juan command has established a special patrol service, from nine o'clock at night until five o'clock in the morning. These rondss are made in automobile. In the Barrio Obrero, two guards; Collq Loízs, two; San Juan, two; and tan" turca, two. Each of the four round" tisno one automobile. Tam(Continued "n al page 14.). ■