THE WORLD
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DIARIC DE LA MAÑANA
NUMBER 10514
YEAR XXVIII
Let's support the men who made the Victory Loan possible.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 2, 1946 FU".
The people of San Juan yesterday paid a warm tribute of sympathy and affection to General Pedro A. del Valle.
Interest.in the North for business here Government office in New York receives conMiiltaR numeroR Industrialists request data MuchaR peraonaR have shown desire to come to island as tourists In an official note authorized yesterday, the Information Office in Fortaleza, states that "the channels" of trade between Puerto Rico and the mainland will soon be swollen" by mainland firms" who are eager" to bring their products" to the Tais and, at the same time, to buy Puerto Rican merchandise." "Indicative of this tendency," it says, "is the growing volume of inquiries that have been received at the New York office of the Puerto Rico Information Office regarding exchanges with the Island, contributions and industries." The note adds: "These inquiries" may be divided into the following types: 1-From importers" who wish to purchase Puerto Rican products for sale in the United States. Many of these importers are engaged in the needle industry or are desirous of entering this field of activity. The editor of a magazine urgently requested a sample of lace" made" in Puerto Rico to be photographed (Continued on page 22).
Island teachers are invited to Mexico for congress.
Dr. Ismael Rodriguez has been specially invited to attend the conference, which will include teachers' attitude towards the current situation.
Several schools in the capital will be enlarged Program has been made on the basis of the school population decrease A program for the enlargement of the main school in Santurce has been recommended by the Acting School Director of the Government of San Juan, Mrs. Elina Mora de Gadea. Said program has been discussed with the Administrator of the Capital, Mr. Roberto Sánchez Villela, and by the Director of Public Works in charge of its execution, Mr. Salvador T. Caro. Part of the project studied has already been approved by the Planning Board. The plan was drafted taking into consideration the density of the school population in a given area of Santurce. The first part of the plan involves the expansion of several existing schools. Some of the work will begin in the near future, others will be developed immediately after the administration raises the necessary funds, which have been underway. The expansion of the "Rosendo Matienzo Clntrón" school is planned, for which purpose the municipality will buy back a lot that it ceded (Continued on page 22) New price for raw sugar 1 The Office of Price Administration announced yesterday that it has fixed a maximum price for raw sugar sold in Puerto Rico. As of yesterday, March 1, the maximum price for this product in sales by the sugar mills to refineries and wholesalers will be the price per quintal at which it was sold during the basic period (April 10 to May 10, 1942), plus 4S-1I2 cents. The price per quintal for sales from wholesalers to retailers shall be the price at which raw sugar was sold during the base period, plus 48-112 cents, or 84.80 per quintal, whichever price is lower. The price for sale to the consumer will be 6 cents per pound and 11 cents per pound. The wholesalers will be able to make a surcharge of five cents" per quintal, if they transport it to the retailer's establishment.
In Mexico City, during the days" from the eighth to the fifteenth of May, will be held the Fifth American Congress of Teachers, according to letter received by the Permanent Secretary of the Higher Council of Education of the University, Dr. La-; mael Rodriguez, inviting him to dl-l cho' act. To this congress has been invited, । "amhlén to the Department of Instruction and the Association of Mae"-! tro" of Puerto Rico. The Invitation has been extended by the General Secretary and the Organizing Secretary of the Organizing Committee of the Congress, Dr. José Carrillo Garete, of Cuba, and pro- i feaor Alfonso Ramirez Altamirano, 1 of Mexico, respectively; who expressed to Dr. Rodríguez Bou i that "your high" intellectual "timbre" and "your continuous concern for educational growth and improvement, make your presence at the May Congress invaluable for its most fruitful results." The Fifth American Congress of Teachers, which is being organized by the American Confederation of Teachers, will discuss the following agenda: 1.
1.-"The teaching profession before the problem" of national independence, economic development of the American countries and preservation of peace. 2. Program of action to raise the standard of living, materially and culturally, of the "great" popular masses of the continent. 3.--The problems of democracy in America and its influence on education. 4.-The" fundamental" problem" of education in America. 5.-Professional, economic, "oclal and juridical" condition of the American teaching profession. 6.-Trade union problems: of the C.A.M. and the world organization of the teaching profession. 7.-Collaboration of the American teaching profession with the educational, scientific and cultural organization of the United Nations"," The Organizing Committee of the congress is integrated as algue: President, Otto Nleman (Uruguay); first vice-president, Gaudeñclo Peraza E. (Mexico); second ■vice-president, Juan Negrete López (Mexico); "ecretarlo general, Alfonso Ramirez Altamirano (Mexico); secretary of organization, Jo "é Carrillo García (Cuba); "ecretarlo of (Continued on Ja page 22)
BULLETINS
WASHINGTON, L (PU). - The, House of Representatives today rejected the Administration's request that it establish price controls on old and new homes, The House, tentatlvanBnte, adopted an>nmlenda to Congressman Patman's hogayes bill, restricting to new homes maximum pricing. The amendment was offered by the House Ranea Committee, and was adopted by a vote of 154 to M. Patman fought the amendment vigorously, but a bloc of Republican Congressmen and Rur Democrats passed it easily. " - - - NEW YORK, t. (PU) - U temperature, today at three o'clock in the afternoon, was as follows: New York, M| Chicago, Al| Wáshlngton, 51 and Miami, 80. WASHINGTON, 1. (PU) - Senator John H. Bankhead, Democrat, of Alabama, complained today that the Office of Price Administration put "a tall daos gentleman who never flew a nao-
One of cotton," in charge of textile prices. Bankhead is chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee which is investigating the cotton apparel shortage. The target of the Southern Senator's attack is Gardner Ackley, Textile Pricing Executive of the Office of Price Administration, who testified, under questioning, that he once taught economics at Ohio State University and the University of Michigan. BORTON, L. (Pül-I "s inmates returned to duty, after the proposed unique collective bargaining, at the bait of a one-day sit-down strike at Charlestown Prison, in protest against "bad meals" and "discriminations committed by the Parole Board." - All available guards were put on duty, and 245 duly armed reinforcements were stationed at the prison when all available guards were on duty, and 245 duly armed reinforcements were stationed at the prison when all available guards were on duty.
The prison was stationed when all 566 long-sentenced convicts refused to work until they were given the opportunity to speak with Corrections Commissioner J. Paul Doyle. Hearing the convicts' principal grievances, Doyle offered to intercede with Governor Maurice J. Tobin, and it was agreed to meet with a committee of 12 convicts to discuss the grievances - " * WASHINGTON, 1. (PU)-The State Department today disclosed that it has been notified that the United States and the Soviet Union are prepared to enter into negotiations immediately on the billion dollar loan requested by Russia in August of last year. The request was received by another Government agency, a fact which was discovered by the State Department only a few days ago. The request was found among documents of the Foreign Economic Administration, whose work was taken over by the State Department in September IMS.
Ufó' K? W ■L ¿9 di * ' I j . ja I .■ Be - JR 1 . " W Bf r* I f E i ' i ' i U I f 'Í i \ i -' w WHrflBHv \ ' w BBHBBBBBB GENERAL DEL VALLE RECEIVES THE MEDAL OF MERIT-The Puerto Rico Department of the American Legion began the" tributes that Puerto Rico has been paying since yesterday to its illustrious soldier, General Pedro A. del Valla, hero of the campaigns of Guadalesnar and Okinawa, by imposing on him the Medal of Merit in recognition of his valuable services. The photo was taken at the moment when Major Luis F. Cuchí pinned the medal to the General's chest. Overseeing the ceremony was Colonel Holmes, of the Marine Corps post in Ran Juan (Photo EL MUNDO).
Chambers to pass again measures vetoed yesterday by Dr. Tugwell
Governor proposes reduction in government operating expenses In the pre-budget bill submitted yesterday to the House* it is noteworthy that the revenue estimate differs from the one submitted by the Treasurer.
By Juan Martines Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO The Governor submitted to the Legislature the Revenue and Expenditure" budget, which will be the basis for the general budget bill for the 194647 fiscal year. The estimated" Revenues of the Go. hernador "on: Customs Duties, $1,780,000; Federal "internal" revenue, $20,000,000; Alcoholic "beverage" taxes, $8,500,000; Taxes, $13,750,000; Property taxes, $400,000; Income taxes, $16,000,000; Inheritance Tax, $250,000; 5 percent of the River Source Authority's "Gross" Revenue, $275,000; Other" Revenue, $450,000; Operating "E" peclale" Fund, the "Income" of which will "engroup" the General "Fund," $2,195,005. Total: *81,870,005,005. It is interesting to note that the Governor's "income" estimate differs greatly from that submitted by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, which was only $51,000,000; and above all, that it differs in certain "revenues" which are under the absolute control of the Treasurer, such as island "contri-; ibudone" on beverage,' in which the Treasurer estimated $5,500,000 and the Governor $6,500,000. In arbitrios the Treasurer - estimated $11, 000,000 and the Governor, $13,750,000; in Contribution "obre la Propledad (Insular part) the Treasurer calleuló a revenue of $350,000 and the Governor $450,000; in Contrlbu- । clones on Revenue, the Treasurer's estimate of $14,000,000,000 was increased by the Governor to $16,000,000; and the Inheritance Tax was estimated by the Treasurer at $200,000 and the Governor at $250,000. The expenditure estimates submitted by the Governor are: Operating Expenses *43,135,953; a reduction of $4,759,188, or 99 percent, from the current budget. The main reduction consists in the reduction of direct aid from $3,000,000 to $1,500,000, eliminating sewing projects, leisure-economic studies, agricultural projects and services administered by the Emergency War Program. The PEG disappears 4ot*lly, although some of its activities are transferred to other departments of the Imuiar Government.
Tugwell explains his disapproval Quiñones Elias, Bolívar Pagan comment on Chief Executive's action The legislative chamber will meet this morning to approve again, over the Governor's veto this time, the measure that Dr. Rexford G. Tugwell returned for approval yesterday. Among the vetoed measures are S. P. 1. 396 and 195, providing for plebiscites on the Island's candidate for Governor of Puerto Rico, the former, and on political status, the latter. The Governor also vetoed S. 2, known as the "Tenancy Bill"; S. 4, allocating $200,000 annually for the Office of Puerto Rican Affairs in Washington, and S. 42, allocating $5,000 for the construction of a two-room school in the Candelaria neighborhood of Toa Baja. Regarding the veto of S. 196, the Governor informed the following (Continued on page 22)
1,500,000 to the Department of Health for direct aid; $200,000 for maternity cots; and $227,600 for milk stations. All other PEG activities cease. * Public Debt. $39,525 e" the estimate, versus $192,762.50 the current budget; a reduction of 79.5 percent. All" bond" issues" that had provision"" for redemption" were withdrawn" from" the" market. Contributions to Public Enterprises. 6,197,918 are allocated for next year against *78,804,222.75 in the current year, that is, a reduction of $72,606,304.75, equal to 92.1 percent. This reduction is due to the fact that the public corporations already have the capital they needed to operate and it must be assumed that they can sustain themselves; however, $3,000,000 is allocated for the Water and Sewer Service; $1,000,000 for the Transportation Authority; $1,760,000 for the Water and Sewer Service; $1,760,000 for the Transportation Authority; $1,760,000 for the Water and Sewer Service; $1,760,000 for the Water and Sewer Service; $1,760,000 for the Transportation Authority; and $1,760,000 for the Water and Sewer Service.)
Salary scale to expire in June if law is not extended
Only a legislative extension would allow the compensation scale established in the Uniform Compensation Act for Employees of the Government of Puerto Rico, approved last year, to continue after June 30. The current Legislature or an extraordinary meeting of the Legislature on or before said date, would have to extend said law. The statute, which provides for minimum and maximum compensation, with annual increases, for all positions in the civil service, will expire on June 30 of the current year. The Chairman of the Civil Service Commission, Mr. Guillermo Nlgagllonl, said that he will send to the legislators, when the model budget is submitted by the Governor, a copy of the Uniform Re muneraclón Act, in order for the Legislature to act on it. Nlgagllonl did not say whether or not he would
Nlgagllonl did not say whether he would request that the law continue to be in effect, but expressed the impression that he would do so. The head of} the CSC was the one who prepared and submitted to the Legislature, last year, the bill that became Act 261 of 1948, the Uniform Immunization Act. In accordance with the provisions of said Act, the Civil Service Commission is working on the preparation of a new classification plan and on the rules to put it into operation. If the Uniform Compensation Law is not extended, in the opinion of a knowledgeable person, the Civil Service would have to continue working with the previous classification plan and rules. If the law is not extended, the salaries of government employees will be subject to what is determined in the government spending budget, as approved by the Legislature.
He was "cheered as he entered the capital.
The military man thanked them "on behalf of 60,000 Boricua*" He did not comment on the governor's E1 Monday he will continue his inspection trip - A meal in Sto. Domingo By R. Santiago Rosa, "Our discipline in the Navy is strong and well thought out and forbids meddling in politics. The government of Puerto Rico is a matter for discussion by the President of the United States. It would be ungracious of me, moreover, to discuss an office which is now occupied," General Pedro A. del Valle, hero of the glorious Pacific campaigns, declared yesterday to the Press, shortly after receiving a warm reception from the people of San Juan, and the homage of the civic organizations at the Elks Qub, in the County. In the company of members of his General Staff and Colonel Holmes, of the Tenth Naval District, Major General Pedro A. del Valle, a Puerto Rican hero who was glorious in the conquest of the islands of Okinawa and Guadalcanal, in the most intense part of the Pacific campaign, arrived yesterday at 12:30 p.m. at the Isla Grande airport in a Navy transport. The first to greet him was Vice Admiral William R. Munroe, who expressed his cordial greetings and his satisfaction for having him as a guest on the island. Immediately after the Genera! was greeted by the representatives" of the American Legion, the Chamber of Commerce, -1 Club de Leono", the" Elk", the" a "oclaclonea of lawyer", Engineer"; Club Rotarlo, the mayor of San Juan, and number""" comí "ion o" organizer" of! tribute of (Impatlaa of which he was the object yesterday by the people of San Juan. A1 confuse" with the group of friends" and family"" who were waiting for him at the airport, the general showed he was" moved, expressing that "he has been so long" in seeing such old friends and my relatives, that it is really time to cry." Immediately afterwards, in the company of the commander of the American Legion, Mr. Lula F. Cuchi, his brother Francisco, and the Legion's relations officer, Mr. Carlos E. Seljo, he took the car that would bring him to San Juan to receive the public tribute. l It is the first time, since the war ended, that General del Valle has visited Puerto Rico. He was only here for three days, after the Guadalcanar campaign in 1943, to reintegrate later to the arduous work of commanding the First Marine Division, which carried out the main battle against the Japanese in Okinawa. Ran Juan cheers: Preceded by an escort of only policemen on motorcycles, the general and his dbjnltlva entered San Juan yesterday at one o'clock in the afternoon, amidst the "acclamation" of the public. Labor", eatudlant", oflclnlata" and other" diver "o" group", among what" which figure* (Continued on page 22) P i ñ e r o requests the federal savings entity on the Island WASHINGTON, 1. (PU). Commissioner Rasidonfa do Puirto Rico an Wellington, loAor Jeiú" T. PiMro, filed a bill in the House of Repra-" sentante" which would permit the creation, throughout the lila of Puerto Rico, of the Federal Savings and Loan Association. The bill onjnends the Federal Home Bank Act, as amended, and would be aimed at eliminating what Commissioner Riflero called "a major obstacle to the solution of the pressing problem of Puerto Rico's living in Puerto Rico.
Popular Unity Discussed
Muñoz Marín, Grillasen, Susoni and Susoni, Jr., spoke in San Juan Mayor of Ponce has not rectified Conference agreed to a waiting period in the struggle for the cause of norms Open a compass" or" ""p "ra *in the Internal Struggle that due to procedural issues are being held within the Popular Party, Mr. Andrés Grillases, Mayor of Ponce, and the President of said party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Me-, rln, "in a supreme attempt to! to achieve the unity of the Party, which is threatened by the disintegration of the Popular leaders of Ponce", was the agreement adopted in a meeting held in the private rooms that Dr. Francisco M. Susonl has in the Escambrón Beach Club, and in which participated Mr. Luis Mu-ñoz-Marín, Andrés Grillasen, Juan Cabrer, Mr. Francisco M. Susonl, son, and Dr. Suconl himself. The meeting, which had been scheduled for last Tuesday, had to be suspended at the last minute to celebrate it *1 Thursday in the morning until two o'clock yesterday, Friday, the five popular leaders were meeting, discussing the internal situation of the Party. Although the participants in the conference have kept the greatest reserve, we can inform that, in the meeting held, Mr. Grillasen firmly maintained his criteria against the Arecibo agreement and that he fought against many of the procedures followed by the Jai leadership of his party. He complained to Muñoz of the influence that some of our popular leaders with whom Muñoz most frequently discusses the norms of the collectivity have been exerting on him. He assured Minoz Marin once again that he had nothing to retract, since his actions within the Party were clean and that he had done nothing to sabotage the Party's program. Mr. Grillases emphasized the need to proceed with the construction of the District Hospital and the Ponce Athletic Park. The former House Representative, Mr. Juan Cabrer, in spite of Jos Attempts made to achieve it, repeatedly refused to withdraw his resignation as House Representative, assuring that his decision was final. As for Mr. Susonl, Jr., we know that he discussed with Muñoz Marín the lawsuits against the Planning Board, in which he is listed as an attorney. It will be recalled that on the occasion of these lawsuits, Mr. Susonl and Luis Muñoz Marín exchanged a correspondence that has not been made public, but which is understood to be of transcendence. Mr. Susonl explained in detail the reasons" he has for bringing these lawsuits as a lawyer and as a member of the Popular Party. For his part, Muñoz Marín called for the unity of the Party. Muñoz assured that all the Popular Party members had to cooperate with him to carry out the program of the Popular Party, since it was the Popular Party members who entrusted him with the task. Hearing him express himself in this way, Muñoz was told that he was willing to cooperate with him in carrying out this work, but '.'following healthier procedures". Muñoz admitted that mistakes had been made within the Party and added that this was due to the period of coupling that has (Continued on page 22)
Commission Status Assignment Signed
Acting Governor Manuel A. Pires gave his approval yesterday to the bill which allocates eighty thousand dollars for the expenses of the Status Committee. The bill originated in the Insular Senate. The House of Representatives returned to the Senate P. S. *1, which provides for the exclusive use of the Spanish language for instruction in all public schools, with a slight amendment in Section 3: "The teaching of the English language is declared compulsory in the public schools, from the fifth grade of primary instruction". The House gave its approval to the bill, but said article was amended by inserting a period after "public" and deleting the rest of the sentence. The scope of the amendment was to leave this matter to the discretion of the Commissioner of Instruction. The Senate concurred in its Thursday session, with the amendment introduced by the House with a vote of 13 in the affirmative and one abstaining: The abstaining vote was that of Dr. Figueroa, who stated that he was not sufficiently informed to vote one way or the other. Senator Figueroa made the motion and it was approved by the Senate, that a cable be sent to the federal Senate requesting its concurrence so that the allocation of 32,412,235 that Puerto Rico currently receives, destined to Jos comedora" escotares, which has now been reduced to <1,500,000, be maintained.