THE MUN DO
38 Pages 5 Cfvs. 2 Sections
38 Pages 5 Cfvs. 2 Sections
DIAR1C DE bA MARAÑA
YEAR XXVIII
"ld*"oa to the men who made " ,.l Empréstito do la Victoria.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 23, 1946
NUMBER 10534
House Passes Language Measure
A debate that lasted more than three hours took place last night in the House of Representatives while Minority Leader Rep. Celestino Triarte explained the reasons why he opposes S. 51, which provides for the exclusive use of the Spanish language for teaching in schools. The measure, as in the Senate, was passed over the Governor's veto. Triarte approached the matter from the point of view of the "political unification that the approval of such a law could have for Puerto Rico, "considering the" probability that the links between the Island and the "United States of America" would never be dissolved. His lengthy speech was interrupted by a representative of the parliamentary majority. Triarte cited in support of his argument a letter sent by the late President Roosevelt to Dr. José M. Gallardo upon his appointment as Commissioner of Instruction for Puerto Rico, in which the then chief U.S. magistrate urged that more English be taught on the Island. Iriarte interpreted this communication as a tacit promise from the American people to keep the Island under their protection. During the debate, which became a political one, Representatives Pacheco Padró, Bauzá and Susoni Lens warmly defended independence. In last night's session, S. P. 429 was approved, which authorizes the Superior Teaching Council of the University of Puerto Rico to allocate part of the permanent fund of said Institution, to the urbanization of land of the municipality and to the construction of houses to be leased to the faculty members and other university personnel. P. 438, providing for the establishment of the probationary sentence in the judicial system of Puerto Rico; to provide in which cases the effect of the sentence shall be suspended and the sentenced person placed on probation, providing for the same; and to fix the necessary requirements that must be met for the imposition of such sentence. P. of C-437, providing for the creation of a Parole Board; to authorize such board to decree the parole of inmates, under certain conditions; to authorize it to grant to such released inmates the enjoyment of certain civil rights indispensable to achieve their moral and economic rehabilitation. This board to act as an advisory board to the Governor in resolving petitions for executive clemency. P. S. 422, amending the Act creating the Washington Office of Puerto Rico. P. S. 797, to direct the Insular Waterworks Service to pay to the Treasurer of Puerto Rico 20 percent of its water collections; that from this fund the Treasurer shall pay certain monthly sums to the municipalities" and the remainder to be provided by the Commissioner of Sanitation for water consumed by public and charitable institutions. (Continued on page 22)
Krug and Puerto Rico New Secretary Studies Gubernatorial Matter
By PAUL HARBIHON United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 22 (FU)- The new Secretary of the Interior, Julius Albert Krug, told this correspondent today that he expects soon to be aware of territorial problems, including the question of Puerto Rican status and statehood for the HaE1 Secretary showed great interest in the views of Muflo" Marin regarding Puerto Rican governance, particularly with reference to Piftero and Del Valle. On this point, he said that he has been studying the question of the governorship and that, although he has not yet reached a decision on the matter, he hopes to reach a conclusion soon. He also said he might have something to say on the matter when he meets with reporters at his first press conference as Secretary of the Interior, which he believes he will hold before the end of next week.
JULIUS A. KBUG
Discussing recent Puerto Rican legislation concerning the island's governorship, Krug said - referring to the bill just sent to President Truman on the veto of Governor Tugwell, which provides for the people to have a say in the nomination of the governor - that he believes it is certainly justifiable for the people to have a say in indicating which candidates are acceptable. He noted, however, that giving Puerto Ricans a say in the selection of their governor is really a legislative problem, since it requires changes to the Charter. On the question of a plebiscite, as provided for by island legislation, Secretary Krug stated that he thought it would be valuable to have the people's expression as a guide in determining their future political status, but again noted that Congress is the anal authority on this. The Secretary "nfatli "o the fact that he still I (Continued on page 22).
Governor Tugwell salutes the new commander.
Briber Tugwell salutes Brigadier General W llllam W. Beaaell, (who has just arrived in In Island to assume the command of the Military Department of the" A ntillaa.) on a visit he made yesterday to the new commandant's office in the Military Department. (Army Communications Corps Photo)
Agreement between cab companies and the PSC Barceló will recommend that no action be taken for now on lowering fares The president of the Public Service Commission, Antonio R. Barceló, will recommend to said organism that no action be taken for now regarding the projected reduction in the cab fares in the metropolitan area, as long as each of these vehicles has a taxi-1 meter installed and the Commission can make a more detailed study on the matter. 1 This was one of the agreements" reached at the meeting held last night between the San Juan cab "owners" and the "flor Barceló, convened by the latter for the purpose of ascertaining the opinion of "quállps" on the Commission's idea of. to demand that each taxi be equipped with a taximeter; and with the purpose, in addition, to know their opinions on the possibility of reducing the cab fares in the metropolitan area, based on the taximeter, which was increased during the war emergency, when Mr. Benjamín Ortlz was president of the Public Service Commission. All the cab drivers at the meeting expressed their opposition to the projected reduction of this rate, alleging that the cost of living and the cost of materials and automobile parts had not yet been normalized. The cab fare, before being increased during the emergency, was 25 cents for the first third of a mile and 5 cents for each additional third. The increase made was ten cents over the previous 25 cents for the first third of a mile. The CSP has in its possession statistics related to cab service in the United States, which were shown to the carriers at the meeting by Mr. Barceló. The Commission has obtained data on the number of cabs authorized in two hundred noteamerican cities of two hundred thousand inhabitants or more in which the metropolis is included. In "all" report" the number of inhabitants" of cabs and the fare in each of them". With (Continued on page 22>
The Planning Board approh qul "ition of land" for the e "cm fruirán in Ponce, Areclho and Mayagi such land has been making them < Agriculture to act in rice case A study is made of reports from the nation's rice mills By Jeta Van Vranken WASHINGTON. 22. (INS) -Leonard B. Ellls, official of the Department of Agriculture's Grain Nogoclado, announced today that a recommendation will soon be made with a view to solving the rice crisis in Puerto Rico. Ellls told International News Service that his office is studying mill reports on rice production and shipments for the month of February. Although the Department has received reports from virtually all rice producers, Ellls said that no conclusion has been reached on the need for a readjustment in distribution. He also said the Agriculture Department official "expected to have the answer by tonight." Meanwhile, the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, Jesús T. Plflero, reported that he has written to Agriculture Secretary Clinton Anderson, informing him of the seriousness of the problem, and requesting immediate action to assure Puerto Rico an adequate supply of rice. Reports from Puerto Rico indicate that the rice shortage is worsening as the days go by and that rationing is not effective due to the shortage of stocks.
Authorization is granted for the location of vocational centers in three cities: Arecibo, Mayagüez and Ponce, where procedures are already underway for the acquisition of the necessary land. - Fund of $1,066,000.00
The" location and location of the "art" and "craft" that will be con "lez. The" procedure" for the purchase of "1 Department of the Interior. It was reported yesterday, in addition", that said Department has almost completed the" design" of these school", i and that e" the" purpose Start "u ¡ construction after next i July. The Government will invest in this" building" one and a half million dollars, having been appropriated 8936,000 by the Legislature on June 30, last. This appropriation will be increased to 81,066,000 on July 1, first, by securing the approval by the Governor of an additional appropriation of 8130,000 under a bill" being considered by the present Legislature. In addition to the aforementioned "arts and crafts" school, it contemplates the expansion of the one currently operating in Caguw, and the construction of new industrial "schools" in Aguadilla, Guayama, Utuado and Cayey. Driver's strike postponed after yesterday's meeting Employers will review complaints about violation of the agreement The threat of strike among the "drivers" who operate the "independent guaguri" on the San Juan, Santurce and Río Piedra routes was temporarily dissipated yesterday, when the" representative" of the" owner" of said" vehicle" and the" Drivers' Association" signed a stipulation by which the" employers" commit" to consider the complaints" that for alleged" violations" of the collective bargaining agreement in force have been filed". Yesterday, after a conference held by a commission of bus owners, a representation of the drivers, and the consul- lator Mr. Collazo, it was agreed by the parties to sign said stipulation, in which it is provided that the bus owners' commission which appeared yesterday at the conference "will enter into the com- pletion of all the questions that have been urged under the protection of the collective bargaining agreement in force, it being provided that this" questioning "will be considered by the employers" in the event of violations of the collective bargaining agreement in force, providing that this" question" in the labor-management relations" will be resolved within the next ten days, in accordance with the provisions of the collective bargaining agreement in question", i The eatipulation reads as follows: "That loa aeflorea Mateo Hernández Díaz, Julio Pérez Roaado, Abraham Pérez, Hipólito Luperena and Eranclaco Sánchez Hevla, representatives all" of all" loa partners do Omnlbua Independíente" and Omnibus Metropolitano", toan signatory" and non-signatory" of the current collective bargaining agreement, will supply no later than tomorrow (today) March 23 at eleven o'clock in the morning, the complete Hita of all" lo" partners that formn both entities; that the aforementioned committee shall consider all questions arising under the current collective bargaining agreement: providing that these questions in labor-management relations shall be resolved within the next" 10 days in accordance with the provisions of the collective bargaining agreement in question; the Unión de Chóferes y Mecánteos de Guaguas Independientes del Area Metropolitana declares that it reserves the right to submit to the labor-management relations of the two entities.
The slaughter tax was not approved
Bill on auxiliary nurses was not discussed in the Senate.
Amendments to the liquor law Part of the UPR amount is earmarked for scholarships for poor students The Senate was divided on Thursday night when S. 10, from "enador Ortlz StsHa, was brought up for discussion to reinstate the "10 party of Indio "F" of Art. 46 of the Municipal Law and paragraph 9 of Inci- ' "o "H" of the Law creating the Government of the Capital, which fixed a Tax on the slaughter of cattle, and which was abolished for the purpose of lowering the price of meat during the emergency period. The lumberman Lorenzo Tierno ardently opposed the bill, alleging that it would again commit injustice against the hu- ' mlldei people who slaughter pigs for a living, "while the well-to-do will be allowed to slaughter freely, without having the control of the Inspector de Sa- * nldad". The bill was defeated by a vote of 12 to 4. P. C. 189, known as the auxiliary nurses bill, was left to be discussed in yesterday's order of business. Senator Barreto Perez asked that it be brought up for discussion, but this was opposed by Senators Gélgel Po- , lanco and Dr. Figueroa, who said that the bill would be subject to some amendments, and since the Department of Health had requested that it be allowed to make other amendments. mltl be allowed to make further amendments, it was , most prudent to wait until this . was done, in order to secure the support . of Health for the measure when it . is before the Governor for his consideration. S. 396, which amends Sec. 25 of the Act to provide revenues for the people of Puerto Rico by imposing "splrltui . | The Taxes ■ prescribed" by this Act shall not be "e co- - brished by that" spirit" distii side" dispensed by a distile- 1 i ry and obtained by any per- - sona in accordance with the provisions- 1 ■ nei regulating them that the Treasurer - prescribes when such spirit" de"-! distilled" "e are used and "ean deetlnado" to the manufacture of alcoholate, Insecticides, perfumery, or product" medicinale", or when such" spirit" distilled" are used" in a served official of lo" hospitals or in laboratory" for fine" analytical" or of experimentation, or for "er used" in the fortification of wine", or for the preparation of soft drinks using alcohol in the preparation and manufacture of concentrates or essences for the manufacture of such soft drinks, provided that the finished product does not contain more than one-half (1|2) of one percent (1 percent) alcohol by volume; Provided, That any person desiring to obtain alcohol or spirits distilled under the provisions of this article shall first submit to the Bureau of Alcoholic and Narcotic Beverages conclusive evidence of his entitlement to such products free of duty; and such persons shall furnish such bond and bond as may be required by said Bureau. Dlaponléndo- ! se, further, that any person I (Continued on page 22)
Union goes on strike claiming insufficient rice quota.
Grupo de San Sebastián addresses the F.L.T. informing it. - The situation in Caguas and Cayey is difficult. - Mayaguez petition to OAP
Announcing that the "workers" of the San Sebastián Factory and Field Union are forced" to go on strike "because of the insufficient quota of rice which does not cover the "needs of the" workers", the "-- flor Ramón Valentín, President of said workers' organization, a subsidiary of the Federación Libre de Trabajadores, has sent a telegram to the Secretary General of the FLT, Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera, "-- flor Ramón Valentín, President of said workers' organization, a subsidiary of the Federación Libre de Trabajadores, has sent a telegram to the Secretary General of the FLT, Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera. Among the communications coming from the workers' nuclei throughout the Island, indicating the situation created by the rationing of rice, as well as by the amount assigned to the "coniumldore", the FLT received this telegraphic communication, which was sent by the "efior Noguera" Rivera "1 Director of the OAP, Mr. Sam Gilstrap. The telegram reads as follows: "Workers of the Union de Factorias y Campo forced to go on general strike. The rice ration does not cover the needs of the workers. Your intervention with the competent authorities is urgent". Upon sending Mr. Gilstrap the aforementioned telegram, Mr. Nogueras Rivera tells him that "even though you understand me
while understanding" the "praiseworthy purposes" that Jnsplran uses its agenda to protect the "public interests and to see to it that everyone gets a reasonable share of the food that we (Continued on page 22)
There is an intention to increase the number of Supreme Court justices.
Muñoz filed by title the bill providing for 'recall' The text of the measure was prepared yesterday and establishes how party committees will make recommendations to the Governor.
A bill bearing the signature of Senate President Luis Muñoz Marin, implementing the "recall" proposal, included in the Popular Democratic Party's program, was filed in the House of Representatives yesterday.
"। yesterday afternoon in the Insular Senate. The aforementioned proposition, according to our reports, was approved by the caucus of the legislators of the Popular Party, which met on Thursday night until one o'clock in the morning, considering numerous bills. The bill, which bears Senate number 507, has been filed by title only. During "1 day yesterday ae "ataba working on au text and dlspoalclonea finalea, according to nueatroa Inform ea. The title of Mr. Muñoz Marin's bill states that the measure is "to provide for the manner in which the central committees of the political parties of Puerto Rico shall make recommendations to the Governor of Puerto Rico, in the event of a vacancy" in more than half of the "offices" of senator and representative of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico, pursuant to the provisions of Article 30 of the Charter." A spokesman for the legislative majority informed EL MUNDO yesterday, that "Mr. Muñoz Marin's bill complies with the purpose expressed by the PDP leadership to open the doors to the people's votes when there is any doubt that the party and its legislators are not complying with their electoral commitments." The aforementioned PDP spokesman added that, "when not" reunlmo" most of the PDP legislators at Sen. Muñoz Mask's residence." some" mraM, manlfw-
LUIS MUÑOZ MARIN tamos our intention to submit ourselves to a public vote, if necessary, when it came to challenge the political validity of our actions or to question before the people our strict compliance with the program and with the" commitment" "obr" political status. This bill has the purpose of implementing the proposition "upon which the statement was made by the legislators who met at Mr. Muñoz Marin's residence," said the aforementioned member of the majority l "g!"tetlv".
SIA to invest $1,700,000 in sewers next year
It will dedicate $900,000 to the Santurce sewage system expansion project. - Several more towns included in the program
The "Servicio Insular de Acueducto" y Alcantarillado" enunciates that it plans to invest $81,700,000 in sewerage" during the fiscal year that begins next July 1.
One million dollars of this amount will be provided by the Legislature, according to the bill presented, and the balance of $8,700,000 will be contributed by the SIA from its own funds. This indica agenda will dedicate a substantial amount to the development of the Santurce sanitary sewer system expansion project. The distribution informed by the director of the SIA, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, to the Planning Board, reveals that the sum of $900,000 will be invested in this project during the next fiscal year. Other important works are those of the Rio Piedras sanitary sewer system, for which the SIA has provided an investment of $8200,000 for the next fiscal year. The projects reported by the SIA to the Board of Plañe", for its sewerage program" for the year (Continued on page 22)
There will be an automatic AC system in June Rafael Delgado Márquez announced. There were strong winds in Caguas CAGUAS. - (By Andrés Martínez García) -In a visit we made to the head of the Communications Authority, Mr. Rafael Delgado Márquez, at his office, he told us that the automatic telephone service will be up and running by June or July of this year in the area of the Communications Authority. He also informed us that, "in relation to the strong winds that hit the city on Thursday night and blew up zinc sheeting and tore out a part of the electric current between GuIrabo and Cagua", "thanks to the fact that the telephone and telegraph lines in the area of Cagua and in the neighboring municipalities have been moved away from the roadside groves, no service problems were recorded". However, in the lighting service, there was a malfunction" in several" of the" exits of this city, according to what the engineer of Fuentes Fluviales, Mr. Miguel Moré, communicated to us.
Approximately $2,000,000 for municipal roads.
A sum of money, of approximately two million Ge dollars will be assigned, in total, by the Legislative Assembly, for "1 exclusive purpose of carrying out the construction of municipal" road", -municipal" road"" of third cia"" most in the municipalities of the Island. The Senate discussed last night in Full Committee, to approve later in third reading, the bill on rents, which has been vetoed by the Governor. It also discussed on Thursday night the "caucus".
Thursday night, the "caucus" of the Popular Party legislators, at the proposal of the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin. । Up to this date, no money was being counted on for the coming year other than the money" from the fund for the construction of municipal"" buildings"" during the next fiscal year of 1946-47, which would amount to approximately 8700,000. With the addition of 81,000,000, approved Thursday night by the People's Caucus, the total funds to be appropriated for the construction of municipal roads next year will be 81,700,000.
The bill adding two was introduced yesterday by Senator Quiñones It has the endorsement of the Governor Fixed at five the number of judges that would form the quorum in the Senate, was introduced in the Senate, by the Vice President of said body, Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones, the bill '8 creating two more positions of Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico. The bill establishes that from the date of its approval onwards, the Supreme Court shall be constituted by one Chief Justice and six Associate Justices. The current number of justices would continue until the President of the United States appoints the persons to fill the new positions. The Organic Act of Puerto Rico with respect to the judiciary determines: "The judicial power shall reside in the Courts and Tribunals of Puerto Rico already established and in exercise in accordance with and by virtue of the laws in force. The jurisdiction of said Courts and the proceedings therein, as well as the different functions and employees of the courts, shall continue as at present until otherwise provided by law; Provided, however, that the Chief and Associate Justices" of the Supreme Court shall be appointed" by the President, with the concurrence and consent of the Senate of the" United States, and the Legislature of" Puerto Rico shall have authority, not inconsistent with this Act, to, from time to time as it may deem expedient, organize, modify or make a new arrangement of the courts and their jurisdiction and procedure," with the "XMpclone leaves District Court- of the" United States" part Puerto Rico." The preaented bill requires five members" of the Supreme Court to con "tlt "quorum," therefore until ol Prealdonto appoint loa ninea justices, ol Court could not sit ai any of the present justices would be ill or auaont for some other reason. The bill with which we are concerned is said to have the endorsement of Governor Tugwell and the leadership of the People's Party and is almost certain to become law. The text of the bill is as follows: "Section I.-The purpose of this Act is to amend the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico and to make a new arrangement thereof by adding two (2) associate justices to said Court. Section 2.-For the purposes of achieving the purpose set forth in the preceding section, two new Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico are hereby created. Section 3.-From now on the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico shall be constituted by the following judges: The Chief Justice and the four (4) Associate Justices who have been members of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico up to this date and the two (2) Associate Justices whose positions are set forth in the second section of this Act. Section 4.--In their capacity as Members of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, the two (2) Associate Justices whose positions are created in the second preceding section shall have the same powers, powers and duties that by law correspond to the other Justices of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico. Section 5.-Hereafter five (5) members of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico shall constitute a quorum. Section 8.-As if the Chief Justice and the four (4) Associate Justices who have heretofore composed the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, each of the two (2) Associate Justices whose offices are held by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico shall constitute a quorum. (Continued on page 22) < -- - --- - --- - - - ■ THE DIRECT ROUTE NEW YORK-SAN JUAN WASHINGTON, 21. (PU)- * The Civil Aeronautics Board expects to submit for the consideration of President Traman "a decision st"> o., on Latin American air routes" in the near future. The decision is expected to grant Pan American AlrwtoiLuna a direct route from New York to San Juan. The decision has been considered by several menea. 1* itself has not yet been submitted to President Truman, because the Civil Aeronautics Board has tasted eaperating comments from half a dozen federated agendas.