THE MUN DO
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY: Partly cloudy. Scattered showers this afternoon. High yesterday: 88 degrees, 78. A hundredth of an inch of rain fell in San Juan. Winds from the east, twenty miles. No sign of a thunderstorm
newspaper of the baton
YEAR XXVIII
Don't buy at black market prices. Help fight inflation.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 6, 1946
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10637
Truman signs bill against rackets
Organized Labor reacts violently to passage Clark says it does not affect unions President rejected 'advice from!', Secretary Lewis B. Schwellenbach By Raymond Lahr WASHINGTON, 5. (PUU - The organized labor movement has reacted violently against the passage today by' President Truman of Rep. Hobbi's anti-"rackets" bill. Spokesmen for the labor movement have denounced the measure as one that infringes on the legitimate rights of unions, William Green, president of the American Federation of Labor, and Philip Murray, president of the Congress of Industrial Organizations, addressed Truman, calling for a veto of the bill. The new legislation brings labor under the jurisdiction of the Rackets Act, which provides for a maximum penalty of $10,000 fine and JO years in prison for anyone convicted of hindering interstate commerce through "robbery or extortion. In 1042, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the present racket law did not cover labor unions. In deciding to sign the bill, President Truman accepted the advice of Attorney General Torn Clark, who maintained that in such legislation the legitimate activities of unions were covered. Truman rejected the con-, se-, sejo of Secretary of Labor' Lewis B. Schwellenbach. The Secretary recommended veto of the bill; on the ground that the bill' did not offer sufficient safeguards. j The Hobbs bill is the fourth legislative m'dld of direct relation to the labor movement ¡ that lia "I been considered in Congress during the" last" sol" weeks, Truman first stirred up the labor movement, a few weeks" ago, when he proposed the d ibtlco anti-strike em>'mencla program. However, he has been applauded by labor for vetoing the Case anti-strike bill and for vetoing the OPA bill, on which so many amendments hinged that the legislation was almost null and void. Traman, while accepting the recommendations of the labor movement in connection with the latter two measures, ignored their requests in connection with the Hobb bill. In his message to Congress yesterday, President Truman reports that Torn Clark says the measure "in no way interferes with the rights of the Unions to fight for their legitimate objectives". The President says Clark has pointed to a section of the bill which provides that this legislation does not modify the Railway Labor Relations Act, the Morris-La Guardia Act, or the Wagner Act. "The Attorney General further notes that the legislative history of the measure indicates that the bill was not drafted with the intent to inhibit the labor movement from any of the rights that "have been recognized, including the right to strike and picket and to use other lawful and peaceful means of concerted industrial action," says Mr. Truman. And he continues: "It is with this understanding that I am signing the bill. The Hobbs bill was passed by the House three times before the Senate passed it recently; it was drafted as a result of a Supreme Court decision involving the New Mexico Longshoremen's Local Union.
A hurricane disaster rehabilitation plan to prevent loss of life and lessen property damage in Puerto Rico is under study by the General Staff of the Military Department of the West Indies under the direction of Brigadier General William W. Bessell Jr. The plan has been prepared with a view to giving ample warning of dangerous weather disturbances, and in the event of a major disaster, to fully utilize the services of military personnel and equipment in the Caribbean area and in conjunction with the Red Cross and public health agencies of the island and municipal governments, to provide relief to victims. The effectiveness of the plan will be tested soon when Army personnel and equipment are deployed to the Caribbean area.
Army has plan to help civilians in the event of a storm
The Military Department explains what the program consists of and how it will operate. It will be tested in a drill shortly.
Antilles Military Department equipment will be put to the test in a drill to familiarize those agencies involved with the plan with the operations, and to measure its importance in times of disaster. Methods for the evacuation of civilian personnel, equipment needed in shelters and systems to produce food and medical aid in a time of emergency in the areas hardest hit by the cyclone will be tested during the drill. Under the plan, all West Indies Military Department installations will operate on a 24-hour schedule during the cyclone period, bringing doctors, Army rations, blankets and military huts to devastated areas and troops will set up hospitals (Continued on page 22).
Engineer Antonio Lucchetti Executive Director of the Authority of River Sources. Strike feared at BPP over salaries Chief laughs Authority has rejected 15% demand. Inipase discussion By Luis Sánchez Cappa * Editor of EL MUNDO The probability that the workers of the Autoridad de Fuente de Fluviales will go on strike was reported yesterday by Francisco Borrero, president of the Island Council of the Unión de Trabajadores de la Industria Eléctrica y Riego, affiliated to the Federa1on Libre, and Nicolás Noguera Rivera, general secretary of the latter group. ! An impasse in the negotiations which for two weeks have been taking place between representatives of the Union and the BPP has created a situation similar to that of last year when a strike in the electrical industry was on the verge of occurring. The section of the collective ■ agreement, which was under discussion [by the parties, concerning salaries motivated last Thursday, July 4, the breakdown of the" negotiations. The workers allege that the Authority Administrator, Mr. Antonio Lucchetti, refused to grant a 15% wage increase. A commission of representatives of the BPP workers who visited EL MUNDO yesterday, headed by Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera, reported that "Mr. Luchettl has refused to agree to grant any increase in the workers' wages," The following statements regarding the situation that has recently arisen in the relations between the BPP workers and its representatives were authorized (continued on page 7).
NEWS DIGEST
Thirty-one of the Island's central SO's have completed the year's salary. - The cider industrialists met with the Commissioner of Agriculture. The Acting Governor expressed that he has not invited, officially or unofficially, President Trujillo to come to Puerto Rico. The American Legion closed its insular campaign for new members with a total enrollment of 18,188. - - - Seven matters submitted by the Governor to the consideration of the legislative chambers which meet next Monday. - Senator Alvin Barkley predicted yesterday that the President will sign the new bill extending for 1 year the term of OAP. 11 bill against rackets, signed by President Traman, includes labor unions. Organized labor has reacted
i Jo Organized Labor has reacted vio-' i slowly. ' * * * I I I On July 1 the ) law prohibiting the resale of bol lotos went into effect. - - - It has been recommended by a federal ex- ► porte the elimination of municipal ■ jails, consolidating- - - them with district jails, - - - - Six hundred and sixty-one passengers bring from New York the transpor-' i te "Marine Tiger," seflalized to . arrive in San Juan mafiana at 0 A.M. - - - - Twenty-one nations, InI elusive China, will meet in Paris on the 20th to structure peace treaties with the satellites of the defeated ■ Totalitarian Axis. I, - - - - Lic. Felix Renato Ortis assumed his duties yesterday as municipal Jura of San Juan. The Military Department informed /a>er that it has a plan to help,
the civilian population in the event of a hurricane. The "Teachers Association" will host a public forum on Monday on the school system. * Dr. Santos Amadeo will act for one year as Acting Dean of the College of Law, due to the absence of the Dean in property, Mr. Rodrigues Ramos. Rodrigues Olmo was replaced at the Verseras by Salvador Hernandez. Mexico lost to Nuevo Lsredo, 4-8 in trades. - Pereira vs. Alonso this afternoon in the Final Double A series between Juncos and Las Mesas. - - - It is feared that a strike may break out at the Waterworks Authority, as a demand for a salary increase made by the electrical industry workers is being challenged.
IN CONFLICT WITH THE LABOR UNION
OAP bill stalled in Senate
Bridges said they couldn't allocate funds for an agency that doesn't exist Barkley sure to pass legislation Prices rise further. WASHINGTON, 5. (PU) - The" forces - moving in the federal Senate against price control legislation - began today an organized attack on the OAP. While Democratic leader Alben Barkley, was trying to get the new legislation considered on the floor, Senator Bridges asked the Appropriations Committee to delay consideration of the bill to give OAP six million dollars for its operation during the current fiscal year, on the ground that "you can't appropriate funds for an agency that doesn't exist." J Barkley said there is no doubt ( [that "there will be a violent ba- ( stature regarding the Office of Price Administration, but pre , he said that ultimately the Senate will pass the new legislation [ and the President will sign it. Meanwhile, Secretary of Agriculture Clinton Anderson stated that he would request funds from Congress to guarantee retroactive subsidy payments to dairy industry stakeholders who had sustained their product prices at the levels set by the OAP while the problem in the legislative circuits was resolved. Across the nation, prices] continue to rise, with new cases being recorded in which other major cities have taken measures to control "rent". The National Homeowners' Association today reported that a dozen of the nation's largest cities have reestablished Fair Rent Payment Committees. In many cities there have been demonstrations of protest against the prices imposed both for alimmentl* j cial products and for rents. However, experts predict that price pressure will not be revealed on the retail market for at least a week. A dispatch from WA-hlngton, authorized by broker William Lander, says that diplomats and businessmen in the most important Latin American countries are watching with keen interest the effect on U.S. business life of the elimination of the rule- I (Continued on page 22) I
Molotov blocks sending out invitations to July 29 peace conference;
Calls for setting rules of procedure
Seven matters I submitted to the Legislature It is requested that the error in the liquor law now be corrected They suggest a measure for the University They request authorization to pay vacations to certain officials Seven matters were submitted to the consideration of the legislative chamber in the call for a special session of the Legislature issued yesterday by Acting Governor Manuel A. Perez. Among the" matters included what EL MUNDO had advanced, such" as amendments" to the drinking law," the Police budget, vacations for teachers," and other". The official notice reads as follows: "WHEREAS, the public interests demand action by the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico on certain matters of importance now pending. NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL A.l PEREZ, Acting Governor of Puerto Rico, by virtue of the authority vested in me by Article 33 of the Organic Law of Puerto Rico, approved March 2, 1917, as amended by Act of Congress of March 4, 1927, do hereby summon the members of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico to an extraordinary session of said Legislative Assembly, to commence on Monday, July 8, 1946, at 10:00 A. M., at 10:00 A. M., on Monday, July 8, 1946, at 10:00 A. M., at 10:00 A. M., at which time I hereby summon the members of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico to a special session of said Legislative Assembly, to be held on Monday, July 8, 1946. M., To amend the Puerto Rico Alcoholic Beverages and Spirits Act for the purpose of adjusting and simplifying the Taxes on alcoholic beverages, and for other purposes. 2.- To provide for the payment of all members of the Island Police Force in accordance with the rates fixed from time to time by the Island Police Commission; to amend Sections 6 and 36 of the "Island Police Act," approved March 12, 1908, as amended from time to time, and for other purposes. To amend Section 1 of Act 39, entitled: "To establish the twelve-month school year for the teachers of the public schools of Puerto Rico; to provide for the granting of a school vacation period with anticipated salary; to direct the Commissioner of Instruction to prepare and submit for the consideration of the Governor and the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico, a program of educational activities in addition to those of the public schools of Puerto Rico; to provide for the granting of a school vacation period with anticipated salary; to direct the Commissioner of Instruction to prepare and submit for the consideration of the Governor and the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico, a program of educational activities in addition to those of the public schools of Puerto Rico.(a) To authorize the Commissioner of Instruction to "establish a program of educational activities in addition to those of the regular school year that will allow the employment of public school teachers during the summer period, as well as the use of the services of unemployed teachers for the term necessary for the extension, expansion or effective implementation of said program, and for other purposes", approved on April 15, 1941, as amended by Act No. 24 of April 9, 1942; to add to said Act a new section to be called "Section 5 (a)"; and for other purposes. To authorize the Auditor and the Treasurer of Puerto Rico to pay to the officers of the Insular Government appointed by the President of the United States, out of any funds available in the Insular Treasury, the amount of compensation to which they are entitled under the laws of the United States for all annual leave and vacation accrued and current at the date on which their resignation or separation from service becomes effective. ' 5.- By exempting from the payment of costs plaintiffs in civi- i los actions authorized by section 205 I (o) of the Federal Act known as the < Emergency Price Control Act > of 1942, as amended. 1 6.- Appropriating funds for the expenses, during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1947, of the perma- ( ( nent Legislative Commission created by Act No. ( 313, approved May 115, 1945. e 7.- To allow the UnlversI- jity of Puerto Rico to make use of the funds assigned by Laws £ numbers 98 and 124, approved on May 8, 1945, for the purpose of paying for the properties acquired by means of forced expropriation. ( 8. To provide for the expenses of this extraordinary session.
Return to base after dropping atomic / ' B >♦ -~~3ririw * iiuraww H Ira Base personnel welcome the B-29 aircraft, "DaveS Dream", as it returns to "its starting point at Kwajaleln Atoll on the first day of" after dropping the atomic bomb on the naval flotilla that hit the target at Bikini, in the first joint Army-Navy test. This is one of the first original photos of the atomic test distributed in Washington (Army photo, distributed by the Associated Press).
Wants to prevent Russia from losing in vote Byrnes exasperated by delaying tactics of Eastern Soviet minister opposes China's invitation "Worst day we've ever had," says delegate. Deep Pessimism By LEON PEARSON PARIS, 5. (INS)-The Conference of Foreign Ministers of the "Big Four" suddenly plunged again today into a whirlwind of confusion and disagreement when Soviet Chancellor Molo- . tov objected to sending out invitations to the 21-nation conference-which was originally scheduled for the 29th of this month-without first specifying the rules of procedure to be followed at the conference. The Soviet insistence on this point is apparently intended to prevent Russia from being defeated in a vote at the conference. After about four hours of discussion on the question of Invitations, one delegate said, "Today may be said without doubt to have been the worst day we have ever had. I am beginning to wonder if we will ever be able to agree on anything. In one of the most heated moments of the discussion, the American Secretary of State, Byrnes, said to Molotov; "I was here yesterday until midnight, so that you could get the money you wanted (referring to the Italian reparations). I am ready to stay again today until midnight to prevent you from blocking world peace". Molotov repeatedly "put obstacles in the way" according to one of the American delegates. First there was a lengthy debate on whether or not to discuss sending the Invitations, then Molotov objected to including China among the inviting powers. Third, Molotov insisted that the rules of procedure should be included in the Invitations, apparently trying to prevent Russia from being defeated in a vote at the twenty-one-nation conference. The fourth obstacle presented by Molotov was his insistence on discussing the German problem at tomorrow's meeting instead of finishing the discussion on the invitations, thus further delaying the convening of the peace conference. Observers described tonight's session as "heated" and say that Byrnes totally forgot diplomatic language to protest Molotov's delaying tactics. After the successes achieved yesterday, today's events have plunged the delegates, tonight, into deep pessimism. One of the British delegates declared after the meeting: "Never was so little obtained in a prolonged and vehement session of the ministers of the four great powers". Molotuv constantly blocked all attempts to settle "a trifling matter" such as the text of the Invitations to the Peace Conference, trying to have it put aside until after the German problem was discussed, thus trying to force the other three ministers to discuss the matter this very night. Byrnes accused Molotov of "gratuitously insulting China" by refusing to be included among the powers invited to the conference. Opposing Molotov's proposal that the rules of procedure at the peace conference be fixed now, Byrnes insisted that all conferences determine their own rules. Byrnes and British Foreign Minister Ernest Be* vln were perplexed by Molotov's strategy regarding the rules for the conference, pre. - The lack of water has worsened because of the
Water shortage worsened by drought HMM"" <M * SIA director fears need to reduce service That "the prevailing situation in the water supply to the San Juan metropolitan area has become critical, and the problem is expected to worsen in the next 48 hours," because "the aqueduct's "reserve" is being depleted due to the lack of rain in the river basin that supplies it", The crisis that has arisen in the San Juan metropolitan area due to the scarcity of water in our aqueduct system," said Mr. Cuevas, "is more acute than the one we suffered during the month of April; That is, we have been forced to reduce the normal supply from 30,000,000 gallons per day to only 20,000,000 gallons per day", The SIA Director also stated that the recent rains "have not benefited our" liquid "reserves" in any way, since they "have not" (continued on page 22).
Report by Representative of the Bureau of Federal Prisons, Loveland, has the sympathies of the Department of Justice > The representative of the Bureau of Federal Prisons before the Insular Government, Mr. Frank Loveland, who has participated in the "study" that the Department of Justice has been carrying out to achieve penal reform in Puerto Rico, has recommended the elimination of the existing "municipal jails". As a suitltute to
this system of confinement of persons convicted of serious crimes, Mr. Loveland has recommended the construction of district jails that would allow for the consolidation and elimination of municipal jails. - It was reported yesterday that these recommendations have the sympathies of the Department of Justice, to which Mr. Loveland has " rendered his reports on the penal reform being contemplated. In arriving at this conclusion, it was reported that extensive information was obtained on the conditions and system of confinement of convicted felons in the municipal jails, and the above-mentioned determination was reached. The latter relate to the type of new district jails to be built to implement the plan. (continued on page 22)
CIDER INDUSTRIALS SEE Izquierdo Insist on Elimination of Sugar Restrictions [ The problems confronting the cider industry were presented yesterday to the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, Señor Luis A. Izquierdo, by a commission of industrialists and harvesters, who interviewed him on behalf of the Committee for the Promotion of the referred industry. i Messrs. Ammonio Sallcettl, An- * tonlo Trueba, Eugenio Rivera and Vlc- 1 tor Fusté had a broad exchange of impressions with the Co- ! I missioned and with the subcomlslona- 1 two José Garcia Abréu, of Comer- ' ció, and Ulplano Colón, of Agrlcul- < tura, the group of harvesters and Industrialists requesting the good i offices nel Depai * amento de Agri- i cultura y Comercio to solve l some of the problems discussed- : Among them, the one concerning the pre- ( paraclón of cider in brine, l| to avoid the dn o that some ve- i ces causes a fermentation defec- ¡ tuosa, due to the action of cler-!< Another matter discussed was the shortage of containers for shipping cider. i The harvesters and industrialists made some suggestions aimed at developing the cider business as soon as the abnormal constancy of the industry ceases. < c The group called, in addition, for In- । -sist in achieving the elimination, as < ante" as possible, of restrictions t on sugar for the processing t of the fruit. A spokesman for the co- > secheros said that Comlslo-u nado Izquierdo offered to coopera-'i (Continued on page 22) L
Seven Puerto Ricans Accepted Permanently by Army Puerto Rican officers among 9,800 chosen from 100,000 applications for executive postings By JEAN VAN VRANKEN WASHINGTON, 5 (INS). - The War Department announced today the names of seven Puerto Ricans nominated by President Traman for permanent positions in the U.S. Regular Army. The Puerto Rican officers who have been recommended to retain their positions are as follows: Infantry Captain Car- ( the Betances Ramirez, Section 1705, San Juan; Major R. Ro-
dríguez Molina, of the Medical Corps, resident of Huicy Street, Condado; and Lieutenant Felipe Díaz, resident of 64 15th Street, Barrio Obrero. In addition, Captain Rafael Negrón, resldenet at 5 Union St., Santurce, has been recommended for the permanent rank of first lieutenant. Captain Miguel A. del Toro, of Cabo Rojo, has been recommended for the permanent rank of first lieutenant. Colonel Manuel Serra Jr. of the Army Signal Corps, San Juan, has been recommended for the rank of major, and Lieutenant Emy L. Matta of 56 Tatt Street, Santurce, has been recommended for second lieutenant. These men are among 9,800 officers chosen from among 100,000 applications submitted for executive positions in the U.S. Peace Corps. The War Department reports that the applicants were carefully screened to 1 (Continued* on page 21) |
Bi । ■ 1 1 1 A. KUMKIGUKZ MOLINA One of the 7 Puerto Rican officers" accepted" nermanontamenta by the | U.S. Army VVV.
Governor says he has not invited President Trujillo The Information Office authorized the following yesterday: 'MJltlmamente rumors have been circulating in Puerto Rico to the effect that Acting Gov. Manuel A. Perez has invited the Hon. Rafael Leonidas Trujillo, President of the Dominican Republic for a visit to the Island. "The Governor In.terino wishes, to clarify that he has extended no such 1 Invitation officially or unofficially!!! mind." 1
[equating what might otherwise po- ■ j d be a vote of fifteen to six in the conference ds twenty-one nations. (The six serianteRussia, Poland, Yugoslavia. The discussion as to whether or not China should be included as a "member of the Council of Foreign Ministers" was not settled, Molotov refusing to include her and Byrnes and Bevin insisting that this had been agreed upon at the Potsdam and Potsdam meetings. The Potsdam and Moscow meetings. Molotov tried to postpone the meeting of the Invitations, but immediately a full-day meeting was called to discuss the problem of the "problem" (Continued on page 22).