THE MOON
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLANDS, HÓY- Generally fair weather, except for a few showers along the coastline in the morning and scattered showers over the Interior in the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN- High yesterday. 80; low 78. Rain, bringing".
44 Pages 3/
MORNING JOURNAL
Help fight tuberculosis. Purchase, Christmas stamps,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SAbADÓ 14 DICEMBRE DÉ 1946
Eniarad as second class matter. Po "t Office, San Juan, P. R.
HUMER 16757
kwo stxvirr
Tahonas of the Island in support of going on strike
It was not until 10:30 p.m. that the Senate began its Thursday night session, December 12. Samuel Qulftone presided. The Governor's communication extending the convocation in the form published in this newspaper was read. The Committee on Insular Government recommended that the Senate Bill 2 "to authorize the Governor to declare an emergency in case of strike or threatened strike by employees of the Insular Government" be approved as amended. Ij" ComlNlón d" Treasury recommended approval of P. del S, t "on additional pay to Government employees until June 30, 1947." Were read" on first reading P. del S. 13, by Seftor Gálgel Polanco, amending the Insu-
Compendium of News
During the" last" day" the flow of water from the San Juan aqueduct has increased. * The Senate defeated a motion by Córdova Chirino for Investí, gar the strike at the paper mill. Rarreto PArt* opposed the motion. " - - Pnnce water service has been improved. SIA is studying additional reforms. * - - - Tomorrow Sunday the national president of the Ladies Auxiliary" of the Legion, "eftor" of Norton Pearl, will arrive on the Island. - - - - Order eliminating the APO does not end the" restrictions, warns M on tañer. ♦ - - Delivery of fourth economic program extended to Dec. 81 by Planning Board. - ♦ - - Puerto Rico second to Cuba in athletics, 87 to 88. ♦ - - Today they ate "* the second round of the professional baseball championship - * - Puerto Rico beat Venezuela in Olympic Mlsbol, 9 by 8. - - - Leon Blum finds difficulties at the head of the government frencAs. M
Santiago Pinero alleges that he has received more than 130 messages from endost Increased price per sack of flour The industry reiterates that it is operating at a loss and will make a decision tomorrow The Puerto Rican Association of Tahonero", which preílde *1 seftor Santiago Plftero. has been receiving telegraphic message" and communication"" by mail from dirtlntaz part" of the lila, adhering to the" proposal" of the extraordinary general meeting that "will be held tomorrow in the "halls of the Atociaclón de Induttrlalei. to consider the "Ituaclón for which eita Industry is going through, as well as a possible stoppage in the production of bread in the whole slab, Aal reported yesterday the prealdápte of the organization, who stressed having received "máa of 130 communications which reflect the desire of the industry to £esar in their work, before the delay of the Government in resolving the demands for an increase in the price of food." "The situation is now further aggravated," said Mr. Plftero, "for I have received a letter from the Midland Flowers Mile, a major wheat flour mill, which communicates another increase in the price of flour of 30 cents per 200-pound sack. This will further increase the cost of production and, consequently, make the position of the industry, which is going through one of its most critical periods, more difficult. On the hsy probablildsdc" of a. the" indueatrialet can, "aperar ioa weeks máa. in what finishes the eatudlo that carries out the lunta of Salarlo Minimum, "work of production, postponing it the duck in the tshona", declared Íue "until now, the tahonas do not show to share this criterion. The communications "in my power give to understand that the industry cannot assimilate any longer the sordidness of the operation. This is also demonstrated by the fact that the bakery owners are only refraining from buying wheat flour at the prevailing price, which would force them in the future to a norm* "in the production of p*u dw -ontlnuar functioning. They understand or" tahoawoa "n** "I Government has also given more than enough time to pay attention to the problem and solve the price increase request". - The president of the tahoneros also added that the industry has circulated the call for an extraordinary meeting among the bakeries in the small towns and the rural area. "In Ponce," he said, "the situation, which the tahoneros (Continued on page 8)
Senate approved yesterday the bill for the increase of salaries.
It also approved the bill against strikes by public employees, after debate, Mr. Muñoz Marín and Mr. Bolívar Pagán.
P. del S, 14. of Seftor Gélgel Polancó. "authorizing the Attorney General to appoint as Special Prosecutors the attorneys of the Office of Price Administration," of the Office of Supply and of the Department of Justice to act in cases of infraction to the" price laws; S. P. 18, by Senator Gélgel Polancó. S. 18, by Sen. Gélgel Poanco, amending S. 2 of the Insular Supply Act; S. 16, by Sens. Qulftone" and Fonfrlas, "to abolish the Municipal Court and the Capital Night Court and create the Capital Municipal Court." S. P. 17, by Seftor Qulftone"; amending Act 394 of 1948; and S. P. 18, by Seftor Gélgel Polanco; to amend the law by establishing the right of safe home. Senate Bills Nos. 14 and 18 were approved on second and third reading. Senator Córdova Chlrlno informed the Presidency that several days ago the folder containing the bills to be discussed disappeared from his desk. The House reported having approved the P. of S. 5 and having accepted the amendments introduced by the Senate to the P. of C. 3. A communication from the Commissioner of Labor was read, informing that he had not carried out the investigation requested by the Senate with respect to the strike of the workers of the paper mill because the Governor has entrusted the matter to Judge Arcillo Alvarado and he believes he should wait for the result of the investigation. Mr. Córdova Chlrlno requested that the Senate appoint a committee to investigate the strike situation at the paper mill, stating that he has news of attempts to break the strike and that the police have harassed the strikers by making the case against them. (Continued on page 14) 31,922 veterans still unemployed The number of "veterans" who have received aid from the Federal Veterans Employment Service in Puerto Rico has now reached 31,922. Rico, has now reached 30,091, reports Oscar L. Bunker. Director of this "orv;colon Puerto Rico or Virgin Islands, out of that number, 31,923 veterans are still waiting for suitable employment. The six offices that the Veterans Employment Service operates in Puerto Rico, Mr. Bunker says, have been able to employ an average of 1,000 veterans monthly, but employment is becoming increasingly difficult. Mr. Bunker appealed to all employers in Pto. (Continued on page 6).
Settler participation is still doubtful.
Uncertainty is due to disagreement with the APA in the past By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA Editor of EL MUNDO The participation of the Colono* de Caño Sector of the Puerto Rico Farmers' Association, which has not yet been definitively decided by the colonos, "still reveals information obtained yesterday by EL MUNDO. Faltando "olamente cuatro dia" to comment on the" negotiations between lo* representatives of the A "oelación do Productora* de Azúcar and the Sindicato de Trabajadora" de la Industria Azucarera, yesterday not "e spoke officially announced by ol Sector de Colono" >1 to take delivery or not in the" discussions of the agreement that will govern it in the next "afra. The Union did not speak yesterday "omitted the draft of the agreement to the" settlers", as it did some* days ago, with the A, P, A. In previous "afto" the" representatives of the" settlers" have participated in the* deliberation "*, together with the* delegate* of the A. P. A. But yesterday, a source related to the Sector de Colonos reported that "officially it could not announce the attendance of the* colono* to the* negotiation "*," The source recalled "however that the* colono* have recently made an agreement, in the sense of "not shunning dialogue" with the ohreroa "about the agreement." Since the President of the Colonist Sector, Mr. Pedro Nido, is in the United States, an official announcement on the matter is not expected until his arrival in the country, since, according to information, it is Mr. Nido who is authorized to decide whether or not the colonists will participate in the "dualonea", as well as in the other countries. On the other hand, "| seftor Pedrp Vega Berrloa, Prealdente del Sindicato Azucarero, announced yesterday that next Monday* will be "ometldo a loa colonoa ol proyecto de convenio redectado por el Sindicato. Mr. Vega Barrio indicated that he expects that the settlers will subsequently "decide to sign the agreement with the worker", adding that "if the settlers refuse to sign this agreement with the Union, we will proceed to request the holding of an election of the Labor Relations Board, in order to determine whether or not the settlers are obliged to sign a collective agreement with the Union". Although up to now and in previous years, the settlers have participated in the negotiations with the workers, their representatives have not signed the contract with them, at the end of the discussions, due to disagreements between them and the producers, as a result of the agreement reached between the latter and the workers, with which the settlers have not agreed. On the same day, the settlers* withdrew from the" factory shortly after the producers and workers* reached an agreement on the" harvesting* to be paid" in the agricultural phase of the sugarcane induction. Although it is expected that Mr. Nido will decide on the participation of the settlers in the negotiation of the 1947 agreement with the representatives of the APA, the impression prevailed in circles related to the sugar industry that the settlers will not take part in the aforementioned dialogue. It is indicated by the fact that on more than one occasion the settlers have not been in agreement with the agreement adopted by the producers and the workers; and it is given as a possible thing that the settlers may decide to discuss independently the contract with the agricultural workers of the sugar industry. Next Tuesday at ten o'clock at (Continued on page 8)
Colonel Miguel A. Mullos was appointed Director of the Ofinina Insular do Veterano", The JRT decided to reopen the paper mill. The U.N. Political Committee unanimously approved a resolution limiting armaments," an action that was hailed by the United Kingdom, the United States and England as a first step toward post-farming, the federal government will renew the 40 percent allocation for rice destined for Puerto Rico, The quota has been reduced since the first of December. Next week the rd announces details of the new arrangement. - President of tahoneros says she has received more than 180 messages supporting the idea of going on strike. Announces new increase in price of sack of flour. The President of the tahoneros says he has received more than 180 messages in support of the idea of going on strike. Returned north Congressman Byrnes, after dervislating militare" aqni facilities. - - - In meeting in Col. Rote's office m Reported that" robberies have increased in the mu* It is doubtful* still the participation of the settlers in the negotiation of the collective bargaining agreement for the 1847 safra.
TRUMAN FEARS NEW STOPPAGES
WASHINGTON, 18. (PU)-President Truman expressed concern at the moment over the possibility of new labor-management strikes in the course of the year.
H. A. Truman
The problem was discussed with his Cabinet at a conference held at the White House. HeI cretary of the ' Interior, Julius ' A. Krug, head . of the Government-controlled mines said as he left i" meeting that the meeting had ' been about "the eco-
TO VWWWWIWIW the general economic picture of the nation." For his part, Attorney General Torn O. Clark indicated that the conference had to do with what he broadly termed "the big picture."
The Puerto Rico Labor Relations Board, on its own initiative, has agreed to reopen the case of the existing controversy at the paper mill, and to hold a public hearing next Friday, to resolve whether or not a new labor election should be held at the plant. At a meeting held yesterday by the members of the Board under the residence of Mr. Fernando Ierra Bordéela, the Board, after studying the Report rendered by the Investigator of the Board, Mr. Pedro J. Brull, agreed to reopen the paper mill.Brull, agreed to reopen the case of the controversy at the paper mill, The reason that has moved the Board to reopen the case is that evidence was alleged during the investigation which revealed the charge made against the management of the mill by the Paper Industry Workers Union, to the effect that in the election held among the workers of the aforementioned plant on August 29th, a person who was not entitled to vote voted for another person who appeared to vote for him in the election, i voted for another person who was on the eligible* list, but who was not entitled to vote either" I The Board will hold a public hearing on the 20th day of this month to investigate this fact, to investigate this* fact* and any other* in connection with the petition filed by the Union which went on strike, and to review, after such public hearing, the certificate given to the Brotherhood of Workers of the Puerto Rico Pulp and Paper Corp., whether or not it is an Impediment: for a new election to be decreed "*, as a result of the fact" Inves- i (Continued on pAgina 8)
Agriculture to Renew 40% Rice Allocation for Puerto Rico; Next Week Announces Details
* UN Committee approves measures to disarm 1 - United States ° for disarmament 1 - U.S., Rusii ' and England lo c ree t : first step for pai : Russian accusation over census Molotov said NU tried to destruii Soviet paper By ROBERT MANNING United Press Correspondent FLUSHING, N. Y., 13. (PU)-The Political and Security Committee, consisting of fifty-four members of the United Nations, unanimously approved the draft resolution providing for a sweeping arms reduction, a measure which the representatives of the United States, Russia and Great Britain called the "first step" in ridding the world of the threat of war. Then, in considering the much-debated problem of the world census of troops and armaments," Molotov accused the United Nations of trying to destroy the Soviet paper on the census. The draft resolution, which has been sent to the General Assembly for formal adoption, provides that the Security Council shall adopt a treaty on arms reduction and atomic energy control. The treaties would then be submitted to a special Assembly for sanction and later ratification by UN member countries. Before the draft was adopted by acclamation, the big* and small* nactone* called it the first concrete step toward universal disarmament by the world organization for Nazi and security. Molotov said the decision to convene a special assembly to sanction arms control plans had put countries on "the important and difficult road leading to general arms reduction." The U.S. delegate, Democratic Senator Tom Connally, called the decision d" "a real hope," and congratulated Soviet Molotdv on Russian cooperation in drafting the resolution. For his part, British Rep. Sir Hartley Shawcrois. said he had "real hope" that the Security Council would quickly prepare treaties on disarmament. The draft resolution sent to the General Assembly maintains the authority of the UN Atomic Energy Commission. (1) The General Assembly requests the Security Council to draft measures for regulation and reduction of armaments, and to submit such measures to a special session of the Assembly; (2) The Atomic Energy Commission is urged to expedite its work to outlaw atomic bombs and to devote nuclear energy to peaceful purposes; (3) The Security Council is requested to establish effective and non-veto-able safeguards for the use of nuclear energy; (4) The Security Council is requested to establish effective and non-veto-able safeguards for the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes; (5) The General Assembly is requested to establish effective and non-veto-able safeguards for the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. ves and not subject to veto for inspection and other measures intended (Continued on page 8)
Normality in maritime route Pacific and Isla Me Connick Steamship informs Me Connick Steamship will begin in second half of month The maritime transit between Puerto Rico* and the United States ports, located* *in the Pacific zone, will begin to normalize"" during the second half of December, according to McCormick Steamship Co, company that represents the nsves qu* cover **this route Due to the last strike tnarftlmi, -st" service was interrupted since the beginning of the month d* octubr*. With the settlement of *1 strike dispute in the Gulf and Eastern ports of the United States, transportation with the Pacific port" continued to be interrupted, as the" officers and maritime employees" remained on strike in this area until only several weeks ago." It was announced yesterday that several vessels destined for Puerto Rico are now loading general cargo into their holds at the port of San Francisco and other western U.S. distribution centers. It has been notified* to the above company that "e has tentatively fixed -( 18 d* diclemhr", as the date "n qu* n is to depart for 1* lila the first vessel shaved of groceries and general cargo, consigned to the Insular trade. Another vessel *atA also set to sail from San Francisco for December 28, it being expected that no less than five vessels will resume operation* of cargo transportation during this period. La lila receives from this zone a large quantity of grains, especially rice and beans. Also canned foods and canned fruits. For some time now, *1 local commerce has been placing large orders for these products, which were stopped on account of the maritime strike.
Department of Instruction, where- ' of 1" dló possession the Interim Commissioner, seftor Herbert A. Martin, , thus ending *1 Interim that . for about do aflo and a half passed in the jefatura of said depen1 dencia insular, since the resignation ' of the previous Comlalonado, doctor 1 José M. Gallardo, - In the act of taking the oath of office, Vlllaronga said, among other things, that for the success of his duties his "maximum and primary loyalty will always be centered on the interests and needs of the people of Puerto Rico". At ten o'clock in the morning, numerous people came to the Department of Instruo' clon to greet the new Commissioner and to wish him success in his official endeavors. Among them was a commission of the Teachers' Association, headed by the "eftor" Luí" Muftlz S Luí" Muftlz Sout- ■ front and Virgilio Brunet; lo" doctoi re" Pedro A. Cebollero o I "mael i Rodríguez Bou, del Con "ejo Supe- - rlor de En "eftanza; el Rector de la f Unlverildad, "eftor Jahne Benitez; ' una comisión de la Liga Insular de . A "odaclon" d" Parents and Teacher", led by the prealdente, "eftor Pedro Court; and another". Briefly" moment" d""pué", a call was received from Fortaleza, leaving lo" present towards the office of the Governor, don Je "ú" T. Plftero. Seftor Vlllaronga was accompanied by his wife; the Acting Comlalonado, Seftor Martin; the Suhcomlalonado, "eftor Francl "co Collazo; and the" other "per "ona" who attended "1 Department. At the invitation of the new Commissioner, all the personnel of the Department of Instruction went to Fortaleza to witness the act of taking the oath of office. It was about eleven o'clock in the morning that "1 "eftor Vlllaronga paaó "J Department to take effective po "*"lón d" "u port, celebrating an external change d" lmpreílone" ron lo" "uhcoml "ionado" Martin and Collazo. Governor Plftero, in introducing "eftor Vlllaronga, said he hoped that the new Commissioner would have the cooperation of all and that he, as Governor, was the first to offer it. The president of the Teachers' Association, Mr. Muftlz Souffront, said that "the island teachers' association will put all its efforts to ensure that the work of Mr. Vlllaronga has a happy realization, for the good of the children and the people as a whole. Also speaking were Rector Benitez and Vice-President of the Teachers' Association, Virgilio Brunet. Brunat, who said he was speaking in a strictly private capacity, after expressing his satisfaction with the appointment of Mr. Vlllaronga, declared that he *hoped that in br*v* time the reforms that the Puerto Rican teaching profession has been requesting for more than 30 years in *1 the Island's school system would crystallize *in reality. Mr. Brunet referred to the fact that school education should be conducted in *1 Spanish language and that the teaching of English as a subject should be intensified. He added that *this was the hope of all the teachers and of the people. and that with only this work *1 rtaevo Commissioner to fill it the asgirations of the msgist*rlo and of the pueThe Governor took the floor again, to close *1 act, saying. *Among other things, he said that *1 **flo-' Vlllaronga will have his full cooperation. He further said, "For me he will be the best Commissioner we have ever had. We are at vl*rn*s 13 and *sto *in the United States *s bad omen, but here it will be a lucky day. It will bring us good luck. Seftor Commissioner, you have chosen well the facha." Vlllaronga received official notification of his appointment on Wednesday. sent by the federal Secretary of the Interior, Seftor Julius A. (Continued on page 14)
Gov. Pinero reported yesterday that a new ship has been obtained. He will soon meet with representatives of the sugar industry.
The Government intends to maintain a regular supply of rice for public consumption in Puerto Rico, Governor Pinero revealed yesterday during his weekly conference with reporters. The Governor informed that an additional ship has been secured on the Pacific coast to bring in rice, and that an offer of rice from Brazil is also being studied, of which samples are being awaited and the guarantee that, in the event of an emergency, the product will correspond to the samples. Mr. Plftero said that Mr. William Baliano, one of the Palace officials in charge of matters related to maritime transportation, has left for the United States to finalize the arrangements for the import of rice from the Pacific coast. Mr. Plftero also said that Ballano will have to make arrangements with the directors of the Office of Price Administration to see if the rice coupons can be honored a few days before the 24th of December, something which the retail trade finds sufficient to please the public in their Christmas shopping. -The Governor announced to the journalists his intention to meet in the course of the next week all the representatives of the sugar industry to discuss the present situation, related to quota and cycle. The Governor made to the porto(Continued on page 20.)
No Boricuoi died in the New York fire NEW YORK, 18. - Do" little boy" of the creek, who were thrown out of has" started "a hell of a fire" have been arrested on charges of arson, while rescue workers dug through the debris of the "cm" of housing" destroyed yesterday by the flames, at 184th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, with little hope of finding any survivors of one of the worst disasters in New York's history, in which twenty people perished and forty others were seriously injured. Seventeen others, presumed dead under tons of brick and concrete of the destroyed six-story house, are still unaccounted for. A check made at the Fire Department* reveals that there are no portorrlqueflo* involved in the disaster. Most of the people who lived in the house were Italians, the rest being Americans. Only one boy with a thin fin who appears in the list of the dead reappears with a Spanish name: Edgar Remires, but todsvío has been Impossible to determine the nationality of his family.
Villaronga assumed the reins of Instruction : i ° i
* Bh * ML v J A I Sk' ' / rKíSw ■■ '''' ■ ¿jíIF * I y B Wa " - ■ V
Moment in which "1 new Commissioner of Instruction, "eftor Mariann Vlllernng," preat the Oath of office before the Acting Executive Secretary. From ísqulerd* to right: "eftor Jaime Benitos, Rector of In Unlveraidad de Puerto Rico; Señor Nteoláa Almlroty, Acting Executive Secretary; "eflor Pedro C. Cebollero, Dean of the College of Pedagogy of the University; aeflor Lula Muflís Souffront, President of Is Asociación de Maestros de Puerto Rico; aeflnr Vlllarnnga, and the Governor, Don Jesús T. Piflero.
i The Governor invited the swearing-in to take place in his office. -In a brief ceremony in the Governor's office in Fortaleza, Seftor Mariano Vlllaronge was sworn in yesterday as Commissioner of Public Instruction of Puerto Rico by Acting Executive Secretary, Seftor Nicolás Almlroty. Shortly thereafter, pa "ó ni
Eisenhower is asked to testify WASHINGTON, 18. (PU)- The Army-Navy Bulletin, in an editorial published on the shooting. Dwight D. Elaenhower should authorize "a clear statement" on whether he has political ambitions. The Bulletin refers to published reports* urging that Elsenhower be selected as the Democratic candidate for President. Elsenhower has also been mentioned as a possible Republican candidate for* I" first m*glstratur* of I* nation. Says the editorial that Elsenhower should, at the very least, tell - i* nation to the he ee either Democrat or Republican.
Water flow has increased lately SIA plans to maintain service in ahaMos for several more days The Administrator and Chief Engineer of the Insular Aqueduct Service, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, declared yesterday that the recent rains have allowed an increase in the flow of water from the Piedras River, which has improved the supply of the liquid to the San Juan metropolitan area. He expressed that the Service expects to be able to maintain such regularity in the water supply for several more days, depending on the continuation of the rains. Mr. Cuevas also said that the new deep well that is being connected to the Hato Rey main well will be finished next week, "which will make it possible to increase the flow of water to the metropolitan area and continue normalizing supplies to the population. This new well will provide an additional average of three million gallons of water per day. The agency has continued efforts to procure the necessary materials to continue the installation of another deep well that is pumping water to the surface and that is not being used due to the lack of pipelines to supply it. Hato Rey is also set to start sinking another new well next week. Mr. Cuevas explained that the supplies from the Bevamón river, which had also improved a little with the recent downpours, "have begun to diminish, and are now extremely deficient". However, the Piedras river, more favored by the rains, continues to provide a long-lasting flow of liquid. Due to difficulties in the installation of the pipe for the new well in Hato Rey, it has not yet been able to be connected to the main pipe, since it has been announced that it will begin to provide liquid to the population in the middle of the present week. The director of the SIA said that the contractors, Antonsantl y Cia., are solving this small difficulty, and have announced that the connection will be completed by the end of next week. In the meantime, no further interruptions to the water supply are expected.
Ellis says there will be plenty of grain ■ ■ ■ - Will govern for period Re one month, maintained as needed Tonnage will exceed local consumption Island contracts are concentrated in very few mills By JEANVAN VRANKEN INS Correspondent WASHINGTON, 13 (INS) -The United States Department of Agriculture today indicated the likelihood of renewal of the 40 per cent allocation - emergency quota - for shipments of rice destined for Puerto Rico and Hawaii, Leonard B. Ellls, Chief of the Grain Bureau, explained that in view of Puerto Rico's shortfall in the supply of rice, the Department believes that the allocation to Puerto Rico should be increased. The details* of the increase, Sólis added, will not be announced* until next week. The Agriculture official went on to say that the Department "will probably reinstate the 40% emergency quota that was eliminated to take effect during the month of November. The* figure* now in effect allocates to the Island 18% of the Southern crop and 28% of 1* California crop,,, to* be emb*rc*d for *the* territory* and credited to the* Federal Government's* purchase*. The mills in both areas were allowed to ship 40% of their production to Puerto Rico during the month of November to replenish the island's supplies which had been drastically reduced during the period of a major strike. Local importers and island government officials made efforts to keep the 40% allocation in place to prevent future emergencies from leaving the island without a grain of rice. Bilis explained that under "the new arrangement that is projected "Puerto Rico will receive no less than 40% of all production," adding that the percentage represents a tonnage that far exceeds the needs of the Iris and that "it will be impossible to ship that much rice to Puerto Rico." The purpose of resuming the emergency figure, he explained, is to allow Island millers who have contracts with Puerto Rican importers who sell 40% of their production to the Island. He indicated that most rice producers do not ship the grain to Puerto Rico and that "the Puerto Rican contracts are concentrated in a comparatively few mills. Ellls said that the problem of rice supplies to the island "is a shipping issue rather than a quota issue. He said that increasing the amount destined for the Island would enable Island traders to obtain rice when ships were available to carry rice to the Island in those months when the c*rg" space was insufficient. The emergency quota would be effective for at least one month and could be renewed on a monthly basis, "if the need continues," said Mr. Ellls. He added that if an emergency arose which prevented Puerto Rico from receiving an adequate amount under its quota, the Essential Commodity Credit Corporation (ECC) could serve the Island Importers with government-purchased goods. It was indicated, however, that "1 Department of Agriculture would hesitate to take such action, since it would encourage millers to sell their rice to the CCC rather than take it to the commercial market. The CCC buys unpolished rice at the same price that Puerto Rico importers pay for polished rice. If Puerto Rico's rice supply were to go through the CCC, the Price Administration Office would face a price situation in which unpolished rice would have to be sold at the maximum price of polished rice, it was explained. Mrs. Pearl will arrive tomorrow Maftana Sunday, at a quarter past one o'clock in the afternoon, will arrive in Puerto Rico the seftora of Norton H. Pearl, national director of the American Legion Women's Auxiliary Corps. Pearl is visiting the island for the first time at the invitation of the Puerto Rico chapter of the organization, presided over by Mrs. Carmen L. Cuevas de Centellóos. On Monday, at four o'clock in the afternoon, Mrs. Pearl will address the Ladies Auxiliary of the Legion by radio. Her address will be broadcast over station WIAC. On Monday she will be honored at the Condado Hotel. In addition, a tour has been planned throughout the Island, so that the visiting lady will have an opportunity to meet her.