THE MONDO
36 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
36 Pages 5 Ctv ®' 2 Sections .
DIARIO DE l.A MANABA
YEAR XXVIII
Entered u second oíase matter. Poet Office, Juan flan, P. B.
NUMBER 10479
slow to loa
Let us support the men who made the Victory Loan possible.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 26, 1946
Aqueductos rectifies its collections
Will return funds where it charged for sewage not having been connected This was announced yesterday by the Director of the San Juan Populars - attribute deficiencies to coalition employees The Director of the Puorto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Service, Sergio Cuevas Bus* tamaiite, announced at yesterday's public hearing on the rates recommended by him to the RIA Governing Board, that payments made by subscribers for sewer service in those cases are neither reasonable nor legal. All the igan for 'ondos, and ■sta espeponer las ivltar that " have been i cóbrenlo su oriol do the SIA an Investigation, it was Informed in many cases by subscribers who had their systems connected to the public sewer. In the redamations, the money improperly collected will be refunded or the amount will be credited to the accounts, as an advance payment. Throughout the morning yesterday, the Popular Municipal Committee of San Juan exposed its complaints about "Administrative Irregularities". The president of said Committee, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gauthler, informed that "the personnel working in the SIA, coming from the Unlorrepubllcano and Soda Lista parties, are sabotaging the program, creating a situation aimed at making the Popular Party look bad before the people". He attributed to this circumstance the growing number of complaints that are being received daily by the Committee from Jos neighborhoods and alleged that "he knows that meter readers have put the amount they want to read the water records of the subscribers, as part of the campaign to make the Popular Party look bad; the installation of public pens in all the neighborhoods of the city; the increase in the volume of free water supplied to the Government of Ban Juan; the remission or readjustment of the overdue bills of those subscribers who have not been able to pay them because of their precarious economic situation. The SIA Director explained in detail the agency's plans, which, he said, include the installation of numerous public pens in all poor neighborhoods, one for every ten families. He also referred to San Juan's sewerage problem, making it clear that this work represents a difficult engineering problem, due to the topography of the terrain and existing conditions, and that the improvement plan for the metropolitan area represents one third of the total allocation to be invested in the coming years for the entire island. He also explained the projects for the water installation in El Fangulto and La Perla, which will be carried out soon, as well as other projects for the other poor neighborhoods of the city. For the Popular Municipal Committee of Ban Juan spoke, besides the speaker Rincón do Gauthier, the soflores Juan Meléndez, Vicente Wlchy, Eduardo Umplerro, Pedro Juan Dumont and Juan de León. All ex(Contlnued on page 20.)
Extension of subsidy for coffee growers who had sold their coffee
Coffee growers of Puerto Rico will receive the subsidy and will be able to continue operating mu torrefacción. - The members will receive it through a cooperative
The manager of the cooperative Cafeteros de Puerto Rico, Mr. Ramiro L. Colón, informed yesterday that an agreement has been reached with the General Administration of Supplies, by virtue of which said cooperative, while receiving the five dollar subsidy for each quintal of coffee sold by its members to the AGS, will be able to continue operating its coffee roasting operation. The members of this coffee entity will receive the subsidy through the cooperative. The problem faced by the cooperative presented the dilemma of either receiving a subsidy by selling its coffee to the Government, having to close its roasting facility, or not receiving such subsidy, retaining the coffee without selling it to the AGS, in order to be able to continue the operation of its roasting facility. Mr. Colón did not disclose the details of the arrangement. On the other hand, he informed that the other coffee cooperative, located in Ponee, did not have any problem, since it does not have a roaster.
The other cooperative, based in Ponee, did not have any problem, since it does not have roasting. This other entity will sell the coffee of its members to the Government, thus receiving the five dollar subsidy. The manager of Cafeteros de Puerto Rico stated that he understands that arrangements are being made to extend the benefit of the subsidy to the farmers who have already sold their coffee, pressed by the circumstances. He said that the General Administration of Supplies has guaranteed that it will look for a way to extend this payment to these farmers. t On the other hand, the General Administrator of Supplies, Mr. Antonio Vlcéno Ríos, informed that the coffee that the Government is able to purchase will be distributed in an equitable manner among all the areas of consumption on the Island. According to him, it is the purpose that the coffee in stock in Puerto Rico be distributed proportionally among all the areas of consumption on the island.
The biography of President Truman's Committee always decided unanimously
This is the twelfth chapter of the biography of the current President of the United States, written by Frances Burns. By FRANCES BURNS NEW YORK, January 1946.-The Trumsn Committee was the brainchild of the present President of the United States. It was born in early 1941 as a result of Harry Truman's disillusionment at not being able to serve his country. Truman's disappointment at not being able to serve his country on the front lines and his deep knowledge of American history, especially that of the Civil War. Shortly after his re-election as sonator in 1940, sonator Traman applied for active duty in the Army. He served as a captain in France in 1918 and now as a colonel in the Reserve. But his application was rejected.
But his application was rejected, as he was 56 years old. After Pearl Harbor he applied again, personally and to General Marshall, Chief of Staff, but was affectionately told in military language that "this is a young-shouldered war. There is no place in the Army for old men like you. But he knew that there was a place in the Army from which to serve the cause of the war; that is, that Congress had a right to investigate what was being done, but that this should be done during the war, not after it was over, as was done in the case of the World War II. Senator Brewster, of Malno, a Republican member of the "foT-Qomlté Traman, says that Traman's leadership of the committee was inspired by two purposes: (1) That it should circumvent the methods of the God Committee, which "was being carried away.
Committee, which "was being led by hearsay or reports from irresponsible persons," and (2) that it should draw on the experience of the committee during the Civil War to oversee the administration of the war effort. President Truman, one of the most knowledgeable men in Washington about the Civil War and one who knew more about military matters than most civilians in the federal capital, informed his colleagues that the Civil War committee had caused Lincoln more difficulties than Robert E. Leo, because the committee continually found out more about the Civil War and was more knowledgeable about military matters than most civilians in the federal capital, because the committee continually found out more about the Civil War than Robert E. Leo, because the committee was more knowledgeable than most civilians in the federal capital. Leo, because the committee continually meddled in matters of strategy, calling in generals who were on Jos battlefronts to tell them what they did or did not do. i Continued on page 17¿
Announces correction of undue collection
The Director of Servicio Insular de Acueductos, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, who announced yesterday that funds will be returned in all those cases in which the RIA charged for sewer service when there are no connections. Eastern offers to extend line to Puerto Rico It would link the Island with the New Orleans and San Francisco route Offering to extend its Route 5 to San Juan, Puerto Rico, as a terminal point, Eastern Air Line, Inc. filed the corresponding request with the Civil Aeronautics Board to amend and extend several of its domestic routes and grant it new domestic and overseas routes. The new route Eastern promises to serve starts at the midway point in New Orleans, Louisiana, and terminates in San Juan, Puerto Rico, with stops in Tampa and Miami, Florida. The extension of that route would link it, if granted, to Puerto Rico with the cities of San Francisco and Oakland, with intermediate stopping points in Texas, New Mexico and Arizona, to serve which routes Eastern has also applied to amend and extend its certificate of commitment for Route number oT. In the so-called "Latin American Case" Eastern has pending applications to establish a direct route between Miami and New Orleans or Miami, Tampa and New Orleans from which points Eastern proposes to extend its service to the United States and Puerto Rico.)
Another clean-up campaign in the Capital
Municipality and Sanitation have organized the plan which will govern the new endeavor The city divided ,into fifteen zones Text of ordinance provisions to be put into full effect As an initial step in the organization of an educational campafla in-! aimed at instructing the public of the Capital on the best way to comply with the provisions of law on public cleanliness| and to enlist popular cooperation in making San Juan a clean city, met the day before yesterday in the office of the Superintendent of Public Works of the Capital, seflorj Salvador C. Caro, Sanitary Engineer Pilllch, of the Sanitation Department, and Mechanical Engineer Juan M. Mendez, supervisor of the San Juan Public Cleansing Department, considered all aspects of the problem and drew up guidelines for the campaign. The Government of the Capital has divided the territory of San Juan into fifteen zones for the purposes of the cleanup. In each zone, according to its extension, there are a number of roadmen, each of whom has a demarcation. In each zone there is an Inspector who supervises the work of the roadmen. The Sanitation Department also has its territory divided into fifteen zones similar to those of the Municipality. At the meeting the day before yesterday it was agreed that, during the week beginning tomorrow and ending February 2, an Inspector from the Sanitation Department and another from the Government of the Capital will go through each zone, instructing the residents on the need to strictly comply with the ordinances in force, especially those that are most frequently infringed, for example, number 367 of March 1937. Paragraphs 4 and S of this ordinance provide that: "In order that the refuse of the houses and properties as well as the cleanliness of the property may be properly removed by the public cleaners, every owner, lessee or usufructuary shall be obliged to provide suitable metal receptacles, with appropriate lids, in which all such refuse shall be deposited, re(Continued on page 20).
Fennell admitted in court yesterday that he had paid in advance the salaries of the employees of the Agricultural Company.
Automobile factories threatened with closure
MASON BARR
Steel strike leaves them short of indispensable metal I Ford leaves 40,000 without work Steel industry faces stoppage of 700,000 workers By'FBÁÑx'ALLEN TN8 Correspondent WASHINGTON, 25. (INS - The strike of 700,000 steelworkers began to make its effects felt in the automobile industry today, with all remaining automobile factories estimated to be threatened with closure because they are unable to obtain the metal they need. The "Ford Motor Company" announced that forty thousand workers who. will be out of work within a week and that it will also be forced to lay off others of its 112,000 employees in case the strike in the steel industry continues. " At the "Chrysler" factory automobile production is vlrtually paralyzed.'8,700 of its" workers having been put out of work. The Packard Motor Company yesterday laid off 1,000 workers and announced that 7,000 will be out of work on January 1, if the strike in the steel industry continues. General Motors factories have been closed since November 21 by a strike of 175,000 steelworkers. The situation of the General Motors strikers is getting worse by the minute as their savings run out. Other steel-dependent industries have also been forced to cease operations. In addition, 60 coal mines in Pennsylvania and northern and western Virginia have suspended operations, putting 17,000 miners out of work. In the Pittsburgh area, which is the center of the steel industry, 5,000 railroad workers have been laid off. The hurlguls. tas and their families" have reduced the amount of their purchases and have slowed down commercial transactions in many towns. It is estimated that the impact of the steel strike has already put more than 900,000 people out of work. This number is rapidly rising to reach the 1,000,000 mark. This fight over a 3-l|2 cent difference, arising between Capital and Labor, will reach the height of the stoppage in a tér(Continued on page 20.) JÑRT holds hearings here next Monday.
The National Labor Relations Board will hold public hearings in Puerto Rico in connection with cases filed before it. To preside over these hearings will come to Puerto Rico the Examining Officer of the National Board, Senior Arthur Left, who is expected to arrive in San Juan tomorrow, Sunday, by air. The first public hearing will begin next Monday, at 10:00 a.m., in the meeting room of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce, Parada 19, Santurce, on the representation case, filed by the Union of Workers of the Maritime Industry of Punta de Santiago, affiliated to the Union of Dock Employees of Puerto Rico (CIO)-CGT) against the Bull Iraular Lino and all other maritime companies that operate ships in ports of the Island. The other unions involved in the representation issue are affiliated with the FLT and the ILA. The Hearing Officer will receive evidence at the hearing regarding the representation issue, and the National Board will then determine whether or not to order a secret election to be held to determine the Union that represents the majority of the workers to bargain collectively with their employers. The hearing in another case, which will also be presided over by Senior Reviewing Officer Leff, will be in connection with a complaint issued by the Puerto Rico Office of the National Board against the firm of (Continued from page 1)
The President of the Union Repub- President of the Union Repub- tion declared yesterday, upon his return to Puerto Rico, that the U.S. Congress should allow the portorrlqucfios Senator Taft on status He says he agrees that Congress should act definitively on the resolution passed by the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce and published in the December 24 issue of EL MUNDO, calling on Congress to act specifically on President Traman's recommendations on the island's political ata-I tions, and explaining that a referendum conducted by the Chamber among its members showed "Inequlvncsmenta that a large majority of its members favor a prompt definition of the future political status of the island through a plebiscite that provides the three alternatives generally accepted by our people and in a manner that allows Puerto Rico to preserve the economic relations and the nexus derived from the change of sovereignty that occurred in the 1R9R", the President of the Chamber of Commerce. President of the Chamber of Commerce. I | cío" seflor Flllpo de Mostos, has re-i ; clbldo .clbldo .contratación de numeroso" । । miembro" del Senado y de la Cámara de lo" Estado" Estados Unidos, a lo"! | | a lo que el seflor de Mosto", habla dirigida copias de la resolución a proI bada. | From Senator Warren R. Austin: "Thank you for your letter to me by air dated January 8, explaining the House position on the political status of the Island. It was a good idea of yours. I was pleased to enjoy the benefit of your views on this important matter." From Rep. Antonio M. (Continued on page 16)
At the Drivers' Congress to be held in Carolina next Tuesday, the creation of the Federation of Transport Workers' Unions will be proposed, which would include the Air Transport Workers' Union, the Public Car Drivers' Union, the Public Carriage Drivers' Union, the Air Transport Workers' Union, the Public Carriage Drivers' Union, the Air Transport Workers' Union, the Public Carriage Drivers' Union and the Air Transport Workers' Union. Sindicato do chóferes de carros pri* vados, do taxímetros, de omnibus, al Sindicato do Cobradores do Omnibus, al Sindicato de Obreros Unidos de Ferrovfas, al Sindicato do Chóferes de Vehículos de carga por carreteras, de empleados de garajes, the Union of uptomobile and motor vehicle mechanics, maritime workers, dock employees, operators of power shovels and heavy motor vehicles, the Association of Automobile Duefloe, the Union of Tinsmiths, painters and saddlery workers of the United painters and automobile "saddlers". I
INSIDE URGES IMMEDIATE DECISION ON SUBSIDY By JEAN VAN VRAKEN INS Correspondent
WASHINGTON, 25 (INS) - The Chief of the Division of Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands Affairs at the Department of the Interior said today that the department is urging an immediate decision on the Puerto Rico sugar subsidy. Barr returned from the island today, where he took with him to address many pressing issues related to the department's direction of the island. "One of the most important issues is the confusing sugar situation," said Barr, "The sugar industry on the island is in an undecided state. It is dependent on the turn taken by the Department of Agriculture regarding increases in sugar tariffs and the amount of future subsidies," he added. Barr believes that the bad effect has been reduced mainly by the delay in deciding these matters, since the harvesters have no basis for determining the daily wages to be paid," he added.
the wages to be paid, without prior knowledge of the benefit" to be received. Barr stated that the Department of the Interior favored a full subsidy for Puerto Rico,
triarte assures there will be action on status this year
Upon his return from the U.S., he reports that Congress will provide for it and that statehood will be included in the plebiscite to be held.
Celestino Irlarte, । Rico, who has the absolute convlcUnldos will take action this "fio pai determine their political status in a plebiscite consultation. "We can be sure," said the "efior Irlarte, that Congress will not authorize a plebiscite if it does not include statehood as one of the" alternatives. CI poFoTo lie FwiTn FTiuTr'nB ptWde *be treated in discriminatory Jorma. In all II" spheres of the United States" "on known the services and sacrifices of the Puerto Ricans" in defense of the citizenship and the flag of that people. The "Puerto Ricans" have defended with devotion and loyalty the "principle", the flag and the citizenship of the United States. Teñe* moa the right to demand that "e no" offer the full enjoyment of the prerrogatlvsi of citizenship that we proudly hold and c*c right is not" recognized and ae not" brlnj will give to fullness. 1 "I bring the best Impressions. I hope that Senator Chavez, (Continued on p. 16)
The Department of Health intends to include recommendations for the establishment of institutions for the asylum and treatment of the insane in Puerto Rico in the Basic Hospital Plan to be submitted to the Surgeon General of Public Health of the United States," if Senate Bill 191, which provides federal aid for these purposes, passes, according to the Commissioner, Dr. Antonio Fernós Isérn, yesterday. The Health Commissioner said that he has also made recommendations regarding this public need to the Planning Board, requesting that the following be incorporated into the bill
The Transportation Workers Union will be proposed.
At the Carolina assembly, the unity of all workers related to the operation of automobiles will be considered.
Be sollcits representation on the General Council of this Federation from all sectors" that agree to join the Federation. (Continued on page 20.)
WASHINGTON, M. (PU)-Today the Annual Report of Secretary of the Interior Harold L IckoA to the President of the United States was made public here, in which he called upon the political leadership of the territories to continue to work for the solution of the economic problems of the territories, no matter what final political status they may enjoy, for whatever their status, there will always be certain problems of the economy, no matter what the final political status may be.
Bell to host status roundtable
He accedes to the request of legislators. - It will also
Committee will hold hearings to decide on alternatives
Géigel, Quiñones say conference with Bell has been "a great achievement" By JEAÑ~VAN VRANKEN INS Correspondent. Jasper Bell, D-Mlsurl. chairman of the House Insular Affairs Committee, said today that he will request a roundtable discussion, called for by Insular leaders, to consider any bill on Puerto Rico's political status that is reported out of his committee. Bell made this statement to Puerto Rican Senators Samuel R. Qulflones and Vicente Géigel Polanco, with whom he will confer on the status issue. The Puerto Rican legislators said Bell agreed that the discussion proposed by Popular Party Chairman Lula Mufloz Marin was of great importance in the drafting of a satisfactory bill. Bell added that public hearings should also be held. In addition, Bell told the Puerto Rican senators that he favored free trade agreements in any independence status that was offered to the island. These provisions will be outlined by Bell in accordance with his experience with the economic problems of the Philippines. Bell also stated that he will outline legislation to offer all alternative forms of government to Puerto Rico, with the Committee deciding what form" should be included in the final bill, in harmony with President Traman's demand that Congress approve any status offered to the Island. Qulflones, chairman of the Commission on Political Status, who is leaving the city tomorrow, said he considered the conference with Bell "a great achievement. Qulflones told the Service (Continued on page 20.)
Asylum for the insane is a legislative responsibility.
In so stating gyer the Commissioner of Health, he reported that he has requested from Planning the necessary facilities in 6-year plan.
- The necessary hospitals for de- . ments "in a General Plan of - Hospitals which we have been ausmclan- - ing, and in the Six-Year Program." Explaining to our editor the i intervention of the Department of > Health in the problem of the de- > mentals without shelter, which hg sl- > do object of commenting them edltorlai les of EL MUNDO, Dr. Fer- . nós Isérn dló to understand that ro- ■ falls, in its two most Im- ! portant aspects, on the Legislature and । the Municipal Government, the responsa- , bllldad in the solution of the problem. "To provide Institutions for the insane poor and insane" dangerous, as far as the Insular Government is concerned - he declared - is a legislative function. To provide hospitals to detain dangerous insane persons while they may be admitted to the Insular Insane Asylum is, by law, a municipal obligation. To the Insular executive, in this case the Health Commissioner, corresponds the administration of the Insular Institutions dedicated to the care of the insane." Dr. Fernós informed that through his efforts, the Legislature assigned the sum of half a million dollars to carry out repairs and expansion of the Manicomio do Rio Piedras. This sum is at the disposal of the Commissioner of the In(Continued on page 20.)
NEWSLETTERS
I mages in said" areas. The Secretary of the Interior adds that, at present, Puerto Rico, Alaska and Hawaii! are trying to review - in order to improve - their relations with the United States and advises that the United States should encourage these efforts by the territories, "which give us the opportunity to maintain our leadership as a progressive nation. .. 1 Continued on page 16)
Invest $1,700 a month in hotel fees
A lawyer who is not licensed to practice pays 86,000.00 per year.
Spoke to Ellsworth about reed cutting
Thirty to fifty people are involved in the care of the cattle The General Administrator of the Puerto Rico Agricultural Compaflla Thomas A. Fennell, testified yesterday in the San Juan District Court that he has not made any approach to the Island Government or any of its agencies to take charge of the Agricultural Compaflla, whose funds have been paralyzed since Judge Ricardo La Costa Jr. declared admissible a motion filed by the lawyers of plaintiff José Suárez Martinez. Fennell testified when called by his attorneys to prove that the C.A.P.R. urgently needs $75,000 to avoid losses in several projects already started in Vloquos, which include the care and maintenance of 350 head of cattle and the cutting of the cattle. 350 head of cattle and coffee cutting in several projects. This motion was opposed by the plaintiff. At the beginning of the hearing of the lawsuit against the Compaflla Agrícola, attorney Luis Blanco Lugo, on behalf of the plaintiff, filed a motion to prevent the intervention of attorneys Francisco A. Arrllla1 ga and Alborto Forrer, alleging that because they were attorneys of the Land Authority they could not lend assistance to the C. A. P. R. The motion was declared inadmissible. 1 Judge La Costa said; 5 also 1 .without place another motion, of the doman* to amplify his proof in relation to the disbursements of the - Agricultural Compaflla after it was * declared with place the interdict - paralyzing those disbursements, Judge La Costa affirmed that "the - proof presented is sufficiently broad." ' Moments later, while pros1 ting a deposition, Fennell admitted on cross-examination by attorney Edel* miro Martinez Rivera that on January 16 the Compaflla Agricola 1 had paid the full salary of its employees for the month of January. When the llconcla1 do Martinez Rivera asserted that such * action constituted a contempt of the Court and therefore double Invootl- ' gario, Judge La Costa said that this could be grounds for a post- > terlor action. Questioned by the defense, Fennell stated that the value of the Compaflla Agricola's property at present is approximately 8450,000; that there are deposited in banks for certain purchases 8200,000; that the C. A. P. R. operates coffee plantations on loan from the Federal Government; that it also has pifla- and 350 head of cattle which it has to care for and feed; that the C. A. P. R. operates coffee plantations on loan from the Federal Government; that it also has pifla- and 350 head of cattle which it has to care for and feed.The wages received by agricultural workers are paid on Puerto Rico through collective bargaining agreements.that in the Compaflla there are workers who are paid by the week and employees for supervision who are paid monthly; that contracts have been made with fishermen around the beach of Fajardo and Boquerón for the purchase of fish, but that these contracts are more illegal than legal. Further on Fennell stated that he estimates that for the conservation of the coffee and pifla plantations in Vieques the sum of 822,500 will be needed during the new somanta; that for the feeding of the cattle in Vlequea $2,000 will be needed at the same time. and for insecticides during that period, 850,00 per week; that for the operation of trucks from the plantations to the docks it needs 8450 and the warehouses and garages of the Compaflla pay 2,400.00; that for the payment of telegrams, telephones, oil, gasoline and other things in the colony, 81,000.00 more are needed; that for the purchase of oil is invested (Continued on page 16).
The Liberal leader returned yesterday Yesterday, the President of the Puerto Rican Liberal Party, Mrs. Josefina Barceló de Romero, who spent several weeks in Philadelphia visiting her son Calixto, who has just graduated as a doctor of medicine, returned to Puerto Rico from the United States. Mrs. Barceló do Romero refrained from making statements to the Pronea. She stated that her trip had no political character. She said that she will meet with the leadership of the Liberal Party to have an exchange of views on the current political situation.