THE NfiNDO
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY-Good weather for the mr/tna, with some scattered showers along the coastlines. Occasional "moderate" showers over the interior and west coast this afternoon. The high in San Juan yesterday was 84. No rain was recorded. No sign" of thunderstorms.
cUtion-
MORNING
MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
NUMBER 10762
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 1946
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
PRICE 5 Cantara"
Island students joined the strike decreed by university students.
Motor vehicles to be inspected
Interior to determine if they meet public safety requirements Special attention will be given to brakes Méndez has promulgated regulations that will be in effect as of December 9 The Commissioner of the Interior, Orlando R. Ménder, is organizing a service for the inspection of all motor vehicles that travel on Puerto Rico's highways to determine if they are in good operating conditions and do not constitute a threat to public safety. The work to be performed is mainly aimed at inspecting the brakes of all vehicles circulating in Puerto Rico, as well as to determine their condition. . J , To this effect, the Commissioner of the Interior has promulgated regulations in accordance with the provisions of the new Automobile and Transit Law, the provisions of which will become effective on December 1, 2009. The Department is in the process of purchasing the necessary equipment in the United States, and is already selecting the personnel who will carry out the work of testing the safety conditions of these vehicles at stations located at the district capitals and on the highways on which they travel. In addition to the personnel who will be permanently stationed there, a group of inspectors will circulate constantly along the main traffic arteries and public roads, suitably equipped, checking the condition of all automobiles, tractors, tractors, trucks, motorcycles, scooters and other types of motor vehicles. The Commissioner of the Interior informed yesterday that he will circulate copies of the promulgated regulation among the members of the Insular Police, the revenue collection offices, the drivers' associations, the transport companies, both passenger and cargo, and those organizations and individuals who are interested in the document, in order to make the new provisions known as widely as possible. I The regulation provides that "all automobiles and motorcycles traveling on the highways and public roads of Puerto Rico shall be equipped with brakes in the manner provided in subsection (-) of Article 12 of Act 279 of April 3, 1946", and further provides that (a) One of the brakes of automobiles of more than ten horsepower shall be manually operated and of the type known as "emergency". - (o) Every tractor shall be provided with two independent brakes, one of which shall be operated by the use of the driver's foot and the other shall be manually operated and of the type known as "emergency". (c) Every tractor-trailer traveling on the public highways of Puerto Rico shall be equipped with a brake in such a manner that it may be operated from the cab of the vehicle towing it, while both are coupled, and the mechanism of said brake shall also be such that it shall operate automatically if the tractor-trailer becomes detached from the vehicle towing it. (d) Every tractor-trailer shall also be provided with a brake which shall operate in such a manner that it can be applied when the tractor-trailer is not coupled to any other vehicle. * The regulation authorizes employees of the Division of Motor Vehicles and members of the In' aular Police to conduct the inspection of vehicles. It shall be considered in (Continued on page 18).
- ■ ' ■ -! News Compendium ¡
Students of the I "la te joined the strike decreed by lo" das, several catedrático" spoke at a rally. In Bayamón, teachers from one school also went on strike. Piftsro admitted to reporters the likelihood that the Congrego kglsl" on the use of the funds for contribution to the rum. He referred to arrangements for the shipment of sugar and the shipment of coal to the dock. Submitted" to Planning, by Interior, the plan" for the metropolitan diversion of Penco. - Thursday "orá distributed, for study by interested parties*, the preliminary economic program of the Government. strike, only brought fertilizers, not food". Expected today shipment of foodstuffs. Suspended 437 veterans from the workshops where they were being trained because the workshops did not meet the requirements of the law. Muflí" says the magieterio can wait no longer: it is urgent to convene the chambers to discuss the salary increase.
1 i By order of the Governor, the AGS suspended the sale of । butter to the employees of the Go- ( blemo and various" private" companies. The" motor vehicle" will be । inspected". Interior determi- : nará al reunen requleito" de "e- i guridad pública. * * ' ] Estimated at 318,648,988 the" In- < greso" of the Island Treasury for the year 1943-47. - - - UPR graduates condemn veto to the Language project. - Senator Fullbright insisted that President Traman resign. Three State" eliminate the closed shop clause. - - - . Equipment" is returned to "vlaita" in San Juan, Cama" and Mayagües parking lots. - - - Maflana "e runs in La" Monjas the Puerto Rico Futurity. Today the "Invictos" of Army and Notre Dame soccer clash at Yankee Stadium. - Molotov met yesterday with Chief" da! Department of E "taChlang Ral Shok gave the order to cease fire in China.
i Dr. Juan A. Pona was appointed yesterday as Commissioner of Health । He had been in charge of the Charity in San Juan. - Pinero says that I; d doctor Pons "has a free hand'' By E. Combas Guerra Editor of EL MUNDO Governor Plftero began yesterday's conference by 1" maftai na with the" journalist" announcing that at that very moment I was going to proceed to extend appointment in favor of Dr. Juan A. Pon" i for the position of Health Commissioner. When he finished signing the creditive document, Mr. Piflero expressed himself in the following terms: "The people of Puerto Rico acquire a servant to all proof.
. His performance as director of the municipal charity of Ja- . pltal is known to all. I congratulate myself and I believe that the people of Puerto Rico should congratulate themselves for having accepted the responsibility of directing the Department of Health". Later in the course of the conference, and when several reporters were making some observations regarding 1the hygienic conditions of public buildings and private establishments, and about the perhaps many inconveniences ■ that the new ' Commissioner of Health would have to face in trying to correct deficiencies with a strong hand, the Governor made the following comment: \ "Dr. Pons has a strong hand and the full backing of the Governor." On the occasion of his appointment, Dr. Pons yesterday authorized the following statements: "To direct the administration of Public Health was certainly never one of my aspirations. I believe that in a man of dignity there is an imperative of reason that commands him to comply with the law, sometimes against his own personal feelings. In this spirit, I have accepted the mandate - which for me is law - that I direct it and, as a Puerto Rican and as a physician conscious of his public responsibility, I am ready to try to do so. I am grateful for the excessive confidence placed in me by the honorable Governor Plftero. In the classical sense- in the classical-modern American sense, I should say-a Department dt
MU Wa m ".WMV ■ ■ ■ W V <■ ■ Xk * i ¡ MR Jl MI [ Dr. JUAN A. PONS New Comleionado de Salud > Salud has as its ministry the con- ■ servar la salud, implantando y ejeI cutando aquellas medidas" que tlen- . den. a evitar la propaganda o Ja i adquisición de enfermedades". In Puerto Rico, to our misfortune, there is no health to be preserved; in । Puerto Rico, in a collective sense, there is no health, there is no enjoyment of health.
Treasury revenues this year are estimated at $83,04*6,998 Buscaglia made a revision of revenues for the year 1946-47, increasing estimates by more than $32,000,000.-Sent to JP 6-year estimate The financial situation of the Island Treasury has been developing during the present fiscal year in a more favorable manner than expected by all the experts of the Government. Government. The termination of the war, which was thought to have brought a decrease in the Treasury's income, miewA AH" 1a* AfertAR daroff anion of the contribution known*
The president of the Teachers Association, Mr. Luis Muftiz Souffront, declared yesterday that the teachers cannot wait any longer for a salary increase to offset, at least in part, the growing increase in the cost of living. I Muflí" Souffront appealed yesterday to the Goibernador and'to the presidents of the legislative chambers, in order that they convene the Legislature in special session, to decree an emergency increase, to take effect immediately. ■ ! . "From various" town" of the Island - i reported- "telegrams appear indicative of the desperate "ltuaI (Continued on page 17).
□gacion cíe ja coninuutiun cunowu" oor Impuesto de la Victoria, have not had the result that was feared and the cobro" during the current year exceed those of the year of Puerto Rico, seflor Rafael Buscaglia. who speaks made an estimate of income for ordinary funds of the Government, j for the fiscal year 1946-47, 1 montante a 351,000,000.00, dated November 4 of the current month, has made a revision of the income for that year, increasing his estimate by more than 332,000,000, since, according to the study he has made, he calculates that the Income will reach the sum of 383,046,998. The Treasurer of Puerto Rico has sent to the Planning Board an estimate of the "ingreao" the Board may have available for the fiscal year, fixing at 363,250,000 the amount available for fiscal year 1947-48, and at 356,850,000 for each of the five subsequent fiscal years". Read amounts to be used by the Plans Board are in addition to those estimated for general Treasury expenditures. Mr. Buscaglia stated that if the economic situation continues as normal, the Plans Board will have available to it for the fiscal year 1946-47 a sum of approximately $364,000,000. The new estimate of income made by the Treasurer, and which alean- - the Armela Biim" elm CQ'l
The new estimate of receipts made by the Treasurer, and which adds to the aforesaid sum of 583,046,998, implies, it was said yesterday, that the resources of the Government available for appropriations, net of obligations (including those not yet carried on the books) will at the close of the year amount to 323,297,911.61, which sum may be added to the estimate of receipts* for the year 1947-41 for the expenditures of that year. According to the study carried out by the Treasurer, Mr. Buscaglia, the contributions - source of income for his revised estimate of 383,046,998 - which are to enter the general funds during 1946-47, are: Customs, 33,500,000; Federal Internal Revenue, 333,151,876; Beverages, 36,440,000; Excise, 318,000,000; Property, insular part, 3350,000; Income Tax, 319,000,000; Inheritance, 3300,000; Victory Tax, 375,000; Miscellaneous Revenue, 32, 230,122.
The Department of the Interior । has completed the studies and plans for the construction of the Ponce metropolitan bypass, and the project < has been submitted to the Planning Board for approval by Commissioner seflor Orlando R. Mén- ' dez. For now, it has been proposed to build 2.54 kilometers of <lcho detour, using previously approved federal and island funds for these works. The total project comprises a wide road 3.10 miles in length,
It is probable that legislation will be passed on the rum tax Piñero admitted this yesterday to reporters - Cole says he would understand his position. The Go- 1 bernador added: , , " "During the time I was Resident Commissioner a bill to that effect was introduced, --although it was unsuccessful, -by Rep. W. Sterling Cole." -Is Rep. Cole still in Congress," the reporter asked again. -Yes, he is still in Congress. - Then there is that probability," commented the reporter again, and then Mr. Pifiero said: "Representative Cole is a very good friend of mine. I understand Cole's position and I also believe that he will understand mine. Maritime Affairs" The Governor revealed yesterday during his press conference that the Island Government has been making arrangements for some time with the Mississippi Shipping Company, whose ships make the route from the continent to Africa, so that they may call at Puerto Rico. "These facilities would allow us to import raw materials to boost the wood industry in Arecibo. "Negotiations are well underway. The president of the maritime company is negotiating with the Maritime Commission, to obtain permission to include Puerto Rico in the itinerary, and I am aware that the Maritime Commission will favorably consider the request." Sugar The Governor announced that the possibility of shipping sugar "in bulk" is being studied, in view of the shortage of jute sacks. Another of the efforts of the Insular Government is aimed at getting the ship's dock into operation in order to provide work for a considerable number of people. Shipping companies are interested in having this service in Puerto Rico. In addition to the careening dock there is a small floating dock, whose services will also be managed. The Governor hopes that the negotiations taking place in Washington will be successful. Doméstica" The Governor passed to the reporters several clippings from American newspapers, which praised the skill of the Puerto Rican domestics who have been hired by Chicago families. The Governor said that the general impression is that both the U.S. households where these domestics work, as well as the domestics themselves, are, in general, satisfied. He said that he has read letters from these domestics to their relatives, in which they reveal their satisfaction and the good treatment they receive. "One of them has gone on a summer vacation to Miami during the winter and in a letter she describes how she is enjoying life on the beaches." Also nabbed by the Governor:; so(Continued on page 7) !
' CHICAGO. 8. (PU)- Senator < . Robert A. Taft. republican, of i , Ohio, who is likely to be II- i 1 der of Senate majority in the .. new Congress, reiterated today the pro- < i, tables made by the Republican Party during the campaign, to re- । duclr the fe- i s deral spending budget and lower by 20 per cyen- 1 i, to contributions. < " In a major declared*. In important post-electoral statements as one of the party's outstanding spokesmen, he has already submitted plans for the
The plans for the Ponce metropolitan bypass have been submitted and will cost the Govt.
The construction of which will cost the Government $3805,000, and of which only a proportion will be invested this fiscal year to cover the cost of the first 2.54 kilometer section. This project comprises the cons- } trucclón of a modern road < for two trachas, completely pa- ( vimentada, which will serve as two- " vio to the city do Ponce, to the Inter- i connect the Insular road núme- c ro tros with the number 36, and the nú- c mero uno with the number three. ¡1 (Continued on page 18)
Ship which arrived on the island yesterday brought fertilizer It is the second ship to arrive in Puerto Rico after the strike Another is expected today loaded with provisions The itinerary announced for the month of November includes 23 ships The "Luther Hurd", a vessel belonging to the Bull Insular Ll| ne", docked yesterday morning at the dock ¡ of that port, with a cargo consisting entirely of fertilizer, consigned to various importing firms in San Juan. Contrary to what was expected by the public who came to the port, the ship did not bring any quantity of food to mitigate the desperate situation of the island. The "Luther Hurd" is the second ship to arrive on the Island, after the settlement of the strike conflict that interrupted, since the first of last October, the maritime transit between Puerto Rico and the United States. The first ship to reach our port was the "Columbia Victory", of the Waterman Lines, last Wednesday, also with a cargo of chemical products for the elaboration of fertilizers, bought by local industrialists. The "Luther Hurd" came from the port of Willmlngton, Del. Delaware, from where it departed several days ago. The Bull Lines reported yesterday that the Coastal Mariner is expected in San Juan tonight, with a cargo of refrigerated food. This vessel has a capacity of 6,500 cubic feet of refrigerated cargo, consisting mainly of butter, fruit and yeast. The Bull Line also informed that the ship is carrying corn flour, and that these products were in its warehouses when the strike conflict arose. It also added that another ship, the Cape Borda, sailed from the port of Baltimore with foodstuffs only, and is expected to arrive in San Juan on Tuesday. < A United Press dispatch ' from Washington, received ( aver, Reports that the head of the Ofi- . ciña of Puerto Rico, seflor Emilio Colon, announced that the Itinerary of ( maritime voyages" for November "e ( has been completed, with a total of 23 ( vessels seflalada" defini- , vamente to leave for Puerto ] Rico, the first of which lie- ¡ gará to San Juan on November 11. It is added oue, according to । the Itlnersrlo Informed by Colon, the Coastal Ringleader, of the Puerto Rico Line, which left on November 4, will be the first to arrive at San Juan on the 10th, or Sunday. Fl Wild Ranger, which departed on the 7th, will arrive on the 11th. E1 Cape Sebastian, which departed on the 13th, will arrive on the 18th. D" the Bull, the Coastal Mariner, which departed on the 2nd, will arrive today with R,500 cubic feet of refrigerated goods. (The company announced that it was leaving today.) The message also announces that it will arrive today. It is also announced in the message that the Cañe Borda departed Baltimore; the Cape Nome sailed on the 6th, and will arrive Tuesday. The message mentions the delay of the Belgium Victory, on account of repairs, and adds that the Davidson Victory is expected at the Lilac on the 11th, from Mobile. It is also added that Columbus ex- ¡ piled that this Itinerary is definlti-1 vo now, and that there will be a > regular service with the Island hereafter. Also that the Ge-. neral Supply Admin-. is putting special pressure on the butter embari ques. :
: Taft reiterates the, ; budget and contributions will be reduced ' Reported that new Congress is set to , end the system of earmarks resembling blank signed checks.
Taft said he believed that government expenditures for the next fiscal year should be reduced by 313,000,000,000,000 from their present figure of 343,000,000,000,000. He added that the Republican aim, to be realized within two years, is a federal budget of not more than 325,000,000,000,000, or 518,000,000,000,000 below the 1946 figure. "That would mean a tremendous reduction <m contributions . di- ( jo, Taft, who will exercise a role dr ' importance in formulating : his party's rules as pre , chairman of the Republican Helm Committee, is expected to replace Senator Alben Barkley, Democrat- 1 ta of Kentucky, as ma- < yorfa leader of the Republican-controlled Senate 1. Reaffirming the campaign promises made by Rep. Harold Knutson, Republican of Minnesota, who is slated to become chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, Taft said his belief was that income taxes could be reduced by 20 percent next year. However, he steadfastly refused to make an open statement that current taxes are de- ' (Continued on page 7).
The youngest U.S. congressman,
The youngest U. S. Congressman ' I tr* 1 Bxygq? William G. Stratton, mtval retainer, receives a kiss from his wife and a hug from his mother, as the election returns indicated his victory as the Republican Party's at-large representative in Illinois, defeating his opponent, Mrs. Emily Taft Douglas, a Democrat. Stratton will be the youngest congressman in *E. He is only 27 years old. (Associated Press photo)
On Thursday, the economic program will be distributed for study.
The purpose is that interested parties can make recommendations at the hearing on the 21st. - Picó comments on important allocations
The president of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, informed yesterday that the government's preliminary economic program will be ready for distribution next Thursday. "Work is being done now on the memory", - he said, - "expecting that the document could be distributed by next Thursday".
The Planning Chairman said that the program will be explained to the press at a conference to be held, and that its distribution in advance of the November 21 public hearing will give all interested parties an opportunity to study the "substantive recommendations" being made and to formulate their objections or suggestions at the public hearing to be held on November 21. When asked to comment on the most important points contained in the preliminary program drafted, Dr. Picó expressed the following: "One of the most vital is the Island's program for the construction of hospital facilities, with the help of the Federal Government. So far, there are no specific funds allocated for this plan, since such action, by provision of the law, will be taken by Congress in its January session. Only funds for studies are available, and the "funds for conatrucclon" are yet to be provided. The Island's contribution to this program will be part of the Board's recommendations. "The school problem has also merited our attention, especially that of faculty expansion to accommodate new high schools. * (Continued on page 7)
Three states I vote against closed shop
PAWA explains diversion of flights from San Juan to New York MIAMI, 8. (PU)-Pan American Airways reports that the detour of flights from Charleston to Han Juan is only a routine change in navigation under rules established by the Bureau of Civil Aeronautics. Aircraft now follow a slightly curved course, rather than a straight line to the north, taking advantage of Charleston's radio wave. Ix>s aircraft will not land at Charleston, just as no disadvantage in time or safety results from this alteration in route. Panalr is now installing special equipment in Bermuda which will enable navigators to follow the local radio there instead of following the Charleston wave, thus approximating a direct flight route to San Juan, Puerto Rky. Flights will continue to be non-stop.
Suspended by AGS for butter dispensing
South Dakota, Arizona and Nebraska amend constitution to effect NEW YORK, 8 (PU)- In standing- - blsclts held slmultaneously with last Tuesday's elections in the United States," the" electors" approved the" four measure" to regulate labor appearing on the ballot, and eight of the" nine propositions to pay benefits for services rendered" in World War II. Voters in Nebraska, South Dakota and Arizona approved, by wide "margins," the ban against sweatshops in industry. Arizona voters, according to election reports currently complete, approved the constitutional amendment banning the sweatshop. Voting reported as of yesterday showed a total of 54,237 votes in favor of the amendment, and 41,401 votes against it. Nebraska passed the amendment by a vote of 189,094 to 128,104, and South Dakota passed the measure by a vote of 51,516 to 21,392. All three measures prohibit agreements between employers and laborers that require union enrollment in order to be employed. In Nebri|a the measure will take effect immediately and there will be no need for the state Legislature to pass legislation. However, John Guenther, president of the Ne- ■ braska. labor federation, announced that his group ( (Continued on page 2)
La di Atribuía a los empleados de Gobierno y empresas privadas Por E. Combas Guerra Redactor de EL MUNDO El gobernador Piflero suspendió el procedimiento que venia siguiendo la Administración General de Suministro", para el expendio de manteca, ai escuchar las queja" que noaotró" formuláramoa ante él aotró" aobre sobre el particular. The General Administration of Supply had been following the practice of selling butter to public officials and employees, and then this practice, when it became public knowledge throughout the city, was also followed with employees of other private companies. The system was as follows: groups of seven or eight heads of families would get together and, by means of a written request, duly authenticated, would obtain a 35 or 37 pound can of butter. Until a few days ago the butter was sold at the price of 40 cents per pound; but as late as Friday, the General Supply Administration itself was selling it at the price of 60 cents per pound, which is the price fixed by the AGS itself for the retail sale of the product in establishments. The Governor expressed his disbelief that this was being done. We pointed out that the AGS, by selling butter at the retail price, was speculating. "I'm going to stop this procedure right now," said the Governor, apparently outraged. - (Continued on page 2)
Protest over Truman's veto ordered In Río Piedras a rally was held in which professors spoke Bayamón teachers on strike Instruction reports no action against students By Luis Hernánds" Aqulnn Editor of EL MUNDO Yesterday morning, - - - eight o'clock. - The strike announced by Jos student" of said educational center began yesterday morning at the University of Puerto Rico, according to the resolution approved in the general assembly of the student body in the University Theater on October 20, in which they protested the veto given by President Truman to the language project, and agreed to a 24 hour strike" in the" University student areas. In front of the statue of Don Román Baldorloty de Castro "a student crowd was gathering, many of whose members" held signs alluding to "1 act, with inscriptions such as the following: "Mogolla a la fuerza", "Mantengamos en alto la vergüenza universitaria", "La patria reclama la vergüenza universitaria", "El Rector no" ha defraudado." "A Truman bounces the ball." In this poster there was a caricature of the President, in which he was throwing a ball, which was hit by a Puerto Rican player. The president of the Student Council, Luis A. Garrastegui, opened the event at the rally organized on the University campus, *and Noel Colón, Fred Santiago and Dr. Julio Garda Díaz, who said: "I feel a great responsibility to speak to the student body, which is the one that will guide our people in basic and procedural matters. There is a belief that the student body is irresponsible and a paternalistic attitude is assumed towards it. I know that the student body is responsible in its actions, and that when this strike was organized, it was in the form of a strike. This is not a question of a party, it is a question of the conscience of a whole people. I know that the student body was filled with great anxiety, and I had faith that this movement would become a reality. I demand of the students that they remain on this plane of dignity and composure; that this be a question of culture. Keep your composure, uphold your principles! Show that you can do the act of protest with order and devotion". Dr. García Díaz's speech was followed by a long applause. Demonstration in the streets: A demonstration was immediately organized on the university campus, with the participation of about three thousand students. The demonstration was led by a group of young ladies carrying the Puerto Rican flag. This demonstration went through the town of Rio Piedras, parading along Muñoz Rivera, De Diego and Arzuaga streets. The crowd, that Iba sing, do La Borlnquefta and other patriotic canelones", was applauded by the" véelnos that sallan to the balconies of the houses. Some merchants of Rio Piedras, in solidarity with the student movement, closed the doors of their establishments. Many students from other schools in the town abandoned their classes and joined the university demonstration. The demonstration went to the recreation square of Rio Piedras, where a rally was held for three hours in which several professors of the University spoke. The municipal band, on loan from Augusto P. Alvarez, of Rio Piedras, played the BorlnqueAa in the tribune, and during the whole morning enlivened the act with pieces of the same name. He also played the hymn of the University, which was accompanied in chorus by the students. . 4? At the rally, university professors Margot Arce de Vázquez, Francisco Matos Paoll, José Ferrer, Reverend Domingo Marrero, and José Emilio González accompanied the students to the recreation plaza, where the rally took place. Speaking at the rally, before the crowd, which included students from different educational institutions of Rio Piedras and San- , turce, who came in commission (to the plaza of Rio Piedras, students Fred Santiago, Garrastegui, Landrón Ubiftas, Eugenio Fernández Méndez, Jorge Landing and José M. Tejada. The following university professors also spoke: José E. Ferrer, Reverend Domingo Marrero, José Emilio González and Rafael Soltero Peralta. The Mayor of Rio Piedras, Mr. Augusto P. Alvarez, and Mr. Rubén Gaztamblde Arrlllaga, President of the Popular Democratic Party in Rio Piedras, gave speeches at the event. Professor José E. Ferrer commented on Rector Benítez's speech regarding university reform when he said: "We are fighting against colonialism. The j essential purpose of the University of Puerto Rico must be the for- | marion of free men in its es- 1 plrltu, who will not succumb, who will not | surrender their potentiality to anything do i ¿Continued on page 31 * M " ' - 'IB