THE WORLD
2nd EDIC105 2 Sections
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
THE MORNING
DAILY JOURNAL
Y Y Y VIII Did you go out in your automobile? Are you sure that PAruv r uv r/ T l i l t l i l not t4 rne malfunctions that cause accidents?
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - .SATURDAY, JUNE 1, 1946
Entered so oocnnd class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
NUMBER 10602
Maritime situation is - still obscure
Truman warns that Government will keep shipping in operation Barkley awaits crisis arréalo - __ Dock stoppage would i I of freezing 400 voyages ¡ monthly of ships < WASHINGTOnTmTíPU). - U.S. President । Harry S. Truman today authorized statements । that ( the Government is to make use of such facilities as may be available to the Navy, Federal . Navy, the Federal Coast Guard and the War Shipping Administration to deal with the shipping problem in the event that the labor unions go on strike on July 15. The President admitted that the situation on the waterfront, in terms of the possibility of a strike, was extremely dark at the present time, but indicated that the Government was taking every precaution to keep the U.S. Navy in operation in the event of a strike. At the same time Truman reiterated his "wholehearted" support for the emergency legislation he requested from Congress last week, when the nation was hit by a major crisis on the labor front. However, the eapItAn Granville Conway. Administrator of the War Shipping Board, said his agency "has drawn up no plan with the Navy, or any other organization," to take charge of keeping the shipping lines moving. "However, this is not to say that we have not been talking about what to do if a strike occurs," he added. Mr. Srhwcllenbach, the Senate secretary, declined to comment on any plans the government may be making to deal with the crisis in the third quarter. Meanwhile, Senate Democratic leader Alhcn W. Barkley, of Kentucky, said on the floor that he had "some justification , to be hopeful that by Friday (today), the maritime strike has been settled ... but he did not elaborate on his remarks after he said these words. Senator George Radcliffe, Democrat of Maryland, said yesterday morning that 'You can bet the Government will gain control of the shipping lines if the strike breaks out. ' Representative Clare Brootho 1 Luce, Republican of Connecticut, 1 said the strike conflict on the waterfront is a "political strike 1 against the United States Foreign Rola- - clone Policy, which will starve millions of people. Let the President explain to the people the implications of this strike, and let the strikers know what they are doing," the Representative said. The Shipping Administration । said the strike will freeze the 400 trips that ships are scheduled to make on commercial vessels from the Atlantic, Pacific and Gulf ports. This agency has under its management 2,400 vessels which will be affected by the declaration of the ' P * The settlement of the strike in the bituminous coal mines broke the great industrial crisis which was affecting the national economy, but the threat of new conflicts on the labor front gives little hope to those who think of an end to the conflicts which are holding up the coal industry. ' All service on the Manhattan railroads and on the section, (Continued on page 22.)
NEWS DIGEST * ' ' r ' ~I ' '
At the end of June will begin to re-I f turn the rebate on the water and sewer rates, as amended by Lic. Examiner Rafael Rl-, vera Zayaa, who declined to pay the fee for his work, - * ' ' I The maril Ima situation in the United States is dark. The President warned yesterday that the Government will use all the facilities to keep the Navy in operation, and the Venezuelan intellectual, Dr. Pmiano Picon Salas, gave the support of the small nation at the " Ala. The strike in the bread industry in San Juan lasted twenty-five days today. o e - Rector Benitos left yesterday for the United States i | In island financial circuits z uilr*topo "a the tribute on rum, forodusca 880,000,000 next year. Mu
The federal Department of the Interior has asked the Communications Authority for a report on the expropriation of the Telephone Company. o o - I The Federal Court intervened yesterday in the investigation carried out by the OAP, issuing an interdict to all retailers of construction materials. - - - Prosecutor Aponte already has the identity of the person who falsely sealed the equestrian box. - The Acting Secretary of the Police Commission, Francisco de Greets, was assaulted by a plainclothes policeman, Nemesio Tapia, when he censured the attitude of the Police in relation to traffic. - Senator Robert La Foliete presented a bill reorganizing the United States Congress. - José Rivera Barreras will act temporarily as Jurs of the District Court for the
Jurs of the District Court of San Juan. - The Capital Administrator yesterday submitted a budget in the amount of $2,148,598.M. - Edward J. Stettinius resigned as a member of the United Nations Council. - The Speaker of the House, Dr. Susonl, offered yesterday that the Government will give attention to the problem of fertilizers. - The sending of clothes and food to the needy of Europe is organized in San Juan. - Bragaña suspended for trying to tarnish Rabo Ruth. - Olmo likely to stay in Mexico to play in Winter League. - Assault is the favorite to win the Belmont Stakes today. - - - - Receiver Vlllodas won Game pa- । ra the Baltimore.Elites.
i Truman did not accept Stettinius' resignation as a member of the United Nations council.
The former Secretary of State had resigned because he feels that since his appointment he has been used as a mere errand boy By ROBERT NIXON WASHINGTON, 31 (INS)-President Truman announced today that he had refused to accept the resignation tendered by Edward Stettinius from his position as American representative to the United Nations Security Council. The President declared to the Press that he tempted him as the Se-i " ■-
cretarto di Estado James Byrnes, had asked Stettinius to continue in his post. He added that he hoped that Stettinius would not resign. At the same time, TrUman said that on two occasions he had invited Generalissimo Joseph Stalin to the White House but that he did not accept those invitations, citing health reasons. The President said that he extended the first invitation to Stalin last year, during the Potsdam conference, and the second about 30 days ago, during the conference held in Paria by the foreign ministers of the four "great powers. Stalin declined the invitations, saying that his doctor had told him that his health would not permit him to make the long trip. The President revealed that the invitations for Stalin to visit Washington were not related to the holding of another conference of the "big three". He said that "I had asked Stalin to come to the White House on a soda' visit" As he asked (Contlnued on page 22)
EDWARD R. STETTINIUS
Federal Interior asked for report on expropriation of Telephone This was revealed yesterday by Mr. Curry, before the Federal Court, when he requested a suspension of hearings to move to the United States By LUIS SANCHEZ CACHA ' Editor of EL MUNDO v ' The intervention of the Federal Government in the Injunction case filed before the Federal Court by the Telephone Company against the Communications Authority aimed at preventing this agency from expropriating the Telephone Company's assets, was disclosed yesterday in the.
Order on -- ■ j rice to be issued today Will permit purchase in California the same as in Louisiana WASHINGTON73177pU)- Sources close to the federal Department of Agriculture said today that an announcement is expected tomorrow amending the rice order to authorize Puerto Rico to purchase in California the same as in Louisiana. This measure has been adopted after several weeks of conferences between Department of Agriculture officials and Puerto Rico representatives. Gue Lallan de. of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce, who has been one of the strongest supporters of this change in the rice purchase program, said that this step will restore the status of the regulation to December 1945, but expressed hope that this amendment will serve to improve the situation of the island supplies, But he pointed to the fact that at present there are no contracts for shipments after June 1, so that purchases and shipments must be negotiated without interruption in order to avoid a dangerous depletion of stocks, which, in his opinion, are now near their normal level. Lallande added, however, that the Agriculture Department's action will not remove a decisive difficulty which he believes may be the determining factor in securing the fair par (continued on page 22)
The Department of Agriculture, however. "master", Jl'rendado Clemente Ruta Nazario, will 1/dá.yA'Hido cetobrapdv. - When the hearings resumed yesterday, the "bogado dr the CA, Jemes' E. Curry hl?o a motion to request the suspension of the same, while.se moves to the Federal Capital on the occasion of a request that was made by officials of the Department of the Interior, to report in detail on the case of expropriation of the Telefonica. Mr. Curry said, arguing his motion to the "master", that he had been informed by officials of the Department of the Interior that Mr. Wolcott Pitkin, attorney for the International Telegraph & Telephone Co., together with Mr. Howard Bucknel, assistant to the President of the aforementioned corporation, Mr. Sosthenes Behn, had conferred with senior officials of the Administration in Washington, defending the case of the Telephone Company and attacking the attempt of the CA to take over the properties of the former. Mr. Pitkin, as reported by Mr. Curry, who is currently an attorney for the International Telegraph A Telephone Co., was the former Attorney General of Puerto Rico.
Federal Court Intervenes in OAP Survey!
- Judge Jorge Luis Córdova Díaz, Acting Federal Court Judge, yesterday issued a restraining order to construction material retailers prohibiting them from destroying or altering any records of purchases or sales of construction materials that they have made or will make in the future. Judge Cordova Diaz's order is directed to all retailers of construction materials in Puerto Rico, but specifically mentions 11 firms on the island, according to an official announcement made yesterday by the Office of Price Administration. The order is in response to information received by OAP investigators that some importers and wholesalers of construction materials are suggesting to their customers and distributors that they destroy or alter the records of purchases made by them. These reports have been obtained by Government officials investigating, since 18 days ago, black market practices in the building materials business. The eleven firms specifically mentioned in Judge Cordova Diaz's injunction order to preserve all their records of purchases and sales of construction materials are the following: Quiñones Lumber Co, Río Piedras; Millón Garcia, Arecibo; Lolsa Lum- ¡ ber. Santurce, Luis Garda BáK Fajardo. J. Ramirez e Hijos, Bayamon, Halo Rey Construction Supplies, ilato Rey, Aguadilla Lumber Co, Aguadilla, Nlevqs Lumber Co, Arroyo, Otero * Co, S. en C., Ma' natl. Sobrino & Co, Sucre, Vega Uaja, and Méndez Hnea, Yabucoa. At the same time, the Office of Price Administration yesterday called the attention of retailers and distributors to the provisions of Section 1.9 of the Second Revised Price Regulation No. 183, which provides that every person engaged in the retail sale of articles included in the said regulation shall keep for inspection by the Office of Price Administration clear, complete and accurate records of all purchases made by it. It is on this federal regulation that Judge Cordova Diaz based his injunction order. The purchase records must include the following information: date of purchase; a clear description or any form of identification of the item purchased; the price paid; quantity purchased; name and address of the seller. OAP warns retailers that they will be subject to criminal prosecution in federal court if they destroy or alter the records, which is considered "a violation of the Emergency Management Act" (continued on page 22).
Follette proposes reorganization of U.S. Congress He has introduced a bill to reduce Senate committees, increase House committees, appoint a coordinating council and raise pay.
For RAYMOND WILCOVE WASHINGTON, 31. (INS)-The committee headed by Senator Robert La Follette today submitted to the Senate a major bill to reorganize the U.S. Congress.
Congress, warning that the legislative branch of government faces "imminent failure" unless it is modernized and modernized. unless it is modernized. The proposed bill is the first legislation of its kind to be introduced in twenty-five years and represents the product of a year's work by the Bicameral Committee studying the bill, which made its recommendations on March 4, 2001. The recommendations were recast in the form of a bill by the special committee headed by Senator La Follette. La Follette said he would try to get the Senate to consider the bill before the end of the current session. He revealed that the Lower House does not intend to take any action until the Senate has considered the bill. The bill proposes, among other things, the reduction in the number of senatorial committees and a proportional increase in the number of committees in the lower house, the creation of a council to coordinate the activities of Congress with those of the executive branch, and an increase in the salaries of congressmen from $10,000 to $15,000 a year. ) The new legislative plan also provides for the creation of a pension system that would allow members of Congress to retire for reasons of age or physical disability. Senator La Follette's committee stated in this regard: "These are critical days for the United States Government. Our governmental nose, which was diae(Continued on page 22)
Water rate cuts to take effect at the end of this month; they will be on a sliding scale
Picón Salas says America wants to hear Puerto Rico Venezuelan professor was the keynote speaker at UPR graduation He made the apology of the small nation He affirmed the Island is conceived in the Caribbean as an active hive of culture "Overcoming that insularism that Pedral ra analyzed so well, Puerto Rico is at the crossroads and intimacy of more than twenty nations that want to hear it". With these words concluded the distinguished Venezuelan writer and visiting professor at the University of Puerto Rico, Dr. Mariano Picón Satas, the dlseurxo d" graduation in ta 42nd, rotation of "ratios of the University held yesterday at the Teatro Universitaria The speaker began his speech j "Apologia de 1a small nation", can an expression of stands, affirm-1 command that "during the semester; academic I have enjoyed dé one of i Iks sweetest things that exist! The placid light of Puerto Rico, which gives the strangest tonalities of the sea and playing with the small hills that offer in flowers, trees and fruits the secular work of the Puerto Rican man, outline this contained and harmonious landscape where the Tropic, so aggressive and excessive in other lands, seems to humanize itself and to humanize in front of the eye that looks at it (see photo on page 1) and the hands that yearn to touch it. Already Puerta Rico has fulfilled that first task of Culture, which is to domesticate nature, to submit it to the keys and to the service of man and to overcome the fear produced by the desert and solitude",! And in aegulda the speaker traces the picture he has seen in the Puerto Rican colony living in New York City, saying: "To the people of this country (Puerto Rico) is not presented, in any way, the mystery of an unknown land, but a landscape already populated and fecundado' as a lap where every corner, every small fence or every source speak to the spirit in a language of reminiscences, of generations that worked and passed. This explains to me the ardent Puerto Rican patriotism, the uneasiness that the man from here feels when he emigrates to other places in search of greater profit, he cannot forget his distant home and is always in a trance of return to the can. In the immense New York metropolis there is, for example, a considerable Puerto Rican minority whose emotional resistance to adapt to other ways of life was for me a sociological fact of great importance. Poverty and the struggle for sustenance unite them there with a powerful tribal force, but they are seldom uncrossed and grafted together as an ethnic minority, jealous of their customs, their food and their songs. At the doors of the tenduchos of upper New York, women and children crowded together as in a Puerto Rican neighborhood; they continued to treat and recognize each other, asking for Pedro or Juana, as if the heart had not yet learned the Inhuman Indifference, the terrible loneliness of man among the millions of men that is the tragedy of the big cities". Further on, in an appreciation of the universal panorama, Dr. Picón Salas pointed out: "We have reached the tragic extreme of a positivist civilization that has subordinated everything to the will of power; that has deified energy for energy's sake without any other aesthetic and moral mpvll; that has preferred the quantitative to the qualitative. The balance of all that, the liquidation of the supermen has been seen in the apocalyptic landscape of Europe. Ser. great and powerful rather than just set, was the philosophy that, detached from a monstrous social bíologlsmo, applied to the relationship < of men ta struggle of the' animals in the tertiary. In this jungle voluntarism in the way it was practiced by the Nazis, there was no justification for the exiatence of a small country like Puerto Rico or any of our Spanish American nations, and I still remember the impression produced on me in the Hygiene Museum of Dresden by a seductive scale of the race from which it was clear that all the dollocephalic rublo% indicated as the number one group among all the human nuclei, were destined to have over all the others the same pro-, dominance of the shark over the sardines". And he added further on, referring to our Island: "Looking at oota (Continued on page 8)
I " " " ÉW JOSE COLL VIDAL '
It was reported yesterday that the federal tax levy on the island may well be expected to bring into the treasury, during the fiscal year beginning July 1, next, about $30,000. It is expected that during the first three months of the fiscal year, - July 1, August and September - shipments of rum to the United States will continue to be made.| He wrote to Muñoz Marín 1 The Island authorities will consider the problem of fertilizers for the agricultural activities of the country, according to the Speaker of the House of Representatives of Puerto Rico, Dr. Francisco M. Susonl, who has recommended that action be taken to solve it. Dr. Susonl has addressed *1 President of the Insular Senate, Mr. Lulo Muñoz M*rln, and the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, Mr. Jesús F. Plfteto, in connection with this matter, after receiving the resolution approved by the Farmers Association, urging that the Government "take the lead in the campaign that must be waged to prevent our agriculture from suffering because of the shortage of fertilizers". (Continued on page 22).
Mr. José Coll Vidal retires as Editor of El Mundo after twenty years in the post VARGAS BADILLO APPOINTED EDITOR
To enjoy a well-deserved rest, our fraternal colleague Mr. José Coll Vidal retired yesterday from the position of Director of EL MUNDO, after having served it brilliantly for twenty years. Yesterday, May 31, it was exactly twenty years since the master of journalists, Mr. Coll Vidal, arrived at our House to direct this newspaper. We say "by then" because, when José Coll Vidal crossed the threshold of EL MUNDO, he was already an acclaimed journalist. On that occasion, Mr. Romualdo Real, founder, president of the corporation and then acting Director of EL MUNDO, announced the appointment of our colleague as follows: "As of today, our dear colleague, the notable journalist Mr. José Coll Vidal, is the Director of EL MUNDO". "We do not intend to praise him now, although it is well deserved for the prelfioso writer who has already copuéuTe with us others the task 1st ira, since his pertonarlwB Jntelectual
m well known throughout the P "l>. what has htuuado and exalted with mu vigorous pen ofudo the columns of the daily Press. But if we must say in honor to the truth, $he cannot <eacribrate the history of the insular journalism, in what refers to X the last ten years", period in which the Puerto Rican Press has managed to conquer a legitimate progress "ln that the name of José Coll Vidal figUM" in prominent place, as one of the writers that with au tálenlo and their culture have contributed Kcnndemente to widen the horizoniei of the Piensa porl<H riquéfin. "Coll Vidal stands out worthily as one of our young masters of journalists, and this title, which very few can boast in full youth as our comrade, has nido conquered by him since the puvMtoa reprenentative he played in the colleagues "Ia Democrat!*" and "El *1mpm clal", after .of a work as brilliant as praiseworthy. El, MUNDO is pleased to give its warmest welcome to the new Doctor" Writer and journalist by temperament and by the most tense vocations of his spirit, Coll Vidal has already been an active journalist for over thirty years, ennobled by the most preclam actions. From the now distant times of "El Carnaval", the literary magazine in which he veiled his weapons, to quickly mark himself as an avant-garde writer, until today, many years have passed, crowning the life of one of the most distinguished journalists of our country. In the space of those years he was editor of "El Carnaval", Deputy Director of the "Boletín Mercantil", Director of "La Democracia", from 1917 to 1924; Deputy Director of the former "El Imparclal", from 1924 to 1928, and Director of EL MUNDO from 1926 until yesterday he completed twenty years in the arduous and difficult task. For some years, in addition to being Director of EL MUNDO, Mr. Coll Vidal was also Director of the magazine "Puerto Rico Ilustrado". "In the direction of "L* Democracia" Coll Vidal fought resounding campaigns, characterizing himself as one of the most brilliant polemicists Puerto Rico has ever had. In the direction of EL MUNDO, there are our editions of the last twenty years. Our colleague is not retiring after twenty years as editor of EL MUNDO. He is retiring after more than thirty years of constant struggle to enjoy a rest that he can no longer deny himself. To carry out the direction of EL MUNDO, as of today has been appointed our colleague Don Pablo Vargas Badillo, who has been until now Deputy Director of the newspaper, having belonged for twenty-two years to the staff of this House. Island circles expect rum to produce $30,000,000,000 It is estimated that during the first three months of the next fiscal year shipments to the United States will continue to boom, with the base at high levels.
It is estimated that during the first three months of the next fiscal year, shipments to the United States will continue to boom at high levels, assuring the Island Treasury a considerable amount of federal revenues during this period. It was reiterated, however, that such levels may reach a decline after September, when the U.S. grain harvest will permit the lifting of] the unprecedented restrictions imposed by the Government on the Nation's liquor industry in the grain economy. The distilleries of the United States, by virtue of a recent order of the Department of Agriculture, were compelled to operate using a smaller quantity of grain during the months of May. July. The monthly grain usage for those months must correspond to the equivalent of three days of normal mashing capacity, as compared to the five days they were allowed prior to the issuance of the order. This new order will permit not less than two and a half million bushels of grain to be used for distilling alcohol during either of those two months. The use of wheat on a restricted scale for the manufacture of whiskey during this period was also maintained. This measure will bring about an economy of grain in the food conservation campaign, so that the famine-stricken population of the war-torn countries can subsist. In the meantime, the country's liquor industry will continue to increase its shipments to the continent, to levels that will allow for the first three months* of next fiscal year to ensure sufficient income to the Erarlo to make it possible to establish the estimated 30 million dollars, as explained to EL MUNDO.
Basic price is fixed at .045 cents New law allows reorganization of prices and services Ledo. Rivera Zayas declines fees / - Board has expressed its gratitude for the work done in hearings For RAFAEL SANTIAGO SOSA Editor of EL MUNDO The Governing Board of the Servicio Insular do Acueductos y Alcantarillados, gave its approval to the new water and sewer rates proposed by the Service's Examiner, Mr. Rafaol Rivera Zayas. The action of the Board of Governors will allow a considerable reduction in the provaiedent rates and the implementation of new "norms" regarding the relationship of this agenda with its subscribers. -The director of the Service, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, informed yesterday that "the new rates will begin to be charged with the bill which will be submitted to all users during the month of July next. They will cover, therefore, the reading of the meters and the payment of water on an average basis for the period from June to July". The lowering of the rates has been made possible, it was explained yesterday, by virtue of the approval by the Governor of a new law which eliminates the compensation paid by the SIA to the municipality*, the free water for public uses in the schools, municipal buildings and public pens, and instead establishes that the SIA shall pay to the Government an annual amount equal to II and 2|3 percent of the total amount charged for water service and that the Government shall pay to the municipalities the annual compensation they receive and shall pay to the BIA for the free water served. This will allow the economic stabilization of the SIA and a notable reduction in operating expenses, which will make possible the reduction in the rates adopted, he said. Mr. Cuovai informed that "the Board of Governors expressed, in an approved resolution, its gratitude to Mr. Rivera Zayas for the services rendered in the study and preparation of his report. Mr. Rivera Zayas expressed to the agency that he will not charge any fees for the services he has rendered in conducting the public hearings in the main towns of the Island and preparing his detailed Report. For this gesture, moreover, the Board of Governors and the SIA have expressed their appreciation. The tariff approved by the Board of Governors has the character of a twofold increase, rather than an increase, as it currently prevails. The basic water rate is set at .045 cents per cubic meter, up from .056 cents per cubic meter at present. The sewer rate is also reduced. The following is a detailed breakdown of the rates approved by the Board of Directors: R "mldenclal: Minimum of 00 cents per month with delivery of 1S meters and any excess of 4.5 cents per cubic meter as recorded by meter. This eliminates the previously recommended progressive rate and results in substantial savings for all users. In the unmetered residential rate a minimum of 60 cents is also established and a 60-cent payment is allowed for facilities with four or more cubic meters of water. (Continued on page 8) "-The Maritime Board announced today that the "MARINE TIGER," a C-4 transport converted into a passenger and cargo vessel, will make her maiden voyage from New York to San Juan on the 18th of June. This steamer will replace the "George Washington," which is scheduled to sail today from New York on her last voyage. Although no details have been given as to the transport, it is believed that it may carry eight passengers. Ix" proelM tentatfvos oon WO for a trip in first and 000 in second class. The itinerary of the "Marino Tiger" included two trips a month without cleavage between the Mainland and Puerto Rico. She will arrive in San Juan on her first voyage on June *í, and on M will leave Puerto Rico for New York ol M.