THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY-Thundershowers with scattered thunder on the coasts in the morning, and "guaeeroe °®" thunder in the Interior, this afternoon Partly cloudy skies. A flurry of rain was recorded yesterday " high was 18. No sign of thunderstorms.
MURRAY REELECTO-Atlantic City. 22 (INS)-Philip Murray was unanimously re-elected today president of the Congress of Industrial Organizations, II powerful American labor organization better known by its initials CIO.
XJT X yt J J M DAILY MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XX
VIII
NUMBER 10776
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 1946
Entered as second class matter, Poet Office, San Juan, P. R.
PRICE 5 Cents
I The session of the Chambers is still under study.
The draft of the collective bargaining agreement to be discussed between the sugar employers and the Sugar Industry Workers Union, presided over by Representative Pedro Vega Berrios, and which will govern labor-management relations in the sugar industry during the next harvest, will be submitted to the Sugar Producers Association and the Colonists Sector of the Farmers Association next Monday.
News Digest
Lewie was summoned yesterday by the Corto Federal. I will have to appear next Monday. In meantime, strike in coal mines m general. 400,000 Lowto miners on strike. Dudley Smith reports that the Sirius has reduced the amount of manure to be sent to the Island. - The Commissioner of Instruction, OoAor B. A. Martin, made statements in which he expressed his official disapproval of any move to close the American schools, which were named yesterday as the Director of Charities of the CaLoo veterans who refused at the end of October to Mr. MS. Weekend baseball series begins with San Juan vs. Santurce, Ponce vs. Aguadilla and Mayagüez vs. Ca The requests for funds from various agencies were formulated before the Board of Plans. XI Dr. Juan A. Pona assumed
The Legion will bring a home plan before Congress for consideration, - - - e The tahonas are not yet operating in San Juan at full capacity. - Although nothing has been finally settled on the special support of the chambers," it is probable that there will be and that I consider the bonus for public employees - - * - Arrangements completed for the completion of the scarce of shingles. Order will be placed for eleven thousand of them. Insular Agent will ask for funds for car inspection work. - Senator Butler is almost certain to chair committee which controls Puerto Rican affairs. - Michigan and Yale are favorites in today's soccer games, Planchardon Quiñones is the League's leading runner in effectiveness and games won at 5-0. They sue the Government of the Capital, for alleged breach of contract oobro the sale of an urban estate. ose Delegations of unions of the CGT Auténtica conferred &yer &yer coi} the Plftern. rogéis lé n ohrera in the Fomento.
Pinero says there is likely to be. - Would discuss bonus for employees Is supporter of free trade But advocates retaining in force control over various items Gov. Jesus T. Plftero, during his weekly conference with reporters, said he was in favor of free trade. He believes that the government should only exercise its control on the prices of basic foodstuffs such as rice, beans, meat, wheat flour, cod, butter and jerky. But I believe," he said, "that the other items should remain outside of control, and if of those listed there is excess control should be discontinued. Mr. Plftero said that there was already plenty of rice on the market and that, in addition, the Government was trying to get as much rice as possible, "as long as we have ships. He said that enough rice had been landed in San Juan and Ponco, but not in Mayagüez, where a ship was waiting yesterday. The Governor fears that there may be interruptions in supplies due to maritime transit, "and we must have enough supplies here. Everyone must buy as much as possible, both commerce and the Government". The Governor disclosed that nothing had been finally settled about the special session of the Legislature, as the matter was still under consideration and was likely to have already been. Asked if it was true that there was any thought of making an increase to government employees with appropriations from the War Emergency Bill, the Governor stated that this was undoubtedly a rumor, adding: "If the special session is held, it will be a very brief one, in order to consider this matter as quickly as possible. The idea, to date, is to grant a bonus or bonus, whatever you want to call it. In view of the abnormal situation through which we are passing, the salaries would be increased proportionately, doing justice to those below, until June 30 next year, so that the Legislature, in its special session, may have sufficient time to consider a scientific plan to be followed from the first of July next, which is when the fiscal year begins. Turning to the situation of prices of basic necessities, the Governor said: "We are now on the crest of the wave and the tendency now is to go down. We are passing through the worst of the storm and it is hoped that in a few months the situation will return to normal, unless unforeseen problems arise. The Governor made some remarks regarding a meeting held the previous day in Pala- ; do to discuss plans for the construction of a building to be built in the city of Pala- ; do for the construction of a new building.
Sugar industry agreement to be submitted, workers expect to deliver it to the employers on Monday. - Groups of representatives have already been appointed to participate in the negotiations.
Although the agreement to be submitted by the sugar workers to the employers is almost completely drafted, Mr. Vega Berrios informed yesterday that the clauses referring to salaries and "check off", have not yet been inserted in the contract, due to a study that the Union will submit together with the same, reis- cloned with data and numbers that will serve as a basis for the demands that the sugar workers will make. During the last few days, the leaders of the Union have been working on the drafting of the agreement. It is expected that the negotiation of the contract will begin during the month of December. Regarding the demands for salary increases to be made to the employers, Mr. Vega Berrios revealed yesterday that a study would have to be prepared in order to determine the amount of the increase to be requested. The Union president did not want to anticipate any information on the increase in wages to be requested. Regarding the "check off" clause, which was recently announced by a Union leader to be included in the new contract, Mr. Vega Berrios also declined to say whether the clause would be included in the workers' claim. In the meantime, both parties, lor (continued on page 7)
Butler for head of Grounds Committee
Reed would chair Civil Service committee-no mention of Ellender Pop CHARLESMeCABE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON. 22. (PU)-Aug. Hugh Butler, R-Nebraska, is "almost certain" to head the Senate Public Lands Committee, which will have charge of considering questions affecting Hawaii, Alaska and Puerto Rico, he said today. Alaska and Puerto Rico, a senator who has been closely following the committee assignment plans under the Congressional Reorganization and Modernization Act said today. That source added that Senator Clyde Reed, Republican, of Kansas, who is also a strong candidate for the post, will probably receive the chairmanship of the new Civil Service Committee which, under the reorganization plan, will oversee matters pertaining to the Civil Service, the Post Office Administration and post routes, the informant said that if for some reason Butler is not appointed to the post, Senator William Langer, Republican, of North Dakota, is "out of the running. North Dakota, be "out of the question," Langer, although ' m mentioned -'rominontoment 1 in preliminary speculation, ■ was more or less ruled out when the Republican Rudder Committee so reports that it ignored him in all < consideration for the office. Of the mondo- ¡ nated domestic candidates, ol Senator Informant dito . that Chan Gurney, Republican, of South Dakota, will probably be < I resident of the Armed For- 1 te Committee, and quo Eugene D. Mil- i likln, Republican, of Colorado, "not i has a chance." I Meanwhile, a source close i to the Republican Helm Committee, said- । lo that the chairman of that Committee, ( Robert A. Taft, Republican, of ] Ohio, has spoken to Butler on : the question of distribution of co- । mltés v that Butler has spoken to him indi- । cated his willingness to accept the of Public Te- । rrenos, if offered. Butler has visited Puerto Rico and Hawaii since he came to the Senate in 1941. Although someone close to him (a Press montage discovered by the United Press regarding the issue, it was a morally noncommittal and not directly unfavorable one. Upon returning from a trip to the Pacific in early August, at an informal press conference at the domestic airport, 1 in the company of Senator Alien J. Ellender, Democrat, of Lulslana, 1 Ellender expressed his outspoken opposition to Id ostadity for Hawaii. Butler, commenting on Ellender's 1 statement, said, "No mo gustarla i come out on his (ostadl- j dad's) defense, but I am not in a position to 1 say I would oppose it." He said < Sue was involved in it was a question of a "broad national standard," i.e., whether non-contiguous areas, such as Puerto Rico and Ha- 1 wall, should be incorporated as states, and that until Congress settled that point, he would not like to make any personal decisions about Hawaii. Butler also visited Puerto Rico after his trip to Latin America as a representative of International Racism. After that trip, Butler published in Senate papers and magazine articles his fierce condemnation of the "wastefulness of the New Deal" on Latin America. His accusations were later countered by Secretary of State Cordell Hull, and by Secretary of State Cordell Hull, and by Senator Kenneth W. McKellar, Democrat, of Tonnes- , seo. who said Butler was . "95 percent wrong" Butler attacked the government in the Virgin Islands under the regime of Secretary of the Interior, Harold L. íckes, and in Puerto Rico, under Foxford G, Tugwell. saying that in those reglons "a pattern has been raised v I fashioned for < New Deal profligacy in i all of Latin America." < (Continued on péglna 7)
NAMED AY£R
' I ■ 1 V K Dr. FERNANDO BATLLE Batlle, Director of Beneficence of the Capital Dominican Doctor had been working at the San Juan Municipal Hospital _E1 Acting Administrator of the Capital, Seftor Angel Diez do Andino, yesterday appointed Dr. Fernando A. Battle Director of Health and Beneficence of San Juan, to fill the vacancy caused by the recent appointment of the previous incumbent, Dr. Juan A. Pona, as Health Commissioner. The appointment extended to Dr. Batlle, was effective yesterday, taking the oath of office before the Secretary of the Capital, Miss Josefina Rincon. A graduate of the College of Medicine of the University of Santo Domingo, Dr. Batlle is a Dominican professional who has been practicing medicine on the Island for about eleven months with the authorization of the Medical Examining Board by means of a special license issued for that purpose. The new Director of Health and Welfare of San Juan has been in the diplomatic service of his country on several occasions, having acted as Consul of the Dominican Republic in the cities of Montreal, Canada and New York. He also served as Secretary of the Dominican Legation in Havana, Madrid and Buenos Aires. He was Undersecretary of State, SMmdad and Beneficence of the Dominican Government and Director of the Hospital Blllinl do Ciudad Trujillo. Married to a Puerto Rican, Mrs. Dallla Leon, Dr. Batlio was Assistant Director of the Maternity Department of the San Juan Municipal Hospital when he was appointed to that position. - I hope in this new position," Dr. Batlle declared yesterday after taking the oath of office, "which for me is very honorable, to be able to continue the work begun by Dr. Juan A. Pons, and for this I hope to count on the cooperation of the Government of the Capital, of the medical class and of the people of San Juan and Santurce in general". (Continued on page 7.)
John L. Lewis Summoned Yesterday; To Appear Monday; Two Miners Killed In Virginia
r The tahonas are not yet operating at capacity ■ - ■■■■■■■ ■ - [ This is the reason why the product is not being sold at the market and in grocery stores The distribution of groceries continues New shipments of butter expected * this weekend The 22 tahonas of the city of San Juan, resumed since last Tuesday the work of baking bread, noticing on Wednesday a greater influx of the public in request of food, in the establishments themselves. The dispatch of bread to the retail stores also resumed at the same bakery. However, a large number of retailers could not sell the food in their stores, nor was it possible for street vendors to resume their sales at the market. Asked yesterday by the Industrialists Association about this situation, its secretary, Mr. Vicente Leon, Jr., informed that "the bakeries are not yet working at full capacity, due to the fact that flour has not been received and distributed in sufficient quantities. The mills consume an average of 200 sacks per day of wheat flour and the stocks of flour, since the product is now being received from the United States, are still limited". He added that once the bulk of the wheat flour shipments are in Puerto Rico, "the bakeries will operate at full capacity and deliveries to stores and sales to the market will resume normally. The distribution of the other foodstuffs received recently has continued. However, the Centro do Detallistas de Provisiones said that there are still many "retail businesses" to receive their respective quantities of rice. It attributed the delay to the slow way that, in its opinion, has been observed in the sales of the grain to the small stores, both by the Government and by the wholesale comorolants. This slowness is due, according to Mr. Ramón Nieves Alicea, to the need to establish a good distribution system. The implementation of such a system is hindered," he added, "by the fact that the wholesale stores are congested by the constant visit of traders, both from San Juan and the Island, requesting their respective quantities of grain. This hinders a rapid distribution". The trade also expressed satisfaction with the news supplied by Governor Plftero yesterday to the Press, to the effect that 'by Monday there will be enough butter in Puerto Rico. It was expressed that new shipments of this product are expected on the island during the present week. The work of transporting the last butter received to the local warehouses, as well as its distribution to the metropolitan commerce and to the other towns of the Island, continued. The shipment of foodstuffs and general cargo received on the last ships that arrived at our port was also being completed.
The number of World War II veterans applying for study benefits through the last day of October has reached 29,505, according to a report made yesterday by Mr. John J. O'Brien, acting director of the Veterans Administration. "Of this number of veterans interested in pursuing studies under the provisions of the Veterans Bill of Rights, a total of 28,824 were authorized to enroll in various educational institutions, but only 18,243 were able to find places in them and are now studying," said the official note, adding: "Only 1,164 veterans of the last war were studying last February, compared with 16,243 who had this benefit at the end of last October. "A total of 14,676 veterans were enrolled in public institutions at the end of October, while 1,567 were enrolled in the industrial, commercial and agricultural training plan". Juan B. Ferrer, head of the Education and Vocational Rehabilitation Division of the Veterans Administration, announced that the 14,676 veterans enrolled in educational institutions in Puerto Rico were enrolled in public institutions as of the end of October, while 1,567 were enrolled in the industrial, commercial and agricultural training plan".
Eduardo Gonzalez clarifies his statements on appointments
Explains how the interview with the Resident Commissioner was conducted. - Consultation with the President of the Republican Union
t "From the explanation of Mr. González it is clear", said Mr. Iriarte, "that the version of the interview published here - according to dispatches received from Washington - is very different from the reality, as explained by Mr. González". i The" paragraph" of the communication received by Mr. Iriarte . The" paragraph" of the commentary received by Mr. Gonzalez on this matter, offered yesterday by Mr. Iriarte, states that while Gonzalez was at the Mayflower Hotel, talking with the" journalist" Dorvllller and McCabe, the latter received a phone call from his office in which he was informed that the Resident Commissioner had just arrived in Washington and that at that moment he was at the residence of Softer Colon. "They asked me," said Mr. Gonzalez, "if I knew Dr. Fernos and if I had any objection in accompanying them to see him. I told them that I knew the doctor well and also his political ideas, and that I had no objection in going with them to see him. "During the trip, and after a number of questions put to Dr. Fernós by the two journalists, the offer of cooperation made by the President of the United States to the Republican Party was brought up.
The president of the Progressive Republican Union, Mr. Celestino Iriarte. He informed EL MUNDO yesterday that he had received a communication from the "national comlttoeman" of the Party, Mr. Eduardo R. Gonzalez, in which he explains the details of his interview with the Resident Commissioner in Washington, Dr. Antonio Fornos Isern, and in which he is attributed certain statements that have been made to him by the President of the United States.
... _ . The Governor yesterday brought together the heads of four parties.
At the invitation of Governor Don Jesus T. Plftero had lunch on Fortaleza with the presidents of all the parties that have representatives in the Legislature, the setters Josefina Barcoló de Romero and the seflores Luis Muñoz Marin, Celestino Triarte and Bolívar Pagán. The Governor explained that he wished to know the opinion of each one of them regarding the problem that Puerto Rico has to face due to the fact that the prices of the products that Puerto Rico consumes have been decentralized and the price control for the main product that Puerto Rico produces, sugar, continues. The prosontos expressed that do-
The prosontos expressed that they unanimously asked President Truman to increase the price of sugar or lower its price "because of the current economically disadvantageous and discriminatory situation for the country. Although there was perfect harmony among the assembled leaders as to the substance of the matter discussed, no agreement was reached as to how to deal with it, and both Mr. Muftoz Marin and Mr. Iriarte agreed to make a draft petition to President Truman. These drafts will be discussed at an upcoming meeting to be called by the Go. (Continued on page 7.)
Molotov and Senator Connally shake hands '*9 Hr I lor''*' < 7 ■ ' a B||||k ।i ¡¡|| ■ ■ ■ (I Bé ' Hr K mH u RUguav The Minister of Soviet Extarloree Relations, V. M. Molotov (Left), and "enator Tom Connally so shake mnnn shortly before the United Nations Political Committee met at Lake Success, New York. It was at that session that Mooltov, as Russian delegate to the United Nations, accepted the U.S. proposal requesting all UN members to report any military forces they may have in enemy as well as non-enemy countries.
I Dr. Pons says he will be severely critical ■ at the Health Department j Early yesterday he assumed the" duties of the position. - Marchand consents to remain for some time longer in the sub-commissariat "Loa employee and function them of this Department will have in me a friend, but as a friend aeré a severe critic. If I have any inclination to impose severe disciplines, it is because I have always imposed severe disciplines in life", said Dr. Juan A.
Pone, upon taking office, yesterday morning, as Health Commissioner. At 8:45 a.m., Dr. Pone arrived at the Department, at Parada 19, accompanied by the Deputy Commissioner, Dr. An5 el D. Marchand, who until yesterday occupied the position on an interim basis. For ten minutes, Dr. Marchand and Dr. Pons were conferring in the Commissioner's office. After the conference, Dr. Marchand accompanied the new head of Health on a tour of all the Department's facilities and introduced him to the officers and employees. At 10:00 a.m., Dr. Pona left his offices to attend a meeting at the Planning Board. When asked by reporters for some remarks by the new Commissioner of Health, at the moment of taking office, Dr. Pona expressed himself in this manner: "I want, first of all; to take this opportunity to extend a cordial greeting to the fun* ders and employees of this Department and assure them that they will have in me a friend who is always ready to pay attention to the problems they are confronted with in their businesses or agencies. As a friend I will be a severe critic. If I have any inclination to impose severe disciplines, it is because I have always imposed severe disciplines on myself in life. "I realize more clearly every day the enormous task before this Department. This work requires not only that everyone knows what his duties are, but enthusiasm, interest and perhaps even devotion and a spirit of sacrifice: all this for the good of the community. We also need the determined cooperation of the constituents of the community, since the officers of this Department cannot carry out their work if they encounter apathy and even passive resistance from the people. Referring to the work that the sub-commissioned Dr. Angel D. Marchand will continue to perform, Dr. Pons said the following: "Dr. Marchand has consented to continue in his position for as long as he deems necessary to ensure the continuity of certain projects initiated by Dr. Fernos. As far as I am concerned, that "will be as long as he wishes. I am sorry that these projects cannot continue under the able direction of Dr. Marchand. To the letter sent to him by Dr. Pons asking him to remain in his post as Deputy Commissioner, Dr. Marchand replied with another in which he says: "I appreciate the honor you do me in asking me to remain in my post as Deputy Commissioner of Health, and I regret most sincerely that previous commitments will only allow me to do so for a few short months which will ensure the continuity of the vast Public Health program outlined by your predecessor, Dr. Antonio Fernóz Isern. "I can assure you," says Dr. Marchand further on in his letter, "that you will have my coope(Contlnued on page 15.)
GRECO-YUGOESLAVIAN BREAKUP REPORTED NEW YORK. M. (PU)- | Columbia i Broadcasting System receivers picked up tonight a prni cedent dispatch from Berne radio, i according to which Yugoeslavla has decided to break off dlplomáttoaR relations with Greece. The dispatch added that ol Enuari gado of Business, the only diplomat left in Greece, after the Ambassador's recent trip to Belgrade, has already left Athens as well. i ; Iriarte thinks Ty dings' phrase is a joke ¡ He considers him a lion ( "clawless" in a ; Republican Congress i The latest statements of Senator Millard E, Tydlngs, publical da" in the local Press, in the sentír that he will continue the fight for . Puerto Rican independence . in the new Congress, and that the Republican vlc- ■ torla in the United States । । two does not represent the disappearance . "of its influential position in tos . political affairs of the territories > and possessions," are only "an invi- , heel to laughter," declared yesterday the , president of the Unión Republlca- . na Progresista, licenciado Celesti- । no Triarte. r As is well known, Senator Ty* I dings has authorized declarations, Rubllcadas by the wire service, which suggest that the Senator for Maryland will have to again pre* 1 sit the independence project for the Island, when the next Congress adjourns. > "Tydings is now, in my con- [ repto", - said Senator Iriarte,- I "a caged lion, without claws and ' gin teeth, fit for play" do * chiquillos. For eleven years he was * mistreating the pals with continuous ' threats, year after year, of his profseto do independence. If we did not fear him during all the - time he enjoyed his non- ■ table political influence in a Congress dominated by his party, I do not see why we need worry now, when he announces to fight for independence in a Congress dominated by Republicans, who have statehood as their platform as the only political solution to the Puerto Rican problem. "Now the senator from Maryland," said Mr. Iriarte, "is too offensive to us. He lends himself, with these new threats, to mere childish games. To us, such purposes of Senator Tydings we take as an innocent joke. We have tlem1 (Continued on page 20 ).
Strike is general in regard to Lewis' Union 400,000 mine workers entered second day of strike yesterday President remains firm in fight Government prepares embargo of non-essential cargoes By UNITED PRESS WASHINGTON. 22. (PU) - Sergeants at Arms of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia (Federal Court) this afternoon served labor leader John L. Lewis court papers ordering him to appear before said Court, next Monday at ten o'clock in the morning, to explain why he should not be punished for contempt of Court, in view of his refusal to retract "or strike order to the coal miners, issued on Friday, November 15, while President Truman continues his vacation in the Darte most su* retía of the State of Florida. Inexorably determined to carry his fight against Lewis to the last redoubt he chooses to undo the Government, and while from the mining district of West Virginia comes the first news of the first outbreak of violence as a result of the work stoppage in the mines, in which two miners were shot and killed by a coal loader who was ordered to stop transporting coal. Meanwhile, the strike in the mines - one hundred percent effective with respect to the 400,000 miners affiliated to Lewie's union - entered its second day today, and the nation and its government were preparing to face the great fuel crisis that this strike will determine, precisely at the gates of the imminent winter, setting emergency plans to stretch as much as possible the scarce supplies of bluminous coal. The first to feel the brunt of the strike will be the National Railroads, which are to reduce by 25 per cent the traffic of coal-burning passenger trains by midnight next Sunday night. Half of the United States, eastward from the Mississippi River, faces the necessity of a wartime blackout if the strike is prolonged. Within hours after the strike was fully declared, one of the major railroads announced its intention to lay off some of its employees in the repair department; and spokesmen for a number of large industrial plants, among them the General Electric Company at Schenectady, New York, said that reductions in production were certain to occur if the coal strike continued for any length of time. In Seattle, Washington University closed its classrooms for an indefinite period because of the coal shortage. In Washington, the Government subsequently ordered a return to wartime schedules for heating and lighting in federal buildings for the purpose of conserving coal. This order covered about 300 buildings in the District of Columbia as well as all other buildings operated by the Federal Government which use coal. Except for the endorsement of Lewis and his miners by the CIO at its recent convention in Atlantic City, and the more effective backing of more than 10,000 anthracite miners who have gone on strike in sympathy with their labor leader Lewis, the Government appears solidly supported by most of the press, by public opinion and by unchallenged leaders of the Republican Party in their pulley to a decision with the obstinate leafy coal union leader John L. Lewis. Today, from Dallas, Texas, came a call to both Republicans and Democrats from former Minnesota Gov. Harold E. Stassen, one of the candidates for the Republican nomination for President in 1948, to stand solidly behind President Truman in his election against John L. Lewis. Stassen said: "IF Lewis cannot totally break the labor contract between the Government and the United Mine Workers of America, he must be punished, and all the power of the Government should be used to see that the coal is taken out of the mines. Stassen also urged that the contract be defined as to its meaning, adding: "If there is any clause which would allow Lewis to cancel the contract, then the Government should immediately sit down with the mine workers to sign a new contract. For its part, the Civilian Production Administration was today ready to order the curtailment of manufactured gas service, wherever it is in stock.