THE
48 Pages 5 Ctvs * 2 Sections
48 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DIARIC DE LA MAÑANA
NUMBER 10581
YEAR XXVIII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MAY 11, 1946 --- 1 ---S-B----*
Entered a" .econd claw matter. Post Oefice. Snn Ju.n, P. R.
Let us support the men who made possible the Victory Loan.
Truce decreed in car non strike; miners to return to work next Monday; Government plans to expropriate Telefonica.
Muñoz prefers a Chinese man supported by the people to a Puerto Rican without that support In an article published in "The Nation ' the popular leader exposes my criteria "on the economic situation, the political status and the governorship NEW YORK, 10. (FU)- In the latest addition to "The Nation", the president of the Senate of Puerto Rico, Lule Muñoz Marín, publishes an article with the title "A plea in defense of Puerto Rico". The following is the complete text: "Will Puerto Rico be free?
JULIUS A. KRUG, U.S. Secretary of the Interior, will visit the island on May 16 -- "l' " .-XR ' a JR JULIUS A. KRUG , U.S. Secretary of the Interior. Interior chief wants to know island situation He will spend several days here on his return from Carlota Amelia, Virgin Islands WASHINGTON, May 10 (P.U.) - Secretary of the Interior Julius A. Krug will arrive in San Juan, Puerto Rico, on May 16, according to an official release from the Department. Secretary Krug will then go to St. Thomas to attend the installation of William H. Hastie as Governor of the Virgin Islands on May 17 in the city of Carlota Amella, the capital of the Islands. Hastie, a noted attorney and former U.S. District Court Judge for the Virgin Islands, is the first colored man in the history of the United States to receive a presidential appointment as governor of a territory or possession of the United States. When Secretary Krun arrives in San Juan on the 16th, it will be the first time that the new head of the Department of State will be free to live, not free to live.
Will the United States continue to be classified as a colonial empire because it insists, for no good reason, on continuing a colonial system of government in Puerto Rico? These are the two questions over which Puerto Rico and the United States constantly clash, and yet their basic Interests are Identical. Puerto Rico does not want to be a colony. The United States benefits from not being a colony. It is time that this run see it expressed in common action. The undeniable economic fact that Puerto Rico cannot subsist without free trade with the U.S. should not be used as a roson to frustrate the desire of both sides to restore Puerto Rico's colonial status IF that is the reality, we will use creative statism to solve the problem by recognizing that reality. IF the United States says to Puerto Rico: 'We give you freedom or death', it will be choosing against its own interests to leave the problem unresolved. Puerto Rico, today, is facing three major tasks that it must be able to perform in accordance with the democratic principles for which eighty thousand Puerto Ricans served in the recent war. These three tasks are: to improve the basic economic situation; to fix the future status of the island; and to consider who will be its next governor after Tugwell retires in July. "The economic situation is the result of economic injustices, poor natural resources and a large and growing population. Only half of the island's 3,500 square miles of land area is arable. As far as is known, the subsoil has no valuable resources. The population, about 580 persons per square mile, is increasing at the rate of 55,000 per year. By I960, the particle: me""o laborious stork assigned to Puerto Rico, aided by the declining death rate, will have covered the island with three million human beings. For a long time, the population and production of Puerto Rico increased together. Then, in 1934, we had 1,6 0,00 inhabitants. Now we have more than a million more with almost the same production. How do we manage? Artificial federal aid and war expenditures, coinciding with a more liberal attitude in Washington, have helped us. In addition, since 1940, Puerto Rico has had a government of the people - ratified by huge majorities in 1944 - which passed legislation aimed at increasing production and distributing more equitably what was produced. During the last five years, more political power has been wielded than before.
"WASHINGTON. 10 (PU)-Federal agricultural employees are prepared to make known their objections to the proposed plan establishing the new minimum wage for employees outside the continental United States. I At a meeting of a subcommittee of the Council of Government Employees, affiliated with the American Federation of! ti down, held at ( today. members of ' it said it was agreed to hold a conference, jointly- L ment with officials of the Civil Service and the Bureau of Pro- 1 supuesto, at which the employees , would state their case. It was emphasized that the federal employees would insist that the "decided-' clal dlfoorn-' clal" should be extended to the pay of government employees working outside the continental United States. i A report was recently issued by the Bureau of the Civil Service Preau- , । sion and Commission, stating that the "25 percent dIteren- ■ established in the Balarlos . plan for all U.S. federal workers with- . The members of the subcommittee of the ■ Council of Federal Government Employees who are concerned with the wage problem are: s Leo George, President of the Post Office Clerks' Organization; w Foster Pratv. President of the Tecl nlcos, Engineers, Architects and De- ■ lineers; Jamos B. Burns, President of the American Federation of Government Employees; George Rl1- ley, representative of the Electrical Workers; Herbert Woods, Director of Research; and, in connection with the practical Engineers (Continued on page 33), the American Federation of Water Supply and Sewerage Engineers.
"The water reserves of the aqueducts, in the metropolitan area, have been completely exhausted and only the meager flow that is available is
NEWS DIGEST
Yesterday a truce was declared in the coal miners' strike. operations will be resumed next Monday, - - - - - i For the time being it will not be possible to pay the "owed" to the personnel of the Government's hospital institutions. - The petition to annul the decree on wages in the milk industry is denied. - The Secretary of the Interior, Julius A. Krug, will arrive in San Juan on the 16th . . . Water reserves in the aqueducts of the metropolitan area exhausted. . Strikes in the United States are affecting the Island. - . - - - Mu ños Marin writes in 'The Nation" on three problems of the Island: the economic situation, the political status and the governorship upon Tugwell's retirement. Dissolved o¡ Jury in the case con-.
against brother" Rodrigues Vil-, ches. - Plan studied for the emigration of a thousand Puerto Rican workers. There is objection of the federal unionized personnel, to the plan, on salaries. Tahoneros and workers to discuss strike today. Jtménes de Asúa against punishing delinquent children, - - - - Nineteen injured in a collision at Parada 34 yesterday. - Rodrigues Olmo participated in triple play, playing first base, as Mexico beat Monterrey two to one. - Three Olympic marks may be improved at Justas ds silver and field today, Nando Fabregas, Ucho Santiago. Torras and Vicéns were selected most outstanding athletes at the University. - I Council of Ministers of Italy
accepted King Humbert as successor to Victor Emmanuel. - Byrnes pleads with Foreign Ministers in Paris to accept his idea of a Fas Conference next June. - - - - Russian troops have been withdrawn from Iran, according to information from the Iranian Minister. A thermal power station will reinforce the electric power supply. - Justice contests suspended sentence in a less serious case. - The company confirms that there is enough short-grain rice for Puerto Rico. * . * The police officers who were at the racetrack on the day of the riot are transferred. - . - - Public hearing objected to increase in BPP rates. - . - - The University of Puerto Rico has been accredited by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools.
The case would begin with the seizure of some 17 inland plants The Ponce plant would be included Banco de Fopiento made a report contrary to the Company's proposal Everything indicates, according to information obtained by EL MUNDO yesterday, that the Puerto Rico Communications Authority intends to establish at any moment procedures leading to the acquisition, compulsory expropriation, of the properties of the Porto Rico Telephone Company, or part of them. It was also reported yesterday that in the last forty-eight hours, representatives of the Communications Authority, í the Telephone Industry Workers Union and the Free Federation of Workers of Puerto Rico have been holding talks with a view to reaching a definitive agreement between the Authority and the Union to ensure the continuation of services to union employees under the new administration, should the expropriation be carried out. Other information obtained by EL MUNDO reveals that a preliminary agreement has been reached between the Communications Authority and the affiliated Telephone Industry Employees Union. (Continued on page 14) COOPER ORDERS CA NOT TO EXPROPRIATE Federal Court Judge Robert A. Cooper yesterday granted a preliminary injunction, ordering the Communications Authority and its directors to refrain from any attempt to expropriate the Telephone Company's property. The Judge's order was issued after an Injunction motion was filed by the Telephone Company's attorneys. For the discussion of the Injunction petition, Judge Cooper set May 14, 2009.
At the last meeting held by the Commission of Higher Education Institutions of said entity, Mr. Bowles was in Puerto Rico at the beginning of April and made an inspection visit to all the facilities of the University. The Secretary of the Association held interviews with officials and professors of the Institution, as well as with individuals, regarding the academic work and the problems and plans of the University. Although Mr. Bowles did not disclose the nature of his recommendations, he was impressed with the progress of University affairs and praised the reports prepared by the University in response to the usual questionnaire required by the Association. The reports rendered reveal the complex and vast structure that has become the Institution that had humble beginnings when in 1899 the Normal School was established in Fajardo. The Normal School was later transferred to Rio Piedras, where the University was established by a law voted on March 12, 1903, which is considered the official date of its founding. The campus developed little by little and its growth was marked on July 21, 1925, when a new law provided it with secure and constant income for its development, and on May 7, 1942, when another reorganization law expanded its livelihood and gave it perspectives in tune with the changes in the Puerto Rican social environment. The University now has seven faculties in Rio Piedras and, in Mayagüez, the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts, divided into three faculties. In all the faculties, during the regular academic year, there is a faculty of 375 professors with more than 7,300 students. Other departments of the Institution include the School of Tropical Medicine, the Experimental Station, the Agricultural Extension Service, the School of Industrial Arts, the Institute of Meteorology and the Center for Social Research. Recognition given to .(Continued on page 32)
With water reserves exhausted in the entire metropolitan area, Cuevas Bustamante says only the scarce flow of the Bayamón and Río Piedras rivers and the Hato Rey pump are available.
The Bayamón and Rio Piedras rivers and the Hato Rey pump, which are not enough to cover the needs of the area," said yesterday the Administrator and Chief Engineer of the Aqueduct Service, Mr. Sergio Cuevas. He also explained that, as the public was warned several days ago, the service will be irregular during the drought period, which he described as "crucial, since it has lasted until well into May, which is usually optimal for rainfall. "The public can help prevent the current shortage from causing discomfort," Cuevas said, adding that "the way to do this is to avoid wasting water." Otherwise "we are doomed to suffer a water shortage that will undoubtedly cause a lot of inconvenience to consumers." The SIA chief recalled that some time ago he announced that the island was losing forty percent of its total water production and that this could produce, in times of drought, a serious public problem. He said that when he made public the news about some water in the reservoirs and rainfall was normal, but the calculations about the waste had led him to issue an alert to the public."
"I trust that all citizens will have to be as careful as possible in their use of water. We must insist on an economy aimed at avoiding waste," said Cuevea.
Failure is portrayed in their faces
j * yw it ai ~ JM wi ■"mhlantA sullenness of this" gentleman" betrays the inability to reach f a M¿rdo on To. problem, more" important, related, to peace at the mlnl.tro. conference of foreign affairs, of the" <¿u*tro Great" Power" that "e held in Parí". They are it" U.S. Secretary of State Jame" F. Byrne. (right) and "enador re PubH there." a assg tJiisag The University accredited by U.S. association The Middle State* Association took favorable action at its last meeting. - The University of Puerto Rico has been included in the list of institutions accredited by the Middle States A""ociaton of College, and Secondary Schools, according to a communication which the Rector, Mr. Jaime Benitez, has received from Dr. Frank H. Bowlcs, a Columbia University official and secretary of the Association, The decision was made by the President of the University of Puerto Rico, Mr. Jaime Benitez, who has been accredited by the Middle States A""ociaton of College, and Secóndnry Schools.
Plan for the emigration of 1,000 workers 7 I The transfer of small advance workers has been authorized this month Labor studies the proposal Employment agent is the one who manages the shipment of agricultural workers By Luí" F. Ránche" Cappa Editor of EL MUNDO The Department of Labor has been considering for some time a request for authorization to transfer, in an emigration plan, a number of Puerto Rican workers to four states of the nation. The application has been made to Labor Commissioner Manuel A. Perez by Mr. Samuel E. Friedman, an employment agent, who holds a license as such issued by the state government of Peninsula. Mr. Friedman, who has resided for some time on the Island, intends to sponsor an emigration of Puerto Rican workers to the states of Maty-, Land, Vlrglna. Pensllvnnla and New Jersey, where it has been reported that there is a shortage of pure arms to perform agricultural labor. The emigration will consist of one thousand workers, who will be transported by plane, in groups that will leave for the United States according to the existing transportation facilities. The exodus would begin this May and would continue during the coming months of June, July, August and September. The Employment Division of the Department of Labor, which is headed by Mr. Pedro San Miguel, has been charged with studying and considering the probabilities of success of the emigration. To this end, said department has been analyzing the circumstances and conditions and guarantees under which the workers would go to work in the agricultural zones of the states of the union mentioned. One obstacle to Mr. Friedman's emigration plan is that it is not sponsored by a corporation or company of recognized economic solvency, and consequently in a position to offer the greatest number of guarantees and advantageous conditions to the Puerto Rican workers who would be able to work in the agricultural zones of the aforementioned states.
Yesterday the bakers and workers picketed in front of the San Juan bakeries While the strike movement decreed by the San Juan Bakers' Union, affiliated with the FLT, continued yesterday, a complete shortage of bakers' and workers' supplies continued, a complete shortage of bakers' supplies continued yesterday. - continued yesterday, a complete shortage of bread was noticeable in the commercial establishments, where the consumers acquired the substitute products of said food, such as cookies and others. Although in very small numbers (Continued on page 15).
Justice challenges the suspended sentence in the misdemeanor case The Supreme Court is asked to order Judge Alvarado to remit the case and annul the sentence. They allege that it is only for serious crimes.
The Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Enrique Campo del Toro; the Assistant Attorney General Edwin Cortés and the District Court of San Juan District Attorney José C. Aponte, appealed yesterday to the Supreme Court with a Certiorari, requesting that the suspended sentence imposed by Judge Arcillo Alvarado on Judge Alvarado be annulled by said court. Judge Arcillo Alvarado to Vicente Andino Clemente, who was found guilty of the crime of Involuntary Manslaughter and sentenced to eighteen months imprisonment, which sentence was suspended, subject to certain special conditions recommended by the Probation Officer of the District Court of San Juan. The petitioners allege that the
court exceeded its jurisdiction; that Act 259 of the Suspended Sentence does not cover the misdemeanor case, such as the present one; that the word "felony" in the text of the statute is equivalent, purely to "felony, serious," d. a.e "Inato in the deepest degree and below, as the statute says in the text of the statute; and that such was the intent of the law, as it is in the text of the statute.The RollcDantes ask that the law should be interpreted in such a way that, if it had been another .1 legislative crlWo, it would also have been expressly stated in the same law, specifying the conditions, caiucterlatlcaa and nature of certain less serious offenses, in which the :e> should be applied. I The RollcDants ask the court (Continued on page 33)
Statement to that effect was made as Truman called the parties together for a conference Senate agreed to extend conscription law.This action is interpreted as a repudiation of the attitude of the miners' chief, John L. WASHINGTON. 10. (INS)-John L. Lewis, president of the United Miners Union, affiliated with the American Federation of Labor, today declared a two-week truce with the coal strike, after the Government announced the dire consequences to the nation of the continuation of the strike conflict. The order affects four
The order affects four hundred thousand miners who will return to work next Monday. The water statement was issued just as both Lewis and the mine owners have been summoned to appear before President Truman, and as Congress was clamoring for legislation to end the strike. In the meantime, John D. Small, Director of the Civilian Production Administration, declared that the "coal supplies available for emergency distribution were "less than the nation's needs for consumption in a 13-hour period". Lewl", before the truce was declared, the Senate today agreed to extend the conscription act until July 1, thus automatically extending President Truman's power to seize the bituminous coal mines. United Press reports from the slgulen- ; te way: In addition to the great bituminous coal miners' strike, two new threats are looming over the economic outlook: the railroad workers' strike, scheduled for May 18, covering 300,000 workers in that industry, and which will definitely cancel the delivery of the scarce supply of coal. And another strike on the sea front, affecting 300,000 more workers, scheduled for June 15, which would paralyze all commercial movement on the Pacific and Atlantic coasts and in the ports of the Gulf. The country's declaration on the minimum front is subject to the approval of the members of the five most powerful maritime labor organizations in the United States. President Harry 8. Truman is considering the Idea of Government seizure of the railroads for the purpose of keeping them in operation after the 18th. Meanwhile, in Cleveland, A. F. Whitney, president of the Brotherhood of Railway Workers, said today, referring to the projected seizure of the railroads by the Government, that "we want it clearly understood that we must insist on our proposals "for changes in the regulation of labor, no matter who operates the railroad lines." Whltney further stated that he could not immediately determine whether the Government's decision on the seizure of the railroads would affect the declaration of the strike scheduled for May 18, or whether the national presidents of the unions would have to be called together to make a decision on the matter when, and if, the President actually declared the seizure of the railroads. The union headed by A. F. Whitney and the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers have been adamant in their demand that they incorporate changes in operating regulations and in their demands for increases. President Truman today told a press conference that he is conducting a study to determine what authority he may have to end the bituminous coal miners' strike, and reaffirmed his belief that the conflict is close to turning into a strike against the United States and the United States. We believe we are rendering a useful informational service to our readers by publishing the full text of the legislation under discussion.