THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY: Generally clear except for scattered showers over eastern Puerto Rico this morning, and over the mountains of the west coast this afternoon. High temperature AS arados, low 76 degrees. The "ol leaves noy at fas 6:06 A. M. Sets in at 6:50 P. M. No sign of a storm.
£c¿¿¿c¿¿n3ina¿
A.M. DIARY
YEAR XXVIII
NUMBER 10679
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 17, 1944
Entered as second olaae matter, Pott Office, Saa Juan, F. R"
PRICE 5 Cents
Campos pro only jail in i agiotaje cases.
The Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Mr. Enrique Campoi del Toro considers that "jail and prison only" should be imposed on those persons who "in this moment of emergency, instead of cooperating with the government, dedicate themselves to speculate outside the law". Mr. Campos del Toro authorized the following statements regarding the campaign that the government is waging against the black market: "We are waging a battle against those who speculate with the basic foodstuffs that our population needs for their daily sustenance. In this time of crisis, : of emergency, he who tries to capitalize on the needs of others or exploit the hunger of others, not only commits a crime against moral norms and against the healthy principles of an honest citizenry, but also becomes a lawbreaker. Selling food articles at prices above those specified by the regulations of the Federal Price Bureau or the General Supply Administration, refusing to sell the food or concealing it, or conditioning the sale upon the purchase of other articles which the purchaser is not interested in and which the dealer wishes to dispose of, all these and other unlawful acts provided by law amount to public offenses subjecting the offender to imprisonment and fine. The Government, conscious of your responsibility and in fulfillment of its duty, and looking out for the welfare of each and every one of you who compose the community in which we live, has enlisted all the forces, all the means, all the instruments* within its power to create a machine which will relentlessly pursue and punish those who violate the law by fostering the black market and speculate in food in this hour of scarcity. The Department of Justice is part of this machinery. As such we have instructed judges and prosecutors to apply the law to the fullest extent. We have asked them -to be stern to the limit, । uncompromising and Inexorable with those who trade on the hunger ■ and need of their neighbors. We are insisting and will continue in- ■ siztlendo that ze punish with cArcel, with imprisonment those who (Continued on page 24.)
triarte believes Tugwell's phrase confirms URP accusations He was the head of the People's Party, he says, yet he ran the past elections. -He reiterates that the former governor violated island laws.
Commenting on some statements about Puerto Rico made by former Governor Rexford Guy Tugwell at the University of Chicago, in front of a group of students and professors, in which the former chief executive of the Island stated that "President Roosevelt sent to the Island a man who was in sympathy with the Popular Party and of which he has been its head many times", Representative Celestino Iriarte, President of the Republican Union, made the following statements yesterday: "What Tugwell has said is a i confession on his part that he was the president of the Popular Party - since as he assured he speaks "been its head". Of that very thing we accuse him here and in Wáshlng- , ton, and Jln embargo, it was he who tfirl- ■ gló the past elections, which the - popular have dared to say i were a fair and lmi partial elections, besides denying that Tug- > well directed them personally. "I don't know why the newspapers haven't dared to say that, and we have to say it, when that's what we have to say.
I don't know why the newspapers haven't dared to say that, and we have to say it, when that's the reality. We again and again gave our cry of admonition in time. Now we can explain so many violations to the laws of Puerto Rico on the part of Tugwell, who even maneuvered with the appointments of the Insular Board of Elections, to put people who were convenient for JM, of course, as he himself said, "because he was the head of the Popular Party". No less can we now explain the maneuvers he made so that 85,000 voters would return to the electoral lists illegally; his maneuvers to suppress the Independent newspaper EL MUNDO: his violent actions against judges such as Gonzalez, La Costa and Romany and others. - We could go on listing the many illegalities committed by Tugwell, such as the famous one of putting sixteen million dollars in the hands of the Popular Party to buy or bribe voters. (Continued on page 24.)
NEWS DIGEST
Piftero said yesterday that his appointment will test the political maturity of Puerto Ricans. Today he lunches with Cardinal Spellman at the Prince of the Catholic Church's residence on Fifth Avenue in New York. Supreme suspends ' order on tuition at Mayagiles College. CSC President Nlgagllonl could not enjoy the salary increase that the Legislature ordered, because it was contrary to the Charter. The Puerto Rico Teachers' Association will sue the Executive Secretariat by mandamus to enforce the language law. Four merchants of Rio Pie-
dras under bond of 12,000 each. - - - . As of yesterday the 1948 enrollment of the University of Puerto Rico was 4400 students. A total of 6,000 is expected, higher than last year's enrollment of 5,200 in Rio Piedras alone. - e - The allocation for veterans' burial expenses has been increased from 6100 to 8160. The Employees' Association continues to refute the Auditor's Report and the actions taken on the state of the entity. Yesterday it rejected other charges, stating that one of them, "false and unfair," is based on the allegation of a fact which the Auditor knows did not exist. The Homes Authority will use the sheds ceded by the Army to erect in Isla Verde on the island of Isla Verde.
The Housing Authority will use the huts ceded by the Army to build in Isla Verde - on land ceded by the Government of Ib Capital - a hamlet for veterans. * Planning has made the studies that will allow the implementation of the federal program on hospitals. - - - The Evangelical Youth in Cuba approved a resolution on the status of Puerto Rico. - - - Attorney General Campos del Toro reiterated yesterday that only jail sentences should be imposed in cases of racketeering. He says he will insist in this sense with judges and prosecutors. - - - OS Boards are functioning in all municipalities, with the exception of three. x
AEG rejects other charges O of the Auditor.
Says it establishes one alleging a commission that he knows there was no commission Refers to increase in discount rate Not only was the agreement adopted, but it was disseminated, he says By Juan Martinox Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO The report of the Director of the Employees' Association, refuting the statements authorized by the Auditor of Puerto Rico, states that "it is false and unfair, To the assertion made by the Acting Directors that no agreement was ever made to increase the discount rate authorized by law to save the fund, the Directors respond by assuring that "not only was the agreement adopted, but it was also gxiblically disseminated. The report states: "The Board of Directors is responsible for the insolvency of the insurance company". "The basis of the imputation of liability for the precarious condition of the insurance fund is reiterated to be that the Board has not used its powers as the law confers upon it to remedy the insolvency. On page 151 of the actuarial report it is stated: "Although the Board of Directors of the Association has had the power to increase the percent of assessments to be deducted for accrued claims, it has taken no action". On page 154 of the same document: ' "The Board of Directors has been remiss in failing to use its power to Ibgrgate this settlement". On page 157: "that the Board of Directors is responsible to some extent for the present state of affairs is proved by its failure to adjust the insurance provisions with greater care and conservatism in accordance with the discretionary authority it had. Merely by increasing the 10 percent discount from assessments provided by law as provided by the amendment to section 20(d) passed in 1937, "for the purpose of preventing the accumulation of cases pending settlement..." the Board could have effected the settlement of a considerable number of claims now unpaid. Such action was not taken-it has never changed the discount rate". "...the Board has been Reckless in the exercise of its duties. That the Board has been negligent in its responsibilities under the Act is demonstrated by its failure to increase the discount rate of ten percent, as provided in Section 20(d) of the Act "for the purpose of preventing the accumulation of cases pending settlement..." Such action was not taken despite the fact that the Board has had this authority since the year 1937." "The Auditor of Puerto Rico lashes out with the same concern in "El Imparcial" of June 18, 1946, stating: "In addition to the fact that the Board of Directors of the Association has failed to exercise its discretionary powers sufficiently to avoid disaster, this has made it inevitable that the insurance business of the Association has reached a state of insolvency. The Association, its Directors and officers have known for many years that the insurance phase was actuarially flawed and that the Association was in a precarious financial position. Although this ■ was fully known to them, they did not take any effective steps to remedy the situation". And in THE WORLD of June 19, 1946: "The Board of Directors is also responsible, in some way, for the present state of affairs, because of its failure to administer with greater care and restraint the insurance provisions, using the discretionary authority it has by law." (Continued on page 24) ,
VOTE OF CONFIDENCE IS GIVEN TO HIM
Recep Peker, the new Prime Minister of Turkey, who was given a vote of confidence by his anti-Russian-leaning Cabinet. Peker succeeds Sukru Saracoglu. (Associated Press Photo). Evangelicals in favor of resolving the island's status Congress held in Cuba approved resolution. The Congress of the Latin American Union of Evangelical Youth, held in Cuba from the 4th to the 14th of this month, approved a resolution of the Puerto Rican delegation demanding the solution of the political status of the Island as soon as possible, in tune with the feelings of the Puerto Rican people. Puerto Rico was given the honor, according to what the young university student William Fred Santiago, member of the Puerto Rican delegation, said yesterday upon his return, of presiding, through Mr. Hipólito Marcano, over all the work of the Congress, by unanimous vote of the delegates of the 18 republics that were represented at the Congress. Another Puerto Rican delegate, young Gildo Sanchez, was also appointed to preside ULAJE for the next four years. The Executive Secretariat of the organization also fell into the hands of another Puerto Rican, the young Sh-muel Velez. The resolution on Puerto Rice, approved after two hours of debate, according to young Santiago, reads as follows: "Considering the abnormal political situation through which the people of Puerto Rico are passing, in which both the political authorities of that country and the various religious groups have expressed their desire that the political status of the island be resolved as soon as possible, the Congress resolves: (a) To express its solidarity with the sentiments of Puerto Rico in regard to the (Continued on pAgln 24)
Pinero interprets his appointment as a test of Puerto Rico's political maturity.
Island prepared for hospital development Planning has done studies, with a view to carry out federal plan Dr. Picó describes work done Pmce District Hospital would cost more than S3,000,000.00 The president of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, informed yesterday that the Island Government is prepared to face its responsibilities as it begins to implement in Puerto Rico the law that provides funds for the development of the hospital program in the states and territories. "The Planning Board," he added, "has been preparing itself in recent years, and is currently ready to comply with those provisions of the Act that require its intervention in the discussion of specific plans and programs. Regarding the work carried out on the Island, Dr. Picó added the following: "Even though the specific details of the Act of Congress are not known, I understand that it requires that, in the application of its provisions, a study of the entire program be carried out on the Island by the United States Public Health Service. In this regard, I wish to report that we are well advanced in such studies, many of which have the approval of our Department of Health. "The Public Works Design Committee has already finished the plans for the new district hospital in Ponce, and there is a general study for the construction of these types of hospitals in different towns of the Island. A plan for municipal hospitals and rural medical centers has also been drafted and approved by both the Board and the Department of Health. "Work has been done lately on the plan for anti-tuberculosis hospitals, which will be a program that will include the construction of new facilities and the expansion of existing ones. "The Ponce district hospital has been designed at a cost of $3,660,000, and is included in the Board's hospital regulatory plan which forms one of the completed studies. "The Public Works Design Committee has also completed standard plans for municipal hospitals ranging from 10 to 24 beds, which are projected to be built in harmony with the public health unit plan. Final designs are also being prepared for the new rural medical centers. (Continued on page 24) 29,798 cars already registered in Puerto Rico The Island Government has already registered 805 cars with the GI license plate. As of July 31, 2005, some 29,798 motor vehicles of different types have been registered with the Department of the Interior, a figure that represents an increase over the previous year's number. All of these vehicles have paid the corresponding fees for their free circulation on the highways of Puerto Rico during the present fiscal year, and 12,204 of them obtained their licenses. They are followed in order of number by commercial vehicles, with 4,597. The Insular Government and the ' Municipal Government appear with the highest number of vehicles in comparison with previous years, i.e., a total of 1,221 registered, with the Insular Government registering 805 and the Municipal Government 416. ' The increase so far recorded in vehicles of all types has been due, as explained, to I h sale by ol Federal Government * d* war surpluses, as well as i i ei receipt at the tola of the first * shipments of automobiles and camloK nos manufactured in the United States after the war ended. i The following is the distribution i by class of Ucences up to ol 31 (Continued on pAgln 24.)
Nido expects fertilizers to arrive shortly - _i--. Cree first arrive next week, with other shipments The president of the Settlers Sector of 1a Farmers Association, Mr. Pedro P. Nido, expects that in the course of next week the shipments of fertilizers which were detained at the port of Baltimore, due to the state of strike which existed there, will begin to be received on 1a Island. Nido said that the strike had affected fifty thousand tons of general cargo that were in the ports of New York, Philadelphia and Baltimore, consigned to Puerto Rico and among which are the shipments of fertilizers destined for the Island. The labor unions which were disputing the right to contract collectively, he added, have declared a truce in the strike movement, thus giving way to the detained cargoes in those ports, which include sulfate and ammonia nitrate, potash and superphosphate, The fertilizers to be received, which include ammonia sulfate and nitrate, potash and superphosphate, will be used in the manufacture of fertilizers for the cane crop for the coming 1947 harvest, and although they are not expected to solve the fertilizer shortage problem, they are nevertheless considered to substantially alleviate it. Nido reported, on the other hand, that there is no absolute certainty that the necessary amount of fertilizers for the 1948 cane crop will be available. He explained that there is a great demand for these fertilizers and that, on the other hand, there is a shortage of them.
He also said that he would like to approve the law, register and promulgate the 51st law of the Senate of Puerto Rico that provides for the exclusive teaching in Spanish in the public schools of the island, approved in the last session of the Legislative Assembly. Virgilio Brunet, attorney at law, told EL MUNDO yesterday that law number 51, by virtue of the provisions of the Puerto Rico Charter, is law, since the ninety days that the Charter gives to the President of the United States to veto or approve a law that will be referred to him by the Executive Secretary of the United States have passed. The President of the Association of Puerto Rico, the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico, with the provision that if he does not consider it within such term, the bill shall become law, just as if it were expressly approved by the national Executive. The President of the Association of Teachers of Puerto Rico, Mr. Luis Mufilz Souffront, and Mr. Virgilio Brunet, according to what the latter told EL MUNDO yesterday, visited the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico, Mrs. Haydée F. de San Miguel, and requested her to register and promulgate Law 51, having refused to (Continued on page 24).
They will build a house for veterans: with huts ceded by the Army and the Homes Authority will use for said purpose the Isla Verde property ceded by the ' Government of the Capital. - Details of the program
Numerous wooden huts, built by the Army on a temporary basis during the war emergency, have been ceded to the Municipal Housing Authority of San Juan. The Authority on Homes of San Juan, presided over by Senator Ernesto Juan " Fonfrlás. for the purpose of providing some 200 houses for veterans on a farm located on the road leading to Isla Verde. This property, which previously was to be used for the new cemetery of San Juan, was transferred by the Government of the Capital to the aforementioned Authority, in order to facilitate the development of the project. The wooden huts were designed to house offices and members of the Armed Forces, according to the program for the defense of the Caribbean area. Since they are removable and the wood is in very good condition, it will be easy to move them to the Authority's project in Isla Verde. The nature of the housing shortage prevailing among the families of these male
The housing shortage prevails among the families of these men, who have been discharged from the service. The houses will be moved from Salinas Point, Fort Brooke, Goat Island and other military camps in the next few days, when work on the project will begin, according to Mr. L. Sevillano of the San Juan Municipal Housing Authority, who explained yesterday. The plan has been prepared to build individual dwellings, as well as to divide the casetas into one or more room apartments. Sewerage, electricity, water, and other services necessary for projects of this nature will also be provided. i It was reported that, in accordance with the provisions of the regulations of the Housing Authority, most veterans do not qualify for permanent housing, especially because their income exceeds the levels set by these agencies. However, the Municipal Housing Authority reported that it has been giving preference to veterans on equal terms to other applicants.
Piñero received by in New York ■k io*"" - iB ■ 'IMF, /í . I £ JEB ' ' y New York Mayor William O'Dwyer (right) stepped forward to receive Puerto Rico's Governor-designate Jesús T. Piñero, as the distinguished Puerto Rican arrived Thursday at New York's City Hall to receive the tribute of the City Council. This photo was impressed at the time. On page 7 are more pictures of the tribute paid to Piñero in the great American city. (P. A.)
Teachers to sue Executive Secretary By mandamus they intend to prove that the language bill, now before the President, became law The Teachers Association of Puerto Rico will file a writ of mandamus next Monday before the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico against the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico, Mrs. Haydée F. de San Miguel, urging her, by virtue of the powers conferred upon her by
As of yesterday there were 4,500. Eight hundred are former members of the Army During the present academic year, the largest enrollment ever recorded in the history of the University of Puerto Rico has been at the University of Puerto Rico. According to the calculations made to date by university authorities, this year's enrollment is expected to exceed by more than a thousand students the total number of students enrolled last year, when the enrollment was higher than that of the previous academic year. As of yesterday, at 10:00 a.m., only 4,500 students were enrolled in the schools of Rio Piedras, and it is expected, according to estimates to date, that the total enrollment will exceed 6,000. Last year, 5,200 were enrolled in Rio Piedras schools. The increase in enrollment this year is mainly due to the influx of veterans of the second war who have come to study at the University. As of yesterday, at eleven o'clock in the morning, a total of 850 veterans were enrolled in various courses. The Director of the Veterans Office of the University, Felix Alegria, reported yesterday that he expected that the total number of veterans to study in university classrooms, according to his calculations, will exceed one thousand. One of the colleges where more students have enrolled is the Law School. The dean of the College, Dr. Santos P. Amadeo, said yesterday that sixty students have enrolled in the first year, half of them veterans. This number is twice the number of students who enrolled last year in the same grade. In all, one hundred students were enrolled in the College of Law this year, making this one of the highest enrollments in that school. Meanwhile, hundreds of first year students have had to stay out of the classrooms because the University does not have accommodation facilities for so many people. Rector Benitez is studying the problem in order to determine how it can best be resolved in the best possible way and within the circumstances in which the University is developing, as far as the espado is concerned.
Will govern in accordance with the majority But expects, he says, the cooperation of all opinion leaders Lunches today with Cardinal Spellman Yesterday met at the Algonquin Hotel with Dr. Rexford G. Tugwell By JABIES B. CANEL United Press Correspondent NEW YORK, 16. (PU)) - The appointment of a native* tlvo governor of Puerto Rico is only an initial step toward greater political independence for that island, in the opinion of the new island leader, Jesus T. Piftero. Piftero. He told the United Press: "I believe and cherish the hope that my government will have a short life. I believe that my appointment is an initial step for the American Congress to grant the Puerto Rican people the right to choose by popular vote the final political status they desire". In this regard, Piftero reiterated bu opinion that the unprecedented appointment of a native governor is a kind of test that the Washington Government has decided to make, to know ai lúa ' portorrlquefios have political maturity to govern themselves. Governor Quo added: "For us to emerge triumphant from this test, it will be necessary for all Torrlquefio to cooperate with my government, contributing to its success. I am confident that I will receive the cooperation of all leaders of public opinion in conducting the government of the island in the best possible manner." . "Of course," Piftero continued, dictating, "under a democratic form of government, the Executive must govern in accordance with the wishes of the majority of the people, ■ whose will it will scrupulously respect. Piftero declined to make a concrete statement regarding the final status for Puerto Rico, saying it is impossible for him to predict what it will be, because it depends on the will of the people, expressed at the ballot box. On this point, he added: "Since a plebiscite of this nature has not yet been held, I cannot know what kind of political future the majority of the people will choose." He added: "But, there is no doubt that my appointment is a decisive step towards a greater degree of political independence, which we all desire, in one way or another." At noon today, Friday, Piftero had lunch with former Governor Tugwell at the Algonquin Hotel. Tugwell arrived in this one from Chicago too late, yesterday, to attend , the reception and luncheon given by the City Council to the portorrlquefto governor. Mafiana Saturday, Plfiero and some of his entourage will lunch with Cardinal Spellman, at the residence of the Prince of 1a Church, on,Fifth Avenue. At three o'clock in the afternoon, Plfiero will return by plane to Washington, where he will remain until August 26, when he will return to New York for a banquet offered by the Puerto Rican colony. Last night and this morning, Piñero stayed at his hotel, receiving friends and people interested in Puerto Rican affairs. In the afternoon, he visited the regional offices of the Veterans Administration, finalizing the details of the visit that a commission of said agency will make to Puerto Rico on August 19. As has been reported, the commission, composed of four VA supervisors, will study the needs of Puerto Rican veterans, particularly in terms of education, to place them on the same level as mainland veterans with respect to the rights granted to them by the Veterans Bill of Rights. Piftero plans to delay his trip to Puerto Rico, arriving there only a few hours before his inauguration ceremony. At the ceremony, the first native Puerto Rican governor will deliver a detailed speech about his plan of government, which he has not wanted to anticipate in advance. Plfiero plans to begin work on the speech when he arrives at his office in WáshingteaB on Saturday morning. As is known, the inauguration of Governor Pifiere is scheduled for the third of next month. Among the guests*# honor that day is the U.S. SectoflH of the Interior UolB Mr. Julius A. Krug. B