THE WEATHER
WEATHER FORECAST FOR IRLA, TODAY- scattered showers over the Interior and showers over the northern and eastern seaboards. Cool east-northeasterly winds along the northern and eastern seaboards. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: Low temperature, 80{ minimum, 77 j rain, thunderstorms.
48 Pages 5/
* morning newspaper.
YEAR XXVIII
Ayutfe to combat tubercuiozi". Acquire "them of Christmas.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, DECEMBER 21, 1946.
Entered aa second class matter, Post Office, Ban Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10804
3,000 new lots in metropolitan area
Located in forty-two urbanizations approved by Planning. They involve improvements for SI,250,000.00. It is estimated that there will be 5,000 lots for sale within 5 years.
Tro" thousand "olare", in 42 new urhanizacione" located" in dlatlntos point" of the metropolitan area, have been hahllltándo "e by the" urban Izad ore" that have aldo author!zado" to de "arrollar dlatlnta" Area" reildenclale" in the metropolitan area of San Juan. One" 31 urbanization* have received the approval of the Planning Board for the" preliminary" plat" of in "crlpclone. and as such action has "Ido adopted, they have "Ido Initiating the sale of the" re "pectlvo" "olare", while" another" eleven "e" has "e" accepted the" plat* of con "trucrion, "tying this" last" Area" in the "process of "de "arrollo". The largest number of urbanized. ne" approved" is located in the Hato Rey area, where 16 In "crlpclon "piano", with 1455 "olare", have " been "tested" by the Planning Board, having also had the" construction "plan" accepted for another" 3 new" urbanization"", with 176 additional "solare". A study conducted by the Planning Board" reveals that, taking into account current demand, prevailing" prices" and the" real estate business" conditions, all of these" lots" will be sold within five years," and that not less" than 70 percent of all new development" will be occupied by residences and other types of structures by the end of that period. It is also stated that the number of lots which would be available for the location of residences, according to the new development projects being considered, would amount to 5,000 by the year 1951. The distribution by areas of the registration plans approved by the Board, for 31 developments with a total of 2,067 lots, is as follows: Hato Rey. 16 developments, 1,155 lots: Rio Piedras, 4, with 393 lots: Sabana Llana, 4, with 90 lots: Santurce, 5, with 187 lots: Catafio, 1, with 257 lots and Guaynabo, 1, with 5 lots. Eleven construction plans have been approved, with 918 lots, as follows: Hato Roy, 3, with 176 lots: Rio Piedras. 2, with 82 lots: San Patricio. 1, with 9 lots; Sa. baña Llana, 1. with 31 envelopes: Santurce, 3. with 50 lots and Bayamón, 1. with 10 lots. EL MUNDO was informed that the current restrictions on the sale of construction materials, the high cost of essential materials, and the current price level for building lots in these new developments have prevented a boom in the construction of residential units. Nevertheless, developers have been selling plots periodically, although not in the accelerated manner of earlier periods. All such developments, according to the Planning Law, must conform to the minimum requirements as to streets, sewers, water, electricity and utilities. The builders, in order to guarantee the completion of such improvements, are required to deposit a bond with the Board, which is liable to the Government for those works that are not carried out. In addition, all are endowed with Areas for narque", since the regulations establish that 5 percent of the total area to be developed, in each individual urbanization, must be transferred to the Government. It is estimated that the builders of the new developments in the San Juan metropolitan area have to complete public roads at a cost of a million and a quarter dollars, which include streets, sidewalks, sewage services, aqueduct systems, water, electricity, gas and other improvements.
23 Puerto Ricans on the brink of death
Plane in which they were traveling from New York to Puerto Rico collided in mid-air with another near Aberdeen, Maryland.
NEW YORK. 20. (PUI-Vein-three Puerto Ricans aboard a Universal Air Lines plane were miraculously saved from death when the plane in which they were traveling collided in mid-air with another plane, owned by Eastern Air Une*, near Aberdeen, Maryland. The Universal plane in which they were traveling had left New York for Puerto Rico, via Miami, and must have landed at Raleigh Airfield, North Carolina, to refuel. A woman who was aboard the Universal plane was taken to an Aberdeen hospital, but, shortly after being examined, doctors ruled that she had not sustained any serious injuries. The passengers of the Eastern aircraft stated that at no time did they realize that the two aircraft were about to collide. The captain of this aircraft, Joseph Kuhn, said that when he was crossing Phillip Field, in Aberdeen, he saw the Universal DC-3 suddenly appear in the darkness and felt the bottom of his plane collide without giving him time to act to avoid the accident. The plane in which the Puerto Ricans were traveling at that moment was lowering its altitude to land at the Aberdeen aerodrome, whose runways were illuminated, and diagonally rammed the rear part of the fuselage of the Eastern aircraft. The Eastern aircraft began to lose altitude, but then continued to fly toward wéshlngton, 60 mile" to the audoeate. A paaajero of the Eaatern aircraft said, "Seta inches my down. and it would have been the end." It is not ae known why the pilot of the Univeraal plane spoke reauthorized to land at Aberdeen. The company reported, as previously stated, that the aircraft should have landed at the Raleigh airfield to reabaatecerae of gaaollna. The pilot of the Universal plane, Henry Norria, informed his company that he did not talk about approaching the other aircraft and only realized that an upper part of his plane had hit something. Universal Air Linca announced that it would immediately send another plane to pick up the Puerto Rican passengers to take them to Puerto Rico.
- James F. Donovan, Air Inspector for the U.S. Government, agreed that "only one chance in a million" saved more than 80 people from a fiery death Thursday night when the two luxury airliners collided in mid-air at an altitude of two thousand feet over Aberdeen airfield. In addition to the 60 passengers on the Eastern plane, there were four tri- ' pul- ' pulants. In the U.S. plane was a 19-year-old girl, born in the United States. Several passengers on the Je 1a ■ Universal aircraft received scratches v ■ minor contusions. A nlftlta of tr "a aftos traveling aboard the Eastern Aircraft, re- ! clbló a small blow to the head- . za. Ruben Rodriguez, of United Fea- ' tures Syndicate, was aboard the Univeraal Alrlln*" plane which collided Thursday night with another Eaatern Airlines plane. ' near" the military airfield at ' Aberdeen. Ette et his account of the accident, from Havre de Grace, 1 Maryland: "It was about 6 P. M. and we had been leaving La Guardia airfield for Port P.ico for about an hour. All the passengers were Puerto Ricans, with the exception of a young American woman, who was carrying the same destination as us. "We were asleep when suddenly we felt a loud bang and the plane suddenly lost altitude. There was a moment of panic, but no screams, everything was silent. No one spoke, although in the faces of the other passengers - and probably in mine too - there was a look of fear on their faces. Until later we were not told what had happened, but the crash had broken the rear part of the fuselage of our airplane and spoke fragments of it over the passengers in the baggage compartment. The concern lasted only a moment, because after the effect of the impact, which sent the plane down, the pilot righted it and soon after we watched the lights of the military airfield of Aberdeen, where we descended. The plane's engines continued to run perfectly at all times. Neither before nor after the crash did we see the other plane. It was all so fast that I don't remember what my thoughts were during the few seconds it took for the plane to regain the flight line. The moment passed like a whirlwind in (Continued on page 27).
De Hostos condemns measure that makes it a crime not to sell Censures the festination with which projects were approved in the Chambers. - Calls amendment to Supply "an abuse of authority".
The President of the Chamber of Commerce of Puerto Rico, Mr. Filipo L. de Hostos, made the following statements yesterday: "We have seen with deep regret that despite the repeated pleas made on numerous occasions, the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico requesting that it not legislate without following the democratic practice of holding public hearings that give the interested and affected parties the opportunity to present their points of view and at the same time give the legislator the opportunity to be fully oriented with respect to the different aspects of the subject matter of the legislation. our" House" not only p*r "l "ten in departing from this tana, Judicious and democratic practice to which also, what is worse, "n iegielar in form feitlnada and Inconsulta that forzoiamente gives place to that they commit you serious and grave errorea, when not manlfleata injustice. "Recently, an extraordinary legislature was held for the sole purpose of considering the necessity and convenience of granting a salary increase to public employees. On the eve" of closing the aealon, on the 13th day of the current year, the Governor extended the call to include a number of "new items, including, among others, amendments to Section 16, Section 16.1 of the Public Service Law, Section 16.2 of the Public Service Law, Section 16.3 of the Public Service Law and Section 16.4 of the Public Service Law.
among others, amendments to Section 16 of the "Internal Revenue Act of Puerto Rico," amendment" to the provisions of Sections 445 and 446 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and amendment" to the Inaular Supply Act". On the 13th day of the current month, on which the extension of the call was announced, we tried to obtain a copy of the referenced bill, but it was not possible, since it had already been approved on third reading by the House of Representatives. We then sent a telegram to the Presidents of the Senate and the House of Representatives. We" asked them not to "approve the bill of reference without prior holding a public vote, for harboring doubts" as to the conatltuclonality of the bill, a plea that evidently was not heeded because the newspaper announced that the extraordinary legislature had closed on Saturday, the 14th, before approving the referred bill. "As citizens" respectful of the law and lover" of democracy we believe" our duty to condemn once again eata funeata practice of legislative "nueatraa Cámara" that so much "dificultarte" has ocailo- : nado already to the government itself. "One of the bills passed is S. P. 15. to amend the Inaular Sumlniatroa Act. Eata ( bill has no other purpose । than to criminalize the refusal to sell of a merchant, In other words, in vlata of the adverse decision of our Supreme Court, it is intended to infringe on the right of the citizen to free contracting, by criminalizing the refusal to sell, without stopping to consider the unassailable right that the merchant may have for the refusal. Eato ea, to fall* tlgar a poaible abuse of dlscreción the eatado resorts to a manifleato and arbitrarlo abuao of authority. Evidently, our legislators did not for a moment pity the possibility that by an error or act of arbitrariness the Admlnlatrador General de Suminlatroa may issue an order fixing the price of an article below its real and effective cost, in which case the legislative provision would force the merchant to sell with prejudice to his interests, which, in short, constitutes a violation of the constitutional principle that a citizen may not be deprived of his property without due compensation. "In the eagerness to serve ideologies in conflict with the fundamental right our legislators are encouraging contempt for the law and the disdain of the citizen for authority. This is neither the best nor the most effective means of correcting social evils which, more often than not, have their roots in the human condition itself, when not in the clumsy attempt of the state to solve these problems with complete disregard for Inexorable and Inescapable economic laws. "The persecution of commerce seems to be in vogue today and the watchword seems to be that the, trampling of their rights and the curtailment of I (Continued on page 32.)
The District Court declared aln place the writ of habeas corpus petitioned nd<> by inmate Hermenegildo Sierra. - - - Cris* tal factory workers under flanea, charged with alleged libel. * - * Reinstated to Puerto Ríen the rice quota originally fixed at 4096, making it retroactive to December 1*. - - - Tugwell in his new book expresses doubts about the success of the experiments of the Government enterprises in Puerto Rico, citing Indiscipline of the workers and their leaders. - Plftero announced that he will ask for economies in the Government. He intends to be in Washington for the inauguration of the new Congress. Assured that minorities will have representation on boards and commissions. - 28 Puerto Ricans nearly perished when the plane in which they were traveling to the island from New York collided in mid-air with another plane near Aberdeen, Maryland. - Vlliaronga addressed a message to the teaching staff on cooperation with the Department. De Hoatoa condemns the measure which makes it a crime for a merchant to refuse to sell any product.
News Digest
An Invaalon today find the United States with a defense of only 4 divisions. The Army will submit to Congress a plan for a force of 1,750,000 men, with facilities for increasing it. A shipment of meat and S pork redoubts, will be dktrluld today to commerce. I will soon announce the auction of the works for the diversion of the Rio Piedra route". Convention of loa farmers aeré martana, Will speak during the act Plftero and Izquierdo. lombardo Toledano attacks Intervention of communism in the labor unions. - The teachers of eight states of the continent threaten to go on strike for a wage increase. - * . Managers of the Employment Service held a conference in San Juan. High world sugar production and possible discontinuance of price controls in the United States before the end of 1947 predicted. - - - The Planning Board has so far approved 42 new urbanlsaelones, with a total of 8,900 new lots in Ib metropolitan area.
Tugwell expresses doubts about the success of the experiments initiated by his government on the island.
A shipment of meats arrived in Puerto Rico including 750,000 lbs. of pork product. It will be distributed today
A large shipment of refrigerated meats and canned pork products was received by the Swift and Sharing Company, of this city, on the Cape Sebastian, a refrigerated vessel owned by the Puerto Rico Line. This is the first substantial shipment of American meats received in Puerto Rico since the year 1942, and the Sharing Import Company expects that. If the conditions of maritime transportation, which requires vessels equipped with refrigeration equipment, allow it, it will be able to continue transporting meats in substantial quantities for consumption in Puerto Rico. Mr. J. Chipsen, manager of Swift in Puerto Rico. He reported yesterday that "about three-quarters of a million pounds of pork products were being unloaded yesterday from Cape Sebastian"? He added that this food comes directly from the company's packing and slaughterhouse operations in the New York area. The varietyAd of meat received includes pork chop*, pork shoulder*, ham*, cooked ham, pork shoulder and other pork by-products. । (Continued on page 3)
do" terla abandoned before" and that the Congrego e" the one that Jo has to" decide. He stated that he perionally believes that "the present sugar situation is due to the failure of the administration in charge of food distribution," and added: "They did not treat Cuba as they should have and the whole program has been inefficient from the beginning. He said it was the purpose of the committee to do everything possible to get the program out of control soon, consistent with the best interests of all the groups involved. Jenkln" estimates that there will be approximately one million additional tons of sugar available to the United States, produced in Cuba, by 1947. According to this testimony, the following comparison is made between the 1946 and 1947 crops. According to this testimony, the following comparison is made between the 1946 ¡ and 1947 harvests: the United States* produced in 1946 ¡ and the United States* produced in 1947. The United States produced in 1946 a total of 1,950,000 tons; it is estimated to produce in 1947 a total of 2,200,000 tons; Cuba, in 1946, produced 4,476,000 tons and is estimated to produce in 1947 5,500,000 tons; Puerto Rico, 916,000 in 1946, and is expected to produce 1,000,000 in 1947; Hawaii, 68,000 tons in 1946 and 850,000 tons in 1947. He stated that in addition to the increase in production, the prospect of increased production in the European areas will decrease world demand. Rio Piedras road detour ----- । The Commissioner of the Interlon se- ! ftor Orlando R. Méndez, informed yesterday that they have continued with the purchase of the properties that will be affected by the construction of the North Avenue. To this effect, interviews have been held with the owners whose buildings and lots are located throughout the section to be covered by the projected avenue, and some transactions have already been concluded. The ' legal proceedings being carried out, as reported, is what is delaying the early completion of these works. Commissioner Méndez stated, in response to our questions, that "soon . -I will announce the bidding for the , (Continued on page 28.) '
An invasion today would find the U.S. with only 4 divisions The Army will submit a program to Congress for a force of 1,750,000 men and with facilities for increasing it to 5,500,000.
WASHINGTON. 20, (PU) - The U.S. Army will submit to the new Congress a legislative program calling for a 1,750,000-man force on Mobilization Day, which could be expanded to 5,500,000 men within a year, a knowledgeable source in the War Department, headed by Secretary Robert Patterson, disclosed today. Discussing the need for an adequate defense program, the source said that an unexpected attack today would leave the United States with only four divisions capable of dealing with a domestic invasion. The authorizations enacted by the last Congress called for a force of 1,70,000 officers and soldiers on July 1, 1947. The Army is using 195,000 of these men in occupation duties. The referenced source went on to say that the Army plans to call up a National Guard of 680,000 officers and soldiers: an organized reserve of 876,000 officers and soldiers, an unassigned reserve of three million soldiers. The source, who is a high-ranking Army officer, said that some part of the Army's pro- ? gram would depend on whether the draft law is extended beyond its expiration date of March 31, 1947, which will be determined by the proportion of those enrolled in the coming weeks. The Army believes that universal military training is essential to long-range planning. However, the Army does not believe that the mandatory training program could or should run concurrently with recruiting. The Army's overall program, to be submitted to the next Congress (which opens on January 2, 1947) covers the following topics: (D-Legislation "on merger of all the Armed Forces, including plans for Industrial mobilization, and (D-Legislation "on merger of all the Armed Forces, including plans for Industrial mobilization, and (D-Legislation "on merger of all the Armed Forces, including plans for Industrial mobilization.
including plans for industrial mobilization, coordination of intelligence, coordination of foreign policy and military policy and a central intelligence agency: (2)-United military training; (3)-International military cooperation. Including a hemispheric defense project; (4)-PosIblic extension of Selective Service: j í®w7^ r ? yec l 0 d * reorganization of the Army. Including National Guard, Reserves and Services: (6)-Revision of military justice: (7)-Research legislation: (8)*-Projects to establish permanent supply" and service systems, and [91- Projects on current operations, including measures to make permanent statutory powers and to deal with (Continued on page 8)
Teachers threaten walkouts in eight states on the Continent
NEW YORK. 20 (PU) Z~LoT school teachers, claiming that the profession should be valued more highly, are threatening to go on strike in several cities in support of their demands for better pay. In many cities, teachers are already on strike, while in eight states they are demanding a guaranteed minimum salary of 82,400 per month. In some of these states, the four have prepared the necessary legislation for submission to their respective legislatures when they meet in the near future. In other states, however, teachers have made demands for pay raises without waiting for the legislatures to convene. I
The most serious of the teacher-sponsored strike conflicts occurred in St. Paul, Minnesota, where 1,160 teachers struck 77 teaching plants, while some 30,000 teachers were forced to take an extended vacation. The teachers went on strike on November 25, demanding a salary increase of $50 per month, plus some facilities for school equipment. The teachers, led by the San Pablo Teachers' Council, also requested the revision of the current salary scale, which fluctuates between 81,300 and 12,000, asking that it be authorized, (Continued on page 13).
Campaign against infantile paralysis is being prepared
i A v- uúV i ajRJPW a i - > / MV te T rf , ¡Ir \ /" ' I í - ín 4" '' O i i i, - ■: f ■ ■ ■ i j M -Á wL ; I 1 " campaign for funds intended to combat f lor P Vifiero % U, iL l ' e J ,n * n L* The eobernaFn participated in this < '" Publ * d ? L* Campaign against Infantile Paralysis, p .A iiqulerda to right, seftor Henry Soderberg; Governor Plftero; "eftorlte Isabel Vllé, director of the camparte: sefiorlta Berta Cabanlllas: seflora P. Umplerre, and seftor Tomás Altken. (Photo EL MUNDO).
1 Prospects of high world sugar production announced Chairman of committee studying food situation predicts price control in the United States by the end of 1947 WASHINGTON, 20 (PU)-After meeting with representatives of the Department of Agriculture, the Department of State, the International Food Council and the International Food Council, of the International Food Council and the sugar industry, the chairman of the Republican Party-appointed Committee to Study the Food Situation, Thomas Jenkins, announced a penpectlva" of high world sugar production, making possible the probable decontrol of the price of sugar by the end of 1947. Jenkins said that rationing in the U.S. was possible.
During the last two days coupons have been sent to the editorial office of EL MUNDO by public automobile owners" of the Island, replying to the referendum sponsored by this newspaper "on the issue of the fixed routes. In our edition of next Monday we will announce the result of the first ballot held. Re commissions to speed up the sending of coupon*". ■" ---- - - - - - M , ... . " Farmers' convention to be held tomorrow Pronounce dincurBOR Pinero and Izquierdo. - They make an exhortation Vario" important matters, related to the activities of the* main agricultural Induatrla" of the pal", "will be addressed" in resoluclone" by the annual agricultural artmblea mafiana Sunday, says the "erretarla of the Farmers' Association in an official statement. As "abe, the governor, don Je "ú" T. Plftero, "e will address the ayamblea. by the maflana, a "l as the Comlalonado of Agriculture and Commerce, "eftor Lul" A. Izquierdo, who "erán Guest" of honor of the" agricultore". The event will begin at nine o'clock in the morning, in the auditorium of the Central High School of Santurce.
The Aaociaclón said yesterday that "o expects the Governor and Mr. Izquierdo "will focus on the agricultural problems" within the "clrcunttancla" for which ettamoa atra- , veaando and that make so acute the crisis of "our agriculture". The communiqué adds: The "problem" of raffia, in / P re £ l0 . The" problem" of the raffia, in / P re £ l0 . "úegr. condlde work, penpectlva" for the future of this Industry; lo" permanent rehabilitation: and lo" problem" of tobacco, in relacl<m MtablecldM and the permanent rei habilitation of such an important agricultural Industry, as well as another great number of aauntoa, all" of vital Interé" for the agrl- " in reaoluclones that are already in possession of the Secretary of the Association and that have been studied by the Committee appointed for that purpose. It is only necessary, for this assembly to be an act worthy of the farmers of Puerto Rico and an exponent of economic improvement and rehabilitation, that the greatest possible number of farmers, overcoming the traditional apathy, be willing to attend such an important event, to cooperate in the solution of their economic problems. "The office of the Association, as well as its president and other directors, are confident in the spirit of loyalty and patriotism, which has been demonstrated so many times by our sufferers" Continued on page 11b I
It says in published book, the reason for this is due to a lack of discipline to the workers and the leaders of this presents the island suffering division Trunian contrary to independence. Former Governor's Diary Notes By CHARLEA McCABE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 20 (PU)-Dr. Rexford Guy Tugwell's long-read book, "Scourged Earth," says he "is deeply doubtful that his program will succeed in Puerto Rico, because of the weakness of the labor and Popular leaders on the island. The said work was today offered for sale, in this capital, in the principal bookstores* of Wéshlngton. a week in advance of the date of December 26, as stated by its publishers; and all the copies available were sold in "egulda. Of his program, Tugwell says in his book: ..... "I am deeply doubtful even yet that the experiments in Government enterprise will succeed for long. Not because I doubt their viability; but because of a weakness - which is, however, a profound weakness - the lack of discipline among the workers themselves and among the leaders; and this is inextricably mixed up with the danger of political ingerence, because the leaders of the workers are also members of the People's Party. For all" this" reason, my book has a fi1 nal that is as much of a factor for me as it must be for the reader" . Tugwell presents to the American public an autobiography of a divided Puerto Rico, written by "a liberal governor, which is largely a polemic against the coalition of the Iniulare" 1a Republican Union Pro. gretlsts and the SoclaliRta, The book, which is 704 pages long," including the Index, contains much "pa "aje" Intimo" from a diary that Tugwell evidently kept during "u governorship. Lo" publlclata" of 1" work, a! de "crlblr!" have said of Tugwell oue; "He speaks of the" political" struggle" that arose from the British cotonial nolltlca, in the Caribbean and of nueítrs strategy and our relations, in e"" sea; and, although he n" regates su! "olpei, e "crlbe without personal rancor"; adding that: "T "his book is an intelligent summary of his administration and of those liberal forces in the Island who are battling for a more" equitable life against the familiar pattern of reaction," Tugwell, in one of the notes of "his diary, dated August 23, 1945, the! day he first met with President Truman, said "he (Truman) was very clear "in "his opposition " to independence". He also pointed out that one of the reasons he was giving up the governorship of Puerto Rico was that "Muftoz Marin, obviously, is Hito for a change." On this point, Tugwell added: "He (Muftoz Marin) would not object to me staying, since we have been allied. But he would not object to my leaving either, because my obvious usefulness, mind speaks diminished; and any reasonably selected successor, especially if it entailed, re Political influence with the new group in Wéshlngton, would please him, ría much better." Tugwell reveals in his dedication of the book, that he speaks hoped that he and the late President Roosevelt "could be carved as liberator," in nueitro record "o. bre Puerto Rico," He says that, as of July 1945, Puerto Rico "was completely t the drift in lo" lentldoa political and economic; not e "tando on the horizon temedla, to Ja eitadldad, nor Independence, nor even community." (British Home Rule Type), And afta, de: "And how "e is going to maintain (the Island), in the" post-war years, *- c o"" for my very yew" of darldad" He goes on to say the former.governor of the Island that he tried to make Puado "an example", but that' I succeeded only moderately."
Tugwell also expresses in his book pessimism about the future of the government's lai einpresai program (authorities, compartías, banks, etcetera) and about the eaparity of the popular-democratlcos to eliminate what he qualifies as political engafllfa." At this point, Tugwell adds that, "I cannot maintain that 1a political decepfllfa has been overcome. I have fought it, but my successor will find the snake still in its various pieces." Following Roosevelt's death, Tugwell wrote: "I could have felt better about the past if I had been able to achieve more in Puerto Rico. It was true that we had made headway in industrialization, that the cane, coffee and tobacco farmers were sharing in the wartime prosperity, and that our income had been sufficient" to "minister at least a mi. nlm of relief to the needy. (Continued on page 28.)
| Pinero will ask for economies in the government
He said he has already initiated them at La Fortaleza. - Will go to Washington soon Opposed new government building Assured that minorities will have representation in boards and commissions
During his Piensa conference yesterday, Gov. Plftero said he intends to recommend savings in government spending when the next general spending budget is approved by the Legislature. Asked if such recommendation would include the Authorities and Agencies" of the Insular Government created by the Legislature in recent years, the Governor replied that it would not, and explained that the Agencies and Authorities had been created separately from the Departments, and that some had even issued bonds. The Governor said that he has already initiated the "economy" at La Fortaleza and added that he will not recommend that the new Agencies and Authorities be attached to the various Departments of the Island Government. When asked if he proposed to insist on the approval of the bill creating the Central Personnel Agency of the Insular Government in the next regular session of the Legislature, the Governor answered in the affirmative, commenting that "a good Government must have a good Civil Service Law". Speaking on the language issue, Mr. Plftero stated that it was not necessary to pass any law mandating that it be taught in Spanish since, in his opinion, the Commissioner of Instruction has the power to dictate rules of instruction. On his attitude on the purpose of giving representation in the Government to the minority parties and whether to consult with the party directors before making appointments, Mr. Plftero said that he had not given up the purpose and did not think it necessary to consult "because I know everybody", He added that the minority parties would have representation on the Boards and Commissions of the Government, Governor Plftero reported that he intends to be in Washington for the opening of Congress, an occasion he will take advantage of to greet his former re-elected collogues and to greet the new congressmen. The Governor will also take advantage of his visit to the U.S. Capital to undertake various steps related to Puerto Rico's interests, especially those related to the decontrol of the growth of sugar and maritime freight". The Governor also said during yesterday's press conference that he will request from the next ordinary Legislature the approval of an adequate measure to attack the clandestine game of bolita and holipul, in order to eliminate it definitively. As to the sugar problem, Mr. Plftero said that if it is not possible to achieve the decontrol of said product, I will manage a substantial increase in the price, so that it is leveled (Continued on page 18.) i