THE WORLD
44 Pages 5/
raONOnicoi mu* la ibla. today. -Partially cloudy with scattered light to moderate showers. Moderate to fresh northerly winds along exposed coastlines. IN BAN JUAN, YESTERDAY.-Temperature high, 84.
i MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII
SANJUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 7, 1946
Entered aa second class matter. Post Office, San Juan" P. R.
NUMBER 10790
Island is headed for another strike
Tahoneros say Government had time to readjust price President makes history of case Industry prepares to agree to shutdown next week La Asociación da Tahonero" da Puerto Ri™, which is presided over by seAor Santiago PlAeto. He reported yesterday that. "having improved the situation of loa allmentoa in the Tala, and not ha* hiendo haata now the Government finished au announced, study aohre the demands for a reasonable increase to the price of bread. studies that have already taken him some "res weeks. bakeries throughout m Island are willing to go to! clerr". I am drafting the call for an extraordinary assembly of all the bakers of Puerto Rico," added PIAero, "to consider a strike, in view of the fact that the industry cannot, for more time, cover the daily losses caused by the high volume of production. Before the Industry is ruined, we prefer to cease our operations". The Association of Tahoneros agreed in an assembly held in San Juan to resume bread processing after the last maritime stoppage that forced a cessation of the bakeries, "as a measure of public cooperation as there is a notable shortage of other basic foodstuffs in the country". Simultaneously, they filed with the Supply Administration their official request, previously formulated to the OAP, for an increase in the price of bread. Pending such determination on the part of the Government, the factories resumed their work, after announcing by the Supply Manager, Mr. Antonio Vlcéns Rios, that he had the matter under study for a quick solution. "We met again yesterday with Mr. Vicéne," said Mr. PIAero. "We showed him the letters and telegrams received from the Island, in which it is expressed that the industrialists are determined to go on strike. Mr. Vlcéns replied that he submitted the matter to a study by the Junta Insular de Balarlo Mínimo, and that its president has not yet submitted a report on the matter. We have clearly explained the basis for the price increase request, which is known to the entire Government. And to demonstrate that there has been too much delay in the solution of a problem that affects one of the most basic services that the Industry offers to our population, which is that of the supply of water, allow me to remind you that on September 27th of this year, we submitted the problem to the Office of Price Administration: on October 15th, in view of the fact that the OAP has not considered our request, we resumed our request, with the copy of the previous message. Our communication of October 15 was also not answered, although a decision from this federal agency continues to be sought. Simultaneously with these communications to OAP, we also wrote to the Supply Administration. "When the General Supply Administration assumed jurisdiction over the matter, a commission of tahoneros, formed by myself and Messrs. Antonio Mollnelli and Maldonado Perez, met with Mr. Vlcéns and urged prompt action, and agreed to act urgently. On November 13, in view of the fact that OS had not resolved the matter, we wrote to them again, warning them that there would be a collapse of the entire industry if the price was not increased. At the request of Mr. Vlcéns, in replying to this letter, we submitted comparative cost studies, based on an average tahona. Several days have passed and no decision has been reached. The Government will undoubtedly force us to go to a general strike". Mr. PIAero, who has in his possession more than 125 telegrams and letters from the island, ur*, giondo ol strike. From Quebradillas, ao (Continued on page 7.)
~ News Digest
PIAero announced that measures are being taken to avoid a shortage of basic foodstuffs here. He also said he would discuss with Cuevas the water problem. He also said that he would discuss with Cuevas the water problem. - Lewis appealed to the Circuit Court. Truman will appeal to miners tomorrow. Appointed a committee to look into the preparation of measures to protect the civil rights of the W blo. t . t So interviews have been held with the Governor and leaders iogisiatlvoo. on pay for the teachers. The Ada arden Ada on the mainland, limiting rail shipments, affects the island directly even though I am confident that there will be no decrease for the time being in lmportAclotiMs The Department of Justice lacks funds for forensic work. For this reason, examinations in death cases are not being carried out. The head of the Aqueduct Boiler warned yesterday that water should be economized. He predicts that today's problem will become more serious in the course of the next few months. The Veterans Administration has established an Insurance Division. *
The bakers are preparing to shut down the bread industry next week. They say the Government has had plenty of time to act on the price readjustment. - - - - 14 first* round of the professional baseball championship is decided today and tomorrow in Ponce, between Leones and Criollos. - - - - - - Pepin Pereira will pitch the first baseball game on Monday, when Puerto Rico and Panama meet in Barranquilla. - - . Senate approved allocation of four million dollars Kra AGS. Bill in the Senate, permanently exempting from excise taxes, the re-export of petroleum products. The JET alleges that it cannot proceed oobro request for paper work for olocdoneo. - The Governor expressed to Senator Ortis Stella his agreement to a better wage for the road workers. (Before leaving for the San Francisco agricultural convention, OeAor Podro Nido offered to make representations on behalf of the Puerto Rican farmers, especially the IOW UUCRrBrOI. i
L Hueleuist is taken out during brawl
During demonstrations by strikers at the Allls-Chalmers Company in Milwaukee, several riots have occurred. This photo shows a policeman removing a striker from the picket line during Wednesday's scuffle. The Allls-Chalmers Company manufactures Agricultural implements, and its workmen have been on strike for some time, without any settlement having been possible. (Photo P. A.) । The limitation of shipments by rail affects the Island directly ' Although it is estimated that this will not be at once, ¡t is feared imports will suffer a considerable ' decrease. - Congestion on the San Juan docks ¡ Yesterday "e accentuated in the commercial circuits to Industrials of the ; Island, the probability that 1os effects of the strike of coal workers 1 in the United States, cause new problems to the pals, to the nrdan nromulcada ñor the Government of United States.
The order was announced that all cargo shipments by railroads for export have been virtually suspended. It was reported that, even though the order states that "the exceptions to this suspension are grains in bulk, there will be noticeable delays in the near future in the transportation of products to the Island, which will begin to occur once they begin to be returned to the mué.VuMrS8R.fi that are currently being transshipped to ships bound for the Island. The order promulgated, which will directly affect the Island, states that beginning December A, "virtually all shipments of cargo by rail for export are suspended. The exceptions to this suspension are grain by volume; animals for meat and supplies for the U.S. armed forces overseas. All other items require a special permit to be transported'. Sources close to the importing trade in the metropolitan area said yesterday that imports of grains, canned food, fats, oils and essential items are made by virtue of orders dispatched in specific units, not prevailing on the island the system of importing by volume quantities. This situation, it was explained, will be reflected in the future problem that the island will face if the strike of the Miners' Union in the United States is not resolved. However, it appears that the situation in Puerto Rico will not worsen for the time being, and that the island problem, if it arises, will be delayed for a few weeks. However, both commercial and industrial circles consulted expressed their concern about the limitations imposed on shipments. | As of yesterday, the main shipping companies operating between an Juan and the United States had not received any notification that any suspension of shipments to the island had occurred. Even though such fact was not (Continued on page 103
Nido to attend San Francisco convention Nido offers to make representations for the benefit of all island agriculture Shortly before boarding the plane to San Francisco, California, where he will attend as Puerto Rico's delegate to the annual convention of the । teamericanos' farmers, the president of the Settlers Sector of the Farmers Association, Mr. Pedro P. Nido, authorized the following statements: "As I leave for San Francisco to represent this Association at the National Convention of the American Farm Bureau Federation, I wish to inform the farmers of Puerto Rico that I will defend their interests there at all costs, without limiting myself exclusively to sugar. "It is my purpose to submit to the Resolutions Committee of the convention a number of resolutions in favor of Puerto Rico and I hope that at least some of them will be adopted by the assembly. Specifically, I shall submit resolutions requesting the endorsement of the Federation against any projected reduction in tariffs on the importation of products similar to those of Puerto Rico which are imported from any foreign country, and I refer specifically to the commercial reciprocity treaty with Cuba, which is to be discussed in a public hearing on January 13, 1947, in Washington, and which affects sugar, rum and tobacco, three of the basic products of our economy. I will also be submitting resolutions concerning the price of sugar, demanding parity in price with the other essential food products consumed, not only in the United States, but also in Puerto Rico.
I will have to demonstrate clearly and with numbers the economic injustice that has been done to the sugar industry during these last years and I will have to hold accountable those who are responsible for this situation. The domestic beet sugar industry stopped producing during the three years 1943-1945, more than two million tons of sugar and Puerto Rico and Hawaii more than one million tons of sugar, due to the low prices at which sugar was quoted during those years. Meanwhile, foreign countries increased their production considerably, and in the specific case of Cuba, it produced 3,700,000 tons more during that same period of time, due to the concessions and privileges that were granted to Cuba, to the detriment of the domestic producers of cane and beet sugar. "There is a certain sector of opinion in the United States which favors the granting of still greater concessions toi (Continued on page A) Puerto Rico will be the death of the E By JEAN VAN VRANKEN j] WASHINGTON, 5. (INS). - In a telegram addressed to Dr. Pedro de Alba, Acting Director of the Pan American Union, Emilio Colon said: "Our office joins with the Pan American Union in the unfortunate loss of its Director. The work of the hemisphere has great strength Ins- - "a" ¿ - i "
Pinero announces that measures are being taken to avoid food shortages here; Discusses water supply problem.
-■ r Justice without Lewis appeals to Circuit Court; doctors for Truman to call miners; forensic work acts on people's rights
Examinations on death row inmates not performed due to deficiency Law was passed creating Institute .Alégase no funds for instrumentation of law passed 1943 By JUAN MARTINEZ CHAPEL Editor of EL MUNDO There is a belief among the public that the different Departments of the Insular Government are always cooperating and helping each other and that everything goes on as' if the Government were one entity without discrepancies and antagonisms. However, sometimes this is far from the truth. Relations between the Departments of Justice and Health have been strained over the last few years. Recently, EL MUNDO published the true story of a corpse that could not be buried for more than two weeks, because the district attorney of Arecibo suspected that it was a case of violent death and ordered an autopsy before burial and could not find a doctor from the hospital of that district or a charity doctor in that city or in a neighboring town who would agree to perform the required autopsy. The doctors allege that what the Department of Justice pays them for an autopsy is a pittance and then if it turns out that a crime has been committed, the doctor has to appear in court where he is subjected to a tedious interrogation and cross-examination that wastes your time and patience. The laboratories of the! Health Department have refused to test suspicious and toxic substances sent by judges and prosecutors in criminal appearing cases. Less than a month ago, a district attorney sent to the Health Department's chemical laboratory for testing the viscera of a young woman who was found drowned and thought to have been poisoned and then her body dumped at sea. According to reports, the laboratory refused to do the requested examination and the chief wrote to the Department of Justice stating that lack of personnel prevented him from doing the examination and that the viscera were in his office at the disposal of the Department of Justice where they would be sent if they were not sent for in a short period of time. The viscera were from a person who had died seven days earlier. The aforementioned letter also stated that in the future they would use means other than the Department of Health to perform the examinations in cases of suspicious deaths. The Department of Justice, according to its leaders, lacks the resources to appoint forensic doctors and to install appropriate laboratories to perform the necessary tests in cases of deaths that could be caused by a criminal hand. Up to now, the Health Department has been cooperating in the investigation of crimes; but the Department says it lacks personnel for this work, which is not exactly its responsibility, and the situation is that on more than one occasion, according to reports, investigations that could have led to the discovery of a crime have not been carried out for lack of the appropriate means to carry out the necessary preliminary studies and examinations. (Continued on page 3.)
- The Administration seems determined to continue the fight against Lewin. - They do not anticipate an early solution to the problem posed.
By Raymond Lahr 1 : United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 5th (PU). - The Administration and the United Mine Workers, who are on strike, are being bombarded with i neutral peace propositions, in . as the Government prepared ' drastic measures on bituminous coal, Neither Lewis nor the Administration, however, have indicated ai such peace propositions are receiving serla consideration, as means of ending the strike in the coal mines, now operated by the Government. WASHINGTON, 8. (PU)- The Wahlngton Circuit Court of Appeals this afternoon granted permission to the Government to take directly to the United States Supreme Court the appeals of John L. Lewis and his coal miners' union from the judgment entered against them for civil disobedience against an injunction issued by Federal Judge Thomas Alan Goldsborough. Eliminating unforeseen delays, those appeals will be considered next week by the nation's highest court. Federal agencies have designed far-reaching coal conservation measures that are intended to stave off the threatened economic collapse until March 1. Next Monday, orders are expected to be issued for exten,Wn dimming and for the
1 B B B B HARRY B. TRUMAN Tomorrow, Sunday, will make a call, miento to the miners dq allocation of coal to the most essential consumers. The Administration appeared today determined to continue 1" present Eelea with Lewis and his miners, hasi a decision. As announced (Continued on page 7.)
Senate approved appropriation of $4,000,000 for Supplies Bill on municipal court presented on first reading. - House bill* permanently exempting petroleum products At 11:35 a.m. the Senate session began yesterday. Presl. dló "1 Senator Samuel R. QuIAones. MuAoz Marin, Anselml and Arjona Slaca were absent.
The Treasury Committee recommended the approval of Senate Bills Nos. 7 and 9. The leftor was young Ramón Ruiz Nazario, son of Slmmone. Discussed on second reading was S. P. 8, "to allocate the sum of 84,000,000 to be Entered into the Funds of the Insular Law of Su* ministers." Senator Dávlla Díaz, requested the Chairman of the Treasury Committee to explain the reasons for making these four million dollars available to the General Supply Administrator. Mr. QuiAones, from the chair, answered that this sum is indispensable for the Administrator of Supplies to be in a position to purchase basic necessities, to be sold to the public in any emergency or in the case that agiotists try to hoard these kinds of articles. Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa spoke in favor of the approval of the bill, believing that the current nan paid 8850,000 in duties, especially when 8560,000 in customs duties have been paid, which will revert back to the People of Puerto Rico. These duties were paid upon the importation of foreign goods. Mr. Figueroa further stated that the remainder of the 1" appropriation was used to pay subsidies for the (Continued on p. 7)
During the past two days, the President of the Teachers Association, Mr. Luis Mufllz Souffront, has held conferences with the Governor and legislative leaders regarding legislation pending in the current special session of the Legislature which affects the teaching profession, especially that which refers to salary increases for teachers and other public employees. C. Richardson and José Joaquín Rlve. Accompanied by Messrs. Lewis ra, members of the Board of Directors of the Teachers' Association, Mr. Mtiñlz Rouffront has lately met with Governor PIAero; the President of the Senate, SeAor Luis MuAoz Marín; e| Speaker of the House, Dr. Francisco M. Busoni; the chairman rf" the House Finance Committee, Lic. Benjamín Ortlz; the vice-president of the House, Lic. Ernesto Ramos Antnnlnlnl; and the chairman of the Senate Public Instruction Committee, Lic. Vicente Gélge! Polanqo. It is also "understood that between the leaders of the teachers and the aforementioned government officials, new changes of Impressions were celebrated in this meeting in relation to the Civil Service bill, creating a central personnel agency in the Government of Puerto Rico. As originally prepared, it will be recalled, the aforesaid measure provided for the eventual inclusion of the maglsterlo in the civil service by competitive examination. The Teachers Association, for various reasons, is opposed to teachers being covered by this civil service legislation. Lewis and Union Deposited Fines WASHINGTON, 8. (PU)-The United" Mine" Labor" Union and John L. deposited today the amount of the" fine" imposed" by the Sm Goldaborough. The Union deposited its fine -W,500,000. -in Government securities which are as cash: while Lewla deposited bus 510,000 in cash. In the meantime. Truman considered the coal si tusclone with his Cabinet" for an hour; and" later, a member of the Ga. bínete said that "there will be "no p "aoB backward" in official actl. tud regarding the strike.
J.R.T. claims it cannot proceed on election at Paper Mill.
Sierra Berdecía states that charges filed against the Company must first be clarified.
The President of the Puerto Rico Labor Relations Board, Mr. Fernando Sierra Bordéela, declared yesterday, when questioned about the controversy that has originated the election at the Paper Mill, that "this controversy is closed as far as the Board is concerned". When asked if the Board has taken any action with respect to the aforementioned discrepancy that has given rise to the strike at 1* Puerto Rico Pulp land Paper Corp, Mr. Slerra Bordada said that "the Board resolves to the duel at the 1* Puerto Rico Pulp land Paper Corp. Leo S. Rowe tiradora' with the dead of Dr. co S. Rowe." I Colón also points out that Dr. Rowe is remembered in Puerto Rico for having been the chairman of the Island's Codification Commission in 1900. At that time, Dr. Rowe was appointed by President McKinley to revise and codify the laws of Puerto Rico. He later wrote "The United States and Puerto Rico", the first study of the Island after the change of sovereignty. (Continued on page 8) 'i
He saw the representation controversy at the mill when the "Hermandad de los Tra- ■ bajadores de la Puerto Rico Pulp and Paper Corp." filed a petition with the Board to investigate the controversy and certify it as representing the majority of the workers. That controversy was resolved by an election held last August 29 and by the Board certifying the Brotherhood as the organization that obtained the majority of the votes in that election on October 30. That controversy is closed as far as the Board is concerned". Regarding the new petition for elections filed by the Paper Workers Union, affiliated to the cegstista sector presided over by Mr. T. Colón Gordtany, the Chairman of the Board stated the following: "The Board cannot proceed with respect to such petition until the charge filed against the company by the Paper Workers Union, after the elections, in which it accused the OOMNAALA of having controlled and dominated the Brotherhood, making it an employer, is clarified. The Board cannot place on a "reader!" ballot a union that was found to be illegal. If the charge is substantiated (Continued on page 28)
SIA says water shortage will be even more serious i Head of the Service believes i problem will be greater in the next 5 months Explains the lack of water in the fountains Points out deficiencies that cannot be corrected due to lack of materials The Director of the Aqueduct and Sewer Service, Mr. Sergio Cueva" Bustamante, yesterday issued an emergency notice addressed to the population of the Capital, Río Piedra, Bayamón, Cataño and Guaynabo, in which he explained that the situation of extreme water shortage in the aqueduct supply sources is pale when compared to what it will be in the next five months." He adds that he expects further restrictions in the supply," which will be aggravated because "we have already entered the dry season," and also because "the months" of December, January, February, March and April are the most rainy months of the year, and in the mea mea mea have even less water." The problem posed by e! aeAor Cuevea to the entire population of the metropolitan area is the most serious that the San Juan aqueduct edmlnia- - tration has faced in the entire au exlatencla, it was in' formed. It was predicted yesterday, on the occasion of the prolonged drought, a crisis in the public water service which will affect not only thousands of families residing in the entire metropolitan area, but also industry and commerce. In his emergency notification to the people of the metropolitan area, Mr. Cuovao said that "despite the fact that the Federal Government has made a massive commitment to new works for the pipeline at a cost of more than five million dollars, and despite the fact that the distribution pipeline has been replaced as far as possible to avoid losses of the water supply.Despite the work currently being done, there is an alarming shortage of water for the entire area. I attribute such shortage to the fact that it has not rained in the Bayamon river basin for a year; that the Cidra dam built by the Federal Government has not accumulated any reservoir for that reason. It is added that the pumping units which supply some 9 million gallons of water daily have not been able to stop due to the lack of rainfall in Aguas Buenas and Cidra, breaking frequently because they are old and unused, and there are no new parts or new pumping units. । It is explained that the population has grown notably in all the cities served by the San Juan aqueduct, while new buildings and other necessities that use water in considerable quantities continue to be constructed. Also, the number of subscribers has increased 25 percent. Mr. Cueva reports that in order to alleviate the situation, the service has sunk new wells and is about to sink one in the Hato Rey region, but the work has been slowed by the lack of materials to fully operate the pumps. ■ Cuevas alleges that the Civilian Production Administration "has denied ■ priority to obtain in a hurry , materials for one such Facility," and that "the continuing strikea in Eatadoa Unidos has delayed and continues to delay the shipment of materials and equipment." He advocates that the public, in view of Ja prolonged drought, and the seriousness of the problem that will arise upon the (Continued on page 28) Rio Piedras case discussed with Collazo A commission of adult students of the Escuela Superior Nocturna de Rio Piedras was conferring yesterday with the Deputy Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Francisco Collazo, regarding the problem Burgldo at that school, on the occasion of the appointment, by the Department of Instruction of a new principal and assistant for the school. The students, as ss )abs, are demanding that Jos previous officials of ' the school be maintained, that is to say the principal, se- i Aorlta María Luisa Guerra, and the ' Ayudante, aeflor Francisco Núñez. < The Escuela Superior Nocturna de । Rio Piedras has been working with the new directors of the school for more than a week, but, in spite of this, the student body maintains its attitude that it will keep the previous ones. At the major conference, which was held, it was agreed that the Department of Education will bring the students to the final decision, who are already studying. The student commission was headed by the students' president, Mr. Relnsldo Vllisnueva, and was also composed of students Lula Garcia and Gregorio Andino.
The Governor expressed that he would sign the bill of increases as soon as he believes it does not cover the Authorities Message from leaders on sugar prices. Elimination of slums In a morning conference with journalists, Governor Plftero discussed the problem of water supply in the metropolitan area. When asked about the issue, he began by saying that, just before the press conference, he had another interview pending with Mr. Sergio Cuovao Bustamante, executive director of the Inaular Aqueduct and Sewer Service. The Governor explained that he is talking about plans to increase the water supply for the metropolitan area; to take advantage of the water from the rivers of El Yunque (which is a combined project of the Water Resources Authority and the Island Aqueduct Service), and to take advantage of the water from the Rio Grande de Lolza, pumping its waters to a point from where they can be distributed, from Luquillo to Dorado. The Governor warned that both projects contemplate the same end, "As any such work will take a number of years to complete," added Governor Plftero, "I believe it should be the best and fastest solution to the water shortage in the metropolitan area. In this regard, the conference of the PIAero oeflor with the executive director of the Inaular Aqueduct Service should be seen. Salary increases. The Governor intends to sign the bill granting salary increases to teachers and public employees as soon as the same Bogus for his consideration, he explained yesterday to the newspapers, in response to another question, the Governor said that in his opinion the increases which the Legislature might enact were not "ubiortop the employees of the Authorities, since these are to be hired as partleulsros agendas. Arrabales. The Governor told reporters that he no longer wished to speak about the suburbs, "because I want to see it" un "p "r "cer. Immedistamonto spoke the Governor of the need for the approval of the plans flnalss for the development of Caflo do Martin PeAa, "that almost doubles the waterfront. He went on to express his opinion that "the port facilities would receive a tremendous impetus and at the same time it could be possible to develop and clean up other areas where to house families residing in the suburbs", "If in my government no other thing would happen than the elimination of the suburbs, or God would take my life after having achieved that, I would die peacefully," said the Governor sententiously and gravely. Eg believes that if the Legisla* ¡tur' approves the bill before its consideration, the project would be finished by next March, and the regular Legislature could establish a way for the project to be carried out as soon as possible, and within a period estimated at only four years. "If we succeed in clearing San Juan of those slums on the banks of the Caño Martin PeAa and the other slums, and at the same time clean up the city, we will then have given it a starting weight to begin in Puerto Rico the green* dcr> tourism that we need to develop. I hope that if this work is begun in the other towns of the Island, it will awaken the interest in eliminating the slums as well. It is the opinion of the Governor that in some way money could be allocated, either locally or by the Island Government, so that every town would dedicate special land with a street layout, and perhaps with all the main services (water, sewage, electricity, and the Botares would be sold at a very low fee, to avoid the disastrous slums and also to avoid the influx of the inhabitants of these rural areas to the cities. Forecasts. j The Governor announced the fact that the Government is taking the necessary measures to avoid the shortage of basic foodstuffs, as a result of a prolongation of the coal strike in the United States, and also due to other contingencies. Pinero said that the intention is to make a large warehouse building to be under cover in any £ , .í? 1 4P*J ancia- *l can make dlffcll immediate transportation dt staples. He disclosed that he had appointed Judge Arcillo Alvarado to conduct an investigation of the situation arising at the Compaftla de Fomento Agricola Paper Mill, as a result of a ruling of the Labor Relations Board, and to judge whether it has proceeded in accordance with the law. He informed the Governor that the investigation ordered by him has been requested both by the workers on strike and by the labor relations board. He expects the report to be submitted by the middle of next week. Prado del asúcar. Existo rsdactado a mensajo to tas authorities do Wáshlngtoa pending the signature of the Iida(Continued on page M.). ' ' $ ' '