THE WORLD
2d.. EDITION ' 2 Sections .
40 PAGES 5 Ctvs.
2 Sections
DIARIO DE u
YEAR XXVIII Did you go out in "u automobile? KaM sure that nnw aathi has no deaperfecta that cause accident!!!?
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JUNE 15, 1946
Entered a" eeoond elaaa matter, Poat Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10616
Settlement to avert maritime strike set for today is near completion
Island Acquires Modern Weapon Against Paralysis
Baruch Explains U.S. Atomic Plan
Yesterday he made a dramatic appeal to a United Nations commission It would create international authority We have to choose between world peace and destruction, he declares
For MICHAEL CHINTGO ROME, 14 (INS) - Alclde de Gasperl today defended the Cabinet's decision to announce the establishment of a republic in Italy, stating that the "sane is the legal coro' larlo of a recent Supreme Court ruling. The Prime Minister, who is himself provisional president, said that the new administration was automatically vested with power when the Court announced the results of the referendum, and added, "IF the Supreme Court was not convinced that the republic had the largest number of votes, it should not have publicly proclaimed the results. De Gasperl characterized as "a threat of catastrophe the ¡ proclamation made by Humbert the second before leaving for exile, to the effect that the opening ¡ration of power by the cabinet. constituted a revolutionary act, The premier praised Humbert's conduct during the last two 1 years" calling his deposition and departure 'expiatory" In this regard he said what "we must all atone - even those who did not inherit or participate in the errors of the monarchy." Undemanding to exhort political parties to refrain from continuing to engage in "destructive polemics" he declared, "I promise a democracy of balanced public powers, fair to all social classes and willing to
by Robert MCCORMICK NEW YORK, lÓlNSI- After saying in biblical admonition that the delegates to the U.N. Atomic Commission are meeting "to choose between the living and the dead," Bernard M. Baruch "went on to declare that the U.N. Atomic Commission is not a "dead" democracy. Baruch went on to state in the report he delivered today as Chairman of the Board: "Behind the black portent of the new atomic age there beats a hope which, embraced in faith, can work out our salvation. If we fail, then we will have condemned all men to be slaves of fear. Let us not deceive ourselves - we have to choose between world peace and world destruction". Baruch said that the U.S. is gradually ruling out the transfer of its industrial know-how in nuclear energy and the atomic bomb-making concept, as the international authority for the development of atomic energy is gradually being put on a firmer and firmer basis. In addition to directing those actions which are a latent danger to "world security," such an authority would control, authorize and inspect the production of atomic energy and related facilities to prevent them from becoming clandestine arsenals. For greater security, according to Baruch, the atomic energy factories would be decentralized and spread throughout the world. The staff would consist exclusively of experts and would be recruited internationally. The U.S. delegate noted that international self-government would be so far ahead in atomic energy technology and research that it would be able, by virtue of this, "to understand and whereby to discover any misuse of atomic energy. Baruch called for the least possible intervention in peaceful atomic energy factory activities once they have been authorized or inspected for safety purposes. He proposed in this respect that the Atomic Authority should have jurisdiction "over the subject matter, but not necessarily as the owner of it". I. "The science which gave us this terrible power," he said, "shows that we can make it a helper to our suffering humanity, but science does not teach us at the same time how to prevent it from falling into the wrong hands. Much of Baruch's" statements were based on what was already contained in the Ache "on-LI-Jlenthal Report. However, his insistence on the organization of a world atomic police force to give effectiveness to treaties to be concluded on the subject, as well as his objection to the veto of any of the five great powers in matters relating to atomic energy, are factors in his insistence that a world atomic police force be organized to give effectiveness to treaties to be concluded on the subject, as well as his objection to the veto of any of the five great powers in matters relating to atomic energy, are factors in his insistence that a world atomic police force be organized to give effectiveness to treaties to be concluded on the subject.
Interior explained yesterday why "e gave some traffic lights longer than others to change, and, why the facility to turn right was eliminated even when m confronted by the motorist with the red lu". - Senator Ortls Stella, believes that the management of the Status Commission in the United" Challenges" has been profitable. - - - Las Meaa" and Coamo play tomorrow games that could be decisive in the South Double A Final Series. - - - Yauco was eliminated by Barandilla in basketball of the preliminary pro-Olympic Selection Series. - - - Tampico beat Veracru", 1-0, in dies inning". * * * - * Eight Boston players are oandldates for All-Star Game, July npeve. . --- Civilian Production Board approved new con"-" project.
Red Cross campaign closes on the 30th The $259,000 quota has not been met. - Mr. Jaime Annexy, insular president of the American Red Cross Pro-Fund Campaign, informed the press yesterday that "the campaign of this Institution, aimed at covering the quota of 82S9,000 assigned to Puerto Rico, will definitely end on June 30." Mr. Annexy said that he has already addressed the campaign "chairmen" throughout the island, notifying them of the closing of these activities on June 30. The quota," said Mr. Annexy, "has not been covered yet. In fact, as of Thursday, only 20 people had reported having paid the quota," he said.
The traction, worth 180,000, including the private building," said Mr. Annexy. 1 - - - - Federico Garcia Veve, of Fajardo, was elected President of the Rio Pie-i dra" Leone" Club. The new district chief of the Arecibo Police, Mr. Porfirio Vega, will take office from Monday" to Tuesday" next week. * Bernard Baruch yesterday invited mankind to choose between world peace and destruction, while explaining the United States' plan for atomic energy. Tranquility* has returned to Italy. Humberto left a proclamation protesting the actions of the Government. Lumber production in the United States has increased. On the other hand, the production of black pipe, mosaics, bricks and other building materials continues to be affected. 1 --- * I The OAP has refused to increase
i Suddenly protests ceased on Italian soil; the Allies advised Humbert Humbert to leave the country.
The monarch left a proclamation protesting the actions of the Cabinet - De Gasperi judged it "a threat of catastrophe for the nation".
to manage reforms that are not oppressive and to respect individual freedom. Let us unite to present a solid front. Let us confront those who conspire against our dearest border and exploit new internal dlscnclones. We reiterate once more" that in the confvjciói. of the peace treaties. the Italian people is determined to defend its sacrosanct rights as well as its future". Meanwhile, a superficial calm prevailed in Italy while the Republican leaders were preparing to consolidate their control over the nation. The monarchs, who threatened to avenge the overthrow of Humbert, suspended hostilities as if in obedience to superior orders. In this regard, its leaders said that the violent protests were prompted by Humbert's appeal to his supporters to remain "calm". Humberto left Rome yesterday, having arrived today at noon in Lisbon. Upon his arrival in Barcelona, where he spent the night, the ex-king declared: "Yesterday was the saddest day of my life. I cried when I left Rome". The socialist newspaper "Av "nti" caused surprise in the royalist circles when it affirmed after the departure that: "Humberto could have remained in Italy without any hindrance, until (Continued on page 24).
More than 1,000 veterans doomed to find no school in Ponce
The principal of the Superior, O'Hainmill, says that facilities are lacking and that it is necessary to give preference to middle school graduates. Faced with the problem that "more than a thousand veteran students" who will enroll for the next school year in the municipality will not find a place in high school", a movement has begun in the city of Ponce to find a way to resolve this situation.
This situation has been initiated. According to what was reported by the principal of Ponce High School, Mr. Charles O'Hamlll, to Mr. Pascual F. Lanauze, of the local American Legion post, the high school of the Pearl of the South "will not be able to admit in its classrooms the students who under the Soldier's Charter program were receiving school instruction, due to lack of facilities and the need to give preference to the younger children who recently graduated from middle school". The organizing committee of this movement is composed of Messrs. O'Hamlll; Lanauze; and J. Barnés, training officer of the Veterans Administration. The correspondent of EL MUNDO in Ponce, Mr. O'HamiU informed him, on the other hand, that the War Emergency Program had an allocation of 836,000 for the construction of six additional classrooms for the Ponce High School, for "the purpose of accommodating the veterans" who will be enrolled in the high school for the next school year. The plans for this construction are already approved, he added, but so far the work has not begun.
NEWS DIGEST
another look" at the price of Dominican "re" meat. - " - Yesterday arrived at the Istia, - little more than 18 hours" of having asked EL MUNDO, edltorlalmente, that it would ¡purchase- the first mechanical lung, for the treatment of infantile paráll "l" and another" Icalone". - José Guillermo Viva", from Ponce, will receive the Legion of Merit, a thousand veterans are doomed" to not have a school in Ponce, due to lack of facilities®". - Juan Solia Valle was sentenced yesterday to sel" months in jail and a fine of 1,800 for adulteration of milk. । The District Court yesterday approved the sale to the Land Authority of the land" .. other property of, the Glorgettl Estate, for the sum of 82 JH 000, - -- Insurance does not respond when the owner does not guide the public automobile ' insured.
First mechanical lung is already on the Island THE WORLD ordered to be purchased more than 72 hours ago The first mechanical lung imported into Puerto Rico, arrived yesterday aboard a Carib-bean-American Line plane consigned to the firm of General Electric X-Rays Corp, of this capital. The order for the purchase of the mechanical lung was placed by the Department of Health a few hours after the circulation of our edition of Tuesday, March 11, with an editorial in which it was reported that a commercial firm of San Juan was in a position to offer the Government such apparatus at a cost ranging from $82,190 to $4,500.190 to $4,500 "And if that is the expense to be incurred", said EL MUNDO, "it is not" strange now much more that in this Island a human being has to be left to die because such a modest investment has not been made, In view of this situation Increl (Continued on page 24)
Interior Explains Why One Light Was Given More Time Than Another
Transit Supervisor informs that the new regulation incorporates some reforms suggested by EL MUNDO.- Right turn.
At the request of the Deputy Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Jesús Benites Castaño, the Traffic Inspector of said Department, Mr. Mario A. Rivera, made a report related to the traffic lights after having commented on the matter by EL MUNDO. The publication of the report has been authorized by Mr. Benitez Castaño. It says "gil" "In the newspaper EL' MUNDO, edition corresponding to Sunday 9 of the current, appears an editorial entitled: "Passing the red light," that after praising the performance of the Insular Folíela Corps in relation to the" violations to the traffic laws, deserved praise and justice that is done to the members" of this Corps¡ pas* the edltoriallsta to comment on the operation of the automatic lights. The automatic" traffic lights have been installed after the careful study made in December 1943. According to the volume of motor traffic at each intersection, the appropriate lights were installed. This is the reason why some took longer than others using the standard within the minimum and maximum stipulated by the Institute of Traffic Engineers. It is .eclr, that these lights have not been installed at the mere whim of an official, but on the basis of rules already established and in use for so many years in the major capitals of the world. Here is why "at some intersections we have mounted three-color equipment and at other intersections two-color equipment only. Where the three-color light is mounted, the intermediate time for the orange light is three seconds, plus one second for the orange light, and one second for the orange light, plus one second for the orange light.
The intermediate time for the orange light is three seconds, plus a one-second change from one to the other, with the rider having five seconds of intermediate time. In the two-color equipment, the change is only three seconds; time lapse in which the two lights appear: red and green lights that turn on at the same time. The volume of traffic at these intersections does not justify the installation of three-color lights with the two-color equipment.
At 8714,929.80 were the building projects submitted for consideration by the Civil Production Board and the Building Committee at "u meeting the day before yesterday. Eleven projects" estimated to cost 8180,000.00 were approved. Eleven others valued at 8234,000. were denied and several remained pending consideration. As at the previous meeting, most of the projects approved provide for the construction of public schools with appropriations made by the last legislature. There are several private projects for commercial and industrial construction. Mr. Ramón Montaner, Regional Director of the JPC, informed!
! of the people of Puerto Rico" for the governorship (of the Island). The aforesaid j . "statement" adds that "this is the best way how, at present, Puerto Rico can be given a greater measure of democracy, under the existing law." . i The above statement, in mimed- > frago, has been profusely dlsi tributed by Director Emilio Col lón, of the Puerto Rico Office. . The document is addressed primarily to the representatives of more than thirty organizations who, a few weeks ago, attended a luncheon hosted by Muñoz Marin at the Mayflower Hotel, and maintains that the problems of Puerto Rico "are for the decision of the Government of Washington," and goes on to say that "after consulting with Senator Muñoz Marin, he will be able to make his own decision. "Muñoz Marin, the following important lines" of action are offered for consideration: 1- That the problem of the political status of Puerto Rico be decided by the Puerto Rican people themselves, in a plebiscite authorized by Congress, in which the economic conditions of each status will be defined; 2- Within thirty days, a vacancy will occur in the governorship of Puerto Rico. The Governor of Puerto Rico is appointed by the President of the United States, with the consent of the Senate. Puerto Rican leaders are demanding that the President use his power of nomination in the most democratic way possible, while the status is being resolved through the plebiscite. These leaders are asking the President to nominate the Honorable Jesús T. Plñero, who has been elected Resident Commissioner by an overwhelming vote (see page 24).
JPG approves new projects valued at $180,000.00
8.-* Authorizes one for the construction of a sewing workshop in Hato Rey.
। that since the recent restrictive provisions enacted in Washington went into effect, the filing of permit applications has decreased. On the other hand, the Board has been busy "consulting" with "citizens" who, wishing to build, want to make sure their projects have a good chance of being approved. The Board, after preliminary consideration of these cases, makes its recommendations to the interested parties, sparing those whose projects are obviously to be denied. The projects for schools amount to 8119,000 and will be carried out as follows: A" addition of two" classrooms " one 1 (Continued on page 24.) '|
Puerto Rico office delivers statement on governance
| Affirms that Puerto Rican leaders are calling for Pinero to be the next governor. - Also Urges Appointment Of Commissioner Instruction
For CHARLES MCCABE . United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 14, (PU)-The Puerto Rico Office in Washington has distributed a statement saying that "Puerto Rican leaders" are asking Truman "to appoint the Honorable Jesus T. Piftero, who has been the choice for governor of Puerto Rico. Piftero, who has been elected Resident Commissioner by an overwhelming vote.
1 ' WILL NOT AFFECT THE ISLAND ! SUGAR PRICE INCREASE WASHINGTON, 14. (PU)- The Price Administration Glycine" confirmed today the ' version that an increase * in the price of sugar is pending and that it is to be announced Saturday or Saturday." A likely increase of 10 cents per hundredweight at the mainland refinery and at the consumer level is not expected to affect refineries in Hawaii, Cuba and Puerto Rico, nor will it affect the maximum prices for harvesters or manufacturers. The OAP does not raise the price of Dominican meat and believes that the demand of traffickers 1 i 'i The Office of Price Administration reported yesterday that it has authorized a new increase in the maximum prices of imported beef from the Dominican Republic. The official communiqué adds: ' "The new increase of 1 cent per pound had been requested by Dominican exporters and by Mr. Ramon Nieves Alicea, president of the Retailers Center. OAP stated that such action would be detrimental "1 in an effort to avoid further increases in the prices of the most consumed items. i In fact, the increase now requested in the prices of beef from the Dominican Republic is the second increase requested by Dominican exporters this year. Last January, OAP authorized an increase of 1 cent per pound, at their request and due to the shortage of slaughter cattle caused by the drought in the Dominican Republic. This increase was made on the understanding that, once the drought was over, by April of this year, prices would return to their former level. This increase was assimilated by the retail trade. In April, Dominican exporters not only refused to restore the original prices. "Instead, they agreed to a further increase of 1 cent per pound as a condition for continuing to ship beef to the U.S. (Continued on page 24.) 1
U.S. lumber production has increased.
I . - But production of other essential materials has been affected. black pipe production has declined. brick and tile shortages are also critical. lumber production in the U.S. has improved in the last few years to such an extent that lumber producers have tentatively set a peak of thirty billion feet for the current year. However, it would not be unusual for it to rise to 32 million feet before the end of 1946, judging from the average production of the last two months, as reported to the Civilian Production Board. On the other hand, several other essential building materials have been vitally affected by the steel and coal industry strikes. Among these are black pipe and the like, the production of which has been greatly reduced, partly due to the strikes and partly to the shortage of the elements necessary for their manufacture. The shortage of mosaics and bricks, which are in great demand throughout the nation, is also considered critical. During the months of March and April the manufacture of black pipe reached 28,000 tons, but experienced a rapid decline in the month of May, to the extent that many manufacturers of this material were forced to close their factories. This caused the manufacturers a permanent loss in the labor force in their factories. As explained yesterday by Mr. Ramon Montaner, local director of the Civil Production Board, the agency estimates that it will be many months before the black pipe industry can recover from the disastrous effects of the strikes. । As for steel, it is considered that the shortage "e will be seriously felt .during the next twelve months. It has been estimated that about nine million tons of steel will not be produced due to the effects of the steel and coal strikes. . Another of the materials for which shortages are acute at the present time are the keys," in the manufacture of which a deficit of 182,000 tons, or 30 per cent of the total needed up to the end of the year, is being recorded.
4/
This photograph of the mechanical lung, a medical weapon against paralysis and other injuries, was impressed yesterday at the Isla Grande airport upon arrival of the first of the units, the acquisition of which was claimed by El. MUNDO, editorially, last Tuesday". The unit was consigned to the Health Department (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Some interruption, however, is expected
Bridges* labor leader in the West, was the last to acquiesce Truman anticipated no stoppage The agreement was expected to be signed before midnight By CHARLES ~HÉRROLD WASHINGTON, 14. (PU) - A settlement between the Government and the Union to avert the merchant marine strike is nearing completion, but it may be a little late" to avoid some interruption in shipments from the United States. Workers loading and unloading ships and crew members were already .prepared on the east, west and. Gulf coasts to stay off duty Saturday unless they are notified that ■" a settlement has been reached. S" other unions are expected to respect the picket lines. However, the settlement is expected to be signed before midnight tonight, after Harry Bridges, leader of the West Coast seafarers and the last of the union's ¡functions to give in, finally agreed early Friday to press for acceptance of the Government's ¡conditions. An International News Service dispatch from the federal capitol reports that President Truman this morning expressed hope that he would resolve this afternoon the problem which threatens to provoke a maritime strike in the United States beginning at midnight tonight. The President added that the Department of Labor has told him that there is a good chance that the dispute will be resolved today. On the other hand, a United Press dispatch, also from Washington, confirms the above news from the International News Service, saying that, at his press conference this morning, Harry S. Truman said he did not believe there would be a maritime strike; adding that there is a good chance that, in the course of today, the labor-management dispute will be satisfactorily resolved. As is well known, Pacific Seamen's leader Harry Bridges and Seamen's Union President Joseph Curran have repeatedly stated that there would be a strike if their demands for hours of work and number of days in the workweek were not settled; so the announcement that the dispute will be settled today is regarded as apparent evidence that the workers are succeeding in their demands to that effect. The threatened strike to use the entire shipping movement at ports throughout the United States, including navigation on the Great Lakes, which is so vital to American and Canadian industry and to the feeding of the American nation, and inevitably determine another strike in another industry, whose workers would demonstrate their sympathy with the striking arlnoa. On the railroads, for example, and on the port fronts, there would be strikes in adherence to the seafarers, among the labor unions handling cargo on the railroads and docks. Although the American Federation of Labor regularly stands face to face with the Congreao de Organizaciones Industriales, which is the national union to which the seafarers belong, they would still go on strike, because the aforementioned union would not be able to support the seafarers.
WASHINGTON, 14, (L UJ- A representative of the United Press asked President Traman at a press conference if he could give any information concerning the appointment of a successor to fill the vacancy left by Governor Tugwell. The President replied