THE
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
TANGLE DIARY
Enterad as second class matter. Post Office, Ban Juan, P. R,
NUMBER 10493
YEAR XXVIII
"ldemoo to the men who made or the Victory Loan.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 9, 1946
Fennell asks for an extension from the court
President of UNO
JF WL lU JIm Khl Paul Henry Rpaak, president of the United Nations (Associated Press photo). 04 P has fixed prices for refined sugar I i Esina will be in effect from tomorrow. - The Office of Price Administration reports that it has fixed specific maximum prices for refined sugar sold in Puerto Rico. The prices are as follows, to be effective tomorrow, Sunday, February 10: Refinery price for all kinds of refined sugar, in 100-pound bags: $5.80;'' wholesale, $5.95; retail, $6.50. ' 25-pound containers; refinery price, $5.90 per 100 pounds;) wholesale, $6.05, per 100 pounds; retail, $1.63 per 25-pound container. 10-pound containers; refinery price, $5.95 per 100 pounds; wholesale, $6.10 per 100 pounds. 5-pound containers: refinery price, $6.05 per 100 pounds; wholesale, $6.20 per 100 pounds. 2-pound containers: refinery price, $6.05 per 100 1 pounds; wholesale, $6.20 per 100 pounds. 1-pound packages: refinery price, $6.25 per 100 ¡ pounds: wholesale, $6.40 per 100 pounds. Retail prices for 10, y, 2 and 1 pound packages in their packaging: original: 7 cents pound. Loose, : 7 cents pound, or 2 pounds for 13 cents, । In cases of refinery prices, the prices quoted include 1 I carrying charges. ¡ If the product is packaged in (Continued on page 15)
The Administrator and Je-1 fe Engineer of the Aqueduct and Sewer Service, Mr. Sergio Cue- 1 vas, informed yesterday that with the proposed residential rates for water consumption and sewer use, more than seventy percent of the Island's consumers will pay between 50 cents and $2.12 a month for both services. Two dollars and twelve cents represents 33 cubic meters of water per month, which is the current average used by Puerto Rican families, according to Service statistics. He added that this proportion will cover about 50,000 families, which, according to the average number of members per family, represents more than 265,000 people. He further reported that even the present rates are lower than those indicated by the Public Service Commission, since out of seventy municipalities whose rates were accepted by the Commission, 47 have much higher water rates, than the present SIA rates and only ten towns have them slightly lower but on an ascending scale. "The remaining few municipalities," he said, "have rates equal to those of the SIA. The apa-1 rent difference in 1the prices is not|
B O L(E T I N E S
He alleges that he was given a short time to prepare the inventory he requested Objects to the appointment of a new trustee He says he has not yet been given the opportunity to prove whether he serves Three motions were filed yesterday in the San Juan District Court, presided over by Judge Ricardo La Costa, Jr., by Harry F. Besosa and Thomas A. Fennell, trustee of the Puerto Rico Agricultural Company, in connection with the lawsuit filed by taxpayer José Suárez Martínez against the Company. In the first motion, signed by attorney Harry F. Bososa on behalf of Thomas A. Fennell, the court is asked for an extension of time to file the Inventory of the company's properties and operations requested by the District Court of San Juan. It is alleged in this motion, that due to the short time granted by the Court to the defendant,-ten days,-and due to the fact that "it has been necessary to request from the . "genios and related to the business of In company, employees and others, all kinds of information to complete this inventory, and that it has not been and is not possible to obtain figures and records of everything in such a short time, it is respectfully requested that the Court be given a few more days, 'until February 20 of the current year to file the inventory as requested". ) In the second motion, signed by Mr. Fennell himself, it is requested that the Court not accede to the petition made by the plaintiff, in the sense that a permanent trustee be appointed, who has no relation whatsoever with the Agricultural Company. In his pleadings, the trustee Fennell argues that he has not yet had time to prove his efficiency as such trustee; that the plaintiff has no reason to file a complaint either directly or indirectly against the aforementioned trustee, and that he sees no reason why the court should appoint a permanent trustee, without having had the opportunity to measure the work done by him, according to the appointment made to him by Judge Ricardo La Costa, Jr. for such action. In the third motion, signed by ■ Harry F. Besosa, attorney-at-law for Thomas A. Fennell, the Court is informed that the only funds the Company has ■ (Continued on page 22)
70% of the population will only pay from 50c. to $2.12 to the SIA This was explained yesterday by Administrator Caievas when referring to the rates for residences.
The issue is not in the rates, but in the collection of water in agreement or disagreement with the rates of the municipalities. Although the rates set by the Public Service Commission are in most cases higher than the current rates of the SIA, this has not been the case in reality, because the municipal governments did not charge those rates. When the ISW began to charge regularly for water, according to its current rates, there was an apparent difference between these and the municipal rates. The difference is really between the water that was not paid at the high rate of before and the water that is paid at the moderate rate of now. Naturally," he continued, "there is a large proportion of the public who find it very difficult to get used to paying reasonably for an essential service which they were not used to paying for and were not required to pay for before. The public did not know that the rates written on official paper were high. It did not know and did not care to know, because the high rates written on paper did not apply. What "1 the public was seriously concerned about was having an I (Continued on page 15)
yin realized its present exist-; claa. NEW YORK, A (PU)-Loz precío" of sugar values, at the close of business, today, fqeron the following t Eastern Rugar, on the street market, 50.75; Fajardo, 82; Routh Porto Rico, 57 cents; Anaconda, 61; Atlantic Refining, 85, e Eastern Sugar, "on the moe trader, 80J0. - - - - - Detroit, 8. (PU)-Prospects of a sudden weekend settlement of the dispute between GM and its striking workers were dissipated today when negotiations being conducted by the company and representatives of the Laborers' Union were recessed until Monday. - - - - WASHINGTON, A (PU)-EI preI Bidente Truman recommended to the
i Congress the additional appropriation of , $29,000,000 for the State Department, of which sum $10,000,000 would be earmarked" if program to disseminate information concerning Ina United" State". This pariMaM entails funds supplementary to those already requested for that department's budget for the fiscal year 1946-47. WASHINGTON, 8. (PU)-The President of the Civil Service Commission of Puerto Rico, Guillermo Ni- [ ragllonl, told the United Press today that he has completed a bus con- [ ragllonl. United Press today that he has completed bus- , ferendas with officials of . the U.S. Civil Service Commission, and that they are now . United States Civil Service Commission, and that they are now in agreement on the procedures for converting the Insular phase of employment into the J. (Continued on page 12.),
Sugar legislation still stalled
No action expected in Senate for ten days 7 n n n Banking Committee leader ill Report on contract to be held by Puerto Ricans By CHARLES McCABE United Pren"" Correspondent WASHINGTON, 8. (PU) - -The Senate is expected to act favorably "within ten days" on sugar legislation pending in the Banking and Currency Committee. Meanwhile, Senator Alhen Barkley, Democrat of Kentucky, who, in lieu of Senator Robert Wagner, who is ill, has been acting as chairman of the Banking and Currency Committee, told the United Press that he is not familiar with the details of the sugar bill and that it has not been brought to his attention, officially, either by the Committee or by officials of the Department of Agriculture. Asked whether to prioritize the sugar legislation because of the current sugar situation, Barkley replied, "I don't know." Barkley is currently one of the busiest men in the Senate, as he chairs the Committee Investigating -1 Pearl Harbor disaster and is the majority leader. An Agriculture Department spokesman said, meanwhile, that! the sugar supply situation "is not so bad now" as a result of the Cuban arrangement to ship sugar "in the interim" and the shipment to the United States of 81,000 tons of "old sugar" recently obtained from Eastern Sugar Associates of Puerto Rico. The spokesman added that the contract that will soon be presented to Puerto Rican producers by Dudley Smith, representative in Washington of the Sugar Producers Association, is "exactly the same and as good as the one that was offered. He added that under the terms of the new contract, Puerto Ricans will be able to acquire their regular payments and subsidies "a little later, but not much later than before. He confirmed reports circulating in the sugar market that the Department's current intention is to put Cuban sugar into consumer channels as soon as possible and to stockpile Puerto Rico's supplies until "the situation there is entirely clarified. The official indicated that the only detail necessary to consummate the sale of the 1948 Puerto Rican sugar is action by the Senate giving legal authority for such purpose to the CCC. Secretary of Agriculture Clinton P. Anderson stated this afternoon that unless Congress grants authority to the Government to incur a financial loss in the sugar subsidy program, the price of sugar will "substantially decline." In a letter to House Representative Harry McGregor, the Secretary says that either the price of sugar must rise or the Government must take a subsidy loss in order to ensure "an early supply of this year's sugar production." He adds to Secretary Anderson that the Government can do nothing to increase the 1946 sugar production because this year's milling is already in progress, and that, in order to stimulate production, the Government has previously announced that it will pay a subsidy to sugar producers in order to assure them a desirable level of income. The Secretary goes on to say that such orders, as announced, "were contingent upon legislative authorization to incur losses in respect of the 1946 crop operations." As you are aware, Secretary Anderson has already requested the Congress to grant him such authority by legislation.
NEW TORE, 8. (PU)-New York harbor tug and barge tri(Hilantes■M voted overwhelmingly today to continue on strike in the face of the Government's embargo of tugboats. The crewmen rejected the request of their union leaders to return to work, by a vote of 881 to 467. ..WASHINGTON, I. (PU)-A Civilian Production Administration struck today against the manufacturers of nylon and men's shirts who have been withholding their goods outside the morcco. In telegrams sent to groups of manufacturers of nylon and men's shirts, the said administration ordered the immediate < suspension of further manufacture of their products until they ha-I *- ". r .' -
The shortage of cement has led to the partial stoppage of the construction program in Puerto Rico.
Bolivar Pagan says Congress will not act on status until the country says what it wants " "" ~ ■ ■ ■ ■ ""' r ~ - _ S t a t e d i t y, he says, will not be included in any project with other formulas.- The President of the Socialist Party and member of the Legislative Commission on Status, who went to the United States as a member of the Sub-Committee which during the past few weeks carried out negotiations in the North, returned yesterday to the Island, under the impression that the Congress will not act on the problem of the political status of the Island until
DEL VALLE ARRIVES AT - END OF FEBRUARY Mr. Carlos Raijo, Contact Officer of the American Legion, reports that "news has been received of the forthcoming visit of General Pedro Del Valle to Puerto Rico. The distinguished military officer will arrive here at the end of the current month of February. The Legion has addressed the President of the Senate, Luis Muñoz Marín, requesting that a joint session of the Legislative Assembly be held in honor of the General, and the Legion would take advantage of the occasion to present him with the Distinguished Service Medal. Preliminary preparations are already being made to organize a reception for the Puerto Rican soldier. * The Supreme Court ruled yesterday on the Barceloneta case. It confirmed the verdict of the Assembly, exonerating, but explains the decision! The Supreme Court of Puerta . Rico confirmed, in opinion emlti-j given yesterday, the resolution of the Barceloneta Municipal Asam-' hle" exo-! ) nevando al alcalde Bonocio Cam- ' pos Segundo, pero bizo contar el alto tribunal que dicha confirma'ción no debe ser interpretada en modo ningún modo como una aprohac'/.i por parte de la Corte de las act- 1 clones del alcalde querellado en re- ¡ laclón con los hechos expuestos en ! (The' opinion of the Court, in which the presiding judge, Martin Travle-) "o, acted as rapporteur, ends as follows: "The Prosecutor presented as his principal witness "1 the defendant Mayor himself, who testified at length and in detail in response to a lengthy cross-examination by his accusers, tending to get the witness to make unbelievable admissions.226 students at the University; this semester enrollment was reduced in several colleges. - In Extension it increased 'i With the time limit granted by the regulations of the University of Puerto Rico to students to be able to enroll in the University, it will no longer be possible to obtain special permits from the authorities of that institution for new students to gain access to the university classrooms. This was announced yesterday at the University of Puerto Rico. At the same time it was indicated that the total jet of students enrolled in the colleges of Rio Piedras amounts to 5,226, including the extension courses offered on Saturdays. According to figures from the University's Tabulation Office, sixty-six percent of the student body is female. There are currently 3,524 female and 1,751 male students. Enrollment in general studies courses decreased by eleven percent. Last year the enrollment in this school was 837 students, while this year it was only 744. In the evening section there was a decrease of nineteen percent. This year only 629 students were enrolled in the evening courses. In the extension courses, however, there was an increase of nineteen percent. In these courses last year there was an enrollment of 1,288 students. " The highest figure in enrollment " by colleges was reached in the College " of Education, with a total of 1001 i- students, of whom 104 are l- boys and'897 ladies. At the Colej .(Continued on U page 23)
The Puerto Rican people have said what they want as a definitive formula. Mr. Bolivar Pagan's decorations, to that effect, were as follows: I believe I have been able to rapture what is the prevailing thought in Congress on the affairs of Puerto Rico. I refer especially to the efforts we have all been making to liquidate the colonial regime, For several weeks I have been moving about in Washington, actively and cautiously, exploring everywhere, about 1" present action in relation to Puerto Rico. As a member of Congress, I have there the permanent privilege of entrance to the Senate floor and to the House floor, which enables me to confer promptly, without the delays of previous meetings or antechambers, with the Senators and Representatives, This also facilitates the off-the-record conversation, which sometimes reflects what one does not wish to reveal to all, and helps me to notice the invisible strings that are pulled around presidential recommendations and the legislation. I am in a position, and it is my duty, to speak frankly the truth about the situation. I am able to speak frankly, because that is always the Impulse of my temperament, and because I am not hindered by governmental accommodations and conventions. Neither (Continued on page 15,> View 1 begins on entry of buses to S. J. 1 Transportation Authority is not in favor of it. Testimony Thursday Almost unanimously, the public which attended last night's hearing held by the Public Service Commission to discuss the matter of the entry of buses into the capital city, pronounced itself in favor of the reestablishment of this service, suspended in 1942 due to the war emergency. Appearing on behalf of the petitioner, José S. Luciano, were Mr. Pablo Defendlnl and Mr. Francisco Susonl. The opponents Ijüan Martínez Vela and the Baldrlch house were represented by Víctor Vidal. | Antonio Qulrós Méndez, for the Centro de Detallistas de Provisiones; Florencio Cabello, president of the Asociación Pro Defensa Pública, of Barrio Obrero; the Revdo. Miguel A. Valentines, for the Presbyterian Church located at 10 Alien Street; Dr. Julio Toro, denj tlstq: Mr. Germán Rleckehoff, ( of the Association of Independent Om- , nlbus Owners, and "1 Mr. j Antonio Mongll, of the Omnibus j Unidos. Mr. Fernando Fornaris and Engineer Salvador V. Caro, of the Government of the Capital, recorded their appearance "to cooperate with the Commission and the parties by offering information to solve the problem. This was also done by Mr. José A. Recurt. Chief of the Transit Division of the Transportation Authority. The first witness who was called to testify was Reverend Mi- ! guel A. Valentines, who said he was the pastor of a church with about 300 parishioners, most of whom live in Santurce; that he was aware that many of the complaints among his parishioners were due to the fact that his church was far from the Plaza de Co . lón, terminus of the bus routes serving the metropolitan area; that the general expression, both in his community and in his church, was in favor of restoring the service (Continued on page 15-1).
Alert to the Puerto Rican Conscience । By Luis Muñoz Marín . Third article: THE SABOTAGE We have described the problem. To solve the problem we are committed to a program. To prevent this program from being applied to solve the problem, the Opposition parties acted between 1940 and 1944. They were defeated by the people. To destroy the program dedicated to solving the problem, sabotage is now acting. Pare-
Luis Muño* Marín.
It seems that the snake of reaction has several lives and that it is necessary to malaria several times. It also seems that "it feeds on a variety of "limits. It is nourished] not only by money, but also by vanity, by the slightest revenge, by the facist potential that exists in every society in which the people have demonstrated their democratic strength. It is nourished tamK blén of the good faith Innocent that, confused, ae deI ja catch of Balsa and seasoning of all the burundan- ■ ga react it. , ■ It is our unpleasant duty to continue matan- ■ do the snake -- separating from its reach the vlcI timas who would allow themselves to be gobbled up in good faith, and defl- ■ nlendo those who are deliberately lending themselves to be x E vlrle of food. Those who are deliberately assaulting with - sabotage the Popular Democratic Party and its programmatic obligation endorsed by overwhelming majorities are as follows: The executive directors
The directors of the political movement, disguised as a workers' movement, which is called Colon Gordlany, in apparent coalition with the directors of the Pro-Independence Congress: The militant labor, now strategically concealed, of the forces of economic reaction in "I. The" forces which innocently, but innocently, are not the only ones to be sabotaged. The" forces that innocently, in good faith, confused, have fallen into letting themselves be used for sabotage, are: Those who are in the Pro-Independence Congress because they believe in independence (to which noble belief they have a perfect right), without realizing that it is not the Pro-Independence Congress that can obtain independence, - and without realizing that the Pro-Independence Congress, since the middle of last year, is a political movement of sabotage against the Popular Party: The workers,who are in the movement called Colon Gordlany for not realizing that this is a political movement, in close coalition with the political movement of the Pro-Independence Congress, to attack and sabotage the work of the Partido Popular Democraticé: Those who in their minds confuse the human errors committed by certain public corporations and government entities with the vehement desire of the reaction that such public corporations and entities, absolutely necessary to deal with the grave problem of Puerto Rico, be annihilated: Those who out of an ontendlblo spirit of regional pride allow themselves to be poked and prodded and bothered by the real need - and therefore the right - of the Puerto Rican people to be annihilated: Those who out of an ontendlblo spirit of regional pride allow themselves to be poked and bothered by the real need - and therefore or! Incuestlona- ! ble right- that our people have to be served in their difficult work, not only by all able Puerto Ricans, but also by all able servants that can be obtained anywhere to serve Puerto Rico, and, finally, certain compatriots in the city of Ponce. As to those of the first group enumerated, i.e., those who are deliberately attacking the Popular Democratic Party with sabotage: What I say about the executive leadership of the Pro-Independence Congress has absolutely nothing to do with Independence itself. This will become clear when I talk about the status issue in these articles. The Pro-Independence Congress could be called by any other name and it would still be equally true what I say. The executive leadership of the Pro-Independence Congress, with those who assist it, is simply a political movement whose dedication is to mace another political movement called the People's Democratic Party. To attack it in the tribunes, and in the writings, and in the propaganda by word of mouth, and to attack it in the conspiratorial organization of multiple sabotages to the Popular Party and its work. Continuous propaganda, picketing conspiracies in Washington, cooperation in political strikes against the Government and public health, maneuvering to infiltrate the Popular bodies, in order to cheat the people of their instrument, without the people being able to vote and defend themselves. The executive leadership of the Pro-Independence Congress, and those who assist them in these activities, constitute a political movement against another political movement called the Popular Democratic Party. They have the right to attack the Popular Democratic Party. They have the right to try to defeat it. But they have no right to attack and try to defeat the People's Party by taking as an instrument the good faith of the Populares. There is no moral or political right to attack the Popular Party and refuse to leave its armory. There is no right to attack the Popular Party with the prestige of its own name. There is no right to pretend to have a political party speaking on behalf of the votes of another. The custodians of the armory, the prestige and public confidence of the People's Democratic Party, we will not allow it. A political movement has a perfect right to "taco" another political movement. But the same person cannot belong to both political movements. The board of directors of the Pro-Independence Congress, and their assistants, are a political movement. The Partido Popular Deimocrátlco is another political movement. I belong to the political movement called the Popular Democratic Party. It is quite possible that under that movement to which I belong Independence will be obtained, under economic conditions of life, and by procedures strictly in accordance with the commitment contracted with the people. It is impossible that the dii rectlva of the Pro-Independence Congress will ever achieve such an end. i In coalition with the political movement formed by the leadership of the Pro-Independence Congress and its aides is another political movement formed by the leadership of the so-called Columbus Gor- , diany movement. In the meetings and assemblies of the one participate the others. In the formulation of tactics of sabotage and conspiracy maneuvers against the Popular Democratic Party, they collaborate closely. In the development of propaganda, their coalition is as close as the Republican-Socialist one was. And the "attack of this political coalition is against the political party which has the mandate of the people and which is called the People's Democratic Party. The difference is that the Republican-Socialist coalition, being open and undisguised, what was required on our part was attack and defense. The New Coalition wants, under disguise, although , transparent, to undermine the Popular Party using the good faith of unsuspecting Po' putares. What it requires is public denunciation. I fulfill before all the Populares in good faith, before the immense mass of the workers, before the sincere pro-independence conviction of the pats, before the people in general, my obligation to make this denunciation. | You cannot be "Popular and an enemy of the Popular Party at the same time. But you can be openly and freely an enemy of the Popular Party. To this end I undertake to exert my influence to facilitate all democratic means to all those who want to be openly and freely enemies of the Popular Party. I will push for a law to make it easy for the open and frank party that wants to establish the New Coalition to register; or we legislators will put into practice a commitment already made to submit our actions with respect to our commitment to the people to a vote of the people. Or I will be ready to push for both, giving them every advantage: the second to test their democratic strength, the first to use it if they have it. Those are the open and democratic means. What we will not allow is to attack and sabotage with subterfuge the party that has the confidence of the people. In the name of the people, in the name of that confidence, we cannot allow it. To the open struggle of democracy before the people, on the basis of the votes of the people! Out with the facistoldes maneuvers! Out with the facistoldes maneuvers of minorities trying to use majorities without the majorities knowing it! It is not only because of his attack on the Popular Party itself that it is necessary to bring this situation out into the full democratic light. It is. in a sufficiently important way, because it represents sabotage in the magnitude of the work we have to do for the people of Puerto Rico so that their livelihood, based on their own production, can sustain, in the shortest period of time, without artificial aids, a '(Continued on p. 22) 1
Puerto Rico Cement sells more to the Government and supplies less to the public Ponce Cement raises 10c" per sack Claims it is now operating at a disadvantage with the Government's factory By R. Santiago Sosa Editor of EL MUNDO The limitation to one third of normal cement deliveries, decreed by the Government Cement Company, and an increase in price of ten cents per bag, decreed by the Ponce Cement Company -the latter as of February 5-, has caused, according to reports obtained yesterday, a partial stoppage of the private construction program throughout the island of Puerto Rico. The increase in price also represents, unquestionably, a rise in costs throughout the construction industry here. As of February 5," reads a circular telegram addressed by the Ponce Cement Corporation to all its employees, "we will accept orders only at our previous price of eighty-five cents a sack of cement delivered; and eighty cents taken at our factory, both prices, net cash". On the other hand, Porto Rico Cement, a corporation of the Government of Puerto Rico, informed that it has been forced to reduce to one third its deliveries for local consumption, because it has established a contract for the supply of some 4,000 sacks of cement daily to the Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority, to supply this product to the Caonillas hydroelectric project, in Utuado. President of the Contractors Association, Mr. Gabriel T. Guijarro, told EL MUNDO yesterday that the construction industry has been "seriously affected" by the increase in prices and the high cost of the product in the local market. "Both companies," he said, "find themselves unable to meet the growing local demand. Numerous works" of private contractors have been paralyzed. "The increase in price," he continued, "will naturally be reflected in the cost of production of Ibs works, since approximately a twelve per cent increase in the price per bag has been decreed by one of the companies. Previously, we paid the wholesaler 77.5 cents per sack and now it has gone up " 87.5 cents, or 40 cents per barrel of four sacks. i "The Association has reports, moreover, that the shortage in the local cement market is very acute, and that there are works in excessive numbers, paralyzed by the lack of the product. This is reflected, mainly, in the general economy of the country, since the construction industry, with favorable wages, keeps hundreds of workers active and consumes products of diverse nature". The contractors are also faced with the difficulty that the Porto Rico Cement Corporation gives preference to the supply of its product to the agencies and departments of the Government. This corporation has an average daily production of 2,500 barrels, with an estimated 10,000 sacks, of which 4,000 are supplied to the Water Resources Authority and the balance is distributed among government agencies and departments, and its customers in San Juan and the fabric. Ponce Cement Corporation's production is estimated at 12,000 bags per day, as reported yesterday, which is the maximum of its production capacity. The present production of these two factories is considered insufficient for the enormous local demand, which is increasing as the Sanitation Department continues to approve construction plans, at an average of approximately 1,000 per month, and which will continue to rise until it considerably surpasses peacetime levels. "The Association of Contratlstaa considers it more practical," - as reported yesterday by its president, Mr. Guijarro - that the Government give preference for now to the development of those public works of indispensable necessity, thus decreasing its consumption of cement, in order to encourage the continuation of private constructions which for the most part, are residential buildings. 1 * (Continued on page 22>)