THE WORLD
36 PAGES 2 Sections* 36 PAGES 2 Sections* 36 PAGES 2 Sections* 36 PAGES 2 Sections
36 PAGES 2 Sections* 36 PAGES 2 Sections* 36 PAGES 2 Sections* 36 PAGES 2 Sections
DIA RIC DE
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
Let us support the men who made possible J Victory Loan.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 9, 1946
Entered a* second cía "* matter, Post Office, San Juan, F. B.
NUMBER 10521
Labor decides tomorrow whether to accept agreement
Sugar union unions meet to discuss terms APA to study contract Tuesday Colonists agreed "at their last meeting that they will not accept it By LUIS F. SANCHEZ CAPPA It is ""per* that within Ion next* four days*, will be finally approved by lo* sugar producer* and the Sindicato Azucarero del aector cegetlsta that directs *1 ardor Ramón Barreto Pérez, the collective agreement to "ometer in lo* acto* that they will have to celebrate said" org*nlzaclone". Its" member" will discuss the" terms" under which" the" workers" and employers" relations" will be governed" at the Indüstrla. Tomorrow, Sunday, the Union will group its" affiliated" worker" members" in the" caucus hall of the House of Representatives" to submit" the agreement" reached" with the" employer* and settler" in the" negotiations" held" for that purpose. Next Tuesday, at the APA office, the centralists will finally study the contract for final approval. The "Colono" sector of the APA, in the meantime, will not sign the collective bargaining agreement, having agreed to it at "its last meeting of the "last week. The "colono" were ratified in "u decision not to accept the distribution of the aubaldio in the agricultural phase accepted by the APA, which agreed to pay 45 cents" to the cane workers. However, the portion adopted by the* colono* left the "aector members" free to sign individually the agreement signed by the Union and the "producer", or any other, accepting or not the payment of the "45 centavo" of the aubaldio. This same situation occurred in the signing of the agreement in the last harvest, when the "colono" refused to accept the distribution of the subsidy. The intention, on the part of the "leader" of the Sugar Union, to order his unlonea in that "zone" in which the "colono" refused to pay the "45 cents" to the "worker", not to "cut a single piece of cane" until the "colono" agrees to pay the said amount. The prevailing impetus between 10" producer" and Jo" colono" is that it has created a tension between" the" relationship" of" both" sectors" of" the" employers"", motivated by what has" been described" by" the" colono* as an act against" it". Meanwhile, the CCA has already sent to the APA the circular letter which stipulates the conditions under which the export of sugar to the United States is to begin, while the final contract for the purchase and sale of sugar from Puerto Rico is being drawn up by the agency. This week it is expected that the vessels that will transport the sugar already produced by the sugar mills, some of which have been suffering from a serious storage problem due to the impossibility of shipping their product, will begin to arrive in the island. Regarding the signing of the collective bargaining agreement, the labor leader Mr. Armando Rivero, undersecretary of the sector cégetlsta of Senator Barreto Perez, yesterday made the following statements: "For the first time since the year 1M2, and the workers of the sugar industry send their dlrlgentes to a convention to dls(Continued on page 20)
Planning emphasizes health program Signals to Legislature the need for a medical center for 5 barrios For aqueducts sets $32,000,000
■ Proposes fund for . two district I e o hospitals and other institutions , I The Planning Board consl- । derails that "e* of extraordinary lm- . poriancla that the Island Government provides", in the field of "health and , public welfare", the" fund" nece- . "arlo" to carry out a broad i program of disease prevention- . medade" and medical treatment." In i au message to the_Legislature on . the Six I Afina Economic Pragram, the Board recommends a "lgna- । clone* "for the ade- । cuselo supply of drinking water in the > rural and urban areas: for new" "l* sewerage systems; for the con"- . truction of medical" centers, municipal" hospii tale", gen"- , rale" district hospitals, and e"- . peclale" hospitals, and for the construction and , improvement" to the" public welfare" institutions." i The recommendations for" the governmental prn- - gramme of health and i public welfare are synthesized in the " following form by the Planning" Board: ■ "In the ca "o of aqueducts, incl1uding the construction of slstepias 1 Individual in the rural area,, in > this program are recommended fon- < do" ($9,500,00(1) which "uplementaI do" with empréstito" and with the "slgi nations approved by the Leglslal tura of the panned year, will complete ■ the $32,000,000 qua "e required pa- - for the completion of the entire program. Similarly, in the case of sewerage, funds 1 ($1,700,000) are proposed for the first two years of this economic program (continued on page 20).
The insufficiency of revenue for the University of Puerto Rico is a matter to be resolved directly by the Legislature of Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico. For such" purposes, ae In- ■ formed yesterday that the provisions of . House Bill number two, i which increases from 20 to 40 hundredths i of one percent the tax " on real property, for i benefit of the University of Puer- . to Rico, "will be discussed by the legislative caucus from one moment to " another. r It was indicated yesterday that this bill . "needs to be studied because it implies an increase in the general property tax and there is some disposition not to authorize a higher levy at this time, because it has been recommended that the emergency tax imposed during the war period prevail.
NEW YORK, 8. (PU) - The postponement of the "mendacious hueM (erroilarla was a reality todayjv Tear President Truman m 'js da Emergency to enM W 1 ñicha dispute. But, "I*rJ jn impasse the strike at the Q. 1 lf MfMotora; and loa miner" of l|4nntinúnn threatening to - I||/e1 President Truman to' iWu s. * necessary" step" under" the Railroad Mediation Act to prevent most of the railroads from being stopped, as scheduled for Monday. The Emergency Board decided to automatically postpone the strike from thirty to sixty days. At a press conference, the President dismissed the possibility of his intervention in the prolonged General Motors stoppage. As the new agreement readjusting the wages allows to "eBar an increase of workers in the telephone communications industry, the number of idle workers in the United States reached MI,000. NEW YORK, 0. (FU) - The temperature at 0 P. M. today was as follows: at Wáahlngton, M; at Chicago, 011 at Miami, 77*, and at New York, 00, i.
| (PU) - There are rumors that the United States will export one million tons of sugar to the European continent in the year 1946, indicating that the export will probably take place before the end of September. This was reported in this city by the "Tambora Company", a company engaged in the sugar business, although it expresses its doubts as to the report it collects. Reported tambora that such /shipment of this product would impose , hardship on consumers do- । mastic. t ♦ - - - , MOSCOW, 8. (INRI - After - two days of silence, the Press and the 1 Radio da Moscow commented today ■ on the anti-Soviet manifestations issued by the Former British Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, in a speech delivered recently- । mind at the University of Westminster, MlaurL In the section i of foreign events, the । newspapers of the Russian capital gave a summary of the speech, also publishing entire columns" reproducing adverse comments to Churchill's speech, authorized by some American senators, as well as statements by the British ¡socialist leader Harold Laski.
The revenue measure for UPR will be dissented in a caueus p ' __ ■ - in - - - - - -- -- -- - Increases the property tax from twenty to forty one-hundredths of one percent. - They are going to study how this will affect municipalities.
i The bill provides that the coni trlbuclon of 20 hundredths" of one > percent dehe prevail until " June 30, 1946, increasing - to 40 hundredths of "d" on July 1 I, 1946, in "front. It was reported that there are no specific recommendations in the budget or in the Government's financial program regarding the provision of additional funds for the operating expenses of the University, and that it will be left to the discretion of the legislature to take action in this matter. The Chancellor of -■the University, Mr. Jaime Beníi tez, argues that the Institution "e en- - faced with a difficult problem since r everything suggests that in the coming year the University will have lni gresos of $2,500,000 to cover an - expense budget of $3,700,000. - Also that there has been a (Continued on page 20)
NEWSLETTERS
.1 WASHINGTON, 8. (FU)- Log lí- > de res in the fight "over the nomhra- . miento of Edwin J. Pauley for . Hub-"eeretarlo of Navy, met secretly today but were unable to reach agreement in . their efforts to outline a plan i for an amicable withdrawal of such nom- . hramlent. In attendance at the meeting were Senators David I. Walsh, . Chairman of the Committee on , Naval Affairs of the Asmado, and Millard Tydlnga, Democrat, of Maryland, । Charle* W. Tobey, Republican, of . New Hampshire, Imverett Saltonstall, Republican, of Massachusetta and Owen Brewster, Republican, of , Maine, The meeting was held ! in I* office of Senator Walah. Pauley informed reporters that he has coneldered to be a "Republican. , that he has coneldered both" way" . to "eguir¡ retire or stay, and at i h* present "I am there fighting." ' NEW YORK, 8. (FU)- Frank J. । Fltaalmons, President of the Aso- । elation of Electrical Employees in the West, said today that he will pe- . tell his union to go on a nationwide telephone strike, ' if the negotiations which that union . is conducting with Western Elec- . íric, have not reached a fells tár- , minus, tonight at eight o'clock. He also announced that, if necessary, he would continue on page 20). |
J Accused in London I
- A L ' । j i , " WBHBu - | " Dr. Alan Nunn May, an 84-year-old British scientist who worked on the atomic bomb project in Canada, was charged in London on Tuesday with violating the British law on official secrets by revealing secrets relating to atomic energy. May conducted research"" in Canada while employed at the Ministry of Supply"". (Photo Pern "a Associate, sent by radio dead* J Londre" to New York). There is enough 'coffee, assured AGS chief i Di jo a Nieven Alicea no reason for shortage according to Corozal complaint The General Administration of 8u'l ministers has enough coffee, d" ■ Puerto Rico and foreign, to meet normally the demand in ■ all the Island. '[ The president of the Centro de De1 tallistas, Mr. Ramón Nieves All- ' rea, reported this yesterday, after a conversation with the administrator of the agency, Mr. Antonio Vlcéns 1 Rio", who received a telegram ! from the Mayor of Aguada, Mr. Juan - Vlllarrubla Santiago, indicating that a shortage of the grain was emerging in that town, and urging prompt action PWAJWÁVVMpia of the telegram !W sent by Mayor Vlllarrubla. Mr. Vlcéns Ríos informed the president of the retailers that the coffee supply and distribution situation in Puerto Rico is normal, and that there is no reason why the coffee should not be sold in the United States.
Senate rejected the appointment of Toro Fernandez, Swigget, Torres Pelegrina and Luis Trigo.
ASA can probably expand activities
Agency chief reports back from Washington meeting Lasseter congratulates local offices
D "le B. Jacqu", director r "glo' n "l of the" Agricultural Security Administration "in Puerto Rico, "ca- ' b" d" regrosar n S "n Juan d""pué" ' from a trip to Wáshlngton, where he attended a" meeting of 1o* regional directors of" the ASA, and where- ) de conferred with the agency's new national Chief 1, Mr. DI--Hard B. Lasseter, recently appointed by President Truman to direct the work of that agency of the Federal Department of Agriculture. -I One of the points discussed" at i the national conference was retarlo-1 ned with lo" bill" now before the Congress to "*!"-' Merer ln ASA romo unnagenrla per¿ । mnnente within the Department; . of Federal Agrlulturn. He said Jnrque" ; queáa* perspective" are good* paJra that such* bill* "e convler- 1 , tan into law in the pre*ent "e "lón of the , Congress. Jacques indicated that it is expected that the budget currently under] i&lderation for next year will allow ASA's activities in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands to continue as at present and possibly be expanded*. He also said that the new ASA Director, Mr. Lasseter, is well aware of the agency's program in Puerto Rico and that he sent "congratulations to the local offices in the island for the development of the agency's activities through the 35 local offices in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. Jncques reported that during the current fiscal year Ja ASA in Puer- । to Rico has granted more than 1,700 new rehabilitation loans* and provided supervisory services to some 12,000 small farm families on the island who are currently being rehabilitated 1 (Continued on page 20) ' " 1 * Judge B e 1 a v a 1 ) . comments on case !■ before Supreme ; Referring to sentence of ; juei Snyder in the case of - of Agricultural Company , ! Stating that broken already by e! ) Judge A, Cecil Snyder "the mutual conridera- - clone that the" courts and i lo* judges owe each other; . . others", and that wishing to "inform j i openly to the pals that within, ¡f the mandamus proceeding the constltuclonalldao d" the" laws 1 and 2" is not resolved. and that "other "Puerto Rico what it is witnessing is nothing other than judicial sabotage to discredit an elective government", Judge Eml¡lio S. Belaval, of 1* Corta da District of San Juan, authorized yesterday for EL MUNDO the following de- - ¡ claraclone": 1 "On March 6, 1946, on ' page 5 of the newspaper "El lm- ' partial", "e published the following 1 news item: "That Judge Emilio S. Be1 laval, of the Dl*trlto Court of ' San Juan has acted in the case ' of the Agricultural Company "as a clerk of the Legislature 1 and not as a Judge" was one of the ' sentences addressed to Ledo. Vene' gas Cortés, representative of the m"- ' gistrado, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court A. Cecil Snyder." Three days have passed since that sentence was uttered without Judge A. Cecil Snyder having in any way rectified the most insulting sentence ever uttered by a judge against another judge in the Puerto Rican judiciary. The phrase is unhonorable, because it is directed ' by a Justice of the Supreme Court at a Justice of an infe- ' rlor¡ Court because it is directed by an ' appointee of the President of the United States* against the only po' der fully representative of the i 1 People of Puerto Rico, whose le- i i yes all the Justices of Puerto Rl- ' co without distinction of category have- < we have sworn to enforce upon taking office; 1 [ (Continued *on page 30) (
Judge Del Toro Fernandez was after Fonfrías sought in the Senate. Yesterday "1 upon learning that the judge of the San Juan Municipal Court, Mr. Carlos del Toro Fernandez, had his appointment rejected by the Senate, he closed Ja Corte and left, heading for the Senate. Here Mr. Toro Fernandez asked for Senator Ernesto Juan Fonfrias, but he was in the District Court, presided over by Judge Marcelino Romanl. The Senate then informed the District Court that Mr. Toro Fernandez was looking for Senator Fonfrias. The drowned friends of Mr. Fonfrias surrounded him, leading him to the Judge's office. Then an application for a license to carry arms was filed, a license which was] granted by "1 Judge, Immediately, the case was heard in camera. The prosecutor Candelario acquiesced to the peI ticlon, j Represented the lawyer Ernesto! Juan Fonfrias "1 lawyer Wilson A. Colberg, putting to testify the applicant himself, who alleged that "he had received anonymous since a case of disaca- ! to was initiated against him, by Judge Carlos del ¡ ¡ Toro Fernandez". He also manl-i I (Continued on page 20) I
Gus Lallande, a representative of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce, reported that rice millers in the Gulf area are not willing to switch to the Puerto Rico market, while the California rice industry seems to prefer to maintain the traditional connections with Puerto Rico. Lallande said he was hopeful, by raising the case with Department of Agriculture officials, that regulations would be changed to allow the resumption of the purchase of California rice by the Puerto Rican market. The representative of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce also warned that if the indicated change in the regulations was not made, with the present attitude on the part of the mills in the Gulf Area, Puerto Rico could suffer a reduction in its rice market, which would fluctuate between 750,000 and one million bags of rice.
Island's Plea Against Freight Increase Prepared DeRCRrteá Cooperated With Pinero And Abe Fort'* Law Firm In Washington Attended Farming System Convention
On his return from the conference on farming systems held in Chicago, economist Luis Descartes, who attended on behalf of the Government of Puerto Rico, reported that he had the best impression of the conference, which was attended by representatives of France, England, New Zealand and Holland, and at which papers were read on Chile, Germany, Brazil and Puerto Rico. Mr. Descartas said that s" work" on farming systems were presented by a considerable group of the most noted agricultural economists of the United States, who rendered extensive Information in "u" tn- i low on such aspects as the । type of farm for a family and the place it occupies in the American econo- ¡ mine, Also on the 1 trend as to the type and means of improving the reia- i clones between* tenants and land pro- l Dietary, and means for ( the improvement of the* condlclo- I
The "vineyards" of the rural population who do not own land. Mr. Descartes presented to the conference a paper "on what has been done in Puerto Rico in agrarian reform, setting forth the work done and aspects of the work carried out.
The Department of Instruction plans to provide in the near future, to all" dl "trlto" encolare* that lack eata* faclllda- । de*, d* at least one complete educational film projection equipment, thus expanding its visual instruction program for the public schools of the pals. In addition, the Department, in order that the educational film service may reach all the centers of public instruction, proposes to improve the quality of its visual instruction program for the public schools of the country.
PUERTO RICO IN THE HOUR OF TRIUMPH
■Ai jtjK a a a y? s' JLl ■ ' 1 * . . ." '■ rxx'.-'' - <r- '■'b&W' The engraving that graces my front page today represents an extraordinary triumph for our country. It represents Puerto Rico's triumph in the "Golden Glove" Tournament, whose Tournament is "anchored by EL MUNDO en mientra Isl". The photograph was taken at the moment when the prized trophy was presented to the nineteen thousand enthusiasts gathered in New York's Madison Square Garden. Pictured, from left to right: Adolfo Cantro Calderon, Ente bantamweight champion and captain of the Puerto Rican team; announcer Matthew Cusack; and the president of the Puerto Rican delegation, Lui* RoMrio, Jr.
Lallande to raise problem of rice shipments to Island He will oppose separation of supplies from California for shipment to the Philippines. - Believes reduction involved would be catastrophe here For PAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, 8 -(PU)- The separation of rice 4e California bound for the Island" Philippines, a decision " reached a few" weeks ago by the Federal Department of Agriculture, ""will be vigorously contested by Gus Lallande, who arrived n Wáshlngton for the purpose of hold- ' brad conversation"" with officials of the Agriculture Dept.
'! Increase in the 1 "II r local consumption of the reds 1 1 ¡ In 1945 it accounted for 46 ' of the total sold. - The level has increased > Mr. Fllipo d" Rosto", pr""l- - dente d" l" Chamber of" Commerce, - stated "y "r that 1" h "hl" ímpreslonndo the boom qu" has had in the ■¡ domestic market "l consumption c "d" i increasing, According to the statistics obtained from the Chamber of Commerce, during the year 1944, the income from the sale of 3,871,364 cases of rum was $64,215,256 from the sale of 3,871,364 cases of rum. Of this number of calories 1,000,000 were sold, at the price d" $12.10 per case, and 2,871,000 " $18. 15. The revenue from internal" ln "ul "re" rent" was $4,077,222 with a total cases sold" of 673,000 "1 price of $6.05 tax per case. Last year's 1945 trend shows "an extraordinary Jocal consumption of rum". In Puerto Rico," said Mr. Rosto, "more rum has been drunk, - almost twice as much, - as the amount consumed in 1944. Last year local consumption of rum accounted for 46 percent of the total amount of rum sold for both export and domestic consumption. Federal taxes on the export of 1,233,286 cases amounted to $22,384,140, and local consumption was 1048,652 (Continued on page 20).
instruction plans to equip schools with new equines
cities of circulation and transportation of equipment and material. As an initial step, the Adult and Extension Activities Bureau will henceforth be responsible for all expenses incurred in this connection. Up to now, the Bureau has been paying only the cost of postage from San Juan to the towns and cities, but the cost of transportation from the offices of the Superintendent to the Department (continued on page 20). I
A Committee was returned to the Ledo. Molina
Dr. Figueroa voted against the rejections and Lie. Pagan abstained on two Large group resulted approved Includes Commissioner of the Interior, and several district judges The Senate yesterday rejected the appointments d" Carlton Swtgget, for member of the Commission d* the Insular Police; Luis C. Trigo, for General Municipal Judge; Ramón Torre" Pelegrina, for Secretary of the Municipal Court of Aguadilla; and Carlos del Toro Fernánde*. for Judge of the Municipal Court of San Juan, Senator Santiago R. Palmer, Chairman of the Nominating Committee," asked that the appointment of Henry Molina St. Remy, Esq. for Commissioner of the Puerto Rico Homes Authority, whose rejection had been recommended by the aforementioned committee, be returned to the Committee. Senator Leopoldo Figueroa voted against all* the rejections recommended* by the committee", for lack of information regarding the reasons why such appointments were rejected. Mr. Bolívar Pagán -- abstained from voting regarding the rejections of Ramón Torre* Pelegrina and Carlos del Toro Femándeg. A motion for the latter to go back to committee and hold a public hearing was defeated by the Senate. Lumberjack Juan Dávlla Díaz abstained from voting in the case of Carlo* del Toro Fernández. The Nominating Committee* recommended approval of numerous appointments. At the last minute, "e requested that they be returned to the Committee and it was so agreed, the appointments of Francisca Meléndei - Santiago, for Clerk of the - Comerlo Municipal Court; José ■ Rivera Pérez, for Judge of the Municipal Court of Vleque"; and Zoila Castaño, for Clerk of the same court. All the appointments recommended* by the Co- ! mito were approved by a unanimous । mldad, with the exception of the appointments relapsed* on Orlande Méndez, in which case, his brother, e! "enador Bernardo Méndez, abstained from voting, due to personal delicacy. ( The complete list of the appointments approved by the Senate in 1" afternoon of" yesterday, is as follows: Orlando R. Méndez, Commissioner i of the Interior; Roberto de Jesús Toro, Director, Bureau of the Pre-supposed; Luí* Janer, Chairman . Commission for Industry): Sol L. Des- ■ Letters, Member, Board of Urban Planning and Zoning; Elmer M. EHawroth, Director, Agricultural Company of Puerto Rico; Lui" A. Izquierdo, Member, Board of Directors of the Agricultural Company of Puerto Rico; Eml- . lio Plflero, Member, Board of Dl- - tractors of the Agricultural Company ■ ile Puerto Rico; Juan Bennazar, 1 Board of Directors of the Compa- ■ fila Agrícola de Puerto Rico; Cán1 dido Oliveras, Chairman, Board of 1 Minimum Wage; Jesús M. Benitez, 1 Member, Minimum Wage Board; Fernando Sierra Berdecía, Chairman, Labor Relations Board; - Julio E. Vlzcarrondo, Commissioner, । Puerto Rico Homes Authority; Ernesto Juan FonfrÍM. Commissioner, Puerto Rico Homes Authority; Jesús T. Plftero, Member, Board of 1s Ofl- । । cine de Asunto" de Puerto Riño in Washington; Antonio J, Colorado, Member, Board of the Oflcln* of Puerto Rico Affairs in Wa "hington; Elmer M. Ellsworth, Member, Board of 1a Office of Puerto Rico Affairs in Washington; José .N Gándara, Member, Board Commissioners of the Capital; Sergio Cuevas Bustamonta, Member, Land Authority*; José López del Vaile, Registrador de la Propiedad de San Juan. See(Continued on page 12) g 1J | I US. ~ " ■ - "l ■*--"> _ ARNOLD TO PASS THROUGH SAN JUAN NEXT WEEK Mr. Edwin C. Arnold, Chief of the Division of Territories and Insular Foseeione" of the U.S. Department of the Interior, who has been in Santomá* since yesterday, Thursday, will return to the United States*, passing through Puerto Rico, at the conclusion of the Western India* Conference.