THE MUN DO
WEATHER FORECAST FOR BOY: Partly cloudy with showers this afternoon. High yesterday in San Juan was 88 degrees. Sunrise at $:07 in the morning and sunset at é:M in the afternoon. No sign of a thunderstorm.
C^JicLonfined
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII NUMBER 10686
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 24, 1946
Enterad ae second class matter, Poet Office, San Juan, P. R.
PRICE 5 Cents
Tito does not accept U.S. ultimatum but has promised to give satisfaction.
Russian demand in Dardanelles rejected Scope of U.S. and Turkish notes to Soviet Must take case to United Nations Denounce Russian aim as one to dominate in Middle East By EDWIN NEWMAN WASHINGTON. 23. (PU) - Govt. do. The United States, outlining a fundamental policy with regard to Ruala, yesterday rejected the" demands made by the Soviet to share with Turkey control of the Dardanelles waterway, An INS dispatch sent from Angora reports that the Soviet demand for participation in the defense of the Dardanelles was rejected today by Turkey in a note delivered to the Russian chargé d'affaires in Angora. The Turkish reply to the Soviet note delivered on August 7 also rejects a Russian proposal that only the Black Sea powers participate in negotiations for a revision of the Montreaux Convention on the governance of the Straits. Turkey expresses its readiness to discuss the revision of the convention only at an international conference of all interested nations. The Turkish note follows the lines of the American and British notes to Russia on the Dardanelles problem. It was drawn up after consultation with the British and American ambassadors. The U.S. note to Russia was carefully and calmly drafted. The United States expects that the matter will be the subject of prolonged and, perhaps, arduous negotiation among all the world powers. But I have learned from highly authoritative sources that the United States will stand firm in its basic position of opposition. The entire Administration, from President Truman on down, it is understood, is of the opinion that the Dardanelles question is of vital importance to the maintenance of peace in the Near and Middle East, and, therefore, in the world as a whole. And the demands set forth by Russia are regarded not merely as a p- ; d f do to share with another nation control of such strategic straits, but in reality they are actually for the purpose of dominating them, dominating Turkey, the whole area bordering them and, ultimately, the whole of Asia, < note was made public by the State Department yesterday at noon. It was delivered to the Soviet Charge of Soviet Affairs, Fe- * dor Orekhov, on Monday afternoon. That the United States does not agree that the control of the Straits should be a matter solely for the Black Sea powers, 2. That Turkey alone could be responsible for the defense of the Dardanelles, with the intervention of the United Nations Security Council, in the event of the intervention of the United Nations Security Council, in the event of the United Nations Security Council. That the question of the Dardanelles should be brought to the consideration of the United Nations, a fact ignored by Russia in its note to the (Continued on page 24).
The Peace Conference is likely to be called off
The latest developments are feared to be a threat to the smooth running of the assembly. General meeting in N. Y. would be facilitated.
By PIEBRE HUBS PARIS, 23 (INS). - It is probable that the Peace Conference meeting in this capital will suspend its plenary sessions for a "brief" period in order to prevent bitter controversies from arising at this time of tension in international relations.
tension in w Fernós will ask for I - I 1 increase in the price of sugar Together with Pinero he will go to the pertinent agencies. - Campaign was discussed Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern । will have to carry out, steps with- ¡ together with Governor Je- । sús T. Piftero, near the federal authorities, in order to have the price of sugar produced in Puerto Rico readjusted. A meeting was held yesterday in the offices of Mr. Fernós Isern so, with the purpose of । outlining the campaign to be carried out in the federal capital, in order to obtain an increase in the price of Puerto Rican sugar, so that said price will be "more in tune with the cost of living on the Island". The meeting was attended by representatives of the Sugar Producers Association, the Sugar Union, the cegetlsta sector presided by Mr. R. Barreto Pérez, and the Land Authority. P& the Union participated in the conference, its president the representative to the Chamber Pedro Vega Berrios, and Mr. Ramón Alvares; for the CGT sector Mr. Ramón Barreto Pérez; for the APA Mr. Femando Vlllamll, Jaime Annexy and Manuel del Valle; for the Land Authority, its Director, Mr. José Acosta VelarI (Continued on page 24)
Compendium of news
Tito roohaaed the ultimatum from loo ■aladeo Unidos but promised to give satisfaction. The case is still subject to investigation. If there was loss of life. The United States will take it to the Security Council. On the other hand, Yugoslavia released the detainees. o o o e Police raid on 7 Corra do Santurvo Street produced - do "únelas contra comerciante". ít . - o e e Yesterday radlearoa aousanlón do aaoataato in the first degree against daotate Carvajal, killer of Captain Jacinto Alvaros. M - Turkey. The United States or England have already rejected the Russian claim to establish their arms in the Dardanelles, sharing with the first nation the dominion of that region. - The Supply Administration has instructed that the Mavorlstao submit a list of its retailers. - The Pos Conference is likely to be suspended, in case recent events threaten its smooth course. '
AV explained yesterday how to compute -1 payment for the Ucence of the Vetorians. The Socialist Party will attend the installation of Mr. Piftero as Governor do Puerto Rico. ♦ - ♦ Increase of $7 per ton fixed on newsprint. - Russia prepares a protest against the exclusive dominion of the Panama Canal by the U.S. and the Sues. The US > and the Suez Canal by England. ♦ " * A U.S. Senate subcommittee report reveals that there were Nasi Party supporters in Puerto Rico. 0 0 0 Three test cases will be raised regarding the U.S. citizenship of Puerto Ricans and their residence abroad for more than 8 years. .... .. * In the month of July last m automobile accidents occurred, the largest number in San Juan, with IBS. 0 0 0 0 110,000,000 will be used here for airport facilities. , ,.
Reliable sources have stated that the suspension will probably be announced at a moment's notice. In the interim, the commission working out the details of the peace treaties could proceed without the harmful effects of the sharp disputes between East and West. It is feared that the U.S. ultimatum to Yugoslavia, Turkey's refusal of the Soviet proposal for wider control of the Dardanelles and the Palestinian situation may give rise to risky statements which could threaten the smooth running of the Conference. Suspension of the plenary sessions might also facilitate the meeting of the United Nations General Assembly, scheduled for September 23 in New York. The plenary of the Conference could take a vacation until the various committees have completed their work on preparing amendments and recommendations relating to the peace treaties. At the current pace of the Conference's work, the committees will need weeks, possibly months, to consider all the suggestions, amendments and protests pending before them. Another INS dispatch adds that the Peace Conference today continued consideration of the problem of whether the peace to be imposed on Italy in the treaty with that nation is to be conceived in terms of benignity or harshness. The political and territorial commission studying the peace treaty with Italy met today to resume discussions on the preamble to that document and then move on to the more serious question of Trieste. Italy is trying to shirk most of its responsibility for Mussolini's wars against the United Nations by proposing that the preamble be drafted in such a way as to absolve today's republican Italy from any connection with the activities of the Fascist government. This maneuver has aroused the opposition of several nations, among them little Ethiopia, which urges the United Nations to (Continued on page 24.)
SLAUGHTERING SUSPENDED IN THREE VILLAGES SAN GERMAN, 28- (By Samuel Irizarry, correspondent) -In San German, Ajas and Sabana Grande the slaughter of cattle has been suspended, it being alleged by the dealers that the" prices of $9 to $10 per arroba, of the cattlemen, do not permit the sale at the £ maximum prices of the OAP. 1 supplier José Lugo says that anyone who violates the maximums will be charged, and urges the Government to take immediate action to deal with this problem. ÁGS requests list of wholesalers' customers Instructions that Vicéns has directed to the local supply boards The General Supply Administrator, Mr. Antonio Vicéns Rioa, instructed the local supply boards to immediately request from the wholesale grocery merchants the filing of a list of their retail customers. The boards, Mr. Vicéns Ríos informed, must carry out the same steps and work in relation to the wholesale trade as is the case with respect to the retail trade. In the cases of wholesale-retailers, they must also submit a list of their customers for their retail business which, "with their consumer customers, separate from their retail customers, shall determine the percentage of their overall business for wholesale and the percentage for their retail business," the AGS chief instructed the boards to immediately make a list of the wholesalers in their respective communities, he added. He instructed the AGS chief to have the boards immediately make a list of the wholesalers in their respective communities, since it is the Administration's purpose to make allocations of staples to such merchants, so that they in turn distribute these supplies to the retailers, under the supervision of the local supply boards. "These allocations," it was reported, "will be made to the wholesalers in proportion to the quantities received by the Administration and corresponding to each community. In cases where Imports are made by the importing trade, the Administration will endeavor to have the same principle govern, and (b) (Continued on page 24)
Soviet to denounce the exclusive dominion of the Panama Canal
By Leon PEARSON PARIS, 23 (INS)- Circulators close to the Soviet delegation to the Pax Conference revealed today that the Moscow government will soon raise a protest against the exclusive domination of the Panama Canal by the United States and that of Gibraltar and the Suez Canal by Great Britain. These questions are said to be included in the reply prepared by the Soviet to the notes from Washington and London on the future regime of the Dardanelles. The United States and Great Britain rejected the Soviet proposal that Russia should share with Turkey the control of the defensive bases along the strait and that this control should be limited to these four powers in the Black Sea.
the four Black Sea powers. In the circuits cited above it is stated that the Soviet reply contains three points:- First: Russia does not agree that the control of the Dardanelles should be of an international character, since it considers this sea lane vital to its security, especially since other sea lanes, such as the Panama Canal, the Suez Canal and the Straits of Gibraltar, are controlled exclusively by the United States and Great Britain. * Second: International control of the Dardanelles through the United Nations would be ineffective if Turkey retained exclusive responsibility for the defense of the Dardanelles.
As a result of the ultimatum sent to him by the United States, which he refused, however, Marshal Tito, ruler of Yugoslavia, has ordered the release of nine airmen and passengers of the first American plane shot down earlier this month over Yugoslav soil. He has also given instructions not to fire on American planes flying over those routes. With this attitude of Marshal Tito, the two photographs above become topical. The one on the left shows Lincoln White (standing, wearing a tie), Press Officer of the State Department, reading to journalists the announcement concerning the last note delivered on Wednesday to Yugoslavia. On the right, Marshal Tito and Ambassador Richard C. Patterson, who delivered the ultimatum the day before yesterday, sip a drink during a hunt last February. (Photos Associated Press)
Bus strike affects transportation in San Juan
One hundred 'ninety independent buses stopped affecting 11,3,000 passengers. - CSP President Offers Efforts
One hundred and ninety independent buses out of the "two hundred and nine that had been operating as public carriers on the routes of the metropolitan area were stopped yesterday, according to a report obtained" by EL MUNDO at the "office" of the Independent Omnibus Association, due to the protest strike decreed by the drivers who operate these vehicles as a sign of protest against the communication sent by the Public Service Commission to the owners in the sense that the buses were to be used as public carriers in the routes of the metropolitan area, and that they were to be used as public carriers.
that the buses should be withdrawn from service. Since 5:00 p.m. last Thursday, the drivers began to abandon their work and yesterday, 190 buses were not running on the routes of the metropolitan area. The attitude adopted by the drivers was explained yesterday by Mr. Julio Colón, president of the Union of Independent Bus Drivers and Mechanics, who declared that "the drivers have abandoned their work in protest against the action taken by the CSP to eliminate the independent buses". At the assembly held by the Union last night, the drivers agreed to "request the Government to resolve the economic problem created for more than a thousand parents who will be left without work if the independent buses are paralyzed; to hold a protest demonstration and to plquete the CSP offices. Meanwhile, the stoppage of most of the independent buses significantly affected passenger traffic on the routes of the metropolitan area. Yesterday, the terminals and bus stops were crowded with passengers, while the vehicles of the Transportation Authority were leaving completely congested with passengers, while another large number of passengers were waiting for another bus. The Barrio Obrero Police arrested yesterday, at 8:30 a.m., the independent bus drivers Monserrate Maldonado Vázquez, Antonio Rivera Pagán, Miguel Hernández Sierra, Ramón Montañés Franco, Catalino Rivera, Rafael Morales Cancel, as well as Jesús Pagán Colón, who is not a driver, who were denounced for disturbing the peace. Ir Policía alleges that said drivers were on Borlnquen Avenue, near the Apolo Theater, in Barrio Obrero, disturbing the peace with threatening phrases and when the buses of the Transportation Authority stopped at said site, said that the strike of the Independent Omnibus "would end with firewood." The Corporal Robles reported that the guard Rafael Arsuaga, who intervened, together with Miguel Carbonell and Apolonio Galarza in the arrest of the drivers, said that "many passengers of the buses of the Transportation Authority were forced to abandon the vehicles due to the provocative attitude of the drivers." The intervention of the Barno Obrero Police allegedly took place at the beginning of the incident. The Barrio Obrero district chief, Rodriguez, distributed part of the force under his command in Jos sitio" of greater vehicle traffic where the guaguas pass, in order to avoid incidents. Up to 4 p.m., there were no new developments in the sectors of the police barracks of Loiza Street and Parada 19, respectively. (Continued on page 7)
। Reception to : Pinero are going to ! decide Tuesday I ■ - ' There will be a meeting that day 1 at Fortaleza to finalize the" details Next Tuesday at 3 o'clock in the afternoon and at Fortaleza, a meeting will be held to finalize the preparations for the reception and the Inaugural reception of the Governor ' designate, Jesús T. Piftero, To attend this meeting, the Executive Secretar- ■ rl" of Puerto Rico has extended invitations to the presidents of the Parade, Transit, Publicity and Decorating Committees. To ■ this meeting, several officials of the Government and the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muftoz Marín, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Mr. Francisco M. Susoni, have also been ■ invited. - The committees organized to date are as follows: Stopping Committee: Col. Brainard S. Cook, of the . (Continued on page 24).
l --. i > Postponed the action of the r b । workers of SIA i .They will wait for the return of ¡ Muñoz de la Isla to - ask him to intervene I Postpone for now the action . they would take in the event > that the discrepancies between the directors of the Water and Sewer Service and the } The union, which was formed yesterday, after a conference held with Dr. Francisco M. Susoni, Speaker of the House of Representatives, agreed to dl- . this decision of the employees and workers of said agency. This decision of the employees of the SIA is due, according to a note authorized yesterday by Mr. Sergio Bullan Baez, to the impossibility of ct (Continued on page 24).
I Fate still unknown ( of those shot down on the 19th Case still subject to investigation. - Byrnes will take it to UN Council if they prove there was loss of life Po7 JOHN REICHMANN International News Service Correspondent WASHINGTON, 23.-(INS). - Belgrade radio declared today that, since the American airmen have already been released from ports, Marshal Tito refuses to accept the US ultimatum.
In Puerto Rico there were followers of the Nazi party This is revealed in a report of a Senate subcommittee that investigated the matter More than 5,000 persons have been listed Names appeared in secret documents that Germany occupied By ROSE McKEE WASHINGTON, 23 (INS). -A Senate subcommittee revealed yesterday that more than 5,000 persons in the United States and Latin America, including Puerto Rico, were members of Hitler's Nazi Party. The chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on War Mobilization, Harley M. Kilgore, D-West Virginia, said the "five thousand Nazis" so far known to have lived in the Western Hemisphere were "but a fraction" of the party's total membership outside Germany.* He added that the total list is still in the process of compilation. 0 The Kilgore Report includes an Army document which debunks the myth that "good" Nazis joined the party only by force. i "An analysis of the rules for membership debunks these statements of 'I had to join by force. The list of Nazis includes a revision of a previous statement on party members in the United States and is the first information published on party members in South America, except for Argentina, for which a previous report was published. The subcommittee revealed that 149 names have been added to the list of ' Nazis in the United States, bringing the total known so far to 720. (The report reveals that it speaks of more than two thousand Nazis in Brazil and about one thousand in Chile. It says . that Nazis have also penetrated Bolivia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, . Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, , Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, . Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Pe- , rú, Puerto Rico, Samoa, Surinam, . Uruguay and Venezuela. Kilgore says , that the list has been compiled from photoi graphs made by the" War Department from Nazi Party files and cardholders discovered by the army in zone I (Continued on page 24.)
The Socialists will also go to the installation of Jesus T. Pinero. Pinero ; Its president, Lic. Bolivar Pagán, E says that the new Executive will be judged in the end by his actions as such 1 The president of the Socialist Party, Lic. Bolivar Pagán, in- ' formed yesterday that his collectivity will be represented by him and by the ' members of the same who wish to attend in the acts of installation * of seftor Piftero as Governor of the Island.
It will be recalled that Mr. Antonio Reyes Delgado, also leader of the Socialist Party, expressed himself yesterday in the sense that the Socialists should attend the act, and requested the reconsideration of the contrary attitude previously announced by the Socialists. k Mr. Bolívar Pagán explained the Socialist position saying the following: "I believe that to attend or not to attend the acts of Inauguration of Governor Piftero should not be an issue among Socialists. We have other" problems and work to do, and it is not worth wasting time and energy on such a passing issue. I always want to cooperate in everything in my power so that there will be no differences between socialists and so that we may all act in harmony, * and so that we may be able to face our responsibility and our place of honor in the opo' lition with strength. "I said yesterday all I had to say against Tugwell's recklessness in deciding to make his presence felt at the inau(Continued on page 24), A
-(Continued on page 2), which was delivered to him personally yesterday afternoon by U.S. Ambassador Patterson at his summer residence in Bled, while the U.S. Secretary of State has refrained from admitting that the reports on the release of the ten crew members of the plane forced to land in a hail of bullets on the 9th of this month constitute an answer to the above ultimatum. BELGRADE, 28. (INS)-Belgrade radio this afternoon quoted a dispatch from the Yugoslav News Agency as saying that Marshal Tito had decided to reject the ultimatum of the United States Government regarding the release of the airmen and passengers of the two American transport planes forced to land on Yugoslav territory. The dispatch said: "Following an invective made by the competent Yugoslav authorities, in connection with the American note, Marshal Tito decided to reject the ultimatum of the United States". (A dispatch from INS correspondent Lovett Edwards, dated Belgrade, reported last night that Yugoslavia released all the interned occupants of an American transport plane which had been forced to land on its territory, delivering them safely across the Itaian border last night, long before the forty-eight-hour deadline set by the Government of Yugoslavia. The seven Americans and two Hungarians who had been interned since August 9 were informed by the Yugoslav Government that they were released at eight o'clock yesterday morning, and in the afternoon they were offered free tickets by bus to the Italian border. Another Turkish passenger of the American C-47 transport, wounded in the back by Yugoslav bullets when it was forced to land, was unable to leave Ljubljana, where he is being held. The said nine freedmen ' arrived at Gorizia, in Italy, ano1 che, at 10:45 (4:45 p.m., ' New York time.) The release of the nine persons cited occurred hours before , the American ultimatum was delivered to Marshal Tito by Ambassador Patterson. It is believed, however, that Marshal Tito already had news of the ultimatum, either official or unofficial, before he received it from the Ambassador. The Washington Government intends to bring its dispute with Marshal Tito's regime over the forced landing of American Army transport planes on Yugoslav territory to a full conclusion. It is noted, at this point, that there are other details pending investigation, particularly the fate of the five people who were aboard the second plane shot down over Bled on the 19th of this month, in full view of Marshal Tito himself. It is possible that these five persons may have perished, although it is reported that two of them parachuted out of the plane, but there is no news of them, nor of the others, although it is known that the plane in which they were traveling was completely destroyed by the flames. Even supposing that Marshal Tito believes he has satisfied the demand contained in the ultimatum, the situation is far from being completely clear. It is hoped that the Secretary of State will not give up her firm stand, at least until official assurances are received from the Belgrade Government that such an incident will not be repeated. According to what is predicted in the authorized circuits, Tito will allege that the referred incidents occurred after the Government of Belgrade protested against certain violations of the Yugoslav border by the American airmen, without Washington having done anything to prevent their repetition. Meanwhile, diplomatic observers are trying to interpret the apparent step backward taken by Marshal Tito. From an American source in Paris, reports have come in that the Soviet Foreign Commissar Vyacheslari Molotov notified Tito that the Soviet Union is opposed to a question of the importance of this American-Slavic incident being raised in the Security Council. Kingsbury Smith, scribe : | (Continued on page 7) I