THE
WEATHER FORECAST FOR TODAY - Partly cloudy with scattered showers in the Interior this afternoon. The high yesterday was 94 degrees. Sunrise today at 9:00 A. M. and sunset at 9:15 P. M. No sign of thunderstorms.
r MORNING DAILY
. YEAR XXVIII NUMBER 10720
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SEPTEMBER 28, 1946
Entered ae second ola"""na* wr, Po "t Office, San Juan. P. B.
PRICE 5 Cents
Labor leaders pro Free Press * -
Barreto Perez says that regimentation does not fit in democratic system Opinion of Colon Gordiani, Nogueras Repudiate that could be put obstacles to the Press in Puerto Rico The organized labor d" Puerto Mico, by voice of the majority of its leaders, unanimously repudiated qytr 1* proposed regimentation of the Pronta. In statements issued by the labor leaders of the three labor unions, they expressed their opposition to the idea of limiting the freedom of the press. The two presidents of the two unions, Messrs. Ramón Troto Péres and Francisco Colón rdlany. "The two presidents, Ramon Troto Peres and Francisco Colon, expressed their condemnation of all the foolishness aimed at regulating the Ronoa. Said Mr. Barreto Péréz, who in addition to directing one of the cegotist sectors is a member of the Sonado Insular: "I consider that the regimentation of the Press, in a country where the democratic system of government is in place, is not appropriate. That would be fine for totalitarian lemons". For his part, Mr. Colon Gordlany declared: "I am against any attempt to put obstacles to the free expression of thought. The regimentation of the Press would be an act of tyranny against the right of the working people to be informed about the matters that concern them. Any legislative measure taken in this direction would be a step backward in a civilized society. The CGT will combat any attempt to limit book expression". The General Secretary of the Puerto Rico Workers Book Federation, Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera, when referring to the idea launched in a radio broadcast, to regulate the Press, expressed himself in the following terms: "The regulation of the Press is not wanted in any way by labor; and much less in the Institutions protected by democratic regimes. The Press must be kept free because it is an essential factor in the structuring of public opinion and must have such freedom of action that it makes possible the expression of ideas, for the constructive control not only of the Government, but also of public institutions. The organized labor movement, both in Puerto Rico and in the United States, has waged great struggles upholding this principle. Under American democracy there is no room for regimentation, which could hinder the free emission of the written word." □DI President of the Sindicato Azu* "grero and Representative to the House, Mr. Pedro Vega Berrios, when asked if he was in favor of the Idoa, answered categorically "No," and added: "On the contrary, I am asking for much more freedom of the Press, because osa is the guarantee of the workers, under the capitalist system." "As a worker dirlgonto I am against the regimentation of the Press and I think it is nonsense to try to muzzle the Ubre expression of thought," said Mr. Sergio Kullan Báoz. Secretary General of the sector ce got 1st a headed by Mr. R. Bórrelo Pérez; (Continued in náalna 24)
Agriculture reports 1 pink and] 1 red" bean quota from U.S.A. । Explains new rule to be followed L a i reserve ' had ' been suspended on October 1, 1945.... - By CHARLES McCABE United Press* Correspondent WASHINGTON, 27 (PU) - The United States Department of Agriculture announced today having set aside fifteen per cent of the pink and colored beans in the United States,-"for the benefit of Puerto Rico." The resumption of stocks . of dry beans, which hsblsn been suspended last year, has . been prompted by present and future shortages of this food, . which is essential to the portorrli quoña diet. The Department of Agriculture ( announced that the new policy, me- , , , dient by which re ( servings of beans are resumed, is spllca- ( ble to any person who eats- , , pro more than velnto thousand pounds of the , hsblchuelss mentioned, during any calendar month. Earlier this week, । according to a spokesman for the Department of the Interior, Puerto Rico was granted * 387,000 sacks of beans for the coming year. The Department of Agriculture notice stated that, as of October 1, 1949, all major bean buyers will be required to purchase a velnt percent of all peas and beans of the "great northern" type, fifteen percent of all pink and small red beans, and 33 and one-third percent of all "rod kidney" beans purchased directly from producers. t The stockpile of kidney beans was suspended on October 1, 1945, when it appeared that the needs of the military and other Government agencies could not be met by ( purchases on the open market. i The United States Department of Agriculture said today that the stockpile of kidney beans will continue, "but in a modified form". < Under the amended order, any- i , whoever buys 20,000 pounds < of the aforementioned kinds of hablchue* i the dry, is defined as a "em- i barcator of the pals." Each month, these i । "shippers" must report their purchases from producers and other "shippers" to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Within 30 days i i i after reservations, such < shippers must offer < U.S. bean number 2 or better grade 'to the Government schedule or to "an ( authorized shipper." , . Authorized buyers in- , clude persons who have contra- ( (Continued on page 24.) .
ivununus vn *- y""*""" - W.. - | -T"" ' ¿ --■ -- ■ 1 T i Compendium of news.
Juan VásquM Ruáros, farmer of Coros"!, was sentenced yesterday to serve eight years in prison for the death of Alfredo San Miguel. - The case of the fixed rutea was raised to the Governor. - Before the I AC I ask for a case roeiMéa on the air routes. Oleo that coa rule 90 reflects the policy of the two great U.S. parties, that * Tfdnroi workers are pronounced to regulate the Press in Puerto Rico. e or e They do not discount the Ucencia do 11 oven and other period" sa quo did not hold in RrvwiOt - e - * Federal Agriculture reports that oo has reserved a quota of pink and red beans from the United States i for the Island. 0 0 0 0 -e The Sons of Arrodilla society pays medaño tribute in that eluded to the Director do EL MUNDO. - o e El Bauoo do Ponto will open a branch in New York on dio i do octet* do instnkto on the
Broad Street. ' * ' ' i Veterans of FX approved rveolurion in favor of lude- 1 pendency. ( Can night oo the elimination * final do liftuento of poto. - - - - t Cachorreo and Aaulwi to be t crucial tomorrow at the Encobar, - - - - JPC explains how to place * orders copper sale do wood. < In ol referendum of lawyers, Borinquen Marrero, C. Ruis Nasario and Ri- * cardo LaCosta obtained a majority. I - - - - - 1 In all, 19,999 of the Vetarans were employed before entering the service, and - Farmer Pedro Romero Ramiros, of Comerio, was exonerated by a jury. - - - Hoopltalisadoa seis caeos sospa- i ehosos do pollo. - - - - । - i Multes Marín denied yesterday that he had said that in a plebiscite < on status the portorrique- ' fies would vote one to nine in favor of Independence. seo ' Irlarto thinks that the Island Auditor should refuse to pay ho- t norarios do Forte" to force the courts to determine the validity or nullity of the < contract. í
Piñero to send Campos del Toro's resignation to Truman, telling him to accept it; Chambers to meet at the end of October.
Banco de Ponce I opens branch I in New York - I It will begin operations on Broad Street on the first of October ; The purposes (le i boricua entity i Hopes to serve the colony of the Island and the commerce of P. R. Pnr ARTUrTTcASTRO JR, Rrdsctor of EL MUNDO PONCE, 27. - Setting a precedent in the advancement of private institutions, the Ban- I co de Ponce will open a branch office at 67 Broad Street, International Telephone and Tele- I graph, Co, in New York. For some time now, pressured by the needs of local commerce as well as those of our resident- - -Idents in New York, the Bank of Ponce had been studying the possibility of establishing itself in New York, considering that a large part of the commercial operations that take place between the Island and the Continent are carried out in New York.
Island and the Continent take place in New York. In addition, the constant growth of our colony in the first city of the world, demands a "banking cycle that responds to the psychology of our residents. The success of this branch and the rapid and growing change in the air comuiücaelon between San Juan and the United States, in particular the direct service between San Juan and New York, which has brought our two towns so close together, were the decisive factor that induced the Puerto Rican banking institution to crystallize its cherished project. The President and Manager of the Bank, Mr. Pedro Juan Rosaly, and other directors of the aforementioned company, made a meticulous study of the possibilities of that trade, of the banking laws of the State of New York and convinced that their action would have to succeed, they requested and obtained the authorization of the Treasurer of Puerto Rico and of the Banking Department of New York for a license to operate an agency of the Bank of Puerto Rico in New York. That license has just "been granted and the Bank will establish its offices" in one of the most central points of New York's financial district, occupying part of the ground floor of the International Telephone A Telegraph Co. building at 87 Broad Street. This location, which forms part of the heart of New York, is being suitably fitted up in keeping with "modern" requirements in this line of business, to place it on a par with the most modern establishments in the banking field. It will be in charge of the agency of the Bank of Ponee in New York, in (Continued on page 24")
: Dr. Gándara no : wishes to head ; Depto. Health i Dr. Fernós Isern (lió his ! recommendation in favor ; <td dpetor Marchand I En' sources' digna" drí greater r credit "e reported yesterday that the new- - vo Comlalonndo Rcaldente, doctor, ' ■ Antonio Fernó" laern, has recomen- - given to Governor Piftcro the nom- ■ bre of Dr. Angel M. Marchand to fill the position of Commissionera- i ■ do of Health of Puerto Rico. Equal-!] i mind "e Informed that the other can- i - didate for Health Commissioner, i ) Dr. José N. Gándara, whom i - I endorsed by the leadership of the i I I majority party maintains his attitude of । - not accepting the position. < - To an editor of EL MUNDO who recently questioned him about his willingness to accept the position of Commissioner of Health, Dr. Gándara stated that he was not interested in the position, and that he preferred to continue to dedicate himself to the private practice of his profession. । 1 Dr. Marchand has counted on several occasions during the last" days with Governor i * Piñero and it is assured that "his nom- < - bramlento will be announced within '- the next few days. Among others, persons backing Marchand, , 1 besides the Resident Commissioner, ¡ - are Dr. Rafael Picó and pro- I - pío Gándara. e On the other hand, it has been reported i 1 that the President of the Sonado has not 1 * made objection to Dr. Marchand ' and that if the other ' 1 candidate -w*l* Dr. Gándara -h i accept the appointment of the prl-l mero. - ■- ■ । - - -
JPC explains how to place ; orders for timber sales ¡ * - Refers to the requirements to be met by , Local dealers. - Disposal of ' timber received for consumption on the Island ■■■■ i
The local director of the Civil Production Board, Mr. Ramon Montanor, explained yesterday, at the request of EL MUNDO, the regulations issued by the administration in Washington regarding the disposition for sale, by local distributors, of their own wood for the construction of houses. This explanation was made by Mr. Montaner in response to inquiries received from local dealers, forwarded to this newspaper, about the new restrictions enacted by the federal government,
> On the manner in which lumber dealers can place certified orders for the construction of residences, Mr. Mon- ( i tañer said the following: "The dealer can place certified orders for the construction of residences. - "The dealer may place or- । i densa* monthly, either with - a mill, with another dealer in ( - lumber, or with a representative of r i a mill, for the following cani, tldades, whichever i greater: 1 Ten per centum of the total of its own lumber for residential consarucclon which it had in stock on January 1, 1942, or for two va- , ¡genes of its own lumber for residential construction during any calendar quarter, at > the rate of not more than one carload in any month of the quarter." ( With regard to the disposl- ( ' clone of timbers received, mani- ] ' tested the head of the JPC as follows- ] ' teJ < . "Of all shipments received on the basis of certified orders, taking as a basis ten per cent of the stock" in January 1, 1942, the distributor is obliged to establish for an indefinite period a reserve of 80 per cent of the timber received. The remaining 20 percent I may be sold by it- " ' ' to the public freely. i "Any distributor receiving imported ma- > dera from abroad, pro- < (Continued on page 2D h L
, ■■ T ... ■... ■■■■ - - Marrero, Ruiz Nazario and La Costa, candidates of the College.
Yesterday morning, the Governing Board of the Puerto Rico Bar Association held an extraordinary meeting to scrutinize the referendum of said body, in which it voted to select candidates for the vacant seat on the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, due to the resignation of Judge Jorge Luí" Córdova Díaz. After the Board conducted the scrutiny, the following candidates received the highest number of votes, which will be submitted to the Board: Borinquen Marrero, 302 votes; Clemente Ruiz Nazario, 182 votes; Ricardo La Coata, 182 votes; and Ricardo La Coata, 182 votes,
182 votes; Ricardo La Coata, 139 votes. This slate will be submitted to the Attorney General of the United States, President Truman, the Secretary of the Interior of the United States, the Governor of Puerto* Rico and the Supreme Court. Only 410 lawyers voted in this referendum, or less than half of the Bar's enrollment of 920 members. At the time of the vote, the Bar Association was crowded with members of the public who came to witness the event.
- . M Nazi defendants visited by relatives in Nuremberg - I- I 111 ■ While the International Tribunal at Nuremberg is passing sentence against the Nazi leaders on trial for war crimes, the accused are allowed to receive a visit from a close relative. In the photo above, Joachim Von Ribbentrop's wife (second from left to right), wife of former German Foreign Minister Joachim Von Ribbentrop, enters NuremOerga prison with her three children to visit Von Ribbentrop. The photo on the right shows the wife of banker Hjalmar Fcacht (left) and their two daughters entering the same prison where Schacht is being held. (Photo" P. AJ
Iriarie believes the Auditor should refuse to pay Abe Fortas Arí, he says, Ion claimants would be forced to go to court and let the courts judge -the value of the contract Que rl Auditor "nqu" count on the citizens of Puerto Rico pnra flicallzar lo" disbursement* of public funds, after the approval by the Legislature of Acts 1 and 2 of 1946, and that said official must go before the trlbunale" to have this" rfstnmilnew In vnllrlez or nullity of the contract entered into by the Bureau.
aeierminun m vauaes o nunuaa uri do Puerto Rico en Wáshlngton with, the law firm of Arnold A Forte", before the said law firm was paid the amounts claimed" for alleged services rendered to the Island Government, said yesterday the President of the Progressive Republican Union, attorney Celestino Triarte, when referring to the contract with Forte that caused the resignation of the Attorney General, attorney Enrique Cam- 1 pos del Toro. j" Mr. Triarte's textual words were the following: "Regarding the Arnold A Portas contract I maintain my opinion "n- । tcrlorly expressed. It is null and void for having been authorized by the Puerto Rico Office in Washington, D.C. without authority to do so, v "Regarding the appeal, the problem that motivated it, i.e., the suspension of the payment to Mr. Arnold A. Fortas, has been resolved. "The Auditor may now pay to ( Arnold A Fortas, if he wishes to do so, the amounts claimed by them, f based on the resolution of the Go- t hernndor. But, in my opinion, he must refuse to pay in order to force the claimants to go to the courts to determine the validity or nullity of the contract. R "After the passage of Tm'c laws 1 and 2 of 1046, restricting the right that until then the courts of Puerto Rico and the United States recognized to the cUl*!The Puerto Rican citizens have the only guarantee that the citizens of Puerto Rico have to audit the disbursement of public funds that have been assigned to them by law."The Puerto Rico Office in Washington," said Mr. Iriarte, "has been organized to carry out the studies to "disseminate information about Puerto Rico and its problems" in the United States, as well as for the use of insular and federal government agencies, and to lend its advice and cooperation to Puerto Ricans residing on the mainland, and to provide adequate information to all interested persons interested in the trade, and to facilitate their participation in the development of the island.) ¡n
BMW The meat supply remains unresolved During the Remana, no product was received from Santo Domingo The problem of meat supplies remains unresolved, reduced by the demands of the industrialists for a price increase. Practically no meat is being sold in the retail establishments in the metropolitan area. The Puerto Rico Retailers Center reported yesterday that the problem is of an insular nature, "and since several weeks ago, meat has disappeared from the Puerto Rican table". The president of the entity, Mr. Ramón Nieves Alicea, said that he has been insisting with the OAP to solve this problem, "but so far this agency has remained deaf to the demands of the trade and consumers". During the week no meat from the Dominican Republic was reclaimed in Puerto Rico. Last week, some" local distributors only received 80 resea, suspending shipments for the current week. There is no certainty that such operations can be resumed in normal quantities, according to Mr. Nieves Alicea, "due to the fact that the Dominican Government is waiting for the signature of the pending contract with the Supply Administration. Even if such a contract is signed, it does not seem that the meat received will be sufficient for the needs of all consumers". Commercial circuits are of the opinion that for the time being the hope that shipments of meat from the United States can be resumed is very remote. The situation in that country is extremely critical, with meat being quoted at unprecedented prices.
Limits for initial appointments in National Guard
The National Guard Bureau in Washington, in accordance with the policy of the War Department, has instructed that in initial appointments for National Guard officers, no candidate under 21 years of age or over 62 years of age shall be examined. Nor shall he be examined unless his age is such as to permit him to serve at least one year before his Federal recognition is terminated, under the age rule given in the table hereinafter inserted. 1 ' An exception is made for aviation cadetship, in which no candidate for commission W
- As second lieutenant will be over 27; for first lieutenant, over 32; for captain, over 37; for commander, over 40; for lieutenant colonel, over 43, and for colonel, over 45. - An air officer will be considered above the maximum age for the grade on the day he reaches the prescribed age, and his recognition will end on the day he reaches the prescribed age. The algulent ea is the edai dea table for loa different ranks: ) Aviation: 2nd lieutenant, 31; 1st lieutenant, 36; captain, 41; i commander, 44; lieutenant colonel, > 47; colonel 49. t (Continued on page 24) w
He did not say whether he would ask for a salary increase for employees He favored better remuneration But it is for the Legislature to say how it would be done, said For E, Comba" Guerra Governor Plfloro told reporters this afternoon, during his weekly conference, that he would send the resignation of Enrique Campos del Toro from his post as Attorney General to the President of the United States, with his recommendation that it be accepted, "and I will give my reasons". Asked if he was proposing his recommendation of a candidate to fill the vacancy of Campea del Toro, Mr. Piñero stated that "that is an appointment of the President's concern; but he may request my recommendation. The resignation of Campos del Toro will be effective on the last day of this month, therefore, since that date, Lula Negron Fernandez will act as interim director of the Department of Justice. Legislature The extraordinary session of the Legislature shall be convened for the end of October or beginning of November. To our question as to whether he proposed to recommend to the special session of the Legislature an increase in the salary of the teachers, he replied: "I am in favor of the public employees being better remunerated, taking into consideration that the living conditions have changed due to the war. It is incumbent upon the Legislature to say how this can be done, as far as teachers and other public employees are concerned, "For special consideration I will recommend the approval of a new Civil Service law, based on studies made by the Commission itself. Health. As to the vacancy in the Department of Health, the Governor said that "I am still considering different candidates. And I cannot determine if by Wednesday, when the Senate meets in executive session, I will have a candidate to submit," Sugar " Before beginning his conference with reporters, the Governor held another with a delegation from the Sugar Industry Workers Union, presided over by Representative Pedro Vega. The conference, according to what the Governor reported, was about the request for an increase in the price of sugar and salt for all workers in the industry for the next harvest. Upon leaving his conference with the Governor, representative Pedro Vega told reporters that "if a fair increase is not achieved for the workers, there will be a strike in the industry for the next harvest. Governor Piñero informed that he had spoken with the employers on the same subject and that it had been agreed that both parties would appear, together with representatives of the Government of Puerto Rico, before the U.S. Secretary of Agriculture. "I have been informed," he said, "that the federal Department of Agriculture would like these representatives to arrive in Washington on October 2 or 3 at the latest, and I am now charged with coordinating to see if it is possible for all the parties to be there by that date. The Resident Commissioner and representatives of the Puerto Rico Office in Wáshlngton will accompany the delegates to their conference with the Secretary of Agriculture." "Theft" of employees The Governor said that several government agencies are "stealing" employees from one another and that, for that reason, he has requested that before contracting the services of an employee, he must first obtain a permit from the department or agency in which the employee is interested, municipal courts We bring to the attention of! Governor the spectacle that he witnessed yesterday morning in the different courtrooms of the Municipal Court of San Juan and the Governor told us that he already had information on the matter and that the Department of Justice is accelerating the steps so that said courts may be moved as soon as possible to a place with the best possible facilities. The Governor announced that he has tentatively set October 11th to invite the Executive Council to visit Culebra, and that they will remain in Culebra until the 13th. Said the Governor that in Culebra there is no current to the Gov. of Culebra's meeting rooms.
Affirms unalterability of E. l'i's policy
)■■■■ JAMES F. BYRNES United States Secretary of State. He affirmed in Paris that Washington's current foreign policy will be the same no matter which political party is in power. Muñoz repudiates statement attributed to him He made no prediction as to the result of the plebiscite on the Island The President of the Senate and of the Popular Democratic Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, yesterday rectified the statement attributed to him by a continental journalist when he put in the mouth of the Puerto Rican leader the affirmation that, if a plebiscite on the political problem were held on the Island, the Puerto Ricans would vote one to nine in favor of Independence. The statement rectified by Mr. Muñoz Marín was authorized by the American journalist Truman Felt, correspondent of the "S't. LoulsSta- Times, who was on the Island when the Waterman Air Lines brought to Puerto Rico, as their guests, a group of journalists from the mainland. Our Washington correspondent, William J. Dorvllller, reproduced in his column the version attributed to Mr. Muñoz Marin. On the island, the secretary general of the Puerto Rican Pro-Statehood Association, Mr. Luis Ferré, then addressed a letter to Mr. Muñoz Marin asking him to clarify the scope of his statement. To this letter Mr. Muñoz Marin replied as follows:- "I received your letter of September 17. It is not my custom to make estimates of the outcome of a plebiscite on political status in Puerto Rico. It is not my custom for two reasons: (1) Because my commitment to the people, even though, strictly speaking, it does not require me, induces me not to make >or what may appear to be personal propaganda in favor of any political status before such a prohle- . 1 the people of Puerto Rico in specific terms by the Congress of the United States: and <2) Because it is practically impossible to judge how the people of Puerto Rico will vote in a status plebiscite without knowing beforehand the conditions of economic relationship offered by * the vote of the people under each form of political status. Nor is it my custom to continually check the Informado-1 nes of the Press, especially of । the foreign Press, which in writing often does so on the basis of quick and confusing impressions. On this occasion I rectify the information of the journalist alluded to by you, regarding electoral predictions about a plebiscite on the political status, because it is about the consultation that you are making to me". When making the request to Mr. Muñoz Marin, Mr. Ferró stated that he was addressing it to him because he considered that "such statements could destroy the excellent work of public trust that Mr. Muñoz Marin has been doing so far". And Forré added: "You (Muñoz Marín) won our confidence as a sector that I ask for the State because at all times you refused to make predictions about which was in your opinion the sector of greater strength in the public opinion of the Island." - .