THE WORLD
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
38 Pages 5 Ctvs. 2 Sections
DAILY MORNING
THE MORNING
- YEAR XXVIII
Let's support the men who made the Victory possible, J Empréstito- de la Victoria.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 30, 1946
Entered as second clan* matter. Post Office. Han Juan, P. B.
NUMBER 10541
Insist on Bread Crisis
► President Association of Bakeries says situation has not changed Flour shortage in many bakeries Urgese tomar medida* para evitar un cierre en toda la isla A! comment yesterday the* declaraclone" of the president of the Cámara ríe Comercio. señor Fillpo L. de Mostos, to the effect that the situation with respect to local wheat flour stocks "should not be considered alarming if it is taken into account that during the last twelve days 29,-MO 200 pound sacks were received, virtually equivalent to the normal consumption of a month", the president of the Puerto Rico Association of Bread Bakeries Owners, Mr. Santiago Plftero, stated that "there has been no change in the situation that I denounced in EL MUNDO regarding the bread shortage that will arise next week due to the lack of flour in the bakeries of San Juan and the Island". "The Association is ready to buy immediately" -he added. - It is also willing to accept that, once this product is acquired, it will be distributed equitably among all the owners of flour mills in Puerto Rico, according to the quotas established by the Office of Price Administration". Mr. Plñero added that he is "surprised by the news, by the fact that the situation that I denounced days ago, instead of improving, has worsened". He said that he has in his possession "numerous communications from the owners of tahonas of San Juan and the island, alleging that the shortage of hominy will force them to suspend their operations in the next few days, if the prevailing situation is not solved". Visit to the bakeries 7 An editor of EL MUNDO, at the invitation of the president of the Association of Tahoneros, visited yesterday several bakeries of the metropolitan area, verifying that the problem of the shortage of flour for the elaboration of bread has been affecting these bakeries, and as a result, the consumer people. He was also able to verify that the bakeries, especially those that supply bread to a considerable population of the poorest and most populous neighborhoods, have shortened their production because they only have enough in stock to meet the demand for the next five or six days. Very few bakeries have enough flour in stock to operate for a reasonable period. Even those that are currently producing bread at maximum capacity, and which have a one or two month supply, indicated their pessimism that the situation could normalize in the next few weeks. The investigation carried out yesterday in the field confirmed the information advanced by EL MUNDO that there will be a crisis in the whole bread industry next week, if measures are not taken to avoid it with all speed. / The visit to the bakeries of San San (Continued on page 22)
B o L E T 1 N E S
NEW YORK, 2". (PU) - The Security Council of the United Nations called the Iranian plenipotentiary, Huaheln Ala, back for a meeting, after which he continued to listen to the presentation of his country's case, with the Soviet representative absent. The Council met after having held a secret session of an informal nature, which lasted 15 minutes. None of the delegates made any public reference to the meeting. Huaheln Ala began the presentation of the Iran-Russia conflict from his seat in the front row. It is reported that there is no possibility of a telephone call from the Russian delegation, as the first item on the agenda is the Iranian issue. Ala, addressing the Security Council, said: "I have no information from official or other sources that the Soviet troops have left the territory of Iran", adding that he was not aware of "movements of Soviet troops from one part of his country to another". Huaheln Ala stated that he had no information about any movement of Russian troops from Iran to Russia, calling on the Security Council to obtain "official assurances" from the Soviets.
"official assurances" from the Soviets that they would withdraw such troops,' since "no agreement can be reached while Soviet forces are still there " Following the statement by the Iranian delegate, the United States representative, Jumes R Byrnes proposed that the Council ask both Iran and Russia to clarify their statements, which were contradictory, and report back to the Council next Tuesday. ,. .. - (PU)- The Supreme Court of Justice today annulled the title conferred by the Senate on ex-Marshal Pletro Badogllo, as being among the 'criminal fascists and collaborationists" The Court announced, moreover, that Count Pletro Acquarone, who served as Instrument for' the formulation of the armistice and the deposition of Benito Mussolini, has been acquitted. ATLANTIC CITY, 2" (PU)- Richard T. Leonard, director of the Ford Division. Leonard, director of ta Ford Division of the Union of Obre1 roa of ta Automobile Industry, affiliated with the Congress of Industrial Organizations, was elected, vi1 cepresldenta of that organization by a majority of 49 votes. "NEW YORK, 29th (PU) - The temperature at S o'clock this afternoon was: New York, New York, 29th.
i today was: New York, 71 degrees: ( hlcagn , 99 degree*, Washington 64 degrees and Miami, 94 degree*. RICHMOND. Virginia, 29. (PU)- The governor of the state, William Tuck, today induced into the State Militia 8,500 employees* of the Virginia Electric Power Company, which was threatened to strike over this*; but *his action has been challenged by the American Federation of Labor, which has described it as "involuntary servitude". Seeking to end the threat of an electric power "brownout" in the state, Governor Tuck sent notice* to the employees* vhrons of I* said utility that they* had been recruited* "into the service of Is community, to execute the law, which requires you to furnish electric boiling to the people of Virginia". Tuck said in the order that he was acting under powers conferred upon him by the* section* of the Virginia Military Code. President William Green, of the American Federation of Labor, voiced Labor's challenge in Washington to the Governor's action, which he said involved "the principle of involuntary servitude, by compulsion of the people of Virginia to provide electric boiling to the people of Virginia.
WILL BE ASSAULTED
- "j James H. Doolittle ■ Gen. Doolittle is i expected aguí ¡ Friday 5 í I I --, -' - - ■ Reception will be held for "(chief of the famous ' air raid ' on Tokyo city ' Gen. .tames H.' Doolittle, commander of the famous air raid on Tokyo in April 1942 and commander of the no less famous Eighth Air Force which defeated the Nazi forces, will arrive in Puerto Rico next Friday, April 5, as announced by the president of the Shell Oil Com- ■ pany in San Juan, Mr. Enrique Bird. According to the information, the American general will remain on the island until the day after his arrival, when he will continue his trip to St. Thomas, Trinidad and other Caribbean points. Trinidad and other points of the Caribbean. In his ' visit he is accompanied by the assistant to the ■ administrator of the Aviation Department of the Shelf, Mr. J. S. Harria. Harria. It is e] purpose to prepare a - reception for General Doolittle, and '.for this purpose Mr. Bird is ■ getting in touch with the Insular, municipal and mi1 litary auto- ■ rlds to finalize plans per- ■ i Uñantes. J General Doolittle - who is coming to the Island in his own plane, a "Mitchell" B-25 bomber, of the same type used in the bombing of Tokyo - since his discharge - from the Army, January 5 of this - year, has held the position of vlcepfesi' dente of Shell, With this Com- - paftfa he held the position of Bdminis- - trator of the Department of Avia- ■ clon until!94O, when he was called - to serve in the armed forces. ■ In the field of aviation, Gen. Doolittle holds a pro- ■ minent position, having won several - awards for exploits performed. Among these feats are the following: He was the first to cross i - flight the United States in tlem- * po less than 24 hours, eeteMxrlen- - making a record in 1922, with 21 hours Jy 19 minutes: nine years later he broke this own record ha- ■ clinging the flight in 11 hours and quln- - ce minutes: the first to vote at '.a speed greater than .300 miles ■ per hour in airplanes for flight - sohre land: he was propellant,of the ■ flight" "blind" by making the prli mer landing without seeing the ground" in - October 1925 won the Schneider racing cup, in the "Interr national Seaplane Classic." In 1930. upon retiring from the Army ) and taking up his post with Shell, he coni' tlruited his aeronautical activities, s winning in 1931 the'Harman Trophy, s A year later he set a new world speed record For his 1942 feat bomhari deando to Tokyo, he received the Congressional Medal of Honor).
Muñoz will study the report on political status.
Of first intention believes document of the Tariff Commission contains a serious study of island economics.
The President of the Popular Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, when asked by an editor of this newspaper about the conclusions reached, in relation to our political status, by the United States Tariff Commission after a study of more than two years, (the document was made public by EL MUbfljo, in yesterday's edition) authorized the following "I will study with great care the data presented in the report of the United States Tariff Commission. I believe it is a serious study of the economic realities of Puerto Rico. I will not attach much importance to the political conclusions of the report, because that is a policy task to be decided between the Puerto Rican leadership and the leadership of the U.S. Congress and the U.S. Administration. A policy maker can find ways to adapt to whatever economic reality he or she has to deal with in order to achieve his or her goals. In simple terms, I believe the problem is the following: -The people of Puerto Rico do not want to live in a colonial system. It is not in the interest of the people of the United States, from the point of view of their international influence for peace, to have colonies.
The Report of the Committee on Tariffs points out in effect that the economic reality of Puerto Rico makes it difficult to achieve the desires of the people of Puerto Rico and the identical interests of the people of the United States on the basis of traditional concepts of the relationship between political status and economic reality. * Therefore, what is incumbent upon the Puerto Rican leadership and * upon the leadership of the United States, in the face of this problem, is to seek creatively the means of realizing the desire of Puerto Rico and the " Equal Interest of the United States, * within the economic realities that exist. . This means that the task . . both of the one and of the other, and is what we might call in . . creative statemanship", . creative orientation. The United States and Puerto Rico have to resolve the colonial problem. They have to solve it within the economic reality that exists. I am sure that the creative orientation will find the means to solve it. ) In finding it, it will have done a great service to other areas of the world which are undoubtedly facing similar problems."
Figueroa fought the rejection (Justices La Costa and Romani He reiterated that the law reorganizing the San Juan Court was but a means of politically rantigating Ambon by removing them from office.
The following speech was delivered by Dr. Leopoldo F'gueroa. in the Senate of Puerto Rico, on the occasion of the rejection by this body of the appointments of the district judges of San Juan. Marcelino Romanj and Rica) do La Costa: "It has no merit in life to call oneself a predictor of a fact, after the fact, without first having predicted the realization of the same. Thus, it does not "constitute any guess to determine the sex of a being, if this is expired after the act of birth. The merit would be, if this were possible, to determine it while the fetus lives in the maternal womb. The latter is what the legislative monster called P. del S. 509. which we foresee, has stepped on with the birth of the fetus. The motive of its approval was to legislatively dismiss, in a fulminating manner, two of our most worthy judges, against whom no taint can be pointed out that would have tarnished their clear-cut role as magistrates of the law, in their august and upright mission of imparting justice. i Indeed, as you consummate, i with our protest, the judicial outrage । signified by the approval ■ of P. of S. 509, we made the "following explanatory vote, which we take from the minutes of the session of - less than twenty hours ago: "We have voted against the provision of Senate 509 "To reorganize the District Court of San . Juan," on the ground that said . bill obeys no other motive - than that of inflicting, the popular parliamentary majority, the punishment of - impeachment, by legislative means, on " two judges: Mr. Marcelino Romanía and Mr. Ricardo La Cos-
t, for having ruled against the point of view of the Popular Party, in the P. E. G. case, notwithstanding the fact that it had been sustained by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, the Beatón Circuit Court and the Supreme Court; and the other, for having ruled, also against the partisan political criteria of the Popular Party, in the case of the Agricultural Company. "We understand further, that in this case, there has been so much festination in ta processing and passage of this bill, because of U Senseless eagerness on the part of this parliamentary majority to take advantage of ta auxencla to-day of Governor Tugwell, The Acting People's Governor, who is to replace him, will be able to act in a timely manner to pass this monstrous Senate Bill 509 into law and thus avoid the risk that might arise should a new Governor be quickly appointed for 1" I "la. Thus, the aforementioned legislation could thus fail, "These are the fears that lead the parliamentary majority to commit the legislative monstrosity that represents the approval of S. 509, against two proven judicial officers, honest and clean of any taint, whose only crime, in our opinion, has consisted in being both faithful interpreters of the law, within the dizziness of justice". What we have just read, we vttlclnajjios ras ago; and in such a short lapse of time passed, we feel the immense pain and the heartbreaking sadness ¡ of the soul, to see that unfortunately for the good name of the l ... Legislature of Puerto Rico and for the outrage of the judicial power in our Island, our prediction is fulfilled, with this act being a poor sample of our preparation for the exercise of our own government. The macabre legislative act that takes place in this hour of pain for the cleansing of the legislative procedures, on the part of this Senate, proves to satiety . what not twenty hours ago from this same site we predicted when we said that the approval of the bill to reorganize the District Court of San Juan, had the sole purpose or fundamental motive of inflicting as punishment to the judges Romanl and La Costa, the removal from office that they occupy as judges of the District Court of San Juan. The judges of the District Court of San Juan, because they have not yielded to the illegal purposes of the Popular Party, in connection with the "Emergency War Act and the Agricultural Company Act". My vatli- cinlos then, are fulfilled a- *. tes of mediating a day in which vc- * mos, that in so short a number of e hours, not only becomes sn law --1*1 Bill 509, but is sent |.'an |.'before this Senate for judicial decepie taclon, lo* do* do* juec?s Ro.| mani and La Costa with respect to t- whom we told this High Chamber that they were the móvhe" what determined the violent ó clon of the Senate's ill-fated Bill 509 e. q Before twenty ho|. ras had elapsed and also as in *1 cutof j Bill 509. more than high* hours | of the night, in this" prime" as ho|a'ras of the early morning, come to the (Continued on page 22)
The Guard recommends that food rationing be reinstated in the US.
Russian officer arrested for espionage R ■ *11 ? ' ' '' ■- .' 'y . 4 '/.<- ' > /. - / . _ Tentant Nicolai Gregorovlch Red In (in uniform e), Navy mus, n who "e arrested in Portland under acuNRclone of espionage, is escorted into the, federal building in that city by Marshal Jack Oaufleld (Left) as he was led into ta presence of Robert A. Ixiedy. Redln was bailed at 925,000 pesos. (Associated Press Photo)
Work to begin Monday on Alien Street Director of Public Works announces how traffic will be diverted - ; - - - - The director of the Public Works Division of the Capital City Government, Mr. Salvador T. Caro, reported yesterday that work on Alien Street will begin on Monday. He informed yesterday that the work of reconstruction of Alien Street will begin next Monday, April 1, and for this reason a new traffic detour has been established for motor vehicles in several sections of Sin i' Juan. The new provisions will re- 7 rotate "according to the order in which construction proceeds until 1 > the completion of these works" The disYlo of traffic during the reconstruction of the various tra- 1 1 1 mo" of Alien Street, comprisi- 1 (Continued on- page 22) |
I Government bond issue to be started in July, 1947 ' It is expected to cover the sum of $17,000,000 to finance the cost of the public improvements outlined for that year The Government bond issue to raise additional funds for the purpose of meeting the expenditures contained in the Economic Program for the fiscal year 1947-48 will be started early in July, 1947, it was reported yesterday. It is expected that the Government of
Puerto Rico is expected to incur obligations for this item, on said date, amounting to $17,250,000. This additional amount is considered essential to continue the governmental program and to finance the cost of the governmental "public improvements" approved to be executed in said fiscal year. The surplus of public funds, at the beginning of the next fiscal year, has been estimated at $1,518,R69. It was estimated yesterday that a sum of $33,150,000, in addition to the Public Revenues, will be needed to cover (Continued on page 22.)
The Governor signed Senate Bill 352, which became Act 225, readjusting the salaries of adult teachers working with the Bureau of Adult and Extension Activities of the Department of Public Instruction. This is the culmination of efforts by the Bureau and the Department of Transportation to correct the error whereby adult teachers have been receiving for the past eight months a monthly compensation of only ten dollars when it should have been thirty dollars. i The Department of Instruction was working yesterday to readjust the adult teachers' salaries to pay the first part of the difference in their previous salary. In the course of (Continued on page 22.) | |
I I I..TH i r I m- -,I, -i i. -.i ■ mo '. . .... ■ - r. -n i n i . 1 ' - - - * - n J'J J - " - n'" - ' -i" ' 1 ' Muñoz and Susoni satisfied with I * í work of ('.amaras legislative ■ The latter hosted an agape for legislators ' in his office, attended by members of the ; minority. - Figueroa has voted 95% of measures.
In the early hours of yesterday morning, after । of having approved the proposed i ' budget in both bodies le- 1 - glslatlvos, the President of the Cá- I ' mara, Dr. Francisco Mr Susoni, i ' offered to all representatives 1 ' in his office, a champagne of ho- । - ñor. Almost all the Popular representatives attended, including Messrs. Quiñones Ellas and Fe-1 liú Pesquera, and the liberal Mr. Er- ' nesto Cádiz. Mr. Celestino Iriarte, representative of the Republican Union, excused his absence. The President of the Senate, Mr. Muñoz Marín, attended as a special guest. Among those present were a number of members of the Senate, including the leader of the Republican Union, Dr. Leopoldo Fí- । : gueroa. i Although there was no official toast, < ■ Mr. Muñoz Marín, in a tone of conversation rather than speech, said that he wanted to take advantage of this occasion to bid farewell to the other legislators at this legislative session and to express his satisfaction for the splendid work done by the Senate in the past year.
for the splendid work that the Houses have done this year. He said that in this session there had been less centralization in the conduct of legislative business, and yet the work had been "superior to that of previous years," and that democracy "is (Continued on page 22/
More bills signed by the Acting Governor
Acting Governor Manuel A. Pérez signed on Thursday night P. S. 173 (Act No. 22) allocating $850,000 for the "Fund for First Necessities -- Deposit Fund" and P. S. 2*" (Act No. 220) allocating $30(5,400 for the Committee for the Design of Public Works to prepare the plans* and ea-
■| pacifications for the 1* performance > of certain* public* works". 'l The Acting Governor' signed /also the* Uguiante* measures: ■ I P. of S. .38 (Act No. 221) raiding $81.00(1 for the construction I of a Government Center in ' Maricao, P. of S 44 (Act No. 222) aslg' nating $",000 for the organization (Continued on page 22.) * > >
Considers it necessary to humanity Addresses message to Peron urging him to help starving Hoover continues tour of Europe In Czechoslovakia 1.5 million children threatened by consumption ATLANTIC CITY, 29th (PU). - The former Mayor of New York, FloréTlo LaGuardia, on taking over today as General Director of UNRRA, sent congratulations to Colonel Ju "n Domingo Perón, and said that he now had the opportunity to make Argentina cooperate with the democracy of the world. (An International News Service dispatch from Buenos Aires reports that the election of Colonel Perón as President of Argentina is already "e> gurated, since the incomplete counting of votes gives him 218 seats" in the Electoral College; that the President-elect will have 109 deputies in the House against 49 for the opposition; that it is considered that at least 30 supporters of Perón will be seated in the Senate, and that, when the count is completed, the observers* already consider that the Colonel will have 304 votes in the Electoral College). LaC rdta made a general appeal of support to UNRRA, and announced that he would buy wheat wherever he could get it. Addressing the UNRRA Council, LaGuardia said: "I want to begin by complimenting Colonel Perón, and tell him that he now has an opportunity for Argentina to cooperate with the 'democracy' of the world". The dynamic former mayor of New York urged the "American" not to waste the "food" and to help the "needy" people of the world. He also spoke forcefully against the black market worldwide. LaGuardia asserted that in New York City alone enough" food is wasted daily" to nourish 350,000 people: adding, at this point: "I know because for twelve years I had to pick up the garbage"" causing rlaa" among lo" usually serlo" delegate". Insisting on the black market, he emphasized the need to eliminate it from the pallets they receive from the UNRRA; and went on to say that the world's hungry people need bread, not bread and butter; aid, not food; fast boats, not slow boats. LaGuardla also told UNRRA delegates that he was assured of President Truman's full backing, "since the President wishes to see "everything humanly possible done to alleviate misery and distress in the world," As former director Herbert Lehman, whom he replaces at the head of the United Nations relief and rehabilitation organization, LaGuardia urged that the United States return to food rationing. In another part of his inaugural speech, LaGuardia made a solemn pledge to keep UNRRA out of politics, declaring, "We will not approach any people with a ballot in one hand and food in the other. And he finished by saying: "On Monday, arum I will go to the administration. And I do not speak in subjunctive mode. We have to work, and we have to work fast". While" LaGuardia, in Atlantic City, formulated the impreaionant* congratulations to Colonel Juan Domingo Perón, inviting him at the same time to place Argentina on the path of cooperation with the democracies of the world, in Prague, Czechoslovakia, a Central European state, former U.S. President Herbert Hoover, who, at 71 years of age, has resumed the reins of the American program to feed the starving people," warned the world today - as reported by correspondent Klngibury Smith of the International News Service - that "the stone paved by the United States is not being rolled back. "the stone of starvation" "looms over Europe. Hoover declared, moreover, that European children will be the first victims of famine unless American relief is continued during the next few months, The former American president made these statements as he was preparing to leave for Warsaw, the Polish capital. Giving an impressive picture of the situation of the children of Czechoealovaqula, Hovar said, in (Continued on page 22.)