THE WORLD
£cl¿ción>
WEATHER FORECAST PASSES ' HOT. - Generally fine weather -with daytime showers in the Interior "ota afternoon. The maximum temperature ai San Juan yesterday was M. No rain was recorded in San Juan. No sign of thunderstorm.
MORNING DAILY -
YEAR XXVIII L 7
NUMBER 10755
CSC enmendé * - - - project ippara el personal II I
* The bill creating a central personnel agency in the Government of Puerto Rico, has been approved by the Civil Service Commission, after having been submitted to public hearings before employee organizations of the "i Public in general. । - The teachers' union was not excluded, as demanded on several occasions by the Teachers' Association. The teachers, as originally recommended and now held, would be subject to the provisions of the law in connection with competitive service, until such time as the Governor, after consultation with the Director of Personnel and the appropriate appointing authorities, shall provide, by executive order and not later than five years after the effective date of the law, for the application to them of the provisions thereof. On the other hand, all officers and employees of the Transportation Authority and of the Water Resources Authority were excluded, placing them within the service without opposition. In addition, it includes in the unopposed service a number which shall not exceed 8 employees or one percent of the total number of personnel working at all times on the effective date of the Act, whichever number is less, in each department, board, commission, bureau or similar agency, the head of which is appointed or elected by express provision of the Organic Charter of Puerto Rico and whose salary is fixed by the Charter; or whose Head is appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate; or whose executive or administrative head is such officer of a public corporation that is an Instrumentality of the People of Puerto Rico. , - ' other f a eight the employees of the'-office g of the Governor included in. the sor- ; Vice unopposed; let us include a- ; i others, in the served unopposed, f not more than one clerk and one ase| sor legal for each Jues of the Supreme Tribu- ; X nal and not more than'one se- ( / "retarlo for each Judge of a tribu- ( I nal of record and for each mu- ] f nlclpal Juca- ] f nlclpal; the permanent secretarylo of the Superior Council of Enseflan- ■ sa and such professional and academic staff of said Council as wk _ be appointed by the perEnmanto secretary and approved by the Director of Personnel. ' In the section of! the bill relating to the assignment and assignment of positions, the section which provided that the Director of Personnel would have the authority to assign any port to a "lúe, or alter the assignment of any position to another clast. was deleted. . In the section concerning the Compensation Plan, the following two paragraphs were added: "Upon recommendation of the Director of Personnel and approval of the Personnel Board, the Governor may modify the Compensation Plan adopted under this lesson, when such action is necessary. Compensation rates shall be determined in the same manner for newly established classes of positions. The Compensation Plan shall be submitted by the Governor to the Legislature at each regularly scheduled session and, unless altered, shall continue in effect. In the section referring to appeals of employees to the Board of Directors, the word "may" was substituted for the word "shall" and the controlling authority shall reinstate the employee and approve the payment of any salary or wages the employee is not to receive, if the final decision is in favor of the employee. The bill eliminated from the bill the duties that were imposed on the Director and the Personnel Board, in connection with the compensation system for employees of the Island Government. Thus, "o discarded Section 9, which placed on the Director of Personnel the duty of administering said system; and Section 8(4), which imposed on the Personnel Board the duty of "acting as the Board of Trustees" of the retirement system for employees of the Insular Government, causing confusion; In a telegram sent yesterday to the local Chief of the Office of Price Administration, softer Sam Gilstrap, "Mulero quo at the earliest possible date, W b| o -- I inform - illustrate the púl| J|bo of all items which are at present outside of that federal agency. M telegram, subscribed cor el se "Mario ejecutivo de la .irqsnlzsi dHLsoftor René Poitcvln. solicita "a iVbro del comercio y la Industria ■ |Bnarto Rico, v m interest do los MHunldores". que, la Oficina de < do Precios "informo J públicamente cuanto anrmi la aplicación a Puerto Rico de las ■ mdKo do descontrol aprobadas por M.national office of the OAP" The Federation reported that oi ore-jdenti Interim of' the entity, seftor Américo Miranda, has been redenso numerous" communications ir iM Comorclante" e Industríalos. ■ rtculriondo Information on all" i products that you are to I "íiOlriO outside the control of oredos WM referred federal Uganda. Ar "W "uo -! Present, in view of ■"- "-"Monoce the complete list I í*wSB" n " food" v deE di "WO* uncontrolled ñor le ■ < U-"existo a considerable cqn-
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1946
TRUMAN ATTRACTS NO ATTENTION
' X By Arthur Hermann Aboard the Presidential Train bound for Independence, Mlsurl, 1 (INS)-Pro-
Truman today maintained his pro-election indifference to local politics as he headed for Independence to vote in this month's presidential election. The train
/ V' '■Et " Traman '-
presidential train passed through practically deserted stations since its passage through them was not previously announced. If, in any isolated town, the train attracted the attention of a small group of people, the chief magistrate ignored their presence and remained in his private car. PAA insists on separate air terminal Bloise objects to concession, saying it would increase Government expenses By CHARLES McCABE declared today that the" negotiations between the Insular Government, the Navy Department and the Pan American Airway" "n relation to that Authority's use of the Isla Grande airport are progressing, He said that the Insular Government and the Navy are in full agreement on all points of the Navy's proposal to temporarily turn over the airport facilities to the Transportation Authority, except for the Pan American facilities. Bloise added that ( Pan American Inilite in being allowed "an absolutely Independent air terminal , at e! । airport; and that. on the other hand. < Authority believes that faclllda- ( ( des should be fully ope- ) rized by the Iniular Government, > offering them to all air services" < in the lila, on the basis" of ¡ Equality. Bloise went on to say that if the Pan Ame- 1 ricen's deieo of an abiolutamen- 1 te Independent terminal were ( granted, it would "lenify it j a double expense to the People of j Puerto Rico for the airport and I a duplication of such faclllda- ( des as space for concourse and 1 space for customs inspection- > ra, for the Inipection of forty- < na of the Department d"' AglfijUtura and for the J parlamento de Inmigra- > ntion. The Authority Administrator also stated that he has been spending most of the week preparing to appear before the Department of Commerce today, Friday, in connection with the proposed island airport development program, Run costing >15,000,000; and that he has not had time to resume talks with the Navy on the Big Island question, other than very informally. Accompanying Blois" were the Authority's attorney. James E. Curry, and the Authority's airport manager, Lucius Burton. Bloise also informed that the U.S. Weather Bureau's telephone information facilities in San Juan would be available to all airlines using the Island Government's terminal on Isla Grande, as well as the communication facilities provided by the local office.
Agency requests are 143 million
Includes operating expenses, permanent improvement funds Public works $39,000,000 Planning studies requests. -There will be a public hearing in November Í?1 The "requests" for funds from government agencies, departments, and public enterprises for their operating expenses and permanent improvement projects to be carried out during the next fiscal year amount to $143,000,000, according to information provided yesterday by the Finance Division of the Planning Board, a division headed by Francisco de Jesús. Funds have been "ollded, for operating expenses exclusively, to be provided from the general fund of the Treasury, amounting to $50 million, which compares with a current budget of $43,000,000. With respect to public works for the next fiscal year, the cost estimated by the agencies, according to their Program submitted to the Board, is $93,000,000. Of this sum. the regular agendas of the Government, - the gunernamental departments, - have requested some $37,000,000, the balance, or $56,000,000, corresponding to the demands formulated by the public corporations. .... In commenting on these requests for funds for the next fiscal year, the Chairman of the Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, informed yesterday that "the Board recognizes the work done in the diverse agenda of the Government in estimating the need for more funding to be able to render the service that the law has entrusted to it and that the public demand requires. "It is with aatlafacdon." -He added, "that we see the Intenaa pia- ; nlflcaclon work carried out by the Depart- , tments, eaendal work to be able to face" four basic problems. The planning work to be done in Puerto Rico is so great that the Board needs and appreciates the strong cooperation it has received from the rest of the Government. Naturally, this . . cadre of governmental requests makes the work of the Board in recommending to the Legislature a program of public funds more difficult, since the demands far exceed the resources available, or estimated to be forthcoming in the future. Nevertheless, such work must be done to assist the Governor and the Legislature of < Puerto Rico in their transcendental task of providing the most efficient funding to resolve the pro- ] naiea in all cases. "The mission of the Board is to make recommendations to the Governor, the Bureau of the Budget and the Legislature on the most pressing governmental needs, without this implying that such action will lead to any final appropriation of the oreania- , mo, which is the sole responsibility of the aforementioned bodies. Such reco- ■ mendations" ae included in the economic pro- , gramme being drawn up, with my rae to facilitate the work to n u m- . tral legislative bodies". In drafting the final recommendations, to be submitted to public hearings on November 21 of this year, the head of the Finance Division of the Board, Mr. Francisco de Jesus, informed, with respect to financial resources, that the Revenue Estimates for fiscal years 1948-4 and 1947-48, to be submitted by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico in the next few days, will be taken into consideration, as requested by the Board. "The Board," he said, "is also, through this Division, (Continued on page 7).
A plan for vocational education for veterans will be discussed on the 4th j Dr. Rafael Picó submitted a memorial covering the plan outlined. On Monday, at 2:00 p.m., the preliminary plan prepared by the governmental committee that has been studying the development of greater vocational training facilities for World War II veterans will be discussed. The chairman of that committee, Dr. Rafael Picó, yesterday submitted to the members who meet Monday in his office, a memorial covering the plan as it has been outlined up to date. The recommendations will then be discussed with Mr. W. A. Illlscrlst, director of the new aíren ry rehabilitation and veterans' education services of the district office.veterans of the district office of the Veterans Administration, TWUCltnwa/ta J* of New York, to which Puerto Rico is affiliated, and with the assistant director, Dr. Ivan Nelaon, and another office of the Veterans Administration, which provides loans to farmers. ; farmers. - Cuban honeys or. """".na...¡ for sale JÍSCS *e> Aer William H. Ludlow, consultant rnrrJañonartd* Prlnan'finida the Junt * dt PlmlflMClÓn. HIS 1 waShiUcton i (Pti? na first observations served as Airiéukür. WX' "*-- P" r * preparation of the preliminary ■ anurrió hav^ue^uJTrlrlrl m * to be analyzed the ■ of mWe? íuh.n" X ñn """-* was Reported, and which 1 roM come íu * expanded as a result of i x i i'í.'irír.x, d * 1 °°°- i livestock feed production- m"- tn " do. Those Cuban miele" are in adl- The memorial contains a resui don to a shipment of L400,000 ga- men of the most i Iones recommendations of Puerto Rican honeys that important" which are formulated for i the Department, on 17 "etlembre, >" so uclon of insuflanuncló problem for sale to manufactu- v d íJiV.HÍmiVnto de*e fea Je-' - The same purpose: the menu- : XSufsSfig L'ÜW" W ; J ?-" asW. ! two by the Mer- Administration of the Financial Reconstruction Corporadon Production J cadeo training program, ts, ■ A 1 U * m train lo" : Said the Department of Agrlcultu- veteran" for work" in lo" cuaJ ra that virtually all ol em- will have opportunlaade" do om- . barque portnrrlquofto has aldo already R,co c0 . c0 . m ® 5 I sold. State" Ualdo" or other" part" of ; La Admlnlatradón de Hogar"" Latin America, should give"" the sl- . Agricolas of the Department do gulontM steps Immediato". . United States Department of Agriculture and the Employment Service of the United States (Continued on page 14) (Continued on page 7).
PRICE 5 Cents"
University Senate rejects resolution joining student walkout; Rector booed at university
The Rector reproached the attitude of ■ the students When they answered him they organized an act that lasted more than two hours They rebuked him for not supporting the strike Teachers Matos Paoli and G. Diaz spoke. They booed Colorado Unlversitsric a resolution which, among other considerations, upheld the solidarity of the Senate with the resolution adopted by the student assembly of October 3p.october, - that is, to go on strike on November 8, protesting President Traman's veto of the Language Project, - a group of about fifteen --t u ói "n t "" maftana d" yesterday booed the Rector of the University while he was on his way to his office. The students were stationed at the main entrance of the University, and as Rector Benitez entered, after calling him by three voices, they whistled and booed him at length. Then the Rector turned on his heel, looking carefully at the group of students, who remained silent. Mr. Benitez then spoke a few words, indicating that it was the obligation of the University to keep itself alive, without being a center of agitation. The Rector informed that he would be absent, since Sue is leaving today for the United States, where she will be for more than a month. He said that he entrusted the students with the University of Puerto Rico, which should be a campus of coexistence and not of agitations. While the Rector was speaking, students began to gather in U entrSi of the building. About a thousand students, who " b * nd 2?fñ ron their classes, gatheredP"£" to hear the manlfestaclonts of the. BWpR' protests of those attending" the act m ¿ontlnu° speaking the ""for Be- 1 nítez and said that neither the a ¡ nor anyone, no power, could a "e- > gurantee that the unlvereldad continue- < ra alendo center of eítudlo, "1 j constituted itself as the center of Mlt*®!®"?*' ♦ and that if it could assure it, the existence of the university organisms that were a cell of the philosophy of what it means to be the university. Finally, the Rector said: "We come to forge in । a process of study, intellection and work, one and the other, < At no time was the Rector applauded for the" ; At no time was the Rector applauded by the "students", < who gave "muaatra" of "a- - grade before" "a" word", (Once the "eftor" Benitez finished speaking, leaving the room, invaded by even more "students" who wanted to participate in the act, the young Fred Santiago, organizer ( of the strike movement, addressed ( the Rector and the attendees".Santiago explained the origin of the impromptu event, indicating that the booing of a group of students, made to the Rector, was due to the action taken by the Rector and several members of the Senate in defeating the resolution of 42 university teachers who wanted to "olida, rizarle with the E "tudlantado. Santiago said that it was convenient to explain the attitude of 83 teachers who had defeated 44 professors of the Senate, teachers who did not respond to the realities involved in the case. . We have to count on and respect the ""tudiantado. The student body < is up in arms and condemns the improper attitude of these 82 professors. The University is for six thousand students and is not composed of concrete buildings. We are (C- continued on page 7)
International Disarmament to be Discussed on Monday Ministers8.of the. four great powers will participate in debate NEW YORK, 1 (INR) -The RÚ-r nlstroi of Foreign Relaclqees®! d"! the four great" pbtshcla", qu" . The four major pbtshcla", which are due to meet next Monday at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel in New York to discuss the" draft" peace" pact" concluded" at the recent Paris" Conference," are virtually committed" to participate" in the" debate" (on international disarmament scheduled" for next week at the United Nations" Assembly. British sources predict that British Foreign Minister Ernest Bevin, who is expected next Saturday in New York aboard the "Aqultanla", will take part in the explosive disarmament debates almost from the beginning. Bevin is also expected to personally consider a challenge from Russian Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov to make public a list of the disposition of British and American troops abroad. In this connection, the "circle" of the American delegation to the Fluahlng Conference began to believe that it would be difficult for the Secretary of State of the United States, James Byrne, to refrain from participating permanently in the debate at the Assembly, in view of the status and prestige of the speakers of the Russian and British theses. In this regard, it was noted that Byrnea has repeatedly pointed out that the Council of Foreign Ministers of the four great Powers and the United Nation's Assembly "ona doa toa" completely dl "tlntw", thus inainuating his intention not to participate personally (continued on page 14).
It was agreed that as the price of the basic articles of the Puerto Rican die-| tica"; for the basic articles of the Puerto Rican die-| ta. "It was agreed that as the price controls are lifted by the OAP, they would be taken over by the General Supply Administration, as deemed necessary. It was also ncorded that eate control by the AGS should continue until normality is restored in prices" and sumlniatros in the local market. "It is possible that uniform maximum prices may be fixed by the General Supply Administration for a limited number of basic commodities, including rice, butter, beans and cod. "It was further agreed that, for the protection of the consumer people, the campaign against" black market practices which has been carried out up to the present will be continued in full force. "At this meeting were present representatives of the AGS, the OAP, the Department of Justice, the Department of Labor, the Puerto Rico Auditor's Office, the Office of the Budget Office, the Committee Against Brokering and the Puerto Rico Information Office, and it is known that the trade circuits have been demanding that the Administration make it clear to the Government of Puerto Rico that it has not been able to prevent black market practices.Supply, that the governmental p "HKm in what respects ILcpntrol of prices and sumlnáÜBa of vívere", once ceases dcfjlvSMHWlt" in such" function" the local Office of Price Administration" be clarified. S" reported yesterday, that although "e intftea. in **1 comuIjifarfd (le F( rtnb ,a qu" probajMa qu" sg fljén price" basic unlMqrmes for uu.limited number.tfüculos basic", it becomes necessary WrfWUBáclón "obro the policy guWrn amen such to follow" in such procedures, due mainly exists neither present a fluctueemn of proof"" v a morcado jKKmpetencla in "atados Unidos. Mw h" been alleged by organized commerce quo the trend M U inflation which has continued its nUrap throughout the mcr. ndo tic vkck'm United States, does not permit obto "nér- jmlo" uniform in the most lÚbPOrtlWtfM Food lines, IVMilwroW very difficult pnr now "¡ ¡ purchase actions in the ¡mtlWp _qóntlnental on the basis of a 'fixed price not pindu i..< individua3" it is understood that the Supply Administration's InterVention" in price and supply control! will have to prevail for a period of approximately one year, given that by that time both industrial and agricultural forecasting in the United States will permit an abundance of the most "wnclal" commodities and foods. (PU)-The Assembly of the Colonists of Carta approved by a vote of 54 to 3 the compromise formula for the cession to the Government of any increase in the basic price of 3.875 cents per pound for the sale of 300,000 tons of sugar for the 1947 harvest, destined for export to countries other than the United States. This formula was approved the day before yesterday by the Hacendiulos Association.
Dr. Fernós Isérn returned yesterday; speaks of the case of the city^pí* 1 -. ■ -t-
The Coml "ionadp Resident do Puerto Rico on Wáshlngton. doctor Antonio Fornós loom,,, returned ayet to the Island, about two v half o'clock in the afternoon. Shortly after he went to Fortaleza to greet the Governor. Dr. Fernós Isern said that one of the main reasons for his return to the Island at this time is the fact that arrangements are being made in Puerto Rico for the budget and it is his purpose to achieve greater coordination of the affairs of the Puerto Rico Information Office in New York and the Puerto Rico Office in Washington. In order to carry out his idea, he said, it is necessary to make the corresponding arrangements in the new island budget. Dr. Fernós Isern is of the opinion that the Puerto Rico Office, which is based in New York, should have its main branch in Washington, so that the two island offices on the mainland work in a fully coordinated manner: "And this is the time to address this here," he said. Dr. Fernós Isern reported that the issue of citizenship for Puerto Ricans born before 1919 is now under consideration by the competent authorities in the United States, stating that - he only indicated that there will be a point of view expressed by him, which raises a new issue. It is a matter of the criteria of the Resident Commissioner,
nor effect of r nnnn'alüariÚwndMb|&| , । ¡ the nwimWntwflM ' ' z,,n I' 8 ' * ?? tir i i i i .c. : "ele unn qjt®] not ineiuva "''<"onoraMMGWy^nrW . word", ■ citizen naturaWdq." nt" ■ lo in a pala, as i Puerto Rico, before d" uhj determined in qu" a w 'pwsw - lejxtlonde a mudaflanla. j < Commissioner Fernós, ya) " ae Installed in his office dat'uongro. " so,'which is the same " nido occupying the actuíl Gpbegudor - de la Illa guando desempeñaba i esa cargo, tillo quoting left >¡ hacia Puerto Rico progresewn Mi -' nBflocnBCiOftM pini'íi triiBjMiAO hj i jijn|"rv "q!r ¿Aíini en esU" neen - ni nenml - Ute'EaUÚn. ""ruó ■ lo delwrnmlllglyd<" . Port his i*spe' tos to the SecretiSWWW the, jnterior. "1 > Undersecretary, the HrOrurator Gen "i ral and other funcionarlo" Dl1 vision of Territories. (Continued on page 14).
Austin addresses the United Nations General Assembly I ' " B " f - 7ü2 I - ", the United Nations General Assembly in Flushing, N.Y., at the time Warren' B. Austin (left, at rostrum), head of the United States delegation, told the assembly that the United States was prepared "to cooperate fully with all" or" other members" of the United Nations in universal disarmament." Members of the Soviet delegation, including the Minister of Foreign Affairs. V. M. Molotov, who advocated disarmament in "his speech on Tuesday, listen with interest, right, "1 background. (Associated Press photo)
AGS will continue control until normality is restored This was agreed during a meeting held in Fortaleza. - It is probable that they will fix prices for rice, butter, beans, codfish A meeting of public officials was held in La Fortaleza, in which the President of the PrwMgi from 8:45 to 11 o'clock at night. "An analysis was made- says official note- of the general altuaclon, and matters relating to food supplies were considered.
UN to spend next year $24,000,000 । Tomorrow assembly to follow up discussions on world questions For ROBERT MANNING LAKE SUCCESS. 1. (PU). - The United Nations General Assembly, after 10 days of dhreur ios, began the lanor of organizing committees to* consider a total of 58 matters and make up tree days of backlog in that task. Today's activity was generally limited to organizing these committees, a task which is expected to be completed today, Saturday, when the important committees - political, security and legal - hold their inaugural sessions. Consequently, it is certain that by Monday consideration of some of the most explosive world issues will begin. In the meantime, the Social, Humanitarian and Cultural Committee unanimously elected Costa Rican Ambassador to the United States, Francisco de Paula Gutierrez, whose candidacy was proposed by two delegates, the British Frank Beswick and the Dominican Seftorlta Minerva Bernardino, who spoke highly of Gutierrez's ability to fill the post. One of the first committees "n ' seslonsr was that of the budget, before which the United States delegate, Vandenberg, "nortically opposed the proposal made by ' the group of experts that the United States pay half of the expenses" of the operation of the United Nations. Austin indicated, on the other hand, that up to 25 percent of the annual budget, Vandenberg protested the experts' calculation, saying it was not fair, and called for the United Nations to make savings. The world organization, following the parallel sessions of the General Assembly in Flushing, has transferred the work of the commissions to (Continued on page 2) Supplement "n c o I o r a i will be missing from the Sunday addition of EL MUNDO The delay in shipments" as a result of the shipping stoppage which recently affected the United States" has delayed the arrival on the Island of the color supplements which are included with the Sunday edition of EL MUNDO. For this reason the edition of KL MUNDO correapondtente to the day of mafiana will circulate without the indicad" supplement in colors.
However it was protested by the veto Truman Faculty was divided, voting in favor of the resolution of Benitez -r~ . i Says it uivolúpró political question Document rejected demanded resolution of sovereignty problem At the meeting of the University Senate. started the day before yesterday, - 4:30 P. M. to take "decisions regarding President Truman's veto of the language bill-after the student protest that prompted a resolution to go on strike at the University of Puerto Rico on November 8-strong discussions arose regarding two" resolutions presented for discussion and approval. The meeting lasted from 4:30 p.m. to 9:30 p.m. The faculty divided into two groups. The faculty divided into two groups: one that supported the resolution presented by Rector Jaime Benitez, which was later approved by 82 professors, and one that supported the resolution of a group of teachers, including Dr. Margot Arce do Vázquez, José Emilio González, Francisco Matos Paoll, Domingo Marrero, Dr. Julio García Díaz, José Ferrer and Rafael Soltero Peralta. (The resolution of this last group was in solidarity with the student strike announced for November 8. The professors who favored the strike abstained from voting on the resolution of Rector Benitez; and it is reported that these professors were in favor of what it said regarding the action of President Truman, but were convinced that it did not solve the problem and therefore did not vote for it. The reference professors reported that they wanted to remain free of any compromise and therefore abstained from voting on the resolution, which they could not accept. The teachers who were (and still are) in agreement with the November 8 strike at the University, stated at the University Senate meeting that they agreed to have their pay docked for that day, as they were in solidarity with the student body. The resolution presented by Rector Jaime Benítez, which was approved, states: "The University Senate understands that in Puerto Rico Spanish should be used as a teaching vehicle, except in special situations that make an exception to this norm advisable, and I also understand that the teaching of English as a subject should be intensified. The University Senate understands the foregoing on the basis of purely educational considerations. It takes for granted that, under the present political status and under any other political status that may exist in the future, it is and will be a key objective of our public instruction to achieve as much as possible, to achieve it as effectively as possible, and to achieve it in the shortest possible time. It is also taken for granted that-under any circumstances of political status, and for multiple reasons of public interest-English is one of the subjects to be taught on a preferential basis in Puerto Rico. Based on clear pedagogical reasons, the University Senate understands that such educational purposes can only be effectively carried out through the teaching of the content subject in Spanish, and through the intonation of the teaching of English. It is my understanding that the departure from this standard has been and is extremely detrimental to our public education system, both in terms of the teaching of content subjects and the teaching of English. The University Senate regrets that President Truman, in vetoing Bill No. 51, has made, in its judgment, the grave error of involving political considerations - in this case, pedagogical considerations - to the detriment of education in Puerto Rico. In view of the foregoing, the University Senate publicly protests against said veto". The defeated resolution, which yesterday provoked an incident between the students and Rector Benitez, having paralyzed some classes at the University for that reason, is the following: "Inasmuch as President Truman's veto of Bill 51, generally known as the Language Bill, is an anti-democratic act, both in the functional sense of democracy because it ignores the will of our people as expressed by the decision of their authorized representatives, and in the austantlvo sense of democracy, because it attacks the very essence of nationhood. Because the veto maintains the pedagogical error of dumbing down the formation and development of human nature and personality, as well as the best coexistence, and that the mother tongue is the instrument by which the human being is aware of himself and of reality and communicates with others. As far as the eefior Traman fuñ(Contlnúa on page 14) 4
Entered as second cía"" matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.