THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY: Partly cloudy, with showers in the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M: low, 77. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:30 p.m., 29.77 inches of mercury. 4
44 Pages 5/
makxnx JOURNAL
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY OCTOBER 18, 1947
YEAR XXVIII
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
Seftor outomovUlota, no attempt eao grade, another m killed with olio.
NUMBER 11099
School enrollment rises to 369,083
Collazo also points out that the deficiency ' of one million in the school system was due to the fact that the number of children in the public schools of Tuerto Rico rose to 369,083 at the end of August of this year, with an increase of 14,797 students, an increase over the enrollment of the same period last year. This was an increase of 14,707, or 4.18 percent, over the previous year's enrollment for the same date, according to the first statistical report prepared by the Department of Instruction, regarding the total number of children enrolled during the first school month. According to what was reported yesterday by the Acting Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Francisco Collazo, it is expected that the aforementioned total enrollment will increase, when the second report is submitted in January, to reach an increase similar to that of the previous year, which was close to twenty thousand students, or about six percent. This increase in enrollment, Mr. Collazo pointed out, has been achieved without having created new teaching positions, and due to the measures that were taken, increasing the number of teachers in the middle school and high school; reducing the number of teachers in school offices and libraries; and making the most of the school work hours. The Department of Instruction was appropriated an additional three million dollars by the Legislature for the personnel budget. With this additional fund, however, the number of teachers could not be increased, since it was absorbed by the new salary scale for teachers, and by the increases made in the salaries of the instructional personnel, in accordance with the new Civil Service classifications. As will be recalled, however, an additional amount of about one million dollars is missing to cover a deficit of a similar amount in the salary budget for teachers and administrative personnel. According to the report covering the situation at the end of August, daytime school enrollment increased in both the rural and urban areas, by 7,592 children in the rural area and 7,205 in the urban area. The greatest increase was noted in the rural zone, where total enrollment reached 176,033 children. In the urban zone, total enrollment is 193,050. Total enrollment in both zones last year, for the month of August, reached 354,286, while this year, for the same date, it is 369,083. As of the same date last year, the total enrollment in the high schools was 24,154 children, reaching 27,261 this year, with an increase of 3,107 children, or 12.6 percent. This was followed by the junior high school, with an increase of 272,749 to 285,314, or 12,565, or 4.61 per cent. The middle school had a decrease in its overall enrollment of 875 children or 1.52 percent. Its enrollment as of August 30
The Department is studying the causes of this situation. The reduction affects both the urban middle school and the rural middle school, as follows: In the urban middle school the total enrollment reached 41,681 last year, and this year 41,101, with a decrease of 580 or 1.39 percent: in the rural, the total enrollment (Continued on page. 7) International Peace Day To Be Celebrated It has been set for Oct. 24, when letter NU LAKE SUCCESS, Oct. 17 (I NS>- The Upldas Nations Commission today approved by a vote of 21 to 20 the annual observance of International Peace Day, Oct. 24. The close vote in the Commission reflects debates over setting the date for a United Nations Day. The United States supported October 24, the day the UN Charter came into force, because schools are in session on that date and so schoolchildren can participate in the global celebration. France, on the other hand, supported June 16, the day the Charter was signed. The French delegate indicated that the General Assembly was in session in October of each year and that many delegates would not be in session in October of each year in their respective countries to preside over the celebration. It was agreed that all countries on that day celebrate an international legal holiday, but will discuss the final date when the matter comes before the General Assembly next Monday for a final vote.
10 more industries to be organized during the current fiscal year
Moscnso says applications from pure firms are coming to the island daily The president and General Administrator of the Industrial Development Company, Mr. Teodoro Moacoso, Jr., declared yesterday that the Industrial program sponsored by the Government has received a strong impulse due to the stimulus currently offered to private capital to establish new industrial plants on the island. He added that numerous applications from major U.S. companies interested in establishing factories in Puerto Rico are currently being legalized, and that during the present fiscal year, ten Phih buildings will be built and equipped with the same number of new industries, involving an investment of approximately $14,000,000.To show the magnitude of this achievement," said Mr. Mosco- ¡ so, "it is well to point out that since the I Company began operations in 1942, up to the present, 'about ten million dollars has been invested in physical plans for new industries by the management of this agency. Now in a single fiscal year, - that is, in the year 1947-1948, - we 1 propose to exceed such Inver- * slon by four million dollar- । res." 1 Mr. Moscpso expressed. furthermore, that the future outlook is 1 very flattering, such optimism being demonstrated in r| fact that day- ' cláentemente new applications are pouring into the Company । from American ' Industrialists to avail- < se of the benefits offered by the Government's ' industrial development and encouragement program ।. "In all ' these cases," he added, "the fact stands out that the new Industrialists to be established on the Island will have to make substantial investments in < Puerto Rico, and represent mainland private companies of recognized economic solvency and reputation," he said.
iMM IBB wWxS/ Ml W k ■ Bfb-fco ' Ww xüs ' Bw W; .-hr IHbB TEODORO MOSCOSO, HIJO. tation in the world market. Thousands of workers will be employed in these new plants, while the annual payroll will be substantial, thus improving the country's economy". Mr. Moscoso explained that there should be no fear that the industries to be established could cause economic damage to others in operation on the Island. "On this point," he said, "it should be pointed out that the production of these new industries will be almost totally dedicated to exports, since they have a large foreign market to attend to and an accumulated and continuous demand for the products they manufacture. Analyzed the Director of the Compa(Continued on page 28)
Seoane says AC will make a study on a plan for the care of medical economies, in Isla ... J. ,, , ■ ..
The President of the Communications Authority and Mayor of Caguas, Mr. Manuel Seoane, informed yesterday that the efforts of the aforementioned Authority are now aimed at achieving a substantial improvement in the service provided by this agency, and at raising its economic solvency with a view to enable it to develop using its own resources. Mr. Seoane said that the Authority "is on a savings plan, achieved through a good management of its resources, which will undoubtedly enable it to dispense with the Legislature's financial assistance in the future. Mr. Seoane also stated that there are plans for the expansion of the current services, and for greater efficiency in the services. He referred to the project for the extension of telephone service in Caguas, don! 1 of, with the new telephone station, the pel Suitable for new instala- 1 clones of telephones have already passed 1,009, He expressed that Caguas brln. I. gives ht Authority a substantial part of its annual income, and that the improvements to be made there will further increase that income.
In a meeting held Thursday night at the offices of the Medical Association, a committee was finally organized to study the problem of public welfare and modest care throughout the island. Senator Vicente Gétgel Polanco was elected president of the committee; Dr. Manuel Astor, vice-president; and Dr. A. Oliveras Guerra, secretary. Also present were Representative Ernesto Ramos Antonin! and Dr. Jeranfel Cordero and Dr. Antonio Navas. The report on the data compiled in relation to the number of doctors in each town of the Island, their needs and problems was studied. This report, according to what was explained to us, is not yet complete. The cases of some foreign doctors who have had difficulties in the exercise of their profession in some towns were considered, and it was agreed to appoint a commission that will visit the Commissioner of Health next week to discuss the situation of these doctors and to look for a solution to their problems. It was also agreed to join the da- * (Continued on page 28)
----- ,| " "nn-mi i i n - -ÚLU- l_ ,0- News Digest
The FAT annual convention in San Francisco approved a resolution calling for clarification of Puerto Rico's status. Hl * - A committee to study the problems of Arecibo was created at an assembly of representatives* of different sectors. -s - Workers stticarero* of the Island have been invited to an International Congress in Cuba, by the Cuban leader Luis Hurtado. ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ Instruction has had to make readjustments in the schools, because of *1 increase in enrollment and deficiency of teachers. * * * My The PIP will hold several acts tomorrow in Bayamón in commemoration of the first anniversary of its founding. ♦ * * Justice raises the precarious state of court buildings and jails on the island; $8,200,000 plan for improvements urged. * * * First battalion of the 65th Army marched to Tortuguero where it will be on maneuvers for 10 days. * The UPR Student Council will meet next Monday and will discuss, among other issues, the Vieques problem. Importers say they will boycott rum from Puerto Rico if the method of collecting taxes is not changed. o o o Hearings on unemployment in the sugar cane industry have begun. Producers raise the need for mechanization of the sugar industry.
The "Tahonero*" and "cervecero" - "tahonero" and "cervecero" - "brewer" - "unite to save nursery". The first will produce smaller buns; the second will reduce production. - * * Fomento announces that during the current fiscal year ten new "Industry" will be organized. ' ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ / This afternoon m Inaugurates the tenth Insular professional baseball season; Mayagüez will visit Santurce, San Juan will visit Ponee and Caguas will visit Aguadilla. - - - Quebradillas qualified for the Basketball Final Series by defeating Ponce in the short playoff series, v * * * Michigan, Notre Dame and Texas. defend their undefeated records in college soccer today. ♦ " - Three more arrests are ordered in the case for the death of Cristi, not Colon Matos in Santurce. ♦ * * Quillones Jimenez defense case closed in Caguas. Defendant was the first to testify yesterday. * * * Russia announces boycott of the small assembly of the UN. * * *. The New York-San Juan flights were delayed due to bad weather on the route. "The PEG is asked to study the petition of the mayor of Yabucoa. - Rio Piedras zenifleaclón. I Board of Plans approved map
FAT asked for clarification of the political status of the island.
PIP to hold rally and other events tomorrow - ; Commemorates first year ■ founding.., It has more than । of 300 rural committees i With ñaa serle of public acts, . among-allb"-uoa general meeting of t sur .efleleleMtantlHiSMimMMM ( and the cMÁ Nnreccíón de lá colecHv!. u dad. the Partido Independentlsta Por- , torrlqueflo will celebrate tomorrow Sunday, in Bayamón, its first afto of activities in the political life of the country. Delegations from all the towns ¡ of Puerto Rico, designated by the ( different" local committees of the party. The party's local committees, will come to Bayamón tomorrow, 1 to witness the events and will participate in a demonstration and rally, which will be held at six o'clock in the afternoon. The official opening of the day's events will be held at 10 a.m. at the Plaza de Recreo. 1 The leadership of the Indepen' dentista Party reported that on the first anniversary of the founding of the party, there are more than three hundred "rúcale" Indepen. ' dentista" committees organized throughout ' the island. The president of the party, doctor Gilberto Concepción de , Grada, invited to the commemoration, of this first anniversary to all the "independentlsta", of field" and i people", authorizing, to the effect, the" , following* declarations: i "Our party - the Partido Independentista Puertorriquefte--cum- , tomorrow Sunday a full afto of life full of activity and dynamism. From Fajardo to Mayagüez and from San Juan to Ponce, robust" municipal committees have been created. More than three hundred rural committees have sprung up in the arena of political combat. Everywhere we have had the enthusiastic and cordial support of veterans, drivers, mats, tro" merchants, farmers, students and workers from all over the country. "Liza, in Maunabo; helechal, in Barranquitas; Vivé Arriba, in Utuado and Caricaboa, in Jayuya, are some of the many symbols of the strength of our collectivity in the rural area. 1 "Our party-the Puerto Rican Independent Party-is the party of the Puerto Rican people.
Russian delegate to small UN assembly Gromyko held bitter debate with British delegate ~ * By James E. Roper , LAKE SUCCESS, N. Y. -October 17 - (PU). Gromyko, calling the United States a "dictator," hinted today that the Soviet bloc will "boycott" the proposed permanent meeting of a "small assembly" of the United Nations. Gromyko said Russia would not accept "any compromise" on the U.S. plan for a "small assembly" of the fifty-seven nations, which would mean a permanent forum of the United Nations. Gromyko mockingly laughed off a British resolution to limit the activities of the "little assembly. And he ignored British delegate Sir Hartley Shawcrou's appeal to proceed in '1 debate "with good will and without humbug."'" Gromyko roared that "there is no possibility of compromise. As far as this proposal is concerned, the word 'compromise' does not exist in the Soviet vocabulary. Russia and its satellites have already announced that they will "boycott" a new "vigilant" commission which the United Nations intends to send to the Balkans. Gromykw's words today left little doubt that Moscow was also planning to ignore the "small assembly" which seems certain to be set up - probably in a very different form from that proposed by the United States government. France, the Philippines, Argentina and Brazil concurred today in support of the "small assembly" - at least in principle - bringing to nineteen the total number of countries favoring it. The only five governments opposed to its establishment belong to the "Oviet bloc. J Several .of the "agreements in principle" are confusing. For example, the (Continued on p. 5)
Island rum boycott if tax collection does not change
By CHARLES MCCABE j WASHINGTON, Oct. 17- Through the publication of another annual report to the National Association of Alcoholic Beverage Importers. Incorporated, the pressure of rum importers on the mainland against the objection of the Government of Puerto Rico to the imposition of duties on rum from this island has increased. The new report, prepared by C. D. Bailey, chairman of the Association's Rum Committee, was presented after another report by the vice-president of the executive body in which Governor Piftero's famous accusation that the Mainland liquor industry was "colluding" was described as "ridiculous". The Bailey Report discussed four measures recently passed by the Island Legislature as an alternative to the Mainland Importers' demand for taxation in the North, and stated that the Rum Committee "frankly does not see how any of these measures can
। help the Puerto Rican rum market in the United States". The report added that the measure referring to "shipment under debit and payment of duty upon return of the merchandise was the only one which, in the opinion of the Committee, could help all rum in the United States market". In eWct, the 'report stated, that importers of rum would boleotsarlam the rum from Puerto Rico unless the Insular Government accepted the method of collecting the tribute. 'I It was said that the Association itself ' made no effort to conse1 gulr Congress to pass the necessary legislation to compel the ' payment of the contributions on the 1 Mainland. "This," he declared, "is clearly the responsibility of the Puerto Rican liquor industry because it is obvious that, as long as there is a definite market for rum in the United States, the industry and the Government of Puerto Rico are not interested in providing the necessary conditions to make rum from the Island available so that it can face competition.
Fot RENE MARQUES ARECIBO, October 17-On the initiative of Miss Villarini, District Inspector of Social Welfare, a civic assembly was held in this city in which various interests, professions and institutions of the community, as well as a large number of citizens were represented. Among the institutions and agencies which sent representation to the assembly were the Catholic Church, Evangelical Church. Ophelca Lodge. Lions Club, Municipal Administration, Health Department, Press, Union of Clinic and Hospital Workers, Union of Industrial Workers.
While John L. Lewis (right), leader of the United Mine Workers, was attacking the Taft-Hartley bill during a meeting at the American Federation of Labor convention in San Francisco, California, FAT President William Green was dozing peacefully. Green was re-elected President of the Federation for the 24th consecutive year. (Associated Press Photo)
The resolution, presented by Nogueras, was unanimous.
i The convention also unanimously approved a resolution calling for the extension to Puerto Rico of Titles I, IV and X of the Social Security Act.
The American Federation of Labor approved yesterday, at the general convention currently being held in San Francisco, Califor- , t ala, a resolution calling for the extension to Puerto Rico of Titles I, IV and X of the Social Security Act. Califor- , t ala, a resolution to request from the United States Government the ' . "definitive clarification of the political status of" Puerto Rico." The resolution was submitted to the convention.
vswii "mu " i" vuiivrrncivn -4" lo FAT Mr. Nlcoláe Nogüero" Rivera and his aspo""", Mr." Berta de Nogueras Rivera, who are attending the convention' as delegates of the Federación Liberté de loo Trabajadores de Puerto Rico, eBado branch of the FAT. Mr. Nogueras Rivera, in a cable sent to EL MUNDO, reported on the action taken by the FAT regarding his resolution. The resolution was approved unanimously by the FAT, and after its approval, Mr. Nogueras Rivers, at the invitation of FAT President William Green, addressed the delegates from the presiding table. The resolution in question states in partj. that "the clarification of the political status of Puerto Rico will, posirb1e the orientation of educational procedures towards practical objectives; the world is vl- . seeing an International hour of , clarifications, definitions and liber- . tities, therefore be it resolved that the .sixty-sixth convention of the FAT, meeting in this city of . San Francisco, put on record, declaring that the American territory of Puerto Rico has reached such a ' point of maturity, capacity and loyalty as a progressive community within the jurisdiction and auspices of the Congress of the United States: that the Congress of the United States is under a moral obligation to define the . United States is under a moral obligation to clearly define the political status of Puerto Rico, through those measures compatible with the rights and privileges of American citizenship granted to the People of Puerto Rico in 1917.'" The resolution further states that "the Executive Council (leaves FAT) is authorized to take such action as may be 'pertinent to carry out the purpose of this resolution and request from the Congress of the United States and the President of; the United States the approval of such measures, which will definitively clarify the political status of two million American citizens living in Puerto Rico." Mr. Nogueras Rivera also informed that his resolution number 8, submitted to the FAT to request Congress to extend sections I, IV and X of the Social Security Act to Puerto Rico, was also unanimously approved by the convention. This resolution declares in one of its sections that ''the extension to Puerto Rico of titles I, IV and X of the Social Security Act, gives (Continued on p. 28)
Committee created to study Arecibo's civic problems
The committee was created to study the civic problems of Arecibo by the Alcoholics Anonymous, Teachers' Association, Parents and Teachers Association, Medical Association and countless other citizens. Because the invitations to the assembly were made individually to each and every governmental, civic, religious and professional agency, the absence of a representation from the Po- - Hela Instilar, as well as from the Rotary Club of Aredbo, was noted. i - The assembly discussed various problems of this community, including youth delinquency, and the < > men- 1 - dicidad. The lack of "ervices j ■ (Continued on pg. 7) 1
Tahoneros join in food saving .
Will make smaller buns; eliminate consignment sales Brewers to lower production Both nation's industries will save 3 million panniers wheat For GRANT DILLMAN United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, Oct. 17. (PU) - The 35.The nation's 35,000 bakers added their support today to the food conservation program by adopting an 11-point economy plan to save up to three million bushels of wheat a month to help famine-stricken Europeans. Bakers constitute the third major segment of the grain-consuming American ■ industries, which enters the campaign ink ciated twelve days ago by the loan. Truman and Charles A. Luck- ■ man, chairman of the Ciu- - dans Committee, under the slogan "Food * For Europe." Representatives of the brewing Indus, tria agreed last night to re duclr by 25 per cent the consu- ■ mo of corn for the manufacture of ' beer, to return 200,000 bushels ' of wheat and rice to the Government and to eli- ' minate the use of products which can. be devoted to the fattening of ga. ' nado. A saving of one million tons of grain per month is anticipated through the adoption of such measures. Previously the whiskey distillers have agreed to a total shutdown of the factories for sixty days, beginning at noon on October 25, which is expected to result in an economy of 10 to 20 million bushels of grain, the shortage of which is acute. The brewers said their contribution will not appreciably affect the quality or quantity of the su. f nuni*teo"-4e cerveeaj*The closing of the distilleries" is not expected to produce a shortage of whiskey, as all the' factories have large stocks. If successful, the three programs will accumulate for export during the two months and months remaining before the end of the year. . of the additional one hundred million bushels" of grain which the Government is trying to raise for export to France, Italy and Austria during the year 1947. Italy and Austria du. . during the Winter. i The tahonero" action was . announced-by Luckman after i several days of arduous negotiations - with representative" of the Industry. - The program consists mainly of the elimination of the current consignment system and a campaign to produce smaller loaves of bread wherever possible. Under the consignment system, 14s tahona" distribute, for sales promotion purposes, more bread than the retailers can normally sell, and then receive the surplus after it has gone stale. Luckman said that the ta" ' lioners themselves estimate that they can save 10,500,000 bushels of wheat a year by placing restrictions on production and di" trlbution methods. He added that housewives can save twice that amount by avoiding waste in the home, and that another 5,500,000 bushels can be saved by public catering establishments. A proposal to start the ela. boraclón of bread rolls of the size of a pint, was made. A proposal to start making pint-size bread rolls was discussed and discarded for the time being, Luckman explained, because the bakers would have to replace their molds, wrapping machinery and wrapping material. But (Continued on p. 28)
Justice urges improvements in the judicial branch
Negrón raises precarious state of court buildings on the. Island Proposes to invest $8,200,000 Jail capacity is not sufficient for current prison population That "it is imperative that the study of permanent improvements in the Judicial Branch be initiated, in order to include in the next economic program those amounts that may be necessary to initiate this program," Attorney General Luí" Negrón Fernández has declared to the Planning Board. In his petition to the Planning Board, the Attorney General stated that "the current state of most of the public buildings in which the Courts of Justice are housed does not meet the needs of said Courts, and those housed in private buildings do not really offer the dignity and respect expected for a Court of Justice. "I understand that the administration of Justice in Puerto Rico," the Solicitor adds, "is an essential and basic service, which we owe to the people, and that these important offices of the Government should be housed in buildings that inspire due dignity and respect. As regards the Executive Branch. comprising the Office of the Attorney General and the Penal Institutions, the" difficulties of space and premises which we have lately encountered in the former, have been of such a nature, that they simply seriously hamper the smooth running of that office. Hence arises the impelling need for the construction of an "ad hoc" building for the central offices of the Department of Justice, or the convenient and adequate reconstruction of the present building at Fortaleza No. 50. The Attorney General also raises the problem of the lack of housing in the Island's penal institutions, by submitting a memorial prepared by the Superintendent of Penal Institutions, Mr. J. Antonio Alvarado, and proposes a remedy to the situation, by eliminating some of our prisons, the premises they occupy, the construction of new structures and the expansion and improvement of the existing ones. To this effect, he warns that "the promiscuity and overcrowding in these institutions, some of them built more than a century ago, make difficult, if not impossible, any attempt to achieve the physical and moral improvement of the delinquents". The situation in the penal institutions is described by the Attorney General as follows: "From 1920 to 1947, the population of the District Prisons has increased considerably, as shown by the following figures: 1920: 536; 1930: 1,312; 1940: 1,515; and 1947: 1,816. To deal with this increase of 1,280 inmates the only additional facility provided over a period of 27 years has "been Camp Guavate, where, together with inmates from the Penitentiary," 50 prisoners have been transferred from these prisons. "It is clearly evident that the only solution to the problem of overcrowding in our penal institutions is the immediate removal of some of our prisons from the premises they now occupy and the establishment of new institutions. Specifically, we wish to point out that there are three institutions that must be abolished as a matter of urgency. They are: "The District Jail *of Mayagüez, which has been located in a privately owned building since 1918. This jail has a total population of 123 prisoners, plus 40 who have had to be transferred to the Ponce District Jail/ The Mayagüez jail at present can house, in relatively comfortable conditions, only 60 or 70 inmates. It is not difficult to imagine the conditions prevailing in that institution when 123 or more inmates are being housed. "Guayama District Jail. This institution was built in 1879. From that date until now not a single inch has been added to the building to accommodate the rapid increase of inmates. The present population is 138 prisoners plus 25 that have had to be transferred to the San Juan District Jail. The Guayama District Jail, like the Mayagüez District Jail, can accommodate only 60 to 70 inmates. "The San Juan District Jail is the oldest on the island. It was established in 1837 to house all prison offenders. Until 1933 it served as a prison and penitentiary, passing in that year the prisoners of the prison to the new establishment built in Rio Piedras. The building currently houses 682 prisoners in truly unhygienic or uncomfortable conditions for the best discipline and order of the penitentiary. The present structure lacks the facilities at all for the construction of rows of cells that are so necessary in a prison of this nature, where such a wide range of different offenders, many of whom are held in the prison, are detained.