THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY. Mostly cloudy ' t-asionalM showers IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY. Maximum temperature, My minimum ti. Barometric pressure at sea level. at 4:30 p.m., 2".M inches of mercury.
32 Pages
OMO Pfe THE MORNING
1072
YEAR XXVIII
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTC
0 RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 20, 1947.
Mr. automovUlata, do not try om grace, another m killed with it.
NUMBER 1
Truman back in the Nation
Will face International crisis on arrival at White House today Will confer with General Marshall Will review incidents in Trieste/report on aid for Europe By Robert F. Lnftus CorrimponMl of United Press WASHINGTON, Sept. 19 . (PU) - President Trumnn ler. mined his 10,845-mile trip to South America today. by 1lcRing at Norfolk, Va. He left at once for Washington, where a series of foreign ,and domestic problems awaits him, which threaten the stahi-. lity of the world and quiz his own! political future. The Chief of the Executive, still suffering from a bronchial catarrh contracted during his goodwill visit to Rio de Janeiro, had a tanned face and was looking well when he descended from the Missouri airplane at 1:50 p.m. to accept a welcome greeting from the office and numbers from the Norfolk Naval Base. Norfolk. Accompanied by his wife, his daughter Margarita and other members of the official group who made the three-week trip to Brazil with him. 1 boarded the presidential yacht WilliamsJ' hurg. which immediately began! to go up the Potomac coi, direction Washington. The yacht is expected at the Capital tomorrow, from half-past seven to eight o'clock in the morning, thus ending the only real vacation the President has enjoyed since he took office 29/ months ago, and marking the beginning of the most momentous days of his administration. i! The President has before him a barrel full of domestic and international problems which have come, to a climax during his , absence. The most serious of all [ arises from the exchange of attacks during the week between the Secretary of State, George C.: Marshall, and the Deputy Foreign Minister of Russia, Andrei Vishinsky. before the General Assembly of the United Nations. Marshall,!' who personally assumed the di- ' rection of the American delegation to the Assembly, is expected here shortly, to confer with Mr. Truman on Vlshins'ky's acrimonious attack on yesterday's session. Other State Department officials will be called to the White House to discuss the food crisis and dollar shortages in Europe, border incidents between American and Yugoslav troops in Trieste, and other diplomatic problems. Also awaiting the President is a government report on the state of the Nation's economic resources with regard to Europe's need for U.S. aid. On top of that is a special report by Lieutenant General Albert C. Wedemeyer on the situation in China and the advisability of giving additional aid to the Nationalist government of General Chiang Kai Slick. At the head of the domestic problems, and forming part of the foreign aid, is the question of high prices for consumers. The most outspoken Republican leader against Pre! Robert A. Taft, Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio, raised the price problem in a policy speech in San Francisco today, and even the most devoted supporters of the Administration advocated government action to stop the rise in the cost of living. State Department officials who have been working to outline Europe's needs before moving to request a Congressional appropriation are concerned that high prices are driving up the cost of foreign aid. French and Italian officials have estimated that their countries will need $1 billion in American aid for the next six months to keep afloat until the Marshall Plan can begin to operate. They are. (Continued on page 16,)
News Digest
Tension mounts at U.N. assembly as delegates openly flag-waving. Vishinsky's attacks were answered with exmada violence. ♦ * * From today the continuous water service begins again in the metropolitan area. - ♦ ♦ Rector, Benitez allows 1 to hoist Puerot Rico flag on University flagpole. - ♦ ♦ ♦ Truman will be in Washington to face the international situation at once - - - - - - - * - A million striking workers decided to return to work eñ Italy, which is a triumph for, De Gásperi. - Peiloff does not see the sugar industry as a factor that will stimulate the island economy.
The island government will contribute little funding to the SAA's work program over the next six years. "The' project involves an investment of $34,041,500. The JNRT gave the CIO and the FAT until October 81 to file statements on whether they have communist affiliations. t * ♦ * The Governor signed the Ix>tería regulations. * ♦ * U.S. military force destroyed Naka River dam which threatened to flood the Japanese Capital. There are 600,000 homeless. * * * Dr. Iron airlifted to do the medical study on the Island, on behalf of the AMA. Commissioner Sierra Berdecía leaves today for the United States.
Liquor problem to be discussed in Fortaleza.
ML 'W; ■ ' Governor Plflern A financing bill is pending Will focus on clandestine rum case -Treasury drafts regulations (The problems of the liquor industry in Puerto Rico will be discussed again by Governor Piftero ¡ with industry leaders and with legislative and government leaders, at a meeting to be held in Fortaleza, the date of which has not yet been set. This meeting will be held at the initiative of the Governor himself, who reportedly considers it necessary to discuss the whole situation again with a view to resolving as quickly as possible the problems affecting this important industry. It is very likely that the said con-j ference will be held at night, in order! that all the, time necessary to deal with all! the problems may be available. It was mentioned yesterday that the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, will be invited to participate in these discussions. Although legislation has been passed to address many of the problems of the liquor industry, no regulations have yet been enacted to put these statutes into effect: Such regulations are very necessary, since they will indicate the administrative procedures to be followed to enforce the provisions of these laws. It was reported that the Island Treasury is working on the drafting of the aforementioned regulations and that this work has taken time due to the variety of matters contained in said laws. One of the matters pending resolution, which is of vital importance to the liquor industry, is that related to the financing plan to facilitate greater shipments of liquor to the United States. As will be recalled, the possibility was studied some months ago of the Banco de Fomento providing the necessary funds to the Industrialists, at a reasonable rate of interest, to enable them to make the large investments involved in the payment, locally, of the federal internal revenue tax of $9.00 per gallon of rums exported. By financing this investment in the proposed manner, more Puerto Rican liquors could be shipped to the United States, in order to establish a reserve in that country that would allow the product to develop more freely in the market free of the tax that represents for the industry a large initial investment of funds for federal internal revenue. This matter was preliminarily discussed some months ago, but no final policy has yet been decided on how to implement it. . Other problems of the liquor industry are the remarkable rise in the production and sale of clandestine rosins, in open competition with the legalized industry, the present situation regarding the production and sale of liquor, and the enactment of the recently passed laws. All of these problems will be given attention at the meeting requested by Governor Piñero, which is expected to be held before the President leaves for the United States.
Tensions rise at Assembly of Nations as delegates openly divide the camps
Downward trend noted in retail food prices in major markets Chicago Chamber of Commerce saw declines in wheat, corn and oats. Government is considering reducing exports to needy nations
Forrestal
By WILLIAM L. HATHAWAY CHICAGO, Sept. 19 (PU) - Grain prices declined today for the second consecutive day in an apparent general downward course in prices in the Nation's major trading centers. However, with the exception of: some scattered items where price drops have been registered, the grocery store where the family buys has not been visibly affected yet by the downward trend that has been taking shape in grains". Wheat, corn and oats are down to the full limit allowed for one day's trading at the Chicago Chamber of Commerce - 10 cents for wheat, 8 cents for corn and 6 cents for oats. Butter and egg prices declined on the Chicago Board of Trade, as did cattle prices, which fell sharply. Corn for delivery this month closed today at $2.46 a bushel, down nearly 20 cents from the all-time price of $2.65% recorded four days ago. September wheat closed at [$2.61. 10 cents less than yesterday and 24 cents less than the all-time price of $2.65 a bushel recorded on Sept. 11. July wheat closed at 52.34 5/8, almost 31 cents less than the $2.65 price of Sept. 11.
May oats were down 6 cents to $1.01-3/8, and butter was down 2 cents from the trading limit. Dun A Bradstreet reported that the price index on 30 basic staples fell again today for the third consecutive day to 281.06. The index's high was recorded on September 16, when it reached 287.05. Butter and egg prices fell on the Chicago Board of Trade as a result of the announcement by the Exchange's Board of Directors that spreads would be increased today. Eggs for October fell 130 to 150 points, reducing the contract to 54.9 and 54.95 cents a dozen. For November they closed at 53.4 and 53.5 cents a dozen, down about a cent from yesterday's price. In the Midwest cattle in the feedlots were down as much as 50 cents and hog prices were down 25 to 50 cents. Retail butter prices were down in many cities. A Chicago chain store advertised butter at 79 cents per pound. In some stores in that city, butter has reached the price of $1.02 per pound. It is reported that the Government is considering a plan to reduce exports to needy countries.
Governor Approves Lottery Rules Establishes the Obligations of Persons Controlling Agencies Yesterday afternoon the Governor approved the regulations prepared by the Treasurer for the administration of the Puerto Rico Lottery. These regulations state that the agencies granted to a married person will be understood to be granted to the conjugal partnership and the contract will be signed by both spouses and the administration. Representation and personal attention shall be assumed by the husband. Every agent has to dedicate premises for his agency and post in a visible place a sign with the name of the agent and the agency number. The main provisions of the regulation are: "Authorized peddlers shall only buy tickets from the agents who have appointed them, who shall be obliged to give them the discount fixed in the scale prepared by the Chief of the Bureau and approved by the Treasurer," "In the case of spouses and spouses who are not married, the agent shall be entitled to the discount fixed in the scale prepared by the Chief of the Bureau and approved by the Treasurer. In the case of spouses under the existing regime in Puerto Rico of community of property, the agency, for all purposes of the Law and the Regulations, shall be understood to be granted to the marital partnership. The contract shall be signed by both spouses and the administration, representation and personal attention of the same shall be assumed by the husband as legal representative of the conjugal partnership, except in those cases in which for clearly justified reasons it is convenient for the best interests of the Lottery and it is agreed between the parties, that such administration, representation and attention be delegated totally or partially to the wife." "Lottery agents shall qualify as such by signing a contract with the Lottery Bureau for the purchase and sale of lottery tickets for a term of one year, in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Treasurer,' and by furnishing a bond sufficient to faithfully answer for the performance thereof." "The agents shall personally administer their agencies in the town or district for which they were conferred and shall be obliged to maintain a place of easy access to the public." "At the front of the building where the premises in which they have established their agency is located, the agents shall be obliged to prominently post in a conspicuous place, a sign not less than 12 inches wide by 18 inches long, in which the name of the agent, the name of the town and the number of the agency shall be stated."
Government to contribute little funds SAA works next 6 years Cuevas said that financing of the program will be done with fund* raised* by bond issue* and small help from the Insular Government.
The Insular Government's economic contribution to the Aqueduct and Sewer Service's public works program for the next six years will be very little, according to the agency's Director, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, who said yesterday. The mentioned public improvement program involves an investment of $34,041,500, according to a detail of projects submitted by the SAA to the Planning Board. When asked to comment on the financing of these projects, Mr. Cueva stated the following: "The financing of this vast public improvement program, which represents an investment for this agency of $34,041,500, will be made with funds to be obtained through the issuance of revenue bonds of the Service itself, and with contributions from the Island Government. "We are currently reviewing the program submitted to the Planning Board in order to determine what proportion of these funds can be raised with the issuance of bonds, and what proportion of the funds can be raised with the issuance of bonds, and what proportion of the funds can be raised with the issuance of bonds, and what proportion can be raised with the issuance of bonds. In Carolina and Ponce, where the Popular leadership has had discrepancies of local character, the Central Direction of the Party has erected a special "organism" to take charge of the Inscription work, according to a note authorized by the Secretariat of the collectivity, adding: "In Carolina, the designated Commission is integrated by Mr. Luis Hernández, Julio Carmona and the General Secretary of the Party, Ildefonso Solá Morales, who will preside over the Commission. As the constitution of this body authorizes Mr. Solá Morales to appoint a representative to preside over the Commission in his absence, Mr. Solá Morales has appointed Mr. Evangelista Rodríguez as his representative. "In Ponce a commission has been appointed' which is composed of Mr. Juan Vázquez Vélez, as president, and Messrs. Dr. José N. Gándara, Obdulio Castro, Ramón Enrique Bauzá, Lula E. Escribano, Francisco Girón,, Jorge Quevedo and Jesús González, coñio vocales. "In both towns these commissions will assume the functions of the Local Committees and it is hoped that through these special organisms the dissenting sectors can lend their cooperation to the work of inscriptions that the Party is carrying out".
The request would have to be made to the Go- ,,, blerno Insular. < "Naturally, we know from there (emano that the funds to be requested from the Insular Government will be for a very small amount, in relation ■ to the total allocation. The । Servlclp is of the opinion that a ■ large part of these works should , be carried out using funds to be ■ borrowed, to be pa- । gated from the agency's own Revenue" - - of the agency." The information submitted to the Planning Board was requested by this body," added Mr. Cuevas, to draft the government's economic program for the next six years. In order to recommend the best way to finance the SAA's program, this agency is conducting a complete review of its finances, as a result of which the scope of the revenue bond issues contemplated will be determined. "ular de Acueductos has had to i postpone, e nfecha recent date, the co- ■ mlenzo of the works of the new Santurce al- - cantarillado, due to the fact that the allocation available is not enough, at present [to cover the total cost of the [same. Mr. Cuevas Bustamante explained that this is mainly due to the increase in the price of materials, which has changed all the calculations to that effect. . Mr. Cuevas added that if the works were started without taking all the money available, they would run the risk of having to suspend them later, with the natural inconveniences and hindrances. A * considerable part of the hamlet of 1 Santurce, including a good part > of the County, does not enjoy, as yet, the ' sewerage service. The new installation is calculated to supply the service needed by practically all the neighborhoods of Santurce.
Metropolitan area roadway plan approved
The Planning Board approved in final form the modifications to the regulatory plan of highways and urban roads for the metropolitan area of San Juan. Important amendments were authorized to the projected Ramal Sur road, which will extend from the Martín Peña bridge to Río Piedras, following the military detour, and to the projected Ramal Labra urban road, which will connect Fernández Juncos Avenue, at the seventeenth and seventeenth stops, with the Con.
section. The Board will make known on Monday the complete details of the approved trajectory for these public roads. The amendments to the aforesaid 'regulating plan originated in public hearings held by the Board some time ago, at which a large number of property owners appeared. Engineers, merchants and other interested persons. In a large number of cases, the recommendations made by those attending these public hearings have been followed.
crest sworn in as Secretary of Defense
Ir H/i sillily ' .'í-'h'-'%. o* S aWjwMsArw >111 El EE VI MMVBRHEi
Jame" V. Forrrwtal (right, or front) was sworn in as the first Secretary of the United States Defenaa" before the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Fred M. Vinaon (center). Iji ceremony took place at the Navy Department, Washington, on mlércolea at noon. Attending the ceremony are, from left to right, Secretary of 1* C e -ra, Kenneth Royall: Chief of Staff of the Army, Dwight D. Elsenhower; Undersecretary ) i aMrlna, John L. Sullivan; Chief of Naval Operations, Chester W. Nlmlts; Under Secretary of War, 8. Stuart Symington, and General Cari Spaats, Chief of the Air Lines. (Associated Press Photo).
Continuous water service begins today in metropolitan area Last* rains have increased the reserves in the SAA reservoirs; there is additional liquid from the Hnto Rey wells; new filters are being installed.
As a result of the latest rains, the flow of water from the Bayamón River began to increase yesterday, and reserves of the liquid began to accumulate in the aqueduct reservoirs, a situation which allowed the Aqueduct and Sewer Service to decree a continuous service to the San Juan metropolitan area starting today. The Director of the Service, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, was very optimistic about continuing to provide water service to the population without any interruption from now on, since the outlook for a repeat of the rains in the Piedras and Bayamón river basins is quite flattering. Yesterday, 31 million gallons of water per day were available for the entire population served by the metropolitan aqueduct. The largest amount, or 24 million gallons, was obtained from the Bayamón river basin, while the rest, or 7 million gallons, was obtained from the Piedras river basin. The additional water also came from deep wells in Hato Rey, which is why the SAA director said the situation "has improved considerably in the last two days. If the Cidra reservoir continues to increase, and if the Bayamón River continues to flow normally, 10,000,000 additional gallons of water could be added to the aqueduct's water reserves, for an amount that will exceed the normal needs of the system's users. Mr. Cuevas informed that new filters and additional equipment are being connected at the Guaynabo plant. Indispensable pa(Continued on page 16.) ' ¿ ¡ ¡ To our readers - Hanoi to bring to the attention of our readers the existence of a state of strike in our workshops on which so negotiates, without success, for two god. The movement, which we are trying to avoid with our best will, arises from the erroneous interpretation given by some unionized workers to one of the clauses of the labor agreement. EL MUNDO has submitted its case to the appropriate government authorities and is confident that a way will be found to clarify the point at issue to the full satisfaction of the parties. We take this opportunity to inform our readers that, because of this emergency, our Sunday edition will not circulate tomorrow; however, we will be circulating, as usual, next Monday, with the best newspaper we can offer under the present circumstances.
Sierra will leave today for the Continent > -- i He will make a study of how Puerto Ricans live in New York City i Today he will leave for the United States, the Commissioner of Labor, Mr. Fernando Sierra Berdecía, who, during his stay in the nation, will make a study of the conditions in which Puerto Ricans live in New York City, where he will make a study of the conditions in which Puerto Ricans live. The "resident" in New York, with my- . rae to adopt measures to be put into effect by the Department of Labor, to help solve their problems. i First, Commissioner Sierra will attend the annual convention of Labor officials, to be held in Ashville during the days (23rd to 23rd of this month). 23 to 26 of the present . month; he will then go to Wáihlngton to hold conferences with officials of the U.S. Department of Labor and of the . Labor Relations Board . Finally, Mr. Sierra will go to New York to carry out the study. i The study is related to The APA receives reports of the last drought from sugar cane districts, with a view to payment of indemnification Puerto Rican sugar cane growers are entitled to receive indemnification for "any losses" that have occurred in their plantations due to the last drought, according to the terms of the Federal Sugar Law. The Sugar Producers Association has already begun to receive the reports requested from the sugar producers on the effects of the drought on the sugar cane plantations, in order to determine the losses that the prolonged period of lack of rainfall caused to the different sugar cane districts of the Island, and to establish the estimated production for the 1948 harvest. The Association was unable yesterday to give an overall estimate of the damage caused to the crops because the reports have not been received in their entirety. They are only in possession of details of the situation created by the drought in very few districts, and more information is expected in the course of the next fortnight. The federal provisions on the scope of the aforementioned indemnity cover not only damages caused by drought, but also disasters caused by cyclones, inclement weather or uncontrollable natural forces. The Se (Continued on page 16.)
Vishinsky's attacks met with extreme violence Russian delegate filed resolution This condemns U.S. as war promoter, - Anticipated to be defeated For James E. Roper United Press Correspondent UNITED NATIONS HALL, FLUSHING, NEW YORK, Sept. 19. (PU)-The" delegates of the small powers to the United Nations General Assembly today intervened in the diplomatic controversy between Russia and the United States, openly taking positions on both sides, while speeches of violent tones were delivered which heightened the tsn "lon between East and West. Argentina, South Africa, Brazil and Australia replied energetically to the accusation launched by the Soviet delegate, Andrei Y. Vishinsky, to the effect that. But White Russia fully endorsed Viahíñaky's accusation and proposed that all members of the United Nations break off diplomatic relations with Franco's Spain. Mrs. Vijaya Lakashml Pandit, Indian Ambassador to Russia, adopted a moderate course, but opposed American suggestions to limit the use of the veto. . As the general debate before the Assembly entered its third day, the small powers began to discuss Spain, racial discrimination in South Africa and many other problems, but the sharpest pronouncements were directed against the two giants of the conference - Russia and the United States." Harry Lawrance, of South Africa, asked Viahlnaky not to interfere in the problem of racial discrimination in South Africa. Lawrance recalled that South Africa is "blindfolded" by the "conquest of territory" by the Soviet after the war, Joaé Arce of Argentine ridiculed VlRhinaky for believing that everyone is fighting against him. He defended Argentina's sending a new ambassador to Spain after the Assembly recommended that all members of the United Nations withdraw their ambassadors and ministers from Madrid. Arce said that Spain did not constitute a threat to peace, but that the situation in Greece did. Greece did. Arce asserted that Russia violated the United Nations Charter whenever it suited its purposes and that the Soviet use of the veto threatened to divide the world. Austrian Foreign Minister Herbert Evatt told a press conference that Vishinsky's attack was an attempt to provoke international friction and disorder. It was, Evatt said, only a smokescreen to cover up Russia's own case, White Russia thought otherwise. Its chief delegate, K. V. Kiselev, repeated almost all the accusations Vishinsky made against the United States, and renewed the demand that the American press be denied the freedom to criticize Russia "on pain of criminal punishment". Russia "on pain of criminal punishment." Vishinsky, who included * sections of the American Press in the accusations of "war-mongering against industrialists and functionaries," introduced a formal resolution to condone the United States for fomenting war. The resolution, which has no chance of passing, also called for declaring it a criminal offense to talk of war. The Assembly said that the continuation of the joint U.S.-British general staffs, and the signing of the Rio de Janeiro peace treaty, oran oeflaloa that the Western powers were preparing for war against Russia. Argentina de "ea to abolish the veto power with regard to the admission of new members to the United Nations. Although Russia has opposed any change in the voting power, the United States has announced its willingness to eliminate the veto on all matters that do not involve proposals for punitive measures. Vmshi ' Dendramio, of Grace, referred to how the Soviet veto blocked action by the Security Council on the Balkan problem. He urged action by the Assembly to protect Greece against the communist dictatorship, which, in his opinion, was asking to be imposed through the intervention of Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia in Greek affairs.