THE NUNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Mostly cloudy, with occasional moderate showers and thundershowers during the day. Showers and squalls will decrease in intensity during the afternoon and evening.
38 Pages 5'.
MARANA'S DIARY
Mr. motorist, I don't try that grace, someone else killed you with it. -- - -
NUMBER 11066
YEAR XXVIII
Entered as second class matter, Post Office. San Juan. P. R
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY SEPTEMBER 13, 1947
Policemen will receive their paychecks today
Checks were sent yesterday in four jeeps to the island's police officers They include the last two months' salaries Mr. Irizarry explains the reductions. - Protests continue in the Corps At the latest in the morning of hov "Abado, according to "a *"P* r *"J* "such'ldad of the members of the Island Police will receive in a single ch- qu", their back pay for the me "e" of July and Mosto. Four ve Mrulos left yesterday afternoon from Headquarters at Puerta de Tierra in four different directions, to deliver to the Police Teles.de Police a total of about d" one thousand five hundred checks. The one thousand one hundred and sixty-two corps checks, comprising July and August salaries, were received from the Paymaster's office at headquarters in the early afternoon. At half past two o'clock, the registry was ready, and at about four o'clock the four jeeps, driven by policemen, left to personally deliver the checks to the police posts. In the Paymaster's Office of the Uniformed I dd worked until 12 o'clock the night before yesterday, when they finished preparing the last payroll of the police personnel. The corresponding division of the Auditor's Office worked hard until half past one in the morning, on the payrolls it received in the course of the early hours of the night. At half past six in the morning of a.xer. as reported in the Personnel Office, Messrs. Oscar M Esteves. Antonio Cuevas, Manuel Meléndez and Luis Rondón, of said Office, went to Headquarters to finish the certification of the last payrolls. At half past seven in the morning, these were already at the Auditor's Office, as reported. The Official Paymaster of the Police, Mr. Francisco Irizarry. He also informed that on Monday work will begin on the September payroll, and the work is planned to be sent to the Personnel Office by the 22nd, so that the members of the corps will receive their pay for this month in the first days of October at the latest. Checks h dispatched yesterday afternoon for the-, la. covering the two months of July and August, amount to a total of $465,000. ~ The Chief of Police, "Colonel Salvador T. Roig. gave instructions that the checks should be delivered at the police barracks where they were found as the vehicles carrying them passed, and that upon arrival at the zone headquarters, the checks corresponding to the zone should be delivered to the office of the Zone Chief. The first delivery route is the one of Bayamón, following the following itinerary: Route 1: Bayamón. Vega Alta. Vega Baja, Manati. Arecibo. Hatillo. Camuy, Quebradillos, tsabela, Aguadilla. Aguada. Rincan. Añasco. Mayagüez. San Germán and Sábana Grande; 1-A, Bayamón. Toa Baja. Dorado, Toa Alta. Coronal. Naranjito. Comerlo and Cataño; 1-B Manatí. Barceloneta. Ciales and Morovis: 1-C. Arecibo and Utuado; ID. Aguadilla, Moca San Sebastián. Lares: 1-E Mayagüez. Las Marla? Maricao, Hormigueros: 1-F. San Germán. Lajas. Cabo Rolo. Second Route, the one from Humacao, as follows: *-A Rio Piedras. Carolina Lo za, Rio Grande. Luquillo. Fwdo, Cei. ba Naguabo. Humacao. Yabucoa, Maunabo, Patillas. Arroyo Guaya- i ma, 2-B. Rio Piedras. Tfi tillo Alto and Guaynabo: 2-C Fajardo ". Vieques: 2-D. Humacao. Las Piedras and Juncos: 2-E. Guayama. Calinas and Santa Isabel. Third route, the deiPna-t: 3-A. Caguas, Cayey, Aibonito, Coamo, (Continued on page 22>).
News Compendium
According to the Weather Bureau, the tropical disturbance will pass early Saturday morning about 250 miles northeast of Puerto Rico. The danger to the island ceased yesterday afternoon, when the storm, which had winds of 140 miles per hour, diverted its route. The police officers will receive their paychecks today for the last two months. Checkup were sent in Jeeps to lotus barracks. Tree Chicago scientists have developed a new technique for the use of powdered penicillin in the treatment of bronchial infections. The Island will send delegates to the Architecture Congress to be held in Peru. / Fogi favors a session of the House of Representatives to readjust salaries. - - * jp formed total of 8,800 in Santiago Igleeiaa, in Ponce, at a cost of NM.2M.40. - - - - JPformed total 6,800 new lots an Is Island. e e e o By Friday, the 19th of the current is sapera will be open to traffic San Jose Street. ♦ - ♦ Plane broke down en route to Miami.
Miami regreaó a Isla Grande. ♦ - * Public Service will start transportation study next week. Molotov "a expected in New York with an undisclosed proposal from Mari "hall begins meetings today with his delegation. The new schools will open at the end of the month in the Capital area. t * - Marshall Plan will not be discussed in special session. - - ■ - Absuslto in Isabela the mayor fuste Méndes Cabrera. v ♦ o Brings visit to Patillas, Dr. Pens intends to render a report. ma sobre los cacos de malaria. Student" UPR leave economics classes explained by Professor Novick. - Workers claim S230A20.T5 in wages from Ferrocarrll. * Agriculture approved Agricultural Extension expenses for $101. - Prices register sudden drop in the Nation, brings resistance of consumers to pay Inflation levels. Taft advises to reduce food consumption.
Tropical disturbance will pass early today i Saturday morning about 250 miles northeast of Puerto Rico - ! "T- ~ i - "1 " n *r .
" i. . i । , 4- H - i ■ T ~ T ; - i j I V s T S" ■ L'.f -4- '" s "" 1 : '- ■ ¡ - a . " 1 - " _ . - ' -Ak-M. I . i- yr'■ **"-*-"** - - - r - Ti ■ i --- ■ - Ví ir*- Cbñ-- -* ' IMBjE i I I -1-4-4-1*! ■ : ! -- -w -ít I - - - m P-H.r"".... ™
New technique for use of penicillin Three Chicago doctors are using it in powder form for cases in bronchial For PAUL ELLIS Unids Press Science Editor NEW YORK, Sept. 12. <P UL -Three scientist" of Chicago reported today having developed a new method for breathing; penicillin powder, and that this new technique has given good results in the trstsmlento d* ailments of the respiratory system. Including chronic bronchitis, bronchial asthma and serious lung disorders. The scientists, Drs. Loul" Krasno, Mary Karp and Paul S.: Rhodes, of Wesley Memorial Hospital, Chicago. They reported their findings in the । journal of science, official organ of 1a American Aso-i elation for the Advancement of Science. Penicillin usually *" administered by injection. by mouth or as a local bandage. The new technique, given to publicity today, involves the use of a simple face mask, which allows the patient to breathe in the dry penicillin. Work on the new technique was begun in October 1946. It was reported by the Chicago group, and continued until last February. In all, 6R persons were treated. including 98 males and 30 females. . J .. In addition, four individuals engaged in the experiments, including the scientists, Inhaled the, penicillin powder in varying proportions, so as to avoid cusl-| ouier discomfort or irritating property. Of the 68 persons who were । treated by use of the penicillin mask. 55 had suffered from infections in 1a upper respiratory tract. Of these. 46 suffered from "common cold" symptoms; four had chronic nasal pharyngitis; three, chronic sinusitis; and two, laryngotracheal bronchitis. Nine patients had lower respiratory tract infections, and one had bronchial asthma. Each of the patients reported a (Continued on page 15.)
All danger to the Island ceased late yesterday afternoon when its track was diverted The hurricane was moving with winds blowing at 140 miles per hour. Heavy rains are expected. - Preparations made Fnr Luis Sanchez Cappa Editor d* EL MUNDO The threat that for several hours hovered over the Island due to the formation and development of the tropical disturbance that in the early hours of yesterday vlerne" took hurricane force, was diaipated yesterday afternoon.
i CSP will study transportation next week Toledo affirms that this problem will be solved in a drastic way. The President of the Public Service Commission, Mr. Jorg* V. Toledo. He informed yesterday that during the next week a study of the passenger transportation" in the metropolitan area will begin, tending to determine which "nn the deficiencies" in the "service and to take the "pertinent" measures to solve "in a drastic way" the transportation problem. According to Mr. Toledo, the Cornalón has considered that the problem is one that needs an immediate solution and, therefore, other work has been suspended in a different agency to attend to all transportation-related issues in the metropolitan area. The study to be conducted will take several days and the services of all the Commission's transit inspectors, the central weights and measures inspectors, and probably some personnel to be specially recruited to participate in this work, which will cover all routes in the metropolitan area, will be enlisted. The Transit Division has been instructed to prepare a list of all the minimum specifications that vehicles destined for passenger transportation must have". Once the aforementioned study is completed, the Commission's Inspectors will inspect all vehicles dedicated to the transportation of passengers and the Commission will cancel the certificates of those that do not meet the "requirements" required by its regulations. Although the aforementioned study and inspection will cover for now the routes of the metropolitan area, the Commission will extend its activities to all the routes of the Island, and according to the Chairman, drastic action will be taken against any public carrier that does not comply with the Commission's regulations. However, this body vi has begun to act against public carriers who do not comply with the Commission's regulations, and the Commission has begun to act against public carriers who do not comply with the Commission's regulations. such* as 25 de Enero Street, Nuevo Norte Street v > piece* of Guadalupe Street v Petardo Street. i The Ponce Municipal Housing Authority's project involves the construction of 34 two-story* concrete buildings. - comprising 96 units of one-bedroom vi- । vlenda: 98 units of two-bedroom vlenda: 80 units of three-bedroom vlenda: 8 units of four-bedroom vlenda, for a total of 280 ' housing units. The project will also be provided with a community center with a recreation area. The works also include the leveling of the land and the provision of water, sewage and electricity services. Three new "streets" will be built, as well as the corresponding "sidewalks" to access the buildings, and an area for the parking of twelve vehicles in front of the community center. 1 According to the Planning Board. The gross density of the project will be ■ 1? family" per acre. The estimated cost of the works reported by the aforementioned Authority is $992,289.40, which will be defrayed by federal or island funds. .1 The aforementioned project was approved by the U.S. Homes Authority and the Federal Homes Authority in the year 1941, the construction plans having been prepared and approved by said agency. The transaction ' for the purchase of the land "e reaH1, only several years ago. Both the 1 (Continued on page 15.)
when, according to reports given by the Weather Bureau, at six o'clock in the afternoon, the phenomenon varied "u curao. From a slight northwesterly curve, the hurricane, blowing at the rate of 140 miles per hour, and moving at 20 miles per hour, was centered, as located by Navy aviators following its path, 180 miles north of the island of Antigua. In the map appearing in this same "ülción of EL MUNDO, shows the location of the disturbance made by officials of the Bureau, i The bulletin number 7, issued by that office, which reported on the course of the cyclone and the elimination of the risk to Puerto Rico, was as follows: "Storm warnings eliminated for the Lesser Antilles at" 6:00 PM. The hurricane was located this afternoon by reconnaissance aircraft, and was centered at 6:00 p.m. near 19.3 degrees north latitude and 60.7 degrees west longitude, about 180 miles north-northeast of Antigua. Winds" are blowing about 140 miles per hour in a small area of the center, with hurricane-force winds" over an area 75 miles" in diameter, and the" gales are extending outward 100 to 150 miles" from the center. The hurricane has changed its course and is now moving to the northwest at about 20 miles per hour. Indications now are that the hurricane will move toward the northwest or west-northwest at about 18 to 20 miles per hour during the next 12 hours, reaching a point about 250 miles northeast of San Juan, Puerto Rico, early Saturday morning. Some increase in intensity and in the area of the wind hazards is expected tonight. All hurricane warnings have been lifted for the Lesser Antilles and there is no danger to the Lesser Antilles or Puerto Rico. However, vessels sailing in the path of this hurricane should take extreme precautions. Reports received by the Bureau subsequent to this bulletin indicated that the hurricane would continue on the trajectory traced on the map, with some slight variation. It was expected to pass to the northeast of Puerto Rico during the morning hours of today, at a distance of approximately 250 miles. It was reported by the Bureau that it was possible that heavy waters, ceros would fall over Puerto Rico, coupled with winds of low intensity. Yesterday's bulletins At 5:30 a.m. on Friday morning, the Weather Bureau issued its weather bulletin.
Pons to report on malaria cases Koppisch prepared an autopsy memorial* on deceased minors Upon his return from Patilla", where he was last Thursday observing on the ground the situation of the malaria epidemic in that town, Dr. Juan A. Fon", Commissioner of Health, announced that he will make a public report on the situation in Patilla". José A. Alum and other officials of the Department visited the town of Patillas the day before yesterday to inspect the work being done there by officials of the Department of Health in connection with the epidemic. According to what was reported by EL MUNDO, according to news received from Patillas, not all the cases that have been presented lately in that town and that were treated by the epidemiologists of the Department of Health, were of malaria, since many of them presented symptoms of other communicable diseases such as pneumonia, bronchopneumonia and gastroenteritis. Yesterday we communicated with Dr. Enrique Koppiach. of Ja Es. cuela de Medicina Tropical, who i Continued on page 22) The JP approved o Santiago Igle 280 units of apartment buildings will be built pi The Planning Board gave its approval yesterday to the construction of the San'iaco Iglesias hamlet, to be located in the city of Ponce, which will consist of ¡ 280 housing units in 34 apartment buildings, and will cost $992,259.40. The aforementioned housing development will be built on 16.5 acres of land owned by the Ponce Homes Authority, located northwest of the city, between Victoria Street and the land of the Sanatorio Antltuhercu Loso de Ponce. This land is
Agriculture approved Agricultural Extension expenses for 1948.
For Jean Van Vranken WASHINGTON, Sept. 12 (INS). - The Department of Agriculture today approved plans submitted by Roberto Huyke, director of the Puerto Rico Agricultural Extension Service, to invest $740,000 in that program's services* during fiscal year 1948. The fund represents $167,000 in excess of the amount appropriated last year for the operation of the rural program. It includes an additional $134,000 Federal ailgnadon for the* Bankhead-Jone Act* dl*po-idone*. and an increase of $33,000 in the* adgnadone* iniuláre*. ,
In the total fund the Federal Government allocates $378,666, and the Insular contributes $361,334. In announcing the approval of the fniular Extension Service budget, W. H. Conway, assistant director, indicated that, although a small portion of the federal funds require an equal allocation from the Island, Puerto Rico is contributing almost the entire amount. Puerto Rico is contributing almost half of the money available for the 1948 program. In his opinion, the Island's share was even greater before* the Eighth Congress approved the 8134,000 appropriation. In accordance with the approved budget, the allocation for the 1948 budget was higher than before the 8th Congreeo approved the appropriation of 8134,000.
Prices register sudden drop after resistance from consumer public
Molotov expected in New York with surprise proposal No í "p has disclosed nature of matter he will submit to General Assembly. - Marshall to begin meetings with his delegation By JAMES F.. Rprt'.R UoriezponsR) rtc Press Unirla LAKE SUCCESS, Sept. 12. Soviet Foreign Minister V. M. Molotov intends to arrive in New York early in October with a surprise proposal which he will offer to the United Nations General Assembly, reliable sources learned today.
reliable sources. The report was the first indication that Molotov intended to attend the Assembly meeting, which begins on Tuesday. The North American Secretary of State, George C. Marshall, will arrive in New York tonight, and is expected to be present for most of the session which will last from two to three months. The English foreign minister. Erl nest Revin, and the French foreign minister. Georges Rldault. may also attend. Forum Molotov apparently e hoped to rob the Indians of the prominence of the function. Informed circuios who revealed that Molotov intended to make a surprise proposal to the Assembly declined to give any indication as to the nature of the proposal. Last year Molotov took the initiative at the Assembly meeting. in proposing world wide disarmament. The indications are to the effect that this time something equally spectacular is proposed. Molotov's suggestion on disarmament led to the creation of a commission on disarmament, but it has achieved nothing. A meeting on disarmament was set for today to discuss how to go about the job. ' Until Molotov arrives, the Soviet delegation will be led by foreign vlceminiitro An- ' drei Vishlnaky. Molotov is fixed-, do for Home to the United States aboard the liner Queen ¡ Elizabeth. He will be backed by । foreign uhminlat.ro Andrei . Gromyko, per- ! manent Soviet delegate to the United Nations Council of dad", of 100 : minor official" from Moscow, and, ■ da a strong contingent of guar- - daegpalda". In Long I "land "a has ¡leased an additional mansion । to house the" new" te*. James F. Byrnes, American Secretary of ¡ ' State during last year's assembly, attended; it only briefly. But Marshall intends to stay until most of the crucial issues have been aired. This will enable him to guide the American delegation through what may prove to be the most "crossroads" session the General Assembly has ever had. It will also enable Marshall to con-; ■ trastrate the mystery and charm that the Russians like to raise. Tomorrow Marshall will begin a serle of pre-assembly conferences with the American delegation, which will again include Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt. The delegation will discuss the policy to be followed "on every important question that is expected to arise. At Lake Success, New York, on the other hand, Great Britain initiated a dramatic move - on the eve of the United Nations General Assembly - to propose a census of all the armies of the world Sir Alexander Cadogan, of England, said that the count would be "a brief and small step towards creating the internal confidence necessary for the success of disarmament and other United Nations tasks. Sir Alexander's startling proposal, made before the United Nations Disarmament Mission, constituted a departure from Britain's previous policy, and set a critical tone for next Tuesday's commencement of the General Assembly session which may determine whether the United Nations will ever function. With scanty circumlocution, the British delegate said that the theoretical and pro- ! gious discussion of general principles would achieve little. What was needed- , Cadogan added- was an early exchange of information on the armed forces" v weapon (Continued on page 22) ■ - No news today of Truman's visit > Hist* yesterday, no special message had been received at Fortaleza about President Truman's planned visit to Puerto Rico. As has long been ■ announced, the President plans to make a trip to Puerto Rico, and according to the latest reports, the visit is likely to take place next November. As will be known, aeflor Truman is traveling 1 at present on the Missouri, on his way back to the national capi- { tal, after visiting Brazil. ;¡l --i
V1ACHESLAV MOLOTOV To consult on the price of gasoline Paoli will address the" drivers and owners of public cars The Sindicato Unico de Chófer"", presided over by Mr. Rafael Psoll, will consult among the drivers and owners of public cars on the island, to resolve the action to be taken in relation to the instability of the price of gasoline. Mr. Paoli said yesterday that "we have been patiently waiting for the gasoline importing companies and the Government to act, one or the other, to control the situation, but, in view of the fact that nothing has been done, the Union will proceed to consult with the drivers and owners of public automobiles to make "our own determinations". Mr. Paoli indicated that he could not anticipate what would be the action of the drivers and owners of public automobiles to the proposed consultation, and assured that "the new increase decreed in the price of gasoline comes to increase the weight of the burden that weighs on the driver class, which is being treated worse and worse". According to the president of the Sindicato Unico de Chóferes, according to studies carried out by him, "the owner of a public automobile contributes to the Island Treasury a "greater than $500 annually for different concepts". He added that "it is imperative an energetic pa "o on the part of the drivers, to relieve them of the burden of the multiple contributions that represent the multiple contributions that are paid to them". (Continued on page 22) San José Street will be open to traffic on the 19th Giro expects that by that date, the cement for said road will already be set Engineer Salvador V. Caro, Director of Public Works of the Government of the Capital, informed yesterday that San José Street will be open to traffic next Friday, September 19, when the work that has been carried out on said road will be completely finished. According to Mr. Caro, by that date the concrete to be used in the construction work will have set as required. The Capital City Government Engineer also indicated that they are currently "carrying out the" reconstruction work on San Juato Street and that work will soon begin on San Aguatin Street, at Puerta de Tierra. As we reported in a recent edition, the Planning Board approved the plan for the construction and reconstruction of San Juan Street, which will be carried out by the Capital City Administration. The program will be carried out with an investment of $200,000, which was distributed to cover the cost of the work on thirty streets in Santurca. The Board also approved another identical program, at a cost of $175,000, provided by the Emergency War Program, which will benefit another twelve streets in San Juan. The "street" to be rebuilt by the (Continued on page 15.)
| They had reached a point only 7 per cent below the 1920 mark Taft advises consumption to be reduced Buyer movement increases to avoid paying inflated prices By CLAIRE COX United Press Correspondent CHICAGO, Sept. 12 (PU)- The prices of grain, butter, eggs and beef began to fall today after six turbulent weeks of increases. The break in prices came as the Department of Labor in Washington reported that wholesale prices, which were set at the end of last week, rose only 7 percent. "They were only 7 percent below the all-time high mark reached in May 1920, immediately before the sharp trade depression of 1920-21. Today's declines promise some relief at the wholesale and retail levels, but not for several weeks. These b*j*". at least, have temporarily broken the upward spiral which began during the drought in the corn industry last month, and which drove up the cost of all staple foods to extraordinary levels. | The weather conditions have apparently had little to do with the decline, however. Market observers say that prices have been driven downward by the buyer's tone, by rumors of the reestablishment of government controls, and by an increase in the margin requirement at the Chicago Board of Trade. "The nation's biggest gra- ¡ no* basic gra- ¡ no* market, "There is also to coneldet the l h "c.ho d" that "1 "1 morcado "ubtó i foolish, had to go down soon' vI commented one oíwiervator. The Labor Department said that the nation's average wholesale prices rose another six percent last week, the eighth consecutive week of record highs. Food prices were 33.2 percent higher than the same week a year ago, the Department said. The Bureau of Labor Statistics of that department says that through September 6, the average wholesale prices, covering 900 basic items considered in a "stu- ; dio, were 27 percent above the previous year, and 54.9 percent higher than the 1926 average. F.l "enator Robert A. Taft, a Republican from Ohio, offered a new theory of the "price" of the "tito". (1)1- ¡ he said that the absorption of food by the American public has a lot to do with the rising cost of grapevines. Taft told a press conference in St. Croix. California. qu" many "merlcano" could help lower prices" ai eo| or even less. He suggested a program for "voluntary reduction of food consumption" as part of a more definite plan.... Asked about the idea of the people eating less, he replied: "no, eat less meat, and eat monee extravagantly." The resistance of the conaumldors to paying the high retail price continued to increase. Fortavocea of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange said that many* shoppers had refused to pay $1.05 a pound for butter at some retail outlets. When consumers bought margarine instead of butter, they said, they said, they were still paying for it. In Decatur, Illlnola. the aeflora C. H. Rollin" initiated a "chain" phone strike, following the pattern set by the one already in effect in Toledo, Ohio. Mrs. Rollins said she called 10 friends and told them not to buy butter for a week. Each of her friends called other friends at the same time. Cheater Bowles, former head of the OAP, predicted in Eaaex, Connecticut, that public resentment would force it to lower prices, as happened after World War I. > . "It is time for the American family, which has suffered drastically from drastically inflated prices for the past 15 months, to stand up and take enough punishment," Bowles said. John Brophy, national director of the Industrial Councils of the CIO, urged in Cleveland that the congressmen investigating the high price issue return to Washington and convene a special session of Congress to "immediately" restore price controls. The American Institute do 1a Meat, agreeing with Taft. said" in Chicago that "there is no mystery" "n as to meat prseios nor as to what makes them rise or fall. "The facts are clear," says the Institute."-"All those who are fa. mlllar with the meat industry, including the United States Dept. of Agriculture, recognize that prices are determined by the demgmlí I of the eon "umidore" by the quantity of meat. "When more" per "ona" gsnan ' (Continued on page 15.) J