THE M&NDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: Mostly cloudy with occasional showers in the morning. Partly cloudy this morning and tonight. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: High, 84: low' 76. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.94 inches of mercury. No indication of tropical disturbance.
38 Pages
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII
second class matter, Poet Office, San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1947
Mr. motorist, don't try that grace, another one killed himself with it.
HUMER 11046
Iriarte urges readjustments in legislation
I Proposes FSE be a corporation A - i WvlílR G. ATOLES MOREU Administrator of the State Insurance Fund Atiles believes it should be governed according to the private entity.
Explains why $47,346.39 has not been collected from the uninsured By Luis Hernández Aqnlnn EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Administrator of the State Insurance Fund, Guillermo Atlles Moréu, has proposed to the Governor of Puerto Rico the need to change the structure of said organization, so that it can be converted from a government agency into a public corporation, so that it can be administered according to the rules under which other private companies are operated. The State Insurance Fund had for the month of June, 1946, in its reserve fund and as free surplus, a sum amounting to $5,512,613.00, which was broken down as follows: $887,537.00 in reserve fund and free surplus of $4,625,076.00. The final liquidation for fiscal year 194647 has not yet been made. In an interview held with the Administrator of the State Fund "on the future prospects" of that governmental division, he explained the plans for future improvement. He indicated that they are preparing the plans for the construction of the hospital of medicine and industrial surgery, which will be built on land in Hato Rey, and for which there is an allocation of $1,760,000.00. It is expected that by the first "months" of next year all of Hato Rey will be ready for the construction bidding. The referral hospital will be the only one of its kind in this hemisphere. As for the dispensaries to be built in various towns of the island, a bill will be prepared shortly for submission to the Legislature, so that the hospital can be developed.
i By ROBERT RICHARDS l i United Press Correspondent 1 ; NEW YORK, Aug. 22, (PU)- , , , An unauthorized longshoremen's strike, which has stopped 12. ships ' । in New York harbor, including the luxury liner Amé- , , ' rica, spread to Brooklyn today. i To a number estimated at ; > 4,000 members of the Ini ternaclonnl Longshoremen's Association (affiliated ] i to the American Federation of Tra- . low) who have been on : The strike at nine Man5 hattan docks was joined in their extemporaneous stoppage by approximately 600 stevedores.
News Digest
The Taft Act machinery is now ready for action on the mainland. Will give priority to cases of jurisdictional disputes" and boycotts" to support it. UPR will begin classes" on the same day. Farm workers demand payment of wages to the UPR. The United States" tries to defeat in Rio an Argentine amendment to the Defense Treaty. * * - . Workers abandon repair work at a school in Rio Piedra". "M * Cueva" assures that they will improve water service, using credit from the Banco de Fomento. * 4 1 * The Agricultural Credit Corporation signed the first contracts for the purchase of the 1948 tobacco crop. - They are waiting for a legal consultation on liberal candidacies. --- Rio Piedras lawyers agree not to run before Judge Rafael Padró Paré". - The Administrator of the State Insurance Fund has proposed that the entity be converted into a public corporation.
into a public corporation. Estimated income" for 1947-48 is $70,750,000. - Irlarte urges readjustment of legislation, demands responsibility for $1,000,000,000 deficiency in construction. - The ports of New York and Brooklyn are affected by an unauthorized strike of longshoremen. Olmo hit thirteenth home run in Veracruz victory, 5-2. This afternoon begins the final series of Double A baseball, with Las Mesas and Juncos facing each other at Escobar. - a * * Local professional baseball season opens on October 18, with Mayagüez visiting Santurce, Caguae-Guayama visiting Aguadilla and San Juan visiting Ponce. - Russia rejects plan on Indonesian case. Afnerl. cana. proposal suggested consuls to monitor the armistice. * ♦ * - - , , , ' The heat wave affecting Chicago has caused one" thirty-six deaths. On the other hand, the intense drought is affecting prices," raising grain prices. In some parts of the state the temperature has exceeded 100 degrees.
Demands responsibility for deficiency of one million in Instruction Calls for action by parents, teachers Announces studies law 2Í)i of May 1947. The President of the Republican Union, Celestino Irlarte, declared that "the time has come to readjust all the legislation hastily presented, without due study and careful consideration, without due study and careful consideration, which has now given rise, as in the case of Law number 20 of May 1947, to the existence of a deficiency of $1,200,000 in the item that will have to bear the expenses for the payment of salaries and raises to the teachers" of Public Instruction." Mr. Triarte added that he urged immediate action by the Teachers Association, the Parent-Teachers Association, the Budget Director and the Commissioner of Instruction to correct this situation, which has caused "anxiety and uneasiness among teachers and parents of children attending public schools."The Chairman of the Republican Union also stated that he will demand accountability in the next session of the Legislative Assembly from those who have caused this situation, and held the Budget Director and the Commissioner of Instruction responsible "for the mistakes made in determining the amount of funds necessary to cover these expenses during the present fiscal year." Mr. Irlarte's statements were as follows: "I am making a study of Act number 20, approved on May 1, 1947, which fixes the basic salaries to the teachers of Public Instruction of Puerto Rico and establishes increases over the basic salary, for preparation and special services, I have found that this Act is deficient, and that it will have to be amended in the next session of the Legislative Assembly. -I have begun a detailed study of this statute, for which purpose I have requested the Commissioner of Instruction to provide me with certain information I need in order to determine the manner in which Act No. 20 to which I refer should be amended. My object is to present a bill that will fill all the gaps in this law, to correct the deficiencies that are found in the same with respect to the qualifications that should be required for certain positions, and of which the law makes no mention. This situation lends itself to injustices, arbitrariness and extravagances which in (continued on page 17)
Longshoremen's strike affects ports New York, Brooklyn Twelve ships, including the liner America detained at the former port. The movement has not been authorized by the International Longshoremen's Association.
Association at eight Brooklyn docks. On board the America, 900 passengers awaited a settlement of the stoppage that would have allowed the ship to sail for Cobh, Southampton and Cherbourg. The original departure date for the America was postponed on Wednesday, the day the strike was declared. IEA local leaders declined to comment on the unauthorized union stoppage. They referred questions to the president of IEA International. Joseph P. Ryan, who has long been hampered by an Insurgent movement within his union. Ryan could not be reached for comment. The dissident longshoremen walked off the job Wednesday because they were dissatisfied with the contract agreement Ryan and his negotiators made with the New York Maritime Association. Last night, just minutes before the provisions of the new Taft-Hartley Act were to take effect, representatives of the IEA and the Maritime Association signed the contract - a one-year agreement covering 65,000 longshoremen in the Gulf and Atlantic ports. The new contract provided for wage increases of 10 cents per hour and 15 cents in overtime pay. The contract was signed not long after Local 791 members voted to continue their untimely strike on the Manhattan docks. A spokesman for the Local said (Continued on page 22)
Estimate for 1948 rises to $70,750,000
Represents $3,700,000 decrease from 1946-47 Treasurer anticipates further revision Victory Tax is not listed as a source of revenue. Other sources By Juan Martínez Chnnrl Editor of EL MUNDO The Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Rafael Buscaglla, made public yesterday his estimate of revenues for the general funds of the Island Government for the year 1947-48. This estimate was submitted to the Governor and to the Chairman of the Treasury Committees of the House of Representatives and the Insular Senate in April, 1947, and has not since been revised or amended. The estimate made by the Treasurer for the current fiscal year amounts to $70,750,000.00, which is equivalent to a decrease of $3,700,000.00 as compared with the estimate made for the fiscal year 1946-47. The Treasurer's estimate of Income for ordinary funds for 1946-47 was $74,450,000.00 and collections amounted to $76,050,459.66, producing a surplus of $1,600,459.66. The outlook for the current fiscal year is not so rosy, and the Treasurer stated that his estimates may have to be revised; but he will not make any study in this regard unless required by some special circumstance, such as a legislative session, for any alterations made at this time may have to be changed within a short period of time. The revised estimate submitted by the Treasurer in April 1947 states that the Revenue for ordinary funds of the Treasury, for 1947-48, will be obtained from the following sources: Customs, $2,400,000; federal internal revenue, $17,500,000; alcoholic beverages, $7,400,000; excise taxes, $19,000,000; property taxes, insular part, $450,000; income taxes, $20,000,000; inheritance and gift taxes, $500,000; miscellaneous revenues, $500,000. Total $70,750,000. For the first time since 1942-43, the Victory Tax does not appear as one of the Government's sources of revenue. The Victory Tax was established by Act 29 of the 1942 special session, approved on December 7 of that year, and repealed by Act 327 of May 15, 1945. After the repeal of the law, the Treasury Department has continued to collect the taxes that were pending payment; but the amounts expected to be collected for this concept during the current year will be insignificant. The Victorla. tax produced up to June 30, 1947, the sum of $8,640,804.52. The yield of this tax by year was 1942-43, the amount of $578,870.30; year 1943-44, the amount of $3,239,305.23; year 1944-45, the amount of $4,347,103.43; year 1945-46, when the law was repealed, the amount of $386,953.57; year 1946-47 the amount of $88,571.99. The Victory Tax was introduced as an emergency contribution during the war and was to remain in effect until six months after the cessation of hostilities between the United States of America and Germany. Italy and Japan; but as a measure of political convenience it had to be repealed before the end of the war due to the protest against such tax raised by all social classes, mainly the lower income classes that had never paid contributions and did not accept the fact that part of their weekly salary was deducted to be paid into the Treasury's coffers. The Victory Tax consisted of a contribution of (Continued on page 22)
School year to begin next Monday, Monday 25 in the metropolitan area; UPR to start classes on the same day
Taft Act machinery ready to go into action Priority given to secondary boycotts, jurisdictional cases Expected to begin work in 10 days JNRT issues rules covering strike cases, elections By Charlea H. Herrold Correspnosal of United Press WASHINGTON, Aug. 22 (PU). The National Labor Relations Board, rounding out its first day of operations under the Táft-Hartley Labor Act, today set in motion an unprecedented government machinery to easily resolve trade union jurisdictional disputes and secondary boycotts. The Board gave priority to such cases and established rules aimed at following a "reasonable and expeditious" procedure for hearing them. A spokesman said work could begin within 10 days to settle the 10-month-old jurisdictional strike at Hollywood movie studios and other similar disputes. The new rules govern the handling of strikes for union recognition, overseeing union shop contracts, holding elections to determine collective bargaining agreements and adjudicating unfair labor practices, The Board has issued these rules amid widespread labor difficulties and recent union challenges to the Taft-Hart Act, whose" dl "po "lclone" finale" went into effect Thursday night. The new statute drastically alters the Government's labor policy, and imposes strict liabilities on craft unions. In jurisdictional disputes, the rules provide that a public hearing by the NLRB will take place within ten days after a complaint is filed by either party. If the dispute cannot be settled by arbitration, or an election or any other satisfactory method within that time, testimony shall be taken before the hearing and the Board shall then determine which "trade, craft or class" of employees shall perform the work. If either party refuses to comply with the order, the regional director of the Board will seek an injunction from the Federal Court against the guilty parties. Those persons who fail to comply with the Court's order will be fined or imprisoned. The Board also provided that in the event of an urgent Jurisdictional dispute, the regional director may apply for an injunction after a site investigation to retain the status quo until a formal hearing sets in motion the Government's settlement machinery. The NLRB acted on the following other developments on the labor front: 1. The Government threatened to place an embargo on shipments to the New York docks that are under strike in an effort to prevent goods from piling up at the port. The New York longshoremen were de.cla(Continued on page 22)
and Judge Padró Parés, a situation that has existed for several months. The Rio Piedras Bar adopted an identical attitude about two months ago, but at the request of the Bar Association, before which the matter was presented, they decided to give Judge Padró Paré a truce" until they could see the results of the Bar Association's efforts. Since the issue has not yet been finally resolved, the Bar met again the day before yesterday and decided to go on strike and not to postulate in the courtroom headed by Judge Padró Parés, as from the first day of next September. It was also reported yesterday in Río Piedras that the Bar will formally raise the matter before the annual meeting of the Puerto Rico Bar Association, to be held on Monday, September 1. In said assembly, 'according to what we were told, the Bar Association will be asked to demand the resignation of the aforementioned Judge. The lawyers of Rio Piedras allege that they do not agree with the attitude that Judge Padró Parés assumes in the hearings of the cases, as he treats the lawyers that pos1 (Continued on page 14)
It would preclude any action against any American country attacking another. - Vandenberg says he would eliminate it as a regional treaty.
By R. H. RHACKFORD United Press Correspondent PETROPOLIS, Brazil, Aug. 22 ¡(PU)- The Inter-American Defense Conference today unanimously approved a proposal to hold a Pan-American economic conference during the second half of 1948. First the Steering Committee, composed of the principal delegates of the 20 Amelican republics represented, and then the Conference itself in its plenary session, unanimously approved a proposal to hold a Pan-American economic conference during the second half of 1948.
Conference itself in its plenary session, approved a resolution for the holding of the economic conference proposed yesterday by 13 Latin American nations. The Helm Committee defeated, by a vote of 15 to 5, the Cuban demand that the proposed continental defense treaty cover economic as well as military aggression. Cuba is expected to raise the issue at the Ninth Inter-American Conference to be held in Bogota, Colombia, next January. The exact date for the economic conference will be set in Bogota. Argentina injected a new problem for the conference today by proposing that the defense treaty being drafted here cover only aggression against an American country by a foreign power. The proposal would thus preclude any action, within the treaty, against any American country attacking another country in this hemisphere. The entire American delegation immediately launched an intense behind-the-scenes campaign to ensure the defeat of the Argentine proposal. In the U.S. view, such a resolution would be regarded throughout the world as directed against communism, and specifically against Russia. Since (Continued on page 22)
Meyer receives subpoena in Los Angeles
y HjwSs!.* ' jÍHiiÉh Ji IT a jkWk B B B ■ B W B B BBI M '¿wmb '■'O b y % ¡ i law " .BfBBBKMI. , -' ■'" iwlii" * ■BBBÉBBBBBBBBEPWifiS®lí Johnny Meyer (right), publicity agent for millionaire builder do eviene" Howard llughe", received a subpoena i from Bay A. RansdeU, Loa Angele" first federal assistant inárahal, on marte" panado marte". The subpoena, which Meyer received at the Federal Building, orders him to appear before the Senate War Affairs Investigating Committee, W&nhlngton, on November 17. At center is George Rossini, federal assistant marshal. - (Photo by P. A.) - given) Rio Piedras lawyers agree not to appear before Padró Parés General strike agreement is the culmination of tension between lawyers and Municipal Court Judge. Decision will be effective from September 9. The Río Piedras Bar Association, in a meeting held the day before yesterday, agreed to go on a general strike and refuse to run for the second courtroom of the Municipal Court of that city, presided by Judge Rafael Padró Parés. This decision of the lawyers of Rio Pieoras e" the culñHnaelón of the existing tension between said lawyers.
1 1 1 T3 f " 'e tender urges ¡ that there be union ; of purpose ¡ Urges political groups to agree on island problems . Resident Commissioner doc- _ tor Antonio Fnrnós Isern, declared _ yesterday that the different po- ? Uticos of the nals must agree. * The Commissioner said yesterday that the different political sectors of the island should be in agreement on all the fundamental problems of the people of Puerto Rico, as they have already been in some others, for the benefit of the island. Commenting on statements of the President of the Republican Progressive Union, Celestino Irlarte, on the margin of the adüa- * P.** r . n . between Rico and the United States, of which the Resident Commissioner, Dr. Fernós Isern made the following statements: "IF my recent statements regarding the economic relations between the Island and the Continent, which he described as a virtual customs union, were to rectify my previous concepts, it would not have, in my opinion, the importance that my friend Iriarte seems to give it. But, if thinking that it is so makes him happy, I am also happy with it. "More Important would be to consider - ¡ whether or not we are right in making that judgment and as to the value to Puerto Rico of the said customs union. . "It is Important also to the t pals that its various po- . It is also important for the pals that its various political sectors agree on our fundamental assumptions. We have agreed before that the status must be resolved democratically by the people, . . and in support of the immediate political reform that has just triumphed, i All of this was and continues to be good and has borne good fruit. If we can also agree on the approach to the problem of our economic rela- . tionships, I believe that we could also . bear good fruit. (Continued on page 22) "Grau replies to i g ener al Trajino ¡ CIUDAD TRUJILLO, August 22 j (PU)- The Dominican Center of 9 Official Information announced today that President Ramon Grau San Martin, of Cuba, has assured President Rafael L. Trüjlllo that; -1 the Cuban Government continued In- . vetiating the activities of Dominican exiles in Cuba. -| The communiqué says that Trujillo ¡ received a reply last night from a personal ca- . ¡ blcgram sent to Grau ? San Martin, asking him to make use of his authority to "put an end to the preparations" being made in Cuba by the communist" re(Continued on page 22) 1
Increase in water supply in the Capital Recent rains gave margin for greater supply of the liquid Cuevas satisfied with amount achieved Explains works to be carried out with credit from Banco de Fomento By R. Santiago So "a Editor of EL MUNDO The population served by the San Juan aqueduct began to receive yesterday a greater flow of water, extending the supply of the liquid until 4:00 p.m. The change in the rationing schedule of the San Juan aqueduct was made possible by the fact that the water supply was extended to four o'clock in the afternoon. This change in the schedule of rationing of the liquid, improved notably the served in all the metropolitan zone, obtaining sufficient pressure, even in the highest parts of the district. The action was taken by the director of the Aqueduct Service, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, after learning the result of the rains that fell in the towns of Rio Piedras, Aguas Buenas, Cidra and Trujillo Alto, and throughout the district, where the Piedras and Bayamón river basins are located. t These rains produced an increase in the flow of the mentioned rivers and allowed the accumulation of a certain amount of water in the reservoirs. Mr. Cuevas said yesterday that the population has begun to enjoy 25 million gallons of water per day, a figure that is nine million gallons lower than the normal requirement of all users of the metropolitan aqueduct. He expressed his confidence that this level of supply can be maintained, due to the repeated rains in the basins of the rivers that supply the San Juan aqueduct. At present, the Bayamón River is supplying a little more than 16 million gallons of water, which includes the production of the suction pumps in Guaynabo. Five million gallons are being supplied from the flow of the Piedras River, and four million from the deep wells in Hato Rey. Also due to the recent rains, these wells increased their water production, which has reached only about three million gallons per day due to the drought. Mr. Cuevas' plan is to provide no less than twelve hours of water service to the population, thus facilitating the opening of the school and university year on Monday. Yesterday, Mr. Cuevas gave a comprehensive verbal report to the Acting Governor on this situation, which has given rise to the action announced by Fortaleza. It is the purpose of the Aqueduct Service to maintain a continuous water service to the population for a period of twelve hours, starting at four o'clock in the morning. In order to feed the pipelines with enough time to have water with sufficient pressure during the early morning hours in all sectors of the metropolitan area, the plan was adopted to feed the mains and the entire distribution system during the early morning hours. The total suspension of rationing will depend on the accumulation of greater reserves in the aqueduct reservoirs. Such action will be taken if the rains continue in Cidra, Rio Piedras and Aguas Buenas. (Continued on page 22) CCA signs contracts for island tobacco Utuado Market Association and Utuado harvesters, the first signatories WASHINGTON? 22 (PU)E1 Department of Agriculture announced today that the prices fixed in the contracts for the 1946 tobacco crop have been signed by the Agricultural Credit Corporation and two harvesters' organizations of Puerto Rico. These are the Puerto Rico Tobacco Market Association in San Juan, and Cosecheros de Tabaco de Utuado. The Department said that negotiations are now underway for the signing of similar contracts, within a few days, with other dealers in Puerto Rico. Ninety-percent-at-par tobacco loans to Puerto Rico harvesters are authorized by the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938. This is the first time, however, that harvesters have applied for loans. In past years, prices have been higher than 90 percent of par. The loans will be granted to the two groups on approximately 9,000,000 pounds of the 1946 tobacco crop. It was expected that other loans now being negotiated will cover "considerably less" time. Puerto Rico's 1946 crop has (Continued "n page 22)
Collazo Orders Superintendents To Make Preparations Pons Reiterates Water Economy Enrollment Approaches 6,000 University Students Yesterday Acting Governor Juan A. Pons, M.D., ordered the opening of the school year in the metropolitan area next Monday, August 25. The Governor's order leaves without effect the previous executive proclamation, postponing the opening of classes, -due to the emergency in the metropolitan aqueduct- in the schools of San Juan, Rio Piedra", Bayamón, Guaynabo and Cataño, Even though the flow of the aqueduct's supply sources has increased, according to yesterday's executive order, the Governor maintains his recommendation that water be economized to the greatest extent possible, since the emergency has not passed, but there has only been a small relief. In accordance with the executive order, the Acting Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Francisco Collazo, sent telegrams yesterday to the school superintendents" of the five towns of the metropolitan area, to the effect that they make the necessary arrangements for the opening of classes on Monday. On this date, regular schools and evening schools will open, and special veterans' groups will also begin to work. As will be recalled, when "the crisis due to the shortage of the liquid in the aqueduct supply sources, urgent meetings were held" in Fortaleza, with the Acting Governor, where "the whole situation was considered and the measures to be adopted to reduce water consumption to a minimum were agreed upon. A special work schedule was arranged for the Government employees, which was aired a few days ago. The opening of the school year in the metropolitan area was also postponed indefinitely. In addition, the Governor appealed to the community to cooperate in facing the crisis by reducing water consumption and avoiding water waste. The people were officially warned of the danger of an epidemic, being instructed to boil water and take other measures to avoid that possibility. The Governor's executive order issued ayar, says: "The lucid rains in the Aguas Buenas region have somewhat increased the flow of the water sources that supply the aqueducts of the metropolitan area. "I, Dr. Juan A. Pon, Acting Governor, by virtue of the authority vested in me by law, hereby rescind the Executive Order issued through Administrative Bulletin 1039, dated July 31, 1947, and order the opening of public schools for the beginning of the school year on Monday, August 25. "I reiterate, however, my recommendation that the precious liquid be economized to the limit, both in homes and inatltuclones, offices and commercial and industrial establishments, in order to face the emergency with the least possible risk to the health of the people." The situation at the UPR Classes will also begin on Monday, the 25th of this month, at the University of Puerto Rico, the date that was originally set for the opening of the academic year. This was finally agreed upon by the university authorities, who were considering postponing classes due to the water shortage registered in the metropolitan area during the last few weeks. A few days ago, before the beginning of the enrollment at the University, the Rector announced that if the water shortage situation did not improve substantially within the next few days, the opening of the Rio Piedras Colleges would be postponed for over a week. Enrollment, however, continued to take place and will be extended until today, Saturday, when the students of the extension courses, whose enrollment began on Friday, will have to register. This year's enrollment is expected to exceed 6,000 students. Prtclsamente, taking into consideration the growing number of students in the first teaching center, university authorities were pending the solution to the problem of the opening, since if the water shortage had continued to register and the course had been opened, it would have been a health problem that confronted the students" of the UPR, Yesterday, Rector Benitez stated that he was in communication with Governor Pons and Mr. Cuevas Bustamante, Chief of the SAA, on Thursday afternoon, agreeing that nothing would be resolved until yesterday, so that the water capacity could be determined, due to the "heavy" downpour that has hit the districts that supply the aqueduct of the metropolitan area. Mr. Cuevas Bustamante was conferring daily with the Rector informing him of the situation. It was the decision of the university authorities, in agreement with Governor Pons and the head of the Aqueduct and Sewer Service, that classes will begin at the UPR next Monday. (Continued on page 23),
Nineteen towns fail to submit medical assistance reports
The committee appointed by the Puerto Rico Medical Association to study the problem of medical and hospital care in Puerto Rico has not been able to meet again because nineteen municipalities have not yet submitted the information requested. This committee, it will be recalled, is made up of representatives of said Association and of the Departments of Health and Justice. Members of the Island Legislature also serve on the committee. The committee has received a great deal of information from the rest of the government, but it has not been able to organize itself properly because of the lack of the necessary resources.
The information from the municipal governments of Adjuntas, Bayamón, Caguas, Cataño, Cayey, Corozal, Gurabo, Hormiguero", Isabela, Luquillo, Mayagüez, Orocovis, Patillas, Ponce, Quebradillas, Las Marfas, Santa Isabel, Vega Baja and San Juan has been abundantly received. Vega Baja and San Juan. The purpose of this study is to "learn about the problems that are affecting the charity service throughout the Island and promote measures to solve them. To this end, we are counting on the cooperation of members of the Assembly of the Legislature (Continued on page 22).