elníOndo
MBA WEATHER FORECASTS ON THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy in the morning, becoming cloudy with showers this afternoon and early evening. IN SAN ÍUAN, YESTERDAY: High, low, 77. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:30 a.m., 39.85 inches of mercury.
40 pages 5/
■ OIAálO-At MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
the "* engine. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 25, 1947
--Mr. automovIllRta, don't try "m harrow, another m killed with "lia.
NUMBER 111
Rice selling price stabilized
It will be fixed according to the rates, of 14, 13 and 11 cents to the consumer Quotation now tends to a rise Vicéns in his order says he wishes to avoid the payment of speculative prices In anticipation gives qua lai conditional qua prevail in the market -supplier of rice affect "the stability and efficiency of the sundnistros to the Island", and that "the high quotations of the grain, with a speculative upward trend, affect sales prices in the island market, yesterday the Administrator of Supplies, Seflor Antonio Vlcens Rios, issued an order altering the previous procedure in setting sales prices, and establishing maximum prices of 14 cents per pound to the consumer, for rice with 15 percent or less of broken grains; 13 cents per pound for good quality short or long grain rice, and 11 cents per pound for short or long grain rice classified as "broken" types.
Contrary to what was expected, that is, the lifting of the current controls on rice sales on the Island, which was anticipated to take place due to the abundance of the harvest in the United States and the fact that several weeks ago the price quotations were lower than those made for the months of July and August, the Administrator of Supplies informed yesterday in his administrative order, that "the price quotations were lower than those made for the months of July and August, In its administrative order yesterday, the Administrator of Supply reported that "the prevailing conditions in the rice supply market, whose prices are irregular and tend to rise speculatively, without offering any guarantee of stability and efficiency of supply, determine in his judgment" the need to adjust the maximum sales prices previously stated, and the procedure established in Administrative Order 154 of August 15, 1947."
The Vlcens minister adds that it is his purpose "to stimulate imports, avoid the payment of speculative prices, and also to assure the greatest protection for the consuming public, all in accordance with the Law". The previous order, which gave a benefit to the retailer of 12 percent over the wholesale price, fixed a maximum for consumer sales of 14 cents a pound. Generally, premium rice has since been sold at the maximum price of 14 cents per pound. In fact, the order issued yesterday by Suministros does not alter the price level that has been in effect for sales of premium rice to Puerto Rican consumers, since the new regulation sets that level at 14 cents per pound. ,
The prices to the consumer, according to the provision of the Administrator of Supplies, will be as follows: For short grain or long grain short or long grain rice, classified as "Extra-choice", "Fancy" or "Ex-tra-Fancy",' which have 15 percent or less of broken grains, 14 cents per pound. For good quality short-grain or long-grain rices, "classified as "Cholee" or "Medium", having more than 15 percent and less than 40 percent broken grains, at 13 cents per pound.
For short-grain or long-grain corn of any denomination, classified as "cracked," having more than 40 percent cracked kernels, at 11 cents per pound. Supply Management will continue to exercise supervision over imports of this food, and has therefore required importers to submit, immediately upon receipt of any imported consignment of rice, a copy of the corresponding invoice, which must indicate the quality and percentage of broken grains in the shipment. It is also a requirement that wholesalers or importers deliver to the buyer a sales invoice, which shall state the maximum price for the consumer, as determined by the aforementioned administrative order. A list of the purchasers with their addresses, the date of sale, the quantities sold with their quality and prices, or the quantities remaining in stock unsold, delivered or to be delivered, must also be submitted to Supplies. Retailers must post in a visible place in their establishments, the maximum selling price at which they must sell rice, and to submit to the delegates of the AS the pertlnent information requested. The above-mentioned administrative order will come into force next Monday, October 27.
The Russians are going to charge them for their uniforms.
Brazilians Announced in Russian diplomatic guarantee" in Rio will get out safely LONDON, Oct. 24. - (PU) - Moscow radio reported tonight that the Soviet Union has decided to hold "n quality do hostages the former ambassador to Brazil and embassy staff as will be to leave Brazil "a salvó 1 '. The Brazilian government broke off diplomatic relations with Moscow on Tuesday of this week because the Soviet press published insulting attacks against President Eurico Gaspar Dutra. Brazil's ambassador to Russia was Marlo Pimentel Brandao. Soviet radio accused Brazil of facilitating and encouraging attacks on Russian embassy staff members in Rio de Janeiro. "Ruffians are constantly gathering in front of the Soviet embassy and hurling hurtful epithets against the Soviet Union "as well as throwing stones at the embassy windows," the radio quoted a dispatch from the Tas* agency in Montevideo as saying. "The Brazilian police on duty at the embassy encourage these acts of the ruffians." The radio added that Grigmrio Xe. lov, in charge of Soviet affairs, and the embassy's first secretary were attacked as they were dismounting from a Soviet car. The crowd threw stones and rotten eggs at them. Among those injured as a result of these acts, according to Moscow, was a five-year-old boy, son of the charge d'affaires. According to reports reaching the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 300 policemen have been sent to Moscow to liquidate the "Moscow".
300 policemen Purpose is to liquidate the 1908 Uniformed* trust fund The Director of Personnel and the Auditor agreed yesterday that the collection from some three hundred members of the Jos Police force of uniforms, insignia* and caps sold to them from the old Uniformed* trust fund, dating back to 1908, be completed so that this fund may be liquidated as soon as possible. The Police, in the meeting held yesterday morning between the Auditor, the Director of Personnel and officials of the Uniformed, agreed to submit to the ODP a certification, stating that the discounts appearing in the October payroll refer to uniforms sold from the trust fund and have nothing to do with the $80,000 appropriation recently allocated by the Legislature for uniforms for the Police Corps. The certification was received at Ja ODP early yesterday afternoon. In addition to the Auditor and the Director ■ of Personnel, Colonel Rolg and Messrs. Francisco Irizarry and Rodolfo Torres, Official Paymaster and Property Manager, respectively, of the Insular Police, were present at the meeting held yesterday morning. Also in attendance were the Deputy Director of Personnel, Mr. Ramón Torres Braschi and the legal advisor of the Personnel Office, Mr. Carlos Á. Vallecillo. The Director of Personnel, Mr. Manuel A. Pérez, said that Police officials reported (Continued on page 16) that the JIRT no longer represents the Police.
JIRT no longer represents the National Board Both bodies set their jurisdiction over labor matters The Island Labor Relations Board no longer represents the National Board. As of yesterday the agreement which existed between the two bodies prior to the 32nd day of J*ha when the Taft-Hartley Act came into force ceased to exist. Therefore, both bodies reached an agreement fixing jurisdiction over matters relating to labor representation, an agreement which the Island Board considered shortly after the return to the Island of its president, Mr. Federico Barela, and around which it authorized yesterday, among others, the following statements: "In terminating the agreement between the National Board and the National Board, the National Board will no longer represent the National Board. In terminating the existing agreement between the National Labor Relations Board and the Puerto Rico Labor Relations Board, the plenary power of the Congress of the United States over labor disputes and controversies affecting labor representation arising in the Territory of Puerto Rico is hereby recognized. It is further recognized that the apparent intent of the Congress of the United States in enacting the Taft-Hartley Act was that state and territorial agencies established to intervene in labor representation and labor dispute matters be encouraged to continue in their mandated capacities in matters of a purely local nature. "In order to avoid any interruption in the normal resolution of labor problems in Puerto Rico, the Puerto Rico Labor Relations Board and the National Labor Relations Board have conducted negotiations for the purpose of arriving at a general agreement concerning the resolution of cases now pending and those which may arise in the future. "In the exercise of the administrative discretion vested in the National Labor Relations Board and its General Counsel, it is the opinion of the Board and the General Counsel that at this time it is not administratively feasible or desirable to exercise such discretion.
Work began on the elimination of the Santiago Channel in Arecibo
The Deputy Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Jesús Benitez Castaño, declared yesterday that work has begun on the elimination of the Caño Santiago, which crosses the southern section of Arecibo, on its way from basket to basket. The works, which are under contract, will cost the government 9342,997.87. Upon announcing the commencement of this project, Mr. Benitez Castaño authorized the following statements yesterday: '"The works will be constructed by contract awarded by the Department of the Interior to the firm of Ingenieros Contratistas, L. Antonaanti, Inc., of Ponce, P. R." at a cost of 1342,997.87. "This Department considers itself obligated to disseminate the history of this project. "For several years, before the project became a reality, the municipal or island authorities, the Legislature and several individuals and civic entities carried out intense activities in favor of the project, but without tangible results. It was not until
It was not until 1946 that the concerted effort of all interested parties in Aredbo came to fruition, and through the presentation of a bill sponsored by the distinguished Areciboan and President of the Legislative House, Dr. Francisco Susonl, an appropriation of 8500,000 for the execution of the works, and which bill, upon receiving the signature of the Governor of Puerto Rico, became Law number 5 of 1946. "This Department, in accordance with the Act, studied and prepared the final project, which in general terms comprises the following works: Construction of a detour canal with concrete floor and walls; Construction of a concrete bridge over the detour canal; Construction of a concrete bridge over the detour canal where it crosses the railroad track. Construction of a structure (continued on page 18),
The tahoneros give until November two They will meet that day to determine whether to go to a general closure That 1" order fixing the new price of bread is causing "great detriment to the tahonera Industry, 1a that v" deprived of its sources or channels of distribution .nbligatoriamente having to reduce au production by more than 70 percent," reported yesterday "1 Administrador General de Suministros, soflor Antonio Vlcens Rios, the President of the Association of Tahoneros, Mr. Santiago Piftero. Mr. Piñero ratified before said agency the request that the price of bread be increased by two cents* per pound, as a condition for 1a* tahona* of the Island to continue operating. He also told EL MUNDO that he has called an extraordinary assembly of the organization's members, which will be held in San Juan on November 2, in case the price of bread has not been increased as requested before that date. In this assembly it will have to be determined if the* tahona* of the Island will close or not, as expressed by Mr. Piñero, according to the probability that they will decide for the former. Yesterday very few commercial establishments were supplied with bread in the tahonas, due to the fact that it was not distributed nor were sales made by the resellers. Mr. Piñero reported that some* quantities of bread remained unsold in many bakeries, due to the fact that consumers did not come to buy it either. However, he said that probably today and tomorrow consumers will begin to gather in front of these establishments*. The Retailers Union agreed yesterday, according to a notification made by the TA, that it will not be able to make direct purchases from bakeries, due to the (Continued on page 16)
The General Supply Administration announced yesterday that it will hold a public hearing next Thursday on the request of the Island's cattlemen for a new increase in the price of milk. The hearing, according to Miss Maria Luisa Guerra, public relations officer of the AGS, will begin at nine o'clock in the morning in the auditorium of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce in Santurce. In addition to a commission of the* ranchers* who* will appear to present the* reason* for* their request,
Kaua aa1va "Ma" i-.-_ / j nos", England (right), and raised another of a nuerion" Karl" í* same lighthouse (right) during a demonstration on Monday of 1o* use" that can be made of "se type of aerial apparatus in the rescue of persons" trapped in maritime lighthouses " gios" and in the transfer of rescued personnel from i" InÍmbE "S!sU members of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution. (Associated Press Photo).
Agricultural vocational training plan for veterans to be implemented in mid-November, announces Louisiana official. Ready contracts to be signed by Instruction P Á an } n, k r uction agricultural vocadonal for veterans puerí™'10 in Practice in the middle of next noí u * tar<!lt -n GranP*n Laver Island airport " ne ' <l "ien arrived yesterday afternoon, via Pan American World Airways, to cooperate in the establishment of the
the same in Puerto Rico.
Mr. Lavergne was invited by the Department of Instru*on, through Mr. Lorenzo Garda Hernandez, Director of Instru*on. Lorenzo Garda Hernandez, Director of Vocational Instruction of the Department of Instruction, on the occasion of a visit of the latter to the University of Louisiana, where he had the opportunity to observe the program implemented at the University by Mr. Lavergne. The contract to be signed between the Department of Instruction, through its Division of Vocational Instruction, and the Veterans Administration, has already been drawn up and is awaiting only the arrival of Mr. Lavergne, who, after making his recommendations, is expected to sign it in the middle of next week. Before beginning his work, Mr. Lavergne will visit several vocational training centers on Monday and Tuesday of next week, beginning work on the program on Wednesday, together with Mr. Lo. nnxo Garda Hernandez, Director of Vocational Instruction of the Department of Instruction, Mr. Manuel Molinary, acting general superintendent of Vocational Agriculture, and representatives of the Veterans Administration. At the Isla Grande airport, Mr. Lavergne expressed his desire not to make any statements to the press at this time, promising, however, that before his return to the United States next week, he would make a statement concerning the work to be done for the benefit of the Puerto Rican veterans interested in this agricultural program. In Puerto Rico there are thousands of veterans who, coming from the rural area, have been dedicated, with sspodalldad, to agriculture, being, therefore, in better conditions to follow the vocational courses, of agricultural character, that can be offered within the plans in the process of being implemented in our Island. Projects of this nature have been under development in the United States for some time.
Supply will hold a hearing on the
on milk price hike
The hearing will be attended by a representation of the Central Consumers Committee, as well as local consumer groups, to oppose the requested increase in the price of milk. The public is also invited to this event. On the other hand, Ms. Marla Luisa Guerra informed that in possession of the General Supply Administration there is a report that in violation of the administrative orders of said government agency, producers are selling milk outside of their areas, and where they can obtain a price. (Continued on page 18)
News Digest
AGS issues order stabilizing the maximum* price* for rice. - Dr. Femó* will confer with the Mayor of New York on the problems of Puerto Rican residents* in the city. - - - UPR enacted new* rule" for student* withdrawals. Union to test Taft law's constitutionality. - The vice-president of the Interamerican Bar Association* was on the island. - The work* on the elimination of Caño Santiago da Aredbo began. - The enormous drop in rum exports has already caused the closure of 8 of the Island's 17 distilleries. - The Russians are holding the staff of the British embassy in Moscow hostage. - The vocational training plan for island veterans will begin in mid-November. - Agriculture has offered to pay an additional sum of 8636,008,008 for eosacha sugar. Ruda again attacked all the "agitators of the war" nortoamo.
ricanoa. New Zealand protested au language. - - - Rector Benito* MÍettró to which the U. P. B. - ♦ - Caco by aaeeinato against Castro Péres m held on 17 da November. Tahonero" will decide on November 2 if they go to a general strike. - The "Junta de Inquilinato" will decide to maintain federal control of the cabro alquitare". They will charge the uniform to 806 pollrie" in order to liquidate the police trust fund. - The JIRT no longer represents the JNBT. Both organizations signed an agreement fixing their respective jurisdictions. - The police officer Rooali Peleon, accused of homicide, was released at the request of the prosecutor Lopee Carrillo. - Tomorrow, Sunday, the Administrator of the Capital, Mrs. Felisa Hincón do Gauthier, returns to Puerto Rico. - - - - - Trum*n to ask for special laws to combat high prices in the nation; and to aid foreign countries - (Taft announces that he will run for the Republican presidential nomination in 1948.
Truman will call for special laws to eliminate high prices.
He will also demand legislation giving aid to overseas countries By Leon Schloss WASHINGTON, Oct. 24. (INS) President Truman told the Nation tonight that he will recommend legislation to the special session of Congress to deal with the twin problems of "high prices at home and hunger and cold abroad." In .a radio talk, broadcast by all the radio stations, the President declared, "Our domestic prosperity is endangered by the threat of inflation. The peace of the world is endangered by famine and cold in other lands." Truman said he is preparing to ask Congress for "comprehensive legislation" to protect the public from price inflation, and high cost of living. Similarly, he said the special session of Congress will be asked to consider temporary aid to foreign countries, citing specifically France, Italy, and the American occupation zones in Germany, Japan and Korea. Mr. Truman stated, "Legislation by Congress is essential. The need is too pressing - the results of delay would be too grave - for it to wait for Congressional action until the next regular session in January." The President warned that the current high cost of living is paving the way for "a recession or a depression." He called attention in his explanation over the radio, as to why he has called the special session of Congress, so-
TRUMAN on the* statistics, the current high* prices and the difficulties of housewives in making ends meet. The President, however, outlined no specific program for action by the special session, apparently intending to wait until he sends his message when Congress meets on November 17. Most of his radio address was devoted to the domestic price situation. The President noted, that millions of low* or moderate* income families are already "*victims* of inflation." He continued, "Eitan mortgaging *their future Incurring in debt*. They are going without the things that they have. (Continued on page 16)
Taft announces he will run for 1948
Said he might seek delegates to Republican national convention Will not be active in campaign Declined to comment on Stassen and of ballot along with this leader By TED S. ALEXANDER COLUMBUS, Ohio, Oct. 24.(PU)-- Senator Robert A. Taft, Republican, of Ohio, today announced his candidacy for the 1948 Republican presidential nomination, and said he "might" seek delegates to the National Convention. Taft declared, however, that he was "not going to take an active part" in the campaign to put him in the White House. He added that he had no intention of participating in the primaries in Oregon or Wisconsin but that the Taft Campaign Committee might find it desirable to take part in the primaries of several states in which there were no active contenders. Taft declined to answer questions put to him regarding the strength of support for the other candidates and would not comment on whether he had discussed with Harold Stassen, former Governor of Minnesota and the only announced candidate, the possibility of going to a Taft-Stassen ticket. At a Preña" conference Taft warned that 1a proposal by President Truman d* assign scarce* item* to buyers* in an -■effort to keep lo* price" low* could result in the return of a vast black market. The senator threw his hat into the round in the face of objections from prominent Republicans that he harta a lazy candidate. Although the Governor of New York, Thomas E. Dewey, has refused to proclaim his own presidential candidacy, he is generally recognized eeww aá howihjWn* 1 who will have to be defeated at the convention. This will take place in Flladelfta next June. The sonador counts M years, and gave him a great fight and defeated Dewey in 1940, but both lost in the final balloting jumping nominee Wendell L. Willkta. Dewey won the 1944 nomination because he was not challenged by a strong candidate. On that occasion Taft endorsed the candidacy of Senator John W. Brlckor, Republican, of Ohio, who later accepted the vice-presidential nomination on the defeated ballot in that election. The landscape offers a wide field for all who will run and especially for the "dark horses" in 1948, as will be evident in the primaries to be held in Nebraska where 9 Republican candidates will be on the preforenctal ballot. The candidates* submitted to the voters in the Nebraska primary are: Dewey, Stassen. Taft, Eisenhower, Reprosentant Joseph J. Martin, Jr., Speaker of the House, General Douglas * MacArthur, Senator Leverett Saltonstall, of Massachusetts, - Senator Arthur Vandenberg, and Governor Earl Warren, of California. Senator Taft's statement, launching his candidacy, had been expected for several days. Until now, the only prominent Republican who has been outspoken in proclaiming his candidacy for the presidential nomination was Stassen. It has been the subject of comment, "ti recent days, the frequency with which Stassen and Taft have participated in public events together, the possibility of their joining forces at the next national convention being a poor prospect.
Helicopter tested in the rescue of persons
Eight of 17 distilleries have already closed down
20,857,000 gallons of unsold rum are stored on the island Crisis affects more than 90% of factories* Industry gave income to the Treasury 8458,321,244 in the last 8 years By R. Santiago Sosa Editor of EL MUNDO At the end of last September there were stored on the island about 20,587,000 gallons of Puerto Rican rum* that have not found an outlet in the foreign and island market. Leaders" of the industry estimate that the* product's manufacturers have iner" tes, in their bonded warehouses, rum stocks worth $30,000,000,000. The stagnation of the industry, motivated by the conditions of the foreign market and the growing decrease of local sales, is already causing disastrous results to the island economy, which are translated into a deficiency of income to the main contributory line of the Treasury's general fund. This unprecedented amount, forced to an inevitable process of aging, represents about 15,000,000 boxes which, if found abroad, would mean for the Insular Government an immediate income estimated at about $300,000,000. The sudden drop in exports found the industry operating at an accelerated volume, and with considerable reserves in the possession of its continental distributors. Although there is hope that a favorable change in the present situation may arise, there is little optimism among Puerto Rican industrialists that such a change will occur in the near future.
The liquor industry is today in a state of recession. The alarming condition of the industry is evidenced by the fact that during the last three months, or from July to September 1947, only nine of the 17 distilleries in Puerto Rico have operated. Of these nine, four operated during the entire quarter; three worked only during the month of July and two worked during the month of September. The magnitude of the problem can also be seen in the 59 firms that are legally authorized to make distilled spirits, of which 17 are distillers and 42 are rectifiers. Of the 17 distillers, eleven also have permits to rectify. During the last month of September, only seven firms, including distillers and rectifiers, shipped spirits to the United States, but in insignificant quantities. The figure for last August was only four manufacturers, and only five during the month of July. This means that the current crisis has affected little more than 90 percent of the distilled spirits factories that exported their product abroad. -
The local market also presents an extremely serious contrast. In July 1947, 30 of the 59 producing firms were operating, including rectifiers and distillers; 18 in the month of August and 30 in the month of September. Efforts to increase sales to the island market collapsed in the face of alarming competition from clandestine rum. The legalized industry could not compete with the "normal production of rums manufactured under the Law. Although no study has been conducted on the illegal rum manufacturing industry, estimates put the number of clandestine stills in operation in Puerto Rico at 2,400. The revenue lost to the Treasury from the sale of clandestine stills is estimated in some circuits to be in excess of $20,000,000 a year. The statistics obtained yesterday, ascertained at the Puerto Rican Institute of Rum, on the insular volume of production by various perlqdoe, also give an alarming picture of the problem of this industry. The production of Puerto Rican rum reached its highest figure in fiscal year 194344, which was just over 13,000,000 gallons proof. This figure declined in the last two years, reaching 8,300,000 proof gallons in 1945-46 and 9,300,000 proof gallons in 1946-47. Although production has fluctuated by month, it reached the lowest figures in the calendar year 1947, as shown by the fact that in July of that year only 614,000 proof gallons could be produced as compared with 1,160,000 proof gallons in the same month of 1946. The July 1947 production represents only 53 percent of the July 1946 production, and shows a deficiency of 47 percent. This also reduced the number of active distilleries, since in July 1947 there were only six in July 1947, as compared with twelve in July 1948. Even though liquor factories have limited their industrial operations to the minimum requirements, the day will come when the available soul* rabbit space will be completely exhausted, or in .(Continued on page 16)