THE NfiNDO
OTHE WEATHER FOR THE ISLAND, 1OY t Partly cloudy, except that the weather will take occasional .rabid with shower* di*porso*. Wind* from the east, da 14 to 30 mlP 0 ' . hWBt ** "A* YESTERDAY: Max temp, ill minimum, 11 1 rain, 0.11 in.
40 pages 5/
DAILY OF
-THE MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
I check brakes, cooperate with automobile inspection.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, APRIL 12, 1947.
Entered a* wuwnd claw matter. Poet Office, San Juan. P. *.
NUMER010913
Commerce studies _ * - purpose of going on tax strike.
Such a step is among measures to be adopted if bill 836 is passed Cite precedent" in United States President of retailer!* denounces "PRACO" as a political issue By R. Santiago Rom Reducer of EL MUNDO Exludes the probability that against the measures" adopted by the Island Council of Trade and Industry Representative Associations, held at the Trade eonii'QM held last Wednesday in San Juan, a tax strike will be adopted. last Wednesday in Sen Juan, to adopt one directed to dodarai a contributive footprint of the Commerce in case it becomes law the P. of the 8. 8.36, that legalizes the chains of stores of the Agricultural CompAla. The final determinml* nation in this respect will be made by the Council upon learning of the action of Governor PiAera er. as it relates to the reclusion or approval of said measure, should it merocoi, as expected, the approval of the legislative bodies. The Insular Congress of Commerce approved a resolution in the sense of requesting the Governor uuc "on the grounds contained in another resolution addressed to the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico, in protection of the citizen's rights of private initiative and freedom of enterprise, as well as of the principles of government by which we are governed, to veto P. 8. 836 to authorize the Puerto Rico Agricultural Company to establish market places to engage in the purchase and sale of articles of general consumption produced in Puerto Rico, in the United States or abroad, in case the same should be approved by the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico". We know that the Committee appointed by the Congress will have to visit Governor Plftero to present its views. Yesterday, he was working on the cloning of the resolutions approved by Congress, giving him the opportunity to put into effect the resolutions adopted. The arguments before the Governor will be limited to demonstrating to him. - It was reported that "the approval of the bill would lead to an invasion by the State of the field of business, to the destruction of commercial competition and to the suppression of free enterprise with serious damage to the economy of the country and to the interests of the public. Also that the PRACO chain stores "would establish a policy openly contrary to the regime of representative and democratic government that governs us" and that the bill "is not based on any proven or verifiable economic or social need and does not pursue any practical purpose since it is absolutely uncertain that the situation alleged in the statement of motives of the bill exists on the Island. As for the declaration of a tax strike or the adoption of other measures such as a general shutdown or the challenge of the law before the courts of justice, San Juan lawyers have been requested by the Federation of Commerce and other entities involved in the protest to carry out the corresponding studies. The president of the Insular Council of the commercial and industrial associations, Mr. Flllpo L. de Hosto*. admitted yesterday the probability of a tax strike, but made it clear that such a determination, because of its importance, should be the object of careful and careful attention and should merit the support of all the organizations that participated in the congress. We know that if the Council were to adopt such a determination, which was considered the most likely, (Continued on page 6!
towards its Independence. In a strong note addressed to the "oviet foreign minister, Vyacheslav Molotov, Marshall accused Russia of blocking all attempts to unify that pal", and of being responsible for its present "grave economic distress". Marshall demanded! That the Russian and American commanders immediately convene the Russian-American Joint Commission and set it to work to establish a provisional Korean government as a first step toward independence, 2. That the United States and Russia, in conjunction, fixed this summer, review the progress of the work of the joint commission. Marshall made his demand on the basis of an agreement made in Moscow in 1945. For 16 months since then, Marshall said, Russia has failed to comply with the agreement, and he implied that this failure was due to an attempt to force a Communist-dominated government on that country. Unless Russia accepts the (Continued on page 14)
Crawford pro PRACO stores operation - - - -j I told Pinero and Fernós ■ that they will be yardsticks to - measure in case prices 1 By WILLIAM J. DORVTLLIER i Chief. KL MUNDO's WAshlngton bureau - WASHINGTON. 11. - Repre- - sentant Fred L, Crawford, repu-1 l bllcano of Michigan, today told - Governor Plftero and resident ' Commissioner Fernós Isern that to his 1 luirlo the stores" PRACO constl-, - tulan an "intelligent measure" pn'readuar as "yardsticks"' 1 by |* fixing ra "¡sonable meadows v making reasonable profits, ') During an extensive conference J with Crawford, Plftero v Femó" exj piled the purpose of the program 'Ide the PRACOs to the chairman of the "uh¡committee on Insular Affairs v T"- , rrltorlxles of the Committee d* Public Lands . i Public i of the House, as ma- . nlfested Plftero to THE WORLD. He added- . eó Plftero that they found Crew- । ford "brokenly Informed" , He has received correspondence l from both sides" in I" controversy , over Iji" PRACO, said Dr. I (Continued on pqln" 24)
Compendium of Mol ¡cías
A tax strike on the part of Commerce is among the piaos being considered in the event the Governor signs the PRACO bill. * * * * The* U.S. *store* have begun * lowering the* price*. heeding *1 Truman's* appeal. * * ♦ o o o Marshall lanas accusation*" * * Russia i amenaaa with separating the American ■ona in Korea. " - ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ Yesterday the payo at the Guánlca plant was solved. o o o * The Island's air trade with ol foreign amounted in 1MI to one million dollars. * o - * Aponte, filed before Marrero his plea in the Orlando Mánde* case. The defense will do so on Monday. - * * * Américo Ruis Martines, killer of Maricao Auditor Emiliano Sierra Mutt, was found guilty of second-degree murder. * Charges against Professor Rivera Valiente. Charging him in cited student* of Mayagüe* to go on strike. e " o Bi Senate approved last night to* immediately govern the MR quo bill that would create the* PRACO store.
I Director"" of the APA will discuss in Washington the Serrallé* complaint about the refining quota. * The nationality bill will be filed next week, reports Femó*. * * * * Crawford Inform* *n the House that in twelve State* has outlawed communist*. ♦ * * * Batan finishing final plans for Banturce sewer, * * * * * Flltpo L. de Hnato* releases figure* on present consumption of staple groceries in IsIb. - * * * E. II. House Labor Committee approves strong measure* for strike control*. * * * Antonio Santiago Burgado, killer of former minister ertsi tlano Rosado Vásques, was found guilty of voluntary manslaughter. * - * * Henry A. Wallace denounces in I Lo nd re*, as conducive to , war, the foreign policy of Retado* Unido*. - " ♦ Olmo's home run and double decided Veracrus win " - - Doa district champions *e decided this weekend in Youth baseball.
Marshall threatens to separate American zone in Korea Accuses Russia of not keeping promise to i cooperate toward independence of country; holds ( Soviets responsible for present crisis Pnr R. H?SHACKFORD । MOSCOW, 11. (P.U.l-EI Secretary of* State, George C. Marshall, today threatened to establish a separate government in the American occupied lo" zone in South Korea unless Russia keeps its promise to cooperate in putting the whole pals on the road.
■■■■ __________ ■ I r - '1 I B B I I I I I I I ■r r ' A iflHp i I I ।"w GEORGE C. MARSHALL ¡
I __ __ - . - - Committee approves measures to control strikes in U. S. A union organization is prohibited from having exclusive hiring rights on behalf of all* workers in an industry R, REEDY,, JR. WASHINGTON. U. - (PU) - The House Labor Committee today approved provisions of the sweeping anti-strike bill which prohibit a labor organization from having exclusive contracting rights on behalf of all workers in an industry; which would proscribe a union's exclusive right to contract on behalf of all workers in an industry; which would proscribe a union's exclusive right to contract on behalf of all workers in an industry; and which would prohibit a union's exclusive right to contract on behalf of all workers in an industry.
The bill's provisions prohibiting a union from having exclusive contracting rights on behalf of all workers in an industry; outlawing jurisdictional strikes and secondary boycotts; and establishing a 7-day "cooling-off period" in labor disputes that endanger public health or safety. With the provisions outlawing the closed shop and other" no less drastic I passed, the Committee expects to put the bill to a vote tomorrow, Saturday (today). The chairman of the committee. Fred I A. Hartley, R-N.J., author of most of the provisions of the measure, said it was already in final form and would be put to a ¡vote tomorrow. He predicted that no more than "five or six members" of the committee of 25 would oppose the bill, although one or two Republicans would approve it "with reservations." Hartley 1 described the bill as adequate to correct abuses d" labor," but Rep. Clare É. Hoffman, R-Michigan, said the measure did not go as far as it should. John Lesinski of Michigan, one of the most prominent Democratic members of the committee, said opponents had given up their attempts to amend the bill to make it unworkable. He added that they would try to block its passage in the House. The Senate postponed I" consideration of the amendment to outlaw general confíalo" in the industry. Senator Robert A. Tatt, Republican of Ohio and chairman of the committee, said that the closed shop ban would not eliminate the "closed shop contracts" which require "new employees" to enter the "union after the first thirty days" of work. The Senate Committee session was marked by the passage of a series of amendments introduced by Senator Irving M. Ives, Republican of New York, including one providing for "freedom of speech" for the employer. The Republican leadership of the House, predicting passage of the House version next week, has called an all-Republican caucus for 10:00 a.m. on Monday morning in an effort to secure the strong support of the majority.As now drafted, the bill gives the House powers to the President to obtain injunctions to prevent strikes in vital industries while government agencies intervene to settle the strike.
CHICAGO. 11. (P.U.)-Two men who waged a struggle against radiation sickness just before the first atomic bomb was dropped today claimed to have found a means of preventing or controlling the kind of hemorrhages resulting from atomic bomb explosions in Japan. It is expected that in "this new atomic age" diseases caused by "irradiation" will play a major role in the "new atomic age".
Charges against professor in Mayagüez Stefani alleges that Rivera Valiente incited students to go on strike Teachers to be investigated on Monday Committee was finishing yesterday investigation of student leaders By Luis Hernández Aqulno Redertnr of EL MUNDO Yesterday was finishing I" ln-, vestlgaclón w c| Colegio de Agrl¿cultura v Arte" Mecánica" de M*- । yagüez, Initiated ron the occasion of the student strike in said teaching center 1 occurred, during the first days of the Semana Sania. The committee appointed by the Vice Rector of the College, Mr. Luis Stéfani. p*-: to carry out the referred" lnvM*¡ ligation, expected to render report, late last night, Said Report will serve as a basis for final action so- 1 ¡on Jos student" who participated in the movement, of which" ! le" hav ten "uapendldos h""t" the ¡fecha, Vice Rector Luis Stéfani He reported yesterday morning, qu*¡ speaks formulated charges "I catodrá1 tico of Biology do| College, Mr. Rafael Rivera Valiente v that the Investigation of teachers coi ¡ menzará o| juno" next. As is known, Mr. Stefani, once the strike was over, called a meeting of the University Senate of the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts on April 2, which agreed to ask the Higher Council of Education to order an investigation, leading to the clarification of the actions of all members of the Faculty and the Administration of the College of Mayagüez, in relation to the strike movement. It was also agreed to place on probation all students* who missed classes during the three days of the strike, and finally, to suspend the leaders of the movement. The Superior Council of Education, meeting at the University of Puerto Rico the day before yesterday, after hearing the report of the Rector of the University on the student strike movement at the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts of Mayagüez, and after studying the resolution of the University Senate of the College of Mayagüez, in relation to the student strike, agreed to reaffirm the normal rexlimentarla" prevailing" in the University that disponéis that "cu "lqttler student agreement" to abandon voluntarlsmnt" the rinses or to violate the university regulations" or contravene the" decisions or i isfrucclnne" of the university authorities" "n such a way that afreten the general dlsclplplln* of the Unlveraldad, "shall be considered a serious offense, and such students" shall be punished" by the Rector with suspension for a period to be determined by him on a case-by-case basis. period to be determined by him in each case, or expulsion from the University. Extracurricular activities may not in any way interfere with the teaching work of the University". The Board of Governors also resolved to declare that in matters related to discipline at the College of Agriculture and Art* Mc'jcanlcax, the Vice Chancellor is the representative of the Rector and in the absence of the Rector, has and exercises full administrative responsibility. Finally, the Superior Council resolved to reaffirm its confidence in the Vice Rector, and to decline the invitation to strike at the Colegio de Mayagüez. The Vice Chancellor Stéfani declared yesterday that the committee appointed by him, composed of the following professors of the College, Cándido Collar, Emilio Cofresl, Guv Ashford, Maxi| mino Cerame and Maxi| mino Cerame. Maxi| mino Cerame and .1, Acosta Henriquez. had investigated "twenty-five or thirty students", and that the committee expected to report late last night. He also stated Mr. Stéfv ni. that he spoke formulated enrgos to the professor of Biology of the Col i- ¡ gio. seftor Rafael Rivera Vállenle, alleging that said teacher incited the movement to strike him, nadiclpo in e| same and did not dló the""*" dur-jm te e| paro esludlantlt. v that otrn" teacher" of the College would have do , "er investigated by, the committee the (Continued on page 14) They are finishing the sewer CiipvRs expects ignalmei soon the works of the fund* of arueduetot The director of| Servicio insular ' de Acueducto", "eftor Sergio Cueva" Rustamante, stated yesterday that 1 ln" final plan* for the construeclón of the sewerage works ' of I" northwest section of Ssnturce, work" involving urta Investment I d" about 8800,000 will be ■ .He added that the studies for the project to develop the Grande de Lotea river have continued, and that both projects will certainly be put up for public bidding.
Doctors master hemorrhage produced by irradiation.
.very important. The scientists" alluded" said they have found that a commercial dye known by the name of tolldine blue acts as a clotting agent to stop the" extensive" hemorrhage" that can produce death The proUmlna, auttancla qu* te extracted from the" egg" of the" fish I has' the" same properties of the aforementioned dye, they said. । This discovery was announced. i (Continued on page 23) I
Senate Approves Bill to Create 'PRACO' Stores; Could Sell to Retailers
The Supreme Court of Puerto Rico is completed The Supreme Court of Puerto Rico was composed of the five justices provided for in the Organic Law on Tuesday when Judge Dnrlnqucn Marrero was installed, whose appointment filled the vacancy created by the resignation of Judge Jorge L. Córdova Díaz. This is the first photograph taken by the full Court after the installation of Matrero. From left to right: Uédl Snyder, Angel II. de Jesús. Presiding Judge-Martín Travieso, Roberto Todd, Jr. and Borinquen Marrero (Photo EL MUNDO, by Casenave). *
APA Directors will disagree on sugar case Ríos explains Serra lies complaint on refining quota They are in the State of the Union and the President of the Sugar Producers Association, Mr. Mamiel A. de| Valle; the Executive Vice-President, Mr. Fernando Aovillamil; and the Director, Mr. Antonio A. Holg, who will discuss with the Sugar Producers Association, Mr. Ríos, and the Director, Mr. Antonio A. Holg, who will discuss with the Sugar Producers Association, Mr. Ríos and the Sugar Producers Association, Mr. Ríos and the Sugar Producers Association, Mr. Fernando A. Aovillamil. Holg, who will discuss with the mitorldade" dn| Department of Agriculture, the contracts do enmpra venta d" the present sugar production, and attend n the announced conference sobro the local sugar quota, Informed in our yesterday's edition. Said conference has been provoked by the representatives of the Central Morcedlta, who claim discrimination against said mill in the distribution of the allocation of 125,000 tons of sugar for local consumption, recently made by the Agricultural Credit Administration. The secretary of the Sugar Producers Association, Mr. Jesús Mari Ríos, stated that the aforementioned directors of the APA are in Washington and "will tend to any problems that may arise with respect to this and other matters. Mr. Rins explained that the distribution of the local sugar quota was made "using the same system that was used by Triple A when the agency was in charge of the said trnhnjn. The procedure is done by using the total quota assigned to the island, divided by the total production of a year. This factor is multiplied by the individual production of each factory, thus obtaining 1" quota for each mill;" "The Porto Rico American Sugar Refinery, of Serrallés," he added. ."(Continued on page 23) plans for the Santurce X nte to carry " siibHsta in Loíza River" - will distribute m to pass legislation during the beginning of the next fiscal year, Mr. Cuevas said that n "r" the beginning of this" work", will be used part of the allocation of 'nuv tro million v half that has nlo consideration I" Legislative Assembly Such allocation, as reported, in Inda probability will be approved" ñor nmh "s camera". Mr. Cuevas said that some additional IR nuehlos will have to be ennfar. according to the Service's program*, with sewer systems, Such" work* will be completed in the course of the next six months. The Service is awaiting a determination of the funds for next year before announcing the distribution of the funds. As far as aqueducts are concerned, funds will be provided to complete projects, after July 1, in the towns of Vieques, Barranquitas, Yauco and Yauco. Adjunta. Yabucoa. Maunabo. Morovl". Narnjito. San Germán. Lalai. Sabana Grande. Quebradillo". San Juan, Guayama-Arroyo-Arroyo-PMi-lia", San Sebastián. Mayagüez-Añasco, Hormlguero-Csbo Ro|o; Coamo-Sallnas-Santa Isabel; v P "r" the continuation of the rural aqueduct programs"". Funds will also be distributed" I (Continued on page 14j
U.S. stores have begun to lower prices Numerous cities have already responded to Truman's appeal. - One chain is selling butter at cost. - Food Prices Cor John HARROW UnrrcMponMil de Preña" Unid" CHICAGO, 11 (PU) In response ni President i Truman's appeal and his ndvenenein" against ln" danger" da ln inflation, vnrins - firms owning pnr department stores announced today their- - tnncihles reductions in ir" prices of" clothing and ni other items. However, the
However, grnnnns' markets fluctuated widely and the price of trlgn for delivery in May rose by as much as ten cents in the Chicago holsn, During the first day of the day, the price of trlgn for delivery in May fluctuated between a rise of two and a quarter cents and a drop of one and a half cents. The final price for the third of May was 82.58-314 n 12.59-114. In Minneapolis and Kansas, wheat ' reached its upward limit, but toward i the end] sustained only a *| small increase in price, The Dun and Bradstreet daily price index" on thirty basic pro- - duels. fell slightly i today to 262.18, as compared inn - ol of yesterday, which was 262.25, Last month this Index was 269 20 ■ v the highest roglstradn this year - was that of March 18- 269.25. In Fllndelfla, almost all of the stores in New York, announced that they would try to force a reduction in prices, and that they would try to force a reduction in prices. Lit. Wanamaker, Snellohergh v Glmhe) Broth- । prs. agreed that some prices" were too high" and began to refuse overpriced merchandise from wholesalers." A" chain store in Memphis advertised butter " 59 cents I" pound, six cents less than the "last emanaad"; and jf) " 20 cents less than the" prices charged by competitors. The store chain owner, Frbd Montcsl. said he was selling I" butter at cost, a drop in prices,
Road regulatory plan subject to amendments In víhIh a legislative resolution was invoked pro Sagrado (<orazon The public vjaU held" pnr I" Planning Board' to discuss amendments to the public road regulatory plnnn" for the San Juan mo- ¡ írof ollfniia znna, held 1 antlec in the halls of the Departa- । ment of Agrlcullura, s<" prnlon ;ó ¡from do" bi afternoon until lima" 1" in the evening. The ncln was presided over by Dr. Rafael Picó, president of said Board, and <>- it was attended by numerous professionals, businessmen, landowners, v mui nutrid" representncmn of the Colegio del Sagrado I I Corazón, do Santurce. One of the matters considered was the layout of a public road to cross the grounds of the Colegio del Sagrado Corazón, in Santurce, and the engineer J. M. Ca- - nal. "l Lic. Rafael Cuevas Zequelra the Administrator" of ' San J'iac Felisa Rincon de Gatl(Continued on i" page 14' Settled the strike at ingenio de la Guániea Parties signed yesterday the stipulation to that effect. - Conciliators acted In the early hours of yesterday morning the prevailing conflict between the factory workers of 1" Central Guánlca and the "d- < mtnistrnclón of said Ingenio nzu- ' carero was settled. The settlement of the dispute occurred when the representatives of the Union and the company, meeting with the island conciliator, Mr. Francisco Verdiales, agreed to sign a stipulation by virtue of which the work stoppage ceased. < A ln" two do I" afternoon of yesterday ' were resumed the" work" I in the mentioned sugar mill, and | that were interrupted" when । the company did not accede to the" de- j mandas of the Union in the "entldo i of qun p| patron empicara the days i Sunday to the same workers that । worked during the week and le" ( pay him for said day jornal double. The company has proposed to employ "distln- j tos, from the same Blas of the Union, on Sundays". Mr. Armando Rivero, secretary of the Sugar Union, who went to Guanlca the day before yesterday to try to reach an agreement between the parties, also took part in the negotiations. (Continued on page 14) I
THE WAIVER IS NOT A SAFE HARBOR. SAYS THE APONTE DA DA That no resignation will be accepted from any official of the island or municipal government, no matter how important he may be, while he is under the weight of a "lnve*tigaelon" for his conduct as an official, declared yesterday District Attorney Jose Aponte, who is in charge of various investigations ordered by the Justice Department in connection with municipal and governmental matters. Aponte said that any person investigated by him who submits his resignation believing that this would put an end to the investigation will not achieve his purpose, because the resignation will not be accepted under any circumstances. The prosecutor added that those who are now under investigation should not be allowed to resort to the refuge of resignations and have them accepted, because if it were allowed, R "l *a would be breaking the law, creating a hearing that would destroy the most "anon* principle* of justice.
Córdova gave it a vote to govern immediately Bolívar Pagan and Figueroa fought the measure. Amend defeated* Measures passed House With amendment* passed the bill establishing the workday The Insular Senate passed anocha the F. cvl S. 8.36. by Senators Lui* Muñoz Marín and Juan Dávlla Díaz, authorizing 1" Compañía de Fomento Agrícola a establecer tes tiendar denominated "PRACO", Votaro,। r in favor of the measure lo" ""- iisfiore* populare" and "ensdor William Córdova Chrlno, y en contra lo" senadores de" la" minoría" uniórrepuhllcana y "ocl "ll "ll "ta. seftore" Leopolan Figueroa and Bolívar Pagán. The majority)" pnrlamentarl" delayed I" discussion of 1" measure because there were 13 votes" in favor of" the bill passing with the clause of immediate effect*" In the first moments only eleven "cnadores populares" and the two of the minority were present in the Senate; Pascaslo García, PDP, nor Humacao, who was in Fajardo, and Senator Muftoz Marín. Senator William Córdova Cnlrino independentlsta, arrived at the time the bill was being considered and announced that he would vote in favor of it. Senator Muftoz Marín, who appeared shortly after, was again present, and the measure was voted on and approved with the votes of Mr. A.'selml, Mr. Barreto Pérez, Mr. Colón. Cóidovs Chlrlno, Fonfrias, Gélgu. Polanco. Méndez. Muftoz Marín, Negrón López. Ortiz Stella, Quiñones ¡sern Aponte and Dávlla 1 Dtez. Bolívar Purán and Figueroa. F.l bill was amended in the Mentido de nutorlsar a las tiendas" FRAUD a vender *u* productos । rnnsumldnre" y detnllUIn" y'nhllgarla" a cumplir enn ln" disposiciones de te ley de contribución por concepto de I tigreros. Mr. Bolívar Pagán proposed two amendments that were defeated and that cnnslsften that the PRACO establishments would give away every week a sufficient purchase for one day to each poor person in the community and that they should sell on credit to the workers who had the solvency to pay for it. Mr. Bolívar Pagán expressed his opposition to the approval of the bill because he believed it was a strategy of the Popular Party "aimed at recovering its lost public prestige. He described the public hearing held on the bill as a rally to outrage the merchants and industrialists who requested it. He expressed that "these stores will be a failure like all the businesses in which the Government has been involved, such as the aqueduct, transportation, etc." He said that the Government has in 11 Ley dt Suministro the means to avoid vi p'ercndo negro. Dr. Figueroa expressed that he voted against the project because he had previously voted against the creation of the Agríente Company and this was a way to widen the setlvldnées of that company; because these stores in the hands of a single political party can become a fearsome political machine; because of his belief that the business of this government has been a fiae.iso v because 1" rolronctive clause seeks to legalize acts previously committed. The set approved the bill the sparse public speaking in the galleries" applauded and cheered " Muño" Marte. A te" 6:25 of te terdo yesterday dló in tenz > te session of the Senate under te presidency of Mr. Samuel Quiñones, At the request of Dr. Leopoldo Flguero" "o requested of 1" Administrator of te Capital, qu" inform ni Senate the amount of the Revenue" of municipal and Insular character by the artos 194.3. 1944, 1945, and 1946: The Senate concurred with the amendments" of the House "1 P. of S. 475 allocating SMi.non for the e*ta> hleclmtentn of a high school in Isabel". In third place was approved S. P. 746 of Messrs. Méndez and Colón, allocating $500,000 for the study and realization of the Aguadilla harbor project. The following bills were unanimously approved: P. d "1 S. 47R, by Ortiz Stella, for the Commissioner of the Interior to take charge of the conservation of the Buena Vista road, in Humacao; P. del S. 77R. of the" "efiores Barreto Pérez and OHiz, amending the law of sale" conditionale" of personal property; P of the 8. 510. of! setter Dávlla Monsanto, so that "e Include in the General Road Plan" that of the Helechal neighborhood, of Barranquitas: the P,'of the 8. 601. of seftor Fonfrla". to ■" Include in "l nlano regulador de la Junta de Planificación el camino Volcán, de Bayamón y el P. del 8 594, sustituto del "eftor Anselml, declarando Hegal la venta, arrendamiento y radiodifusión do dlacos fonográfico* de letra la "clv" u obscena. l,o" "Igulente" project", to Include in *1 General Plan do Camino", were also approved" unanimously: P. of 8. 212, do Ortlz Stella, the road "Gandular" do (Continued on p. 24)