THE
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Clear except for short scattered showers over the montadas and north shore this afternoon. Winds from the southeast at 8 to 14 mph, turning to the south, late tonight. IN BAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: High, M| low, H.
/ 38 Pages í
MORNING
MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
Check brakes." I cooperate with I" Automobile Inspection.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 22, 1947
Entered m second class matter, Port Offley Ban Juan, F. B.
NUMBER 10865
Jurisdictional dispute and work stoppage at Coloso plant settled yesterday.
By RAFAEL SALAZAR United Press Correspondent NEW YORK. 21 (PU)- The Interim Committee on Puerto Rico of the New York Welfare Council today appointed a Committee of Six to prepare a draft procedure regarding Puerto Rican affairs in New York. This was the first meeting of the 33-member Interim Committee since its appointment at a session of the Welfare Council at the Commodore Hotel on January 11. After a lengthy discussion, the
Compendium of News
The strike at the Central Colossus was settled, separating the factory union from the FLT. The Union then agreed to hire separately. Yesterday, at a quarter past twelve, all the transportation services had been reestablished throughout the island, and the strike that began on the 15th was over. A tremendous snowstorm has been affecting flights from New York to San Juan for 48 hours. SIS flights were suspended at La Guardia Airport. - o - Undersecretary of State announces he is considering appointing portorriDreams as advisors to attend the international trade conference in Geneva. ' - - - Local committee appointed to continue study on air facilities on the island. - en The cider industry asks for a higher sugar quota. M s - s A group of agronomists from Brazil visited the Experimental Station yesterday, on a study trip . , . Commission discussed with Muñes and Susoni the lack of means to attack tuberculosis on the Island. * The public works carried out by the Interior
The public works carried out by the Interior reach 14,252,787. - ♦ Render Report to Rector Benitos, on the incident that occurred during matriculation on M " January. It is recommended to change system. - - - The House, after Incident between Quiñones Ellas and Ramos Antonin! voted against Investigating the strike at Coloso. Bies made accusations against the mayor of Mayagüez. e , A" drop in the volume of sales, fear of a sudden drop in prices and the abaivotamlento do stores" have caused a state of uneasiness in the Insular commerce. - Piñero signed the bill ending the fixed-route system at 11:05 p.m. on heavy Thursday night. - Rep. Crewford predicts collapse of the "Central Service Centers" operated by the Insular Government. - The Post Office Department urges an increase in the rates. - The oil workers' strike is postponed". * * President Truman urges creation of a relief fund in the other notions.
The strike, which is said to have begun. The strike, which began last Monday in Sabana Grande and which was rapidly spreading throughout the island, was suspended by the local committees of striking drivers as the news was received that the movement was having the desired results. The adjutant general of the Insular Police, Captain Guillermo Arroyo, reported yesterday, at half past twelve in the afternoon, after a tour of the island, that the situation is normal and that the transit of vehicles has been restored. Fears were also dispelled yesterday that some people would remain in protest attitude even after eliminad*" by law fixed routes" and pending" additional concessions by the Government. The president of the Insular strike committee, Mr. Carlos Almodovar, to whom petitions were made by comrades from Sabana Grande in that sense, yesterday ended the protest movement, ordering the resumption of all services. News received from the Island indicates that the transportation service was resuming as local agencies were confirming the news of the Governor's signing of the bill that eliminated the fixed routes. The fact that the bill was signed into law around midnight Thursday night meant that the news was not received on the island until the early hours of the morning. Therefore, the suspension of the strike was not simultaneous. In many towns, as the news was received, there were acts of jubilation. Our correspondent in Humacao, Miss Marina L. Molina, reported yesterday that at fifteen minutes to ten in the morning there was a general alarm in the city of Humacao.
Puerto Ricans in New York have English as a problem
They also need vocational training, says Committee studying the case. -Exodus is now from the mainland to the island. -Majority employed
In the light of the need to correct certain conditions caused by misadjusted Puerto Ricans who have emigrated en masse from their homeland, it was decided to address the problem first by establishing English classes for Puerto Ricans and intensifying vocational instruction. Other aspects of the problem, such as child care for the children of employed parents, juvenile delinquency due to lack of adequate youth activities and housing, can be addressed more successfully when the language barrier is eliminated and vocational training is offered. The Program Committee is composed of Lee Dowling, Chief Commissioner, New York City Department of Social Welfare; Ralph Whelan, Chairman of the Youth Guidance Council; Charlotte Authler, New York City Department of Social Welfare: Rita Morgan, of the East Harlem Community Planning Council (a large proportion of New York's Puerto Rican colony resides in East Harlem); Clyde Murray, of the Union Settlement House (also in Harlem); and Dr. Eugene Chimen", of the New York District Health Office. The Interim Committee decided to appoint other subcommittees to work on other aspects of the total Puerto Rican problem. These subcommittees will be further added, (Continued on page £2)
By Lula Hernández Aquino Editor of EL MUNDO The committee that investigated the events that occurred on January 29 at the University of Puerto Rico, on the occasion of the enrollment at the University of Puerto Rico, finished its investigation, having prepared a report for the university administration. Said committee was composed of Mrs. Carmon Rivera de Alvarado, José Guelts and Luis A. Garrastegui, the first two members of the committee, and the other two members of the committee were Mrs. Carmon Rivera de Alvarado, José Guelts and Luis A. Garrastegui.
Transportation services reestablished on all Puerto Rico highways I \ , > In some cities the drivers held jubilant demonstrations - A new union organization of the For R. Santiago SOSA class is being thought of Yesterday, in the early hours of the morning, all public motor vehicles that had been on strike in Puerto Rico were reestablished, after Governor Piñero approved the bill that permanently eliminates the system of public transportation in Puerto Rico.
There are public works in process for $4,252,787 More investment by Interior corresponds to roads, $2,214,777 The Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Orlando R. Méndez, yesterday announced the details of the public works being carried out by the Department he directs, according to the program for the present fiscal year. It is clear from the statistics offered, that at present works are being carried out in different parts of the Island, involving an investment of public funds, amounting to $4,252,787. The largest investment corresponds to road projects that are being carried out under contract. Etta amounts to $2,214,777.75. It is followed by the construction of public buildings, by administration and contracts, with a total cost of $1,151,889, and in last place are the secondary roads under construction by administration, at a cost of $886,123. The road program, in which $2,214,777 is invested, carried out by contracts, included the following projects: Patillas "Muñoz Rivera" road, $35,341.26; "Pasto" road in Gueyanllla, $88,926.60; "Balde Caguas" bridge, $37,921.00; Ponce-Jayuya road, $98,416.00; "Cacao" road in Ciales, $203,257.00; "Saltos-Vargas*' San Sebastián road, Moca, $231,936.50; "Fraile de Caguas" road, $37,921.00; "Cacao" road in Ciales, $203,257.00; "Saltos-Vargas*' San Sebastián road, Moca, $231,936.50.50; "Fraile" road in Sabana Grande, $47,986.75; "Mameyes" road in Jayuya, $111,442 25; "Tea" road in Lajas, $31,582.75; "Vlvl-Caonl-lias" road in Utuado, $50,413.50; "Tanamá" road in Adjuntas, $65,832.50; "Río Prieto" road in Lares, $67,371.50; "Maracuto" creek in Carolina, $15,001.10; Caguas-Ca-yey. detour, $82,285.50; "Guayabotas" road in Yabucoa, $70,980.00; "Luis Alejandrino" road in Guaynabo, $23,842.00; "Guanajibo" road in Cabo Rojo, $46,443.75; "Sal-tos-Caguana" road in Utuado, $52,783.00; "Cerro Gordo" road in San Lorenzo, $52,721.30; "La Rosa" road in Toa Alta, $46,417.50; "Pozas" road in Cíales, $287,188.00; Florlda-Utuado road, $378,452.50; "Rio Hondo" road in Comerlo, $88,235.50. Regarding the public buildings plan, the summary of the works in progress is as follows: Contract construction, completed, $78,682.63: contract construction, in progress, $960,905.70: administration construction, completed, $28,301.05 and administration construction, in progress, $84,000. The secondary road program now under development comprises 48 projects in different towns of the Island, with a total investment of $886,123, of which $409,891 has been invested as of January 31, 1947, in projects already completed and in the process of completion.
Head of the group that invests in the island, once the problems confronting the island are solved.
If the problems now confronting the island with regard to air transportation facilities are solved, which is feasible, "Puerto Rico can become a center of tourist attraction of great importance," according to Mr. H. G. Tarrington. Mr. Tarrington was on the island for several days at the head of a committee composed of the following members
Rector is recommended to change UPR enrollment system
Student Services Board of the University; and the last one, president of the University Student Council. Ten people were investigated by the committee, including Isaac W. Jacobs and Rafael Miró, members of the administration, and students Alda Irla Fernández, Erasmlt* Masslnl, Monserrate González Royes. Carmen Azucena Lugo, Astor Aponte, Héctor Barreto and Sebastián Colón. Tam(Continued on page 22)
Carloi Almodóvor, president of the drivers' strike that culminated yesterday with the elimination, by legislative and executive action, of the fixed route system, sent the following message to EL MUNDO; - "On behalf of the drivers of Puerto Rico I want to express our gratitude to you for the cooperation you gave us during our campaign asking for the elimination of the fixed routes. I congratulate you for all your editorials, including today's (Counterproductive Violence, is the title) which has my full support". The law which put an end to the fixed route system Lh was signed by the Governor at* 11:05 o'clock Thursday night The P. of the C. number 1. 1, "providing that public service automobiles "* with a capacity of 10 or more passengers "may travel throughout" the "public highway" of the island, "without any limitation" as to route" was signed by "I Governor of Puerto Rico, Don J "aú" T. Plñero, on Thursday night, at 11:05 o'clock at night. The bill, as signed by the Governor reads as follows: "TO add a new article under number 19 (a) and repeal clause (b) of Section 3 of Act 279, approved on April 5, 1946, entitled 'Automobile and Traffic Act', and for another" end". "Section 1.- It is hereby DECREED BY THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF PUERTO RICO, Section 1.
For Jean Van Vr "nken Corre "pon "al of the International News Service WASHINGTON, 21, (INS). - Under Secretary of State William Clayton today was considering the possible appointment of several Puerto Rican "coniejero" to the United States delegation to the International Trade "Treaty" Conference to be held in Geneva in April. The Interdepartmental Executive Committee in charge of foreign economic policy, which is chaired by Clayton ""- is considering a request from Secretary of the Interior Jullu" A. Krug, asking that a local committee be appointed to study foreign economic policy.
Local committee appointed for air traffic study
stigated facilities for the center to solve problems of various agencies.
The committee, which will be a center for the air transportation industry, will conduct an investigation of our available facilities and the procedures currently in place for the enforcement of regulations regarding the entry and exit of passengers and cargo via the air route. In the first "hour" of the morning of yesterday "winter" the referred committee left for Miami. From there -- it will move to the city of New Orleans, with the purpose of carrying out in that city a study of the San Juan. The committee took a close look at everything related to passenger and cargo traffic at the lila Grando airport, and also held a hearing on the problems currently affecting this means of transportation. The committee will provide another agency advising the President on air facilities with a report on its investigation, as well as recommendations aimed at improving or simplifying existing regulations" on the subject. (Continued on page 22)
They ask for means to attack the white plague Commission saw Muñoz and Susoni. A commission of the Anti-Tuberculosis Association of Puerto Rico composed of doctors José Roi drlguez Pastor, Alejandro Otero López, Julio A. Santos and Mr. Rodrigo del Manzano met with the President of the House of Representatives, Dr. Francisco M. Susoni, and the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin, to present them with the serious problem of the absence of hospitals and means to attack the tremendous tubercular disease"!"The referred committee discussed with the President of the Legislative Chambers the convenience of acquiring huts of the camps of the Island and a thousand beds to begin to give attention to a child equal to the victim of the white plague immediately. Speaking to EL MUNDO, after the interview with the elderly Suaonl and Muñoz Marín, Dr. Otero López stated that it had been very productive. On the other hand, Dr. Su "onl expressed his determination to do everything in his power to promptly confront the growing increase in the number of tuberculosis patients throughout the Island, and expressed his sympathy for the growing number of patients with tuberculosis in the island.
Puerto Ricans Likely to Attend Trade Conference The Assistant Secretary of State announces that he is considering appointing Puerto Ricans as advisors to the Geneva event.
Puerto Rico will be represented at the Geneva Conference. The purpose of this conference is to review the present trade agreement of the United States with certain foreign countries and to draw up a charter regulating the conduct of domestic trade. Krug's "ollcltud has as its basis a recommendation ' of the Caribbean Commission, adopted at the Conference held ' in the" West Indies" last year. On that occasion, the Commission expressed the view that the governments of the territories should be represented at the Conferences on International Trade. Acting on this recommendation, the Committee on International Economic Policy stated that the United States should view with "sympathy" the Territories' views on international trade agreements. He urged the strengthening of U.S. policy to represent the territories in foreign trade negotiations and suggested the appointment of a well-qualified territorial representative to the Geneva Conference. Krug called for such a policy to be implemented. He further requested that the Department of the Interior be given a vote on the Interdepartmental Subcommittee on Foreign Trade of the International Economic Policy Group. Krug makes his point in a letter to the Department of State, in which he states that the United States' international trade treaties are of enormous importance to the territory. He adds that (Continued on page 16) triarte entertains congressmen today The President of the Unión Republicana Progrealata, Mr. Celleatlno Iriarte, and Mrs. Ana María Valdéa de Irlarte, will offer a buffet lunch tonight at the reaidencla of Pueblo Viejo, in Guaynabo, in honor of the group of North American congr "alataa" who are visiting the pala. The event, to which 200 people have been invited, will be attended by the entire Congressional delegation in Puerto Rico, headed by U.S. Ambassador Hugh Butler.
Drop in the volume of purchases by consumers has created uneasiness in trade Traffickers also face a state of overcrowding-De Hostos says not to fear a sudden drop in prices For R. Santiago Sosa Editor of EL MUNDO The Insular grocery trade is suffering at the present time a state of uncertainty and stagnation mainly due to a considerable drop in the volume of purchases" by consumers and the overcrowding of the market.
"ilmular, with large quantities of ,; foodstuffs of all kinds which cannot J! be sold at the rate of standard time operations." The retail trade made "aber | yesterday in San Juan that the" owner" 1 of e "tableclmlento" retail e "tán Impoilbilltado" of making purchase" of vlvere" for finding "* also with exce "o of renglone" food" Important", and eitar facing the problem of a reír'ducclón "úblta in the demand of ' "u" customer". On the other hand, it was also noted that there is a general state of alarm in the retail business at the news that the food market could suffer from one moment to the next a sharp drop in its current price level, This would cause the grocery trade to be reluctant to supply more than the amount needed to meet the daily demand of consumers. 1 However, the president of the Chamber of Commerce, "eftor Flllpo " L. de Hoatoa, reported that he can " aaassure that such fears are unfounded, and that "prices in the - market of origin remain as high as they were immediately after the lifting of the controls by the Office of Price Administration," making it clear that "the outlook for the future of the market of origin is as good as it was in the immediate aftermath of the lifting of the controls by the Office of Price Administration. The immediate and future outlook is that there will be no substantial changes in the prices of the main foodstuffs that could cause a disruption to the economy of the country and to the stability of business. 1 On the other hand, a well-known food importer said that the situation is so extreme that commercial credit in some countries is suffering damage. InI formed that ie have nadoi caioi in r that product! received! in the pali i no hin ildo raised! by iui . coniignatarioi, having loi reprei lentantoi of the importing caiai! i that hacerie charge of the market- . rlai, and that, to force the fulfillment of somea contracta of purchase-sale, there will be necealdad to engage recuraoa Judiclalea. Most of them have had to use additional storage space to store their goods, having to use port warehousing. The conaumldorea, on the other hand, reflect the desire to maintain caution in the purchase of essential items, after a difficult period of high prices and black market, in the expectation that the prevailing price levels, which have not undergone substantial changes in recent months, will be reasonably lowered. i The president of the Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Flllpo L. de Hos- - tos, when questioned about this problem, reported yesterday that in reality there is an abnormal situation in the insular market of vi- . veres, with quantities of important foodstuffs in excess of the normal needs of the population. In commenting on this ' situation, Mr. De Hostos made i known that no fear should be entertained by the trade in the sense that a sudden drop ; of prices in the ori- ' * "Pw the contrary," he continued, "there ' has been a very strong reaction in the markets and prices are 1 now as high as they were (Continued on 7) ■ There are still doubts I on compulsory service Gurney declined to promise anything as to action to be taken by bu committee By JAMES AUSTIN Correaponaal of United Prenaa. WASHINGTON, 21. (P.UJ-White House announces today that Congress will be informed within a week whether President Truman wishes to extend the draft law beyond March 31. At the same time, sources on Capitol Hill believe that the President may seek a temporary extension. Certain rumors began to circulate after the President said at his press conference that he did not intend to make any recommendations regarding his military training program until the reports of his advisory committee appointed for that purpose, probably late in the spring. In view of this possible delay, ( some Senators and Representatives . stated that possibly ol President Truman will ask that the Military Recruiting Act be extended for two or three months beyond the expiration date, i.e., on (Continued on page 22).
FLT Union became independent In this way the Union agreed to let it sign contract Nogueras makes no comment Settlement of difference* "was achieved by intervening mayors of the AGUADILLA district. (By Gilberto Cruz Igartúa)-The effort to find a way to put an end to the strike at the Central Coloso, effort made by the mayors of this district, Mr. Fernando Milán son, Arcadlo Colón Serrano, Justo Méndez Cabrera, Juan Vlllarubla Santiago and Rafael Hernández Cario, had definitive success, having achieved the solution of the discrepancy" between the Factory Union, affiliated to the FLT. and the Agricultural Union, affiliated to the Sugar Union. The workers of the factory, together with the district mayors and the labor leaders of the Union, Mr. Armando Sanchez and Mr. Armando Rivero, in the meeting held at the Aguada City Hall, agreed that the Union of the factory would renounce its affiliation to the FLT, declaring itself an Independent Union. Under these terms, the Union agreed to recognize to the new Union the exclusive contracting rights which, according to the law, belong to the Union. i The leaders of the CGT sector turned to the demands of the Union of Factory--Sisterhood Independent of Coloso workers, under a new name, to have absolute freedom in terms of contracting with the Contra! Colossus, of the new agreement that will have to govern when the one signed previously by ol Union will be left without effect. The solution of having the Factory Union declare itself an Independent Union, as a way to put an end to the Coloso strike, was brought to Mr. Miranda Fellú by the mayors, with the collaboration of Mr. Arturo Reichard, from this city, and Assemblyman Raúl Cabán. Mr. Miranda submitted the idea of declaring the Union Independent to the workers, who manifested themselves favorably at the meeting in Aguada. To find out if the Contra! Colase was willing to sign a new agreement with the factory workers, an interview was held between the conciliators and the workers with Mr. Gabriel Flá and Mr. Rafael López, administrators of the plant. These gentlemen expressed their willingness to discuss a new agreement immediately. At the Aguadilla Mayor's Office, the specifications were signed, declaring the Factory Union independent and granting the Union to the new Union, the contracting rights. Rivero and Sanchez signed for the Union; Miranda Fellu, President of the Independent Union, and Juan Villanueva, Secretary; Arturo Reichard and Fernando Milán, Jr., Warden, signed as witnesses. The terms of the agreement to be discussed will be finalized today (yesterday) morning and this afternoon (yesterday afternoon) the directors of the Union will go to the Central to discuss. It is expected that these negotiations will be completed by today or tomorrow and that the mill will be able to start milling on Monday. This Coloso conflict has been going on for 22 days and its solution has caused jubilation among all circles, workers, industry and commerce. In view of the same, the merchants suspended the order of closing that they had fixed for today (yesterday). Noguera" Rivera does not comment Interrogated yesterday "eftor Nlcolá" Noguera" Rivera, General Secretary of the Free Federation, to which the Union was affiliated.de Trabajadore de Factoría, Vlaa y Obraa, de Ja Central Coloao, was affiliated to, about the agreement reached between its leaders and the representatives of the Sugar Union, which has led to the resolution of the workers' conflict in said sugar mill, he limited himself to saying that "there is no comment". When asked if the agreement would have the approval of the FLT, he repeated in the same way. In view of this attitude of the secretary of the Book Federation, it could not be determined yesterday what steps will be taken by this labor organization to avoid that in the future, another incident of this nature could dismember its forces, in those cases of conflicts that arise with its unions, over hiring rights. The strike of the contra! Coloao speaks already caused a crisis in loé .(Continued on page I)
Crawford predicts TA will fail
Repudiates $1 Government operation saying it imposes high costs Butler supports statement Announces action would be taken with a view to decentralizing Government ownership By WarJAM'irDÓavnjJlR Chief, Washington Bureau of THE WORLD) Representative Fred Crawford, Republican, of Michigan, and chairman of the U.S. House of Representatives subcommittee on Territories and Insular Affairs, yesterday predicted the eventual collapse of the operation of sugar mills by the Insular Government. By implication, Rep. Crawford predicted a similar fate for other phases of government-controlled sugar production in Puerto Rico. > i. During a press conference held yesterday at La Fortaleza in which reporters questioned Rep. Crawford, Sen. Hugh Bütlor, Republican, of Nebraska; Joseph C. 0'Mahoney, Democrat, of Wyoming; and Guy Cordon, Republican, of Oregon, Rep. Crawford carried the day, dominating the conference with rapid-fire answers, particularly when the ■ Exchange revolved around sugar. Senator Butler, who is chairman of the Senate Public Lands Committee, supported Crawford's assertion that government control tends to increase sugar production costs, making them higher than those of private industry. Senator Butler stated that costs are generally higher because "Government production is not as efficient as private operation. < Sounder O'Mahonoy inter- ■ posed to say that "it is all based ' on the assumption of Inefflencla." - Sonator Butler, who opened the conference, briefly explained the ¿ program of the Republican Party-dominated Congress aimed at reducing government operating expenses from wartime to peacetime levels. In response to a question, he stated that the effect of a national economic government in Puerto Rico would be similar to its effects in the various states of the United States. In connection with the political status problem, Senator Butler faced a question about what Congress would do in responding to the Indian Legislature if it passed a resolution asking for a solution, saying that Congress would cooperate in seeking a solution through the regular machinery of the legislative process. Representative Crawford reported that during the day he had been informed that, because of certain export regrets, he was unable to export pifias. He said he went to the docks, however, and saw some 25 truckloads of pineapples about to be shipped. "We need," Crawford said, better information." Crawford added that the Congress should take the necessary steps to offer protection to the pineapple industry in Puerto Rico, "for it must continue to expand and be allowed to expand. Crawford is interested in the regulations governing the control of industrialized pifias with quota sugar * for island consumption, he said. s and added that I will try to obtain a liberalization of those regulations. It is assumed that the Repro- b aentwhile has in mind regulations requiring the mainland shippers of sugar- ndustriallized pifias in Puor- d to Rico to surrender federal sugar ration stamps ' for the amount used- 1 (Continued on page 7)
New president of the Security Council
.. A -W ■ - I t Dr. Oswaldo Aranha, one of Brazil's most connoted governmental figures, who is the new president of the United Nations Security Council, a position he will hold until the delegate from China becomes ocu- . parlo, in accordance with the system of । monthly rotation by alphabetical order of nations. - (Photo by F. A.), Nevada affects New YorkaSanJuan flights Day before yesterday delayed two PAWA flights. One departed yesterday; another was suspended NEW YORK, 21st (PU). - The worst storm in many years buried most of the eastern basket states under a carpet of snow today. - The storm lashed from the south behind winds of 30 to 50 miles per hour speed, passing through Virginia. West Virginia, Pensllvanla, New Jersey and New York, and curving into New England and thence out to sea. By noon, twelve people are reported dead as a result of the storm. Weather Bureau employees predicted that the storm would pass over the Atlantic, north of Boston, around noon, but at that time it was still pounding, leaving behind 19 inches of snow and accumulations six feet deep in some rural areas. The storm caused all aircraft flights to be suspended, and domo- ' red ships at sea. Pan American Airways reported yesterday in San Juan that because of the snowstorm two flights had to be cancelled from New York to San Juan the day before yesterday; that one of the two cancelled flights could be made in the early hours of yesterday morning; but the second flight yesterday - number 117 - had to be cancelled also because of bad conditions due to poor weather conditions. Although there was no Infqr- । maclon yesterday regarding the day's operations, the local Eastern Airlines office reported that (Continued on page 2)