THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Scattered clouds with scattered showers" and showers with thunder, quite scattered. IN SAN. JUAN. YESTERDAY: Maximum temperature, M: minimum, 75. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:00 p.m., 29.94 inches of mercury. No indication of any tropical disturbance.
40 pages 5/
DIARY OF . |> MARANA
YEAR XXVIII
Entered a* second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1947
Aeflor motorist, don't try that grace, another *- killed with it.
NUMBER 11032
Opening of schools still postponed
Nor will reinstate Resigns his seat in the old schedule of the Senate Insular Government employees
Water shortage has worsened Cueva raises new sewage problem The public schools* in the San Juan metropolitan area will not be able to open their* doors* at the beginning of the next "emana. Nor will it be able to open its doors during the working hours of the Government's office, according to a decision of the Aqueduct and Sewer Service's Governing Board. The Board met last Thursday under the chairmanship of Acting Governor Dr. Juan A. Ppn. to consider the entire water shortage in the water supply of the capital. The possibility of inaugurating the school cure on Monday was one of the matters discussed. On the situation of the water supply and the accumulation of water reserves, the Director of the SAA, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, made a comprehensive report, reaching the conclusion that the problem was in all its magnitude and therefore it is not advisable for the Governor to leave in effect * his proclamation delaying the start of the school year and suspending the new working hours in the Government. Mr. Cuevas. Questioned yesterday about the situation, he said that the rains of the last few years have not been favorable in terms of the accumulation of large reserves of the liquid in the aqueduct reservoirs. He added that even though "there have been sporadic downpours in some regions of the Piedras and Bayamón riverbeds, these have not been sufficiently intense and prolonged* to alleviate the problem of permanent shortages. "This* rainfall has allowed us to deal with the situation a little". - said Mr. Cueras, - "since they have allowed us to alter the rationing plan and achieve some pressure in the pipes. But they have ■been so intermittent and short*, that once *the little accumulated water is exhausted, the problem arises again in all its severity". Mr. Cueva* also added that in vltta of this situation, the flow of the* Piedra* and Bayamón rivers again dropped alarmingly, causing another readjustment in the water rationing plan for the population, which reduces by at least one* hour the time that was being dedicated to serving water to the* users* of the system. -Everything seems to indicate that no more water flow will be obtained from the subway sources of Hato Rey, since the studies carried out reveal that the subsoil from which the liquid is obtained seems to have reached "its maximum development. Forcing this zone to obtain a greater quantity of liquid could cause salty water to be sucked up, according to the opinion of aqueduct technicians, to such a degree that it would be inadequate for human consumption. As is known, one of the deep wells in Hato Rey, which provides a flow of more than two million gallons of water per day, is already producing "brackish" water. ' The Governing Board also discussed at the aforementioned meeting the need for an educational campaign, in all of the Hato Rey area! (Continued on page 24).
■■■te ii " ■rf ' M " ; TsO* JU ja lEIF j "¡ / as \ / í ¡ - Ledo. LUIS ALFREDO COLON i They point to feud with ; Méndez as cause ; for resignation j ■ - ■ - i On the other hand change , in road project ' displeases Senator ' AGUADILLA, August 8. (By Gil- - herto Cruz Igertúa, correspondent"- 1 The senator for this district, Ileon* * ciado Luis Alfredo Colón, presented 1 his resignation from his post in the Insular Legislature, for which he was elected in the 1944 elections. k Reports obtained from sources* close to the aguadillano senator denied that he had presented 1 his resignation, but at the* new*tr*" instance. They informed i that he did so yesterday by letter to the President of the Senate of Pueri to Rico, Seftor Luis Muftoz Marín. The contents of the letter to Mr. Muftoz Marin were not disclosed, but it was reported that it indicated that the resignation was of an irrevocable nature. The reason for the resignation is not known, and it has surprised the* ) political* circle* of the locality. 5 Source* close* to Senator Co- - lón assure that the resignation dq ' this legislator must be related ron a certain antagonism that is ■ reported to have arisen between Senator Colón and the other senator for that 1 district, Senator Bernardo Méndez, it is * Reported that the antagonism *- is due to a certain antagonism *- between the senator and the other senator for that 1 district, Senator Bernardo Méndez. antagonism *- is due ' to the fact that Senator Méndez has been ln- ' tervinlendo in the political affairs ' of Senator Colón's nuehlo -Mo- , ca , In addition, Senator Colón is disi liked on account of a compro.'miso made to him for the con*- ' trucción of a road in the barrio , Cerro Gordo, de Mora, with bridge , ¡on the Culebrinas river and. of which. - Now, according to the plans, the bridge, which is the fundamental necessity of the project, is omitted. Senator Coi lón has made a formal promise to the inhabitants of this area that the road and bridge would be built. '
News Digest
Work* on improvements to the Capital's . lar plata* is completed. ExComiaionado de Instrucción, doctor Gallardo, visit to Isla. i - * ♦ Received* 12300 quíntale* of I Dominican coffee. . - . Difficulties have arisen in the present school year, registering encases of classrooms, teacher* and equipment. * * * UPR Board considers Rivera Valiente's appeal. Hernándes Aquino endorsed for Police Chief in Virgin Islands. Supply assures that there is enough arros in the market so that the island does not fear a grain drought. * Colon Gordiany raises non-partisanship of CGT teeter that pro-Ide. - The insurance of carriers excludes the risk of damage to other people's property. * Piftero says that even if he could he would not exercise the new powers of appointment which the reforms give to the elective governor. --- The water shortage would prevent the reopening of the schools in the metropolitan area or the reestablishment of the old government employee's salary. - The Civil Aeronautics has tightened the rule to charge the airplanes dedicated to flights without fixed itinerary. - The Prosecutor finished presenting his evidence in the case of El Verde. New party denies news about registration.
Today begins in Aguadilla i* convention of the Veteran's Brotherhood". Lions of Cabo Rojo request the removal of the monument* from the public pias* of said town. - The committee in charge of studying new" procedure" on 1* enrollment will report today to the University Board. - Senator Luí" Alfredo Colón, of Aguadilla, has presented his resignation to the President of the Senate. The Rio Piedra market will be temporarily relocated while the building undergoes major renovations. - Truman signs 1* Sugar Law extending for 5 years* the* Sugar Act. Island industry says measure is good for* the pal." - * - Director of! PEG discussed yesterday in Portales* 1" way of speeding up hospital building program. e - * House of Commons granted dictatorial pruning to Labor Cabinet. - e - President of the American Veterans Committee will try to affiliate the HVP to that entity. - Rolg considers to be the number of complaint" in July, for violation of traffic laws in the metropolitan area. * ♦ * The School Benevolent Society offers to manage the night high school of Río Piedras.
Piñero does not find that the reforms grant him power to exercise the powers of the elective governor.
Difficulties on the Island with the school year More classrooms, teachers and equipment are reportedly needed in six towns. Problem with a group of veterans Commissions from the Island are continually bringing their cases to the Department of Instruction A" according to the* Report* arrived* by different* means* at the Department of Instruction, the new school year has begun with a general lack of teachers, classrooms and school equipment. i The problem, according to these" Reports, is not of a serious nature in many cases, but is" acute in others". Commissions from different towns of the island continually come to the Department to present their respective cases and to demand the assignment of more teachers, the opening of new "alone" and the assignment of new school equipment, all to accommodate the enrollment of children who have not been able to be accommodated in the existing public schools. EL MUNDO has been presenting how this situation affects different municipalities, among them Cayey. Aguas Buenas. Rincón and Aftasco. Yesterday, Arecibo and Las Piedra" joined the list, presenting one or more characteristics of the problem. A commission presided over by the Mayor of Las Piedra," Seftor Gabriel Ricard, said that in that town "all teacher vacancies have already been filled," but that "an additional physical education teacher, an industrial arts teacher and at least two rural teachers are needed there. Las Piedras, he said, could fill up to ten teachers* and the corresponding additional "sienes, if there were the necessary equipment since there is a demand for enrollment. The municipality, he added, has ceded the use of a building valued at $25,000, which offers facilities for twelve additional classrooms, but the Department of the Interior has not yet proceeded to equip it. In addition, more teachers and the corresponding equipment would be needed. "The municipality has already made the sacrifice to help prevent children from being left on the street," said Mr. Ricard. "We understand that the Island Government should do its part, enabling the building we ceded; giving us teacher" and assigning us equipment." He informed the Mayor that his" gestione* in the Department "a relacionaban also ron the matter of teacher transfers." On the other hand, he reported, the Mu-, nlclpal Hospital of La" Piedra" burned down some time ago, but to date the new building for it has not been constructed, as provided for in the law that allocated $85,500 for this purpose. The plans and designs for this building have already been completed," he added, and all that remains is for the land on which the new building will be erected to be appraised and for other procedures related to its construction to be expedited. In the meantime, he revealed, the Municipality has to continue sending its patients to the Humacao Municipal Hospital or to the Fajardo Dl*' trlto Hospital. (Continued on page 24)"
Today, the University Board will continue its meetings to consider different "a "unto" that are pending consideration. This body has been meeting lately to discuss problems that affect the courses to be initiated on the 25th of this month, and that must be resolved before the beginning of classes. As has been reported by EL MUNDO, in "u" previous meetings the Board dealt with the problem of the" new promotions and entered into the consideration of the case of the College of Law of the University of Puerto Rico, promoted by the students of the first and second years, who submitted a memo- । rial to the Rector and the Higher Council of Education, on the failures of the College of reference.At the meeting of the Board to be held this morning, । "e will discuss the Report submitted to j said body by a committee ¡ appointed for that purpose, on the proce- ¡ (dlmiento de matricula y pago de; i derechos. This committee was appointed last May and made a study of the problem of university tuition. Another important issue to be discussed is that of । the arrangements for the establishment of the university tuition and fees committee.
CAB tightens its rules on flights without fixed itineraries Will begin issuing authorizations for irregular carriers in September* 10, - Governor Pinero weighs in on the matter.
Fnr PAUL HARRISON United Press Correspondent 1 WASHINGTON Aug. 8, (PU).-The Civil Aeronautics Board's regulations governing the operations of licensed airlines will not cripple the "no fixed-route" flights between Puerto Rico and the metropolis, and they have no bearing on the much-discussed air transport of Puerto Ricans to New York, despite recent reports that this was the case. The United Press, in discussing these regulations with the authorities of the Civil Aeronautics Board and with other officials of the Federal and Island Governments, has found that even though these regulations may restrain the traffic of the airline, they do not have any bearing on the airline's ability to fly to New York.
There is no way to determine the extent of such a restriction, should it come to pass. In the first place, it should be borne in mind that regulations governing licensed airlines have always governed and that requests for their provision come from all parts of the nation and not only from Puerto Rico, although Alaska enjoys certain exemptions because of its special situation and the need for the development of faster transportation within the territory and between it and the United States. Revisions to the regulations *are contained in a CAB decision of 10 June of this year. These revisions have been under consideration for more than a year, and the Government of Puerto Rico has been interested in them from the beginning. There have always been two main arguments-presented mainly by the fixed-route airlines-against the UceneiA carriers. One is that non-routing operators sometimes give the impression that they* are regularly certificated carriers and thus give the public the wrong impression. The other is that, although they are not required to sustain fixed overhead costs and are not required to maintain such strict safety procedures as those of the non-route operators, they are not required to maintain such strict security procedures as those of the non-route operators.
12,500 quintals of coffee received from the Dominican Republic
12,500 quintals of coffee, purchased* by 1* Supply Management* in the Dominican Republic, have been received* in Puerto Rico to alleviate the coffee shortage that has been prevailing. The purchase contract includes a quantity of grain up to 25,000 quintals and the balance will be requested as it is needed on the Island. The Government agency is carrying out studies to determine the possibilities of the next coffee harvest in Puerto Rico.
Puerto Rico's next coffee harvest. Specific information on this estimate could not be provided because the research and data gathering* that has been taking place has not yet been completed. The importation of foreign coffee has been considered prudent in order to prevent consumers from suffering from the scarcity of the food. This action, as will be recalled, was recently announced by the Director of the AS, Mr. Antonio VIcéna Rio*.
1 As Brewster testifies, Hughes talks with llllB -7--- ~ r B Howard Hughes, center, and drowned Thomas Slack, right, confer as Senator Owen Brewster testified Wednesday before the senatorial eubco mite investigating war matters. Brewster, a Republican from Maine, admitted that he and Hughes talked "by telephone on March 3 about a merger between Hughes' airline, TWA, and Pan American Airways. - (Preña" Associate Photo).
Truman signs sugar bill; extends subsidy for five years Vtllamil says that although the bill is not all that the Island hoped for, it guarantees for five years the stability of the island industry WASHINGTON, Aug "to~8. -"(PU) - Under legislation signed into law today by President Truman, subsidies, quotas and a half-cent excise tax on each pound of sugar were extended for five years.
New party denies news of registration Says F. Font Suarez is to sign the first ballot in the Capital Assuring that representative Eugenio Font Suarez will sign the first ballot of the Inde* pendentlsta Party when the registration of this collectivity is initiated in I* Capital, Dr. Gilberto Concepi ción de Gracia, provisional president of said party, denies the information published in the "enildo ; that Lic. Francisco Co- 1 lón Gordiany, president of a see- , tor of the CGT, "serla the first to sign it." 1 The following is the complete text of the statements made by Dr. Concepción de Gracia: "I wish to deny the information that appeared in the newspaper "El Impartial" yesterday, to the effect that comrade Francisco Colón Gordiany, president of the C.G.T. Auténtica, would be the first to sign in San Juan a registration letter of the Puerto Rican Party. Puerto Rican which I have the honor to preside. "The news that appeared in "El Imparclal" took me by surprise. At no time did any authorized leader of the Puerto Rican Independence Party approach comrade Colón Gordiany to request such a request from him. Nor did comrade Colón Gordiany call any leader of our collectivity to claim for "i the privilege 1 of signing the first registration ballot. "The information that appeared in "El Imparclsl" in that sense was not authorized by the Puerto Rican Independent Party nor by any of its leaders. (Continued on page 24) Piñero spoke today with Columbia officials WASHINGTON, Aug. 8. - Governor Piñero is scheduled to travel to New York tonight, where he will confer tomorrow with Columbia University officials on the proposed study of the Puerto Rican emigration problem. Piñero should be back in Washington next Monday for conferences with federal officials on a variety of subjects.
The new law represents a revision and continuation of the 1937 Sugar Act, which, but for this revision, would have ended on December 31. Because of scarce wartime and postwar supplies, imported and domestically produced supplies have been suspended since April 1942. President Truman may suspend the new quotas if he decides that shortages must continue! If the quotas are not suspended, the Secretary of Agriculture will have to estimate the probable domestic demand next year. His estimates will finalize the import quotas for that year. ! The quotas* established for domestic production are as follows: sugar beet. 1,800,000 tons; cane to be produced in the continental United States, 500,000 tons; Hawaii cane. 1,052 tons; ! coffee from Puerto Rico, 910,000 tons; cane from the Virgin Islands, 6,000 tons. I The Philippine Republic received an i allotment of 952,000 ton" ' annually, but that republic is believed to be unable to be in condition- , clones to realize that quota । for several" years. Cuba will be allowed to supply 98.64 percent of the difference between continental demand and total domestic quotas. Cuba will also be allowed to take charge of most of which (Continued on page 24) HV convention begins today in Aguadilla They will try to solve the urgent problems confronting the organization On the occasion of the beginning of the work of the second annual convention of the Brotherhood of Veterans". which will be held today and tomorrow in Aguadilla, the president of the organization, Lic. Jorge E. Gautier, yesterday authorized the following statements: "The Veterans Brotherhood has designated Aug. 9 and If for the celebration of its second annual convention. The event will be held in the halls of the Rivoli Club, Aguadilla. "All the veterans of Puerto Rico are awaiting what will take place in Aguadilla today and tomorrow. The delegates to the convention, who have been selected by the 88 local chapters of the HVP, will decide whether the organization takes a step forward or backward in the achievement of its* objective* through the agreements* that will be formulated. We believe that such a step will be forward without any hesitation or wavering of any kind. "The Brotherhood is sltused before urgent problems with which the veterans and all numbers of the people are confronted: The question before all is: what can and should the HVP do to solve these problems?
' Declares he would not apply them even if he could Nothing is found in the । law that would allow him to do so, he says in Washington Senator Butler's statements were to the Senione" Journal when he could not read them in the Senate WASHINGTON, D.C. (PU)-Puerto Rico Governor Jesús T. Piñero said today in Washington that he would not apply them even if he could. Piñero, told the United Press today that he did not interpret the Puerto Rican Charter reform bill, recently passed by Congress and signed into law by President Truman, in Sen. 11do that it gives a governor appointment power to nominate the heads of the executive departments of the island government. "I have read the entire text of the bill," said Piñero, adding that "I find no evidence to show that I can appoint the heads of the executive departments. "But, even if I do find evidence, however," he continued, "I do not consider it convenient to take advantage of it. It was clearly the intention of the congregation of the members* of the House of Representatives* and of those of the Senate laboring on the bill- that this power should be exercised only by an elective governor. "The co-authors (of the bill), Chairman Hugh Butler of the Senate Public Lands Committee and Chairman Fred Crawford of the House Public Lands Subcommittee on Insular Affairs, were clearly thinking of a November 1948 term," Plfteró continued. Piñero added that the issue is quite academic, because the only department involved, at this time, is the Department of Instruction, and that an interim director is now assuming that position. Hugh Butler, R-Nebraska, one of the authors of the measure, was unable to offer the statements he had prepared to read before the Senate, but the publication of the bill in the Journal of Congressional Sessions was authorized. From that publication, therefore, we take ( in part 1es statements of Senator Butler, which are as follows: "The Committee on Public Grounds* has recommended that House Resolution 3309, which would en. mondar the Charter of Puer. to Rico, be passed in the same form as it was passed by the House, with the addition of two new provisos. The Charter of Puerto Rico, as amended by H.R. 3309, is an act of the Congress serving the same purpose in Puerto Rico as a state constitution in a state. Under the provisions of the current Charter, which was approved in 1917 and amended in various ways subsequently, the Government of Puerto Rico consists of three branches: the executive, the legislative and the judicial. The legislative branch is popularly elected, but the Charter provides that the President of the United States shall appoint, and the United States Senate shall confirm, the governor, two of the heads of each of the executive departments - the Commissioner of Instruction and the Attorney General - and all of the judges of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, which is the highest court in the Island's judicial system. Section I of the bill would authorize the electors of Puerto Rico to elect the Governor for a term of four years, beginning with the 1948 general election. Section II would provide for the resldenclemlento procedure if the Governor is indicted for treason, bribery or other felony or misdemeanor. Section III of the bill deals with the heads of executive departments. Currently, the Governor has the authority to appoint the heads of five of the seven executive departments created by the Charter: the Treasurer, the Commissioner of the Interior, the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, the Commissioner of Labor, and the Commissioner of Health. All appointments are confirmed by the Senate of Puerto Rico. The Governor does not appoint the head of the Department of Justice, i.e., the Attorney General, nor the head of the Department of Instruction, i.e., the Commissioner of Instruction. These two officials are appointed by the President of the United States with the approval of the U.S. Senate. The bill would authorize the appointment of these two officers by the Governor with the approval of the Senate of Puerto Rico. Senate of Puerto Rico. All executive department heads, whether appointed by the President or the Governor, are currently Puerto Rican, in keeping with the long-established U.S. policy of encouraging the territory's inhabitants to become increasingly involved in local government. Therefore, there would be no practical difference in the current altitude to the (Continued on page 20
(There is plenty of rice on the market).
The SA assures that the island will not suffer from a shortage of the grain 220,000 quintals will arrive this month Shipments already signed guarantee until the September harvest The Administration of the Supply Administration reported yesterday that it has secured shipments* of rice in sufficient quantities so that there is no fear of a shortage of grain in Ja Tala before* the shipments corresponding to the new harvest begin to arrive next September. The Acting Director of the AS, Mr. Julio Perez Garcia, stated yesterday that Puerto Rico will have to receive in the rest of August about 220,000 quintals of grain, according to authorizations issued by the office for purchases in the mainland market. Mr. Perez Garcia said that all the orders have been placed in the United States, having already received the first shipments from ports in the Gulf. He said that part of this rice was acquired at prices within the maximums established by the Supply Administration. Mr. Pérez García also stated that "at present there is no shortage of rice in Puerto Rico, and it can be assured that there will be no shortage in the future. The new rice crop in the United States" begins to be harvested after the first half of August, and there are already offers for rice from the new crop at lower prices*. There was a real fear that a grain shortage could arise in Puerto Rico during the current month of August, due to the delay in closing purchase transactions in the U.S. market because of the high prices at which the food began to be quoted after June 30, the date on which federal pre-j clos controls ceased. It will be recalled that in view of this situation, the U.S. Administration began negotiations for the purchase of rice from Brazil, which were suspended when offers were made for deliveries by mills in the United States at an acceptable price. ( Quantities of rice from esU- < madn of 220,000 quíntale* have been started to be received at the 1 lila which are es- t peran in the course of the present i me* of agoito. < The Supply Administration* reported yesterday that the first canti- < dad arrived on the ship 'Morning Light,' < on the fourth of last Augito, which pro- ] ceded from the Gulf. Said vessel brought ( 11,883 sack* of consigned rice* -" ] traders lócale". On the sel" of j August 9,342 ; quintals were also received, on the ship Nancy Lykes, ¡ also consigned to the compelo in- । su!ar, for a total of 21,205 quln- ( such. About 120,000 quintals ( additionale* are being shipped now at North American ports," which will be received in Puerto Rico probably next week. Other ships are expected at the ports of San Juan, Ponce and Mayagüez, with quantities of grain for various local importers and distributors. The outlook for the future is quite promising, as we saw yesterday. Puerto Rico will be able to dispose of large quantities of quality rice once the grains from the new harvest become available. A fairly abundant supply of this foodstuff is expected in the producing regions of the south and west of the United States. It was reported, moreover, that the American mills are interested in preserving the import market of Puerto Rico and Cuba, to which they export a substantial quantity of this food annually. To stimulate these markets, rice growers' organizations have been discussing sales promotion plans and guidelines to ensure that they keep their sales at normal levels, mainly in view of the threat that rice production in Brazil and other foreign areas could undermine these two markets. The impression obtained locally is that the island will be able to obtain rice from the new harvest, starting in the first half of September, * at prices lower than the current maximums. The new crop will also make it possible to substantially improve the quality of the product shipped to the island. As will be noted, in recent weeks it became necessary to consume in Puerto Rico rice of inferior quality, which found an outlet due to the shortage created by the transition between the old and the new crop. In the efforts to prevent Puerto Rico, in view of the shortage, from importing rice from Brazil, *1 congressman for the state of Lulslana, Mr. Domeneaux, frankly admitted that the United States rice industry* would suffer serious damage "1 Puerto Rico would be out of the North American market.