THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: Partly cloudy with a few scattered showers" over the Interior. Clear tonight. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temperature, 84 and low. 78. Barometric pressure at sea level, - 4:80 p.m.. 29.88 inches of mercury.
38 Pages 5*
DIARIO Di la MAÑANA
YEAR XXVIII
Entered ae second elam matter, Poet Office, San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 11, 1947
-after motorist, I didn't try that crack, another one killed him with it.
NUMBER 11092
Rents are not expected to be decontrolled
Benitez Gautier declares that Crredon's decision does not affect Puerto Rico Within three months, the Rent Advisory Board, which is attached to the Federal Inqul. Ilnato, will make a recommendation as to whether or not to deacon, tro! or not to deacon, or part of the lila, as well as the general level of existing rents for the Island. It is expected that the Board will not amend the lack of revenue control in any part of the Island, nor will it alter the current maximum level thereof. Jorge Benitez Gautier, regional director of the Federal Tenancy Office, informed yesterday that the Board has been officially requested by the agenda to make its recommendations to the effect, in order to be submitted to the U.S. Housing Accelerator, Mr. Frank ¡ Creedon. The latter is interested in having under his consideration the re.
He is interested in having under consideration the amendments on rent control and rent levels which all Boards are able to submit for the purpose of complying with the provisions of the federal rent control law. Mr. Benitez Gautier stated that it is his impression that the Board of Puerto Rico will not recommend decontrol of revenues in the Island, or any part thereof. He based his belief that a recommendation to decontrol all or part of the rents in Puerto Rico would be academic, since there is an island law to regulate housing, which provides that it will become effective as soon as federal control takes effect. As for a recommendation regarding an alteration, whereby the levels prevailing under federal law, Mr. Benites Gstitter stated that it is considered to be completely current. The Puerto Rico Rent Control Board, which is headed by Mr. Rodolfo S. Aponte, was instructed two days ago to submit recommendations on the two aforementioned points. The request has been made following specific instructions from the Housing Accelerator. The same has been done with all the other boards throughout the Nation. Since the Board was appointed by the Federal Government to act in Puerto Rico, it has been meeting at night. In the meetings held so far, the body has been considering its internal regulations. The Board is expected to meet in a few days, according to Mr. Benites Gau. tier. It is expected that the Board will meet within the next few days. (Continued on page 7) Hurricane threatens Cuba and Florida It is likely to try to take the dry ice Miami, Florida, October 9.
Late this afternoon orders have been issued to take precautions and be prepared, pending further weather reports of a cyclonic disturbance, with winds up to ninety-six kilometers per hour, advancing in the Caribbean Sea toward Cuba, heading northwest from the vicinity of Swan Island. Storm seals have been ordered around the entire coast of South Florida, from Miami in the east. Fort Myers on the west coast. At three o'clock this afternoon, New York time, a cautionary bulletin from the Miami Weather Observatory reported that the disturbance will probably reach hurricane strength within the next twelve hours, passing over Cuba tonight and heading for Florida tomorrow. The disturbance was located by Hurricane Watch aircraft this afternoon, three hundred and eighty-four kilometers south southwest of Havana, and was moving northward at one hundred and twenty-four kilometers* per hour. The meteorologists say that the strong disturbance will continue to head northwest with accelerated speed, so it is possible that it will weaken as it passes over Cuba. The observatory warned that caution should be taken against dangerous winds along the Florida Keys beginning early Saturday and over the rest of South Florida later Saturday. The storm was discovered at eight and only fifty-six kilometers per hour winds near the Vortex. During the last twelve hours, the storm's intensity increased rapidly. Winds of eighty and ninety-six miles per hour today, and the gusts extend some three hundred and twenty miles northward from the (Continued on p. 15)
J The totality of the 1946 readjustment has already been received on the island.
This was revealed by the CEC representative in Puerto Rico, Mr. Maximino Vázquez. Amount exceeds $8,5000,000. - Workers' Participation ■ - - - - - - - - - - - -
| The Puerto Rico sugar industry has already received the full amount of the readjustment for the 1948 harvest, according to Mr. Maximino Vázquez, representative in Puerto Rico of the Agricultural Credit Corporation. The amount received by the sugar industry, which has been distributed among the sugar mills, which are settling the participation of the settlers and the workers, amounts to more than eight and a half million dollars. Since last July, the industry has been receiving the shocks corresponding to the readjustment, which was paid by the CCA in accordance with the clauses of the 1948 contract for the sale and purchase of sugar production, which provided for a readjustment in the price of sugar in accordance with increases in the cost of living. The only participation that has not been totally liquidated is that of the workers, since it has been the cause of controversy between workers and employers. This controversy has revolved around the amount to which the workers are entitled. As is known, the employers have alleged that the workers, under the provisions of the Secretarial Determination, are only entitled to 9 cents a day increase in their wages, while the workers, relying on an opinion issued by the Minimum Wage Board and supported by the Commissioner of Labor, maintain that their participation in the minimum wage is not sufficient to cover the minimum wage.
Ibajo, maintain that their participation in the readjustment is 18 cents per day. The Commissioner of Labor, Mr. Fernando Sierra Bordela, has appealed to the courts with a petition for injunction to compel the cane growers to pay the aforementioned amount, which has been fixed by reference to the provisions of Mandatory Decree No. 3 issued by the JSM for the Sugar Industry. i However, a number of workers have been collecting their share of the readjustment at the rate of 9 cents per day. Others have been paid at the rate of 18 cents. The workers, however, are in a position to claim the halan-| ce if it is decided by the courts that the amount to which the workers are entitled is 18 cents per day. On this matter, Mr. Pedro Vega Berrios, president of the Sindicato Azucareros, informed that some of the affiliated unions were collecting their participation at 9 cents per day, but that this does not deprive them of the right to collect the balance of up to 18 cents, if the courts decide in favor of a ruling by the courts. The total estimated amount of the workers' total pension in the readjustment is estimated to be about three million dollars.
Water service to be increased in San Juan today Irregularity in water service was due to a broken pump in Guaynabo In order to quickly normalize the water supply to the metropolitan area, after a breakdown in the Guaynabo pump was corrected, after correcting a breakdown in one of the main pumps at the Guaynabo plant, the Director of the Aqueduct Service, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, ordered the opening of the gates of the Cidra dam to increase the flow of water in the Bayamón river basin. This failure was caused by the interruption of the electric power service last Thursday, which caused a malfunction in one of the 800 horsepower pumps installed in Guaynabo. Mr. Cuevas informed that for this reason, the water supply had to be suspended in almost the entire city starting at noon on Thursday. He added that they immediately began to repair said pump, having worked until six o'clock in the morning on Friday, ending the repair at about that time. Since the water from the Cidra dam takes 18 hours to reach the Guaynabo plant, Mr. Cuevas warned that this could cause irregularities in the service of the liquid in some areas. However, he warned that today there will be a better water service to the population, as the supply will be normalized. The water shortage situation has not improved substantially, Mr. Cuevas said. Therefore, rationing will continue until six o'clock in the afternoon, and on days of higher consumption, until such time as the volume of water reserves available to the population allows.
The General Administrator of the Ministry of Finance, Mr. Antonio Vicéns¡ Ríos, reported yesterday that he had given specific instructions to the Inspectors of the Administration to pursue and prosecute, by all means available under the Law, those who violate the corresponding administrative provision* which fixes the price of a loaf of bread at sixteen ounces per loaf. Mr. Vlcéns Ríos said that the Law will have to be applied in all its rigor, warning that several violators have already been caught by the Supply inspectors, against whom drastic action will have to be taken. An administrative order of the General Supply Administration expressly prohibits, and declares as a speculative practice, the lack of quality in the bread sold to the public. This speculative practice, added Mr. Vicén" Ríos, carries a prison sentence or a heavy fine. | Consumer committees organized in most of the island's towns, according to reports, have complained to the AGS Consumer Division that bread is being sold to the public with a weight less than the weight of the product. These committees have urged both the Bureau of Weights and Measures and the Supply Administration to take drastic and prompt action to stop this practice, which is prohibited by law. . . and the practice is forbidden by law. . The Administrator of Supply ■ is still considering the request of tes i tahoneros, to the effect that ae suitor ico a further increase in the pro- ■ cio of bread, due to the high coai toa of wheat flour, This "o(Continued on page 2P>
News Digest
Personnel Office orders re- 1 adjustment in li Police preaupueeto. decreeing increase in ■ salary, retroactive toi July 1. * * * No decontrol of , rents or alteration of maximums expected. """ CSP agree - that they lower 1* railroad fare. " * * * 1 i Mrs. Barcelo does not yet know ai she will withdraw. She said she cannot 1 allow the Liberal Party * to be dissuaded. o o o o ' The opening of the port of " Tampa has increased the oeporamas of increased shipments of nitrate to the * lela. 1 * * * * ÜPR students start campaign against the cession of Vieques. Bayamón students run cable * NU. ' * * * - , They will grant unpaid leave of absence to veteran employees who request it to follow this * . god" - * * " Armed deployed Stymie on- , among the horses that have earned the most money. i * * * * UPR urges students to avoid ridiculous and dangerous initiation tests. 1 0 0 0 8IA explains, breakage in a .
Irregularity in water service. o * * UPR approved a personal loan plan for employees. * * * Supplies has ordered its Inspectors to pursue those who reduce the weight of bread. e e ♦ They do not yet know the number of voters reinstated to the official lists of voters.  * * * * Jews* strengthen garrison on the Syrian-Lebanese border; take Arab invasion of the Paleotina. o o o New schism arises in basketball, The referees* decided not to act except on the courts* of the University and San German. * o o o o Basora will fight tomorrow in Caraca* against the champion* J. J. J. Fornándea.
Personnel Office orders readjustment in the Police budget to give a raise retroactive to July
Mrs. Barceló does not know yet if! will retire She said yesterday that she can not allow the Liberal Party to be dissolved A few hours after meeting in extraordinary u "mbl "i the Liberal Party, Mrs. Josefina Barceló de Romero, proaidenta of you collectivity, He reported that he has not yet decided whether or not retlrsbs of you presidency, ys that he could not allow the Perfidious fuer* <11- , loose, "as you want some" by "ona"." Although she did not specify, the "aflora Barceló de Romero intimated that she would have to make a tenacious opposition to any proposition that "| Liberal Party enter into mergers or rosliclones with other political parties." With Is setters Bsrceló de Romero ■s met yesterday, in the office" of the Central Board, the" district vlcspreildontea and the" vlcsprssldentts "st large" of the Liberal Party, and discussed at length the various issues that will have to go before the conalderation of the assembly. Among the matters discussed at this meeting were amendments to the rules of procedure and to the economic-co-aoclal program of the Liberal Party. Yesterday afternoon the Central Board issued Isa endoneteles of the delegates of 70 towns of the Island, and it was expected to issue last night those of the "reatante" town for tomorrow's meeting in Fajardo. As you know, there is a Committee of Confidence made up of members of the Central Board of the Liberal Party, which was appointed with the intention of initiating a new political collectivity. | In favor of the "rganlaaelón of a new party, an agreement was approved yesterday by the Liberal Party Committee in Mayagüez. The agreement of said Committee, communicated yesterday to EL MUNDO dlco as follows: "El Comité Llbonl do Miyegüoz. ae met last night, October 9, in the re "Idoncil of the ox-ilcalde, Don Juan Rullán, under the prealdoncla of the aeflor Franclaeo Pagán Medina, resolving after consldsrsr the political sitúaclón of the moment, expro "srao in sympathy eon the Idea do or-| ganlsar a nuova collectivity, fir-| memento oriented to obtain the ter| mlnaclón of the coloniaje, by means of. The Committee was also informed of the need for a new collective, with a direct vote of the people in a plebiscite, and with an economic saving program so that a real and positive social justice would reach everyone, and not a privileged few, as is the case at present. | At the same meeting, the Mayagüez Committee elected the following members of the assembly: Luis Mui floz González, Armando Sarrsmeds, Luis Zamora, Joaé Ayala, Franclais Sarrsmeds, Luis Zamora. Joaé Ayala, Franclaeo - Freyre Qulftonoa and Lula D. Pared. ! delegate" owner": and Ileon- > ciado Antonio V. Acosta, and don .José, i Rullln, alternate and delogsdo frster- . nsl. respectively. The attitude of Mrs. Barceló de Romero against the Liberal Party's entering into . 1 negoclacionoa with other political parties, a growing number of leaders, many of whom are members of the Central Board, hold a different view from that of the party's president. According to aysr aeflora larceló da Romero, the Puerto Rico theater in Fajardo, where the assembly will be held, has the capacity to accommodate 800 people, although she said it is expected to have a much larger turnout than the aaambloa.
UPR approved loans to employees Allocated a supplementary budget to the School of Industrial Arts The Superior Teaching Council approved the plan for personal loans to employees of the University of Puerto Rico, subject to the provisions of the Board's Plsn de Pen. alones. It also approved a supplementary budget in the amount of $87,000 for the School of Industrial Arts, with the purpose of providing the necessary funds for the training and hiring of additional personnel for the operation of said school. Other agreements affecting the UPIJ were also discussed. The Rector of the University, IIesneiado Jalma Benltea, reported that the Council held an extended session, in which various matters of importance to the University were discussed. The Council proceeded to the approval of the budget for the Night Extension Courses, amounting to 823,000. The referred Night Extension has a basic course enrollment of 250 students, and in the recurrent courses there is an enrollment of 750, for a total of 1,000 students. The latter were attached to the Faculty of Commerce. According to the Rector, in order to make the organization of these courses of General Studies feasible, it was agreed to give a supplementary contribution to those of us who teach at night, over and above the regular salary. This criterion was extended to all the professors of Commerce who teach in the evening courses, so that, as the Rector explained, the total means an increase in the regular salary.
The study, which will cover all of Puerto Rico and Hawaii and their economies. The study, which will cover the whole question of mechanization in all sugar producing areas, has been authorized under the provisions of the Investment and Marketing Act of 1948, according to the department. I "The work will be conducted by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics, in cooperation with the Agricultural Research Administration and with the experimental estsdonss estaduslss of those states" in which this essential srtlculo (sugar) aea important." as as disclosed. The result of this work should enable growers and agencies concerned with sugar agriculture to keep abreast of technological advances; it should also serve as a guide to more productive agricultural management practices. Previous studies have shown some of the effects of these tractors and other farm equipment and techniques on worker productivity * on farm yields, but only in a general way. The current Department of Agriculture research project contemplates studies on specific agricultural crops, such as corn, rice, and cotton, with the goal of improving their competitive position through lower production costs. | There is a real need for this type of study, both in the experimental field and in the field where the new varieties are being adopted for the first time by farmers," said E. A. Me-, ysr today. A. Me-, ysr, Administrator of the Act ds' Research and Marketing. in giving his approval to the ss* project (Continued on page 22)
"- il (i a i i- . iir■*""■"■"■"----' | Triarte calls Governor's statements confusing.
The President of the Unión Republicana Progreaiita, Celoitlno Iriarte, in commenting on the statement made by Governor Piftoro to a reporter of the Tymea-PIcayune newspaper of New Orleans. and published in yesterday's edition, he stated that "it is time for us to move away from this position in which they are accustomed to place some political dlrlgontoi of the Popular Party, to accommodate the political situation of Puerto Rico to the partisan convenience of the moment". He added that "such situation is detrimental to the internal of our people, and it is a failure in the mountain of our youth that harms the orientation and development of our people towards the only goal of peace and prosperity for our people. Iriarte also said that "it would be convenient that Governor Piflero, when carrying out the Exchange program with the University of Tulane, had in mind the exiatencla of the prejuleioa raelalea in Luiaiana. very diatintoi
to the sxistsntss in New York, which could create complications in the relationship life of our people, with ol people of Lulslana". Mr. Iriarte announced that he will discuss this matter with Mr. Piflero, upon his next visit to the island. Among other things, Iriarte said: "Governor Piflero, in his interview for the New Orleans Press, has expressed his criteria with respect to the political situation of Pusrto Rieo and the upcoming negotiations with Tulane University, to establish relations and formalize the contract for the latter to take over the operation of the School of Tropical Medicine currently existing in Puerto Rico and in operation with the cooperation of Columbia University. His ma* । nlfsstadonss regarding the political status of Puerto Rico could not have given more than they did. (Continued on page 33)
The total number of voters who filed petitions for the reinstatement of their names on the official list of electors was not known yesterday by the Island Board of Elections. This is because the board has not yet received official documentation from the island's electoral colleges. An official of said agency indicated that the inter* ¡ maclon will probably be available in the course of the next week. It was added that employees of the Insular Board of Elections left yesterday for the island to take charge of the official documents related to the registration of voters who were eliminated from the list".
Study air transportation facilities in the Caribbean f .JO ít. ' 1 '■ k ' ■ * K v 1* Mr J < "i ' ■■ k A,. For the purpose of making a study ds air transportation facilities in the Caribbean area, arrived at Borinquon Base, General Robert W. Harper, commanding general of Twin* Command. B "rte U.S. Air Force, who is pictured (Isqulerda) talking with Colonel Wlh am H. Hanson, commanding officer of Borlnquon Base, and who stated that the base will be one of the key "airports" of the CTA. JFotogrsfia of the Army).
Federal study to be made of island sugar industry Relates to WU mechanization itself and ' its economic effects* - Will help agricultural members determine advantageous use of equipment By CHARLES R. McCABE United Press Correspondent 1 WASHINGTON, Oct. 10, (PU>- The United States Department of Agriculture* said tonight that it will conduct a study of the economic effects* of additional mechanization of the sugar industry, including the mechanization of the sugar industry.
,. . -. and V.. I Hearing on sugar industry 17 House Committee requests documentary information for Capitol Hill event Next Friday at 10 a.m., public hearings on the sugar industry problem and the possible effects of mechanization will begin on Capitol Hill. To this end, the Special Committee of the House of Representatives agreed to call by secret ballot, for the purpose of appearing at the hearings, the Sugar Producers' Association, the Sugar Planters' Association, and Labor organizations, as well as other interested parties in the Committee, to furnish written information to the Committee for its consideration, to supply written or documentary information which may be useful in the study of the sugar industry and the social and economic consequences for workers of the cane industry and the technical methods of cultivation in sugar cane agriculture. The decision to require that the reports and recommendations be "soon submitted" in writing was made because it was felt that otherwise it would not be possible to reach conclusions only so that the Committee could make its final recommendations to the Legislature when it was ready to make its final recommendations.
The number of voters reinstated to the official list is not yet known.
official list. Said documents will be forwarded to the Board for inspection and approval for final determination of the inclusion of the petitioners on the official list of voters. Early reports received indicate that a large number of the 85,000 eliminated voters did not attend the registration colleges to reinstate their names on the official lists of voters. However, it was not possible to obtain an official figure of those registered in order to give a comparative proportion, since the electoral committees have not yet submitted their official reports in advance. *
Reassignment of $12Q mfnimd salary to police officers and $140 to mea Muñoz a, favor of Exempt Service Announces that he will push legislation to that end at the next session Retroactive to the pri. mero de julio, el Director do Personal, señor Msnuel A. Perez, yesterday ordered the reaalgnaclon of police officers and corporal's officers, in the Inaular Police organization, to the 14th and 18th grades, reapplied, under the "Public Employee Compensation Plan", with a minimum salary of $120. for police officers and $140 for corporal's officers. This plan involves an increase of $197,000, according to estimates by the Board of Persons, in the Uniformed Forces' salary budget. The action came after a conference held between the President of the Senate, Mr. Lula Muftnz Marin, members of the Board of Persons! and the Director of Persons! in which the problem of salaries of the Po. Helo. The Personnel Director instructed the Classification Division of the Personnel Office to expedite as much as possible the resignation process, hoping that this will be completed by the 20th of this month, so that the policemen and the tails can receive their October pay increase by the end of this month or early next month. The Presidents of the Senate, Mr. Muñoz Marín, informed that he agrees with the recommendation of the Personnel Board to include the Police in the Exempt Service, and that he will promote legislation to that effect. He stated that it was his opinion that the Legislature should double the pay for rsenganchss, the in per "ente and supply ds termes, as well "orno slimlnar the two. count for lodgings in the euar> tolos do Policie, when such hospo. dsjo. dsjo os a need of the service. Mr. Péros informed EL MUNDO that what is planned is a readjustment in the Police budget, paying the sums paid, until the budget is exhausted and then the Legislature enjuges the deficit with a deficiency law. Should the Legislature decide to include the Police in the Exempt Service, these salary increases will be in effect until the measures taken by the Legislature to that effect take effect in October and during the month of November, the cops and officers will receive a separate paycheck, with a pay increase of $1,000 per month. In officially announcing the decision, the Director of Personnel authorized the following: ("During the last few days we have been considering and studying the recommendation made by the Personnel Board regarding the reassignment of the grade level of the ¡ number" and the sbos of the Internal Police. sular Police. The recommendation of the Board is to the effect that the policemen are placed in Grade 14 and the corporals in Grade 16 of the Distribution Plan. "After discussions with the Governor and with the Legislature regarding the availability of funds for these assignments, it has been decided to follow the Board's recommendation and assign the policemen* to Grade 14 and the corporals to Grade 18 of the Pay Plan, which have minimum salaries of $120 and $140, respectively. "If the Legislature, following the recommendation of the Board of Por. sons! resolves to place the Police Corps in the Exempt Service, these sumsnto" dsubsldo sstsrlan sn in effect until they smplsctn to rsglr the msdldas that the Legislative Assam. bisa. approves. "The Classification Division of the Office of Personnel* has been doing preliminary work on these reaassignments and I have ordered that the internal work be accelerated to see if it is possible for the officers to collect their October paychecks when they are asked for their paychecks. Since the assignment will be retroactive to July 1, the same officers favored by this decision will receive a bump with the increases corresponding to the months of July, September and September. For his psrto, the President of the Sonado made the following manilos, tadonss: "Was dlscutlsndo with the Personnel Board and its Director on all matters relating to the salaries of the policemen, with a view to forming judgment on the "eden logy, latlva that may be advisable. I discussed the recommendation with the Board and its Director at length. (Continued on page 33)