EL NANDO
WEATHER FORECAST TARA LA ISLA, TODAYt Partly cloudy with scattered light showers over eastern Puerto Rico, ending early in the morning. Winds from the east, 11 to SW miles per hour, decreasing well into the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: High, M; low, 71.
38 Pages
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII.
I check brakes. Cooperated with automobile inspection.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY MARCH 15, 1947
Enterad a" aocond ola" matter, Poet Office, ñau Juan. P. R.
NUMBER 10886
Loans to Greece and Turkey to be used to build bulwarks against Communist expansion
House to open hearings on Balkan <'aso ('milité gave pHority, however, to nroyecto dej avuda of 8350,000,000 Se Hemora President Vandenberg's plan has asked - details, but urges se : l de . OBERT F. LOFTUS United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON. 14. (PU) - The House Foreign Relations Committee agreed today, after a three-hour conference with top Cabinet officials, to begin a hearing on the plan. Initiate hearing" uih'lca" " I" next week in connection with proposed anti-communist aid to .Greece and Turkey up to an Iota! of $400,000,000. The Committee, however, gave priority to! Mr. Truman's project by allocating $.350,000,000,000 for foreign aid despite the Administration's pleas to speed up aid to Greece and Turkey" before" anything occurs which might dislocate the delirious balance of power in the eastern Mediterranean. The chairman of the Committee, Charle" A, Eaton, Republican, of New Jersey, said the Committee trusts Report the general aid project - which is a grant of $50,000,000 for Greet . on* Monday, and begin to consider Immediately after the serious question raised by the President's request Ai refusing to act immediately, the Committee seems to have dimmed hope d" complete 1a congreafontl "on action on the program by March 31, which is the date set as a deadline by portnvocea of the Administration. England, which has borne the main burden of protecting Greece since the end of World War II, has given notice that it will not be able to continue to help any more, but it has not announced its intention to withdraw its aid. However, England has not announced its intention to withdraw "economic aid to Turkey and has shown its surprise at Mr. Truman's gesture to lend American arms and money to the Turks as well, > A further indication of the "slow-acting" attitude among the leaders of the eongreslonale J also emerged in the Senate, where the Republicans announced that they would insist on (Continued on page 15)
House acts on Communism Will hold hearings as early as March 21 on bills I outlawing it By GRANT DILLMAN United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON. 14. (PU) The House committee on antlamerlcana nctlvldn- ! des" announced today that it will begin public hearings March 24 on legislative proposals to stop or ban the Communist Party. Rep. J. Parnell Thomas, R-New Jeisey, chairman of the committee, said invitations to testify have been sent to high-ranking government officials, legal experts and representatives of organized labor, and patriotic and religious organizations. I No Communist Party officials will be allowed to testify, Parnell said, because "everything they could say would be a lie," í The list of witnesses in person includes Secretary of Labor Lewis B. Schwellenbnch, who provoked the congressional offensive.
i Muñoz suggested a new study of the Railroad's finances ; It would be made, he said, after there was a settlement of the current strike-Company believes that ; strike will reduce the number of its customers By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA 1 EL MUNDO Staff Writer
The possibility of the Government appointing a commission to carry out a new study of the economic conditions of the railroad company, in order to recommend what action the Government should take to ensure the operation of this means of transportation, was mentioned by the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz, at the conference he held with the representatives of the railroad workers and those of the American American Railroad Company, at the conference he held with representatives of the railroad workers.
(railroad workers and those of the American Railroad Co, ■! Although Mr. Muñoz Marín gave no assurance that such a thing would be done, he expressed his belief that such a study could be made in the future, following an outbreak of the prevailing dispute between the railroad employers and workers! It was authoritatively reported yesterday! that after Mr. Muftnz Marin ( hearing the" point" of view in tor- . no to the conflict on either side," He urged the union and the company to take an agreement that would end the stoppage on the train, giving then the possibility of the aforesaid study, the । which would include the data and recommendations contained." in the two Infrrmes that have so far been made on cl status of the railroad. In the course of the interview of the railroad workers and directors, it was reported yesterday, no mention was made of any possibility of the granting, for the time being, of a subsidy by the Government to the company, which has been mentioned as a means of reaching an agreement between labor and management, The impression expressed yesterday by persons in the company with the parties indicates that the result of the conference is the elimination of that possibility, if any existed. In other words, it is not a thing that can be taken as a reality that the Legislature can allocate any funds to be granted in (Continued on page 1">
Com pendió de Noticias
American "experts" explained yesterday how the" loan" to Greece and Turkey "will be used" to strengthen bulwarks against" the expansion of the cnmunl "mn in the Near Orlente ♦ ♦ ♦ - . A highwayman tried to liquidate his entire family in a neighborhood of San Germán One of the wounded" son" died. The aggressor committed suicide. Renadorea protest of the attitude of several Chiefs "le departatomento" who do not answer the requests fnrmuládale". . - The "pnilcía" is charged. alleging that he challenged a colleague to fight, and the other succeeded in disarming him. - It is not yet known what determination the Legislature will make on the PEG. - Dewey has under consideration a bill declaring illegal "employee strikes" against the government. Five thousand Marines "assaulted" Culebra Island on Thursday, during the Escuadra's "maneuvers" - - The secretary of the Unico del Transporte union asks for the collegiality of the drivers to reduce the number of automobile "accidents".
Descarte" finds progress in "I way to protect the Island in relation to the reciprocal treaties" and "tariffs", - * - They will increase in April the service of the aqueduct, using the new well of Hato Rey. r - ♦ - The contract for the purchase of sugar from cate afta is about to be sent to the Island - o - About the truck stop in Maunabo there will be on Monday a hearing before Public Service - * - I* Federal House has summoned to hearing" to discuss the project" against communism. - The Iji Miss Josefina Qulñune" Jlménes hlso yesterday alerarión of not guilty in the Corta todera). - Today Dr. Pedro A. Cebollero leaves for the United States to support Vlllaronga's campaign - - "The status bill for the island will take a long time to be filed, since Senator Cordon must discuss its provisions with several congressmen. - * - - Local war surplus" bureau announces it will sell to commerce. Has goods for Hojwo.ooo. - - - Art' the ñens'in da eiiteto" United is a proposition to boycott the Soviet.
During the session of the Senate, in i yesterday morning, Senator Leo-! poldo Figueroa requested the secretary to furnish him with a list of all the." petitions for-mulada" by him and which have not "Ido answered, noting the fe-! date on which they were made and the date on which the" ! same were reiterated for. <rgún said, go before "l Governor to protestor "of the lack of consideration of the je¡fe" of departments and "another" of-.
The contract for the sugar planters is about to be sent to the Island.
WASHINGTON. 14. (PU) - A spokesman for the Department of Agriculture said today that the drafting of the contracts to be submitted to the Puerto Rican sugar producers "is almost completed," adding that it is possible that they will be sent early next week. He cautioned, however, that the negotiation was "almost finished" earlier. Commercial sources are more optimistic, reporting some" that the final forms of the contracts are complete and will be shipped early next week.
The final forms of the contracts are completed and will be sent to Lain within "a day or two". (For "u parle, the Association of ¡ Sugar Producers" reported yesterday in San Juan that it has not yet received official information from Wáshlngton in connection with the" final agreements for Ja purchase by the Government of ¡ the sugar production of the 1947 crop. Its executive vice-president, Mr. Fernando Villamil, agreed on two occasions before (Continued on page 15)
1 ■ t 11 ' ' ' 1 i * ' ' í . I H M -Mu ■ Gl * J |9k 1 RRk > f ¿ 1 r' i. "' Jr 4K í ■ f * F . The Greek criais trtvo dramatic cnlmlnaclon last Wednesday" when the President of the" United States, Harry S. Tniman (center), after a "closed-door meeting with the leaders" of the CongreNo, appeared before the cameras and asked 'With I" extension to Greece and Turkey" of the aid that England can no longer give him", the support of Congress and public opinion gives the United States for the establishment of a "political overa Mpaimnada to stop the advance of communism in the Near East. Yesterday it was announced that the loans requested for the two European countries will be used to strengthen their respective armies, preparing them to face a sudden aggression. In the upper left of the photo are Senator Arthur Vandenberg (left), President pro tempore of the Senate, and Joseph Martin, Speaker of the House of Representatives. Speaker of the House of Representatives. In the center, in the background, from left to right: Admiral Wllllnm D. I.e "hy, Commanding General Harry Vaughn, and Captain James H. Foskett. (Associated Press photo).
Man wounded seven members of his family in San Germán In a rage he attacked his wife and children; his brother-in-law and his elderly father-in-law-One daughter died-A victim committed suicide shortly after By E RAMIREZ RRAU EL MUNDO Editor A new family tragedy filled the Rosarlo Alto neighborhood of San Germán with horror last night when a father, armed with a pick-axe, made an attempt on the lives of his wife, his children and his elderly father-in-law in his own residence.
the lives of his wife, his sons, his brother-in-law and his elderly father-in-law, seriously wounding them all and killing one of his daughters. After his mad deed, the perpetrator committed suicide by hanging himself with a corduroy cloth. Reports the Police of Snn Germán, that last night, at eleven o'clock, Juan Vidal Jtisinoí_de 36 years, ! who worked as a truck driver, moved by jealousy, according to suspicion, came to his house armed with the handle of a pick, immediately wounding his wife Luz Ma-1 tin Amel) Pngán, da 45 nños, n who inflicted a contused wound on e. left cheekbone, another wound on the eye of the same Indo, possible fracture of the left arm and numerous contusions in other parts" of the body. In his frenes!, vldnl Juslno then injured his daughter Ernestina Juslno AmelL, 10 years old", I inflicting a deep wound (Continued on page 16).
Obollero leaves for Villaronga hearing I Hearings to begin March 25. Padin and Osuna expected to appear Today, Saturday, the first member of the commission of the Puerto Rico Teachers' Association to appear March 25 for convreslonal hearings on the confirmation of the appointment of Mariano Villaronga as Commissioner of Insular Public Instruction, Dr. Pedro A. Cebollero, dean of the Puerto Rican Teachers' Association, will appear on March 25. This delegate will be joined in New York by Mrs. Paulina Rojas, an American teacher who is a member of the Teachers' Association of Puerto Rico and who will attend the hearing as part of the Puerto Rican teachers' commission."(Continued on page 22) New York passes bill against strikes by public employees ALBANY, 14 (PU) - the New York State Legislature today passed a bill declaring strikes by teachers of public instruction and other government employees illegal. The vote was M to 54. The measure was then passed to Governor Dewey for consideration. Thirteen Republicans joined the Democrats who voted against it. Under the bill, a public employee "who goes on strike against the Government is automatically discharged. He or she could be reinstated" but would not receive a raise for three years" and would be subject to probation for five years. ... . - ■
Senators protest attitude of several department heads Figueroa, Ortiz Stella and Géigel alleged that they do not meet the formal requests.
The government's pendencies with the senators". Dr. Figueroa alleged that some of these petitions were formulated in the first days of the present legislative session and had not yet been "answered, "in spite of the fact that the information requested is not available to be able to make judgments" in consideration of some of the projects presented". Figuern" was joined by Senators Vicente Géigel Polanco and Cruz Ortlz Stella, who also stated that some government agencies were taking too long to send the information. The president, Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones, declared that whenever a request has been reiterated, he has ordered that it be given immediate response, and that he would insist again that the heads of the government agencies send the information as soon as possible. The Senate recessed until 4:00 o'clock Monday afternoon. The following "bill" was considered "by title" on first reading: , (Continued on page 20.)
New Hato Rey well will produce an additional three million gallons of water. Aqueduct and sewage works worth seven million dollars are currently being carried out in different towns on the island by the Aqueduct Service, according to the director of this agency, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, who said yesterday. Mr. Cueva said that this investment represents only a part of the "public improvement program" that was set in motion when the law creating the agency was passed. ! "Of the aforementioned research, i$4,300,000 corresponds to urban and rural aqueduct projects," said Mr. Cueva, "and $2,700,000 for sanitary sewerage systems. i He also stated that "in addition to this considerable investment of funds, the Service has completed the drafting of a plan for the construction, during a reasonable period of time, of 414,000,000 water supply systems," said Mr. Cueva, "and the construction of 414,000,000,000,000,000 water supply systems. The Service will invest in these rural projects" exclusively, the sum of (Continued on page 15.) It is not yet known what final determination the PEG will make regarding future" appropriations for this agency. The PEG has continued to fund its" respective" public works" program" and "ervlcío" " the community, using" the" balance" of that," aslgnacwna" remaining at the close of operations last fiscal year. It was reported yesterday that even though the PEG was provided with additional funds for public works, with the exception of the bridle path plan, Cate still has a fund balance that will allow it to continue operating for an additional period of time if the Legislature does not adopt in this session the rule to totally eliminate it and transfer its operation to the Department of the Interior. Even though the Planning Board's amendment prevails that the work will be carried out by the Department of the Interior, the Legislature did not adopt the rule in session.
Will strengthen armies of either nation | American experts । explain aid from I the United States Greece is bad risk 'for Bank It will probably be necessary to increase the aid that has been asked for ' By ROBERT MANNING United Press Correspondent LAKE SUCCESS, 14.-American experts said today that most of the proposed $150,000,000 loan to Turkey will be used to strengthen the Turkish army and prepare it against "any possible sudden onslaught" so that American forces will have time to act. These experts said that at least half of the $250,000,000,000 requested for Greece by President Truman will be devoted to equipping and training the 100,000-man Greek army and preparing it for any eventuality. The "experts" do not allow that "e" UNON "u" name, but "u" comment" on the "emergency measure proposed" I by President Truman, they can also "r "e as a direct indication" of the "American" plan to build in Greece and Turkey a "bulwark" against the "Communist expansion into the Middle East. The funds requested by the President, especially those earmarked for Greece, will not necessarily be a loan, even if the Congress calls it that, said one of the sources alluded to. He noted that Greece is considered such a bad risk that the new World Bank has determined it is impossible to lend to it at this time. "Is it possible that the" two hundred and fifty million requested by the President is only a , first investment? Will that amount be enough to bring the tranqullldad we desire and that - not" allow us to withdraw from Grace completely?" -it was asked - to one of the sources. The questioned replied that it was impossible to say at this time i whether the two hundred and fifty million ■ would be sufficient to finish the i work, but that it was possible that a second investment, and 1 perhaps more, might be required. He emphasized, without emi Iwgo, that it was very difficult and very - premature to predict accurately ■ how far loa ! 250 million in aid and i equine might reach. i "Was not the World Bank formed precisely to make such loans to needy countries?" i --was another question asked. The reply was as follows: "If it was known that the success of the new bank was going to depend on the sale of value to the amorlcana citizens, it would not start with such a risky loan as Greece is today." Experts said that plans to help Greece are considerably more" advanced than" L?'. 1 ?? Turkey and will require an equal division of the 250 million for economic reconstruction and military development. They added that an important link in the plan to help Greece could be a plan proposed by the United States for the establishment of a permanent guard by the United Nations to eliminate friction on the borders separating Greece and Bulgaria, dominated by the Soviet, Albania and Yugoslavia. The proposal is likely to be made by Warren Austin in the Security Council after the commission investigating the Balkans returns and submits its report on the border incidents. On the other hand, Lyle C. Wilson, United Press co* rrespondent, reports from Washington that the Administration's shift in Greek policy from modest aid to a convulsive economic offensive against communism in the Eastern Mediterranean has been fully accomplished within the last 11 weeks. -On January 3--11 weeks ago today Mr. Truman sent to the Congress his budget proposals for the fiscal year 1948 which will begin next July 1. Among other items. it called for $.-126,000,000 for relief labor in the unoccupied nal"""". "It is necessary. He then informed the Cangreso. "It is necessary to provide for a program to provide relief for those who are still in desperate straits. The message about the assumption did not mention the countries. But when Mr. Truman "met with the reporter" to discuss "1 budget before sending it to the Canadian, he was asked to explain that line item in fuller detail". MY" note" show that his rea(Continued on page 13)
Status Bill Delayed
Cordon first wants to discuss it with some members of Congress It would not give the island full autonomy There will be hearings on the bill that provides statehood for the island By JEAN VAN VRANKEN ' Corre "pon "al of the National Inter "national News Service*. WASHINGTON. K.-Today it was reported here that a controversy over congressional oversight of the statehood bill for the island was to be heard. Congress, "over the way the Insular Government invests its money, delayed the immediate introduction of a bill giving Puerto Rico "modified autonomy." The chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on Territory". Guy Cordon. told the International News Service that he has received the bill prepared by the Department of the Interior, which gives Puerto Rico "everything but full autonomy. The bill will not be introduced, he said, until he 'Cordon) has discussed its provisions with the chairman of the Public" Land" committee, Hugh Butler, Republican of Nebraska, currently out with a knee ailment; with the ranking minority member of the committee. Cari Hatea, Democrat of New Mexico, and House Territorial Subcommittee Chairman Fred Crawford, a Michigan Republican. Describing the bill, Coi don dljo said it provides for the election of the Governor by the Puerto Rican people and authorizes the Governor to appoint his entire Cabinet and the Island Auditor. The measure does not provide for the appointment of a Presidential appointee to represent the United States Government" in the island, Cordon said, noting that "this point may be the subject of controversy". The senator also pointed out that "Congress would retain the power to repeal or amend the Organic Act" and, according to him, 'this provision represents a sufl-! cent control by Congress over the island government.'" He added that "the situation in this case is not comparable to that of the Philippines, where a High Commissioner was appointed during the period preceding the Independence "ncle of the islands." The sonator exnlllcated that* et ststus last of tas Philippines ¡ubi" Mdo clearly defined and that "et Co- ¡ missionary acted merely as an adviser or envoy." Munlfast that "the legislation which is uncle- i ne in preparation for Puerto Rico is not intended n precede any particular status. There is, pue" no apparent need d* to appoint such an official for Puerto Rico." Cordon added, however, that this" judgment of his is "prellmlfar." He said, "I want to get a general picture of, what would be the ln reasonable way to attack the problem." Rep. Crawford, a tenacious opponent of the economic program being developed by the Island Government based on the Rum Tax, is expected to delay discussion of the bill because of the provision regarding the appointment of the Auditor by the Governor. Cordon said that his interviews with the other congressmen will also determine the procedure for the presentation of the bill. He stated that "the bill can be introduced in the House of Representatives. The procedure depends only on which of the Public Lands committee is free to take action on it first." He added that "if the bill is introduced in the Senate, the Committee could conalde.brl* probably after the hearings on the appointment of VIHaronga " I41R hearings on the appointment of Mariano Vill "ranga for Commissioner of Instruction will begin before the Committee on 'lerreno."(Continued on page 7)
Five thousand sailors "stormed" Culebra Island on 1.3
(PU) - A contingent of five thousand Marines "stormed" the small island of Culebra, east of Puerto Rico, yesterday, Thursday, completing one of the main amphibious maneuver pits of the Atlantic Squadron's Shock Force in the Caribbean Sea. The operation, which was carried out without serious accident, is the first amphibious maneuver to be carried out after World War II. Three members of Congress observed the maneuver: Representatives Dewey Short, (R), of Missouri; William E. Hess, (R), of Ohio; and W. Sterling Cole, (R), of New York.
: Marshall carried : a five-point program I । Indirectly condemned ; Russian attitude in Germany and suggested new guidelines'* By R. H. SHACKFORD ¡ United Press Correspondent MOSCOW. 14. (PUl - The Secretary of State, George C. Marshall, 1 "l presenting to the Ministers" of the , Four Great" Powers" a five-point program for the democratization of Germany, warned today that I" true democracy will be impossible in Germany unless the Germans are allowed to exercise freedom of the Press and radio. 'i Not to mention that Russia has a government which dominates the Press । and radio. Marthall said that anti-democratic "ideology" would never be eliminated in Germany unless all Germans enjoyed unrestricted access to all kinds of information. "Government domination and manipulation of the media in the interests of the Nazi Party were powerful weapons employed by the undemocratic Nazi regime," Marshall said. Taking the lead at the ministers' meeting, for the second time. Marshall put before the Big Four the following basic prln- > riples for the democratization of Germany: 1- Uniform guarantees" in all constitutions to be made in Germany of basic civil rights" for all Germans. I 2- The right of political parties to take part in free elections in competition with each other. ■I 3- Guarantees of the rights" of free "Indians. 'I 4- An effective guarantee of the ■ freedom of Press and radio in ' all parts of Germany, 5- Freedom of movement" for- ■ ra persons and for things everywhere in Germany. Marshall also gave the minis' tros a report of the number of German prl- : sicneros who are in malino" of Americans - 30, - 976 - and revealed that U.S. (Continued on page 15.)