THE MÜNDO
44 Pages 5/ ♦
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy, with one*little*shower*dlsperM*tonight. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: Max. temp. temperature. My low, 79. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:30 this afternoon, 29.9S inches do.
. LA MAÑANA NEWSPAPER
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 1947 . "
NUMBER 11133
year xxvin
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
Pons defends Department programs
Before the Planning Board, addresses the need to continue direct aid Explains progress against malaria Makes presentation on hospital works and the plan against uncinariasis By Lula Hernándea Aqulno Redactor do EL MUNDO The Secretary of Health of Puerto Rico, Dr. Juan A. Pons, has raised before the Planning Board four issues that the Department believes are necessary and fundamental to promote the physical, mental and social health of the Puerto Rican people. According to Dr. Pons, the Department of Health's response to the Planning Board's recommendations regarding his department's budget allocations is not controversial, but rather a full exposition of the views of said governmental agency. The four public health issues relate to the direct aid program, the uncinariasis problem, the malaria problem and the hospital construction program. Regarding the direct aid program, it has been a few weeks since Dr. Pons submitted three plans to the Board, any one of which he claims would yield favorable social results.
With respect to the proposed elimination of the direct aid program, the Commissioner of Health has stated that the responsibility of the state for the underprivileged seems to have been recognized by all peoples at all times, and that in Puerto Rico the only thing that has been had and almost the only thing that has been had so far in the matter of anchorage security, is what is recommended to be terminated in the near future. * The Health Commissioner believes that "the termination of the direct aid program would be a step backwards, and that the fair thing to do would be to tend to the implementation of a complete social security program. He adds that he is dissatisfied with the way in which direct assistance has been provided, "consisting of the inflexible sum of >7.50 per month for each case, through a system that does not allow to assist each one according to his special and peculiar circumstances". According to the plans submitted by Dr. Pnns to the Board, the first of these provides for Individualized assistance, based on 60 percent of the minimum needs of .WXXl cases, which would gradually increase to a maximum of 42,000 without exceeding that number for the next six years. The plan would cost >7,1,19,000 in the first year and $8,200,000 in subsequent years. The second plan proposed to extend assistance to those cases unable to meet more than thirty percent of their basic needs, at the rate of $7.50 a month, except for children who would be given individualized assistance. The cost of the plan was W.3M.000. The third plan provided for the continuation of the present system, with the 1 percent of minimum needs requirement and the uniform assistance of $7.50 per month, except for certain children who would be given individualized assistance to cover up to 100 percent of their minimum needs. The cost of this program, with no real expansion of the present, but with greater effectiveness, would be >3,750,000. The Commissioner of Health asks the Board of Plans to further study the matter of direct aid, arguing that the possible effects of withdrawing from the market the circulation of >3,000,000 annually, which initially circulates in small businesses in the countryside and towns, may be a reason to give the problem further study. Dr. Pon" said that it is precisely when the economic situation of the Government worsens that direct aid to the needy becomes more necessary. Regarding the second matter, the Commissioner of Health informed the Board of Plans that the program of latrines in rural Puerto Rico aspired to the installation of 200,000 of them, at an approximate cost of >5,000,000, having made an allocation of >100,000 for the 1940-47 fiscal year and another identical allocation for the 1947-48 fiscal year. The allocations have permitted the installation of some 4,000 latrines and the allocation I am proposing for the coming year, which is $50,000, will permit the installation of an additional 1,200. At this rate, says the Commissioner, it will not be possible to complete the program for many years, and in the meantime it will be impossible to sanitize the soil and bodies of water, to reduce the frequency of uncinariasis in our fields, to reduce the spread of hllharzioala, to put an end to typhoid fever and bacillary dysentery, and to supply pure water to the entire population of Puerto Rico. (Continued on page 33)
Bradley was appointed Chief of Staff
Jr 9
Gen. Omar Bradley, new Chief of Staff
He succeeds Eisenhower who retires in February. - Carl R. Gray to head VA* Gates in charge of Marine Corps
WASHINGTON, Nov. 21.- appointed by President General Dwight D. Elsenhower to a new Army post, "Bradley, with his statuesque, gray hair and 54 years of age, is now head of the Veterans Administration. He will be succeeded by Carl R. Gray, son, vice president of the Chicago A Northwestern Railway Company, a Republican and a surprise selection. Bradley was a favorite of the soldiers during the last war "in which he held the highest combat command the United States had when operations in Europe. It is believed to be Eisenhower's personal selection for command. When Bradley took charge of that large organization (the veterans) he was the subject of much criticism. But even his own crltl. eos agree that he brought order and efficiency to it-when that or. ganzaclon was sapped of tackiness and waste. President Truman also announced, at an unusually early press conference, that he had completed a virtual reorganization of the nation's high command. Mr. Truman revealed that Major General Clifton R. Catea will replace General Alexander A. Vañdegrlft as Commandant of the Marine Corps. Only the command of the Air Forces remains unchanged. The retirement of Admiral Chester W. NImita as Chief of Naval Operations, equivalent in rank to the position of Chief of Staff in the Army, has been previously announced. He will be succeeded by Admiral Louis Denfeld. Commanding General Robert M. Littlejohn will relinquish the post of (Continued on Go p. 28)
(PU)-Gencr*! Omar N. Bradley Truman today to replace Chief of Staff Gen. Omar N. Bradley Truman today to replace Chief of Staff Gen. Omar N. Bradley Truman today to replace Chief of Staff Gen. Omar N. Bradley Truman today to replace Chief of Staff Gen. Omar N. Bradley Truman today to replace Chief of Staff Gen. Omar N. Bradley Truman today to replace Chief of Staff Gen. Omar N. Bradley Truman today to replace Chief of Staff Gen. Omar N. Bradley Truman, the most senior SAA reservoirs have enough water in them. Mr. Sergio Cuevea Bustamante, director of the Aqueduct and Sewer Service, said yesterday that the water supply will remain fairly normal and that there are no fears of shortages for now. Mr. Cuevas said that the system is being maintained with the flow of water from the Bayamón and Piedras rivers, which supply the Rio Piedras and Guaynabo filtration plants, and that this flow "is sufficient to maintain a good service. The reservoir in the Rio Clrira and Trujillo Alto lakes is not being used for the time being, since there is no need for it due to the level at which the flow of the aforementioned rivers is maintained. About three hundred billion gallons of water are presently accumulated in Lake Criira, and another one hundred million gallons of water are being stored in Lake Trujillo Alto, and another one hundred million gallons of water are being stored in Lake Trujillo Alto.
. News Digest
Governor Instructs Public Service Commission and Transportation Authority to seek Supreme Court resolution of Jurladlcdon issue, Ü - - - - - Conaumidore* to ask LegUlature to repeal current Rumlnlatro* law. - * - - Island rum importers insist that sales could improve somewhat *1 Island government changes policy on tax collection*. - - - The Navy filed a petition with the Federal Court for the acquisition of the land it is interested in owning on Vieques. VyshlnAy declared before the General Assembly, that his country will use the veto power to the Hmitacionee. - Federal Agriculture will give a. dienclaa in December to domestic sugar millers* to fix pro. bable demand. e. e. e Police will campaign to prevent children* from riding on the back of the back of buses. - - - Cuevas hopes that by 1949 the San Juan aqueduct will be using water* from the Loísa River. e e An investigation is being conducted at the San Juan Fiseilfa in tete. "IAm éAi naf*ni rama rinn roí. onjeiog Bomrviiiow enmo evidence.
Blum warns France of the danger that threatens the Republic. - * " Rector Benitos accepted the resignation of Mrs. Rivera da Al. stranded. - ♦ ♦ Commissioner Pon* expuao anta Planning the need to continue program* da direct aid, against malaria, con. tra uncinada*!* and plan rie ho*. pitóle". "General Omar Bradley to succeed Eisenhower as Chief of Staff. - - - Ordered tntenalfie search for porter* and diphtheria immunization work in Maunabo. - The "discard" believes that tin should take part in the formulation of the organization created by the Charter of International Trade. - - - Exlaten autidentea reaerva* rie water to face a period of do* mera* drought. - Puerto Rican* agronomist* group* conducts* study* to* encourage* credit* extension* - small* industry*. Leaders of the *Msysgiles visit Ran Juan: rampeone* of the Penca van " Cartel and the Ranturce Invade Aguadilla in the contL nuation of the championship rie hále hot professional with serle* of 3 .Game*. - o * - , Penn State faces Pitt" Harvard to Yale and Michigan - Ohio State in U.S. college football*.
Student Council withdraws confidence from Chancellor Benitez
By Lula Hernandes Aqulnn Editor of EL MUNDO The university student body agreed yesterday afternoon, through the Student Council, a body created by the University Law as the representation of the student body, to withdraw confidence from the Rector of the University, Jaime Benitez, alleging that he created the position of Dean of Students, without consulting the students, and that he preterid Mrs. Carmen Rivera de Alvarado, in her position as director of the Office of Student Services. It was also agreed to give the latter a vote of confidence, which was unanimously approved. Mr. Jorge Lui* Landing presided over the Student Council. The following Councilmen were present; Jorge Luis Landing. Patrio E. Lausell Ramos, Noemi Rodriguez, Juan Noriega Maldonado, Carmen Laura Vendrell, Danol A. Morales Lugo, Luis F. Valentin. José Narciso Moreno, Miguel A. García Jiménez, Armando Amy Cestero, Osvaldo Ramírez Muxó, Domingo Vélez, Miguel A. Velázquez, Miguel A. Tlmothée, Daniel Cabrera. Ju*n Ortlg Jiménez, Israel Malaret and Ssntos Bren es Larroche, The chairman opened the proceedings, and egtee s 4
The president opened the ceremony, and stated that he was going to discuss the position of the student body regarding the creation of the Dean's Office for Men and the position of Mrs. Carmen Rivera de Alvarado. He explained that in the Office of Student Services, which Mrs. Rivera de Alvarado directed, during the summer *some of the aid for poor students* was eliminated, as well as other positions* in the Service Board*, in order to hinder the aforementioned Incumbent. He said that he was defeated at the University Board when he raised the problem of the elimination of both aid and the Student Service Board, but that later, in view of the failure of the Board, because the deans did not appear at the meeting, there was a need to create the Service Office, entrusting Mrs. Rivera Alvarado with the direction. In *his speech, Mr. Landing harshly attacked the Rector. Indicating that he had a "r "ecuclón -l*temátlca p "r "ecuclón against Mrs. Rivera de Alvarado. F.xpu "q the "eftur Landing, who recently conferred with the -eflor Collazo, president of the Consejo Superior de Enseñanza, the body that created *1 position of Dean d" Student*, Indicándole é*t" (Continued "n page 38)
Navy initiates expropriation in Vieques ,
Federal Court filed petition requesting power to use land Will take possession on December 15 Order expires on June 194-8 but before that they believe they will request title to property By Luí* Sánchrx Cappa Editor of EL MNDO The United States Government, through U.S. Attorney Phillip Herrick and his special assistant Antonio Castro Fernández, filed yesterday at eleven o'clock in the morning, in the Federal Court, a petition to acquire a lease by expropriation over the land it is interested in owning on the island of Vieques to be used by the Navy. The petition, which was submitted to the Federal Court "by orders and under the authority of the Attorney General of the United States and pursuant to the petition of the Secretary of the Navy," was followed by an order signed by Federal Judge David Chavez, granting the right of the United States of America to "take possession of the properties described in the expropriation petition on December 15, 1947. The Federal magistrate ordered the defendants in possession of said properties to vacate the same and surrender their dominion over them to the United States and its agents on the said date. The petition for expropriation states in part that "the Inferi- ¡ nary Secretary of the Navy has determined that it is necessary to acquire for naval purposes the interest herein expropriated in the property which is the subject of the suit, and to take physical possession thereof on December 15, 1947." "The property subject to expropriation is located in the lila of Vloquos, Municipality of Isabel Se gunda, Puerto Rico, wholly within the District da Puerto Rico, and is described as follows: Rural: Percal* of land located in I* Muntelpatidad 4e Isabel Seguada, Puerto Rico, having an area* of 4,370.04 cuerdas adjoining on the north with the Atlantic Ocean, on the south with the Caribbean Sea, on the east with lands rie United States of America, known as Finca Salinas, designated as Parcel "B" in Civil Registry No. 2714 in the United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico and on the West with the lands of the United States of America, known as Finca Campaña, which was designated as Parcel "A" in Civil Registry No. 2714 in the same Court, jointly and severally with the lands of the United States of America, known as Finca Campaña, which was designated as Parcel "A" in Civil Registry No. 2714 in the same Court, jointly and severally with the lands of the United States of America, known as Finca Salinas, which was designated as Parcel "B" in Civil Registry No. 2714 in the same Court. 2714 in the same Court, together with all buildings and improvements and all appurtenances." "The interest to be expropriated in the dlch* property by this proceeding is for a term of "ñna beginning December 15, 1947 and ending June 30, 1948." "The persons listed on Exhibit A which is Included, upon Information and belief, have and claim to have some right, title or Interest in the said property." "Wherefore we request that a resolution be issued on the said petition, expropriating the said Interest in the said property described for the use by the United States of America, decreeing and ruling that said interest in the property has been vested in the United States of America, setting forth and determining the amount of compensation for damages to be liquidated for such Interest," "It is further requested that an order be entered decreeing that the United States is entitled to take possession of the property subject to expropriation on December 15 rie (Continued*on p. 23), and that the United States is entitled to take possession of the property subject to expropriation on December 15 rie (Continued*on p. 23). 23)
Pinero Recommends Eliminating Employee Discounts; Sends 18 Matters to Legislature
Sugar quota to be set in December Agriculture to call hearings to hear domestic industry By CHARLES R. McCABE WASHINGTON, Nov. 21 - (PU)™ A source connected with the sugar business said today that the Department of Agriculture will hold hearings during the month of December to allow the domestic sugar industry to express its views on the domestic claims in 1948. The informant said that he had been informed of these hearings by officials of the Department. He added that he believed that Puerto Rican, Hawaiian and mainland sugar producers would be called upon to present their views, and that the Cuban industry would be given the opportunity to make its views known. Meanwhile, a spokesman for the Department of Agriculture said that such hearings would probably be held in December, but that the matter was not "finally decided." / These hearings will be of great importance to the sugar industry in general, since on the decision of the Secretary of Agriculture as to - consumption demands depend the quota" to be allocated* under 1* 1948 Sugar Act and, to some extent, the price of sugar. Under the new law, which is to take effect January 1, the Secretary of Agriculture is to determine the amount of sugar needed to meet consumer demands in the coming year. In making that decision,** the Secretary shall base his decision on (1) the amount of sugar distributed for consumption during the twelve-month period ending October 31; (2) an allowance for shortages or surpluses in sugar stocks; and (3) an allowance for changes in consumption due to changes in population and demand conditions. The 1948 Act adds a new factor, which provides that the Secretary shall take into consideration the relationship between the wholesale price of sugar resulting from such determinations and the general cost of living in the United States. Under the new Act, the Secretary will not be required to limit his calculation of "consumer demand" to the price ratio provision or to any other factor exclusive of those listed. The guiding standard is represented by the provision requiring the establishment of a supply of sugar "which shall be consumed at prices" which are not excessive" to consumers" and which maintain and protect fairly and equitably the welfare of the domestic sugar industry." After determining the demands" of the" coniumlriors, the Secretary will assign the" quotas for each area. The 1948 Act provides for fixed quotas amounting to 4,268,000 tons, to be distributed as follows: domestic beet sugar, 1,800,000 tons; domestic cane sugar, 500,000; Hawaii, 1,052,000; Puerto Rico, 910,000; and Virgin Island, 6,000.
The President of the United States said that the economic problems of the island's products and its economic organization would participate in the determinations of the organizations to be created by the adoption of the Charter of International Trade and Employment. He said that he had discussed all aspects related to the "tariff treaties" with Governor Piñero. He added that "the Government of Puerto Rico and all producer, civic and citizen associations should ask President Truman to give representation to the Department of the Interior on the Trade Agreements Committee. In a press conference held yesterday, Mr. Descartes explained the intervention of the Government and the Island's commercial organizations in the negotiations "on tariff treaties. He explained how Puerto Rican producers can make their case* when they are harmed* "by virtue of tariff concessions made and "clarified that in the" initial efforts to obtain a better deal for the Island, not only the Government, but also trade and industry organizations had an active participation. Mr. Descarte's* statement* was as follows: "The* recent* news* of reduction* in* U.S." customs" tariffs* on* the* main* product* of* the* Island* has caused, as was to be expected, concern in Puerto Rico. The situation has been the subject of commentary from the leaders of the producers' association and from our daily press.
Health moves against diphtheria in Maunabo
The Acting Chief of the Bureau of Epidemiology of the Department of Health, Dr. Jose Hernandez Matos, who made an investment of diphtheria cases in the town of Maunabo, explained yesterday that he has recommended to the health authorities of the town the Inteniification of a campaign aimed at determining the carriers of this disease, and the vaccination and immunization of the people residing in the affected areas. According to the information provided by the head of the Bureau of Epidemiology, several cases of diphtheria have been recorded in Maunabo during the last three months. The first case was recorded on September 1 on Juan Cruz Ortiz Street. Laboratory analysis of a sample taken from the patient determined that it was a clinical case of the disease. In October, three cases were reported in the Pica and Talante neighborhoods. Of these three cases, two were laboratory positive and one was clinically positive. And in the current month three new cases were registered, one in the California neighborhood, another in Calzada and the last one in the Rordelatae neighborhood. Of these, one was laboratory positive and two clinically positive. Analyses made to the contacts of this "ca "oa. gave negative results. As explained by Dr. Hernandez Matos, in view of the situation, he recommended that the search campaign for the carrier be initiated (Continued on page 14).
A group of Puerto Rican agronomists, interested in the economic problems of the paw, is carrying out studies aimed at achieving an increase in island production, through the cooperative system, and to reduce the costs of distribution with a view to lowering the price. Torres. M. Hernandez, Hector Zayaa and Vicente Medina Bem. The preliminary study now made shows that there exists on the Island the need to extend credit to a group of producers"" formed by small"" indiutrial"", that due to the nature of "u" business"", cannot obtain credit* from the Banco de Fomen te and banking""" institution*" of the pal*. The study also eitá oncamina-.
Descartes believes Interior should be on the Treaty Committee.
Suggests that personnel* knowledgeable in the Island's economic problems participate in the formulation of agencies to be created by the ('arta de Comercio).
Mr. Sol Luí" Descartes, Puerto Rico's delegate as a member of the State Department's representation at the international trade conference held in Geneva, declared yesterday that "the people of Puerto Rico should request that people" well versed in economic issues participate in the formulation of the
The people of Puerto Rico should request, therefore, a review of the management of the Government of Puerto Rico in relation to the international trade conference held in Geneva. The Government of Puerto Rico in connection with the conclusion of new trade agreements between the United States and other countries attending the Geneva Conference. It is also worth noting the resources available to the country to protect its interests in connection with existing and future trade agreements. "As a result of the national policy of encouraging the re "tabl "ciment of international trade, it was suggested by the United States* the formulation of a Trade Charter (continued on page 14).
Six government hospitals have been built
Executive Assistant to the Governor reports that others are under study The Executive Assistant to the Governor, Mr. Jorge Font Salriaña, who is also a member of the Public Works Design Committee, reported yesterday, in response to questions from EL MUNDO, on the status of the projects of the Government's program for the construction of hospitals and medical centers, as well as for the construction of rural medical centers, in numerous towns of the Island. According to the informant, there are six hospitals and medical centers that have been adjudicated for the town of Maricao, Rio Grande. Adjunta". Naran. jlto, La" María" and Trujillo Alto, The" plans" of the works were in charge of the CnmMé rie Titaeño, which has sent to the construction agencies. in addition, the plans for the units belonging to Rincón, Villalba, Aguas Buenas, Orocovis. Dorado. Isabela, Corozal and Aftaico. According to the information provided by the Governor's Executive Assistant, only the plans for the hospitals and medical centers in 1-a" Piedras and Hormiguero are pending approval. Regarding the La Piedras hospital, the Design Committee is currently working on a topographic study of the land on which it will be built. On the other hand, the situation regarding the rural medical center construction program, the preparation of whose plans was also entrusted to the Public Works Design Committee, is as follows, according to Mr. Font Saldaña: (Continued on p. 14)
They are looking for ways to extend credit to small industrialists
The aim is to increase production with a view to raising the average annual income of workers. According to Mr. Luis A. Nazario, he has already succeeded in some businesses that operate in the form of cooperatives, especially consumer cooperatives, in reducing the diatribution coats, obtaining reductions in the cost of the articles to consumers. In the opinion of Mr. Nazario, the current complicated system of food distribution greatly influences the increase in the cost of goods, and as a result, the purchasing power of the working people. Among the achievements now obtained in Puerto Rico with regard to the development of programs of this nature, he cited Mr. Nasa (Contlpúa on p. 33).
The case of Public Service and Transportation Authority will go to the Supreme Court The Governor Piñero revealed in his weekly press conference that he proposes to include in the special session of the Legislature a recommendation to eliminate the "discount" for exemptions in the salaries of public employees. The Governor, on the other hand, recommended yesterday that the Transportation Authority and the Public Service Commission agree to take to the Supreme Court the question of whether or not the PSC should assume jurisdiction over the Authority. The Pren "a conference was called for eleven o'clock in the morning, but was not held until around one o'clock in the afternoon, due to the fact that the Governor had to attend to other matters earlier. The Governor began by informing each of the IR toma that he proposed to include in the call for an extraordinary meeting of the Legislative Assembly. Mr. Piñero declined to comment on the problem that has been created regarding the Navy's objection to the International Airport being built in the Isla Verde area. "I prefer not to comment on that in the press," he said. The Governor confirmed the information exclusively reported by EL MUNDO, in the sense that he would not include in the meeting the issue of the affiliation of the Escuela de Medidna Tropical. The 18 items. qqr >"íún dijo oí Gobernador kyor tallo, so proponía Incluir on la convocatoria, son lo* ■i guííente*: 1. 2. Authorization to use in the construction of public* works* a remainder* of about $.100,000 in the PEG funds*. the term for which expired on June 30, last. 1 Legislation in order to facilitate the study of the Aguadilla Port project. 4. A $150,000 donation for the construction at stop 20 of the building in which the Communications Authority will establish its offices and radio station. 5. Authorization so that the study of the port area of San Juan may be carried out, with funds" from the appropriation made for the study of the Caño de Martin Peña railroad. 6. Legislation related to the tax exemption program for new industries. The arante has to do with amendment* - Varia" taye", to the" end" that in lndu "Ij those of textile can work the . women after the die* of the night. 7. Authorization to use in the construction of the building of the Industrial School of the University, as well as for the purchase of equipment, a sum of $250,000 out of the sum appropriated to said School for the exclusive purpose of purchasing equipment. The Governor explained that some of the equipment of the School had been purchased as war surplus, at an extremely low cost, and that there was now less than was appropriated for this purpose, while there were no funds to complete the construction of the buildings. Amendments to the Liquor Industry legislation. The Governor reported that both the liquor industry and the Government were in agreement on the "draft" prepared for this purpose. 9. Appropriation of >35,000, to cover a deficiency in the funds of the Comlalón Insular do Beca. 10. Legislation to eliminate the "food, labor, welfare and other benefits on the salaries of public employees. This includes the Insular Police, the Penal Guard, nurses and other employees, 11. Legislation regulating and duly channeling the emigration of Puerto Ricans to the United States. Legislation amending the Law that creates the Office of Puerto Rico on 13. Legislature authorizing the copying of those books and records that are in poor condition, due to their constant use, in the municipalities. The Governor reported that he could not determine whether this payment would be five dollars, adding that it would depend on the amount of coffee acquired by the AGS by purchase from the coffee growers and on the proceeds of the tax levied on the foreign coffee which would have to be imported. The idea is, as is clear from Mr. Piñero's statement, that the Government will not have to incur expenses from its own* fund* and that it will give a proportional payment per quintal it collects, after deducting the tax on the product* (Continued on page 33).