THE MBNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: Partly cloudy with occasional light showers early in the morning. Generally clear tonight. IN HAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, SS; low, 74. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.87 inches of mercury.
' ■ 1 z 40 pages 5/
LA MARANA NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXVIII
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan; P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 1947
Motorists* demoetremo" the traditional courtesy of the peí".
NUMBER 11126
From today bread will be sold 14 cents per pound
Vicéns Ríos issued yesterday an order raising prices effective immediately Justifies action in raising flour prices -Becuerdh penalties imposed by law on those who speculate with prices - The Administrator of "Supplies, s*ftor Antonio Viren" Rio", yesterday left "in effect the previous orders relating to the fixing of prices" for bread, and issued a new administrative order increasing by one cent the price per pound of this food for consumers, effective immediately. Under the order, bread is to be sold in stores to consumers at the price of 14 cents per pound. The order also gives a profit margin to the deliverers, of one cent a pound, since they can obtain the bread at the bakeries, paying eleven and a half cents a pound, and sell it to the retailers, trained in their establishments, at the price of twelve and a half cents a pound. The latter" will distribute it to consumers at the price of 14 cents a pound. The order further solves the prevailing problem of the distribution of the food, which was totally pa* ralyzed by the previous interim order of the AGS. The Association of Tahoneros had asked the AGS for an increase of two cents in the pound of bread, in line with the increasing increases in flour prices. To this effect, it adopted an agreement to close the bakeries next Monday, if they do not agree to this increase. In view of the intervention of the General Secretary of the Free Federation, Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera, in calling for a meeting of the industrialists, the workers and the Government to discuss the problem the day before yesterday with a view to avoiding the closing of this industry, an extraordinary assembly of the mill owners will be held today to reconsider their previous agreement. It was reported that the order issued by the Supply Administration is to be discussed also at the convention of the tahonera industry scheduled for this afternoon. Therefore, whether the bakeries will be definitively closed on Monday will depend on the action taken today by the owners of these establishments. In his administrative order, Mr. Virens Rio expressed that "the fundamental reason on which the petitioners base their request for an increase in the sale price of bread is the increase in the price of flour in the supplying market. This increase has been accentuated and the prevailing prices, which the Administration finds proven at approximately $2.00 more per 200 pound package, do not justify the requested increase of two cents per pound, but that of one cent per pound on the general price scale". Therefore, Mr. Vlcona states that "as of November 1, 1947, the maximum prices" for the sale of common bread in Puerto Rico are fixed as follows: "Per pound of 16 ounces, wholesale, to distributors, eleven and a half cents per pound; to retailers, taken at the bakery, twelve cents per pound; to retailers, delivered at their establishment, at twelve and a half cents per pound and to the public consumer, at fourteen cents per pound. The Supply Administrator also states, among other things, the following: "On October 21, 1947, the SGA issued provisional Administrative Order number 159 amending the scale of maximum prices that had been fixed for the sale of bread in Puerto Rico. "The amendment to said price scale was limited mainly to an increase in the wholesale price, since it had been sufficiently proven that the prevailing price was below the cost of production; and the consumer selling price was not altered by the failure to furnish at that time, or at the public meeting held October 7, 1947, sufficient information or evidence as to the production of bread which was being sold by the bakers to deliverers and dealers, or directly at the maximum price of 13 cents per pound to consumers, essential information which has subsequently been obtained and which now enables the case to be disposed of more definitely. "The Administration has ascertained that the transitory measure of eliminating the intermediate price, which at the same time tends to eliminate the deliveryman, is detrimental to the public interest, mainly for the peasant classes who are deprived of such an essential article because they do not have the facility to go to the village bakeries to get bread, but who depend on the small stores which are supplied by the deliverymen, which is the same in the urban area. "The Administration has also ascertained that the number of small shops which are supplied by the deliverymen, which is also the case in the urban area, is not only very low, but also very high.
Yesterday ended the institute on tuberculosis
Program included a variety of lectures. Yesterday ended the Institute of the Society for the Prevention of Tuberculosis in Children, held under the auspices of the Department of Instruction, with the cooperation of the Department of Health, in the lecture hall of the School of Tropical Medicine. The event was attended by teachers from San Juan, San Luis, Rio Piedras and Cataño, including private schools. - During the sessions held yesterday, the following persons lectured: Doctor José Rodríguez Pastor, on "Causes and Prevention of Tuberculosis"; Doctor Adolfo Bernabe, on "Problem" of Nutrition"; Doctor Antonio Acosta Velarde, on "Diagnosis and Treatment"; Doctor Juan Arruza, on "The Resource" that the community has against Tuberculosis"; the school director of San Juan, Mrs. Elisa Mora de Gadoa, on "The functioning of the School Hygiene Clinic" of Puerta de Tierra; the director of Vocational Rehabilitation, Mr. Manuel Hernandez, on "The vocational rehabilitation of tuberculosis patients", and Mrs. Lydia Esther Rodriguez, who explained how to prepare the room of a sick person. A general discussion was held which was very interesting. Many questions were asked by the teachers.
Fernós has no plans for the next session of Congress He is confident that in the regular session legislation will be passed extending the Social Security law to the Island, giving bonuses to expeditionaries and on citizenship By Juan Martines Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO The Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, Dr. Antonio Femó" Isern, said yesterday that "it is not certain that he will leave for the United States today", adding that he intends to leave one day next week, without being able to specify the exact day.
Dr. Fernós said that he has not yet finished resolving several of the "issues" that require "a pre""nclave in Puerto Rico, some of which will require legislative action, such as the one related to the elimination of the Identification Office in New York, as part of the Puerto Rico Office in Washington. Dr. Fernós, as well as Mr. Emilio Colón and Labor Commissioner Fernando Sierra Rerdecla, believe that the present Identification Office should be abolished and replaced by another under the jurisdiction of the Department of Labor. With respect to his attitude towards the rum industry, Dr. Fernós stated that he is in favor of the Legislature of Puerto Rico providing it with all the necessary assistance, and offered his most determined cooperation for any action that may be necessary in the National Capital for the benefit of the industry, although he will oppose any attempt to try to have the Congress fix the rules on the form and place of payment of the Taxes, re "tándole right" that the Insular Legislature has today, Dr. Femó" is of the opinion that the (Continued on page 16). 16)
Committee formed in Ponce for new party Minority party leaders met. They are going to campaign PONCE, November 14 (By Miguel Rivera). -- Last night the leaders of the parties, Liberal, So. clalhta, and Republican Union, met in the city of Ponce. They agreed to appoint a pro-forma committee for the new party, which was constituted as follows: President: Joaquín <de¥ Llano, Secretary, Cario" M. Caballé ; Members: Luis E.trique Tristan!, son; Julio Viera Morales, Luí" Vázquez; Luis Portilla Janeiro, Luis Principe. Rafael L. Plrl", Genaro Perones, and Luis Betancourt. The committee is sending to the Republican Union and Soclallata Liberal and Soclallata party "juntas" lócale. Liberal and Soclallata a circular Informing of "the new crusade that "e has Initiated for the formation of a new party Integrated by all" lo" party" minority" in order to organize a political force of good will to defeat! party in power, which has operated a de "government in the I "la and has unleveled the public finances with direct prejudice to all" laa social classes of the pala." It is requested in the message that the "body" of the "parties" mentioned above "meet to adopt a resolution to the effect of "rdbuitecer the new party's caution (Continued on page 16).
They will be included in the increase to be made to Puerto Rico producers by the CEC Pnr Jean Van Vranken WASHINGTON Nov. 14 - (INS) - The federal Department of Agriculture is considering granting increased payments from the Agricultural Credit Corporation to Puerto Rican sugar refiners who produce for local consumption as well as to producers who sell to the CEC. The Puerto Rican Sugar Producers Association requested the approval of the refiners under the terms of the amendment to the 1947 sugar purchase contract recently submitted for the Association's consideration. The amendment proposed by the CCA increases the payments for purchases of sugar by the Government by three and three-quarters cents per hundredweight, in line with a previous round of the Cuban agreement. The Puerto Rican contract stipulates that any increase in the price paid for Cuban sugar will be reflected in a similar increase for the Puerto Rican crop. The suggested price increase, however, will not apply to refiners producing sugar for local distribution. Manuel A. del Valle, president of the Association, M. A. García Méndez and Dudley Smith, the Association's Washington representative, have been conferring with CEC officials this week in an effort to have the amendment applied to these refiners. A spokesman for the Association said the CEC has submitted the controversy to the head of the Sugar Division of the Department of Agriculture, James Marshall, for a final decision. So said Marshall promised the Association's members that he would provide an early resolution to the matter.
Governor and officials seek to speed up approved public works".
■■r |p>. '"'BFEF' .< í-sW' Attendees at the meeting held last night at La For tal ota, under the presidency of Governor Pihero, for the purpose of discussing the medicaa of speeding up the approved public works*, especially in those places where the unemployment problem is most acute. The heads of departments and agencies, as well as other official funders, presented their respective programs and discussed the difficulties they are facing in their development. (Photo KL MUNDO)
With a view to accelerating public works projects, giving preference to constructions to be carried out in the areas most affected by the unemployment problem, the Governor held last night a long meeting in Fortaleza, which was attended by the various heads of departments and agencies, as well as other high ranking officials. The Governor gave an e". tudlo of the current situation of the various projects," Inquiring
the different projects, inquiring about the nature of the "difficulties" delaying the normal development of those "which have not been started" or those which, having been started, are at a standstill. The purpose was to seek how to overcome the inconveniences that have prevented the start or continuation of the project within the public works program of the Government of Puerto Rico.
Governor Plfiero began by questioning each project on a list of numerous projects before him, ascertaining their status and trying to determine what could be done to facilitate their speedier completion. The list on which he questioned ol seftor Plftero contained about two hundred projects" of various kinds which have been approved by the Plan Board and which are the works to be constructed in the near future.
Each department head and agenda brought a written report on their respective construction "programs" and explained the "difficulty" they were facing in developing them. The list of 200 projects included schools, aqueduct, medical center, housing, road, highway, home, land for school and other purposes, atlétlcoa park and other works. This meeting, which was chaired by the (Continued on page 16)
News Digest
Admiral Barbey revealed yesterday that the U.S. Navy objects to the site chosen by the Island Government for the Isla Verde airport. As of today and by order of the AGS, bread will be priced at 14 cents per pound. * Femó" has no legislative plans for the extraordinary session of Congress. He expects legialición in the ordinary session. - * ♦ Consumers act in view of the decree of the AGS increasing the price of bread. - * ♦ . Federal Agriculture considers making increased payments to Island sugar refiners. - ♦ - Governor instructs Department Heads not to recommend allocations higher" than the" current one. - The General Assembly of the United Nations" approved the American plan for the Independence of Korea. - The Governor, along with other Island Government officials, reviewed the list of approved public works to determine how to accelerate their construction. . . - e * Supreme Court dismisses, certiorari filed by the Carioca Company. * . t - * * Picó believes that customs coordination in the Caribbean is necessary for the development of the IndustrialtzMión program. t - * Governor appoints mayors to preside over the campaign against infant paralysis.
Pona will insist that the allocation of *3,000,000 for public assistance be maintained. - * * * Four teams of the professional baseball championship may change positions this week. - ♦ Tonight in San Germán the island basketball championship will be decided when Atlético" and Cardenales face each other. Asunción Uanoa and Abelardo Alejandro fight "n Monday's semifinal. * te Michigan goes on the road to win the Midwest soccer championship today as it takes on Wisconsin. ♦ - * * < The United Nations approved the American plan so. bra Korea over Soviet opposition. - * * * * Ramadler offers to punish the Communists who promoted serious riots in Marseilles. a o s' United States anforiss the eh. restraint of a powerful Chinese force. . * * * * . .A doctor states that the lawyer Mee before he died accused Satira of having dlspu.ado him of. llberadamente, - - - - The Herald Tribuna continues to comment on the case of tn" port, rriqueftos in New íoik. sao Be recorded pathetic scene in the District Court when a defendant denied the patemMad of do" child" who "nfrent him the * Prosecutor.
By RAYMOND LAHR United Prense Correspondent WASHINGTON, Nov. 14. - A heated dlzputa partldlitz regarding lo" means of reducing the high coate of life seemed ea* tara" forming today between mlem* broa of the Joint Economic Committee. to which, prealde aenator Robert A. Taft. This announced that his group would promptly consider any anti-flaclo* niat propositions that President Truman might place before the special Congreao aaalon, which opens on June. The Ohio Senator said he hoped to begin the hearing on the Administration's plans next Thursday and to complete the study within two weeks; but he "cannot predict any legislation enacted this year; and the prospect is that none will pass, unless the Committee mends the existing Republican-Democratic divide. Two broad programs to address the high price issue were submitted to Senator Taft's group at a preliminary meeting today, but Taft referred one of them back to a Subcommittee amid Democratic complaints that the Subcommittee was "isolationist" and "partisan". The report was prepared by Rep. George H. Bender, R-Arizona, a Republican.
There is partisan disagreement over anti-inflation measures
Ohio, and placed the major responsibility for high food costs on Mr. Truman's foreign relief operations. Without comment, Taft accepted for study the second plan, drafted by a Subcommittee headed by Senator Ralph E. Flanders, Republican, of Vermont, whose group has proposed a dozen possible lines of attack against rising prices, including voluntary rationing of meat, butter and eggs, and a compulsory rationing program "if the voluntary rationing would cease to operate quickly and effectively. The Flanders report, which was signed by all Republican and Democratic members, also proposed higher exemptions for income taxpaying dependents. Discussing far-reaching policies to combat the high cost of living, the report recommends further study of the 40-hour work week, and raises the possibility of longer work hours to provide emergency relief for Europe without disrupting the domestic economy. "We" - says the Flandor Report - "could be confronted with the need for a temporary increase in the working week, if (Continued on p. 16).
Navy objects to government's choice of airport site
Pinero says budget will not be raised Recommends reducing as much as possible current government expenses Governor Plftero has issued specific instructions to all heads of government departments and agencies so that when drafting "their recommendations on the operating expense budget for the next fiscal year, "under no circumstances should any department or agency, in any of its activities, be recommended a higher allocation than the one in effect for the present fiscal year. In his communication, the Governor also stated that he "dehemoR, in addition, submit to the Legislature an operating expense budget containing reductions in all those activities which are not imperatively necessary". The Governor's communication was originally transmitted to the Chief of the Budget Bureau, Mr. Roberto de Jesús, under whose jurisdiction is the preparation of the Government's general expense budget. The communication reads as follows: "We will soon begin the preparation of the model budget to be sent to the Honorable Legislative Assembly at its next ordinary session. The reduction in the revenues of our Government and the bleak fiscal outlook make it necessary to reduce the expenditure budget of the Island Government in an appreciable manner. "We must take special care to reduce the operating expense budget as much as possible. According to estimates presented by the Planning Board in its 6 Afto' Economic Flociúma, it will be very difficult to cover the operating expense budget with the revenues expected in the next few years. Therefore, it is necessary to take measures that will enable us to cover the operating expense budget with our normal revenues in the coming years. "Under no circumstances should any Department or agency - in any of its activities - be recommended a higher appropriation than My current appropriation for the present fiscal year. We must, submit to the Legislature, an operating expense budget containing reductions in all those activities which are not imperatively necessary." The Governor's action is interpreted to mean that the Government's current expense budget, amounting to $53,038,290, shall not be increased at the next meeting of the Legislature. Rather, it is to be reduced in order to adjust it to the reduced tax revenues. The Chief of the Bureau of the Budget, Mr. Roberto de Jesús, informed yesterday that the official forms and instructions to the departments and agencies that make up the Government, regarding the budget for the next fiscal year, will begin to be distributed next Monday. Said forms will include the figures required for the payment of salaries and services to government personnel. The Budget Bureau Chief's instructions will be in line with Governor Plftero's announced policy of not increasing operating expenses or recommending new services, but rather, reducing them. The Budget Bureau is expected to begin meetings with department heads to discuss their respective budget requests after the 15th (Continued on page 10).
It is expected that the coordination of customs slatemea" between the Caribbean countries will be one of the most important pro. Rafael Picó, a member of the Caribbean Customs Union, said yesterday that Puerto Rican delegates to the Caribbean Conference will request a Caribbean customs union. Dr. Picó also stated that "the Caribbean Customs Union program, which has been under study by the Commission, is related to the problem of the existing customs restrictions in the Caribbean countries. "If we are going to have a coordinated industry," Dr. Pl. có commented, "it implies exporting to those areas" that are not well developed, the products" manufactured by areas" that have achieved greater development. It is the feeling of many people that in order to achieve an efficient exchange of products, the existence of four different tariff systems among the countries that make up the Caribbean Conference represents an obstacle. The Commission's countries have been working, since the last meeting in Trinidad, to coordinate the Customs Tariff and Tariff Alaterna" systems so that they work in close relation". However, Dr. Pl. có revealed that the achievement of such purpose "is extremely difficult and complicated". (Continued on page 16) Brooks assumes command of troops today He has been named chief of all Army forces in the Caribbean The appointment of Major General Edward H. Brooks, Chief of the Military Department of the Army in the Caribbean. Brooks, Chief of the West Indies Military Department, as commander of all United States Army troops in the Caribbean, was announced yesterday (Nov. 14) by Lieutenant General William D. Crlttenberger, Commander in Chief, Caribbean Command. In accordance with orders from the Department of the Army, General Brooka will take command of the Army's "troop" - Inatalacionea today (Saturday, November 15) as part of the recently announced change in the entire command of the Armed Forces in this area, whereby General Crlttenberger was named commander-in-chief of the combined service. With the announcement of the change of the entire command in the Caribbean, a new name has been given to the Military Department of the West Indies. The name "Military Department West Indies" will no longer be used as of today and the same area will henceforth be known as "U.S. Army Forces West Indies." Simultaneously it was announced that Vlc"-Admiral Daniel E. Barbey, Commander of the Caribbean Sea Frontier and the Tenth Naval District, will command Naval Forces and Installations under General Crittenberger and Commander General Willis H. Hale will command the Air Forces ""installations organizations.
Pons to insist on continued funding for public assistance
Dr. Juan A. Pona, Puerto Rico Health Commissioner, will appear next Thursday, the 20th of this month, at the hearings to be held by the Planning Board, publicly, to discuss the Government's Fifth Preliminary Economic Program, in order to support the requests made by his department for allocations considered necessary for the operation of some public health programs. Yesterday, Dr. Pone expressed that he will defend the position of Mrs. Celestina Zalduondo de Goodsald, Director of the Bureau of Public Health, arguing that the $3,000,000.00 allocation for public assistance, consisting of assistance to the elderly - disabled, should be maintained, since it is a necessary part of the services of the Bureau of Public Welfare. Recently, the Board of Trustees recommended the elimination of the lot of funds for aid to the disabled elderly.
tion of funds for direct aid. In the Government of Puerto Rico's preliminary economic program, it has stated that: "Our Government cannot continue indefinitely to offer direct aid because its resources do not permit it and because individual aid is so small that very little is returned. Our calculations of the amount of the General Expenditure Budget have been made on the assumption that since the year 194950 direct aid will cease in its entirety". Mrs. Zalduondo de Goodsald reacted to what was expressed in the referred program, and stated that she would strongly oppose the elimination of said funds, and that she would attend the public hearing of the Planning Board to express her protest against the Board's recommendation and insist that said agency modify its criteria. (Continued on page 16)
too close to the naval radio station in Isla Verde To remove it would cost about $5 million Admiral Barbey says there is no place in Puerto Rico to take it The indications are that "1 projected new International Airport, which the Transportation Authority plans to locate in Isla Verde at a cost of $15,000,000, cannot be built" there due to the Navy's opposition to the "construction" on the "land" in the process of being purchased. The commander of the Tenth Naval District, Vice Admiral Daniel E. Barbey, revealed yesterday that the Navy has objected to the site selected by the government for such work in Isla Verde, mainly because the projected airport will hinder the operation of the naval radio station installed by the Navy on the road to Carolina. Vice Admiral Barbey denounced the station as "the Navy's communication center for the Caribbean area." The Navy's opposition to the location of the International Airport in Isla Verde, due to the "grounds" they claim, jeopardizes the development of such works. For the construction of which "a vast number of topographic studies, plans, specifications and legal procedures have been carried out for the acquisition of land and buildings. Vice Admiral Barbey pointed out yesterday that the plans for the construction of the airport require the construction of a runway at a distance of about 1,500 feet from the aforementioned naval station. He explained that such a project would cause radio interference in such a way as to force the Navy to abandon facilities which would cost the Federal Government at least $5,000,000 for the cost of relocation to another site. r According to the Federal aid plan for the construction of airports in Puerto Rico, part of the cost of the International airport construction will be covered by the Federal Government. In commenting on this point, Vice Admiral Barbey stated that it seemed "unlikely that the Congress would allocate funds for the airport, knowing that it would force the dismantling of $5,000 worth of naval facilities. He also stated that the naval communications station, built in 1944, was constructed in its previous location to precisely avoid the interference that would have resulted from the airport. He said that the wireless receiving station was moved from San Juan to isolate it from the Isla Grande airport and to isolate it from the noise produced by industrial plants. According to additional information he provided, Admiral Barbey stated that the Island Government, as far as he has learned, has invested no more than $100,000 in plans and cost estimates in connection with the selection of the site for the Tala Grande airport, adding that so far no land has been purchased. "In these days when we have to be given to economics," said the admiral, "we have to look at this situation from a broad angle and decide what is best. It's a question of whether the airport or the naval station should remain in place, Ambai cannot exist there." In the course of the interview, Admiral Barbey added that the Navy has not been able to locate another spot in Puerto Rico that it considers suitable for a communications station. He indicated that if forced to abandon its current facility, the station would be rebuilt outside Puerto Rico. According to the federal air- ' SUSfíSl' * Pu * rt0 R,eo -- '" $600,000 to be used for site preparation, clearing of approaches and paving of the runway at the Isla Verde airport. This allocation " tn ágoatp last by T. P. Wright, administrator of Civil Aeronautics, in Washington. The Airport Act funds appropriated by Congress for the years 1947 and 1948 were devoted to the development of the program. On the basis of a substantial federal contribution for Puerto Rico estimated at $5,000,000, the island airport program* was prepared, which included the preferential construction of the Isla Verde airport. The Isla Verde airport was planned to be carried out in stages, with federal or island assistance. Studies for the acquisition of land in Isla Verde reveal that it is necessary to acquire about 1,500 acres of land for the necessary facilities - many landowners in that region are affected by the projected construction, especially by the delay in closing the land and building purchase transactions. (Continued "on page 13").