THE NANDO
IYÍIPF2S2? ora. tibmto nu LA ISLA, HOT: Cloudy with showers v, " ntot the southeast, do 1® ■ mll ' M hour. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M; low, TI; rain, 8.4* inches. The barometric preelon at sea level, at 4:M in the afternoon, was tata inches of mercury.
38 Pages
DAILY MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR
XXVIII
I check the brakes. Cooperated with the Automobile Inspection.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MAY 17, 1947
Entered ea second matter, Poet Office, Ban Jou, P. B.
NUMBER 10948
New party repudiates reform bill
In manifest dlée that in nothing alters colonial status of the Island Contrasts attitude of Muñoz Marín Insists that now solution of the political problem be managed The Board of Directors" of! Par♦Ido Indopondentlsta Puertorriqueño, presided by o! doctor Gilberto Concepción de Gracia, repudiated yesterday the bill of reformat a la Carta . Organic, pending the con"'deración of the Concrete, declaring that ea clearly insubstantial and not puppet in any way the colonial status" of Puerto Rico, In manifesto to the pala, said Board séllala that 1st efforts on the status should be directed to the problem toa solved now. The manifesto Independently said: "The reform bill pending before the U.S. Congress is clearly insubstantial. It in no way alters the colonial nature of the regime established in Puerto Rico: -" that is, it continues the status of an Imposed and revocable regime at the mercy of the United States Congress. The enmlendai to consider you do not touch the current economic regime. In that order it does not make you to Puerto Rico neither a metric concession. We are left as we are; without power to legislate in the matter of cabotage; without power to regulate our customs; without power to protect the development of our industry against foreign competition; without power to intervene in the development of our industry against foreign competition. We have no power to intervene in commercial treaties affecting our economy, and in short, no power to confront our economic problem with any chance of success. The amendments are aimed । only at reorganizing the executive branch, and there is a likelihood that the current power of the Governor will be transferred to some other functionary appointed by Congress to serve as an intermediary between the President of the United States and the Government of the colony, and to coordinate the many federal agendas and activities. The bill does not in any way increase the authority of the colonial Legislature, nor does it broaden its jurisdiction, nor does it give a permanent condl- j donation to the "curtailment of the powers granted to it. The Legislature is left as it is, without even being granted that power which all the parliaments of the world have; the power to override the veto of the Executive and to pass by the will of one-third of its members, such legislation as it deems Indispensable.
In addition, the powers of the officers referred to in the amendments to be enacted are vested in the Congress of the United States, and it may reduce, increase, and eliminate them at its pleasure and whim, as it may also create at any time. "The new functionary, be he called coordinator, commissioner, auditor or whatever, may, as we have said, annul, con. trol or postpone the powers of the functionaries elected by the people of Puerto Rico by virtue of the grants made to them by the people of Puerto Rico. In any event, it does not increase the power of the colonial governor to reach the "multiple agenda" and federal officials who exercise omnipotent authority in Puerto Rico. Nor is judicial jurisdiction expanded and the absolute independence of the Federal Court and the subjection of our highest Court to the Boston Circuit Court and the Supreme Court of the United States" continues. And, more importantly, the Congress of the United States continues to have authority over all the territory and all the people of Puerto Rico, as if we were its "thing" or property, and continues to retain the power to amend, repeal or substitute any legislation passed by the Legislature. Likewise, the (Continued on page 10)
News Digest
New budget Includes I four million more for employees. Does not include additional salary for the amortization. Comparison with the items in the current budget, the Senate will represent the Senate in the House hearings on elective gubernatorial elections for the island. House Committee reduced Navy appropriation by 1® percent, or M77JJl*4®0. The House Committee reduced the Navy appropriation by 1® percent, i.e., M77JJl*4®0. - Lottery directors and employees were furloughed last night when Piftern reorganized the agency, but all were reappointed at the Governor's own direction. - s - Olmo raised his average to .**8 by hitting two doubles and a triple in * turns, in a 1-run tie between Mexico and Ve rae rus. Colón Garda-Cedí ' Schoonmaker fight canceled. Mise broke a major league record yesterday by scoring in his sixteenth consecutive Juago, ai beating loo Giantsa to M. The steamer Borlnquen will be reinstated in Port Bi-
I co on 3® funlo. It will accommodate 4M passengers. Bq "lles Instructed them to oe mark on the callea, the place of I crusar loa pedestrians. a * * * Ramos Antonlni discussed Relias Artes provectos ron the Go*e " National Guard a camp on Tortuguero from July 2® to <8 August. , . . - - - - < - I i The Independence Party repudiates the bill of elective governor. Dlee that it in no way alters the colonial "atheta" of the Island. - - - They plan to charge 14 per credit to maeatroa and Irregular students at the University, starting next semester. - e e e The delay in the processing of easements abuses abuses Interior to lose a federal allocation of 14,000,000 for public works. ■ - - Labor leaders censure veto of bill on Injunctions. ♦ * * Technical problems have forced the postponement of the start of work on North Avenue in Rentarte. - ♦ ■ - Government deposits M.A00,00® as partial payment - gives a total Erelo of *6,040,000 - of land acquired from FaI Jardo Sugar Growers.
"Fajardo's land pact objected.
Attorney General alleges that it violates a clause of the consent decree HUM III I ' Appeals to the Supreme Court Disregards rule used to fix the value of the farms The People of Puerto Rico's opposition to the stipulation between the Land Authority and The Fajardo Sugar Company was filed yesterday before the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico. The Fajardo Su- * , gar Association and Loiza Sugar Com- । P "ny. i The opposition brief was filed by the Department of Justice on behalf of the People of Puerto Rico. It is stated in the document that the Attorney General was notified on May 12, 1947 of a stipulation filed before the Supreme Court between the Land Authority and the Fajardo in which it is requested that the Supreme Court, in accordance with the" term" of the second paragraph of clause 2 * by consent decree, ' approve the agreement made between the Land Authority and the" ' corporations mentioned" on ■ valuation of the property to be acquired by the Land Authority. The Attorney General alleges that he has requested the Auditor of Puerto Rico and the Treasurer of Puerto Rico to report to him on the reasonableness and correctness of the procedures followed in fixing the value of said properties, but up to the time of filing his opposition, he has not received any information from said officials on the matter, reason for which he is not in a position to report to the Court on said matters, j It is alleged that regardless of whether the value fixed is fair and reasonable or whether the correct and correct methods have been used, he is not in a position to report to the Court on said matters, The Attorney General cannot know until he is so informed by the Auditor and the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, the Attorney General objects to that part of the eighth clause of the agreement which makes available to the Fajardo the amount of five and a half million dollars on the grounds that such agreement is contrary to the Consent Judgment rendered by the Supreme Court. The Solicitor argues in his opposition brief that if the Supreme Court approves the eighth paragraph of the agreement made between the Land Authority and the corporations, the Supreme Court will not approve the agreement.
Labor leaders censure veto of injunctions bill Barreto Perez believes it is a step backward. -Nogueras would insist in the next Legislature. -Ledo. Colón concerned. -Saez Corales Urges Unification.
The Puerto Rico labor leadership yesterday expressed its dissatisfaction with Governor Plfiero's veto of House Bill 1281, filed by Rep. Ernesto Ramos Antonlni. This bill limited the jurisdiction of the Courts to hear labor-management disputes. Mr. Ramon Barreto Perez, i 1 , president of one of the cegetlsta" sectors, stated about the partlcu- ■ lar: "I have been surprised by ' the Governor's veto of that pro-, hyerto. We in the Legislature! ■ approved the measure, in the believe- ■ . ciated to be to the Go- ¡ . bernator's liking, because we knew his - way of thinking. I "The truth is that the veto signlfl- ■ cates a setback of about 50 years I - in the" conquest" of the organized labor movement l. If the policy I established by the courts of
- If the policy established by the courts of justice continues to prevail in order to ban picketing, in my opinion this means that later on the strike will be banned. Today more than ever, the Puerto Rican labor movement must unify to continue fighting for new rights and to sustain those already acquired. Senator Barreto Pérez informed that he will present in the next session of the Legislature another bill with the same purpose, and declared that "while I am a senator, I will not be willing to sponsor or encourage measures such as the one prohibited by the Governor. Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rlve- । ra. General Secretary of the Free Federation, authorized manifestations in the sense that "it is necessary to insist in the next session of the 11th Legislature, so that a project is approved in such a way that it covers the technicalities pointed out by the Governor and that it does justice to the organized labor movement, since the employers have enough laws within their reach to protect their interests and rights within the democracy in which we live". Francisco Colón Gordlany, authorized the following: "We are aware of the serious implications for the organized labor movement of the approval of anti-worker legislation by the Federal Congress, and the veto of the Governor, Mr. Plñero, of which P. of the C. 1261, which was aimed at prohibiting the issuance of injunctions or judicial interdictions, in case of labor-management struggles, was the object. We are also aware that the anti-worker laws passed will produce a terrible employer reaction against the labor movement and its organizations. We are deeply concerned about this whole situation. But we ask ourselves, can the (Continued on page 22)
| Cooper expects to return later this year
■ atete ■ Ite I I I ■ Mr w A K Leaves the Island without rancor; with genuine regret Insists that problems ¿ the country would be solved through education By LUIS'SÁNCHEZ CAPPA Editor of El. MUNDO 1 "I am ending my" day" as a Federal Court Judge on the Island, with genuine regret. For over thirteen years I have enjoyed the hospitality of the Puerto Ricans and that hospitality has been so true that it has matured into a friendship that will last for the rest of my life. Such is the fraternal message sent yesterday by the judge who for more than a decade has been dispensing justice from the bench of the federal court in Puerto Rico, Judge Robert A. Cooper, hours before taking the steamship that, accompanied by his wife, will take him to the United States to begin his retirement from the Judiciary and public life. Judge Cooper embarked yesterday, by Mayagüez. Always willing to receive journalists in a friendly manner, Judge Cooper agreed to a final interview for EL MUNDO as a federal magistrate, receiving us in the lobby of the Condado Beach Hotel, where he has resided during his stay on the island. Before we could ask any questions, the Judge went ahead and asked us to take a message of praise to the people of Puerto Rico through the columns of the newspaper before leaving. And then, without affectation, he pronounces the words of greeting, imbuing them with the sincerity that characterizes him. Regretting that he has very little time to satisfy our desire to cover as many topics as possible, given the proximity of the time of departure and the travel arrangements, he does not re(Continued on page 22)
Next year's budget excludes emergency payments; Committee cuts funds for Navy I .
Reduction is in the sum of l 1 I $377,519,200 Nimitz had warned that it would force ' discharge thousands of sailors 1 1 - - - Taber pro lower pay to officers It was roared to limit gaMoa at Annapolis*. - Appeared ForreMal By JAMES F. DONOVAN WASHINGTON, 18, (PU)-The House Appropriations Committee of the House of Representatives" agreed today to recommend a ten per cent reduction in Ins spending for the Navy during the fiscal year 1948 despite the warning given by Admiral Chester W. Nlmltz that world peace rests on a balance of power maintained by the naval power of the United States and Great Britain. Extending its economy campaign to the armed forces, the Republican-controlled committee approved a bill appropriating $469,761,100 for Navy operations for the twelve months beginning July 1--a figure which is less, by $377,519,200, than the appropriation requested by President Truman's Bureau of the Budget. The Bureau had calculated that the Navy could not operate on less than $3,847,280,300. At the same time, the Appropriations Committee released to the public the secret testimony of Admiral Nimitz and other high-ranking Navy officers who warned that the most powerful naval fleet in the world would be forced to shed some forty thousand men and make other debilitating economies if its budget was reduced. Nimitz, in his capacity as Chief of Naval Operations, gave the committee a realistic picture of the world situation in this period of interl- ( nldad while the United Nations" still has its fa- i cuitabilities to make peace tested. < The security of the nation and the ' peace of the whole world, said the admi- ■ rant frankly to) committee, depend on "a balance of power, 1 in which, once again, American and British naval power are aligned on the same side." Ad- . virged that England's economy had been in such a way bled ' that it might not possibly enable the United Kingdom to maintain the formi- ' dable fleet which since 1815 has been ' the chief guardian of the world's maritime fronti- ' ' rage." Against 1 ¡ that contingency, he said, the United States must take steps to maintain its naval power. I "In other words," the admiral declared, "any weakening of British naval power is a reason for the strengthening of American naval power." He pointed out that Britain emerged victorious from World War II, but deep in debt, with its Domestic resources diminished and its Overseas Investments so greatly reduced, that its people are forced to live without what they need in order to rebuild their economy. "It is obvious that the British will not long be able to provide adequate naval forces for their own security and certainly will not maintain a fleet strong enough to constitute a major factor in the security of the Western Hemisphere," Nlmltz said. "This responsibility now falls to the United States, not for idealistic or altruistic reasons, but for self-interest." Nimitz insisted that he was not pessimistic about co--i (Continued on Ja page 12) ।
The steamer "Borlnquen" will sail from New York harbor for San Juan de Puerto Rico next June 20, it was disclosed yesterday by officials of the New York A Porto Rico Line at Snn Juan. The date has been tentatively set in the company's Itinerary for the month of June because it is expected that by that date the refit of the ship, which served as a military transport during the war period, will be completed. However, this date is considered definitive.
Start of work on North Avenue postponed
It has been postponed 1a construction of the prlmerrtramo Ñorte Avenue that "e extend it from the bridge Guillermo Esteves, following the shore of the Condado Lagoon, Wilson Street, to the intersection of Lopez Landron Street with Avenida José de Diego, in the vicinity of the Municipal Hospital. This was made known yesterday by the Acting Deputy Chief of the Interior, Mr. Angel (2) Silva.
Mr. Silva expressed that this avenue "has such a difficult problem" that it is necessary to solve it, that its construction has been "postponed". He informed that the same was not included for that reason in the program of works to be undertaken during ■ the present fiscal year. However, the project has not . been abandoned, according to information . obtained by EL MUNDO. The works (Continued on page 22).
of the current month of May. Ernest Grant, secretary of the committee, reported that McFarland was appointed by Senator Hugh Butler, Republican of Nebraska and chairman of the Senate Public Lands Committee, to represent that body at the public hearings. McFarland is one of five members of the Senate Public Lands Committee's Subcommittee on Insular and Territorial Affairs, the other members being Butler; Guyi C. Cordon, R-Oregon and chairman of the subcommittee; Sherldan Downey, R-California; and Henry Dworshsk, R-Idaho. Fred Crawford, R-Michigan, chairman of the House subcommittee before which the hearings will be held, estimates that the sessions on the elective governor's bill could be completed in three days or perhaps less. To date, Secretary Krug, Governor Plftero and Resident Commissioner Fernós Isern are scheduled to appear. Reports have circulated that Muñoz Marin will be here in time to appear, but this could not be confirmed in Washington. In San Juan it was reported that Mufloz Marin has announced that he will be present at the hearings. Governor Plfiero, who has been extremely busy in San Juan, dispatching the large number of orders approved by the Island Legislature, will leave for Washington tomorrow, Saturday, to attend the hearings. The Governor received instructions from Wáshlngton as to the necessity of making the trip, which, of all things" I (Continued on page 12).
I The steamer "Borinquen" will return to service in June i ■ - - -. 3 The work of refitting the ship, which served as a military transport during the war, is nearly completed.
The "Borlnquen" will accommodate about 400 passengers due to advanced refit work, according to George Horner, spokesman for the Atlantic, Gulf A West Indies Lines, operators of the New York A Porto Line. The "Borlnquen", which will replace the "Marine Tiger" on the route between New York and San Juan, Puerto Rico, will make two voyages a month and once refitted will accommodate about 400 passengers, or 100 less than the "Marine Tiger" accommodates on the trips it now regularly makes every two weeks. In addition, the Borlnquen, after being converted into a modern passenger vessel, will have space for general cargo and appropriate refrigerators for cargo that needs to be shipped under the refrigeration system. For the time being the Porto Rico . Lina will not put any other passenger vessels on the route between New York and San Juan for the time being because, as reported by Senior Edgar S. Rloom, chairman of the Board of Directors of the Porto Rico . Rloom, president of the Board of Directors of the AGWI, the company which subsidizes the Puerto Rico Line, the Maritime Commission denied a request for a subsidy to recondition two ships for this purpose.
With the help of her son Leonard, Mrs. Leonard Rosa, a Puerto Rican resident of the Bronx, New York, is feeding a child she alleges was substituted for a baby she gave to her at Lincoln Hospital, New York, on 1* seasickness. She and her husband make that allegation in a $200,000 damage suit they filed against the City of New York. Hospital Commissioner Edward M. Berneker called the matter a "clerical error." - (Photo P. A.) McFarland to represent Senate in gubernatorial hearing He belongs to the Upper House Public* Grounds Committee and received assignment from Butler.Crawford estimates sessions will last about 3 days . By ( HARLES McCABE WASHINGTON. 16-(PU)-A spokesman for the House Public Lands Committee said today that Senator Ernest W. McFarland, Democrat of Arlaona. will represent the Senate in joint hearings on the simplified elective gubernatorial bill for Puerto Rico. Dlchasaudlenclas to begin Junes 19
The Puerto Rico Drivers Association, presided over by senior Gerardo Ferrao. agreed yesterday, in a meeting held by its Executive Committee, to declare, in two weeks" time, a protest strike throughout the Island due to the disapproval of the bills that would benefit the driver class by Governor Plfiero. The drivers' leaders have met to consider the veto given by the Chief Executive to the" measures related to the case. In reporting yesterday on the agreements reached, Alberto Sanchez, secretary of said entity, said that in the coming week commissions of drivers will go out around the island to organize the strike. He added that the strike will cover public buses, buses and trucks. The duration of the strike was not disclosed by Mr. Sanchez, but he indicated that it is considered that it could last for 48 hours. > For more efforts that were made so that the Governor would understand the scope of Senate Bill 127, which determines the collegiality of the drivers, the Chief Executive gave him his pocket veto," said Sanchez. He added that the failure to sign this bill will result in a great unrest in the drivers' ranks "since the same (Continued on page 12) AGUADILLA WELCOMES LAW ON ITS PORT I received a phone call from the Mayor of Agu*. dlUa, Mr. Fernando Mtlán, "I want to express on behalf of the "Mayor of Agu*. dlUa, Mr. Fernando Mtlán, "Ir, who wished to express on behalf of "u people ol Immense rejoicing of the city aguadlllana by the triumph of the project that authorizes to rf|llaar the" works of the annual port. The Mayor informed that the city began to celebrate from the dawn the news and. to break the dawn a reveille accompanied da coheteo crossed the" street" in manifestation da Júbilo. The saflor Milán wishes to express to the name of Aguadilla the undying gratitude of its people to Governor Plfiero, to the legislators who sponsored the project and to EL MUNDO, which made its own from the first moment the campaign to save AguadlHa from the strangulation process that threatened the entire community with hunger. This newspaper shares as its own the Aguadlllano rejoicing and hopes that the door's ohna will be accelerated in tune with the need that the Infor, ma.
Interior is about to lose $4,000,000.00 Delay in easement process puts federal aid at risk । Work is on deadline Must be started by July 1 for allocation to benefit The Department of the Interior is accelerating efforts to close the legal negotiations and procedures that would culminate in the granting of the necessary easements for a series of road and rail projects that would be cut with federal and state funds, of the first combined allocation of $60,000,000 in cash. The Federal Government has made available to the Island Government $3,000, ' ÜUO, for this" projects to invest "# in 1946-1947, as the first contribution to the Island according to the" ilitpoaiclone" of the Federal Canetera" Act of 1947, the Island Government having deigned the balance. - This program, in equal proportion of aid, was extended for the first three years of the post-war period. The" fund", according to the dte- ; options of the Congreto law, must Invest"" during the year for which they have been provided". As far as Puerto Rico and the states benefiting from such a grant are concerned, there is a risk that they will not know how much money they would have received if the projects listed in the approved program for the first year had not been started by July 1, next year. For this reason, the Department of the Interior has been activating the final procedures in order to be able to announce the largest possible number of public "u- "enough" before the first of next July. I The "ubcomtelonado interim of the (Interior, "efior Angel (2) Silva, de- । clarified yesterday that "all" the "all" lo" trámite" L légale" are "iendo activated", in order to take advantage if possible in its . totality the allocation, both fede- ' ral and insular, of the first aflo". It is understood that the main obstacle to speeding up these procedures is the system currently in force for the acquisition of servlaum- ■ bre tracks by the Government. This I' requires the intervention of the Attorney General's Office, and should also be subject to the regulations of the Office of the Auditor. So far, there are funds to be disbursed amounting to about four million dollars from the federal and island allocation earmarked for the first fiscal year. Even if the projects to be covered were to be postponed to the second fiscal year, this funding is not allowed. "In accordance with federal law and the approved ln "ulare" law, carry this balance of non-invested funds to the next year's program, and return this money to its source of origin. Therefore, in the case of Puerto Rico, there is a risk that some four million dollars may not be invested in the current fiscal year, with $2,000,000 corresponding to federal funds and the same amount to island funds. However, the Acting Deputy Commissioner of the Interior, Senior An- - sel (2) Silva, expressed optimism that "the efforts we have been making will allow us to announce new work auctions" 5 (Continued on page 22) i The Governor signed this ; 487 bills - Of Ion 313 remainingii only five received Pinero's express veto The Governor received for his consideration, from the last regular legislature, a total of eight hundred bills" approved" by the two houses. Of that total, the Governor signed 487. figure which includes the last bill passed, the general spending budget for the next fiscal year. "The executive branch, therefore, did not sign 313 bills. 313 bill. They received the express veto of the Chief Executive "ólo cinco proyecto". r> botelllo veto, therefore, cupo to about 300 proyecto". The Governor issued "an express veto," which he returned to the Legislature after the Legislature had passed it," and while it was still in session, to the next bill: Amending Lesson 34 of the Municipal Law; amending Lesson 87 of the same Law; allocating $5,000 for the extract and alphabetical index of the literature of Puerto Rico; granting the payment of $582.50 to the senior Franclico Bergei Pacheco, for the service rendered to the Minimum Wage Board; and granting a pension to Dr. Manuel Quevedo Báez. The Legislature, while" io en(Continued on page 12)
i However, it contains $4,000,000 more appropriation for employees There was an increase in several items Comparison with funds appearing in the current island budget By RAFAEL SANTIAGO SOSA Editor of EL MUNDO The Government's budget for the next fiscal year, approved by the Governor of Puerto Rico before the legal term for the signing of bills expired on Thursday, amounts to $53,061,505 and exceeds the current budget of $43,643,145 by $9,117,360.117,360. The Bureau of the Budget reported yesterday that such increase in the operating expenses of the Government, contained in the new Budget Law, is due mainly to the implementation of the new classification and remuneration plan for public employees, and to the incorporation into the general budget of expenses, of numerous appropriations of special laws and public services which were maintained separately, and which were renewed year after year. In some cases," these laws were of a permanent nature, not requiring legislation to renew the appropriations they provided. A study of the action taken by the Governor reveals that this fiscal year, for the first time, a large number of special appropriations that remained dispersed, amounting to about six million dollars, were included in the Government's expense budget. Among the most important special allocations which have produced the apparent increase in operating expenses is the one earmarked for school maintenance expenses, amounting to SL500,000. Said funds were incorporated to the budget of the Department of Instruction, and were previously provided for by Act No. 76, approved last year. The Bureau of the Budget also explained that the new compensation plan for public employees, which establishes a basic salary according to the new elasiflcaclollaries granted, creates an additional expense for the next fiscal year of more than four million dollars. It was stated yesterday that at least two and a half million dollars will be used to cover increases for public school teachers. As of July 1, there will be no additional emergency compensation for government employees. It was reported that such compensation was eliminated with the implementation of the compensation plan, which sets new salary rates for government employees, in line with the new classification granted to the personnel. The new classification, in most cases, improves the salary level of the current budget. Although the current expenditure budget, at $43,643,145, is more than nine million dollars lower than the approved budget, it was reported that the Government's current operating expenses amount to $58,167,987. This is due to the fact that special appropriations laws, amounting to more than fourteen million dollars, have been enacted. Therefore, as a matter of fact, the Government's budget for the coming fiscal year contains no increase over that approved for the current year, because the special appropriations which are to remain in effect from July 1, next year, have been eliminated in the Budget Act passed last night. An idea of the appropriations approved for the coming fiscal year, as compared with the current appropriations, is given in the following figures: i. Tax Court, its budget is increased from $66,807 to $66,815. Civil Service Commission, (now Personnel Office, is lowered from $292,141 to $235,000. Industrial Alcohol Inspection, U.S. Department of the Treasury, is increased from $93,000 to *105,600. Puerto Rico Office in Washington, is increased from $150,000 to $195,000. Island Police, increased from $3,156,000 to $3,231,127. Island Fire Service, increased from $368,560 to $430,540. National Guard, decreased from $200,000 to $175,000. Municipal Prisons, the appropriation of $75,000 is maintained. Senate Insular, is increased from $269,045 to $305,045. House of Representatives, is increased from $281,214.62 to $326,491.62. Legislature's Translation Bureau, increased from *26,761.18 to $28,890. Department of Justice, Judicial Branch, increased from $1,470,591 to II,707,446. Office of the Governor, Including the Bureau of the Budget, is decreased from $254,330 to $223,270. Department of Justice, Executive Branch, is increased from 11,171,503 to 11,425,336. Office of the Executive Secretary, is increased from $86,630 to 192,210. Office of the Inspector of Cooperatives, attached to the Executive Secretary, is maintained at $25,000. Office of Administration of Boards of Examiners, is increased from $20,000 to 132,630. Planning Board, decrease from 1377,000 to 1285,000. Board of Building Appeals, decrease from 1377,000 to 1285,000. (Continued on page 22).