THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy with showers and thundershowers in the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 87; low, 77. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.97 inches of mercury. No indication of tropical disturbance.
44 Pages 5/
LA MAÑANA NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXVIII
® n^ r ®ÍL* a ■®cond class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, AUGUST 30, 1947
Sefior motorist, I didn't try that harrow, another one killed himself with it.
NUMBER 11053
Approved by ! Pinero election rule
i Mr. Martin >D. Dubner, dt- ■ rector of the Office of Plant and Physical Plant of the University of Puerto ■ Rico, reported yesterday that within . a short time the improvement of the buildings of the instl- . tuclon will begin in i said educational center, in a plan of repairs for which $100,000.00 Jen a reserve fund is available, which repre- . sents 2 percent of the value of ■ the assets of the UPR, as recently appraised. This maintenance and renovation plan, for which the reserve fund is earmarked, is distinct from the plan for permanent improvements proposed, which amounts to the sum of
Compendium of News
Authorizes 85,000 voters voided in 1944 not to register They will be placed on electoral roll They will make a written affidavit and may vote in 1948 The Governor yesterday approved a resolution of the Island Board of Elections, taken unanimously. 'establishing the rules so that! the Local Boards of Elections can more easily and expeditiously perform the function of law with respect to the authorization to vote in the 1948 election without having to re-register the 85,000 voters whose registration papers were cancelled by the Island Board in 1944. The Insular Board of Elections met on August 28 and approved the aforementioned resolution, which also received executive sanction yesterday. The Election Law, as last amended, in its Section 100 provides the procedure so that in the 1948 elections the persons in the registration petitions that were declared null and void and cancelled by the Insular Board of Elections in 1944 may exercise their right to vote. Section 100, which received the approval of all political parties represented in the Legislature, is intended to place on the electoral rolls and enable all those citizens whose registration petitions were declared invalid and cancelled in the last general election to vote in the 1948 election without the necessity of re-registering. The Insular Board of Elections approved a model document in ; which the petitioner whose registration ballot was annulled in 1944 must state his identity as the person whose name appears on the ballot annulled in 1944 that he says he would belong. The Island Board also adopted a model document in which the Local Board of Elections shall declare the petitioner whose ballot was annulled in 1944 to be a legal voter. On the rules relating to the procedure to be loeally followed, the Insular Board of Elecclonea resolved: "Immediately after a Local Board of Elections receives the registration petitions ! from said petitioners, the Chairman of said Local Board shall make a schedule of the meetings to be held by said Local Board in order that, within the term of I (30) thirty days from the date of the date the Local Board of Elections is to commence repairs to the ballot.
The ÜPR is to commence repairs and ¡i improvements at a cost of $100,000 J Plan of works shall be carried out from a reserve fund other than the one proposed in the sum of $236,470.
$236,470.00, which Includes the reorganization and alteration of the Industrial Arts Building for College and other repair work, to be carried out this year at the UPR. Mr. Dubner. Jos Engineers Enrique Vilella and Luis Duprey; the Superintendent of Workshops, Mr. Eplfanlo Rosario, and the Superintendent of the Cleaning Division, Mr. Rodríguez Pérez, from the Physical Plant Office, are touring the different university buildings to inspect them in order to proceed with the necessary repairs. The first building inspected was the Hostos building, and in the course of the next week the inspections of the other buildings will continue. Once the inspections are completed, the repair and maintenance plan will be put into effect. On the recommendation of Mr. Dubner's office, an appraisal of the University's buildings was conducted this morning. Mr. Dubner, Comptroller Jose M. Feliciano and Engineer Lula Duprey appraised the University's buildings and grounds, after which a reserve fund representing 2 percent of the appraised value of the property was created. The property was appraised at $5,000,000.00, which brings the reserve fund to $100,000.00. The reserve fund is to be used for building improvements and repairs. Previously, the system used was to allocate several line items for improvements, each one independent. Now a single line item is created, against which funds are drawn to carry out repairs. The previous allocations were spent in the fiscal year and if any funds were collected, they were passed on to the Treasury for the next fiscal year.
New decrease in water supply recorded - - - - New York education authorities prepare plan to remedy the problems of Puerto Rican students in that city. - - - The UPR office in Washington has been eliminated for the next fiscal year. - - - Riflero approves voting rule related to 85,000 voters annulled in 1944, - * * * The Governor will make efforts to obtain more federal funds for highways. - - ♦ - New metropolitan tona highway regulatory plan will cost! Government 828,3,000. - * * The President and family will leave maflana from Wáahlngton for Brazil, where they will arrive lunea afternoon. Traman will address a plenary session of the PetfÓ. polis conference; and on Friday, 8, before the legislative chambers of Brazil. * * " A check from the Island Treasurer for the sum of 81,280,000 was lost yesterday to an employee of the Waterworks Service. He immediately notified the Police. - The cost of feeding Japan amounts to $680,000 per day, it is revealed in the United States.
The Territorial Director of the Federal Office of Rentals, Lic. Jorge Benitez Gautier, yesterday authorized a note explaining the provisions of the new federal rentals law regarding the changes in fees for furnished and unfurnished apartments. Mr. Benítez Gautier explained that the old federal rent regulation allowed landlords to increase the amount of rents and set new maximum fees when converting to fully furnished housing.
Federal law prohibits increases in the rent for furnished housing.
The new law prohibits increases in the rent for fully-furnished housing. Under the new law, which went into effect on July 1, 1947, this practice has been prohibited, according to Benitez. Benitez Gautier further said that under the circumstances expressed, landlords cannot increase the maximum rent of such dwellings converted from unfurnished to furnished unless authorized by an order of the federal office of in(Continued on page 28)
16 die in Patillas epidemic
Municipal Hospital is full to capacity; Fajardo District Hospital is used Outbreak already affects youth and adults Measures are taken to avoid spreading to neighboring towns by tris HERNANDEZ *O "TN0 EL MUNDO Staff Writer Yesterday the epidemic situation in Patillas continued to worsen, as fifty-eight cases of pernicious malaria were registered without counting the ambulatory cases that were still undetermined. Deaths amounted to sixteen. Young people and adults are currently affected, as well as children, in whom the outbreak of pernicious malaria began. The Patillas Municipal Hospital was full to capacity, making it necessary for the Health Department authorities to determine that new cases be sent to the Fajardo District Hospital. Control measures are being taken so that the malaria outbreak does not spread to the towns near Patilúg. Dr. José A. Alum, Deputy Commissioner of Public Health, when questioned by this editor, indicated that since Wednesday, measures are being taken both in the urban and rural areas of Patillas, to control the epidemic outbreak that has been registered in that town. The general measures being taken, according to Dr. Alum, are the spraying of DDT.The general measures being taken, according to Dr. Alum, are the spraying of DDT, which is being carried out by brigades of health inspectors to kill the mosquito larvae breeding sites; the determination by the entomologist, Mr. Garcia Perez, of which class of anopheline mosquitoes is the vector that has spread the disease and the use of a mobile laboratory to work on the analysis of blood samples, so that those who are affected by the disease, resulting in positive cases, are sent to the District Hospital of Fajardo, Dr. Alum explained, when asked what drugs are being used on the patients, that all kinds of antimalarials are being used, especially arsenic, which is one of the most recent drugs acquired by the Department of Health for malaria cases. The Health Subcommittee also said that for some time now they have been working on malaria control in the town of Patillas, where the Department of Health has some equipment that is used to spray arsenic on mosquito breeding sites and larvae, as well as to work on the traps, where the live mosquitoes are caught, and through this work it is determined if the breeding sites are abundant and what type of mosquitoes are present. According to what Dr. Alum informed us, the action radius of the anopheline mosquito is two miles, and taking that into consideration, the control work has been extended to a radius of four miles, so that the epidemic does not spread to the nearby towns of Maunabo, Yabucoa, San Lorenzo and Guayama. On the other hand, when we contacted the Patillas Medical Officer, Dr. Garcia Camilo, he informed us by telephone that Dr. Ramon R. Rios, Acting Chief of the Public Health Division, Dr. Abel de-Juan, epidemiologist, and two other doctors from the Federal Government, who are in Patillas, have been there since the beginning of the year. (Continued on page 28)
Riflero promised teachers to consult Truman on who has the power to appoint Chief of Instruction. - ... - Additional scholarship fund allocated. - Preliminary report on the Melbourne, Florida air disaster is given. - - - Homes program to be submitted to Planning. - All island personnel - excluding only emergency personnel - are granted vacation entitlement. Eighteen people have already died, victims of the pernicious malaria epidemic that is affecting Patillas. - With apparent strong support Argentina tries to limit the hemispheric defense treaty to aggressions within the security zone. Wáshlngton objects. - According to Sol L. Descartes, the trade agreements adopted at the Geneva Conference do not harm the island. - Federal law prohibits furnished housing fee increase. - - - UPR to begin repairs and improvements at a cost of 8100,000. a The Commerce Department does not believe that charging veterans will stimulate a boom in purchases.
Will consult Truman 1 on Instruction.
■E ■ W W W ■Mi'M**flHM' Governor Jesus T. Riflero promised yesterday to a committee of maes- ' tros, that he will raise an inquiry to ' Truman as to who has the power, at this time to appoint the Chief of Instruction. 1 I I i Governor so I I ' promised the teachers > It will go up through I the Attorney General. Unfreeze vacancies 'i Governor Pifiero told yesterday ' a commission of the Association of 1 . Teachers' Association that he will submit an inquiry to the Attorney General of the United States to determine who has the authority to make the appointment of the Commissioner of Public Education of Puerto Rico, in the light of the amendments made to the island's Organic Act. This commission reported yesterday. It was composed of the President of the Association, Mr. Luía Muñlz Souffront; its President and legal advisor, Mr. Virgilio Brunet; and a member of its Board of Directors, Mr. Lewis C. Richardson. Richardson. The Governor informed this । group, also, that he had given instructions to unfreeze the appointments to fill a certain number of positions in the Department of Instruction, which it was first thought not to fill, in order to achieve an economy that would partially offset the deficit of more than one million dollars in the budget of Instruction. On this matter, it will be recalled that the Bureau of Pre- 1 ---------- assumption, in agreement with the Department of Instruction, has recommended to the then Acting Governor, Dr. Juan A. Pona, that such appointments be frozen for the time being; and that *1 Dr. Pona has been informed that it was resolved not to fill a number of positions in the new curricula for teaching I H (Continued on page 14),
Argentina tries to limit scope of hemispheric defense treaty; Washington threatened with defeat
Water supply has registered a new decrease The amount available is 17.9 million gallons, 16 million less than the normal figure Santa Rosa pump is still not working. At UPR the problem has been averted
The hope that water service would be available to the region this weekend was dashed yesterday when Aqueduct Service Director Sergio Cuevas reported that the flow of the Piedras and Bayamón rivers had once again dropped significantly, causing a decrease in the volume of water available for general use. The amount available yesterday was 17.9 million gallons of water per day, 16 million gallons lower than the normal 34 million gallons per day. The decline has been a little more than two million gallons a day, since the utility had been counting at m*dlv two weeks with a flow of 20 million gallons a day. "The situation has become a crisis again," - commented sefior Cuevas. ~ The latest rains have not benefited the rivers that supply the metropolitan aqueduct. This makes it entirely difficult to increase the hours of rationing, as we had hoped". It has not yet been possible to put into operation the pump which was damaged at the site known as Santa Rosa. The Director of the Service informed that it is in the process of being repaired and that if it is put into operation as it is at present, there is a risk of rendering this equipment useless. i Mr. Cuevas said that the rule has been adopted to wait for the result of the rains during the present weekend, when the schools will remain closed until next Tuesday. He did not make any predictions as to what action will be taken regarding the closing of schools if the drought continues in the Cidra and Aguas Buenas regions, affecting the water supply. However, he said that should an even more critical situation arise, he would keep the public informed, through EL MUNDO, of the scope of the situation and how it will be addressed. The situation in the public schools, as reported by EL MUNDO, is quite critical in terms of hygiene, due to the lack of water in these schools during the afternoon and evening hours, when hundreds of students are studying. However, the problem at the University has been practically solved, as reported yesterday by the Director of the Physical Plant, Mr. Martin M. Dubner. This has been made possible by the installation of drones with a capacity of 55 gallons of water in the buildings of the institution, a reserve of the liquid that is used for the cleaning of the sanitary facilities after the water service is suspended. In addition, care has been taken to leave the physical plant facilities in the Hostos buildings open. Pedreira and Janer buildings open, so that sufficient water can accumulate in the previous toilets, and so that the water can be used to flush the toilets after the water service is suspended.
Warner explains how the cost of gasoline has risen Since the OAP ceased, supply sources have decreased by 3 cents The price of gasoline at the supply source of the companies operating on the island has increased by three cents since the price control ceased, according to the president and general manager of the Standard Oil Company of Puerto Rico, Senior G. S. Warner, who explained yesterday to EL MUNDO why the local companies have had to increase their sales price to retailers. On the other hand, Mr. Warner revealed that some distributors who still sell gasoline at 25 cents per gallon, derive a profit of 3 cents per gallon, while those who raised the price to 26 cents have a profit margin of four cents. Mr. Warner explains the situation in a letter to the Editor of EL MUNDO, which reads as follows: "I have just read the editorial entitled, "El Precio de la Gasolina", in the edition of that newspaper corresponding to this date, and I hasten to make certain clarifications, with a view to achieving the best approach gives this matter on the part of public opinion. "I understand the interest of that newspaper in bringing to its editorial columns matters such as the present one, which directly and indirectly affect a large sector of our population, and at the same time I consider that it is the duty of the Compartía that I represent to explain simply and in a clear and definite manner, the reasons for the increase in the price of gasoline, so that the public opinion may accurately understand the reasons for the same. "The increases that this Company makes in its prices are based exclusively on the increases in costs that are made to us at the source of supply, as well as on increases in maritime freight and in operating costs. When selling prices were last fixed by the Office of Price Administration in June 1946, our price in the U.S. was based solely on tariff protection.
' us in tariff protection, dl- ■ jo today Sol Lula Descarte," of the 1 Island Planning Board. : Back in the United States after nearly five months of absence 1 in Europe, Descartes said he is convinced that a trend toward freer international trade has already begun. "That means," he told a Press con- . ferencla, "that we must , prepare to compete in the markets of the United States and other । zones with less protection in the form of quotas, tariffs, subsidies . and other means." i Descartes acted as adviser on terrlto- . trade problems! particularly problem" by- , torrlquefios, of the American delegation to the Gl- . nehra Conference "obro convention" of reciprocl- । trade and on the proposed . world trade organization. . Rum, sugar, tobacco, pineapple," needle products" and other" products of Puerto Rico are among the items" on which reciprocal trade with Cuba and 16 other countries have been discussed. (Of particular interest to Puer- . to Rico, he indicated "discard," "on e "o" . product" -- such as rum, sugar and tobacco -- which both Puerto Rico and Cuba sell in the U.S. market. Because of the aran- . celes or quotas on that" products, . Puerto Rico can compete favorably with Cuba. Descartes said that although the trade agreements are currently in their final form, the terms of the agreements are confidential and not open for discussion at this time. He said, however, that his belief ■ is that none of the commercial 1 agreements would be detrimental to Puerto Rico. 1 The proposed national trade Inte" ■ organization has as its - fundamental purpose the eatablecl- ! miento of freer Internaclo1 nal trade in order to increase world production and consumption and maintain overall employment. Delegates to the Geneva conference have been working on the drafting of a world trade charter to be approved in its final form, and changed if necessary, at an international conference to be held in Havana, Cuba, in November. The process of achieving a more Uber international trade, as envisioned by the proponents" of the international trade organization, said Descarte", should be , gradual. "No one is proposing to eliminate all" । । trade barriers' overnight," he said. "The process serla, for example, to reduce the" barriers and dlscrlminatory systems of preferences gradually, so that appropriate scconomic adjustment can be made without cau(Continued on page 28)
The housing program is to be submitted to the Board of Plans Iglesias reports that a memorial has been delivered to the Governor on this matter. - They believe it is likely that a meeting will be called to discuss the plan.
All the projects for the construction of the 10,000 low cost housing program, whose contract was awarded by the Government to the Long Construction Corporation in a meeting held recently in Fortaleza, will have to be submitted to the study and approval of the Planning Board. This body has been working on the study of all aspects of this program, according to the Acting Chairman of the Board, sefior Santiago Iglesias, Jr. Asked yesterday if the Board had participated in the final discussion of the program, held at La Fortaleza last Thursday, Iglesias said that the Board has been working on all aspects of the program.
Fortaleza last Thursday, Sefior Iglesias said that he had not been summoned for this event. However, he noted that on two previous occasions the Board has participated in discussions on the plan, advising the Governor on several of its most important aspects. "We have drafted a memorandum which we will submit to Governor Plfiero,'' said Mr. Iglesias, ``which covers all aspects of the bonus and planning of this vast program of homes. This memorandum has been drafted at the request of the Executive Branch itself. In addition, we have discussed with the Long Conatruetlon Company matters related to the program. Iglesias said that according to the provisions of the Planning Act, all projects for the construction of the homes must be previously approved by the Board. As of yesterday, the Board had not filed any request for land subdivision or urbanization of land for these projects. At present, topographic studies and land surveys are being carried out in the area surrounding the San Juan metropolitan area, and land studies have already been done in other parts of the Island. The Acting Chairman of the Planning Board added that there is great interest on the part of the Government to carry out this vast e-'Mal (Continued on page 28).
SIX MORE NATIONAL DEFENSE CHIEFS Washington; August 29 (FU)-President Traman today announced six appointments" to the new unified national defense organization, including that of Major General William Henry Draper, Jr. for Under Secretary of War. The other appointments are those of Arthur M. HUI to Chairman of the National Security Resources Board; Thomas IL HarSrave, to Chairman of the Board of Ordnance; Sydney William Souers, to Executive Secretary of the National Security Council; Rear Admiral Roscoe H. Hlllenkoetter. Director of Central Intelligence Service and Major General Alfred Graenther, Director of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Marshall departs with General Monteiro JIPI - 11 -J ■ *1" ' ' ' K ■ X Í>* v ■ '.ti Secretary of State. George C. Marshall (left), seflala something of Interest General Pedro Goes Monteiro (center), a member of the Brazilian delegation to the Inter-American Defense Conference, during a horse show in Quitandlnha, Brazil. Seflora Marshall is shown on the right (Associated Press photo).
i 1 No harm to Island h Geneva conventions, says Sol Descartes Puerto Rican Economiata inata to increase > agricultural and industrial production and to depend less on tariff protection rnr rA1 'i, HÁRRISON > United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, Aug. 29. (PU)-The Puerto Rican people tlena - to prepare from now on to depend more on an au1 ment in efficiency in industrial and agricultural production, v me-
WWSVS" S41WMWAAU4 JT agélVviUl ¿f ÍI1W" New federal highway fund to be requested The Executive Branch will make the request. - The matter was submitted to him by Jiménez The Commissioner of the Interior, "ertor Jorge J. Jljnénez López, declared that Governor Plftero will take the necessary steps to secure an additional allocation of funds for the federal highway program, to be developed with a participation of $3,000,000 from the Federal Government, during the period 1948-1949. Mr. Jimenez said that he discussed with the Governor, among other matters, the one related to the road plan for the next fiscal year, indicating that the importance of this work required that the Island Government fully contribute its share for the continuation of these works. Such Insular contribution refers to the annual allocation that the Government of Puerto Rico must make in order to be able to use $3,000,000 annually allocated by the Federal Highway Administration" for these works. The insular allocation shall be equal to the amount contributed by said federal agency. For the next fiscal year, the Island Legislature did not provide the necessary funds and it is expected that such action will be taken when the Legislature meets in its next regular session. This matter was discussed by Mr. Jimenez with Governor PJfiero in a conference held last (Continued on page 28).
O'Connor warns Jos of beet plans of American producers The prediction that the Island's sugar industry will have to reduce itself in the near future to alluvial lands, and that it will have to resort to the use of revolutionary mechanization methods in all phases, from the sowing of the letter to the sowing of the cane, from planting to cutting and hauling, in order to successfully face the consequences" of large-scale production of sugar beet on the mainland, has been made by the Consultant of the Puerto Rico Office in Washington, Senior Donald O'Connor, in a document sent to the Economics Department of the Experiment Station. According to the aforementioned document by Mr. O'Connor, who in the past held the positions of Professor of Economics at New York City College, and Economic Analyst at the Office of Price Administration in Washington, a true revolution "has taken place in the sugar beet industry in the United States, being ready for a prompt and gigantic expansion, thanks to mechanization and the utilization of large extensions of land in the West, which will be exploited by means of adequate irrigation. The "efior O'Connor indicates that the lands which are not alluvial, or which are mountainous, should "er (Continued on p. 12)
Would not force nations to attack outside zone Argentine delegation won strong support in secret sessions Vandenberg obi eta nlan Buenos Aires
Cannot distinguish, he says, between crime outside and crime within for R. H, SHACWrORD correspondent of the United Press August 29, ' "'was today threatened with defeat at *" the Inter-American Conference when Argentina suddenly sought to exclude from the provisions of the proposed defense treaty any attack against United States territories outside the hemispheric security zone. If Argentina - a Me "u'* wn "a"-'"n at the Conference - would argue that any attack against troops" ner. r,rana * ® n x per example, by a foreign anchor, it would not be considered an aggression within the terms" of the treaty. "nlí! The treaty now provides that. 5? a "♦-qw centers an American radon within !a hemispheric security dinner .all" the 21 republics "would be obliged to j"' ?' '- h,h,eltrt "taque fúer" de la tona, pare en terFlf "r j ,a effective Jurisdlel 6 ? (,e . a ® nac ' ón of! treaty, the" other" would be obliged" to consult it on measure" poalble" to take. Argentina would favor the complete elimination of that obligation. The "dramatic and dramatic move by Argentina - a fact "given that the Argentine delegation succeeded in obtaining "a strong and pivotal support for it in secret meetings" with other delegates - was made in Committee Number Two of the Conference. The Committee "met for what was urged to be a routine approval of the treaty clauses dealing with aggressions. Because of! Argentina's motion, "1 Committee discussed for about four hours" and recessed baits 1ns nine da asta noehe to decide 1a question. F1 Senator Arthur H, Vandenberg, Republican (fe Michigan, State representative" on Committee Number Do", pmnunded an anaslnnado speech pleading lo" delecndo" defeat the amendment a" gontlna. "We do not nnd to establish dlstlnelones between crime committed inside i, zone v crime outside committed outside Ja zone," dHo Vandenberg. "Argentina establishes a geographic limitation on the definition of aggression. We don't like geographic limitations on erlmen." Vandenberg asked the Argentine delegate to explain what he meant by limiting the definition of aggression. "Re consider an attack on the American crowns in Germany as an attack on this continent?" asked Cromlnaa, the Argentine delegate. "No nation present can avoid the fundamental obligation it has within the United Nations to oppose aggression wherever it occurs," Vandenberg reiterated. "We cannot encapsulate that obligation in this treaty even if we try. F1 security zone concept merely means that American nations assume additional responsibilities-he repeats with emphasis "additional"-when an attack occurs within the zone." He quoted 1a wording from the first article of the treaty: "An armed attack by any state against an American state shall be considered an attack against all." "IF that is not what we mean to imply, then we say nothing," Vandenberg added. "We cannot distinguish between crime committed inside the zone and crime committed outside the zone. All we have done here is to distinguish between procedures that we will follow after attacks occur inside and outside the zone, and when the attack occurs outside, the only obligation is to consult." The thrust of Vandenberg's speech was that Argentina's proposal not only violated the spirit of the treaty but also hindered it from a practical point of view, and was also a violation of the U.N. charter. As soon as the news of the disagreement between the United States and Argentina spread, the Committee room was filled to capacity with delegates. The American delegates were caught sleeping. They took the situation so seriously that they said it could jeopardize the prospects for ratification of the treaty by the U.S. Senate.