THE MONDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy with scattered showers, becoming mostly cloudy with showers in the evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High 80; low 70. Barometric prealon at sea level, at 4:30 p.m., 29.93 inches* of mercury.
44 Pages 5/
D.IARIO LA MAÑANA
aso xxvni
Entered a* second cla*a matter, Post Office, San Juan, P, R
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 27, 1947
Automoviliata", demoatremo" the traditional shovel cut.
NUMBER 11167
Pinero makes explanation to teachers
Says legal* and moral* problems prevented him from appointing a commissioner Governor-elect believes it is obvious that this was the intention of the Congress when it passed the law Affirming that a "legal and moral problem" has motivated his attitude of not appointing the Puerto Rico Instruction Board, the Governor, Mr. Jmús T. Piñero, affirmed that "a problem" has motivated his attitude of not appointing a Commissioner. Piñero, affirmed anlr lo" mana, trn" d* la ImIh munido" yesterday in assembly, that "nadir más que yo atentente rl desen rl honorable that rl Governor of Punrln Rico appoint the Comlslonado.of Instruction of Puerto Rico; no more than I feel the compulsion to put an end to the drama of the pedagogical direction of our people." To conclude the speech delivered by Governor Piftero, at the inaugural session of the teachers' assembly which began at the Santurce High School: "For the second time, in my capacity as Governor of Puerto Rico, I address you on the occasion of your annual assembly. In December 194, my appearance before you had the significance of coinciding with a moment of struggle by the Puerto Rican teachers in their quest for justice, and with a step forward by the Puerto Rican people in their tenacious determination to conquer the goals of democratic freedom. A man from Puerto Rico, who had been chosen by the majority of the people to represent the island in the United States Congress, had just been appointed Governor. Thus I, whom destiny chose to articulate that reality of progress, was able to address you with the particular accent of VWúnldad áusitre. in com ***** An of its problems* and purposes. more due to the lights that I could have, by the natural identification that credited my life and my origin, carved in the entieña of the people and arose from the entraba of the people. The Puerto Rican teaching profession and the Puerto Rican people have achieved these aspects of justice. "This year 1047 presents a ! The right is assured that the Commissioner of Instruction of Puerto Rico will be a person chosen by the people of Puerto Rico, through the Governor elected by the people, with the support of the senators elected by the people. That demomuii¡a reality constituted, in my judgment. The most solid support we have obtained for the forging of our destiny. Now our responsibility is greater and, in u "t< s, teachers of Puerto Rico, we bear the greatest weight of that responsibility. "At this point I believe it my duty to offer you a dlreite explanation of the motivations for my attitude in not appointing the Commissioner <le Instruction of Puerto Rico. I have not been able to do so because of the legal and moral reasons. No one more than I had the compulsion to put an end to the drama of the whorish, góglr* leadership of our people. But I have not thought it wise to wrap my yearning, which is yours, in the marnñ" of a complicated legal situation. And, moreover, I have not thought it honorable to do so when I am aware of the legislative intent which gave way to the right to appoint our Commissioner of Instruction and which linked it to the right to elect our Governor. A new order of things is created in Puerto Rico by the election by Puerto Ricans of their Governor. Perhaps, given the technical provisions of the present Organic Act of Puerto Rico, there is a legal basis for a Governor appointed by the President of the United States to appoint, in turn, the Comlilonado de Instrucclón of Puerto Rico, but obviously that was not the intent of Congress. Morally the situation is best illustrated by supposing, for example, that I were not the Governor of Puerto Rico, but a person who, when appointed by the President of the United States*, had no connection with the democratic de. "eo of our people. Does that Governor, by appointing the Commissioner of Instruction of Puerto Rico, express the attainment of the fundamental right to determine for ourselves the "goals and objectives of our educational system? No; that right will be mine when it is exercised through the Governor whom the bloc itself elects with its* direct vote*. The fact that my appointment of Gober, nadar resembles a "direct election of the Puerto Rican people does not justify ignoring the dlfer /neta. Let us restrain our impatience so that a moral glow illuminates the appointment of Puerto Rleo's first Commissioner of Instruction chosen and approved Ii briefly by lo* Puerto Ricans." "Visualizing the road ahead" am(Continued on pg. 14)
The teachers' assembly began its work.
r / 'Jarr Or fa nA BmKt ¿i \ w
M mr mr prealdenclal of the general HMamblra of teachers which coincided yesterday at Central High School. At the front, from left to right, are Virgilio Brunet, Vice-President of the Teachers' Association; Jesus T. Plñern, Governor of Puerto Rico; Luis Muñís Snuff ront, President of the Association; Felisa Rincón, Administrator of the Capital; Frandsen Collaan. Commissioner of Instruction, and Elisa Mnra de Gadea, Director of Schools of the Capital. At the back, in the same order, Messrs. Lewis C. Rlchnrdson, Marcelino Canino and Manuel Lóp*" de Victoria (Photograph from EL MUNDO).
The bill on tax exemption for shares issued by domestic and foreign entities* The bill on tax exemption for shares of corporations has already been prepared, according to the Vice President of the Senate, Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones, who has presided over the meetings held by the Permanent Legislative Commission on Industries, informed yesterday. Mr. Quiñones informed that the bill prepared "responds to the consensus of opinion of leaders of the legislative and executive branches of the Government, as to the approval of legislation that would remedy the situation created by the resolution of the Court of Appeals, declaring the shares of corporations subject to taxation, which has been the object of numerous comments by spokesmen of the industry and commerce. The draft prepared contains a provision whereby the "contribuclone" that in the past have been accrued on shares" of corporations are condoned. "This provision," said Mr. Quiñones, "will be the object of careful discussion in the caucus of the legislators of the congressional majority, since the purpose that determines it seems to be subject to different criteria." Mr. Quiñones has held discussions on the content of the bill with the President of the Senate and head of the majority party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, as well as with other government officials and legislative leaders. The bill also includes a provision exempting from taxation the shares of foreign corporations whose main business activity is carried out in Puerto Rico, so that the tax exemption would apply equally, if the bill is approved, both to the shares omitted by domestic corporations, as well as to the shares omitted by foreign corporations whose business is mainly based in the Island. Mr. Quiñones made the" (Continued on p. 14")
The political reform gave the theme ¡ for the initial speeches Muñiz said the Association will ask for the approval of a law that would make it obligatory to teach English as a subject and other subjects in Spanish By Marcelino Flore* Rodrigue* L* trigóMmosr.xtH "samble* annual dr i* Asociación dr Maestro* de Puerto Ríen, It began its" work" at" ten o'clock "yer morning, in the Rr'tox hall of the High School of Santurce. From very early in the morning, delegates were arriving, who were attended by a Co- ■ m41á d* Credenciales, with sufficient personnel ■ --- - - - -- --
sufficient purely to lighten the Identification of the miamos. At ten o'clock, the delegates sang e| hymn of the Teachers Association. President Luis Muñiz Souffront invited the Guests* of Honor and * I" Board of Directors of I* organization to the stage. Seated on the proscenium were Governor Je "ú" T. Plftero; ei "cftor Francisco Collazo, Acting Commissioner of Instruction; Mrs. Felisa Rincón and Mrs. Elisa Mora de Gadea, Administrator of the Capital and School Director of San Juan, respectively; Mr. Pedro Court, President of the Liga Insular de Padres y Maestro" de Puerto Rico; Mr. Virgilio Brunet, Vice President of the Teachers Association, and the" 20 other directors. Governor Piftero's speech, which appears on the front page of this issue, was followed by that of Commissioner Collazo, who reported on the administrative measures taken this year to "improve the guiding and directing function of the central organization of the Department of Education. In his extensive speech to the teachers' assembly, Mr. Collazo affirmed that "the approval of the Charter reform marks an epoch in our political development, signaling a new direction for the educational mission. The measure allows us to exercise autonomy so that the education of Puerto Ricans" can develop within a close link to our social and ethnological reality. "The efforts," continued Collazo, "tend to improve services by taking advantage of the best human resources of the best resources of the teaching profession. With this purpose in mind," added the Acting Commissioner of Instruction, "agencies are created whose primary mission is to improve the quality of the services provided to teachers.
If the recommendation of the Just* de Planlfi. (■ation to create a general fund from all the savings in the budget to cover the cost of raises* for employees* is implemented, the problem of the lack of funds for this purpose is expected to be solved in the near future. The President of the Federation of Island Government Employees, Mr. Justo Pastor Lozada, yesterday expressed his satisfaction with the recommendation made by said Board to Governor Piñero and the Budget Bureau, and indicated that he was pleased that the Board was guided by the recommendations made by the Federation on the matter. The Board's specific recommendation to Governor Piñero states the following: ["It has been estimated that the annual cost of an in-grade increase plan for public employees would cost about $1,750,000 per year. ! 000 a year, We recognize that such a ! plan is" very' fair and desirable. However, because of scarce resources, it is not possible to make an appropriation for this purpose from the General Fund. Such a plan should be implemented from the current savings of the General Expenditure Budget, i.e., from the unobligated proceeds of the General Fund. "unobligated proceeds of । lo" operating expenses. He added that this should be by joining all the departmental surpluses in one item, in order to attend to all the departments". Mr. Pastor Lozada said that so far, the plan to increase public employees has not been able to be implemented mainly because no funds were allocated for such purpose. He said that the Budget Law contains a provision for each department to use the surplus" in salaries* for each fiscal year for such purpose, but that the seal has not been able to "oluclonate the problem of the" increases, since there is no common fund to receive all* of it".
Compendium of News
May agüe* and Santurce start today at Escobar for* first round playoff; leader Aguadilla defends game-and-a-half lead in water* and San Juan plays in Ponce. American ambassador in Panama reported resignation. Anderaon orders hoha's corredote* to deliver him the trafficker's letter". - Economist of the Unemployment Committee collects data" in the* downtown*, "obr* d**ocupactón in I* lona cañera. Franco quotes the Council of Ministers*, in connection with the request of the Parliament that "e de*, tltuya to Suance*. Dr. Charle* Muulcato is on the Island with the purpose of carrying out a study on "health and emigration". - C* - Harriman summons the steel industry to a meeting on the 3rd. - Me Plftero Insists in his motion before the Supreme, on the impeachment of Grillasen. Alleges Municipal Assembly acted capriciously in acquitting him of charges. "The Permanent Legislative Commission on Industries prepared a bill exempting the stock from taxation. . . Puerto Rico ended up muddying *its sugar quota of the 1M7 tax. Planning favors the Banco de Fomento's extension of loans to the cooperative.
loans to the* cooperative*. * ♦ ♦ ft Augleren plan to eubrlr 1o* increase* to employee" in "ulare". s< - ft Plñero declares before maantio* that prohjem** of legal and moral character have prevented him from nominating the Commissioner of Instruction. * . * The Department of Commerce believes the Marshall Plan can get the Cuban sugar market. - - - - Senator Malone calls for review of U.S. relations with Latin America. * * * Charlea T. Dockarty unveils plans for tourism development in the Caribbean. * - * * *A work* has*begun*on*the*theater's*a*mbl' a "ambl' a. The Governor and the Commissioner of Instruction took part in the *e*hugural. * * * The Governor considered the idea of convening a round table to discuss problems affecting the sugar industry. - ft - The Governor has not yet decided whether to convene the* Chambers in extraordinary session. - Plñero may reconsider the Orlando Mánde* case in light of the recent decision in the case of the Mayor of Ponee. * * * * Investigation to be extended in case of student* suspended* at Unlveraldad, Creen Snyder to recommend to Truman I* reduction of contribution to work Revenue.
Insist on Grillasca's impeachment.
Piñero rn motion before Supreme censures lo* aAAmhleíñta* ponceños Says limited to justify mayor Believes Supreme Court *was based on erroneous conclusion of councilors Cor ANGEL CRUZ CRUZ Redactor do EL MUNDO El Gohoi nador do Puoiio Rho, dnn Jr "iis T. Piftcio. The Puerto Rico Supreme Court has again asked the Supreme Court to dismiss the Mayor of Ponee, Andrés Grillasca, by asking our highest court of justice to reconsider the ruling issued on Friday of last week, in which he was exonerated of his duties as Mayor of Ponee, in which "1 Mr. Grillase* was exonerated of each and every one of the 17 charges brought against him. The motion for reconsideration, which reached the Court yesterday morning, was signed by Governor Piftero and by his abosado," Carlos Sanlana Becerra, Acting Attorney General; José C. Anonte, Special Attorney General; and Guillermo A. Gil, Deputy Attorney Geneml. The signing of the motion for reconsideration by Governor Pinero is an innovation, since in these cases interlocutory motions and other pleadings are almost always signed by the petitioner's attorneys alone. - The 22-page typewritten backpack on legal paper discusses one by one the 17 counts and abounds in the various con*ideiaclone*s by which the Court is urged to grant its ruling, in discussing the counts included between numbers 3 and 10, related" to the" purchase" of" materiale" rie" rie eonítrureión made" by the Municipality of Ponce to I" firm Garrí* y Clntrón, the Supreme Court entered to con "ider "r "i such" purchases were for a public work riel Municipio. for which a public subatta is required. To this effect, the Court discussed what, in its opluna "public work". On the Court's discussion of these charges, Governor Piftero states the following in the motion for reconsideration: "With all due respect to the Court, the plaintiff understands that this is a very easy problem that has become difficult. Whatever was ultimately the nature of the street repair project in Ponce, the plain, simple and plain fact is that the Municipality provided the stone, which it acquired with money from the Municipality and it was, therefore, richer for the Mayor to acquire it at auction as required by law. If he had given it to the. maeenarla, or for a project whose nature was easily dolerminada, the situation would not have changed one iota. All the rest is but a justification of why the law was not complied with". In the second" paragraph" of the motion, Governor Piñero, through his" stifled, alluded to the Ponce Municipal Assembly, criticizing its resolution to acquit Mr. Grillanca. The Governor accuses the Ponce Municipal Assembly of having acted "capriciously" as well as with notable partiality. After stating that there are exceptions to the general rule that higher courts will not intervene in findings of fact made by lower courts, the motion reads: "The record in this case demonstrates beyond doubt that the Ponce Municipal Assembly made findings and conclusions of fact that are simply capricious and could not have responded to any desire other than the desire of the Municipal Assembly to exonerate the mayor. The moral position of the resident mayor was not to testify before the Assembly, despite the delicate public administration issues involved in this proceeding. A defendant has "1 right of (Continued *on page 28)
Caro Nominated For Transportation Authority Director
The Board of Directors of the Transportation Authority met yesterday morning and accepted the resignation tendered by "eftor Jose G. Bloise, from the position of Admlpiatron General of said government agency, and appointed * "eftorite E "tella Draper, executive assistant of )" Authority to, fill the position on an interim basis, effective January 1, pending the appointment of Seftor Bloise's successor, As "e will recall, Seftor ñloise resigned his position during the previous meeting of 1* Board of Directors at which "e agreed to recognize the Jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission "over 1* Authority and to cooperate with the Commission so that dlch* jurisdiction would be exercised without difficulty for* the benefit of the general public. Mr. Rloia* always "-stated his opposition to this measure" and fought it in the "anger of the Board. The day after an agreement was reached between the Board of Directors and the Public Service Commission to begin implementing such jurisdiction, Mr. Bloi "e sent his resignation to the Board, which was not considered until yesterday.
a w 1 1 k W í -ie. SALVADOR V. CARO Mr. Blois* intends to leave office on January 1 to engage in private business. The Board did not consider at "u meeting yesterday le" candidate" who have been "i*ndo mentioned" to fill *1 office of Admiiitrator (Continued on p. 14).
New York under scourge of terrible snowstorm
INITIATE IN JANUARY HOUSING IN PONCE PONCE, December ?", (By Miguel Rivera! - A ni dlad<>" January <mm*n "aiá h build "* *n Pone* ¡a bnirlad" Santiago Iglqsla" according Inform* today the firm <1* rontrntlatn" Gonaál** Seí-,|o-Texldor, to whom "- b'" ndjudicó I" auction i>or l" amount ' ' ' "995,000. The farmhouse co"' A of 34 ed'Delns with 'JWl unit** for family" d* *"cn*o" r*etir "o". One* 30<" worker" will be employed" *n *1 project. According to the l*y, ¡"the" ohra" should be termlnnda" in ,MMl day", but the contratUta" They report that they expect to finish it" in one year.
University Board backs Rector on suspension* Pnr Lula Hernánrlct Aqulim Editor of EL MUNDO L* Junt" Univer "it "ria, in a" meeting held" *n *1 di" d*"yer, did not approve a petition, which is said to have been later withdrawn, to the effect that you approve the *expul*lon d*flnit.The Board did not approve a petition, which was later withdrawn, to the effect that the students Juan Mari Bias, Jorge Luis Landing and José Gil de Lamadrid, who are "impended" from said Institution due to the incident of April 15 in said school, when the change of the banner occurred in the Roo "*v*lt tower. On the contrary, the Board approved a motion by the Dean of Pedagogy, Dr. Pedro A. Cebollero, requesting the Rector to suspend the said students, and recommending the extension of the investigation made by the Dean of Students, so as to cover the testimony of other university students. Par" e| next Tuesday, so that they may appear to give their testimony before the Dean of Students, have been summoned the students Pelcgrín Garcia, Tony Gregory, Manuel Abreu Castillo and Angel Rodríguez Lozada. After these students give their statements, the University Board will meet again to discuss the matter of the expulsion of the freshmen, Mail Bras, Landing and Gil rie Lama- ! rttid. and to know the participation of the defendants in the same. The meeting of the University Board began at ten o'clock yesterday morning and continued until four o'clock in the afternoon. There were present*nt*s its picsldent*. the Redor and ' lo" Messrs. Manuel Rodriguez Rh- - mos, Dean of the College of Leves; ( Luis Torre" p¡ tz, Dean of Furnia- 1 cía; Pedro A Cebollero, Dean of| Colegio rie periHgngla; Mariano VIllaronga, Dean riel Colegio rie Esludios Generales, Dr. Sebastian Gonzalez Garcia. Dean of Humanities; Reece R. Bothwell, Dean of the Faculty; F'éiíx Luis Alegría, Dean of Students; José M. Laracuente, Dean of the College of Business Administration; A. Bird, substituting for the Dean of Social Sciences; and José Noriega Maldonado, student representative. Copies of the report of the Dean of Students on the events of December 15, as investigated by him, were delivered to the Board member. According to said report, it is alleged that Jorge Luí" Landing was the student who incited the other" without authorization to climb the University tower to raise the Puerto Rican flag for the second time, helping to lower the American flag and participating in the rally held *on the" stairs" of the administration building. As for Marl Brus, according to the report, it is alleged that he was in the group that broke into the tower to lower the American flag, also taking part in the organization and in the organization of the rally held on the steps of the administration building.
Collect data on the unemployment problem at the plants
Mr. Wilfred® Santiago, an economist assigned to the Statistics Office of the Unemployment Committee presided over by Mr. Ern*"-. to Ramo* Antonlnl, has begun the work of collecting data and information from the" office" of the sugar mills, related to unemployment in the sugar cane zone of the sugar industry. The information provided by the sugar mills will be used by the Unemployment Committee in the investigation which this legislative body has been carrying out to recommend to the Legislature the measures to be adopted to deal with the problem of unemployment and the effects of the use of mechanical devices. । nieo" and yerblclda" *in the "l*mbr* and cultivation d* cane. The Employment Committee has been holding public viitaa" with a view to gathering evidence, both from ।
both from workers and employers," which may be useful in the formulation of the measures to be introduced by the legislature* at its regular session next fall. D* according to the" testimony" collected" rie employer" and laborer", by the Committee, *1 use ri* mechanical and yerbicide" ! artifact" ! in the f*. "* agricultural sugar industry has been recognized as a necessity for Puerto Rico to continue to compete with the other sugar-producing areas, especially Cuba, Hawaii and the mainland sugar-producing area. The next meeting of the members of the Unemployment Committee, as reported yesterday by the representative of the Antonlnl "Ramo" Antonlnl, is likely to be convened within two or three days.
('atorre hours after this one began there was already 25 inches snow Broke record for blizzard of 1888 _ Few casualties but brought transportation system to a complete standstill By SARA YOKLEY , NEW YORK, December 28 - I (TI') T" most serious d* snowstorm in d* New York history blanketed the New York Metropolitan Area today with a heavy white oa* p*, bringing with it ln*sp*" ¡ indas difficulties pnr* "u" doc* mi* ' llene* rie inhabitant*. At eight o'clock d" night, eatorr" hours and a half after co. 1" storm began, they spoke of 25 inches* of snow and 1" storm" which paralyzed all transportation*, over the surface of 1* New York City and on Long Island, in Westchester County and in the densely populated" northern New Jersey cities across the Hudson River, which together compose the most densely populated* area in the country, had virtually* passed. The previous record snowfall was 2 (1.1) inches, in the famous 1RR8 storm that broke three rows and killed twenty-four people. The storm rte today was not a blizzard, and the lows" were po. [ cas; but e| total d* snow ealda ex* ceded by many inches the d* any twelve-hour period" d* previous*" snowfall." Only one* death * was attributed * to the storm, but scores received injuries * as a result of cal* do on the" slippery street". One man, 64 years old, collapsed while snowboarding, later died. Two people" were injured" when a 1* sea. theater window gave way under the pe "o rt* 1* snow. The" official" of the Weather Negocrarta at six o'clock this evening* ceased to predict when the storm would end, but they did not think it would last through the night. i The temperature on the occasion dft the 1RRR storm was rie rustro ¡ degrees below zero, and the snow was accompanied by wind" of 64 miles per hour. The wind today at no time exceeded thirty miles per hour, and the temperature was twenty-nine degrees." Because the snow c*|* duranle lorio *1 din and continued to fall at night at the rate rie almost rio" ! inch" per hour, the entire area was paralyzed and miles" <1* thousand** ' of people" remained isolated* Djos dr their homes, i All* aircraft remained on their runways at lo" nernspunrlos, La i Guardia, Newark and 1os there ha- ! cía r| north to Boston and to the ' south hnsdn Flladelll". Rumber Service Commissioner Hank J. Quayle said that the storm has caused the heaviest flooding New York has ever experienced, and that lives and property have never been in such danger because the streets have been blocked by snow. He asked citizens not to light their Christmas trees, * urged homeowners and superintendents * to clear the fire hours of snow. Torio bombele found on hand in the city has been placed on 'continuous duty. New York Bay, the largest in the Nation, was paralyzed by snow, which reduced visibility to several feet The Cunard White Star Lin* cancelled the 4:30 p.m. "aHela" of the giant liner Queen Mury, The" pa "ajero" "*- gulr was allowed to enter *i ship ha "t midnight, and the compaftil" was confident that* 1* rrav* could sail early in the morning. Flladelfia. the Nation's third city, received "iete inch* d* snow; Hartford, capital of Connecticut, thirteen; Bo "t.on, nine; Albany, capital of New York, five. Laa low" in e "to" Jugare" foreign" from the area of the storm, the center of which "e found in N. Y. were few". In Saratoga. New York, another man died of a. heart attack while" shoveling snow. At Plattiburgh, N Y. a d* freight train of twenty-two caboose*" was derailed by snow. The hotels*" of New York were crowded" by the" much" mile" d* wayfarers who* could not get back to mu" bogars. Many of those who "ailed to the suburbs" "found themselves stranded - a thousand in one station on the N*w York Central Railroad - due to a "breakdown" in the electric power line. The Long Island Railroad suspended all service on the Rockaway Park and Port Washington lines, which serve many thousands of people. The city seemed almost a dead city in the afternoon, with virtually all vehicular traffic having been suspended on a snow-covered street. The store and office closed early to allow an employee to get to her car for transportation. The" private" car" owners," the" taxi" drivers" and, finally, the" bus" drivers (Continued on p. 22).
It is not certain that the Chambers will be convened.
Méndez's case could be reviewed ♦ The Governor relies on the recent decision solite Mayor Ponce Nn c" certain that the projected espoeinl session of the Legislative Assembly will be held, according to the Governor in his weekly press conference yesterday. The Governor informed that he has in his possession the report of Judge Villares Rodriguez regarding the charges against Mr. Anibal Garcia, who was suspended by the Governor from his post as Sect rtarío-Auriitor munlcipal dr Poner. Mr. Píórro said that the final action to be taken in this case will depend on what is definitively resolved by the Supreme Court in connection with the case of Mayor Andrés Grillase", ('or as is known, the Governor asked the Supreme Court ruling exonerating Mayor Grillasca from the charges brought against him by the Chief Executive. The Governor also said, when questioned, that the Supreme Court decision could have the effect of altering his decision in the case of Mr. Orlando R. Menrlez, whom the Governor dismissed from the position of Commissioner of the Interior. To this effect, he explained: "It would be a charge of conscience that I would take "í nn if justice were to be served to all the torios equally. This is the reason why, as Governor of Puerto Rico, I have wished that the recent ruling (the Grillase" case) be carried to the end, so that tomorrow it will not be said that the Governor could have asked for a reconsideration of a sentence and that he did not do so in time. Conversations*" regarding a possible emigration rte Puerto Rican" to Venezuela will continue and to that effect there will probably be an exchange rie misione" between the" Government" of Venezuela and rie Puerto Rico, as stated by Mr. Piftero, He said r the Governor that it appeared that the Venezuelan sugar industry was in need rie arms. The Governor "impatiz.aba with the idea that Borlquoian workers be taken" to ti"- I down to that republic, mentioning that this pal", like other South American rie I" 1s, offered great* possibilities to people" who w "ere willing to work. The Governor gave an account of. । carved <1* mu Wednesday trip to the Interior rie the Island. He was in Mavacüez, accompanied by Senator Lula Alfredo Colón, and observed the situation in I" barriada Dulce" Labios, where a sewage provect is pending reallzarae and ropa ración doa la callea. The ae- ■ ñor Piñero, as he said, had special interest in touring this part of the city, and that it is his purpose to do everything possible so that the pending works for this section can be carried out soon, From Ma.vagüez, Mr. Piñcio pa- ! só to Maricao, where, accompanied by the Mayor, he visited I" ariistlntaa municipal dependencies and investigated the needs of the municipality. The next town visited by Mr. Piftero was Las Malias, whose progress he expressed great admiration for the Governor, who told him that he had worked in this town to try to remember some places, due to the changes that had taken place. "It has served such .its advancement" -- he said-- "that it can be said to be one of the most progressive towns of the Island." Mr. Piftero praised the cleanliness he noticed and the huen estado de la* callo", admiring also the new plaza de recroo, the new cemetery, the new building of the Mayor's office and the dispensary with complete equipment. From La Marias, the Governor left for Moca, whose progress was also admired by the Chief Executive. Chief Executive. Mr. Piftero said that Moca has a ball park bigger than *| Parque Sixto Escobar in San Juan. The town also has a municipal band. z The Governor declared that the current Chief of the Works Division* (Continued on page 14)