THE NANDO
PBO WEATHER! WEATHER FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: Partly cloudy with scattered showers. Winds from the east, It to 15 miles per hour. IN BAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: Maximum temperature, M¡ minimum, 72. Barometric pressure at sea level at 4:Sn this afternoon was 3S.M inches of mercury.
40 pages 5/
MARANA DIARY
YEAR XXVIII
Check the* brakes. Cooperate with the Automobile Inspection**.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, APRIL 26, 1947
Entered m encond ota"" matter, Poet Office. Ian Juan. P. R.
NUMBER 10927
Marshall is to inform the people on the 28th
Cráeze that his plane will be at noon today in Washington Does not believe Conference failed Met Clay in Berlin. Confident there will be progress later i WASHINGTON. 25.' (PU) The S* , rretarln of State, George C, Mar""h*1l. will deliver a 30-minute* Report over the radio, addressed to) the American people, in connection with the M*"cú foreign ministers' conference, at 3:30 o'clock in the evening next lun*a, according to announcement made by the State Department. Marshall's report will be broadcast from Washington over all major international broadcast networks. A State Department spokesman said the Department did not yet know the exact time Marshall will arrive in Washington. The General is on his way back to Washington from Moscow, via Berlin and Iceland. The broadcasting networks which will carry Marshall's report are American, Columbia, Mutual and National. Meanwhile, correspondent John B. McDermott of the United Press reports from Berlin that Secretary Marshall sailed for Washington today, feeling optimistic, to report to the American people on the conference of foreign ministers which recently ended in Moscow. . His plane should arrive in 'táshIngton about noon tomorrow and may make a stop in Newfoundland. Marshall took off in his four-engine plane, with his chief advisers, at 3:26 p.m., after a two-hour stop in Berlin, during which he conferred about 90 minutes with General Lucius D. Clay, American commander-in-chief, on plans for speeding up Germany's economic recovery. The American Secretary accused Russia on Wednesday of widening the gulf which existed between opposing views on the Austrian treaty, and of damaging any possibility of now completing a four-power treaty to enforce the treaty in Germany. Yesterday, after the final meeting of the Big Four in Moscow. Marshall expressed disappointment at the failure to conclude a treaty with Austria or an agreement on the four-power treaty, although he expressed mild optimism as to the International outlook. Arriving in cuta city from. Moscow considerably more optimistic. Marshall said that the conference had not widened the differences between the Four Great Powers, but had clarified the views of each delegation. I said that the views between the United States and France spoke improved "Was the Moscow conference a failure?" he asked the Gehoral. "No, they did not think it was . -he replied. The conference "brought to light" the critical issues facing each of the Big Four, he said. He added that he had never been confident that the German treaty could be completed in Moscow, but expressed disappointment at the poor progress of the Austrian treaty. The conference covered a wide field, he said, and now apparently irreconcilable differences depended on future meetings, and on "how much longer Europe can endure? Europe struggling with that problem. Marshall declined to speculate as to how long it will take to reach agreement on the German and Austrian treaties. He said he was confident that some progress would be made when foreign ministers met in New York during the United Nations assembly, before the next formal meeting in London, not<Continued on page 14).
Consumers to conduct price study. Committees appointed to organize chapters* throughout the Island " * * * The Newburyport plan, for the reduction of prices, continues to spread throughout* the United States, * - . On the occasion of the crisis facing the liquor industry have commented to produce ce* sentías in the perennial do desUlería*. - ♦ - Attorney Natrón Fernándes yesterday pronounced himself in favor of an immovable, carefully selected Judiciary. He accepts in advance the resounding criticism. Federico Tllén was* named general district lúea; José A. Negrón Lópes, District Judge of * Irterto clarifies he does not oppose Farnándes. Fernós 1aern says it is blan that Tyding" has filed the Independence bill provided *~n* it is not discussed until it is ' Ajalido del of reforms to the "Orgánica. turned 5 yesterday!
Compendium of News
te" of "URpending the vi*ta for the lune*. ♦ * ♦ *u "onl believes "o should protect the Transportation Authority service, - * ¿"B Merchants allege Muñnt lo" cradled *ln bases. They offer datna "ohre Import "*, to deny profit* of 111 ",000,000. They give razone* for mccln" in Miami. Marshall is going to Inform ai people the tunee. No oras that I* Mn* Conference had failed. eú. - - An X-ray* pixel has been perfected for the treatment of a certain* type* of cancer. * * * - The Federal Court fixed at 1210,ooo the value of the "La Colectiva". building expropriated by the United State* Government* from Mr. Felipe Segarra, - ♦ - The number of smallpox falls reported* in the United States during the first* 14 "emana* of the "year, m I* half the corresponding total *1 same period in IMS. * " - Entry will be free to Big Island airport May 4. - Police station in Tel AW" blown up by extremist. Government advises English to stay in aua sections". ( ~
Pleased by price reduction
■i ¡ ] I Harbers Ja rest leaves a Nashua, New Hampshire, grocery store carrying in her hrsso her nephew Cari Johnson and in the other a package of items she bought at a 50% reduction. The owners of the grocery store, which is part of a chain of stores, announced the reduction in the retail price of items* sold in stores in New Hampshire and parts of Massachusetts and Vermont, in response to President Truman's call. (Associated Press Photo)
Fernos puts reform ahead of Tyding's bill" E*lá well, he declares* *i not be disrule IihsIh we have come out of reform.- Borirua official world in Washington gives no great importance Pnr JEAN VAN VRANKEN (International News Service riel Correspondent) WASHINGTON. 25, (INS). - Senator Guy Cordon, Republican of Oregon, is still undecided today as to the date on which he will file the Puerto Rican charter reform bill, originally scheduled to be filed this week.
week. The chairman of the subcommittee on territorial and insular affairs has expressed his intention to have the measure drafted by the Department of the Interior ready for the Committee's consideration within a short time. He had previously announced that the bill would be filed with Inda-1rly this week! At the end of the week, however, Cordnn's office said that the measure was not likely to go to the secretary for another day. So he explained then* that most of Sonado's time had been spent on work within the Appropriations Committee? At the mlsmn time it was reported that Cordon had not yet given consideration to the Independence bill filed by Senator Millard Tyding*, Democrat of Maryland, 1 yesterday, The Tyding bill* was similar to earlier measures filed by the former chairman of the former Cn-, Mlté of.Territories and Senate Insu- . lares, offers the por- , tnrrlqueñn* the alternative between ( Independence and the status quo, The ( only change of Significance in the bill is the transi- , clone period. The only major change in the bill is the transition period, which is increased from 20 to 40 years, during which the* tariffs for Puerto Rico will be gradually eliminated. It is believed that the Senate Committee on Public Lands will listen to the evidence on the Tydings bill *1- ' much the same as that which may be offered on the status quo bill when the hearings on the Langer bill are held. Cordon has stated that the* hearing" on the project will be used "as an avenue for ventlling the whole question of Puerto Rican status". As an extensive consideration of the problem, including statements in favor of independence, it is conceivable that (continued on page 21)
Consumers to Study Prices Appointed Committees to Organize Chapters in Municipalities The Central Consumers Committee, chaired by Mrs. Cayltn C. de Rivera, has agreed to appoint the following committees to organize chapters in the municipalities. de Rivera, has agreed to designate a Commission on Prices, composed of twenty persons, entrusting to said commission the task of investigating in the grocery stores* of the metropolitan area the price* of articles, with the purpose of "observing* the* merchants* who are selling their products at high prices and recommending consumers to buy in those stores* that have lowered their prices". > Ln lnóli meeting of the Consumer Committee was held at the residence i of Ir Mrs. - Juana Rodrigues Mundo, Rio Piedras, under the presidency of Mrs. Cestero de Rivera, and at the same ** they agreed ln* plans to create the consumer entity through laxist. Several committees were appointed to visit the towns where they will organize local chapters attached to the Central Committee of Consumers, The committees appointed were the following: Ir* señorii* Carmen Alvarado, Belén Fernández and Caylta C. de Rivera, for the towns of Vega Alta, Dorado, Tna Alta, Tn* Baja, and Vega Raja; lo* señores Moisés Ledesma, Santiago Brito and A. Ruiz, and senoras Sackett, Sinz, and señorita Maria L. Guerra, for the towns of Carolina, Trujillo Alto, Canóvanas, Rio Grande and Lolza Aldea; los seftorew Antonio J. Colorado, Florencio Cabello and Alberto E. Sánchez, for the towns of Cataño, Bayamón, Guaynabo and Comerlo; Mrs. Sil Reyes, Juana Rodríguez, Miss Berta Cahanlllas and Mr. Isidro Hernández, for the towns of Cague", San Lorenzo, Gurabo, Las Piedra", Junco" and Humacao. Regarding the organization of the local committees in the aforementioned towns, it was agreed to request the persons interested in the organization of the consumers to communicate it to the Central Committee. A commission that will make a study and investigation of the price quotations of imported pork and beef, and of fat and butter, in order to fix a reasonable price for these producers, was also designated in the act. It was further agreed to "applaud the action taken by several food (Continued on page 10
Rum crisis leads to layoffs; Newburyport plan comes to the West; Political tension grows in Palestine
Police station blown up near British barracks in Tel Aviv í Four killed in blast . ' -.-- ... t Government advises । Englishmen to remain in their sections Pnr ELTAV SIMON rorrcsñon**1 of United Press JERUSALEM. 25 (PLD- Do" ex-remlita* Jew" employing a stolen cn- , ero armored car, Heno of exnloslvos, vnlnron today the Sarona police station. near da the < ''liárteles general British* in . Tel Aviv, killing four British nolifin* and wounding five. This is the most recent afnquR of -evancha carried n caho ñor ¡a" or "anlzaclones of reslatencln. The destruction of this oollclnca station and an earlier Attempted ( kidnapping, prompted an inquiry in Tel Aviv, which lasted five hours. and the Government has given strict orders to all British tns, 'to remain in "their sections - until further nvlsn. i Aunau* Sarona is guarded ' as *1 were a fortress, the cen.! finóla* of the gates allowed the armored car and its do* uniformed* occupant* to enter, des. after a thorough examination of their credentials. The two men parked the vehicle outside the station and a minute or so later returned to the norton with a boiler and a roll of wire. They said they were going out to repair the telephone lines. They were allowed to leave. A short time later the car exploded! The explosion destroyed a northern part of the building used as a living quarters, another part where there was a telephone station and the day room. It is understood that the armored car was taken by nine men on a Jeru*N- road.
A man disguised as a sheriff stopped it and another" eight armed men" assaulted *1 driver. They tied him up and left him in an orange grove, to let him loose on his own. Twenty-eight rooms were destroyed by the explosion. The police "quarters," a stone structure on the site of the former German hospital, was completely destroyed. Hundreds of troops converged on Tel Aviv and spent 5 hours searching for the attackers. Residents of the city rushed to the stores to buy food, fearing that the Jewish section, which has a population of 200,000, would be placed under martial law, but the troops withdrew and returned the city to civilian traffic. The authorities attribute the "taque r Im Irgun ZvrI Leuml who has vowed to avenge the death of six of aua members, two of the eu "lo* committed suicide in his" proplss cells nnte* of being hanged." Unnoticed, the clandestine urgunlzaclons" gave the BritAnlco" a six-hour warning that a new wave of violence was coming, when five irgunUtas broke into the Swank Park Hotel in Tel Aviv at midnight and kidnapped Morris Collins, a British subject living in Egypt. Collins, who had come to Palestine for two days, was released when his kidnappers discovered he was Jewish. Six hours later the explosion destroyed the Sarona police station. The station is near Citrus House, British headquarters in Tel Aviv. The area has been blanfCuntmú" on page 16).
The president of the Unión Repu- i hlicana Progresista, Lic. Ce- i lostlno Irlarte Miró, declared yesterday . that the party over which he presides "is not going to i oppose, nor has it opposed, the nnm- ' bramlenlo of Lic. Luis Ne- < grón Fernández, for the position of < Attorney General of Puerto Rico", 1 "No no" vamo" to oppose this 1 appointment".â€ he said,™ "nor did we homo" oppose". Mr. Triarte added that । "as agreed by the Congre- ,
Yesterday the budget of $53,755,313 was sent to La Fortaleza.
Yesterday was sent to " la Fortaleza the proposed budget for the" general expenses" of the Government for fiscal year 1M7-4R approved by the Insular Legislature which -closed its work on Sunday. The budget, amounting to * the sum of 03,755,313 was signed by the Senate and House representatives and sent to the Governor in the afternoon, yesterday, and was approved by the House of Representatives.
As "o speaks Reported before-i < rlorly by THE WORLD, 1* "u- < ma total of the Government's general preaupue "to 11 spending" was mndlfl-p each, varying the original "urn which ú was $54,055.013, This change in the i total amount of the budget "e de- i hló--according to "e has reported -to an arithmetical error made at the time "e was submitting the pro- i yerto ta approval of the House, i .in the" last* hour* of ta madru- 1 I (Continued on page 21.) I
Attorney General in favor of immovable judiciary Affirms that he will strive to guarantee the efficient performance of Justice Accepts and expects reasoned criticism Will ensure that there are no discriminations, privileges. Luí* Negrón Fernández was the object yesterday of many congratulations** from government officials and lawyers of Sen Juan and the Island for his appointment as Attorney General made the day before yesterday by President Truman. "The Press will always have my *1 aml "0" --said the Attorney! General- "and I will give due attention n any reasoned criticism that hach both of me and of the । Drnartamrnto halo my direction." Negrón Fernández, who authorized the" demonstrations, said: "I am honored by the appointment of Attorney General that President Truman has submitted to the Senate for consideration. "I must express my public reeonoclmlen-l to the Governor of Puerto] Rico. Hon. Jesus T. Plftero, for having recommended the appointment, as well as to the Bar Association of Puerto Rico and to other federal and island officials who likewise endorsed the recommendation. I must not fail to mention private citizens and civic entities that pronounced themselves in favor of my nomination, (Continued on page 24.) -IRJII íl 1 IIUL.I1 ■■ I - w, 11 III II II I !■ I" 1 1II*""-I
1 which has been declared for 19 days, ■ ] There was no immediate reaction from the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and its Bell System subsidiaries, also on strike; but a new contracting session was set for 7 p.m. today, and it is expected that the union's offer will be formally presented to the union at that meeting. The factors in the , union policy said they would arrange j! Immediately the strike ron which, any unit of the. Bell System that t offered pay increase" of $6 . i weekly, instead. of the 1ns 12 orígi- ; nally demanded. ■ i Well-informed" source" said . that the* Government conciliators i veiled little prospect of the company meeting even that . reduced figure; and were trying to j ' persuade the Bell System that it would offer . . ca at least $3. There is no ln- । dication that the strikers would accept $3. i ¡ ¡ This coincided with news coming from Baltimore of the first favorable break in the strike impasse. - (Continued on page 16)
Triarte clarifies that there is no opposition to Negrón Fernández He says i*ii party objects only to a candidate* who does not aean raparen or in whose appointment a principle has been involved. -There is no interest in the position".
We will only object to those appointments* in which there is a question of morality, or capacity in the candidate* or which, as in the case of Mr. Mariann Fernández, have involved a principle of morality or capacity in the candidate*. as in the case of Mr. Mariann Vlllaronga for the Combarla d* Instruction, a fundamental question of principle is involved*" "There is no opposition to be made in the case of Mr. Negrón FernánrlP7," he emphasized,™ "just as there was no opposition in the case of Mr. Borlnquen Marrero for Supreme Court judge. The Republican Union is not defending positions. it is simply defending principles, and that is why our attitude towards the appointment of Mr. Vlllaronga." Mr. Iriarte also added that in the opposition by questione" 4* principle", as in the case of Mr. Vlllaronga, "e e" tends that* the appointment per,lude "lo* principle" that" no "other" we defend because we believe that e* detrimental to the achievement of our aaplraclonea. that e" the eatadldad," "I will make it clear that we are not to make any opoilclonea to the appointment of Mr. Negrón fernández,"- he continued,- "The Republican Union has not recommended (Continued *on page 24.)
Price reduction* covers from*East to*California Shopping spree is general Wholesalers are to be reached*with the* reductions imposed*For United Press NEW YORK. 25. (PU). - The Newburyport Plan spread across the nation today, prompted by reports that the public has welcomed the price reduction project with a buying spree. The plan - consisting of a general price reduction" of ten percent, for a period of ten days"~ was in its fourth day of operation at Newburyport today with the following results*: Sales* in women's clothing: an increase of 200 percent over last week's corresponding rate; household goods: an increase of 110 percent; men's clothing: an increase of 100 percent; household goods: an increase of 110 percent; men's clothing: an increase of 100 percent; household goods: an increase of 100 percent; household goods: an increase of 100 percent; household goods: an increase of 100 percent; household goods: an increase of 100 percent; household goods: an increase of 100 percent; household goods: an increase of 100 percent: a 100 percent increase; hardware" items: a 45 percent increase; drugs and groceries*: a 40 to 60 percent increase; jewelry: a 40 percent increase; children's clothing: a 75 percent increase, gasoline and automobile" accessories: a 100 percent increase: groceries: a 35 percent increase; liquor: a 30 percent increase. "We're like Christmas," -said the admlnlitrator of a department tlenida, "[The store] hasn't emptied all day." , Warnings have been made, however, that the reductions in pre. rivers and the increase in the" buying" may prove artificial and fra- ¡ ct, if nn a general wholesalers' markdown is nn achieved*. Some ■ sources say that the reductions are only a spring sale, to "decongeatlonize the window dressing," and that the purchases are typical of the season. (Continued on page 15).
| j II -SI ■ 1-a.' 1 .lIRII' . I i II II I I S lilililí I" II _ -r- ' - -- ' ■ r Telephone reduce demands; :¡ settlement prospect, scanty ' Union on strike last night undertook settlement plan ; a bane of lowering rn 50% wage* request*. The Bell - did not react immediately. A group leaves strike By CHARLE* H. REMOLD - United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 25. (PU) - Leaders of the 340,000 telephone strikers cut their wage demands" in half, today, in a settlement proposal to quickly settle the national strike.
Free entry to airport from May 4 Only *? will regulate ; taximeter entry*. reports head of AT i l From May 4, next, it will be free entry of i person" to the Grani Island airport, and it will not be necessary, therefore, to obtain a pass card at the nfl- . i This was informed by the "dminis-,trader genernl of the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority, Kvhor José G. Blnlse, who said that only those who, for a temporary condition or for other reasons, should not have access to the airport, will be prohibited from entering the airport. The Puerto Rico Transportation Authority, as is known, by agreement between the island and federal governments, has assumed the management and administration of the Isla Grande airport, Blolse informed. On the other hand, it will continue to be regulated, as it is now, the entry of vehicles to the airport. The owners of taximeters, according to official notice, must apply for a new permit for each vehicle. The application should be addressed to the DI , Airport vision" of the AT, pnr - written, Indicating the number of 'the license issued by the Depar- ¡ lamento de ln Interior and giving '¡detail" as to the amount of 2'insurance" covering each taxlme- , tro. Boi "e said that the number of vehicles that will be allowed to enter the airport under the new administration will be more or less the same as the number that can enter now. The purpose of continuing the ¡regulation of ¡automobile entry, Mr. Blolse explained, is due to the limited space presently available at the airport- ¡ port, I The military guard will continue to provide guard duty on Isla Grande; "however, employees of the 1* Transportation Authority will take over the necessary duties, such as supervising the entry and exit of vehicles. -The private vehicle*," reported Blobe, "will not need to be accompanied by a driver to enter the airport, but the entry of all vehicles" will have to be judiciously controlled. Also, consideration will be given to allowing ■ the entry of private cars, the con- > Alción de las personas" que* vayan -n lo* mlamoa.
Merchants allege Muñoz accused without basis They offer figure" for *their contention <le that they did not । earn $115,000,000 They say he took the case । PR ACO of politics ; They give reasonone* for the" ¡ difference" in price* . with article" from Miami i The insular Congress of Commerce and Industry, presided over by Mr. Flllpo de Hostos, replied yesterday in authorized statements to the Press, to the speech read by Senator Muñoz Marín, on the radio the Saturday before last, in defense of the legislation on the PR ACO stores. ' Says e| Publicity Committee of the , ' Island Congress of Commerce and ' Industry that the ground on which 1 rest 1o" arguments of Mr. J ' Munoz. Marin "is so contemptible, ' that it becomes an easy task to demonstrate - its inconsistency with a few nam' hras." The Committee declares: "As ' Puerto Ricans we sincerely deplore"'. - rn and deeply deplore the spirit of animosity, of injustice and of tolerance in which the words of Mr. Muñoz. Marín. It is impossible to agree with Mr. Mu. Doz Marin's attitude, with that of a leader of a people which he claims for himself." ¡ ¡ . It further deplores the Committee of the ¡ । Congress that "it has become cues" । , tlon political, of matter of" so much , transcendence and of such grazes con- " sequences for Ir community, since ,¡qua by doing so it takes him n a te- , rrnno in which nn will be able to be conslde. ■ rounded and analyzed with the serenity the thoroughness and Ir pondering ! that claim "u importandi and its - scope," To that field - he adds- can not go representative associations I enmn those that compose "this Congress and in whose bosom are mixed I men of all beliefs, of all social spheres, of all" l the parties and of all Ideologies, and in whose board of directors , there are such distinguished members of the' I PonulRr Party as ln" Messrs. i Juan Luis Roseta Luí" Camacho v ► Amérlco Miranda." It says Ir reply to Mr. Mu. | ftóz Marín that "there is no right to i mistreat with such Inusitada hard. zr and evident injustice and anaslonnmiento, r sector (Rn considerable, 1 Imnortsnte and respectable of Ir eomu. nldad." TrI seems - he continues - that j to his" njos the commerce of Puerto Rico nn is composed portorrlqueños. It is a people of our people, neither better nor worse than the generslldad: for a north 'nte "r, ar'te 1 of that mlsmn nuehln that encum hrsra to power." "It is highly significant 1). ce the Committee- that in his very long speech nn attempts to jafut the "eñnr Muñoz Marín nor a snla of 1 "s good and solid reasons ex- [ our ñor e| commerce nara rom. hatlr the establishment of hs tten. * PRACO and it is even more significant that in the Impossibility d" pro. duclr new facts in such current amounts Justify v determine in accordance with reality the need for such a measure, Mr. Muñoz-Muñoz-Marín has not been able to justify the establishment of such a measure. measure, Mr. Muñoz-Marín limits himself to wielding as his only argument a situation of new facts, "fnrtunarlRninnte, va nn - exists, v that twoRnareció ron Ir tern mi nation of the war " He continues' "Fn his temerity, Mr. Muñoz-Marín nn tituben an " nretander harer harer believe Ir comunt. ri dad new severe controls so", o hleclds by a| Federal Government s failed miserably and not 3 (Coitatln continues on page 17) - His so ii i believes r. ¡ must protect : AT i FzMtimB service rompetrncÍH o" prrjudicifll. -At the end of May or at the beginning of June, the Legislature of Puerto Rico will meet again in extraordinary session to consider important matters of importance, including amendments to the Electoral Law, according to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Dr. Francisco M. Su*onl. ! He also said that, in the next extraordinary session, the issue of the situation confronting the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority will probably be included in the next extraordinary session, due to the implementation of the "Fixed Route System". ■ On this matter Mr. Susonl! expressed yesterday his opinion that the ■ | Transportation Authority will not be able to I ■¡assume 1* responsibility to offer ! an efficient service, in full romI petencl* with the Inde.¡pendent porteadorea"; and added that of "ubsl". . tlr the present situation, the economoi mt* of the TA will be seriously i sfectadR. J On the other hand the Impression e" ' that the Government is concerned " with eita situation of the Transportation Authority, which, according to ln- ; 1 formed by Mr. Jose G. Blolse. H 1 (Continued on page 24.) I
The industry is limited to produce for the demand in the Island It does not store in the debit warehouse Spokesmen explain that the industry faces its most serious situation l'nr R. Santiago gnu Editor of EL MUNDO Spokesmen of the portorriquen" industry of rum made it known yesterday qve on the occasion of the considera| ble decline of the* faithful product exports to the United" States" ta industr.a is doomed to a critüs "ln precedent* in. iu history. Yesterday, according to information provided by EL MUNDO, the effects of the crisis were beginning to be felt in some of the factories, as well as in the staff, both administrative and technical. It is expected that, if the problem of having to pay taxes for the liquor industry is not solved.It is expected that the situation will continue to worsen even more in the coming weeks, at a time when there is little demand for the product in the U.S. market. It was reported that some of the firms forced to reduce staffing levels have had to do so or. < This has also been forced by the fact that this industry cannot continue to store its rums in bonded quality because it does not have enough space in its warehouses. A reflection of the magnitude of the problem is also shown by the fact that, according to information received in San Juan, whlakey distilleries have also been forced in various parts of the nation to order adjustments in their operating expenses and to suspend work in some sub-daytime warehouses, This is the first year since 1942 that the continental whiskey industry has been in full production. The production of whiskey and other alcoholic beverages in the United States has, in the last week, exceeded all demand. It was predicted yesterday that the Continental liquor industry will have to keep up, especially as far as the whiskey supply is concerned, operating to more than meet all the needs of consumers. Everything seems to indicate that if a favorable solution is not found for the rapid export of our rums so that they can enter the U.S. market under competitive conditions, the situation in Puerto Rico will have an adverse effect on the entire rum industry of the country. It was reported yesterday to EL MUNDO that in the best of times, the U.S. rum market reached a little less than six percent of the total hard liquor market. Such average exports of the total domestic market put Puerto Ríen above the volume of exports from any other foreign country, including Cuba, by about 50 percent. In normal periods, including the prewar period, the average volume of red spirits in the domestic market was about two percent of the total market for hard liquor. Both in the prewar period and during the war, about 50 percent of the red spirits consumed in the United States came from Puerto Rico. Puerto Rican industrialists hope that Puerto Rico can retain at least as much of the total U.S. market as it had in the prewar period. Even though, as reported, we are going through a period of readjustment, causing a sudden change in the market of suppliers and buyers, it cannot be expected that the island will recover its normal average in the U.S. market if the problem facing our industry is not resolved quickly. On the other hand, it was reported to EL MUNDO that the Island runs the risk of losing its ascendancy in the U.S. market, with more serious damage* to the industry, "I trafficking with advantage* the ions of Cuba and the Virgin Islands, These two pulses, which are our main producers as well as other countries, pay their taxes* in the United States", at the time of their sale", can therefore store unlimited quantities of their rums at any point of the nation. Practically all shipments of Puerto Rican rums are paralyzed. "It was certain yesterday that both Cuba and the Virgin Islands and other producing countries would take advantage of the problem facing the Puerto Rican rum industry. Yesterday, it was reported that the industrial activities of many of the country's factories were being limited to the quantities necessary for consumption in Puerto Rico. The situation was not expected to change in the near future. To give an idea of the present conditions of the industry and the magnitude of the problem, I offer the following figures obtained yesterday from various island sources: , , , Federal revenue from ne roñe" exported* * United* States* reached $26S,959.R9 in the me" of March of the current year, Ln* revenue* derived* by the ml "mn concept in the month of March 1546 was $4,226.325.70; in the same me" of 1945, it came - (Continued on 1* page 14).