THE DAILY MORNING WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Clear weather with some clouds over the interior this afternoon. IN ST. JOHN'S. YESTERDAY: High, 79; low, M; rain, none.
40 pages 5/
MORNING
MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
Truman for firm rent control
9=
In conference with Press yesterday he affirmed his views on the case. He asked Hannegan not to leave office Marshall has full freedom to make changes in State WASHINGTON, 24 (PU)- President Truman said today that he has asked Postmaster General Robert E. Hannegan to continue to serve as Postmaster General. Robert E. Hannegan, to continue to serve as Postmaster General and Chairman of the Democratic National Committee. Trbman added that Hannegan had promised him an early reply, the cygl will depend on how the Democratic leader is feeling in health: and said also: that he hoped the answer was. ra favorable. As he climbs. Hannegan has been suffering from high blood pressure, for several months. On Wednesday of this week, he returned to Wá.hlngton from a rest stay in Florida. In his first regular press conference in the last three weeks, the President also renewed his demand for firm rent control, saying that any changes in the current rent ceiling are a matter for Congress to decide. -* The President praised Henry Ford, Jr. for his recent reduction in the prices of automobiles manufactured by his company, and added that he hoped that other automobile manufacturers would follow his example. The President was asked how it was that he crossed a picket line, last night, at the National Theater, where he went to see the play, "Blossom Timo" (In Bloom); and he replied that he did not know that the said coliseum was being picketed, until he read it in the pe-, rlódicos, this morning. The pickets, ; They were protesting that di-, o theater was refusing to admit negroes to its audience, were made a la- l do to allow the ' President to enter. < He was then asked " Truman 1 how his ¡ 1 efforts to cooperate with the Con- I gress seemed to be working; and he replied that the coopera- 1 clone was working well. Regarding Hannegan, the Pro.)-' dent said that he had spoken to him at - Casa B Ignea, and that he appeared ' in good health. He added that he believed that i' Hannegan had been a good pro- ¡ bident of the Democratic Party, and' that he believed he still was, Expll-J có that Hannegan had not asked to be relieved of both his official and political duties, but that, as rumor had it, he had been a good pro- ¡ bident of the Democratic Party, and' that he believed he still was, Expll-J có that Hannegan had not asked to be relieved of both his official and political duties; but that,,,,, as the rumor consistently had ( been circulating that Hannegan ( would resign, he himself (Truman) spoke raised the subject, in conver- , saéion with the Postmaster General, asking him to remain in office. He added that < Hannegan was pleased and 1 that he would send him a reply. He added that Hannegan was pleased and that he would send him a reply as soon as he knew how his health was. | Truman stated tremblingly that he had considered with Secretary of State Marshall the question of the differences between the Argentine Me.iseramlth and Assistant Secretary of State Braden. < But, the President offered no further details. He added that. in talking , today with General Marshall, the two ( devoted the usual attention j to various matters, among which , he mentioned China, South America. । Germany and Palestine, but did not give । further Information on these. Truman and Marshall conference, which lasted twenty minutes. The President j said that they did not deal with il Mar- ( chalí He will go to Moscow, for the conferen- ( ola of the Foreign Ministers । of Foreign Affairs, as to the tra- 1 1 1 tates fie peace with Germany and Aun- i tria. Nor did they speak of lu con. I venience of an early convening of an inter- °¡ i to an interamorlcsna < conference to draft the Western Hemisphere defense 1 pact, as i recently proposed by Senator < Vandenberg. Questioned the President ?oute । the information given that *1 ha- I bia asked Marshall to Inver- । (Sontlnued on page 24) ' I
News Digest
The U.S. ambassador tü. in . Poland Points to Irregularities habldar in Polish Elections; Former Rep. May and his eo-defendants pleaded not guilty to charges in connection eon war contrets. The trial will begin on the 19th of May. It has been contested, in Congress, the election of Marcantonio, j *-* The American Legion favors compulsory univeraal training. . Pifiero explained yesterday that an Indirect means is being sought to increase the price of sugar. It would operate on the basis of lower living costs. At the hearing on labor guidelines, Senator Ball insisted on reducing privileges to commercial entities in favor of opening new ports, to avoid the present cargo congestion in San Juan. The island has been allocated a $186,000 quota for the Red Cross this year. It is expected that this year they will begin construction of the Pueblo del Niño.
Northern Rice Growers Against Import Concessions To Foreign Countries. Anderson asks for powers to prevent costly agricultural overproduction. Truman yesterday spoke in favor of strongest control over rents. Asks Hannegan to retain offices of Democratic Chief and Postmaster. --- - More classrooms to be built by Interior in San Juan area. Legion medical advisers meet at Wá "hlngton. They will make a plan to improve medical services for veterans. A special group has made recommendations to amend the law creating the Juvenile Court. Veterans have until Feb. 1 to reinstate policies without a medical exam. Cane settlers will meet tomorrow at the Ateneo to decide on the contract for the sale of the current safra. Guillermo Pierlulsl Invites the President of the Republican Union to appoint the Reforms Committee agreed upon in AguaI dilla.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 25, 1947
More Schools in Interior Program I
The Puerto Rico Agricultural Growers' Association has been insistently requesting that the sugar cane growers of the Island be part of the sales contract for the 1947 Puerto Rican sugar cane harvest. Its president, Mr. José Ra- - món Quiñones, has requested the support of the United States farmers' association ■ -the American Federation of Agricultural Bureaucrats, to which the agricultural organization is affiliated- from which it has obtained the requested support. The president of
Legion president to present plan to improve medical services
The American Legion medical advisers will hold a conference at Washington, February 20-22, for the purpose of outlining a program to improve the system of hospitalization and medical treatment offered to all discharged men and women of the armed forces. All state departments of the Legion, as well as those of the territories and possessions, have been invited to the event. The public relations office of the organization, which is headed by Mr. Mario Fuentes, reported yesterday
- Mr. Mario Fuentes, reported yesterday i that a communl- - cated has been received from headquarters in > Wáshlngton, in which is expressed, r among other things, as follows: - "The American Legion will hold / your first national conference of - its medical advisers, at Wá- - shlngton, during the days of February 20 to , 22. At least 50 medical officers, representing their respective state and territorial departments, are expected to attend this event. i "For the three days of discussion (continued on page 24)
The construction of a 20-room school in the Loli za area will be among the works to be carried out soon in the capital area: the Labra school expansion project, to provide 16 additional classrooms, and 24 additional classrooms to be located in Las Palmas, are among the works to be carried out by the Department of the Interior to increase the capacity for education in the city of San Juan, and for which funds have already been allocated. The 20-room school in the Lolza section was specifically earmarked by Act 146 of last year. The funds will have to be provided by the Department of the Interior, from the allocation of more than one million dollars that was assigned to it, for the construction of the school, according to the terms of Act 304 of 1946. The governmental Committee that has been studying the program for the development of a major school in the San Juan metropolitan area, which is headed by the head of the Induatrlaa y Servlcloa Division of the Planning Board, Mr. Lula Rivera Santoa, has recommended to the ► Department of the Interior that this school be located on land located at the end of Lolza Street. - To this effect, a public hearing was held with the purpose of coordinating this school with the project of the new park to be built by the Government on the road leading to Isla Grande. It is expected that the matter will be definitively resolved in the next few days. Another project that has been under study is the expansion of the Labra School in San Turco. The sum of $110,000 was allocated for this work, according to lev 436 dol ' 1946. It is estimated that 16 classrooms could be added to this school. As to the manner in which these classrooms are to be installed, the Committee is awaiting the submission of the plans for the project, so that it may proceed rapidly. However, it was reported that the program for the expansion of this educational center is in progress. Another important project is the construction of the new 24-room school in the Lao . Palmas, Santurce. This was "utolized by Act 308, of 1945, and its cost was originally estimated at $120,000. Due to the increase in construction costs, the work will rise to $185,000, and the Department of the Interior will have to cover the difference in the $875,000 appropriation provided by the Act recently passed by the Legislature to cover deficiencies in the school construction program. The purchase of the corresponding land to locate the school was approved by the Planning Board. In addition, the Planning Board gave its sanction to the construction project. It is expected that the corresponding auction will be announced by the Department of the Interior in the coming weeks. I There are also other projects in Rio Piedra", destined to - the acute shortage of facilities of Instruction in the wool. Law 125 of 1946 authorizes the construction of a 16-room building in Rio Piedras, and the committee has already recommended that this school be located in the Las Monjas neighborhood. A study is underway to determine which lot should be recommended for the location of this structure. It is also contemplated to build another eight-room school in the Monacillos neighborhood, in an urban area near Rio Piedras, on the road leading to Sana- ■ torio Insular. Also in this ca- ' so 8e is studying the appropriate site for the location of the ediflicjo.
The cane settlers will decide tomorrow on the contract for the current harvest - ' I ' They will meet at the Ateneo for this purpose. -The program ' includes, adeniái, a labor matter. -4 A.A.'s management; regarding direct action by settlers, supported by the American Federation of Agricultural Workers.
The American Federation of Agricultural Businessmen, Mr. Edward Nelu, as reported yesterday, will send to the Secretary of Agriculture, Mr. Clinton P. Anderaon, an official communication claiming the right of the Puerto Rican sugar cane settlers to be a direct party to the referendum contract. In addition, requesting that the United States Government offer, by any arrangement, a better price for the Puerto Rican sugarcane for this crop. As is known, up to now, Puerto Rican sugar has been purchased by the Federal Government, through contracts to that effect signed with the island processors and negotiated through the Puerto Rico Sugar Producers Association. Quiñones received a letter from Mr. Manuel González Quiñones, member of the. González Quiñones received a letter from Mr. Manuel González Quiñones, member of the Board of Directors of the Farmers Association, who is in Washington, D.C., together with another member of the Board, Mr. Rafael Menéndez Ramos, attending the federal hearings on the tariffs on behalf of the farmers of Puerto Rico. Gonzalez Quiñones explains in that letter in detail all his efforts so far, especially with regard to the island sugar problem. He sent a copy of í (Continued on page 24) i
Former U.S. President Herbert Hoover (right) and Dr. Julius Klein, former head of the Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Trade, talk as they leave the House after a conference with President Truman. Hoover accepted an assignment from the President to conduct a study of food problems in the combined Anglo-North American zones of Germany and Austria. (Associated Press Photo)
Three judges proposed for the Juvenile Court. Special group makes a series of suggestions regarding the court Drowning for the amendment of the Juvenile Court Law to provide for the appointment of three judges "at large" who will be exclusively dedicated to hear juvenile cases, a group of persons that was summoned by the Director of the Public Welfare Division headed by Mrs. Celestina Zalduondo, to study the different aspects of juvenile delinquency, which was integrated by the Special Prosecutor of the Children's Court of San Juan, Mrs. Antonia Llovlo, and by officials from different departments of the Department of Health, has placed at the disposal of the Committee appointed by the Attorney General to prepare the new Juvenile Courts Law the following recommendations: "1. The Children's Courts should be separated from the District Courts, or three judges should be appointed "at large" who will be exclusively dedicated to hear juvenile cases on the Island. The jurisdiction of the Children's Courts should be extended to children under 18 years of age and children under 18 but under 21 years of age who have been previously subject to the Jurisdiction of a Children's Court. 3.-It shall be the policy of the People of Puerto Rico in dealing with the problems of children that the most suitable place for the guidance, care and welfare of all minors is in their own home; or a substitute home that is similar to the child's own where the minor may develop in an environment of security, acceptance and understanding, when the permanence of the child in the child's own home is neither desirable nor advisable for his or her well-being, providing that institutional treatment shall be limited to those minors who present problems that make their stay in their own home or in a substitute home impossible, and when such institutional treatment is in the best interest of the minor. 4.-Physical, psychological and psychiatric examinations of minors should be required before a decision is made as to where they should go, in addition to a (Continued on page 15)
i The trial of Andrew J. May i was set for March 19 The former representative and his co-defendants pleaded not guilty to the charges against them ' in connection with war contract 1 Poh John L. CUTTER United Press Correspondent * WASHINGTON. 24 (Pü)- Former United States House Re' presenter Andrew Jackson May told Federal Judge Bolltsa J. Law today that he is innocent of the charges against him that he entered into an unlawful conspiracy to defraud the United States Government in connection with the war contracts for military training.
' Campaign for military training WASHINGTON, 24-(PU). -The American Legion has proposed plans for a nationwide campaign for the enactment of universal military training legislation. The Legion said today that it will support the bill of Representative Overton Brooks, Democrat, of Lul.lsna, establishing universal military training. Warren Atherton Stockton, of Ca- ' llfornla, chairman of the Nations! Defense Committee of the di.lo that the deterioration of the" American defenses H has not" liévho as vulnerable as in the <'fss prior to Pearl Harbor." J -- _ _ ' ; A ; conference is proposed on " ■ rice : WASHINGTON. 24. <FU> - The . preparatory commission of the Bureau , Food Advisory Office suggested today i¡ that nations which are members of the organization appoint a ■ group of experts to hold an international ■ conference in Southeast Asia concerning ■ rice supply problems. ■ The Commission recognizes that there is 11 currently an acute shortage of -■rice and adds, "The supplies available" for allocation by the ■ Emergency Food Council- ' cially barely amount to 40 1 percent of the import mlnii mas needs of the i rice-consuming countries." The current pro' do? do? according to the Commission, I vary greatly from country to country and the world market is in a "highly abnormal state." The Commission said it had not tried to reach conclusions on the establishment of a rice board since it would be necessary first to examine the base price and the problems associated with the price range in general. It further said that before such a board could be established, it would be necessary to consider together such plans as plans for increasing production and consumption, improving marketing methods, growing difficulties, processing practices and storage facilities. The Commission said that any preparatory committee or study group to be appointed should compile (1) production and price statistics; (2) data regarding plans and marketing methods for increasing production and stabilizing prices; and (3) data regarding plans and marketing methods for increasing production and stabilizing prices and for making war reserve measures.
war reserve measures. Brothers Henry M. and Murray Garsson, as well as Joseph F. Freeman, indicted for the same offense, also pleaded not guilty. Judge Law set the trial for frame 19. As is known, four indictments have been returned by a federal Grand Jury against former Representative May, former Chairman of the House Military Affairs Committee, for specifically accepting $16,000 and agreeing to accept $53,000 more in exchange for, according to the FBI, influencing the award of war contracts totaling $78,000,000. Jointly indicted with May were" the Garsson brothers - Henry M. and Murray- and Joseph F. Freeman, former" officers of Erle Basin Metal Products, Inc, of Elgin, Illinois, and Batavia, Illinois. t The first indictment alleges that May received $5,000 in a check from 1" Erle Basin on August 22, 1944, and also $1,000 in cash on May 1, 1943, as well as $10,000 in cashier's check" on July 10, 1943, He is also charged with requesting dirt Under Secretary of War to come to his office to hear the protests of the Garssons" and Freemans over the War Department's withholding or freezing of funds from the Garssons" and Freemans. War Department withholding or freezing funds which were madly due to the above-mentioned companies. Tami blen charges that May, in September 1945, intervened with War Department officials to have the order withheld funds allegedly owed to the Erie Basin modified or rescinded. The indictment alleges that May, in 1942, represented the Garsson interests to the War Department. And, further, it alleges a ser- May's Interventions with the De- ' parliament of the War and funclo1 "Continued on page 2 )
Check the brakes. I cooperate with the Automobile Inspectorate.
NUMBER 10837,
Indirect means sought for island sugar to enjoy better price.
w - ■_ r "r--. -'■"**"*■ ' 'f enr--"- - " r "" r , Trade favors opening more ports with cargo space Notes that this would help to reaolve the current shortage problem. -They will ask partners of commercial entities for quick removal of cargo.
iM'organizaclonM of San Juan commerce favor the opening of other ports in the island, such as those of Arecibo, Arroyo and Aguadilla, among other measures, to help solve the serious cargo congestion problem faced by the capital's private docks and warehouses. The Federation of Commerce and the Chamber of Commerce, through softors René Poltevln and FHIpo I* de Hostos, respectively, suggested this measure, not only as a step to help solve the problem of cargo storage in Han Juan, and benefit the commerce of other towns, but also as an action aimed at providing work for the "current" workers of inactive docks in the region of the towns whose docks are closed, as well as for the transportation workers of those towns. - Another measure in which the trade agrees is related to the rationing of rice. Ix"" traders understand that lifting the rationing of this article will also help to solve the situation, since there would be an opportunity for the trade to increase its production.
' -< - " for the retail trade, to use profitably the storage capacity of its own eatahledmionte". 1.0 WHAT THE FEDERATION SAYS he" Federation of the Commerce, by its executive secretary, Mr. René Fqitavin, declared, in relation to the matter of the arros. that "egún the last figures" of that dUpono. there is at the moment in H Island arros enough to take care of the nocooldadeo of the people and that therefore it is necessary to maintain the reasoning of said article. Poltevin stated that the Department of the Interior, on the other hand, should refrain from certain activities for the time being, in order to facilitate the prompt removal of the people who have arrived and are arriving in San Juan. "Until such time as it is ascertained that there are enough trucks and other transportation equipment in Puerto Rico," Poltevin declared, "the Department of the Interior should not adopt measures that would hinder or delay the distribution of incoming cargo. The whistleblower was (Continued on page 7)
ata "■"--- m Ball insists on reducing the current privilege of labor unions Held debate with Senator Murray on the floor of the Labor Committee. -WASHINGTON, 24 (PU)-Two Senators today offered diametrically opposed solutions to the struggle between employers and labor, one of them calling on Congress to reduce the privileges enjoyed by labor unions, and the other proposing the creation of an investigating committee like that proposed by President Truman.
The proposals were made by Senators Joseph H. Ball, Republican of Minnesota, and James E. Murray, Democrat, of MoM*"** Both aon members of the Senate Labor Committee, and both spoke as the Committee began public vlatas! which it hopes will serve to usher in a broad review of national labor policy. Bal! said that Congress should attack the problem of maintaining the IndUBtrial peace by eliminating or reducing the Privllegioe eapeclalee - Icgalea" immunity enjoyed by the untonea. Murray argued in favor of the Democrats' proposal to carry out Truman's recommendation for a special commission to investigate labor-management relations. That commission would consist of 12 members of Congress and eight presidential appointees. Murray said that Congress should not forget the danger of achieving a short-lived victory through compulsory techniques. He added that Congress should not rush to take orders imposing dangerous P"""" "on the basis of distorted facts or preconceived judgments. Ball countered with the warning that "if the present trends" of workerism were to continue, the American worker, within 10 years, "will be more bookish than in Nazi Germany. Said Ball: "One of the axioms of a book society is that special privileges and logical immunities," he said, "will corrupt even the best of men," and the Hdere" of unions are quite humane in that respect. Ball added that the "arrogant defiance" of the past mo", shown by John L. Lewis, head of Jo" Miner" United", was "the I logic of e "e de""rrollo". He defended Si' Ball-Taft-Smith project. which already has the approval of the Republican leadership. He said that 1 "a judicial and liberal solution to the problem of paralyzing industrial de-"stasis is not ! vast powers to arbitrate them in the executive branch of government to "n-, i face the crisis, but to correct: ! 1the law and apply it equally^ i fe - das the houses which originate the crl "ls . Trygvie Lie will leave tomorrow for Haiti HAVANA. 24 (INS)-Trygve Lif, secretary general of the United Nations Organization", "will be the object of protocol attenclone" and will attend as guest of honor to an event to be offered by the ambassador of the United States" in Havana. Henry Norweb. The Secretary General arrived yesterday afternoon by air from Panama, accompanied by U.N. Assistant Secretary Benjamin Cohen of Chile, along with "executors" William Stoneham and Brian Urguhart and Secretary Daphne Chamberlain. Lie and his entourage will leave next Sunday (maftana) by plane to Port-au-Prince, capital of Halt. From Ciudad Irujlllo They report that [ 1a University of Santo Domingo, i the oldest in the world, will invest the degree of Doctor Honorl" Cau "a d" the Faculty of Law to Trygve Lie, upon his arrival at that capl1 UL UL
The United States Rice Harvesters' Association and the Rice Millers' Association are calling for the elimination of the tariffs on imports of the grain to foreign countries, on the grounds that such action would not benefit them, and would merely lead to a reduction in the price of domestic rice. To this effect, a memorial has been filed before the Committee that studies reciprocal treaties, a copy of which was received yesterday in San Juan. In it, the reasons why new export tariffs should be provided for rice produced in the United States, and the rule of not offering a reduction in the rates of tariffs for rice imported into the nation should be upheld. Among other things, the document states the following: J The production of rice in the United States for 1947 has been officially estimated at about 70,000,000 bushels of unpolished rice, which will produce about 2,000,000,000,000,Oüü d", pound, of polished rice. Unpolished rice production in the last five years has averaged 67,b(Xl,0U0 bushels, with an average yield of 1,900,000,000,000 11bra". The domestic use of rice in the United States during the past five years has averaged about 1,000,000,000,000,OOÜ pounds, representing little more than 1,000,000,000,OOÜ pounds, representing little more than 1,000,000,000,OOÜ pounds, representing little more than 1,000,000,000,OOÜ pounds, representing little more (Sontlnued on page 24) Anderson asks for authorization to create system He believes it indispensable; i to avoid costly overproduction WASHINGTON, 24. (PU)-Agriculture Se- - crotary, Clinton P. 1 Anderson, said today that in prepa- ■ rming plans for ania produc- , agricultural clone for 1947. he was "speculating" that de- I manda so would remain high. i He added that it was "possible, but not ; extremely easy" that there might be dead-end surpluses resulting 1 from the Department's request for the same amount of arable acreage in 1947 as in 1946, Testifying before the House Agriculture Committee, Anderaon ap- < reated his statement with a doman- 1 given by legislation authorizing him to link the agricultural price-support program with some system of production or market controls. He said such action was Indispensable to avoid Unnecessary and costly overproduction. * Anderson said the Department's counsel has stated that he has authority to control production in connection with the price stabilization program. But he said he would feel it more tran- d quile with a mandate dol Congre-,| io. £
Cuban treaty precludes use of direct form Píñero explains what " ' suggested on cost" of living Staple foods would be made cheaper Economists now working on memorandum on votes, income By Joan Van Vrankon CnrrMponeal dol International News Service ...WASHINGTON, 24 (INS) -Puerto Rico's II Governor, Josú" T. Píñero, explained to the newspaper the arrangement he has suggested for bringing the costs of the conoumMoreo, in acquiring essential items, into correspondence with the Immovable Income from the sale of their sugars. This topic was the principal one in the fifteen-minute conference which Insular spokesmen, accompanied by the Secretary of the Interior, held yesterday morning with President Truman. The Governor said - reiterating a statement he had made last week following an interview with the Assistant Secretary of Agriculture - that Puerto Rican sugar prices could not be increased without a corresponding adjustment in the price of Cuban sugar. The Governor added, however, that President Truman had spontaneously offered the help of the U.S. Department of Agriculture in supplying rice, beans and other essential foodstuffs to the island's consumers at lower prices. He went on to say that this could be achieved through the purchase of the food commodities from the U.S. Government. As you know, for the past three weeks, the Governor has been urging the Department of Agriculture and other government officials to consider granting Puerto Rico a substantial increase in the price of Puerto Rican sugar. That direct increase is prevented, evidently, by the terms of the sugar contract with Cuba. It is now a question of finding the method by which Puerto Rico's sugar - that is, the island's income from its principal export product - will acquire a rise, in terms of increased purchasing power for the consumer in general: The proposed indirect increase in the price of sugar would necessarily have to be paid for by the federal Department of Agriculture, so that such action would result in a higher cost on the Puerto Rican sugar market, according to Governor Píñero. The higher increase would have to go to the island government, to pay for a "workers' food purchase tax," according to the government's plan. Island economists are now working on a memorandum showing the relationship between the island's cost of living and its income. This statement will be submitted to President Truman, his economic advisor John R. Stedman, and the Department of Agriculture. According to preliminary studies which have been made of this question, Píñero estimates that an increase, at present, of one to two dollars per hundredweight of sugar would be necessary to meet the rising cost of living in Puerto Rico. The Government's plan will allow for subsequent adjustments in line with further changes in the cost indexes. In addition to their work on the sugar price proposal, both Píñero and Muñoz Marín have been holding colorful conferences with Congressional leaders regarding possible action on defining Puerto Rico's political status in the current Congress. Muñoz and Píñero have described the conferences as "familiarizing ourselves with the new Congress and giving its members a general picture of the Island's political aspirations. The central point of the discussions has been the question of the plebiscite, in which Puerto Ricans would express their preference regarding their political destiny - statehood, dominion, independence or status quo. Muño" Marín proposed to complement his work in this regard with a memorandum that he would send to senators and representatives, describing the political and economic situation of the Island. Governor Píñero expected to leave today to return to the island. Muñoz Marin will remain in Washington for at least a week. - Both leaders, accompanied by the Resident Commissioner, hosted a reception last night at the Willland Hotel, among those in attendance were Interior Secretary Krug, Assistant Secretary of State Braden, Congressional leaders and other top public officials.
I learned m second class matter. Poet Office. San Juan. r. B.