THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST8 FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Clear to partly cloudy, with a few scattered showers, mainly over BU" YESTERDAY: High, M; low, 72" rain, 0.08 do inch.
36 Pages.
MORNING JOURNAL " ' ,
YEAR XXVIII.
Check the" brake." Cooperate with the automobile Inepecclón.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, JANUARY 18, 1947
Entered a" e "cond class matter. Port Office, San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 10830
Villaronga in favor of reevaluating the curriculum
Points out increase in the level of preparation of island teachers Only $40 per pupil per year Appeals to the intellectual leadership in demand of cooperation from the Board of Instruction. "Mr. Mariano Villaronga stated that the Department will initiate a program to expand the opportunities for the instruction of Puerto Rican veterans, in the summary of the digB also discusses the matter of the professional preparation of teachers, stating that it will be the policy of the new administration to recognize the professional concerns of the teaching profession. On these I and other matters related to ia public instruction in Puerto Pilco, Commissioner Villaronga was *x. ■rosa in the following terms. "The direction of educational affairs in Puerto Rico is one of the most difficult and complicated tasks in our government. It has always been. It is even more so today because of the vertiginous growth of the school system in recent years and the incorporation into the Department of Instruction of a number of new activities and duties which complicate in an extraordinary way the operation of the service in general. School administration in Puerto Rico is unlike that of any other region in the United States. There is not a single department or agency there which contains or in 1* d- -* ren tralizes powers and '--P 0 "*í'"dades equivalent to those of our Department of Instruction, "Moreover, your centralization of executive authority is necessary to ensure greater 2fidency in the handful of multiple administrative tasks, principally those relating to the school hadonde. "The situation in our system is very serious, as we currently have an enrollment of 888*16 students, in public and private schools; a population of 7,078 classrooms staffed by 9,643 teachers and principals, with a general expenditure budget amounting to 830,103,W). We are in the presence of a system reorganized only four years ago, in which the school structure, popularly known as the 8-4 Plan, was replaced by a six-year elementary school, a three-year middle school and a three-year high school. The Department has progressively and consistently diversified its services. They include such diverse functions as administering a vast school commodore program that consumes five million dollars a year; adult schools of which the one in Santurce, for example, enrolls nearly 4,000 students; a vocational training program that annually trains and doubtless makes useful to several dozen people with physical or mental disabilities; a vocational education program devoted to teaching. M of agriculture, the economy do. medical. trades, industries and occupations, commercial clones- free examinations and inesftanza by correspondence; served of orientation; a school dol air; and more sedently, the handful of educational matters before, rlormonto administered by the municipalities. We are, moreover, in the personal interest of Governor Piftero, on the verge of expanding and enriching the educational programs of the state.
News Digest
Congress has reacted in favor of the plan to unify the Army and Navy. The plan to "offset the emplaced" would take effect in - - - - Truman is satisfied with the outcome" of his meeting" with Republican and Democratic congressional leaders. oee Governor Piftero says the prospect for an increase in the price of sugar is "dark". V ... - The APC has suspended the granting of certificates for the purchase of special machinery, such as the concrete block making machine. - The "Guante" Dorados was the most outstanding activity in 1946. - The Cuban Novena will visit Isq la next month. Claro Duany f will come with her. - The annual congress of the Asoelación Oe Chóferes do Puerto Rico will be held in Caguas on ". í - - - - The Waterman Air Uno m hlt is in charge of the operation of TACA Airways, a company cor- - - - - The Waterman Air Uno m hlt is in charge of the operation of TACA Airways, a company cor-
tlflfllcated by Aeronáutica Civil. It is estimated that 00,800 exaoldadoo will be benefited" by the measure that provides for the cash settlement of a bonus" granted" as payment of leave flnaf - - - - The jury hearing the case of Rafael Soegard Matta, for "education, was dismissed, when the medical expert declared that the defendant could not attend for now. evo An assembly of the Ponce Drivers' Union "demonstrated against the fixed" route". - Five new" business courses will be offered by the University of Puerto Rico starting next semester. - o - The President of the Civil Service Commission, Nlgaglionl. has been made an offer to work in Caracas, in a private company. - The representative of! Housing Accelerator, Torres, procures Army surplus for new veterans' housing. Deficiency of libraries in■uIshm has worsened since 19X7. Rodolfo Rivera qomote plan do Santurce defends its lead against Aguadilla today. San Juan goes to Caguas and Ponce to Mayagüss.
Makin examines Austin's credentials _ ¿
Norman J. O. Makin (right), president of the United Nations Security Council and Australian delegate to the Council, examines the credentials of former Senator Warren R. Austin of Vermont as he prepares to take his seat as a member of the Council. New York, - (Associated Press). A mail kicked out of his office in Capitol rotunda One of Talmadge's supporters occupied it in Arnall's absence.- - Talmadge installed his family in official mansion ATLANTA. Georgia, 17 (IN8)- Elite Arnall, one of the Georgia gubernatorial contenders, was thrown out of his office in the Atlanta Capitol rotunda today by one of the supporters of Horman Talmadge, the other contender for the state governorship. . ...... Jamos Dykes, the "Talmadglist" in question, arrived first before Ar-
nall to the offices which he set up temporarily in the Capitol yesterday, in view of his being denied access to the executive office. The occupation of Ellls Arnall's temporary office by Dykes further complicates the situation created by the colorful feud of the state's gubernatorial aspirants. Speaking of his action, the new occupant of Arnall's provisional office said, "I am governor today for the same reason Ellls Arnall was governor yesterday: that is, because I got here first. Meanwhile, the United Press reports that Horman Talmadge, known to the state Legislature as the new governor of Georgia, claimed to be in full control of the governmental machinery after installing Talmadge. The United Press adds that an o" f plosion shook the Capitol rotunda yesterday sending the crowd that had gathered around the portable office of Dapper. Arnall. The crowd fled f terrified. The explosion, not obs- ( so much, parceled it to what" uw" were j close as the noise produced { by a large firecracker and not te j do a bomb. Arnall had just left his desk when the explosion occurred. The Department of the Guard has unearthed an incident which occurred after the Civil War Reconstruction War in which President Grant had to settle a dispute involving the governorship of a state, similar in some details to the dispute which preva fce ¡ actuaimento "n Goorate. i dispute, however, led to the bloodletting. Grant acted where- ( tro of the Constitution to prevent ( 1a civil war on the state of Ar- ¡ kansao- place of the *co "tacimlen- j tos of that d * : which so crossed several shots and ( several perlons rrtultaron wounded. ( Then, as now, two personsii ( claimed, and one so speaks apode- . rodo do te executive mansion. Both contending parties requested Grant to settle the question, and Grant did so by proclamation dated May 15, 1874. Ellsha Baxter, a Republican, and Joseph Brooks, a Republican, and Joseph Brooks, a non-Insurgent, went head-to-head for the governorship of Arkansas. The result of the contest -litoral . was close, and the state decreed that Baxter had been the victor. Claiming quo ha- , (Continued on page 8) ---** --W- ■
5 new commercial courses at the University Respond to the needs of private and island government employees During the semester whose enrollment will begin on January 39, the University of Puerto Rico will offer five new commercial courses of interest to employees of public and private companies, accountants, personnel managers, planners, coordinators and budget preparers, according to José M. Laraeuonte, dean of the School of Commerce. In order to facilitate class attendance, three of the courses will be offered at night, one in the afternoon and one on Saturday mornings. The only one that will be offered in the afternoon will be taught in San Juan so that students can move more quickly from their offices to the classroom. The first one, which will be given by Dr. Julio B. Ortiz, former dean of the University of San Juan, will be held in San Juan. Ortiz, former dean of the School, is Administration 306, on the fundamentals of planning. This two-credit course is for fourth-year students and employees of private and public companies who, in the opinion of the dean or the professor, can benefit from a subject that approaches planning within a scientific theory of administration, analyzes its logical foundations and studies the methods and practice in commerce, industry, agriculture and public services. The course takes into account the current fallacies surrounding planning and its relationship with the planning process, its human and emocratic aspect and its projections in the economic and social development of the community. It studies different types and levels of planning and its current status in Puerto Rico and abroad. This class will meet at the University on Mondays* from 8:15 to ten in the evening. The second is Admlnlstracióh 308' on administrative control* with one credit hour' for fourth year students and employees of public and private companies engaged in accounting or administrative work. According to Dr. Ortiz, the course will focus this semester on presenting the importance of control within the administrative process and underlining its scientific character. The instruments of control, the role of the comptroller and his functions within the framework of a scientific administration will be analyzed. The course will be offered at the University on Mondays from 7:20 to 8:10 pm. Mr. Kenneth B. Atkinson, visiting professor of public administration, will teach the third course, Political Science 354, on administrative factors in personnel organization, for three credits. The class will meet at the University on Saturdays from eight to ten o'clock in the morning. It will emphasize the administrative problems inherent in personnel organization, particularly those to be expected during the postwar period. Mr. Atkinson will also be in charge of the fourth course, Political Science 356, on the budget (Continued on page 8).
Congress has reacted in favor of plans to unify Army and Navy
Géigel Polanco found the Puerto Rican group well He will make recommendations to eliminate future labor unrest He is in favor of better selection Conditions in a certain Chicago factory are better than in another WASHINGTON, 17. - Puerto Rican Senator Vicente Géigel Polanco, informed the United Press during an interview, that he has found the Puerto Rican workers residing in Chicago, in generally satisfactory conditions, and that to that effect he will immediately submit a report to Muñoz Marin, to which report he will attach a series of recommendations, which he believes will eliminate any future discontent. Senator Géigel Polanco arrived in Washington late this afternoon after two weeks of conducting a thorough investigation into the conditions of Puerto Rican workers in Chicago. Géigel Polanco said he found 98 Puerto Rican workers at the Inland Steel Corporation, near Chicago, "completely satisfied" with the working conditions there. He added that about 300 to 400 young Puerto Rican women who were originally hired to work as maids "in private homes in Chicago are happy in their new jobs, but are looking for other jobs or are "making a good life for themselves. Géigel stated that 37 to W men employed in a foundry are still in their jobs and are quite satisfied with their conditions. He added that in "et" case those who were employed by the Chicago Hardware Founder Company, the wages and working conditions were not similar or as good as those who work for the Inland Steel ration, Géigel Polanco clarified that it seems necessary to have a more rigorous selection among applicants for jobs, so that most of those reports of bad treatment and dissatisfaction, as has been reported recently, can be avoided. He noted that some job applicants, particularly among female workers, were found to be insufficiently trained for the work required of them and did not speak English. He said that some of the girls admitted to him that they had applied for work "solely for the purpose of going for the ride, He said that there were some cases in a pregnant state that they should not have been allowed to leave the Island under any circumstances. He pointed out that about 44 girls have returned to Puerto Rico and there are 8 among the group who do not know their whereabouts, that is, those who left the employer who originally agreed to work and are either working elsewhere or have left to live a licentious life in nightclubs or with friends. Géigel Polanco added that in the case of the Inland Stool, for example, (Continued on page 8)
The Puerto Rico Department of Veteran's Administration estimates that more than 50,000 Puerto Ricans in the armed forces will benefit from the approval of the bill presented by Rep. Dwight Rogers, D-Fiori. Fiori- < da. which provides for the liquidation in cash of the bonds granted by the U.S. Government as payment for the final leave. Also, more than 1,000 former members of the Armed Forces, who have been granted the '
rero pessimistic about increase in sugar prices.
WASHINGTON. 17. (PU)-Governor Piftero reported last night that the outlook for an increase in the price of sugar to help the people of Puerto Rico combat the high prices prevailing in the price of beans and other essential foodstuffs which the island imports from the United States is gloomy. Tiflero told the United Press that in conversations he had held with Assistant Secretary of Agriculture Charles F. Brannan, he had received a letter from the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Charles F. Brannan, has received a polite "no comment" to his request that he be granted the
He went on to say that Brannan said that he would not comment on his suggestion that Port Uco be granted a preferential price for its sugars. He went on to say that Brannan told him that the Department of Agriculture is bound by the Cuban contract, which sets the country's level of sugar contracts with Puerto Rico and Hawaii. Under the terms of the Cuban contract, the minimum price for sugar in 1947 would be equal to the maximum price in 1948. This price has been determined according to a scale based on the cost index (continued on page 8).
! The President's gesture of goodwill, however, was immediately overshadowed by the renewal of the burning verbal spat between the national committee chairmen of the Republican and Democratic parties. i President Truman, in defiance of the President's wishes and in spite of the President's own wishes and the President's own desire to make a gesture of goodwill.President Truman, notwithstanding the aforementioned acrimonious exchange, has planned future meetings of the nature of yesterday's as part of his program of cooperation with the Congress, now controlled by the national party hostile to him, a program of cooperation which may have much to say about who occupies the White House after 1948. A few hours after the aforementioned, the ailing chairman of the Democratic National Committee, Robert E. Hannegan, came down hard on Republican boss Carroll Reece for suggesting that Truman's message about the condition of the nation was designed to invite the support of the nation's left and right for the next presidential contest. lannegan. who is recovering from deteriorating health conditions that forced him into temporary retirement, dictated a statement by telephone to his Democratic headquarters in this capital that Reece's remarks constituted "a deliberate attempt to inject tes "nNc 10 "*' ejlttlcas" of the ■publican© NmIomI Party leaders into the 1a "SS ■ quo: ''No one can doubt that he is a "nNc 10 "*' ejlttlcas" of the ■publican© NmIomI Party leaders into the 1a "SS ■ quo: ''No one can doubt that he is a "nNc 10 "*' ejlttlcas" of the ■publican© NmIomI Party leaders.
PONCE (By Miguel Rivera)- The battleship "Missouri" of the United States Navy arrived at this port. In this aco. It was in this port that, on the 2nd of October of this year, the American General Douglas McArthur, acting as delegate of the President of the United States, received the Japanese unconditional surrender. A commission composed of the Mayor, Mr. Andres Grillases, Luis 1 Ferre, Governor of the Leo' do Leo. - nos do Puerto Rico; Arturo Castro ■ Jr" Governor of the District Rotarlo do Puerto Rico; Juan Lulo Dmi cío, President of the Chamber of - Commerce of Ponce; Dr. Willtam Golpl, President of the Club de ico ■ Rotarlos do Ponce; Enrique Potro- ¡ vlch, President of the Club do Leo- < > nos do Ponce; Antonio retaza, proi Bidente dol Club Deportivo; Capí- - tán Miguel Martínez, chief of te Po- < । Hela Insular; Colonel J. M. Tudy, , Comand.n>" J. I, bo. ■ Field; Capt. Jame: M. Ramsey, Military Provost do te of Lo- ■ Bey Field and ti officer d * a ? n f ? n f n ° i of the Departamoiito a *J*". tillas, Commodore Lula J. d !$ ( welcome to Capt. Thomas (Continued on 1a page 14) , !
50,000 former Puerto Rican soldiers to receive cash bonuses
Settlement bill filed by Rep. Rogers of Florida - Another bill on training course
Edith Nourse Rogers, of Massachusetts, providing for the repeal of the law that "taxes" a maximum of $3,175 for singles, and $3,200 for married men and women who are benefiting from the program. As will be recalled, the latter issue prompted a controversy between the Administrator of Veterans Affairs, General Omar N. Bradley, and the National Commander of the American LegMn. Paul Griffiths, at the last Legion convention held in San Francisco. The American Legion's agreement was to fight for approval of legislation aimed at eliminating maximum compensation in industrial training programs, thus providing higher incomes for the veterans served. The public relations officer of the Puerto Rico Department of the Legion, Mr. Mario Fuentes, yesterday provided information received from the organization's headquarters in Washington, in which the following is expressed about these measures presented in Congress: "With the meeting of the eightieth congregation of the American Legion (Continued on page 15)
Truman Satisfied with Achievements of Meeting with Congressional Leaders On the other hand the chairmen of Republican and Democratic national committees have engaged in a fiery duel of words I ' PoeVoNALD G. VAN TINE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 17. (PU) It has been reported that President Truman "was satisfied with the results of his ftüclal leI gislative conference with the four Republican and the two Democratic heads of the Senate and House," held yesterday, at the House Btenóa,
I - '- ■ i, j ■ni i f j HARRY 8. TRUMAN te about the President's motivations. No one can seriously ha political venlence. To raise against him such an accusation, in the light of his every action, is only an accusation of confusing the needs of the nation with the needs of the nation by reflecting adversely on his actions.
Battleship Missouri may be visited during today and tomorrow The ship arrived yesterday at the port of Ponce, where ■e agaaajarí today oficíale, and crew. The nrocrama of the events that were prepared.
Drivers' congress is in Caguas on the 20th It will consider fixed routes; union affiliation; / tax rebates The Aosclaclón de Chóferes de Puerto Rico will hold its next annual congress on Wednesday, January 29, in Caguas. * The Board of Directors of the Association met yesterday to finalize the details of the preparations for the congress, which will consider the problem of the fixed routes decreed by the Public Service Commission. The fixed-route issue is being submitted by the leadership of the "driver class" Association by means of a referendum agreed to by the Executive Committee. This body is already circulating among the members of the Association a questionnaire in which the drivers will express their views on fixed routes and also on the affiliation of the Association to one of the bureaucratic unions. The drivers' congress will also consider the collegiality of the class, as well as the need to request from the Government a reduction of the taxes that the public carriers have been paying. Congress will take action to request the improvement of the psrnol Commissioner of Labor, and the Chairman of the Public Service Commission, will be nvltled to the act. - (Continued in the Mlln* _ MUÑOZ COMMENTS ON THE MADRID CASE WASHINGTON, 17. (PU).The repercussion that has had in the" Puerto Rican circle" in e "ta capital 1a news of !ue in Madrid circulated loose hois" demanding that "e returned to Puerto Rico to - Eapaña. was aimilar to the repercu "lón that "e registered in San Juan, cenital of Puerto Rico, The Preeidente of the Puerto Rican Senate and Chief .Lula Muñoz Marin, who is in Washington, said that such news was not worth commenting on, but added that it would please the United Preñas Unida co-ponaal, who went to communicate the news, to be a candidate for the post of ambassador in Madrid. Muflo" Marin added that "you could" take"" a couple of bull"" as aecretarlos""
Deficiency of libraries throughout the Island Rodolfo Rivera sends recommendation for an investment of $3,290,540 ■ ' r There is only one island library Situation has worsened since 1937, when Arthur Gropp made report An island program for te construction of public libraries, involving an investment of $3,290,540. has been drafted and submitted to the Design Committee <ie Public Works", by ri señor Rqdolfe O. Rivera, attaché of .cultural relations of te United States Embalada" in Guatemala. Mr. Rivera has already completed the work entrusted to him by the Jnauter Government for this purpose, having drafted a plan, which is now under study by the Diaeftoa Committee. An allocation of $8350,000 is also recommended for the training of the staff to staff the new library, as recommended by Mr. Rivera, as well as an additional $700,000 per year to cover the maintenance, operation and renovation of books and publications. In his presentation to the Design Committee, Mr. Rivera states, among other things, the following: "The expenses for buildings, land, and books to be acquired, which are prorated over a ten-year period, may be considered as capital investments. The total sum of $3,290,540 recommended for land and building acquisition for a plan of 80 libraries compares with expected expenditures of $3,382,988 included in the Government's third economic program and $2,103,000 in its fourth preliminary program. "The training of personnel will be a minor matter, after an initial appropriation of $350,000 prorated over a ten-year period. It is believed that the more economical recommendation to prtMiper the increased training of personnel at the University of Puerto Rico will be accepted. Mr. Rive- , ra also expresses that "it must be an obligation of the Island Government to establish and maintain an island library service, as the state of the Island Treasury permits. It is obvious to the visitor accustomed to the public library service that the entire island is practically devoid of the library services which lead to individual education and recreation through the IIbroB. With only one island library, and four municipally owned reading rooms in San Juan, and only five reading rooms in the rest of the 78 villages of the island, it is evident that the vast majority of the population has no access to the use of books at all. Arthur Gropp. in his report on libraries written in 1937, estimated that outside of the BlbllotecaXternegíe, there are less than 20,000 Hbros available for the use of the two million inhabitants of the Island. The situation has worsened since then". . Mr. Rivera cites other factors which have determined that the problem has continued to worsen, and adds: ' "The Carnegie Library has been developed from the old Island Library, and since 1916 has been well located in the building where Torres procures the Army's surplus I would use it in the housing for the ex-Alderadoa ¡ - - -i- .' । Mr. Walter Torres, the Island representative of the National Housing Accelerator, Mr. Frank Creedon, has initiated arrangements with the Army and Navy to provide surplus equipment and materials that can be used by the homebuilders to facilitate the rapid development of a plan to build more housing facilities for veterans of World War II. In such actlvlda- । es, Mr. Torres, who is a < colonel discharged from the Army, also met with the local director of the War Surplus Office, Mr. John L. Gllmar; " Mr. Torree's office has been ( established in booth C, at stop 8, where he reported that he will be able to provide any information required by the parties involved in the island program entrusted to him. He stated yesterday that his current efforts, in no way interfere with the work of the federal agency that operates in Puerto Rico and which is directly linked to the construction program. Our main objective is to (Continued on page o)
Defense Department to be formed > Eximan savings will be enormous with combined procurement plan Truman brought together force chiefs Aspects of merger clarified - Each branch under one undersecretary By ROBERT O. NIXON WASHINGTON, 17 (INS) - President Truman's plan to unify the nation's armed forces will reduce the number of members of the present Cabinet from ten to nine by combining the War and Navy Departments into one Secretary of National Defense. If Congress approves the merger plan, both portfolios will be abolished. This was revealed by the White House at a conference attended by the Chiefs of the Army and Navy. The conference was convened to clarify the compromise amalgamation plan announced last night. It was also reported that the proposed "unification" of the Army and Navy is in reality a reorganization plan which aims to unite and coordinate the command of the armed services at the highest levels. According to the plan, the Army and the Navy will be maintained as autonomous entities, in conjunction with a new, autonomous Air Force. The three entities, -Army, Navy Í. Aviation, will be commanded by secretaries under the supreme authority of the Secretary of National Defense. . The new Secretary of Defense will have civilian status, as will the other members of the President's Cabinet. Under the proposed reorganization, the Secretaries of War, Navy and Air Force will be of the same rank, most probably corresponding to military elements. These three Secretaries, according to the White House announcement, will not have ministerial rank, but will be free to communicate directly with the President of the nation without the requirement of having to do so through the Secretary of National Defense. Judging from the statements made by the War and Navy officials at the White House conference, there is no immediate plan for any immediate savings or budget reductions in the maintenance of the armed forces. This disproves earlier allegations of an alleged savings of "billions of dollars "* under the unification plan. Rear Admiral Forrest Sherman, Deputy Chief of Operation "Na vals," replied to a question asked at the conference that there would be savings in the long run, but not for now. Participating in the conference were Secretary of War Robert Pattenon, Secretary of the Navy James Forrerial, General Dwlght D. Elaenhower, Admiral Chester Ni mi ti, Admiral Dilliam D. Lcahy, Vice Admiral Sherman. Presidential Chief of Staff and General Lauris Norstad. The Chiefs of the Armed Forces each made a statement in support of the Compromise Attention. Said ri Serretlwo Patterson: "The Secretary of War fully endorses the proposal. The plan is workable and effective and does not destroy the desired autonomy in the three branches of national defense." Secretary of the Navy Forrestal and Admiral Nlmltz expressed their approval of the plan. General Elsenhower said that he had always regretted the disharmony which had arisen between the military and naval branches in connection with the unification plan, but he felt that it had now been "stilled. During the ensuing deliberations, the interdependence of the Army, the Navy and the Marine Corps as units of the national defense was fixed. With the exception of the creation of an autonomous Air Force, the basic structure of the armed forces will continue as before. The answers given to the questions that are asked make it clear that the Fusion Plan centralizes and coordinates the command of the armed services at the highest levels, with a view to facilitating their joint operations both in times of peace and in the event of a new war. A United Press dispatch reports from Washington that Congress responded jubilantly by hailing the unification plan. Even its" most vocal opponents blessed the plan, mainly because through it they have been able to achieve" sound economies. Senate Armed Forces Committee Chairman Chan Gufnoy said his group would act "very soon to ensure the removal of any obstacles that may arise in the plan to unify the armed forces. House Armed Services Committee Chairman Walter Andrews said the agreement reached between the Navy and Army was "a splendid plan." He said (Continued on page 8)