THE WORLD
FfOJPWlC!" Dtl ' TIIMRO PASSES IRLA, TODAY; Partly cloudy, with scattered showers. Winds east to audaate. from U to II mile* per hour. IN RAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: Partly, mind cloudy last night, with vlentn" del Mía da I to 10 miles per hnra.
38 Pages 5<
MORNING JOURNAL.
YEAR XXVIII.
Check lo" brake", (.'oopero with the ln "pocclón do "utomóvlle".
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, APRIL 19, 1947.
Entered aa second ciua matter. Po "t Office, San Juan. P. B.
NUMBER 10920
Prices of Certain Foodstuffs to Be Lowered; Hearings to Be Held on Island Case; Piñero Denounces Absenteeism Plot
The I i "pm i n men ' <> do Salud ha m . Ornado tmn large amount of va 'lina* confia ln smallpox to States l nest* " fin <le inner reserves d, 1 -la* in San linn and continue, without ' .fci mption the immuniznclon of ln '■nhlnrhm fine was started in Snn .liínn moons last IInsta e| Thursday n Himn hour, some 4,f)21 extudinntes - If la* school* public San Juan i'nhlnn been vaccinated. It was expected
Compendium of Mol ¡cías
Wholesalers tmitortadmes d"> R pork redoubts assure that the price will be adjusted for certain livestock In the meantime, the levels continue to be unchanged on the island. - W - Cordon says there will be hearings on the Kstadldad and the elected Governor for Puerto Ríen. - The case of Mariano VIllaronga will be resolved next week. * * * u< It is definite that Muñoz M" rin will speak nutAann at the consumer congreen*. Dr. Pahln Morales Otero will also do so. M - - - Migue la haja in retail sales in United States", as revealed by Government Report * " w Exemption to hotels Included in substitute bill on new lnduatria". - - - The Legion will dissent vetrann problems in the conference which will take place tomorrow at the Athenaeum. - Picó will attend a conference on urbanization which will begin in Cleveland on May K. Approved appointments rn the Renado Insular. - " - - - Menadn approved aid for ln" vetrano" student"; and extension of scope of law on ।
Industry* new, Fine of Al into N M M Tere". Almela for trnfnr fio Influencing a Jury. Health ordered States V n |. do" large quantity of smallpox vaccines. ♦ - - - Re prese nt untes of commerce and Industry will visit Plóern on Wednesday to raise their opposition to the PRAVO. 1.a ( Amara pa "ó iiroject eliminating the ( omission of Civil Service and creating a Central Personnel Agency. iii ii< * The Rector will ask be allowed * 1 PR to handle herself any possible social discrimen rarlnlnl n. ■* ..i a For des days investigated the special attorney general, Aponte, alleged Irregularities in the Municipal Court of Patillas, - - - - Plñern denounces plot ahsent 1st"; Charges him with trying to achieve law to pay trlhutn of the mn at the time of sale. Believes it would leave the Erarlo without funds, Worries federal authorities", - ♦ - Two Lncendlns continue to consume the ruins of the Induatrlal city of Texas City : workers hitaran even corpses are repeated the" scene" of the greatest horror.
He blames him for pushing law to pay rum tribulus at time of sale He believes he could <leave treasury without funds He says *he has realized ({tic have pressed LegÍRlatnra Innular By DARIO ( ARLO Rcdáclnr of EL MUNDO In his first confrrrcm'iH dr Píen"", drspué" fie his return do EstRfln" United States, the gobornudor Je "ú" T. Plhoro, yesterday denounced ln qym he described as nn" conspiracy of inicíese" absenilslus, to Ingrai the passage of a federal lev Insurgí n that would permit payment of the rnntrihiirlón snhro Ins ions at the momentln do leave éslmq for sale, tic the stores" of debit in Ins continental port*, with which, n xu judgment, could cause■e serious" disruptions in ln. public service* of the pals. The Governor went further to say, after declaring that almost all of Ruarlo Rico's industry was o*'á cmilro. The possibility was raised that the tax was allowed to be paid at the time of sale, after two years or two and a half years of being in the bonded warehouses on the mainland, These interests, which he described as "absentee", will force the stoppage of liquor production in Puerto Ríen, said the Governor, who has been accused of stopping the factories in the United States, which are major producers of whiskey in the United States; that in other factories, that* mrpnrnrnclnno* control 31 notn percent of the shares; and that another number nslá under contract of those ''nmpaólas ah "entl "tas, for cuate* are producing ron The problem said, was raised by the Governor to the" federal authorities, n who according to expressed Plñern, "left thinking", in view of the "gravity that this situation takes and do that such possibilities for this are so feasible." The Governor began by referring to the considerable decrease which the income on the ions has been experiencing, After declaring that this income is the largest of the Government of Puerto Rico to attend to the services it provides to the people, he added: "On different occasions there have been attempts to stop or hinder the receipt of this money by the Government of Puerto Rico. When I was Resident Commissioner, a project was proposed which would tend to make this income onfiura to the 'Continued on page 13>
The Capital's Health Department ordered the State to provide a large amount of 5HCUIUK against viruses to Irncr rcMcrva dispouildr, - 5,000 children* of encocla
The Department let it be known to * i a ' ós of its publicity officer, sofmr Humberto Padró, that the vaccination has been centralized "hour in bis public schools in the me- , irnpolltana area of Snn .luán, and that it is the purpose of the Department to extend In same gradually to totin the Island, in the" piaivimos days. Also, that special attention is being given to the vaccination of persons who come to the Island from the United States, as well as those who come to New York. The Department is prepared to supply such quantities of vaccine as may be necessary to carry out its program without interruption. (In order to ensure the smallpox immunization of those who are leaving the country, the Department of Health has made the necessary arrangements with the airline and shipping companies. Cards are being prepared, which will be distributed by the airline companies, for all those arriving on the island. In these cards they are instructed to report immediately to the health unit (Continued on page 7).
All the industrial and agricultural tasks in the Central Aguirre "st as the shipments of sugar of the above mentioned sugar mill, were yesterday stopped, on the occasion of n huolgi initiated by the workers of factory of the above mentioned sugar mill, that "urged as a result of a discrepancy. Ha Jurisdiccional existan'-' rn >", ilíci to da Jobos, The strike in l" facto rt d" l.i Central Aguirre began antier, command the workers affiliated to 1" U T M, were preparing to load the steamer Manta, with raqibna. ría d" Central Caribe, which has
। House passed bill eliminating CS(" 1 ERlahlece an Agency ' ('.entr "l dr Personnel for ("ohirrno of Puerto Rico Made appropriation dc> StLótMMMMI to the SI A For ('onnejo Insular de j Emergency $1,000,000 Other measures approved* I Ls Cámnt's de Representante." reynudó sus fr "hajo" " la" two dr la tsrdc dr "vrc bnlo )"" '"residenci" (|r| Speaker, doctor Ernncisco M Susnni, Impartiéndolo su "protinción con lo." votes in cnnfrn dn 'os rcnresentnntes Celestino triarte, José Portilla v Eugenio Enn! Suároz "I P, del S R4R. pnrn establish 1 a Central Personnel Agency p "r" the Government of Puerto Rico v. mor mor therefore, denting the Civil Service Comí*lón This proví*lón was Hgornmonte discussed, being defeated some amendments m'opuestn" pni o| representative Emit Suárez Ln House amobó "'oí "demás, r| R de! S 3SH "signando |" ennf'dnd do ciintrn mlllmios v medio dr dólacrs al Servicio de \ruoduc. tos v Alcnntarillndos do Puerto Rico pnrnrnn la construcción v mejoramiento do nrmodiirfos v sistemas dr "tcnntnrillndn en ln Island. Other" bills "proved "see "n third reading pm the House were the following' P. del S. Rór "signando fondo" "i Departamonto de Instrucción pern defray 'os gasto" que oca done el programa de oxcuol "s superiores nocturnas y disponer que no se cobrará " los estudiantes una cunta mayor do cincuenta centavos por asl¿nntur" ni sor matriculados en dicho programa; P. do| S. 703 appropriating the sum of *1,000,000 to the Emergency Island Council to be invested in service projects and administrative expenses in accordance with the provisions of Lev. No. I of November 1912; P. del S 743 to "iilorlzar 1" creation of a Special Revolving Fund for Investments and to "tifm Izar "I Auditor of Puerto Rico to charge the* ' public corporations the cost of all" examinations and investigations sn- ' hre the accounting of the same. P del S, 013 to clear a new '■'laza do Inez par a "l Tribuna) del । Dstrifo Judicial de San Juan; P, I dot S 710 par" croar un Musen do । Rollas Artos, allocating *25,000 country e| same, P del S R37 autori- ' ■indo al Comisionado d" lo Inte- ■ rmr do Puerto Rico a adquirir por । rompía o expropiación forzosa una i pareóla do faireño, propiedad del i Dr, Leandro López de la Rosa, indi- , cada en Hato Roy; P. del S, 1RR t naca onmcndHi article 2 of the ( Lev number 45 a hr II 25 do 1P4K that i autnrizn the Commissioner of Agrien)- tura y Comercio to distribute the Clin- i la insular do pteduction on individual " quotas do morcado among the 1 cosechero."P of S 492 I nara to amend section 3 of Lev number 102 of May 14, 1914 entitled 'Lev Authorizing the Miforldad do Enantes Eluviales de Puorlo Rico v "I Treasurer do Pner- , lo Rico to efoclitac payments to com- , pens "r the effect of the tax exemption; P rio! S. R4I "signando I" ; sum do *iootW for the "mpllaclón t v roconstmoción v acquisition of equipment for the Go- i bosnllalo" of the Go- i - Continued on page 22> 1
The Governor, Don Jesus T. Plfiero, will meet with the representatives of commerce and industry next week to hear the views of the opponents of the much debated Senate Bill 836, to expand the activities of the PRACO. stores of the Agricultural Company, authorizing them to deal in articles of general consumption imported from the United States and from foreign presses. The President of the Iriso Council.
(All work at the Aguirre power plant continues to be paralyzed.
The plant has been dismantled for transport to Mexico. The workers of the Central Aguirn* tacforia workers who have demanded to be given partí, clpaclón nn the work on board the ships, to the workers" "filia do* "I Union in Jobos. s" were " I" strike when the ir "hojudoi r" "filiado." to the UTM da Ai roy o and Jobos, were n work "I steamer. E conciliator Eranelsco Verdiales was h "bí" moved an'ter to Johos to try to snluclon ir the confílelo in that port, "urging then," the but in \gunr? Yesterday (Continued on page 22.) 1
hny to Piensa Unida that there will definitely be public hearings." in viciation on the" statehood" project" and elective governor p "t" Puerto Rico, before its Committee, at the "earliest date before June 30. Cordon said that he would probably hold the hearing on both the simplified bill on the elective governor and the statehood bill of William A. Langer, the same fochn. He added that the repuplieann do l'akoiN do) Nnile lia lia oslado "apllccando enough pressure" for c| Committee to consider his bill. Meanwhile, Coidon said. "the first matter to Halar by the ('omite os the appointment of scúor Mnimno Villarnng", and I trust to be able to s "llr drl same "Igun di" of the pió. xlm" week," Coidon said q. the suhcomlié Insula! would not so meet on lime", 21 of ■ihrll. as so hahl" Originally indicated, poro nr'i "dló that eonli "b" fioj "r the matter decided do lodo" modes ln next week. He added that he has not yet had a chance to praise the "record" of Ins audlcnelns because of how busy he has been with the" hearings so(Cnntinued on page 22''
already being received in Washington, signed by the directors of the Puerto Rican mills, and no difficulty has arisen as yet to hinder the processing of these documents." It will be recalled that representatives of the Serrallés firm filed an objection with the federal Department of Agriculture to the distribution of the local sugar quota to the mills and refineries, alleging discrimination against them, which prompted a meeting in Washington at which representatives of the mills and refineries were present, This prompted a meeting on Washington, which was attended by Mr. Vlllamil, other representatives and members of the Sugar Producers' Association, officials of the Department of Agriculture, and representatives of the Quorolianie firm. As a result of that meeting, Mr. Vlllamil reported that "in my opinion, the situation will remain as it is with respect to quotas. "In addition, he attended several meetings in Washington with members of the APA and their representatives there to discuss other sugar problems, and said that he has summoned the General Board of the Sugar Producers Association for a meeting next Tuesday to inform them of my efforts or to report on other matters concerning the Association,
(.omission Comeivio, Industry will visit Piñero on Wednesday In e*ta rnlrrvinlH. aoIícícíImiIh by De HoMon. *e planteiir" cano de la* PRAC.O and other legration.- Industrialists hold meeting next week.
Inr do Asociaciones Reprexentatlva." de! Comercio y de la Industria, señor Flllpo L, De Hos'os who is also president of |" Cámara de Comercio do Puer'o Rico, informed yesterday that o| Gobernador concedió l" entrevista pat" o| o| m'óx'mo Wednesday, at two o'clock and mc.i',t_de 'a afternoon, Ln request for audmncln *o formulated to the Governor mtedyer by telegraph, interrogated -on the matter, the dreamqr De Hostos dlio i|i;c enough yesterday not "e speak demgnidol the persons that will form') the co- i mission that will see the ! "I commerce and the Industrie Mr. Da Mostos, as prest- ; denle of the insular Council d* Asodaciones Representative! of Commerce and Industry, on behalf of the above-mentioned group, which includes, as a member, the presidents of the* Trade and Industry Council. be, the presidents" of the* o'rgamz"-¡, dones who sent representation to the congress of comercian" h* Indus, tríale" held reclcntefñan'e in "I Sixto Escoba Park 1 Por op" 1 narte, we "abido qu - Some 1 d" "sta" organizations have been 1 requesting, individually, nu- ' dlencl" to the Chief Executive, on re- I I lotion with the same issue of >a" store* PRACO and other legislation, " Among the entities of ,'eferan "la i are the Center of Del Milis, c 1 (Continued on page 22)
Cordon dire that will revolve around the Cstadidad v (Governor * Most likely c* final ruling on Villaronga will fall next week. -The ÜRP continues to ask that he not be confirmed By ( HARI.ES McCARE Press Correspondent l'nida WASHINGTON. 18. (PID Senator Guy C. Cordon, chairman* of the Senate Siib('omitee on Territory" and Insular Issue" of the Senate, stated.
SENATOR OUY C. CORDON Chairman of the Suh Committee on Territories and Insular Matter* of the Committee on Land" Púhl'cn*,
Villamil believes that the quotas fixed for the Lonrui'rió h Ih rriinión chud" plants in Wá*hington will not change nor will the company Serralh'*.- APA General Meeting scheduled for Tuesday* The executive viecpresideiito of the Asociación de Pinduetore" do Azúcar, Mr. Fernando A. Villamil, who returned from Washington, reported yesterday that he was under the impression that the local sugar quota, as stated, will not be reduced by the Federal Department of Agriculture. Mr. Villamil asserted that the contracts for the sale of the 1347 sugar cane crop "are in force".
The expiition to the industries covers E*lán hotels included m r| project *ii*litnto.- Exempts GE factories I'n_ substitute bill to the P of the (' 1053, to amend the definition of new Industries* and to protect the same by exemption d" contribuelnnc", was filed in the Senate by the ('omission do Ilaclenda and komento, Said new proyoclo varies sustanrialmcntc c| original bill of l" ('ámnrn c) that Icnin the sanction of the (lompañla dr Eo. As will be recalled, the House bill, the most important provisions of which were published by EL MUNDO, repealed the Act empowering the Public Service Commission to hear such matters, and created a Tax Exemption Board for new industries. lo contains numerous provision' 1 * qu" "Iteinn the original bill fum (regrettably almenfc A conllnunclrtn we offer a sin thesis of the Senate substitute bill, a (foot lineemos reference; In defining new Industries*, Hspeeiflcumente is included "Ins mdustrlH* of glass containers, pa pol, footwear and eeramlen, md "hlei ldns by ln CompHñln do Fomento lndust rial." Hotels operated in Puerto Rico under standards of sanitation and efficiency acceptable to the Executive Council of Puerto Rico shall be entitled to the tax exemption in accordance with the following; 1 For the first five hundred thousand dollars of movable and immovable property, as appraised by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, owned by the enterprise, an exemption of 25 percent of the property tax shall be granted for the period from July 1, 1947 to June 30, 1934; d" 20 percent of the property tax for the period from July 1, 1947 to July 30, 1934; e" 20 percent of the property tax for the period from July 1, 1947 to July 30, 1934; e" 20 percent of the property tax for the period from July 1, 1947 to July 30, 1934; f" 20 percent of the property tax for the period from July 1, 1947 to July 30, 1934.30, 1934; d" 20 1 percent during the fiscal year lü,M1955, 10 percent during the fiscal year 1935-1956 and 5 percent 1 during the year 1956-1957, j 2-For the next five hundred mi) dollars of propl"(l "d movable or immovable property, the exemption shall be 35, 28, 14 and 7 percent for the pe ' rindo and lo" years above indicated, respectivamentc. 3 For the next million dollars of movable and immovable property, the exemption shall be 50, 40, 20 and 10 percent for the period and years indicated above. - 4--For the next million dollars of movable and immovable property, the exemption shall be 75, 50, 23 and 12 per cent for "I period and years above stated," respectively. '- 5--For all movable r and immovable property in excess of three milllo- r no* dollars i$.3,000,000), the o.xen-i tion shall be 100, 75, ,30 and 18 porte- (Continued on page 10)
* No cessation of fire in ■ Texas (atv I \ rr*ion dp they found I alive* rn ruin* of the or Monsanto is disproved Se n "pileii <"s<*eiias of the greatest horror Physician* take measure* to prevent (foot now be dr*develop epidemic By R""l>crt E. Rrown Cm rr "pnn""l of Prens" t'nid" TENAS CITY, Tcins. 18 'PU" - I Tresdcmn" ti aI>" |"dmcs of rescs'c, bsnndn gunnies pAin protect themselves contri" )" g "ngren" producid" by g "srs, Broke into the Induslrinl district. made psvesns dr c "tn cludnd where bsn burning piopledsde* vslorsdHS at $150.<w. 000. pma encontrsi dr scenes of horror and destruction without pnralelo. (Vé"""" fn(o* of In tr "godl" in I* liáglno 2) j D'" Incendo" oil Inn/n1 b*n fodwvlA llnmAS and lories dr smoke dr grnn nlturn mientrns grnndrs "purrens" (Rulldozers) threw n a side ln." twisted debris from the buildings and allowed workers with earns pintadns dr grease that lent " perform rstn nauseating tnrr", enter "Járea of the sinister, pestilent " corrupted flesh. . As the rescuers had already guessed, they found bodies so disfigured by the blows and by the fire that it was impossible to recognize them. And each body constituted a potential "nir. n "za for the living, a possible source of epidemic. The doctors took every possible precaution to protect the workers. Thirty-five bodies had been found among the ruins of the Monsanto Chemical Company - a factory valued at $19,000,000 when the workers did not talk about it but in a part of it. This factory stretches "across a space d" .30 ncre" on which he speaks numerous buildings. The number dr dead known" hit "umenfado " 313 and the speed with which the <a dáveres are being found Indicates that the total will be probnhlcmcnlr of 4(10 William M, Ganb, president of the Monsanto, announced that "a fnlt". lian 307 men of the" 450 that e". lAhan Irahajando in the pl "nt" when it began/mon rl Wednesday the desnsfroso" explosions, but not h" lúa indicH concrelH "lgun" that all, nor siquicrH a great |>"rfr of them, rstuvleian dead, ge He indicated that amid the panic and desperation dr the horns of Wednesday "I est "ll "r a giant explosion behind (Ir will hear and Heñirse it "tmósfero of smoke to a di". tmicla of loo miles, i enfenarr's of men fled the town. L" specification made by Hcd dr employees rnslnntvs is the .iguíeme: "31 dead* (without incmir lo" cíici pos mcnnttodos in lo plant boy i: 41 injured 71 unharmed. Due to the severe restrictions that the authorities have imposed on reporters, rumors spread quickly among the dumbed-down population. During In torde the survivors of the victims (Continued on page 15) Morales Otero at consumer congress Agreed to speak on nutrition. - Definitive <|ne Muñoz will participate ' Mañane *r will celebrate the Congress ' Df'siimidorcs sponsored by the ' ( omlt* mine presides Mrs. Cavi- ' ( \/h Vivero, The congress has ' not purpose the creation of an < entity (|)ir represent and defend । 'os Interese" de |n" cnn "umtdore". ' A Ja* nine o'clock in the m "ñ "n" co- 1 menzoran lo" work of the congre- z so in "I Sixto Escoliar Park,' d" San Juim and is expected to enneuuan ""'presentations of most of the" labor entities, agi'U- । civic" and other nations. In addition to the "person" who "e J lia "nTinciado "nTinciado by the organizers . who have taken the floor "in the r act .niormó yesterday e| professor unl-¡ r versifmio, doctor Antonio J. Coin-' 1 rado, organizer of the congress, that " doctor Pablo Morales Otero, Di-;, rector of the School of Medicine '' Ironical, will address lo" consu- 1 nudores. Dr. Morales Otero will speak on the problem of nutrition in Puerto Rico. The closing speech will be given by " representative Pedro Ve- ' ' a Rerrio", president of the Sindica- *' te Azucarero, who will represent ''i in "i congress the board of directors t* of that labor grouping P As for " the organization of p consumioore* that is Intended cons- If (Continued on page 22)
The RMcguran ni ay orí* so importadora de lo" product* of pork i Levels remain, sm however, igualen 1 Unica rebaja notable ne registra rn harina*, al ( abarrotarse el mercado Pnr R. SANTIAGO SOSA I Redncfor de EL MUNDO Se espera que el mercado insular experimente en la" próxima tres o eURlro semRne" una rebaja en le" pierios "I por mayor, de productos . The latter reported that the latter reported that it will be able to sell its products in the next three or four weeks, with a reduction estimated at between 13 and 25 percent in the most important items, as reported by Swift and Armour, local importers of lard, meat, lard, butter and other food products. The latter reported that lard, cheese, and butter have registered in the last few days a decrease in wholesale bids. Butter has dropped . jh a quintal; butter is ro- . lized ten cents less per pound , (foot the last wholesale price tlrl the market, while qua1 sos h "n dropped from $1.50 to $2 a quintal. In the metropolitan market, । butter is being quoted to lo" consumers at 90 and 95 cents a !'hr "¡ cooking ham, at 58 . and HO cents pounds; lard, . i 4.3 cents pound; and Ua- . mado de papa cheese, at 72 cents* pound. । Lo" prices of meat" s" man- , have high still, according to the uj. ) limas quotations dr prices at the most i udeo ried" released by THE . WORLD several days ago, As of Junes, the prices" a! wholesale of meats, butter, lard, bacon. Hams, guaso". . sausages and canned nlimento" canned - produced riel pork, will register I a slight drop from the present ni- - veles, - as announced by the Swift house, - which will reach for 1aa . next" three or four week" averages of 15 " 25 percent ra" - l aja by specific lines, a - moflida go moflida receiving larger shipments. To this effect, Mr. J. Sehncfer. manager of the Swift house, stated that on Monday a shipment of pork proquotes, estimated at me- ■ dm million pounds, will be received at 1 San .luan for distribution- ■ so in' the marendn" rio San Juan, i'eleven and Msyagüo/, * prices more '■"jos than Ins (ju" prevailed paih cl last shipment received. Meanwhile, 1" house Armour and Company, by voice ri" its manager, se. mu A E Copeland, said that the tenilom ia a |" b "jR eq the price gives Ih manlceR will have to produce pre' ios fAmhién more hsjns in producios drl pork, h "I as in the cari'es He added that "a when not s" have not s" locibidn notifications of Esindo* l'nido" rn as " un* rel'ajH rn lo" "ctualrs rates rio prices pair jRmones and ntros product" -io| crido, Mr. Copeland explained that on March 1, export permits for Europe and other countries for pork products were suspended, a circumstance which allows for increased exports to other countries. Up to now, the Feorral Government has not renewed such permits, thus allowing greater freedom of action for the North American markets, and a part of the "I trade with other countries. *It is expected that the drop in price will be reflected incalmentr. a* voice begin to arrive to Ir Island the" utlmo" shipments ordered" Ro('rla also happen, according to expiteado, that ol local trade begin to " liquidate its old stocks drl product, bought " i Ins high, and that such situation will cause a sudden drop in prices dr retail sales. On restrictions on future shipments of Puerto Rican lard, it was reported that although the regular 1947 slaughter in the United States has not yet begun, it could not be feared that there would be a repeat of the situation which produced the notorious shortage of this foodstuff in Puerto Rico several months ago. In the local market there are abundant quantities of the product, and orders have been placed by hand at the reduced price at which it has been quoted in the last few raffles. It was reported that the sale to Cuba is 15,500,('OH pounds of butter, ""gun the reciprocal trade agreement between Cuba and the United States, will not affect future supplies to Puerto Rico. For their part, local importers and sellers explained an anomalous situation in "I morcado da harinas rio trigo. This product, it was explained, has not suffered a decline in the export market, but even so, it is being sold locally, at a lower price than the mills. It was reported that the quantity of flour on the local market is so great that the purchase rations from mills in the United States have been practically suspended. These flours" "a (.cumulated in Puerto Rico after the end of the last maximum strike, and the fear that they might be damaged has caused a drop in the price, and flour" for the manufacture of flour" is $2 and $3 cheaper" than the prices quoted by U.S. mills. It was reported, moreover, that there is a (Continued on page 6) 7
Caucus raises entertainment tax
1 'omité mprcinl submits today to leaders the study of the island budget The Chambers are expected to sanction it today - Presidents of the bodies* are confident that the work will be completed today The "bill" to be considered by the Legislature. The study of the budget bill was completed yesterday afternoon by the special joint committee of the House of Representatives and today it will be submitted to the caucus and possibly approved by the Legislative Assembly. The caucus agreed to the approval of a bill considering foreign artists visiting "*'* Island as resident" therein, to pay a tax d" Ingreen Inferior to that which they are obliged" to pay at present, The bill also allows them to cim 1 - tas deductions which are not granted to them now. It was agreed to approve a bill increasing the entrance fees to public shows from 20 percent to 25 percent. This increase of 5 percent will have to be paid by the public attending theaters, movie theaters, night clubs, baseball, boxing and other venues where the entrance fees are charged for public shows. It was also agreed to approve a project of Mr. Ertiesto Ramo" Anlnnlnlnlnl allocating the sum of $125,()OO to acquire by purchase the USO building in San Juan, known as the Puerto Rnn Casino building. The purpose is to dedicate it to the Palacio do Rolla" Ar. tes or to install in OI the Escuela Libre de Música de San Juan and painting galleries. From the same representative Ramos Antonlnl. it was agreed to approve a project increasing from $30,000 to $100,000 the appropriation for the support of the three music schools established in San Juan, Ponen and Mayagílez. It was also agreed to approve a project of) Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones allocating $25,000 to establish a Museum of Paintings and reproductions of works of art, by means of plaques, a system that, according to what was said, is being used with notable success in all the artistic centers of the world i' "davfa nn was not reached " agreement as to whether or not to authorize the Treasurer to return the excess of two thousand dollars to the Treasurer, and the Treasurer to return the excess of two thousand dollars to the Treasurer, to return the excess of two rentnvm of arhlfrln pngado for each stick of gasoline that they have in oALlrmin lo" trafl cantes of that nrnduct on the first day of nilm, date nn that will begin to govern the lev that will row in one cent o| adlrlonal tax mee at present c* of three rentav o" About r| nrmriin to cundir |n< telephone lines* ri "l Government to the Porto Rico Telephone Co nothing was done yesterday, and it was said in legislative circulas that that t , rfl^,.|n"| As well as a new revenue proverlo r|r rantrihucifm.es, .will be discussed in a special session to be convened within three months The bill erring the Office <b Personal was expected to be passed attache pm the two rúmaras, and although it was ban h"(|o cumlendas con la" which Gnbmnarim Piñero does not agree with, The legislative work gave a breakthrough during yesterday's session, and, according to reports, both the President of the Senate, Mr. Muñoz Marín, and the Speaker of the House, Dr. Snrom, are confident that the session can end this evening, so that the House will be able to adjourn. This evening, so that tomorrow" Sunday they can go to their homes.
I RAISE THE CASE OF FRAT.
BBs W ■
Vnlversity Rector, licenj ciado Jaime Renítea, who nyer met nn a group of students, , to know their criteria aohre the , bill that eliminates fraternlda- । des and snrnHdadrs at the Vnlversity. । . Benitez will ask < .den free hand to l'ni t ersity ' I ; He believes é*tH can aduat* ; in any diMccrime. 1 1 He met with student* 1 r By Luis Hernandez Aqulnn Editor of EL MUNDO That the nrimlnistrnelñn univ n "i!" . i na has not encouraged hei rinndndnd , among Ins student" should, do another. । car a life "oclal má* nmp'ln *1 , estudiantado, y que el provecto dr , lev 1309 del trpi exentan'.'' Etimos f i Antonlnl. coaita autonomy lint- । erslt arla, were the ptnfr." dr , mas discussion aroused m, a re. union of 34 delegates from Lalm'nldados and unlvrrs i ai the । that summoned yesterday the recto" Jaime v Benitez to his office to nlr the r point" of view of lo* represent- । le" of said groupings, arpes t to Go to ln Legislature to raise r the matter. The bill was amended in the Senate, and a - uif oncln was held in the House of Reprcseiii iqirs, t on ln" amendments lntrod'|c'dnl' , s | as the amendments were not accepted by the House Rnjn, according to ln- d formation supplied by ,n Oft- t t Record of that organls- e mo, Rector Ronitoz was nncontra- c ¡ hn nyer discussing the assumption riel n n nroyecto, with some leglubidore" ni interested in it, t , The meeting convocnda pm vi Rae. The meeting, which consisted of 34 participants, including a number of teachers, fraternities and sororities, only eight people presented their points of view. I ns ladies of Ins smorida- s two, rudders nslstloron nn represan- c laclon of said" bodies, not q externalized their* ideas, a He made known rl roeinr Roml *,■" une n had not varied his previous i.tu iu of radical and fírme opposition i q.i* to my form nlguna and hi|n the p.i'm of n the CPU be sponsored pioh jcn \ b foster racial'v cy- r cllisions ,v dnscnllflrneinnns. pitra * pcr "onn any with motive -ti t < ( 'em i m n < n 11 page 13 -