THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND TODAY. - Partly cloudy with occasional showers; winds from the east, 15 to 25 mph. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 79; rain, 0.58 inches.
36 Pages.
MORNING DAILY. i -
YEAR XXVIII.
Help fight tuberculosis. Purchase Christmas stamps. "4, ~ J
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 4, 1947
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan. P. B>
NUMBER 10816
Fernós waits for Muñoz to discuss status
Mr. Elmer Ellsworth, member of the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rico Agricultural Company, declared yesterday that he is not satisfied with the way in which some of the projects initiated by the said Government instrumentality have been developed during the past year and that he will advocate that more energy be given to the Company's activities this year as a means of helping the Island's economy. Out of the 512,000,000.00 appropriation made by the Legislature, the Com-
Compendium of News
Yesterday the Eighth Congress was constituted. The Bllbo case delayed the organization of the Senate. The House, on the other hand, elected its officers yesterday. - - - Anderson explains the price policy on sugar, which has been followed by Federal Agriculture. Commerce may remain open tomorrow, Sunday, until 10 p. m., according to proclamation of the Governor. - Thirty cents an hour increase for factory workers, and 00% price increase for agricultural workers, union asks Sugar Producers. Industrial Association accuses Tugwell of not helping private industry. Tribute was paid at the University to the late educator gortorrlqueflo Gerardo Sellé" SIA announces that the" last" rain" allow normallsar the supply desagua. Fernós cepera Muflo" arrives in Wáahington to discuss the case of * A committee of the Washington Cdmara of Representatives has called for enforcement against 1m corrupt practices.
It singles out CIO unions, 11 corporations and Com- - -- Measure transferring PEG constructions to Interior to be introduced in February. - - - There is uncertainty regarding federal funds for highways and the homes program. Sol Luis Descartes and Ramón Colón Torreo will represent Puerto Rico in the hearing" on tariffs on the 15th in Washington. - Ellsworth unhappy with development of certain Agricultural Company projects. - The Board of Plans expects to submit its final report on the water supply in the metropolitan area on the 8th. ♦ - - Before Congress, the State Solidarity Bill for Education is expected that teachers will receive from the 15th to the 17th their paychecks for the week's raises. Ponce defends its lead today against Santurce at Escobar. Tomorrow the Gallos del Botón y la Golilla tournament begins.
He said he had not had time to discuss the issue in Puerto Rico He will file a measure on citizenship He will also defend island interests in the hearing on the 13th , By CHARLES McCABE , United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON. 3. - After an extended visit to his island, Dr. Antonio Fernóa Isern, the Royal Commissioner of Puerto Rico to the United States, is back in this capital, prepared to meet with the Eighth Congress, which begins today, which may take some decisive action on the question of the political status of Puerto Rico. Dr. Femó" told reporters that one of the first things he will do is to draft legislation to clarify the "difficult" citizenship status of Puerto Rican nationals who have been residing outside the United States for more than five years. On this point, the doctor said that he has been in constant communication with the Department of State and that he may receive a response from said department shortly. The Doctor added that if he receives a favorable response from the State Department, there will be no need for him to file legislation on this matter. The Resident Commissioner went on to say that the main piece of his official activity will be to present the case of Puerto Rico in the matter of international tariffs before the Committee on Reciprocity Information, which is scheduled to hold public hearings on this matter on January 13. On the issue of Puerto Rico's political status, Dr. Fernós said he has no plans, at this time, to file definitive legislation. He explained that he and Muñoz Marin have been so busy during his recent stay on the island that he has had very little time to discuss status issues with the President of the Senate, adding that as soon as Muñoz Marin arrives here, which is expected to be early next week, he intends to meet with the President of the Senate to discuss the status issue, he intends to hold extensive conferences with him on this question, from which he might "urge some legislation that might supplant the plebiscite measure bearing the name of Senator Tydlnga and eX*congreilata Piñero, which was never the subject of public hearings, in committee. He went on to say, "I have not yet made up my mind as to what is the best thing to do about the status, and I intend to study the situation further before making any definite commitment." The Doctor clarified, however, "There is no reason to believe that the fundamental position of the Legislature that the colonial alaterna should be liquidated on the basis of the wishes of the Puerto Rican people.
Ellsworth expresses dissatisfaction with certain CA projects He says he will advocate that more energy be put into the agency's activities this year to help Puerto Rico's economy.
The Agricultural Company has so far spent close to $1.5 million in the purchase of three farms located in Bayamón, Caguas and Vieques, which are dedicated to the cultivation of sugar cane, pineapple and vegetables, and the raising of livestock. The aforementioned amount also includes" the payment of salaries" to technical personnel, wages to workers and the payment of the offices occupied by the Company. The most important projects among those currently being developed by the Agricultural Company, according to Mr. Ellsworth, are the planting of crops and the raising of livestock in Vieques; and in Bayamón, the planting of vegetables. Another project of great importance for the Agricultural Company is the establishment of the so-called PRACO plazas, which will be extended to the different municipalities of the Island. Of these establishments, one is already operating in Santurce and another will soon be open in Puerta de Tierra. Referring to the projects developed by the Compaftia Agrícola in Vieques, Mr. Ellsworth stated that they have been operating satisfactorily; and that, at present, there is no hunger in* Vieques, where the Company employs some 400 workers in its activities. Mr. Ellsworth also said yesterday that the Agricultural Company has purchased a fishing boat equipped with a refrigerator, with capacity for 40 tons of fish, which will be used to explore the waters" (Continued on page 20).
(Uncertainty over federal funding
Planning explains how it affects the road program* here Confusion over homes plan No solution found to slum problem. Hospital Improvements The Planning Board will make -aben to the Governor of Puerto Rico, in au Final Report "obre the Government Economic Program ~ to be takene romo basis; for RRHtuw ion approval"" The "final report on the" next" fiscal" year" fl "cslea. that "in term" geneVale". po-. would declare "with baiting certainty that the" alienations already made" v¡ the" a "lgnaclone" that "e recommend now, "on, apparently, sufficient" to provide half, more n n less. of Jo needed to achieve a minimum level of public services in Puerto Rico, with the obvious exception of the highway program, for the completion of which more funds would be needed; and the problem of slum clearance, for which no solution has yet been found, nor has its financing been clearly determined. Regarding the security of federal funds for the continuation of the highway program, the Board states: "The prevailing uncertainty as to the allocation of federal funds and the collection of special funds makes it difficult to make a precise distribution of funds, and also makes it difficult to determine the number of kilometers of the type of road to be built, the cost of which varies considerably. The Board also emphasizes that the scope of the homes program "is even more difficult to measure, for similar reasons. Uncertainty regarding federal legislation, and the large difference in per-unit costs, depending on the type of home, also make it difficult to focus clearly on the objectives. The current Program is based on continuing activity in this field, through the use of Insular funds, pending clarification of the uncertainty regarding the prospects for federal aid in order to carry out a more extensive program. "As to "health and general welfare," the Board adds, "we believe that 4SS the funds authorized and recommended, and with the federal funds likely to be available, about half of the proposed program could be carried out. The Board believes that, with respect to the latter aspect of the program, "the capacity of general medical hospitals (district, municipal, and private hospitals) should be increased by 50 per cent, reaching a ratio of 3 beds per thousand population by 1853: doubling the capacity of district hospitals and achieving in each municipality the recommended minimum standard of one hospital bed per thousand inhabitants; * increasing by two and a half times the present number of beds in tuberculosis hospitals, and substantially improving the kind of medical treatment to be provided. The minimum standard set by the Department of Health equivalent to one bed for each annual death caused by that disease will be achieved: and the current capacity in psychiatric hospitals will be tripled. It further considers this body 3uo the approval of its recommendations contained in the submitted program, to achieve it "to cover half, a little more or less, of the minimum needs of the Island of the instructional program", and that "the recommended allocations for institutions and buildings nenafes probably exceed 50 percent of what is needed to complete this phase of the program'. "Allocations have also been increased," he adds. - he adds, "allocations for parks have also been increased, so that the recommended allocation of funds will cover about 50 percent of the total so far estimated for these purposes. It should be noted, however, that as the regulatory plan for an adequate system of parks throughout the island is developed and refined, the amount of funds allocated for this purpose will undoubtedly increase.
PRESIDENT OF THE E. V. CHAMBER.
* ■ l V ' ■ '-O* 1 j fry g JOSEPH W. MARTIN - The veteran Congressman from Masaacliusetta was elected Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives yesterday. Anderson sets the price standard for Cree sugar at 4.49 c. lb. over 1946 crude The president of the Federation of Island Government Employees, Mr. Justo Pastor Lozada, releases part of the reply of the Secretary of Agriculture, Mr. Clinton P. Anderson, to the message sent by the FEGA to the Secretary of Agriculture, Mr. Clinton P. Anderson, in response to the message sent by the FEGA to the President of the Federation of Island Government Employees, Mr. Justo Pastor Lozada. Anderson, to the message addressed to him by FEGI on the sugar problem: "The Department of Agriculture announced on November 6, 1946, that its program on Puerto Rican raw sugar for the 1947 crop will provide for an initial price of approximately 5,258 c. lb. The final establishment of an initial basic price will depend on Jos. food or living cost indexes according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the last 6 months of the calendar year 1946. The initial price finally established may be subject to increases during the calendar year 1947, if certain events occur, such as an increase in the cost of living or food commodity above a basic percent or an increase in the maximum price or market price of sugar. The price offered for the 1947 crop will provide a substantial increase of about 4.49 cents per pound over the current price of raw sugar for the 1946 crop. "As an additional inducement to increased sugar production, the Department is also offering an increase of 80 cents per 100 pounds over nearly half of the 1946 crop, provided that Puerto Rican producers participate fully in the 1947 program. This increase will be matched by some cents to enable the Department to recoup the excess transportation costs it absorbed in the 1946 crop.
The case of. Bilbo Case Delayed Senate Organization Yesterday; House Elected Officials
Puerto Rico in rate hearings - -~.- - - Sol L. Descartes and Colon Torres appointed by Gov. Pinero Hearings to begin Washington on 13 Several countries to take part. - Discussions vital to the Island Lo" señor"" Sol Luis Descartes, -member of the Planning Board,- and Ramon Colon Torpes, head of the Agricultural Economics Division of the Experiment Station and assistant director of the same, have been appointed by ei Governor to cooperate in Washington with the Resident Commissioner, the Territories Division of the Department of the Interior and the Puerto Rico Office, in the defense of the Island's interests at the public hearings to be held on January 13 to discuss the negotiations on new types of tariffs to be agreed upon with various countries of the world. The attention of both the commercial and economic circles of the palace has been focused in recent weeks on the consequences that could result from lowering the prevailing tariff rates, especially on rums, to the detriment of Puerto Rico's export products. The Island Government, business and industry have been preparing to present their views at these discussions, which will be sponsored by the Federal Tariff Commission. When questioned yesterday about the importance of these hearings, Mr. Sol Luis Descartes, who will leave the pals on Monday, stated the following: "The purpose of my visit to Wá "h. Ington is to help in connection with the tariffs. Ington is to assist in connection with the hearings on the reciprocity treaty to be established by the United States Government with Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, France, India, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Holland, New Zealand, Norway, Union of South Africa, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and the United Kingdom, "These hearings are of enormous importance to Puerto Rico. As can be seen from the enumeration of the countries with which it is proposed to negotiate, it does not relate to the discussion of a reciprocity treaty similar to the previous ones, to be discussed with a particular pal". This will be a treaty to be negotiated at the same time, as one of the most important steps, in the words of the State Department, in the program of economic collaboration that began with the Atlantic Charter. The hearing is linked to the United States' proposal to create the International Trade Organization. "The first preliminary meeting has already been held in London to lay the basis for this organization by means of these hearings. The United States is trying to obtain from its citizens information on a list of items which might, in negotiations with the other countries of the world, receive concessions in the form of tariffs. The products listed for which information and information is requested (Continued on page 19).
Final water service report expected on the 8th Refer to supply in metropolitan area. - Opinions of AFF and SIA The acting president of the Planning Board, Mr. Sol Luis Descartes, stated yesterday that the preliminary report on the El Yunque and Rio Grande de Lolza projects for the "water supply to the San Juan metropolitan area will probably be discussed in final form at a meeting of the Board scheduled for January 8. This meeting will be attended by the president of the organization, Dr. Rafael Picó, who is enjoying a vacation." "This Informé," he added, "as is often the case in these matters, took longer than we first estimated. Today we will have a general exchange of views on the recommendation of the technicians who have been working on this study. Dr. Picó will attend this meeting. We hope to finally resolve this issue at our meeting on Monday, January 8, by which time the document will be ready. As is public knowledge, the determination made by the Planning Board in this matter will resolve the differences of opinion existing between the Water Resources Authority and the Aqueduct Service, with respect to the (Continued on page 10.)
Mayors' opposition to proposed elimination of PEG is expected Transfer of constructions would give Dept. of the Interior an additional $1,200,000. Interior an additional $1,200,000. - The measure will be presented in the next legislative session
i The transfer of the Construction Division of the Emergency War Program to the Department of the Interior would have provided the latter with funds estimated at $51,200,000 for various public works, if this measure is adopted by the next ordinary Legislature. This eli fra represents the balance of funds for public improvements, previously provided" to the PEG, which was to prevail as of June 30, 1947. For the 1948-47 fiscal year, the Legislature appropriated to the PEG some $53,600,000, of which $5400,000 was dedicated for the repair of municipal buildings.
mino" municipalities. The remaining funds were distributed for service projects. Although it is expected that there will be opposition, on the part of the mayors, to the total elimination of this agency, especially for the transfer of its functions as a construction agency to the Department of the Interior, the Planning Board's recommendation that the PEG be detached from the Government's construction program has been maintained. So far, the Board has maintained unalterable its criteria that "at this time," the volume of construction work that the PEG has at its disposal is not sufficiently high to jus "tlflflflfy its exl "tence as the agency in charge of the con "trucclon, in addition to the Superintendence of Public Works of the Department of the Interior. It is also the opinion of the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Orlando R. Méndez, that his Department may take charge of the work of the aforementioned Division. According to what has been proposed, legislation is expected in February, aimed at achieving such purposes. In addition to the transfer to the Department of the Interior of its functions as construction agency of the Government, it is expected that the program of nursery schools and milk stations will be continued under the administration of the Department of Health and will be transferred to the Department (Continued on page 19).
Cases of typhoid in Guaynabo; Health requests sewage system
There is a state of alarm among the neighbors of Guaynabo, due to the outbreak of typhoid which has recently appeared in that town, and which is being combated by the Department of Health, but the causes of the disease have not been eliminated. The frequent cases of typhoid fever that have appeared in that jurisdiction are attributed to the lack of sewage in the town of Guaynabo; and, according to the public, to the fact that in the municipal hospital as well as in some schools and in the Mayor's Office, large water drainage pipes have been installed.
According to the public, the municipal hospital, some schools and the mayor's office have installed large sewage pipes that flow into a creek near the town, a creek that flows into the Guaynabo River, about two kilometers from the urban area, precisely near the place where the recent cases of typhoid have appeared. The Commissioner of Health, Dr. Juan A. Pons, to whom we informed of this belief of the inhabitants of Guaynabo, expressed that he already knew about this situation, and that perhaps those thieving drainage pipes were not the cause of the outbreak of typhoid fever.
Republican leaders in the national Senate A 'ER* WOK /'K Meunldoa gleefully after the Senate Republican conference selected them Monday to run for the majority seats in the upper chamber, we see in this photograph Senator Arthur H. Vandenherg (of Michigan), who will be the chairman of the Senate: Senator Kenneth Wherry (of Nebraska), center, designated majority "tote," and Senator Wallace H. White, Jr, of Maine, who will be the majority leader on the floor (Associated Press photo).
Instruction expects teachers to charge increase from 17th to 18th
This is the week between the effective date of the raise law and the end of the school month. - The Department of Instruction expects that between January 15 and 17, teachers will receive their paychecks for the December pay increase. The Department, as reported yesterday, decided to do so a "l and not to leave the payment for that week until the end of January, in order to avoid the complications that would arise in
The Department, as reported yesterday, decided to do so at the end of January and not to leave the payment of the week's salary until the end of January, in order to avoid the complications that would arise in the work to pay the regular salary and the increase for January. . The teachers, as "e know, will only receive the salary increase for one week, as far as last December is concerned, because they are paid per school month and the time elapsed between the signing and effectiveness of the salary increase law, on December 16 and the date of the end of the last school month, December 20, was one week. As it is also known, in order to place the teachers on a parity with the other public employees who are paid on a calendar month basis and who are receiving a half month raise in December, official steps will be taken so that the next ordinary Legislature corrects this deficiency, as far as the mentioned month is concerned. It was revealed yesterday, on the other hand, that the Department of Instruction will pay the "teachers" the "raise" for the "month" of January and subsequent months," together with the regular salary, in a single check. The Department is already working to this end. The Department is currently collating the payrolls for the payment of the December salary increase and it is expected that the same will be dispatched to the Auditor's office during the course of the next week. This "emana will be paid to teachers between January 15 and 17, if there are no unexpected "ditlcultades". The Department's central office personnel entitled to a salary increase have already received the increase of two "emana" of December. Also, the superlor school principals, school superintendents and their assistants, farm caretakers and other instructional personnel who are paid by calendar month have received their raises. The Army and the G.N. visit the Governor Led" by the 81st Army Ground Forces Band" and making their way through the old wall of San Juan, Brigadier General William W. Bes "ell, Jr., head of the Military Department of the" Antilles and officers of his staff marched from the old city gate at Casa Blanca to La Fortaleza to pay the first official visit of the year to Governor Piñero. The visit, an annual custom of the military chief on the island, took place at 11:80 a.m. on the day of Afto. M., on New Year's Day. The Governor received General Bessell and his staff in the fortress where they exchanged greetings. The" vl "ltante" were obaequlado" by the Governor. After eata vlalta to the Goberna(Contlnued on page 20)
Fortaleza inquired about the date of Lie's visit to the office of the Governor of Puerto Rico "ollcttó yesterday from the United States Department of State, report" about the date on which the Secretary General of the United Nations, Reflor Trygve Lie, will arrive on the island, in order to proceed to organize the reception of the distinguished statesman, who begins on January 10 a trip that will include visits to * Puerto Ríen. Santo Domingo, Cuba, Haiti and other Central and South American countries. SIA is of the opinion that there will be normal service now The latest rains have solved the water problem. - Two more wells The" latest rains" will allow the Aqueduct Service" to maintain the water supply to the mei tropolltana zone of San Juan, in fairly regular" conditions, according to . reported yesterday the head of that agency, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Busta- . mind. Mr. Cueva said that there has been some rain and although there is still no reserve in the Cidra reservoir, the flow of the river that flows into the lake remains good enough to provide efficient service to the population. He added that there is enough water accumulated in the reservoirs of Las Curia" reservoir, and that the Piedra" river is maintained with enough liquid. So far, it has not been possible to connect either of the two deep wells that were sunk by the Service to the main pipeline. Mr. Cuevas said that the one located on the Service's land in Hate Rey has had to be repv raree, since the pipeline, about 30 feet deep, "suffered a crack, which has been acidizing. This has caused the well, which will provide two million gallons per day of the liquid, to take no less than five additional days to operate. Regarding another deep well, also sunk in the Hato Rey section, the pipeline ordered to connect it to the main branch in that section has not been received. Mr. Cuevas said that the ordered pipes will be delivered during the month of February, according to the "eeperance" offered by the manufacturing company. It has not been possible to obtain surplus material from the Army or Navy to carry out the installation of the pipe necessary for this work.
Senator Taylor aligned himself with Republicans He was the first speaker of the day and turned his attacks on Senator Bilbo Composition of the two Houses - Tax reduction and labor unions in the first legislation By Lyle C? WILSON Director of the United Fren- - - ■" Bureau ,in Washington WASHINGTON. 3 (PU>- The eightieth United States Congress, the first with a Republican majority since 1932, began its session at noon today, and immediately both Houses began consideration of its most urgent business, including the reduction of the individual income tax and new legislation to limit the powers of labor organizations. The question of whether to accept or reject Senator Theodore Gilmore Bilbo's election record produced a heated debate shortly after the Senate meeting began. Senator Silgo, elected for the third time, November 5, from his state of Mlslslsipl, is accused of having intimidated Negro voters and of having accepted gratuities from war contractors, on whose behalf he influenced Congress and the Government, during the war, to grant him war contracts. WASHINGTON. 8. (FU).- After six hours of discussion of the Bilbo matter, a final decision was reached, the Senate adjourned at 8:01 P. M. for continuation tomorrow, Saturday. The first speaker was Democrat Glenn Taylor, who, surprisingly, joined the Republicans in their attack on Bilbo, calling for a new investigation of the matter and, pending the final outcome of the new inquiry, for Bilbo to be barred from the Senate. The Southern Democrats, who support Bllbo, intend to resort to flllbusterlsm (a method of parliamentary obstruction) to prevent or delay a vote on any motion against Bllbo, but it is believed that, in view of Democrat Taylor's attitude, the Republicans will have enough votes to reject the Senator's certificate of election for Mlalsipl. The line-up of the present eightieth Congress is as follows: in the Senate: 51 Republicans and 45 Democrats, including Senator Bllbo, who may be thrown out of his seat; a total of 96 votes needed for a majority: 49. In the House of Representatives: 245 Republicans, 187 Democrats. 1 American Labor (Marcantonio), and 2 vacant seats"; a total of 435, the majority of which, at this time, is 217 votes. Ijib two vacancies were caused thus: Representative John J. Sparkman, Democrat, of Alabama, resigned from the House to accept the nomination for the Senate, to which he was elected, on November 5; and Representative Robert K. Henry, Republican, of Wisconsin, died the day after the election. I The discussion on Bllbo occurred while the members of the Senate were being sworn in, in alphabetical order, a ceremony which was interrupted, and, for the same reason, it was not possible to elect immediately the authorities of the Upper House. On the other hand, the House of Representatives proceeded without difficulty in the swearing in of its members and in the election of its officers. Joseph W. Martin, a Republican from Massachusetts, was elected Speaker of the House, replacing Democrat Sam Rayburn of Texas, who became Democratic Minority Leader. The vote in favor of Martin was 344 votes to 182 for Rayburn, whom the Democrats nominated for Speaker, even though they knew he would not be elected. In his speech, the new Speaker of the House called on Democrats to help Republicans save the country from "ruin and destruction because of the domestic economic crisis" and said that it was necessary to "rescue the United States" from the current economic situation, "because they have launched a wrong policy and war. Martin added that by both" cooperating on legislation, the United States will be able to produce miracles in the form of new comforts and new inventions, and achieve "greater prosperity than ever" it has known." The new Speaker also advocated the elimination of the Communists and other extremist elements from government offices; the reduction of Taxes and the public debt, and the end of the war between Capital and Labor. As has been unequivocally implied by the Republican leadership, it "proposes to give the (Continued on page 2D)