THE NftNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy with light" scattered" showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: Maximum temperature, M; minimum, 72 Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:M in the afternoon, 7a.uo inches of mercury.
52 Pages 5/
LA MAÑANA NEWSPAPER
year xxvm
Entered as second class matter, Poet Office, San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 20, 1947
AutomaviUataa. demoatremoa to eorteeto traditional of the country.
NUMBER 11161
Muñoz opines AlbizuestálO years behind the times.
He says commenting on the latter's phrase that the situation of the Island has changed He points out the rights of the majorities.
Commenting on the opinion expressed by Pedro Alhizu Campo" upon his return to Puerto Pico, the President of the Popular Democratic Party, Mr. Luis Mufioz Marín, said yesterday that the Puerto Rican leader has not been able to solve the problems of 10 years ago. said yesterday that the naelenallata leader has made a political pronouncement equal to the one he made more than ten years ago, despite the fact that the conditions on the island have undergone a fundamental change in the period of time, Muñoz Marín said that with the method used by the ■-flor Alblxu Campos years ago, he did not achieve the minimum progress to solve the economic and political problems of Puerto Rico, and that the only way to establish a government of freedom is through the will of the majority of the people. The President of the Popular Democratic Party authorized the following communiqué: "The President of the Nationalist Party, "flor Alhizu Campos, upon returning to the Island after 10 years, has made a political pronouncement. The pronouncement is the same as the one made by God nftns antea. haee now faced with a situation that has changed profoundly in those ten years. "Ten years ago, our people had not created for themselves the effective use of the democratic powers at their disposal. Now our people, with special reference to its great masses, even within the same limited political status, is in the honorable vanguard of the peoples who in full consciousness assert the democracy that is in their hands - in the vanguard of the peoples who defeated Nazism and - I fascism, and that forever prosorfhleron its ideological expansion and its practices of violence and internal political coercion, "Haca dial artos the people of Puerto Rteo has not undertaken the democratic crusade that dresses it ds exemplarldad among the best democracy" of the world, which puts it at the level of 14 best democracy that can be in the United States, and above the level of many regions of the United States itself. "Ten years ago, while the use by the people of the democratic rights available to them was still rudimentary, there was no deep struggle with the real economy, with the economic steps they had to take, not only for greater justice in their lives, but also to create the economic conditions to make real and effective the area of freedom that was not - and still is not - in their hands. "Ten years ago the production on which the people have to base their daily life grew much more slowly than the number of inhabitants who depended on it. Now, although the population is increasing more rapidly, production is growing just as rapidly, and possibly more rapidly, than the number of inhabitants - on its way to all the conditions of real freedom. "Ten years ago, in the absence of the people as an effective factor, political life developed in the form of violence and serious disturbances - the peace between minorities of the opposition and minorities of the government, has begun to assert the functions of democracy within its reach and is implementing a program that is leading remarkably to overcome its economic problem and, therefore, to lay the foundation of a true and lasting freedom, and that is expressed not only in documents, but in the life of] the Puerto Rican man in his home, in his work, in the respect for his peace and his spirit. "Here now there is a democratic people, still developing in a limited political status. 10 artos ago speaks the limited political status, without the action of a democratic people. And the democratic action of the people is creating the economic conditions which are unquestionably eliminating the colonial economy and which will unquestionably eliminate the colonial status. The people are overcoming their economic problem and are ready to establish by the friendly way - which is the only possible way - the full political freedom that is still lacking. "Faced with this profound change in the heart and in the struggle of our people is that the President of the Nationalist Party makes a pronouncement equal to the one he made before the vigorous and sweeping initiation of this change. What is this pronouncement? "It seems to be the following: That Independence must be established regardless of the enormous economic hardship of the people, and in the manner and by the method of hostility arbitrarily dictated by a very small minority of our people. By this same method, god artos ago, remember well, we did not achieve the slightest step towards II- / quldar nl the economic nor the political problem of the Puerto Ricans * . * ... (Continued on page U)
Supreme Court Clears Grillasca on All Charges
The Court's decision was unanimous. The verdict was celebrated in Ponce.
■ I . " ÑRRBrar i X ♦ r \ \ \ w I \ M MAYOR GRILLASCA (Exonerated)
The Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, in an extensive opinion issued yesterday afternoon, in which Associate Justice Softer A. Cecyl Snyder appeared as rapporteur, exonerated the Mayor of Ponee, Mr. André" Grillases, of each and every" charge" that was formulated by the Governor. These" charges" referred to alleged" irregularities committed" by Mr. Grillasca, in his capacity as Mayor of Ponre, in violation of the Municipal Law in force. The Court's decision was unanimous. It confirmed the decision issued by the Ponce Municipal Assembly, which, after a hearing of several days," proceeded to dismiss all charges. The defense of Mayor Grilasca was in charge of Cayetano Col. Cuchi and Francisco M. Susonl, Jr. The governor was represented by prosecutors José C. Aponte and Guillermo A. Gil. They requested the Supreme Court to revoke the decision of the Municipal Assembly of Pnnce, and proceed to decree the dismissal of the Ponce Mayor. The Supreme Court enters to consider the charges" one by one. In the first charge, it imputed that "Mayor Grllaaca has a direct or indirect interest in certain contract* entered into" between the Municipality and the firm García y Cintrón, for the purchase of crushed stone and gravel, in violation of Article 19 of the Municipal Law and of Articles 202 and 20.1 of the Political Code. (Article 10 of the Municipal Law provides that a mayor shall incur in misdemeanor if he "is directly or indirectly interested in certain contracts, in violation of Articles 202 and 20.1 of the Political Code.
ts or Indirectly, in contracts celebrated with a municipality...,,") The alleged interest of the "eftor Grillases in these contracts" e "tá prerilcado in having signed in 1943, together with Luciano Martlniano Garda and Juana Clavel! a promissory note s I" order of the Bank of Ponee, on the occasion of a loan for $17,500. The proceeds of this loan were used by Garda and Cintron to acquire the assets of the Atlantic Ore Company, which operated a (Continued on p. 30)
Chambers approved aid to Europe for
They overrode Marcantonio's action in which the congressman threatened appropriations for China. - They stripped $150,000,000 from the requested amount.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 10. (PUL The U.S. Congress last night gave final approval to the expenditure of $540,000,000 for cap-and-bucket aid to Western Europe and $340,000,000 for the Army of Occupation in Europe and the Far East, after 4" soalayar Uhfilibmte;l "mo with which Congressman Marcantonio threatened Volgnaclon.
Federal Grand Jury indicts Gen. Meyers Ix" perjury charges for which he could get 60 years By Jamee F. Donovan WASHINGTON, Dec. 19 - (PU) - Maj. Gen. Bennett E. Meyers, a retired U.S. Army officer, has been indicted on charges of perjury. Meyers, retired Air Force officer who incurred difficulties with the Senate over certain war contracts, was indicted today by a Federal Grand Jury on a series of perjury charges, sufficient* to send him to prison for 60 years, - The Grand Jury also returned a grave hand* against Rleriot H. Lamarre, "dummy" president of a war profiteering company controlled by Meyers and who refused to disclose to the Senators the entire history of Meyers' business dealings. Meyers, who attributed all of his "dlficullndes" to a love affair with Mrs. Lamarre, was charged with three counts of perjury and three counts of bribery of perjury, (Continued on page IR)
♦ of background" for China. Spending by the U.S. Treasury redén authorllas of the House-- Includes $522,000,000,000 country Auitrla, France and Italy and $19,000,000 for China. As ae , "abe, President Truman has not blA requested any appropriation for the latter pal." The conferees in both houses succeeded in stripping $150,000,000,000 from the sum requested by the President for the occupation forces in Europe and the Far East; but Senate leaders said that "the door is open" for the Army to ask Congress to appropriate the full amount originally requested - $490,000,000.000. Sonado's action was delayed by a protracted debate "over American policy in West Germany, particularly with regard to the transfer of dismantled German factories" to Russia as reparations. But the Senators made a push, and resolved the bill after hearing from the President, Arthur H. Vadenherg, Republican of Michigan, that the 'J'partan en to to of State has ordered the cessation of all such transfers." Vandenberg announced that it would be the policy of the United States to "henceforth" not to send any more industrial factories to the United States IF there are any other transfers, he said, they will have to be stopped.
News Digest
The Governor will begin the groundbreaking ceremony for the San José farmhouse on Monday. * Mlnmi Herald dedicates article to the Puerto Rican colony in the city. * - * Students suspended at the RTI are summoned to a hearing before the Dean of Rstudlantea next Monday. - * * * SAA announces that it is achieving a reduction in operating costs. - Pauline M. Rojaa director of the English Program, JP ruled out a large number of public works due to the decrease in income. ♦ * * * CAP authoring" more pro vlrionolM permits to omnibuses in the metropolitan area. - Nicolás Nogueras Rivera and "I licensed Hipólito Marean" took their non-communist Oath yesterday. - The House approved a resolution ordering Anderson to publish a list of speculators. - The House passed a resolution yesterday ordering Anderson to publish a list of speculators.
of the Marshall Plan to avoid a Third World War. ♦ * * * Congress passed the Republican antlinDadonary program, which provides for voluntary action Malamente. Ignored Truman's request. - Supreme Court will recess from Dec. 24 to Jan. 12 inclusive. - - - - HUton Smith (to be decided by Ponee rata late centers the Rantur- - ce in the Pearl of the Rur: Juan Páre" against Unt in MayogUes and Chet Brewer against Federico in the Escobar. Tonight the Caribbean boxing championship is decided at the Escobar between "quipos do Panama and Puerto Rieo. - Cliff Mapes is a candidate for a regular position with the New York Yankees. - - - - - Puerto Meo faces Colombia today for the World Amateur Baseball Championship. Boricuas eliminated Nicaragua yesterday, I par 1. - - - * THE Supreme exonerated Grillases on loo t7 charges brought against him by Gov. - a a Muflo" apina qua "I pronouncement of AlMsu Campos "a Equal to that of haee lé aAoc and that le sltueeidn of the lotus hs variadé ¿cedo entoMea.
JP discarded the large number i delivers list of speculative projects
He believes the decline in revenues will not allow them to be revived in the future Affecting the UPR and the Medical College It is unlikely that the hospital improvement program, which was part of the original government program, has been practically abandoned. The prospect that such projects* might be revived in the future has been discarded because of the decline in the Island Government's *revenue*. The second economic program of the Island Government, prepared by the Planning Board and submitted to the Governor on March 17, 1944, included a capital improvement plan involving an investment of $72.RR.5,000 over a six-year period. The document outlined a series of public infrastructure projects and expansion of government services, which have not yet been implemented. In some cases, the execution of these improvements has been suspended due to various circumstances, and in others, although the need for them still exists, it will be impossible to carry them out due to the decrease in Treasury Revenues. On the other hand, many of the original plans* have had to be altered* to adjust them* to new standards*, particularly those established by the Congress of the United States* with respect to the contribution of funds* for construction programs* in Puerto Rico. Among the projects outlined for execution at the beginning of fiscal planning in 1944 were the following: a new island jail, at a cost of $1,300,000; a reformatory jail, at a cost of $1,000,000; and a Home for the Nlftos in San Juan, at a cost of $03,000. These three projects were part of the judicial reform program. The program for the construction of new hospital facilities*, which began with the Pira de Ponc" studies and plans, has had to undergo changes due to the approval by Congress of a program which provides the Island with funds for its plan for the construction of these institutions. Originally a program was prepared which involved the construction of the following projects: Hospital de mafrito de Ponee, $1,ROO,000. Sanatorio Antituberculoso de Arecibo, $1,2000,000, Hospital d" Distrito en Caguas, $1,500,000 Ampliación al Manicomio Insular de Rio Piedras, $1,610,000. Hospital de Distrito de Mayagüez, $1,500,000. Sanatorio Antituberculoso on Humacao, $1,610,000. Guayama District Hospital, $900,000. General Hospital of the Metropolitan Area, $1,600,000. Extension to the Mayagüez Sanatorium, IROO.OOO, expansion of the Guayama Sanatorium, $600,000, Expansions to the district hospitals of Arecibo, Aguadilla and Fajardo, $600,000, This vast program of hospital improvements was then recommended for completion by the fiscal year 1949-1950, and in some cases, initial appropriations of funds for construction and land purchase were approved. Its complete realization, even with the annual aid of federal funds that the Island will receive as of next year, is considered improbable in the fiscal circuits, due to the ro*tea of the program and to the annual contributions that would be needed for its operation and maintenance. With regard to Instruction, "a vast program for the construction of classrooms, at a cost of $12,000,000, to be completed by the end of 'Continued on p. 15).
House approves measure for Anderpon to give eRta to advertising Resolution passes for Truman's signature
ErIc said he would give immediate approval to the bill. Tor LOUIR CARSELA WASHINGTON, Dec. 19 - (PU)-The House passed today, without dissenting vote, a resolution previously passed by the Senate, directing Secretary of Agriculture Clinton P. Anderson to make public his confidential list of "speculators" in the "commodities" market. The measure will now go to the White House. President Truman, who strongly backed Anderson in his refusal to release the list, "ln a special act of Con. gress which" would relieve the Secretary of his responsibility for keeping the names secret, said yesterday that signing the measure "immediately," Anderson said it would not take him "long" to gather the names* of In* large* speculadnre* in grain," cotton and ntroa commodities; but he did not declare the list to be released nñ a matter of hours or rilas. The passage of the resolution ended a week-long dispute between Anrier "on and Republican leaders on the Senate Appropriations Committee. The committee took the unusual step of sending a subpoena to the Cabinet official in an effort to obtain the list, which is suspected of containing names that "used administrative information" to profit in the market. Anderson, hinting that names of congressmen might be on the list, refused to allow the committee to see the list in a secret meeting unless it was released to the public at the same time. He also insisted that the existing law prevented him from releasing it to the public. nor: unchanged today, amends the old Commodity Exchange Act by specifically authorizing the Secretary of Agriculture to release the names of speculators any time a congressional committee asked him to do so, or at any time he deemed it advisable. Thus, Anderson could publish the list, *if he so desires, while" the Congress is enjoying its Christmas vacation. Regardless of any action taken by Anderson or the Senate Committee, the House will proceed with a separate investigation into Government employee* business. Immediately after passing the Senate resolution, the House approved a $25,000 appropriation to pay the expenses of "a newly appointed one-man Investigating Committee. Rep. Augu "t H. Andresen, R-Michigan, a Syrian-speaking Republican, spoke earlier in the day to preaidi "on the group that was set to begin its inquiry in early January. Speaker Joseph W. Martin, Jr., also appointed the following representatives to the committee: Fred L. Crawford, R-Michigan; Howard H. Buffett, R-Nebraska; Mitchell Jenkins, R-Pennsylvania; John W. McCormack, D-Massachusetts; Albert Rains, D-Alaba (Continued on page 3).
CSP authorizes more bus permits in metro area
The "ertor. Jorge Toledo, chairman of the Public Service Commission, reported that the Commission authorized at its last meeting a number of permits for the operation of buses to transport passengers on different routes in the metropolitan area. "Said permits have been granted, says aeftor Toledo, taking into consideration the results of" the investigation, ción recently made by this Commission, which" indicated the need for an increase in the omnibuses serving the metropolitan area. "The additional vehicles must be new vehicles meeting special conditions set by the Commission, must be painted in colors different from those of the Transportation Authority, and must be personally inspected by the members of the Commission before being put into operation. Provisional permits have been granted for a term of 18 meaea. They will be assigned to routes in need and preferably to new routes. It is the purpose of the Commission to try to avoid traffic congestion greater than that presently experienced on the main thoroughfares of the metropolitan area, "The Commission definitely wishes to make it clear that it is not to grant certificates and provisional permits in addition to those previously granted and that it is its purpose to grant certificates and provisional permits in addition to those previously granted and that it is the purpose of the Commission to grant certificates and provisional permits in addition to those previously granted.
The Commission definitely wishes to make it clear that it will not grant provisional certificates and permits in addition to those previously issued and that it is its purpose to put into effect a number of measures already approved which it believes will alleviate, "but not definitely solve, the problem of passenger transportation in the metropolitan area. "Until the result of these measures is observed in practice, this Commission will not consider any application already filed or which may be filed in the future, which is made public so that all the interested parties may be notified. As will be recalled, the Public Service Commission began a study some time ago, with a view to determining the exact "n "c "aldadea of the Capital, as far as public transportation is concerned. The Inspectors and other personnel of the government agency carried out a computation of passengers and peak traffic hours and other statistics. The granting of the provisional permits is the culmination of this study. As is also known, after an agreement with the Transportation Authority, the Commission acquired jurisdiction over the Bus Division, with the right to regulate their use, set bus routes and in general ensure that they provide the best service to the community.
Avenues Ponee de León, Muñoz Rivera included in program
Lui" Muñoz Rivera Avenue and the section of Juan Ponee de León Avenue, from the entrance to San Juan to the vicinity" of bus stop eight, are definitely included in *1 urban road improvement program" to be carried out by the Department of the Interior during the 1944-1949 period. As far as Muñoz Rivera Avenue is concerned, the project has been included in the federal aid program, to be funded by federal and local funds. As further adjustments in the design of the work to be done become necessary, a brigade of engineers and draftsmen from the Department was appointed to carry out the work. The "e were taking measurements" *on a section of Ponee de Leon Avenue, for the purpose of making various" adjustments; and "n previous occasions""
ae have also been taken on Luis Muñoz Rlveia Avenue. The removal of the electric streetcar rails left a large free space to widen Avenida Ponee de León. This widening section has been completed from the Guillermo Esteves bridge to the twenty-second stop. All that remains to be completed is the section covering Paseo de Covadonga and Ponee de Leon Avenue from the National Guard armory to the turnoff to Muñoz Rivera Park. The Department of Jo Interior has already completed studies on both projects. Work on these studies has been underway for some time. As any need for additional data becomes urgent, a brigade of engineers and draftsmen is dispatched to fill in the information.
Truman pleads before Congress for aid plan for Europe.
Presents Marshall Plan as Vital Step in Averting World War Fnr DONALD J. GONZALEZ United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, Dec. 19--(PU)--President Truman today asked Congress to authorize a $17 billion rehabilitation program to help 16 non-immunized European nations re "lstlr the 'agre-j alon totAlitArla" and to ensure' U.S. security. I In the long-awaited message on the vast Marsh "ll Plan--document rfc 9,000 word"--"eftor Truman told the House and Senate that the 51-month program constituted a vital step in the effort rie State* Unli rio" to avert World War III. He requested an initial appropriation of $6,ROO,000,000 000. The President admitted that the program would demand sacrifices and po-' aihlemente more inflationary pre"'ón within the pata, But he warned that failure to approve the $17 billion rie plan, or its reduction, Although there is no guarantee that the plan would succeed, he said, *its cost would only amount to five percent of what was spent on the war effort - a small investment indeed. xertor Truman did not mention the Soviet Union by name. But through rie torio the document made it clear that the Communists were to blame* rie 1" situation prevailing in lo* world affairs, and that the multibillion-dollar project was going to be a "one-stop shop" for the Soviet Union.
"I PRESIDENT TRUMAÑ (Insintr) aimed at halting 1" expansion of that form of totalitarianism. The President asked Congress to endorse the $17 billion program, to be launched on April 1, 1944, and to continue until June 30, 1952. He requested approval of an appropriation of $6,800,000,000,000 for the first 15 months. Anusle" requests will be made for subsequent years. | (Continued on page 18)
Liberals, Republicans to resume talks on Monday
They will consider a draft statement to set the new grouping's position on the currents of opinion on political status.
Negotiations between the contact committees of the Liberal Party and the Progressive Republican Union will be resumed next Monday at a place to be notified today to the members of said organization. Among lo* matters to be discussed at this nine meeting - which is expected - --- - - - - - ♦se* the last to be held for.
J. Selles Sola new Deputy Chief of Instruction Collazo also appointed Dr. Pauline Rojas to English program Confirming exclusive news from EL MUNDO, it was reported yesterday that "eftor Julio Sellé" Solá, a pedagogy professor at the University of Puerto Rico, has been appointed Deputy Commissioner of Instruction, to fill the vacancy left by "eftor Herbert A. Mar. tin. It was also reported, on the other hand, that the Acting Commissioner of Instruction, Francisco Collazo, appointed Dr. Pauline M. Roja, as director of the newly created Curriculum Division of the Department of Instruction, a division which will be headed by Carmon Gómez Tejera, a professor at the University. Dr. Rojas and Dr. Sellés Solé will assume their respective positions* on January 1. The creation of the position of Director of the English Program, within the Curriculum Division, responds to the purpose of facilitating the intensification of the teaching of English in those phases of the English language whose learning is considered most necessary in Puerto Rico. A source closely linked to the Puerto Rican teaching profession declared yesterday that "Dr. Rojas' service record shows that she is duly qualified to perform the position she will assume at the beginning of the next school semester. She is a native of North Dakota and has been practicing in Puerto Rico for several years. Ms. Gomez Tejera has seen her (Continued on p. 15)
The new party will have to consider a draft statement to establish the position of the new grouping with respect to the different political status guidelines prevailing in the area of political status. Jj, drafting of the referred riadaración was in charge of rio* representative* rio* rie the Republican Union and rios riel Liberal Party, which met yesterday for several hours in San Juan. At the meeting of the contact committees scheduled for next Monday, a decision will be made on the franchise of which of the parties will be used to give legal status to the new party. This matter, as far as it has been able to learn- ¡ has. been already extensively considered- ; mind and *e attributes to it Extraordinary importance. Dr. Lassise, the leader of the Republican Union, who has been involved in the negotiations, had requested at the last meeting of the contact committee that the new meeting of the bodies be held outside the metropolitan area, but no agreement was reached on the matter. On the other hand, it was reported that Mr. Luis Pérez Matos, interim president of the Liberal Party, was in San Juan yesterday holding a long conference with Mrs. Josefina Barceló da Romero, president in property of said party. He also reported yesterday that Mrs. Barceló rie Romero has been fully aware of the progress of the negotiations that the representatives of her party are conducting with those of the Republican Union. The name, flag and insignia of the new party have not yet been agreed upon, and as reported yesterday this matter will have to be taken to the joint assembly to be held by the Liberal and Republican Union parties in the city of Ponee. Both this joint assembly, as well as the separate assemblies that the Republican Union and the Liberal Party will hold to agree on the integration of the new party, are planned to be held in the aforementioned city in the first half of January.
Congress passed measure on inflation 1
Ignores Traman's plea urging power to fix prices Bill provides for voluntary action Leaves to industries distribution of all scarce materials For RONALD G. VAN TINE WASHINGTON, Dec. 19 - (PU) -Congress today passed a merilrfA as an emergency remedy To the high cost of living, in which *e ignores President Truman's plea for 1" emerging powers to set prices and ration commodities*. The Republican plan, which seeks to achieve by voluntary means some of the steps which President Truman is to take compulsorily, was sent to the White House amid predictions by several Democrats that the Chief Executive would sign it because it was better than nothing. The congressional firmtal action "e occurred in the House, which passed it by a vote of 2R1 to 73, after less than rio* of rio" hours of debate. Already the Senate had passed it yesterday, 77 to 10. The bill was supported in the House by 17Republican". 102 Democrats; and Representative Vito Marcantonio, of the American Labor Party of New York. It was opposed by 29 Republicans and 44 Democrats". The measure, drafted by the Republican leadership as their party's immediate response to Truman's drastic 10-point anti-inflationary program, would provide for: ] 1.-The establishment d" a voluntary slst". ma rie distribution of scarce Industrial materials, such as steel. The Industries could enter into voluntary agreements without fear of violating the laws prohibiting monopolies, provided that the Government officials approved the initiative and that the agreements were approved by the Attorney General of the United States. The Pre. "Idente speaks of requested authority to implement compulsory rationing of scarce materials. 2.-To extend governmental controls on exports and exports of scarce materials. Extend governmental controls on exports and transportation until February 2R, 1949. These restrictions would have expired next February. Mr. Truman requested these extensions as part" of "his original program. 3.-To grant the President powers to close grain supplies to neutral distilleries and spirit" industries until Feb. 1. Secretary of Agriculture. Clinton P. Anderson, requested this authorization as a substitute for the grain saving "holiday" ending on Christmas Day. He indicated that the authorization was necessary, since the distilleries were not showing any signs of willingness to extend the holiday voluntarily. 4. Places Congress on record as favoring the President's plans to encourage the conservation of food in the nation and the production of food in foreign countries other than Europe. The Administration may invest in this program as much as $1,000,000. 5. Establish machinery to insure prompt congressional action in the event that the voluntary contribution system fails. The Senate and House committees would be given only 15 days to draft a program of compulsory measures. The Democrats made a last-minute effort to scuttle the plan. Rep. A. S. Mik" Monroney, Democrat of Oklahoma, introduced a motion requesting that the bill be sent to] the Banking Committee, with instructions that it be structured in line with the request" of President Truman. The having promised qu" they would embrace Job point" more aobretaJIantea of the Pre's plan. Having pledged that they would embrace the most important point of the President's plan to implement it at the beginning of the year, they did not have to ride the coattails of the absent member to defeat Monroney's effort, which was decided by a vote of 156 to 73. Only a handful of representatives heeded the brief, but choleric argument adduced by Rep. Okla. homa. "Voluntary controls will not suffice," Monronty shouted into the microphone on the Speaker's platform. "We're really giving big business the power to allocate and the power to ration." But the chairman of the Banking Committee, J "sse Wolcott, Republican of Michigan, who in conjunction with Republican Senator Robert A. Taft, of Ohio, have been pushing -! "quick" Republican plan to ¿rave Congress in the last hour" of the emergency session, ridiculed the Oklahoma imputations, shouting at him, "IF you want to destroy the American alst "me of government, why (Continued "n the ptf. W.