I-, f V \ THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS PABA LA ISLA, ROY: Partly cloudy, with a few light showers, quite scattered, over the south and west, in the morning: winds variable, 16 to 14 miles per hour. IN SAN JUAN. AYEBi High, 18; low, 13.
38 Pages
DAILY MORNING
v THE MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
I check brakes. Cooperate with the Automobile Inspection.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY MARCH 22, 1947
Entered gg enconé olas" matter, Peat Office, San Juan. P. R.
NUMBER 10893
Sugar Sales Contract Already Approved
Del Valle says it represents $15,000,000,000 income to the country Explains effects on wages Certain clause causes industry to lose one hundred thousand dollars The Board of Directors and the Board of Directors of the Asociación da Prodac* toraa da AsUcar agreed to approve the contract for the sale of the Puerto Rican sugar cane in 1947, which was submitted by the Corporación do Créditos sobre AH* montos, (CCC). Such determination was made by the sugar producers affiliated with the APA after discussing the terms of the aforementioned contract and after considering the recommendations submitted to them by the negotiating committee of the Association which intervened in this matter in Washington. The president of the APA, Mr. Manuel A. del Valle, reported that the sale of the sugar crop according to the accepted terms will produce revenues of $115,000,000. He said that the negotiated price is $4.925 per quintal, plus the tariff, plus a minimum freight differential of two cents. Commenting on the effects on this important transaction of the State Department's agreement to lower the tariff on Cuban sugar, according to the demands that have been made by the sugar industry of that river, from 75 cents per quintal to 37 cents, Del Vallo said that Puerto Rico would automatically be able to reduce the tariff on Cuban sugar from 75 cents per quintal to 37 cents per quintal, Del Vallo said that Puerto Rico would automatically suffer a considerable loss that would revert against the industry and against the workers, since the price of the sugar shipped or arriving in New York when said reduction goes into effect, or that in the future will be shipped, would be lowered by 37 cents per quintal. Regarding the agreement reached by the Puerto Rican sugar producers, Mr. Del Valle added the following: 7 *The sale and purchase agreement for the 1947 sugar harvest has been under discussion between a negotiating committee of the Sugar Producers Association and the representatives of the CCC since the beginning of last January, so that the negotiations lasted approximately three months. This morning the APA Board of Directors met to consider the contract as well as the recommendations of the negotiating committee. The Board agreed to recommend approval of the contract to the APA General Meeting to be held shortly thereafter. This recommendation was reported to the General Meeting, which also gave its approval to the contract. "Any member of the Association, as provided in the bylaws, has ten days to reject any agreement made, if he or she was not present. The contract with the CCC is not signed collectively between that agenda and the APA. Each of the mills, separately, conducts its own negotiations. Mr. Del Valle added that the contract follows the terms already advanced by EL MUNDO in yesterday's edition, and added, regarding other clauses, the following: "It provides for the creation of an Arbitration Committee in case of discrepancies in the application of the contract, formed by a representative of the sellers, and another representative of the CCC. If no agreement can be reached between the two, a third party shall be selected, and if no agreement can be reached for the appointment of the third party, then the American Arbitration Association shall be the funder. "The Association agreed to appoint the (Continued on page IB.)
* - BC# r > । । ■ 1 i *' MANUEL A. DEL VALLE President of the P. R. Sugar Producers' Association which yesterday approved the contract for the sale of this year's sugar. Strike on docks set for tomorrow. to break out at 1 P. M. if present conflict at Jobos is not settled At 1 P. M. tomorrow, Sunday, a maritime strike will break out on all the docks of Puerto Rico, if a solution is not found to the existing conflict."The union of workers at the docks, affiliated with the Puerto Rican Labor Federation, after having given a 72-hour deadline to Governor Piero and the shipping companies to solve the conflict at Jobos, persisted yesterday in its decision to go on strike at the expiration of the deadline, at the aforementioned time. Later it was reported by the leaders of the local in San Juan of the UTM, Messrs. Juan H. Garcia and Carlos J. Recelo, that the strike will begin at one o'clock in the afternoon. All Indicated yesterday juo the maritime strike do stevedores and other dock workers comenJórlz * the hour Indicated not having been made managements endoroi Continued on page T)
Providing for a 50 percent reduction in the 20 percent tax paid by automobiles and other motor vehicles sold in Puerto Rico, Representative Benjamin Ortlz introduced the following bill in the House yesterday: "To amend Section 16, Subsection 7 of Act 85 of August 20, 1925, known as the 'Puerto Rico Internal Revenue Act', as subsequently amended, and for other purposes,
i - "V" Compendium of News
Benjamin Ortta has proposed Iuo m rodusca to 10 percent-or now-the Internal Revenue paid by motor vehicles. Incidents occurred at the University on the occasion of the eonmemoradon do loo - "- eeooo do Ponce an 1987 00* The CBF announced that it will acquire the loans granted to veterans for homes. ♦ - * Don Pedro f "omocq, the head of the Council, visits the island. 000 VI U.S. Department of Justice investigates the increase in gasoline prices, after numerous complaints. 000 Leaders of the Aooeiadén de Maestras interviewed several legislators. ♦ * * As on the first day, the train service is still in trouble and there is no prospect of a fix. - The Medical Association vstrnc tures the plan to rstahleco- an emergency medical shift, 0 0 0 Agrlculturists of Aguadilla demand prompt andon of the Government to solve the stoppage in ol Tren. - * * * Approved by the Board of Commissioners the map of the Capital's neighborhoods.
The Government will accelerate work* in Ponce and Juana Díaz to confront unemployment created by the "4 cessation of the central (toca Chica. . --- Because of the lack of concrete UoUh" on revenues, it has not yet been possible to act on a large number of projects threatened" to be frozen in committee. ♦ e ♦ triarte leaves today for the United States. So will oppose the ronflr maelon do VQlarongn - * * Dr. Jose I adía will ask for confirmation do Villaronga. Paul G. Miller, and other educed urea, also aolieltan. **The Asúear Producers Association approved the OCA contract for the sale of In safra of 1948-1947. * * * The House Ways and Means Committee yesterday approved the Republican plan for the reduction of the income tax". * * * * Venegas and Escudero impress in Ginn* te" Dorado" training. Igulna was outstanding in Len Morris's final three victories of the season, and is already submitted to the United States. Already before the United States is an amendment to limit presidential term limits in the United States.
Ortiz proposes reduction of internal revenue on automobiles Rhora rate is 20%; legislator suggests it be reduced to 10%. -Provides that cars sold to crippled veterans not pay the tax.
Article 1.- Section 7 of ■ Section 18 of Act number 85 of August 20, 1925, known as the "Internal Revenue Act of Puerto Rico", as subsequently amended, is hereby amended so that it shall read as follows: 'i Section 18.-', '7. Vehicles and Self-Propelled Vehicles and Apparatus - Upon automobiles, motorcycles, locomotives, and other self-propelled vehicles of a similar nature (by whatever name called by which such vehicles may be called). (whatever the name by which they may be known), including the chassis and boxes (auto bodies) for any of the vehicles and apparatus enumerated herein, which are sold, transferred, used or introduced in Puerto Rico, a Tax of ten (10) percent on the price paid in Puerto Rico; Provided, that those automobiles which are sold to disabled veterans of the First and Second World Wars, pursuant to the provisions of the Act of Congress of the United States of America of August 8, 1948 (Public Law 663-79th Gong.), pursuant to which the tax on the price paid in Puerto Rico is increased to ten (10) percent; Provided, that those automobiles which are sold to disabled veterans of the First and Second World Wars, pursuant to the provisions of the Act of Congress of the United States of America of August 8, 1948 (Public Law 663-79th. Gong.), by which the United States Veterans Administration is authorized to furnish automobiles to listed veterans, shall not be subject to the payment of the Internal Revenue Tax established by this Subsection on such automobiles"; PROVIDED, further, that if any Importer or distributor had paid directly to the People of Puerto Rico the internal revenue taxes due on such automobiles, the importer or distributor shall not be subject to the payment of the Internal Revenue Tax established by this Subsection.
The House Ways and Means Committee gave its approval to the bill that reduces the income tax.
Padín to ask for Villaronga's confirmation Says Villaronga has gone as far as he would have -wanted to do on Isla Paul G. Miller ; also endorses । - . One hundred teachers from Puerto Rico will be taken to E. IL to study Indian By CHARLES R.~McCABE United Press Correspondent" WASHINGTON. 21. (PU)-EI Dr. Jose Padln. excomlslonado of Instruction of Puerto Rico, said he will appear before the Comí. Lt.?/ Senate Public Lands Mr "H.Í?°vm *' nom braniiento de ü . v, l, l ,ar °n<" rome Common" nate of Instruction. Hearings to that effect will begin on Mar zo. with o an outstanding au tortaed, both in linguistics and education, said that {■vorects entirely Villaronga's theories as to i" teach.
Jjaó* English, that Inchye the u "o - of the vernacular Language to ensoñar tn '*"* "cuetes i elementary as in the higher ones. - Padln said that in his opinion the eni seflanza dol Inglé" in Puerto Rico, ' ? P*s "da half a century, has si' . P n ■contoclmlento extraordlna- - rio, taking into account the impedi- - amounts that have had to face > educators." - He said that *this fundamental reason" ' for the failure of more Puerto Ricans to speak English is due to "the lack of adequate educational faclll- - dates, of all kinds, on the Island.' ' . A Puntó quo ntincz attends more than ■ half of the population of the Island 1 to school; that of this half, more i lo mlted only "fisto a te school 1 half the time, and that SO ■ percent of, es" parta that fell " te half d "l time abptWonn the ra- - quota before termirfar the fifth - Padln arrived at Wáahlngto.n yesterday, and " Immediately had a conferen- - cía with Fernós and Luis Muflís Souf- ) front. The latter arrived "yer late > also, coming from New York. Pedro Cebollero and Professor W*. - illam F. O'Reilly, of the Univerz'dad * of Puerto Rico, are expected" here ' from one moment to the next, Among the other persons who are expected to testify in favor of Villaronga's nom' bramlento. <le acuer- * do with Fernós, include: Dr. 1 George Zook, dol National Council > of Education; Dr. J. J. Osuna, d "1 cano oméritus of the School of Education of the Unlvoraidad de Rico; Podro Court, of the Parent-Teachers Association, and Pedro Casablanca and Juan G. Llvera, "n representation of the Association of Fernos High School Principals, who appeared, naré several somanta/ in the company of Muñoz, at the preliminary hearings, said he intends to appear before the panel again । Padin said he is "more convinced than ever" that the enso- । fianza en el Idioma vernáculo will result in an Intensificación rn la en- . He also revealed that "the "> uo rn the English language as well as better pedagogy in other subjects. . He further disclosed that "> uoetor , Paul G, Miller, oxcomtaionado do . Instruction, has written him a letter , to the committee endorsing Vlllaron- . ga . He said he hoped that Dr. Miller would be able to appear before the Senate, but he understood that the doctor's health was not good. Padln, who was a forerunner in the teaching of aslgnaturea ¡ (Continued on page 15.)
F'S S" BSIVU Emergency medical shift to be established The class itself is organizing it with a view to more efficient service With a view to laying the groundwork for organizing emergency medical services during the evening and holiday hours in the metropolitan area, Dr. Manuel Guzmanq Rodriguez, president of the Puerto Rico Medical Association, has called a meeting of the members of the San Juan district for March 24, at 8 p.m. at the Association's home. The idea of those who originated the plan is to enlist the cooperation of a number of physicians who will undertake to be on call to provide medical assistance to the public during the hours when it is currently difficult to obtain such services. In a letter addressed by Dr. Guzmán Rodriguez to the members of the District Association, he stated the following: "The Puerto Rico Medical Association, conscious of its duty to watch over the welfare of the public in health matters, has been studying the means of rendering a more efficient service than it has done up to the present. "It is undeniable that it is difficult and almost impossible to obtain medical services during the night and on holidays. This happens not because of negligence or lack of desire to provide service, but rather because of the lack of an organizational system that could provide medical services in a coordinated manner. In the preliminary discussions, attention was drawn to the fact that "even though (Continued on page 8)
All the efforts made yesterday by the Insular Conciliator, in favor of the parties resuming negotiations, were unsuccessful.
i The situation in the strike at the Railroad was at a critical juncture, since no agreement was in sight between the parties that would put an end to the strike. Both the workers and the company maintained their attitude towards the union's demand for a general wage increase. The crisis in relations between the American Railroad Co. and the United Farm Workers Union began Tuesday, when negotiations between the parties, at the Concilla Initiative, began.
- ..._ । I dor Francisco Verdiales, were suspended indefinitely, when the company rejected the request of the union for an increase in the "Jornale" of the guards and "u- । xlHaro" of the work. । The company had proposed to the union increases that were tentatively approved for a number of workers, but the proposal was rejected by the union, claiming that the workers had had their pay raised last September. The Union rejected the proposal, and yesterday the crisis became more serious when the company announced that its original offer tentatively approved I" speaks withdrawn, The ompros", by voice of its Director General, Mr. Ettleno Totti, announced yesterday ostirdeclslón. For their part, the workers maintained their demand for two and three cents per sheet increase for the gatekeepers and shop stewards. ) In the meantime, the In- . sular Conciliator, Mr. Verdiales, continued his efforts to reach an agreement between the parties. i In the morning hours, Conciliator Verdiales held a conference with the Com- pany Auditor José P. Gorbea. p As of yesterday, the conciliatory proposals suggested by Mr. Verdiales had not progressed. (Continued on page 15)
Iriarte leaves today for the U.S.A.; he will oppose Villaronga.
The president of the Unión Repu- i bllcana Progresista, Lic. Ce- < leitino Iriarte Miró, will leave today at < noon hada Washington in gos- 1 tlonos related cor. the political colectlvl- < dad that he presides. Accompanying Iriarte on this trip are his wife, Doña Ana Maria < Valdes do Iriarte, who holds the position of "nationai-commlttoo-wo-man" of Puerto Rico on the Republican National Committee. National Committee, and Mrs. 1 U. S. Allison, principal of Saint John's College. Mr. Iriarte will appear before the
the Senate Public Lands Committee to testify on the opposition to the appointment of Mr. Mariano Villaronga to the post of Commissioner of Instruction. He will also interview Congressional and National Republican Party leaders on issues related to Puerto Rico. Yesterday the announced meeting of the Central Territorial Committee of the Republican Union did not take place because it was not deemed opportune to convene it at the I (Continued on page 15)
ll Smiles upon learning of the Supreme Court decision 4 1 ■i | --'-ó ' ■ ' Sii I | ' i ' : h / 7 | I I l '? f | \ I I I H I - I I I I ' -' ' * - ■ ■■■■:■ AS Xi ii " vT / ' - '> * U jH ra -■ । ■ i Accompanied by "u mpom Aúne (right) and "u "eftora madre (Left) Lt. goüernadur nt. & Thompaon, of Georgia, smiles modestly in "u hotel room in Atienta upon learning"" that the state Supreme Court had upheld his claim to the governorship of Georgia. The court ruled that the state Legislature's election of Herman Talmadge as governor was unconstitutional. - (Aaortada Press Photo).
E. V. flag substituted again yesterday at the University Student" independentista" put up the Puerto Rican flag-Rector ordered that the U. S. flag be hoisted on the tower. - Incidents of the day By Laiii HERNÁNDEZ ÁQUINO Editor of EL MUNDO Yesterday for the second time the Puerto Rican flag was hoisted on the flagpole of the University of Puerto Rico, replacing the U.S. flag.
On September 23rd of last year, the U.S. flag was substituted at the University, when a group of students raised the monostar flag in celebration of the Grito de Lares. Yesterday "the Independence Society commemorated the Ramo Sunday" of 1937, when events took place in Ponco that have been popularly called the "massacre of Ponco. At half past four in the morning a group of university students, integrated by Juin Marl Bras, president of 1" Juventud Independentlsta de Puerto Rico; William Fred Santiago, president of the Sociedad Independentlsta Universitaria: José Oralndo Grau, Jorge Luís Landing, president of the Student Council; José Gil Lamadrid, Juan Ortlz Jiménez, Andrés Rivera, Castelar Garda, Rafael Barreto, Juan Elliot Rublo and Jesús Rodríguez Benitez, went with the Puerto Rican flag to the grounds where the American flagpole is located, and ceremoniously raised the Puerto Rican flag. It was five o'clock in the morning when one of the University guards stood at the place where the students were being honored, requesting that the Puerto Rican flag be lowered. The group of students refused to lower it, explaining to the guardian that they would submit their names to him so that he could save his responsibility before the university administration, and the university administration would know who were responsible for the act. The university guard opted to take the names of the students with him, leaving the single-starred flag with mourning bands to float to the four winds. A portrait of Don Pedro Alblzu Campos was later placed at the base of the flagpole. At eight o'clock in the morning, next to the portrait of Don Pedro Alblzu Campos, a rally was improvised with the participation of several university professors and the organizers of the event. Mr. William Fred Santiago, president of SIU, made the presentation of the speakers. The first to speak was the student Juan Mari Bi;á>> President of the Independent Youth of Puerto Rleo, who (Continued on page 22) Lev projects signed yesterday by Governor El P. del 8. Uta, which appropriates the sum of 929,000 for the Puerto Rico Public Recreation and Sports Commission to develop a sports arts program in the island, was signed by the Governor of Puerto Rico, becoming law number two of the regular session of the current fiscal year. My number 3, which amends article 107 of the Civil Code of Puerto Rico, 1940 edition, as amended by law number 44 approved on April 18, 1985. The amended article refers to the parental rights of minors in case of divorce.
: Investigation - on increase in gasoline; It is due to complaints that Attorney Clark has received lately " 1 "■ ■ ■ . By FRED MULLEN i 1 WASHINGTON. 21. (P.U.) - The " motoring public is up in arms against rising gasoline prices, and is asking the Department of Justice to act on the matter. "Acting Attorney General Douglas W. McGregory reported to the United Press that the Department was receiving complaints and more than complaints against recent increases in gasoline prices and was prepared to do what it could. J "The gasoline price situation across the pala, is ba- ; jo study by the Division Against lo" j Monopolies," - said McGregor. "That ■ is all 1 we can Report on : wt" moment. The Anti-Monopoly Division is preparing to speed up work to deal with unemployment. i The suspension of operations at the Boca Chica power plant in Ponce has created a difficult unemployment situation in the agricultural area of Juana Diaz and Ponce. The Boca Chica plant is being dismantled because its machinery has been sold to a Mexican agricultural cooperative. In response to a request from the Serrallés Succession, owner of this mill, the Public Service Commission, after holding public hearings, agreed to cancel the franchise granted to the Boca Chica mill, thereby suspending the milling of corns and production at the beginning of the current harvest. One of the most affected by such determination has been the Juana Díaz mill, where hundreds have been affected, reflecting this in the local commerce. In order to find a solution to this problem, Senator Francisco L. Anselm and Representative Agustín Burgos, presented the problem to the President of the Senate, "flor Luis Muflo" Marin, who called a meeting of government officials, which was held in Juana Díaz, where hundreds of people were affected, reflecting this in the local commerce.
It also approved -retroactivity to January, 1947. (P.U.) - The House Ways and Means Committee today approved, by a vote of 16-9, the Republican-sponsored plan to reduce revenue contributions by 850,000,000, ranging from 20 percent to 30 percent. The program, which is a liberalized version of Rep. Knutson's flat 20 percent tax reduction bill, makes all reductions retroactive to January 1, at a cost to the Treasury of $83,840,000,000 annually. The measure is filibustered to reach the House next Wednesday and passage, probably without amendment, is expected Thursday. It will then go to the Senate where Sen. Robert A. Taft, R-Ohio, is leading a powerful movement to postpone its effective date until July 1. 1 - A 30 percent reduction for people over 20,000,000 with taxable income (after exemptions and deductions) of 1LO0O or less, plus flat tax rates ranging from 357 to 835 for people whose net "income" is between 81,000 and 1,395. 2- A 20 percent reduction I for about 30,000,000 taxpayers with taxable income between 31,395 and 8302,896. 3.- Graded deductions ranging from 19 percent for persons with taxable income of 3302,896. to 310-l|2 percent for anyone whose taxable income reaches $6,000,000. .. The reductions would be computed on the basis of the current basic tax rates adopted last year. Within those rates, taxpayers would be allowed to take five percent deductions after their computation. The new 20 and 30 percent reductions would be in addition to the five percent. However, instead of first deducting five percent and then reducing the remaining 20 percent, the taxpayer with income over 31,000 would take a single deduction of 24 percent. That amounts to a five percent deduction plus a 20 percent deduction,' Rep. Melvin West, D-Texas, voted with 15 Republicans to give the program a favorable report. All of the other Democrats voted against it, after Republican Robert L. Doughton, Democrat, of North Carolina, was defeated, 15 to 1U, in his attempt to delay action until the Senate and House finally agree on a reduction in the budget for the fiscal year 1948. The Republicans insist on pressing ahead with the tax cut plans in the face of vigorous opposition from President Truman, Treasury Secretary Snyder, and prominent Administration fiscal advisers. These have urged Congress to think repeatedly before lowering the $259,000,000,000,000 national debt. The chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, Harold Knutson, R-Minnesota, author of the original 20 percent flat tax reduction plan - which caused such strong bipartisan opposition on the grounds that it was "a rich man's bill." He said that requesting it from the Rules Committee on Tuesday was an open endorsement of the new measure. The action taken today by the House Ways and Means Committee was an immediate sequel to statements made the day before by House Speaker Joseph Martin to explain that the Republican National Party caucus had adopted a plan to reduce income taxes. Martin explained that the measure will come before the full House next Wednesday for discussion under a dobates limitation rule that will determine whether the measure can be voted on the following day, Thursday. The Republican decision to modify the plan originally adopted by Republicans - consisting of a 20 percent across-the-board cut - to give greater benefits to low-income people was made in order to stem growing opposition to the program from both Republicans and Democrats.
Threatened number of bills
Can't discuss them yet due to lack of revenue data Agency heads accused of delay --- Representatives complain no major legislation has been passed yet By Jose M. Garcia Calderon Staff Writer EL MUNDO Numerous members of the House of Representatives blame the delay in sending data or reports by the officials who head the various agencies or instrumentalities of the island government for the fact that so far, after more than 40 days of legislative session, no major legislation has been considered. Since the current ordinary session of the Legislature began on February 10, the House Finance Committee has been holding informal conferences with some of the heads of departments and official agencies, especially with the Chairman of the Planning Board, Mr. Rafa Picó, and the Director of the Budget Bureau, Mr. Roberto de Jesús, on the general budget. de Jesús, on the Government's general expenditure budget for the coming fiscal year; however, it has not been possible for the members to reach any conclusions, due to the confusion existing with respect to the real Revenues that the Island Treasury may receive and the manner in which these shall be distributed.
Time and again, in the course of conferences held with the executive officers of the Government, it has been recommended to the Finance Committee to modify the asslg- ! nations requested or proposed by certain heads of Departments, which, in the absence of concrete information on the possible revenues of the public treasury, contributes to complicate and make extremely difficult the distribution of funds, which would be extremely difficult. One of the last officials to appear before the House Finance Committee was Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante. Director of the Insular Aqueduct Service, who informed the members of the Committee the day before yesterday of the existence of a deficit of 3900,000 in said service. It has been reported that the Servicio Insular de Acueductos, as well as other companies and government authorities dedicated to public services, would be doomed to suffer a collapse in its financial state, if the Legislature does not act in a generous manner in granting subsidies. As a measure to cushion in part the economic difficulties of the Insular Aqueduct Service, Mr. Cuevas Bustamante suggested to the Treasury Committee to impose on the Government the obligation to pay for the water it consumes, which, according to what was reported, would provide income to progressively reduce the current deficit of the water utility.