THE WORLD
WEATHER FOR THE IRLA" HOT: Cloudy, with rainy" -"" when. IN RAN JUAN, AVER: High, 84; low, 77. barometric pressure ol nKel & <! * do la tardo. UN Ne there are indications of tropical dlsturMo ilfUM I
40 pages 5/
PtARIO DI ' LA MACANA
ABO XXVIII
elus matter, Foot Office, Ban Juan. E R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1947
BaRor motorist, no Attempt ara harrow, another sa killed was alia.
NUMBER 11018
Before Truman on merger of armed forces; Approval of island bill awaited today
Rum production suffers further decline Shipments were 13% of shipments made in first part of 1946 June receipts to Treasury, $4254 The previous year's figure was S5,734,186. Comparing the state of manufacture and sales in the first five months of 1944 with that of 1948, it reveals that from the first of January to May 31, 1947, production was 97 percent of what it was in the previous year; and shipments to the United States were 13 percent of what they were in 1949. The payments for the federal excise tax, the largest source of the Island Government's income, were 10 percent of the previous year's amount, and local consumption in that year was 82 percent of what it was in the previous year. II Executive Secretary of the Institute of Rum of Puerto Rico, in his official report to the members of the Institution, states: "The yearbook of our statistics for May continues to reveal the critical condition which is affecting the rum industry since the beginning of the year 1947; there is no doubt that the industry is experiencing a severe crisis, the duration of which is difficult to foresee. In the month of May 1947, the following gallons were produced in Puerto Rico: Bacardi Corporation of America, (Rio Piedras) 27,384 gallons: Bacardi Corporation of America, (Santurco) 45,202.88 gallons; Brugal y Co. C. por A., 17,047 gallons: CapL Morgan Rum Distillery, P. R. Ine. 114,958.08 galoneo; DeotiLt r lL£" ,dadog da Brinquen, Inc., 23,062.84 gallonage; Serrando Distillery, Ine., 307,218.82 -gallonage; MayagUer Distilling Co" 79,888.34 gallonage; J. R. Nieves A Co. Inc., 39358.- ? ®512 n .* a L. Pu * rt0 R,co Distilling Co, 180,495 04 galonee. This makes a total of 834,777.22 gallons distilled in May 1947, which compared with 1,053,878.59 gallons distilled in May 1948 represents a 79 percent increase. From January to May 1947, 2,888,981.55 gallons of distillate distillate were produced, which represents an 87 percent increase over the same period in 1948, when 4,040,063.14 gallons were produced. During the month of May 1947, the distillation of spirits was limited to only 9 of the 17 existing distilleries. Eight distilleries were out of operation. During the month of May 1947 shipments to the continental United States were only five per cent of what M -" d " In May 1948 there were 389,038.50 cases shipped against TL715 cases in May 1947. shipments in May 1944 were made by Bacardi Corporation of America, 500 cases; Bru-al C ' P 0P 280 "Oas; Serrallos Distillery. Inc, 8,994 cases; Lieoreria Marin Inc, 273 cases; Ucorarla Ordofiez. 2 cases; Mayagüez . (Continued on page 24)
Senate leaders confident ,1 that bill will not perish । Senator Taft warns* however, that situation is such that no definite sequence can be adopted for consideration of pending billa WASHINGTON, July 25.-PU- Senate leaders were still confident this evening.The Senate leaders were still confident this evening that the bill recognizing the right of Puerto Ricans to elect their governor would pass the Upper House - it already has passed the Lower House - before the recess of the current session of Congress tomorrow, Saturday, but none of them ventured to predict that the bill would pass the House.
They did not venture to predict what time the approval would occur. During the late afternoon hours today, the intent prevailed to consider first the 1947 sugar quota bill with priority over any other measures relating to U.S. territories or foreign policy, according to Senator Robert A. Taft, chairman of the Senate Rules Committee. Taft expressed his belief that the Puerto Rican gubernatorial-election bill would have its turn immediately thereafter, but cautioned at the same time that the Senate floor was too high and did not allow the Senate to adopt a definite sequence for consideration of pending measures. The Senate will be in session late this evening. On the other hand, Joan Van Cranken, Washington correspondent for the International News Service, reports that the Republican leadership remains in sympathy (Continued on page 24).
- eee.iBWOSV MW - I ( I' I I I * Senator Taft
There is movement in the House to include it in the CRF extension. - Local office ¡ awaits data from agency in Washington The federal legislation lately passed, extending the functions of the Financial Recon- ' Marion óe Reconatrucclón Financi.ro, na contains diop y* te continuation of the mortgage purchase program f Iuh* 4* veterans of the last war. Because of this situation, some members of Congress, among them the renresentant"
Ester Kefauvor. of Tenes! are making moves to pass House Bill 4058.। which obviates this situation. This problem affects the entire veterans' home construction program, both in the United States and Puerto Rico. The local office of the Financial Reconstruction Corporation was unable yesterday to authorize any statement on this matter. However, he indicated that he is communicating with the central office in Washington with a view to authorizing statements in the next few days. The remarks of Repre- | sentant Kefauver, at a recent session of the Lower House, addressing this problem, were as follows: "I wish to call attention to a situation which has caused me much concern during the past week. Legislation passed i recently, which included the elimination of 1a Compafila Hipoteca- । ría of 1a Financial Reconstruction Corporation, has created- a gigantic threat to our veterans' housing program. This compafila performed, a great service for our veterans. "In my district, the benefits derived from this agency were tremendous; the veterans' housing plan was accelerated, and with the support of the CRF Mortgage Pool, many low-income veterans were given the opportunity to secure 100 percent mortgages under the terms of the Corps.
.."-WWWW, wasuBw vrnuuw m rFprFRHnran 'Control over rice would be until February Truman ennddera bill nue allows Agriculture pimltar ] R importation Lss Imnortaclones of rice v proHurtos Alimenticios derivative', del i "* p a, """" **ros. will remain under the control of the P. "i rf 4 m S 1 nt0 dF Federal Agriculture, if President Truman signs the bill approved by the *' x< * nd, ? nding war powers over certain nrorfurtpa. The dlsooslrllon restrlctlvA *" H T,tu,ft ITT d * 1A medldA, as was aproned ñ by Congress, after *1 Inform, of the committee of , conferences of both Houses. This will mean that Puerto Rico will not be able to import rice from Bra- । rLL"'l? U ií r P* 1 " W nn the United States, if local importers are not specifically authorized to do so by the Federal Government. This provision was inserted in the above legislation when the alleged threat to the mainland rice industry from the enormous production of rice in Brazil and the intention of the Insular Government to import a substantial quantity of rice from Brazil was recently raised in the Senate. This new measure, if it becomes law, will be known as the Second Decontrol Act of 1947. 1 The report of the committee of conferees states that "it is the general policy of the United States to eliminate all wartime emergency controls on materials, except to the minimum extent necessary to make available to needy countries those items whose export to other points would not be appropriate. 1 The export and import war powers granted to the President would only be exercised until February 1948. As far as the export of rice and rice products is concerned, these are exempted from control since they fall under the classification of "food and foodstuffs", (Continued on page 24).
Compendium of News
Production of rice suffered new drop, shipments in first months of 194? down 11 percent from same period in 1948. oes Prosecutors Aponte and Oil Rivera file motion before the Supreme Court in connection with the Grillases case. oos Seek to resume the mortgage program in favor of veterans within the CRF's powers. 0 0 0 0 Governor accepts resignation of Maricas post office The Attorney General had requested the resignation. 0 0 0 0 0 Aponte is charged with the invwottgaeion of the Pao and short municipal judgeships. - o o ■ OOP outlines its ootratogy for 1948, basing it on labor legislation and reads "taan**" fim. vri romo irbiiw iim- - * * * Pono appoints an esoapial eomitó to study the Train caco. 0 0 0 0 Judge Chavea announces arrival at the beginning of August. 0 0 0 0 Moscooo responds to the interpellation of the Aeociaeión de Duefio" de Hoteles y Restaurantes. e o o Hacienda promulgates new re-
I glemento para s! cobro da arbitrios en espectáculos públicos. - - - t Lmris conducts an investigation of ! "Plnalón occurred in Illinois mine. - The fatal victims of the Mol- 1 ! bourne accident were given their belongings. .* " * Burke's Arion, crashed on 2,009-pound excoso. attack - M mU lias do Atonas. ... ...""*■! to">to> tor "I WWW- ♦ 0 - totuaclón do new übr,r " "- I Faao a la firma* da Traman ol Mucaroraa, y la rasión do las fuersaa armaV tu *r° " u * * *-PrMÍdonto will sign the project of the 1 bonus for loa soldiers. .a revolution was feared to divide China,
The U.S. Post Office Department intends to increase the postal rate for airmail, as reported yesterday to leefior George L. Do Pass, postmaster of Ran Juan. He told Do Pass that there is an intention to increase the rate by one cent per ounce or fraction of an ounce. The current rate is five cents per ounce or fraction thereof. - The Postmaster General's final decision has not yet been made, but, as explained by the Postmaster General, the GOP is outlining its policy for 1948.
GOP Outlines 1948 Policy Labor Legislation, Contributions Top Issues Truman Follows FDR Standards Republicans Believe Left of Center No Longer Supported For Lyle C. Wilson United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, July 25 (PU)- Republicans are betting all their money today that the political gold mine of the center Left has ceased to bear fruit. The late Franklin D. Roosevelt exhausted it completely. Whether he left anything for his successors will not be known until the presidential election takes place a year from next November. The Republican policy upon which the party's 1948 campaign was largely founded has already been drafted by the GOP-controlled Congress, which is set to recess its first session tomorrow (today). Domestically it all boils down to a program of economy in government spending, reduction of income taxes, restrictions on the strength of labor unions, and crushing of Communists. His tax reduction project was put in check when it was alleged that low-income individuals received too little relief while high-income individuals received too much. The Republicans have adopted Adotafrie. The Republicans have aeguldo Adotafrie. The main "Issues" of the 1948 campaign as they appear to date will be labor legislation and contributions. Roosevelt had labor legislation passed by Congress which gave extraordinary powers and protection to labor unions. Under this legislation organized labor acquired political and financial power which enabled it, in general, to defeat the employers, especially when the Roosevelt administration acted as arbiter. As far as contributions and expenditures were concerned, the program of the late Roosevelt was to take from those who had and in some form or other distribute it among those who had little or none. These labor, tax-and-spend rules were central to the left-of-center strategy that Roosevelt espoused. From his first national political triumph in 1932 to his last in 1944, that strategy never wavered. By directly attacking these norms, the Republican Party has taken the position that the New Deal-Democratic coalition created by the late President Roosevelt can be broken. The GOP is confident, too, that President Truman lacks the political leadership to raise the Invincible political army that inevitably followed if senior Roosevelt. The labor question was deter(Continued on page 24)
Chávez is expected ■ in the first days of August! Plans are underway to receive Chavez in a letter to Marfthal Draughon. Although the definite date on which . the new Federal Court Judge David Chávez will arrive in Puerto Rico has not been announced by him, the Bar of . Bar and the Federal Court . . and the Association of Graduates of Georgetown University are preparing to celebrate with several events the arrival of the new judge to the Island. -1 As reported yesterday by Mr. Jose G. Gonzalez, president of the . José G. González, President of the Federal Bar, this entity does not yet have definite plans as to the acts to be carried out by Judge Chávez, "mainly due to the fact that we do not know when he will come to the Island". - He added, however, that there are plans "on the matter. 1 Mr. Gonzalez further stated that the graduates of Georgetown University, where Judge Chavez studied, are organizing an event to honor him. Tn- . formed that among the lawyers* who studied at said university are Raul Chavez and Raul Chavez. "Idad include Ra' fael Rivera Zayas, Judges José ' M. Calderón and Jesús M. González. González himself. As to the date of the arrival of the new federal judge to Puerto Rico, Mr. Gonzalez said that he had reports that Mr. Chavez had decided to come to the island first to make sure of accommodation facilities for him and his family, and then return to the United States to go back to his relatives in 1 (Continued on page 24).
New regulations for the collection of taxes for entertainment.
Includes all activities where admission fees are charged. - Prohibits tax-inclusive gross prices that have a fraction - - I
The Treasury Department has enacted a new regulation for the collection of taxes on public spectacles, which, with some exceptions, became effective last July 10. The regulation defines what should be considered a public spectacle, for purposes of taxation, including all those activities where admission fees are charged. Among the most important provisions of the regulation are the following: "Computation of the arbitrage. Reference rate. Every employer, in accordance with the provisions of Sec.
11 ction 1 of Law No. 137 of May 13, 1943, as amended by Section 2 of Law No. 180 of May 10, 1945 (p. 545), is obliged, at the time of the payment of the tax, to pay the tax. 545) s is obliged, at the time of collecting the right of admission, to co| - brae, in addition, a contribution' * computed at haae of ten i- (10%) per cent on the value - of each ticket or right of admission, the price of which, (10%) per cent on the value of each ticket or right of admission, the price of which, exclusive of tax, does not exceed ten (10) cents, and twenty (20%) per cent on the value of each ticket or right of admission, the price of which, exclusive of tax, exceeds ten (10) cents. (In order to facilitate the determination of the tax in each case, Tables 1 and 2 are provided on the following pages, by reference to which it will be possible for a businessman to analyze any product made in the elements of price and amount of tax; or, reciprocally, to ascertain the amount of gross pro- . The law is refractory to the prs- " b J" 0 lL u V". c,ud8d) d * w.ii r 211' PF' o w> °' 38 ' 0 M ' 0 <8 ' k 0.77, 0.83.... and in general all the soi- perads of 8 cents, or X a which, when disintegrated, produce a price with fractions, and a Tax also with fractions, and - ignoring 1a fraction of the ImpuoaI- j to by law, we would obtain i h । a gross price with fractions of I r one cent. For example, 85 centaI- vos Impuosto-lncluldo is broken down 1 (Continued o a la paflna 34).
A 1 cent increase is expected in the airmail service.
some time "we sent a requisition to the general offices in Washington for a quantity of five-cent air stamps and the same was not filled, and we were sent a notice to the effect that the five-cent stamps would not be sent as it was intended to enact an increase in the air rate". The stock of five-cent air stamps was exhausted in the post offices in Ban Juan. Five-cent stamps are now being sold in other denominations (Continued on page 34).
Florida victims' values delivered i I I I I I ..... ■ ''MBM I W ' I I BkM. 1 MsÍuMom Pantaloncltoe belonging to her hljlto Felix """"U mom, Maria C. Montoso. At right, seflora Ana Rolá, widow of Monaerrate Orus, looks for her late raposo's clothes. - (Photos from EL MUNDO).
The examination of clothes and wallets was carried out at the Prosecutor's office. Amounts over 850 were retained; a declaration of heirs must be obtained. Several life insurance policies were listed Yesterday were delivered to the relatives of the victims* of the accl- *" M * lhourn . a ' the belongings* and effects per-"""J" ° W They could be recovered from the ruins of the plane slnies11 - Ubarv,,ldn d *> <!-"■! Manuel IjSpez Carrillo, proceeded J""**"^ 1 " - ****^ - a f raí Indar a 1a Room A* 1.
■ a is na:a o a la corta da Dl "trlto fourteen sacks, behind suitcases ( and a psquata, containing clothes and other" affections, preceding to open them so that Je" relatives identlficaran all that" object", clothes" and other" useful", belonging" to lo" deudo". In addition to these bags and suitcases in the possession of the Secretary of López Carrillo, there were nine wallets containing the following valuables, documents and cash: María Hernández, one dollar in cash; Maria C. Montoao, $34.00 in cash; Marros Moulller, 89.53 in cash; Humberto Fillet, $871.4? in cash, $871.4? in cash; Marros Moulller, $34.00 in cash; Humberto Fillet, $34.5? in cash, $34.5? in cash. 871.4? in cash, a life policy for 81,500 and another for 8500.00. both" in favor of his wife; Cándido Rivera Rodriguez, 828198 tn cash and a check for 81,000; Aurelio Rodríguez Colón, 8139.17, In accordance with the instructions of prosecutor Wpez, Carrillo, secretary Paradiso proceeded to deliver the wallets containing money worth less than 850. According to what he told the press, when the amount claimed is greater than 850, it is necessary to make a claim through a petition of declaration of heirs before a competent court, which in turn, will order the delivery of said belongings. In accordance with these instructions, the secretary Jesus Diaz Paradiso proceeded to deliver to Mrs. Ana Solé, the portfolio belonging to her husband Monserrate (Continued on page 5) Aponte in charge of investigating the courts Labor was entrusted by Negrón. - The Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Lula Negrón Fernández, has the purpose of discussing with Governor Te "ua T. Pifiero, upon his return to the Island, the advisability of including in the call for a special session of the Legislature, scheduled for next month, the creation of a Judicial Selection Council. The legislation providing for the creation of this body was submitted to the last ordinary Legislature, but was not approved. According to the Attorney General yesterday, the aforementioned body, which would be composed of representatives of the Legislature, the Supreme Court, the Puerto Rico Bar Association and the Department of Justice, would be of great help for a better functioning of the entire judicial system. The Attorney General also yesterday emphasized the advisability of amending the current law on evidentiary rules, which, according to him, has some "defects" that must be corrected, without undermining or undermining the fundamental purpose of the statute. In relation to the same law, the administration of which is in charge of the Board of Pardons, Mr. Negrón Fernández stated that the means provided are inadequate. The means alluded to by the Attorney General refer to the very scarce personnel of the Board of Pardons, whose labor, (Continued on page 24) I
Burke's plane was carrying an excess of 2,000 pounds ¡ Civil Aeronautics spokesman made a revelation. - Melbourne hearing MELBOURNE. Floridi July 25. ■~(PU).- An official of the Civil Aeronautics Administration said today that the chartered plane which crashed near this city on July 13, killing 21 persons, was ""loaded with about 2,000 pounds""1 deapegsr from Newark, New Jersey, The plane was carrying portorrlquefio" that regre "ahan a "u lela nata! on an "excuralon fee" basis. An official hearing to determine the "cauia" of the accident began here today. । Augustua of the CAA in I Atlanta. Georgia, said there were 8 children under 8 years old, and two over 8 years old who were not wearing seat" belts, The manager of the Augusta, Georgia, airport where the Burke Air Lines DC-3 ser*o transport was refueled, is said to have told Leazar that the aircraft had difficulty starting one of the engines, and that he noticed a "spark" coming from the plane's right tailpipe when it hit, Andrew Burke, of Galveston, Texss. The owner of the insured plane, stated that the pilot, Henry Hein, of Houston, did not do this. Henry Hein, of Houston, did not estobs on a "neldo basis but reelhla 30 percent "o of 1o" Gross income" of the plane. He added that he had only one paid employee, a bookkeeper" in Galveston. The Weather Bureau at Mel-' bourne states that the weather was Ideal for flying in this area at mu-, ment when the plane crashed : before sunrise. Passengers on the plane had no indication of (Continued on page 24) Sugar Quota Bill Passed WASHINGTON, July 25 -(PU). - The Senate today voted to approve, sending to the White House, a House-passed measure providing for quotas for domestic and foreign sugar producers for the American market, to be in effect for a period of five years, beginning January 1, 1948. Prior to passage of the bill, the Senate rejected an amendment by the Senate Finance Committee which would have exempted the domestic beet oil industry from the minimum wage provisions of the measure. (
The Chambers ¡activate appropriations Senate shelved investigation of Kansas election case Qty Lo" budgets already sanctioned Will examine Army's. policy in overseas areas* For RONALD G. VAN TTN1 United Prensus Correspondent* WASHINGTON, July 26 (PUTEI Senate, having doocansed for six hours ds rocky after hsber devoted tole night - the fight oothe oovers ol vete fraudulent election in Kanus City, renewed its work on te priority legislation in a hurry. The Republican leaders again set their sights on the adjournment of the congressional session Monday night. The House, infected with vacation fever, dispatched a pile of bills to be delivered to President Truman. Among them was the Administration's sweeping plan to consolidate the Army, Navy and Marine Corps into a single Department of National Defense, which was sent to . This bill was sent to the White Y?**, after a voice vote following a heated debate. While at the same time, the Rensus leaders were threatening another fluc- ™"1 to-"- M ""JScT'í í í Hatch, a New Mexico Democrat, just hours after they agreed to launch a proposed investigation into the election fraud that kept the Ro' . ?J^ a -*' ,dn "wtlnua du- - rente 18 hours" haita 8:13 A. M. ' ,h S ra . I a1 m *fiana. i Hatch, declaring that he could force another session do all te nZ , che, demanded that a vote be taken te loj zlslaclon opproved by the House . granting it congressional sanction . to the cdntrovertlda question of the Do- , portamento of State. "Lo Vos do , America" and other radlodifusienoa for abroad. Hatch yielded in cu* Intentions ruing the chairman of the Committee do ■ ,0 ' ranos. Re- . k* rt A. Taft, of Ohio, said quo leo w Republicans would later agree to 4 consider a plan to create a joint congressional _ committee for f,tl,ap ,o ' Foreign Programs*. 1 The main issue that preoeu- - - paba both legislative bodies" - in the hours" to end te so- > "ion that has lasted seven months. . e" money. Two of the biggest and most Im1 a ' l "n*elonas went through the" last stages as far as eon- ■ sideration is concerned as soon eoi as the Senate and te House rouI nlered to resume their work at i noon today. L-A viva voce. the Senate passed . a supplemental bill allocating . 1a "urn of 81,881,780,397, Including* , do the sum of 81,430,361,400 pe- . for foreign aid. A conference* is to be held with you Camabnt** to take Anal action to discuss the increase enacted in the Senate of 877,581,302 over the total amount approved by the House. 2.-Both legislative bodies, by voice, completed action so* hr * compromise bill granting the Army S5,912J29, 833 in cash and in authorized contracts for fiscal year 1948. As sent to Sefior Truman, it represents a rebate of 8234,381, 887 less" than required for the Army's 1 budget. One of the remaining five supply bills ran into obstacles at the last moment when the Senate refused, by a vote of 81 to 1, to accept the compromise appropriation approved. By is House marked 135,040. ' 2*l. for varl ° corporations of the , Government. This was envlsdo of nine to eoa- . ferencta in part by 1a sópUea ' v' . Pr *' ld * nt * d H Senate, Arthur i Vandenberg, Republican of Miehí- ' f?P UM v '"oroMly to a provision granting the ■ Bureau of the. PreaBudget control over administrative expenses of the Federal Insurance Depository Corporation ■ Among the other prio- ¡ rldad measures amontei ned is a number of prepe* melons demanding Inveetlgaeio. J nes special, which will keep several of the members of Congress busy while their ' tails rest until -1 legislative program of the prá¿. -?dencÍAi and ,B campafta ' j Paaa ndo per high the Democrats' pretoatef, the House approved an appropriation of 8440,000 to fund Invettigselons do v". rivers committees during the next few months. The House granted 825,066 for a special study on contri5 uc, n ?. d '"P'"y t ® I "* 1 "u Ways and Means Committee. The House paired the sum of $125,000 to conduct a study of foreign policy for the Committee on Foreign Affairs or an equal urn to create an I (Continued on page W