THE WORLD
barometric rita at 'sea level, a
38 Pages 5>
MORNING DAILY
YEAR XXVI11
RSrtff&rKÍ S55, "8*5'
.... I. 'I " .III I, I . , I ! , | , ■ SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 6, 1947 ' ' ' j - - - ' - ' - <
Befior sutomovlltata, don't Try that harrow, another m killed with it.
NUMBER 11059
Off " Another 25 cases of malaria in Patillas area.
Also bubo a casualty raising to twenty-five the total of death* Investigating cases in Juana Diaz They find the* waters of Patillas invaded with numerous colibacilos In the. two weeks that takes the epidemic outbreak in the population of Patillaa, hen occurred 25 deaths by pernicious malaria. The last death was recorded last Thursday. Cases increased yesterday to 295, an increase of twenty-five new cases. According to information* received by oata editorial office, two malaria cases registered in the town of Juana Diaz, are being investigated by the Health Department. Health officials stationed in Patillaa are carrying out the analysis of the water of that town, which has been found to be contaminated with colbacles, organisms that can cause typhoid fever, gaatroentorltla and other diseases of a bacterial nature. Nothing is related to the issue of malaria, as it is a work of the Department of Health, in conjunction with the work of malaria control. Our eorroaponoal on Patillaa yesterday sent the following telegraphic communiqué: "a new death was reported yesterday (Thursday), now reading 25 deaths. The number of samples examined was 545 during the day, resulting in three cases of pernicious malaria, four cases of "vivan" malaria, and two cases of "malarias". The total number of patients in Fajardo, Ponco and Patillaa was 95, with four of them being discharged on Thursday. The total number of samples examined so far is 3,742, which gives a rate of 7.8 positive cases, Morata Canton, the modest supervisor of the Southern District was called urgently from Juana Diaz, where there are supposed to be two suspected cases of malaria reported. Dr. Morata Canton was requested by Dr. Visques. "He reported that two of those hospitalized on Lafayette will be discharged today, since they have been cured. Of another delivery, ao has proceeded to examine the waters on oata population, giving ol following result the bacteriological analyses: Population, good; neighborhood Guare darraya, excess of microbes collbarlloa; neighborhood Cacao, with colibacilos, very bad; lake do Patillaa, very bad; neighborhood Bajoa, bad; neighborhood Pollos, quite bad. "We inquired about the danger of this bacillus and was informed by Mr. Roca that the microbe is nofenslvo, because it is found in large quantities, a sign that infected water is being used, which can give rise to typhoid or dysentery. "In the population there is more tranquility, because the deaths are not recorded with the frequency and in ol number of the first days". Yesterday we received the first official report from the Department of Health, giving an account of the 270 cases that we reported in our senior edition. The Department of Health also informed that the Health Department officials stationed in the town of Patillas continue their work in an effort to control the epidemic outbreak of pernicious malaria registered in that town. The official note also informs that the Chief of the EnMem'n'ngta Bureau was in Patillas, (Continued on page 22).
The President of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, has rendered a report to Governor Plftoro on the activities of the Board during the last five years, in which he states that during the aforementioned period, 3,294 public improvement projects have been re-funded and studied by the Board, and that the Board has studied 3,294 public improvement projects. 3,294 public improvement projects were approved, of which 2,331 were approved, representing a total investment of 897,089,799.29 of public funds. He adds that "the service rendered to the people of Puerto Rico through this activity can also be measured by the projects rejected because they represent a questionable investment of public funds; because they were in conflict with other projects of the plan; or because they represent a duplication of efforts or did not conform to planning standards. According to the Board's records, 474 projects, representing 815,983,408.95 in public investments, were rejected and saved by this action. It can be said that in this fund alone, the Planning Board saved the People of ¡ Puerto Rice more than 23 million dollars of its annual budget in the last few years". In connection with urban planning work, Dr. Pled, among other things, said, - ' "Urban development, ' the traditional focus of almost all planning efforts in the United States, has received our undivided attention. For the past four years, the Board has sponsored a study of all of our urban communities, which has resulted in the preparation of maps and classification of every piece of urban land throughout the 77 cities and towns, and in several villages and clusters. This series of maps has proved invaluable, not only to the Board in all its activities relating to urban areas, but also to the work of other public and private enterprises for whom they have proved essential. "The control of the lotlflcaelonos by the Board, begun on September 5, 1944, has helped to regulate the growth of our doubtful areas, laying the foundation for the establishment of healthy and modern suburbs. As of June 30, 1947, 198 developments had been submitted to the Board for consideration in the light of the ratemaking guidelines. Of these, । 50 land subdivision plans were approved, creating a total of 3,800 new lots. All of these projects have provided their own roads, sidewalks, sewage systems, water and electricity services, representing a total investment of 82,830,000 in ' works already constructed or for which the corrospon- । । diento bond has been posted, This investment of private funds in facilities that will be used mainly by the future owners of these properties, undoubtedly will be a bonus.
News Digest
Truman reiterates before the Brazilian Parliament that respect for human rights and morality in international relations are essential to the achievement of world peace. - The Executive Secretary consults Justice on the liberal candidacy in Cayoy. ♦ - Lottery regulations finalized. Buscaglla assures will eliminate Irregularities. - The OCA is speeding up the shipments of sugar from the island to the United States. - Investment of funds approved by the JP in recent years amounts to 887388,788. Hurgon U new cases of pernicious malaria in Patillas. There was a new death bringing the total to 15. Two doubtful cases investigated in Juana" Días. Instruction has not been able to apply the minimum starting salary to several of its employees. * AT is one of the efforts to obtain a readjustment payment for workers at Piaw o - " - Edward J. Flynn, FDB's closest friend, like Jamos A. Farlay, has published his memoirs for the company's employees. * The CEC has shipped a total of 704,017 tons of sugar to the United States. It expects to fear
Oautier objects to plan for veterans' rounds. The minor Santana Diaz escaped for the tenth time from the Industrial School. He was caught the day before yesterday by the Loíoa Street Police and was taken to Mayagüez. - - - ¡ Jlménre applauds the decision on the study of works for Aguadilla. e e o Sugar producers study the effects of the drought on the production of 194* * - - - - Mayoress suggested the construction of the houses corresponding to San Juan, to be carried out on Isla Verde. - Veterans' premiums may be paid on the island. - e - Mason Barr and Donald O'Connor will represent Puerto Rico in the conference to be held in Washington to consider measures to prevent accidents on shipments of ammonium nitrate. - o - Traman is left to decide whether to convene Congress. . - ... - - U.S. military personnel are stranded in Yugnealavia. - Bridges urges that the Soviet penetration manu.
Flynn will also publish his political memoir.
rfe Lm i jF EDWARD J. FLYNN He was James A. Farley's successor < in the Democratic Party Chieftainship, called by FDB Reveals FDR's condition in his last days Says he was failing of mind and body. Traman's nomination* By LYLE C. WILSON Corrosponsal do Pronta Unida WASHINGTON, Sept. 5. (P. U.)-The most faithful friend Franklin D. Roosevelt ever had now declares that the President was failing both mentally and physically in 1944 when he sought a fourth term in the White House. Edward J. Flynn is the authority behind "his judgment on the physical condition of President Roosevelt some time before his death. That statement can be found on page 181 of Flynn's book, "You are ol Jéfs," published this week by the Vicklng Press. Flynn puts it as mildly as possible; on that page I discuss the way in which saflnr Roosevelt cooperated at the 1944 Democratic national convention to prevent the renomination of Henry A. Wallace for the Vtcopresidoncta. Half a dozen-perhaps a half-dozen-do ostadlotaz, Democrats went to that convention in the belief that Mr. Roosevelt would be elected to the presidency. Some of them felt betrayed when the proof came that then-Senator Harty S. Truman, of Missouri, was the President's choice. The truth is that Senator Roosevelt had accepted Senator Truman weeks earlier. Some of the hopefuls were astonished and, even, full of courage. Soundman Alben W. Bar(Continued on page 22)
I- ■ ■ -- .... - , , , , - Truman repeats that respect for human rights and international morality essential to world peace
Gautier objects to veterans' housing plan It is not aid of any kind, he says. - Denounces high prices, high Program excludes students Most will study to finish works. Repudiates rule followed by Executive The President of the Brotherhood of Votoranoa, Emilio E. Gautier, declared after meeting with Governor Piflero to discuss the plan for the construction of 10,000 housing units for veterans, that "the Brotherhood states that the plan does not offer any help to veterans at all.Mr. Gautier added that he left the meeting with the Governor "highly disappointed in the housing program being contemplated. He explained that "the vast majority of the veterans are in school, or will be in the future, especially after the construction of this housing is completed. Their only income is the subsistence payments they receive, which is not recognized as permanent income, and all student veterans are excluded from the plan." Accompanying Mr. Gautier at this conference, held in Fortaleza on Thursday, were House Representative Alfonso Román García, Mayor of Fajardo, Softer Diego Jiménez, and members of the Fajardo chapter of the Veterans Brotherhood. Mr. Gautier authorized yesterday the slgulontto statements in connection with the conference held with the Governor; "It is finally becoming public knowledge what the housing plan sponsored by the Government of Puerto Rica consists of. For many months the matter was surrounded by an impenetrable silence and a mystery that no one could understand. A strong plea from the Veterans Brotherhood, urging quick and effective action, resulted in the release of the Government's announcement of what the Government intends to do. (Continued on page 22)
Price outlook not yet good. - The continuing rise in wholesale prices on the mainland, which has continued for the past nine consecutive weeks, offers no prospect of relief. - The rising wholesale prices on the mainland, which have been rising for several consecutive weeks, offer no prospect of relief for Puerto Rican consumers, who depend heavily on continental exports of foodstuffs, fuel and industrial and commercial materials. Moreover, in the opinion of loi functionaries here, the outlook for the immediate future is not bright. The Department of] Labor reported today that its survey of wholesale prices for 900 commodities revealed an increase of three-tenths of one percent for the week ending August 30. Wholesale prices at the end of the month revealed an increase of 20.1 million per cent over the end of August 1946, and 154 per cent over the average of 1026, which is used as a standard by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The inevitable result of this continued increase in wholesale prices, according to officials, is higher retail prices for consumers. This applies to both Puerto Rico and the U.S. mainland. (Continued on page 16)
Mayor Suggests housing construction be in Isla Verde Said ah Governor that plots could be made available. - Provisional cemetery will be in use within a month in the same area.
The provisional cemetery of Isla Verde will be able to be used for burials within a month, according to the Mayor, the Administrator of the Capital, Mrs. Fallía Rincón do Gauthier, when she was going to hold a meeting with Governor Pifloro, to inform him of the progress of this work. Accompanied by the Secretary of the Capital, Joaoflna Rincón, the Mayor of San Juan also discussed with the Governor the participation that the Capital will have in the plan for the construction of ten thousand houses, to be built in the near future. Also the project of the reconstruction of the sector of Puerta de Tierra, of the Ponco do León avenue, and the extension of the service of electric power and aqueduct to the San Juan neighborhoods that lack the service, Interrogated toobro the high of San Juan where could conatrulrae the vlviendaa that will touch the Capital on the plan of ten thousand houses, the aeflora Rincón do Gauthier roapondló that in lila Verde. In oata aoeeion. considered the point of future extentlón of the urban area of San Juan, there are available land to build several hundred ca■ai, said the Mayor. The use of this land should not be confused with the development of the lala Verde international airport project, the mayor said. When the issue of the San Juan cemetery project in late Verde was referred to the Executive Council on appeal, Mayor Rincón do Gauthier said that the Capital City Government had been offered another plot in the area for the cemetery,
for the cemetery, which could have been used for this purpose without hindering the development of the international airport project. At that time, when the Isla Verde cemetery project was the subject of a public hearing by the Executive Council, the Government of the Capital informed that it had been offered, for one month, three plots, in addition to the one that the Municipality had chosen for the cemetery and which was located in the area of the international airport project, The three plots measure 80, 40 and 20 acres. These are the plots of land that (Continued on page 22)
Instruction has not been able to fix minimum salary for employees Due to lack of funds, the employees transferred from the municipalities to the Department will have to work according to a reduced schedule.
Due to lack of funds, the Department of Instruction has not been able to apply to the employees transferred from the municipal governments to said Department, the minimum starting salary of the uniform compensation plan, and in view of this situation, it has resolved to appropriate the salaries in the budget on the basis of a reduced work schedule for said employees, including the custodians of the public schools.
- public school custodians. The minimum salary which, according to the new uniform pay scale, corresponds to the reduced work schedule positions (part-time), in the budget distribution for the year 1947-48, of the funds derived from Act 78 of 1948, as amended, is as follows: Library Assistant, 91,200.00; School Librarian, 81,580.00; Building Maintenance, 1,800.00; Carpenter, 81,280.00; Automobile Driver, 8980.00; Truck Driver, 8960.00; Dentist, 83,000.00; Nurse I, 81,440.00; Shoe Repair Instructor, 81,200.00; Cultural Arts Teacher, 81,380.00; Physician II. 84,200.00; Medical Specialist, 84,500.00; Messenger, 8840.00; Clerk I, 81,080.00; Clerk Typist I, 81,080.00; Clerk Stenographer I. 81,140.00; Plumber, 81,260.00; Laborer I, 8880.00; Custodial Worker I, 8880.00; and Laundry Worker, 8860.0b. The Department of Instruction reported that it has sent to the superintendents of schools the school budget distribution from the Insular funds for this fiscal year for their respective districts. This distribution covers all allocations granted to each municipality, both for expenses payable from trust deposits (Continued on page 22).
i APA studies effects of drought on the 1948 sugar crop
The Sugar Producers' Association (APA) is sending it information on how the prolonged drought will affect sugar production for the 1948 crop. APA Executive Vice President, Mr. Fernando A. Vlllamll, stated that it was necessary to obtain such data directly from all mills, in view of advance reports that the lack of rainfall has affected all sugar coffee crops. Mr. Vlllamll reiterated that a study is being prepared by the APA in this regard in order to determine all future production volume. He said that, undoubtedly, the farm will produce the pending decline.
The APA will undoubtedly produce the pending decrease, which will have to be calculated on the basis of the reports received from these plants. It will be recalled that EL MUNDO anticipated that, if the period of rainfall were to continue, Puerto Rico would not be able to meet its 1948 harvest. Current rainfall information reveals that the rains have been quite regular in the Island's coffee growing districts for the past three weeks, a situation which has greatly improved crop development, however. *However, even if the rains continue to produce within the normal range on these areas, the damage caused by the soqula will not be able to be repaired. J
l The President speaks aboard the battleship "Missouri' 11 i /w i Ql 1 R* / Jl a! ' MÍ wKf 1 1 1 - i "' ■■ B - Km 1 j President Truman (at the rostrum, toward the right) addresses delegates to the Inter-American Defense Conference at a reception held aboard the battleship "Missouri" in Rio de Janeiro Bay, after attending the final session of the conference. Standing toward the center are Admiral William D. Leahy, the President's Chief of Staff, and Secretary of State George C. Marshall, wearing felt hats. (Associated Press Photo)
-i Fernós denies Russian imputations i health on the Island Declares there are plans to invest $123,000,000 । in a public health program. Cites the increase in the number of Units. NEW YORK, Sept. 5 (PU) - The accusation launched by Russia before the United Nations that the United States is neglecting the public health of Puerto Rico was categorically denied today by Dr. A. Farnóé Isern, Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico
in Washington and former Commissioner of ¡ Health of the Island. "Puerto Rico has realized that it must have citizen" asludahles," stated Dr. Fernós Iwrn, "and we are extending our public health work." In the next six years, the Commissioner continued, the Government of Puerto Rico will develop plans involving an investment of $8123,000,000 in its public health program. Last year alone, the Commissioner explained, the number of Public Health Centers for the 77 municipalities of Puerto Rico was increased from 31 to a total of 170. Mobile X-ray machines cover the entire Island in the fight against tuberculosis. Island milk stations are open for tens of thousands of thousands of children. Thousands more children are receiving hot lunch in the schools. The Commissioner agreed that the Island has less than the total number of physicians demanded by the population, but stated that a number of promising medical students are being encouraged to continue their studies in the United States, The University of Puerto Rico has been studying plans for the establishment of a College of Medicine, and special legislation has made it easier for foreign physicians to practice medicine on the Island. "Puerto Rico's main tropical maladies, -the matarla and uncinariasis, -are being rapidly and completely controlled, declared Dr. Fernós Iiérn. Almost all deadly diseases are steadily declining in potency. "By raising living standards, we will achieve a much greater reduction in mortality," the Commissioner concluded, "and production will rise at the hands of a healthier and better people." VETERANS PAYMENTS RISE TO $104,000,000 . WASHINGTON, aeptlmbre B. - (PU). - The Treasury today disclosed that veterans redeemed about one hundred and four million dollars in final leave bonuses in the first two days of their opportunity to collect their value. Reports received were sporadic, sporadic, and did not indicate the exact amount of dollars paid. The Treasury (irometló. therefore, to publicize the exact amount, when they have received the tfxactoe reports from the federal reserve banks. Ix" Reports will cover the four authorized days, from Tuesday to Friday, NOT even the sum of one hundred and four million dollars will indicate how much money has been paid out, as some veterans have been exchanging their bonds for policies in the National Life Insurance Service, for which they have been seeking sutoriasdon since the bonds were issued.
They have finalized a regulation i r for Loteria BusciigHa claims it will put an end to irregularities. - The regulations to structure the Puerto Rico Lottery Law, approved in the first ordinary legislative session, were finalized yesterday. For two weeks the Treasurer, Rafael Ruzcaglia, the Deputy Treasurer, Santos G. Ramkrez, the Chief of the Treasury's legal division, Raimundo Garda Clntrón, the Acting Administrative Assistant, Jesús Benlttz, and the Deputy Director of the Lottery, Carlos Monagas, have been working on the preparation of the aforementioned regulations, which will be sent to the Governor and once he approves them, they will have the force of law. According to Mr. Busca- ] Rila, the new regulation is on the way to making the Lottery a prin. (Continued on page 22) Refineries will not increase production Although controls have been lifted, local demand does not justify it A spokesman for the sugar industry informed yesterday that there is no likelihood that the refineries of raw sugar in Puerto Rico will be able to resume their activities to produce a greater quantity of sugar for local consumption, even though the controls have been lifted for industrial and domestic users. In this regard, it was added that the Western Sugar Refining Company of Mayagüez was refining raw sugar at the time the controls were lifted, and that it produced 349 tons in addition to its quota for the local market. It was also reported that the Serrallos refinery in Ponce is not working now, because it has adopted the practice of not working during the dead time, even though it has the capacity to produce up to half a million tons per year. Two other refineries, the Rola and Eastern Sugar, are also idle during the harvest period, since they have their machinery coupled to the raw sugar factory, and the probability is also that they will not reopen their factory to produce a greater quantity of sugar, unless justified from a commercial point of view. On the other hand, it was reported that there has been no local demand for refined sugar, for industrial or other uses, which would justify these refineries putting their factories back into operation.
'Speaks before I Parliament in Rio de Janeiro Calls for morality in relations* between loa i people* of the earth State is agent I of the people, says Reiterates that the U.S. will give au maximum support to the U.N. By Merriman Rmlth rorrr "pon "B] do Fren"" United I RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil, Sept. 5, (PU)-President Truman said emphatically today for the third time in a month that true peace is impossible without recognition of the fundamental rights of the individual and an international system that is founded on moral conduct. is founded on moral conduct. Addressing a joint session of the Brazilian Congress, Mr. President also emphatically repeated that the only means of achieving permanent peace rests in a strong United Nations, adding that the United States will support the UN with all the resources at its disposal. As in his letter to Pope Pius XH, dated August 6, and in his speech at the closing session of the Inter-American Conference of Dofonsa, in Petrópolis, on Tuesday, the President, though by implication, clearly lambasted the lack of human rights and political morality in the vast area of Eastern Europe behind the "Communist iron curtain. The points of the President's speech, in which I continued to develop a different theme in the conduct of international relations and in the search for a firm and just peace, were: 1. - The State merely the agent of the people and the IntamaclonalM ratoclonre should be held to the same standard of moral conduct as the individual. 2. - The problems of peace are more difficult than it would have been possible to solve them, but they can be solved by means of goodwill and patience. 8. The Western Hemisphere has shown that individual prejudices and purposes can be set aside in an agreement which will bring great benefits to the world. The defense trot will be a tremendously important milestone on the road to eradicating fuana and reestablishing the rule of law and order. 4. - The fear at the lack of progress in the UN should not diminish the constant effort being made to build up the organization. The U.N. was not founded to solve the problems of World War II, but to provide the means to maintain the peace after just war settlements were reached. The U.N. is a permanent partnership for common peace and welfare. - The United States will support the U.N. with everything at its disposal. Reviewing the parallel course do 1a history of the United States" and Brazil - which celebrates the anniversary of its independence on Sunday - Mr. Truman said that the true lew that unites these two great ' republics is "the fact that we have had common interests", principle" or ideals". "In short," the Prosldent said, "we have the same concept of freedom and democracy." President Truman recalled that the Brazilian statesman, Ruy Barbosa, a courageous liberal of a generation ago, once said that the nations of the world constituted one society and that the principles which formed the basis of equality and justice in each state should apply equally to all nations. "Your declaration that there can be no neutrality between good and evil will forever remain a part of the moral traditions of your country," the President continued. He then referred to his statement, made in his letter to the Pope, that he wished to do all he could to bring about a moral world. After referring to the side-by-side struggle of the United States and Brazil in this war, Mr. Trumsn continued: "But today, the problems of the world are still more difficult than we could ever have thought, but I am confident that we can solve them through mutual goodwill and patience. "The only thing essential is that we maintain our common Ideals and our common principles of morality and Justice. "With them by gula we shall be able to go forward together, and not allow Sue any minor differences to divert us from the path toward the attainment of our common goals." Discussing the defense conference and the defense treaty - or Rio de Janeiro Treaty, as it is officially called - Mr. Truman said: "We who live in this hemisphere have shown the world that right-thinking men can inhibit their individual prejudices and purpose for the sake of achieving a convent (Continued on page 22).