THE WORLD ♦ MORNING DAILY
THE ISLAND, TODAY: Generally fine, except fairly scattered light showers over the northern Htoralee and this in the morning, and over the mountains in the afternoon. The change in pressure-atmospheric in the last 34 hours has averaged an else of 1 1)2 mlllbaraa or nearly .4 inch of mercurous. -
40 pages 5/
i YEAR XXVIII
Check the brakes. Cooperate with the automobile inspection.
■ i i i i i ■mu leiiii.- .iiiii ii i i i i i ni i ■■■■ ■■■■■■ ni" mi mi -"■-n mi" ni i i ii-a-si--iw SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY FEBRUARY 1, 1947.
Enterad m ctoond eta* auttor. Post Of "c", San Juan. P. R.
NUMBER 10844
work begins this year ' .1 ■ ■ ■ , I, work on the Rio Grande, Loíza
Cuevas says they will solve water problem in the Capital They will provide liquid beyond 2,040 The head of the SIA explains how the works will be carried out E" the opinion of the Director of the Insular Aqueduct Service, ae* ' flower Sergio Cueva" Buatamante, that the works on the Grande de Lolz" river, which, in his opinion, will solve the problem of the lack of water in the entire metropolitan area of San Jusn.i will have to begin, if possible, 1 within the present calendar year. As is known, the Planning Board authorized the Aqueduct Service, according to a resolution published by EL MUNDO, to carry out its project to develop the resources of the Rio Grande de Lolza, to supply the entire population served by the San Juan aqueduct. Mr. Cueva said yesterday that he considers the Planning Board's resolution, in this case, "very fair". "Immediately after we learned of this body's disposition," he added, "we began to move as quickly as possible to accelerate the studies in order to complete these works within a reasonable time." Mr. Cuevas also added that "ae will follow the phased construction plan, as previously outlined in his Reports to the Board. We expect to submit in final form the overall plan to the Board within a month at the latest." "We will continue to do all the "Essential diligence," Mr. Cuevas continued, "so that the project can be prepared as quickly as possible and part of the works can be started within the same calendar year." To this end, the Service's engineering corps, under the direct supervision of Mr. Cueva" Bustamante, has been working on the details of the final project. In the opinion of Mr. Cueva", before the end of 1949, the new water supply plant will be in operation, depending mainly on whether materials and equipment can be secured. On the latter, too, arrangements have been initiated by the head of the SAA. These nbras would provide sufficient liquid to the city of San Juan, and to the towns of Rio Grande, Canóvanas, Carolina, Trujillo ALU, Rio Piedras, Cataño, Guaynabo, Bayamón, Toa Alta, Toa Baja and Domdo, extending the service to numerous rural districts. The SAA based its argument on the urgency of this project on the proximity of the Grande de Lolza river to the area of greatest consumption formed by Rio Piedras and San Juan; on the fact that the flow of the river, regulated with a medium-sized reservoir, would reach a minimum flow of 159 cubic feet per second, or 193 million rsons per day, "uficltoie for many years, from 1960 onwards". In addition, the SAA Director stated that "the cost of these works is lower than any of the possible projects": "the water is docile to treatment, so that purification is cheaper, and the annual operating cost is also cheaper when compared with the other projects studied". According to the plans explained by Mr. Cueva, the "stage of the project will now be undertaken". "The initial stage of the project, which involves an investment of $4,792,000, will now be undertaken. The initial development of the project involves the construction of a concrete dam with spillway and cleanout gates. The dam will form a reservoir with the capacity to store seven billion gallons of water.
and News Digest
The Governor insists that , there be economies in public dealings^"He announces that the development of a program of works will begin shortly. - ♦ - The national Lower House approved by a vote of 373 to 38, to extend the tax on 'entes. -Monsignor Mariano Vasallo has -Ido appointed apostolic administrator of the Diocese of Pernee. Monsignor Willlnger will leave 4e the Island on Monday, bound for Miami. The shipping companies soli, will cite permission from the Maritime Commission to apply the new freight rates about February 18 or 1". " - - - It is probable that an enlargement of the city of Guaya- - - - - - - Half an hour was Thursday i in San Juan Dr. Trygvle Lie, secretary general of NU. He spoke at the airport with Governor Plftero. It is only until June the salary increase granted to UPR personnel, Benitos informed the Superior Council. Outline of coffee farmers' rehabilitation plan approved. Public health convention to begin on B-day. The New York Police Department sought the help of the New York City Police Department.
Lie met with Governor ¡ at airport Only half an hour the UN Secretary was able to be here Thursday He was well entertained in Sto. Domingo i ' ■ . He says his trip has no political objectives Dr. Trygvle Lie. secretary general of the United Nations, remained "only half an hour in San Juan on Thursday, -from 8:50 to 7:20 in the afternoon-, talking with Governor Plñero for a brief "minute" at the Isla Grande airport, before continuing his trip to New York City. At the Isla Grande airport, Dr. Lie was greeted by the Governor and other government officials, who welcomed him to the island. The Governor invited him to visit the Island for a longer visit at a future date. -Mr. Lie accepted the invitation. Governor Plñero declared yesterday that it was impossible for the Secretary General of the United Nations to stay longer in the pal" because he had to continue his trip to New York, where he must attend to matters of international importance. The distinguished visitor came from Ciudad Trujillo, where he was honored by the Government of the Dominican Republic, and where he was invested with the degree of Doctor Honoris Causae of the Faculty of Law of the University of Santo Domingo. Before leaving Trujillo City, Mr. Lie held an interview with the local and foreign press, stating, among other things, the following, according to the version published yesterday by the newspaper "La Nacion": "The Dominican Republic is the last place I visit in my twenty day Latin American tour". Tomorrow I leave for San Juan de Fuer to Rico and from there I will continue immediately to New York, headquarters of the United Nations Organization". Dr. Cohen will continue his trip to the south of the continent, to visit other countries not included" in my itinerary due to lack of time. "This trip has no political purpose. My object has been to get in touch with the life of each country through its rulers and leaders. "The United Nations Organization is made up of fifty-five countries, whose representatives before it are the governments, represented (Sonflnúa on page 24) The works of the Santurce emp Han nido zanjadas ha c on the occasion of the projected inte The sanitary sewer of the northwest occtón of Santurce is indicated to begin in the month of July or August of the current year, according to yesterday declared the administrator and chief engineer of the Service of Aqueducts, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante. Mr. Cuevas said that "all the small existing differences have been satisfactorily settled in conferences held by our engineers T with those of the Planning Board". The referred differences," he said, "have been satisfactorily settled in conferences held by our engineers with those of the Planning Board.
The "differences referred to," which has led to the murderer or assassin" of Puerto Rican Rafael Ramires, at 88th and Ninth Avenues. T" Farmers' Association has requested the Governor to review the maritime" freight agreement," alleging that it increases their coato" by $400,000. - Muño" Marín appears today at an informal meeting of the Senate Subcommittee on Insular Affairs. He spoke yesterday with Committee Chairman Guy Cordon. - In July or August, they will comment on the sewer work for the northeast section of Santurce. Yesterday was commemorated the 08th anniversary of the birth of Franklin D. Roosevelt. The United States" has ceded to * - - - Mexico the" services of the Puerto Rican vetertnario Cesar Cia" 1 veil. - - - - ■ The Chief of the Aqueduct Service reports that this afto They will initiate the" work on the Rio Grande de Loísa. He estimates that they would solve the water problem of the Capital and "ona metropolitan area until beyond 2040. - - - Since January 29th, the minea (black strap molasses) were eliminated from the control of the Iirecio, in Puerto Rico, - - - - The 1947 Carnival Queen, Yolanda Dávila Ortlz, gives an account of her life, her ideals, her ambitions.
The National Lower House approved by a vote of 373 to 35 to maintain the tax on luxury goods.
Agricultural class asks for a review of the -fares! Says new tariff represents $400,000 increase in fertilizers Quiñones alleges that the crisis is worsening He affirms that farmers cannot pass on the increase to consumers Exposing the situation in which the farmers of Puerto Rico have been placed by the tariff increase agreement between the Island Government and the shipping companies, the Farmers' Association, through its president, Mr. Jo "é Ramón Quiñones, spoke yesterday to the Governor, Mr. Jesús T. Plñero, "o- ¡ licitando que se gestione una modificación de las tarifas marítimas ' acordadas, en lo que respecta a los productos agrícolas, de ■ modo que les mismas no afecta- ¡ mente la producción de las fincas puertorriqueñas. The agricultural entity informed that "the new tariff represents an estimated decrease of more than $400,000 annually in the cost of freight" of fertilizers", an essential item in the agricultural production of the pala, with serious damage to the" farmers and the agricultural production Iniular", The Aiociactón indicated that the fertilizers in bags" will have an increase in fléte, as of February 17, of 42.02 percent per ton. It stated that the cost up to February 17, 1947, of $5825 per ton, plus loading charges, will rise, as of that date, according to the new tariff, to $8 per ton, plus unloading charges, that is, an increase in freight of $2.375 per ton. Quiñones' letter to the Governor also states, among other things, the following: With respect to the "grayendo" the unloading at the docks of Puerto Rico. The new tariff provides for $6.75 per ton, with the unloading charges, estimated at $1.15 per ton, to be borne by the purchasers. Thus, the transportation costs to the Puerto Rico Importer for bulk fertilizer will be $7.90, or an increase of $1.8375 per ton, which represents an increase of 30.10 percent. It is also reported, by competent experts, that the cost of unloading may increase when there are current difficulties in this line of work. "The amount of the increase in the freight cost of the credit is in excess of $400,000 per year, which would have to be paid annually.00 per year, which would have to be paid by Puerto Rican farmers who cannot do without fertilizer for their crops, 'It is unfortunate that the crisis that our main agricultural product has been going through for several years will be aggravated even more' with a new increase in fertilizers, 'in which it is not possible to produce any fruit in Puerto Rico. "Coffee is the crop which employs the greatest amount of fertilizer, and the rise in the price of this substance and, in addition, the increase in the freight of sugar transported to the American market, will nullify any benefit which might have been obtained by the insignificant increase in price which has been made in the sale of sugar, "If the agricultural products harvested in Puerto Rico could increase in price as the costs of production rise, the farmers would pass these increases on to the consumer and then (Continued on page 24) -1 .... ■-.7. * ■■■!■ W" 1 "- 1
The directive of the Sector of Coffee Growers, of the Association of Agrl- , cultores, approved an outline of the permanent rehabilitation plan : of the Coffee Industry, work ■ which, as reported yesterday, will be given- : rará to know in an assembly of coffee harvesters to which will be convo1 cará shortly, after the ■ plan is submitted to the consideration of , the corresponding authorities. At the meeting held by the . directive of the Sector, which was led by its president, representative Mario Ca- ! nales, appeared the committee com- - placed by the "aflore" Vicente Me-
Muñoz speaks hov before the Senate Insular Affairs Committee.
WASHINGTON, 31 (P'U.) - The President of the Senate of Puerto Rico, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin, informed the United Press today that he held a conference with Senator Guv Cordon, Republican, of Oregon, and Chairman of the Sub Committee on Territorial-Island Affairs of the Senate Public Lands Committee. "We had a very nice conversation," said Senator Muñoz
Marin said in reporting on his interview with Senator Cordon. He further informed "1 Senate President Inaular that Senator Cordon will convene the committee to meet informally on Saturday (today) morning. Senator Mufloz Marin will attend the meeting and will present to the senators his views on the political and economic situation in .(Contra on page 24).
1947. Rafael Mireles Soler, of the newspaper "La Nación", of Ciudad Trujillo, attended as a visitor. When asked by this reporter, the Governor said that he had intended to visit the Dominican ca§1 tal in February, when the anniversary of the independence of the republic is celebrated, but that he has had to desist from the trip because on that date the Legislature of Puerto Rico will be in session and it also coincides with the time of the "preparations" to receive the visit of President Truman. He promised to go to Santo Domingo at the first opportunity, as he believes that friendly relations between the two peoples should always be kept cordial. The Governor spoke of the close friendship that unites him with the Dominican Ambassador in Washington, Mr. Emilio Godoy, who has promised to visit Puerto Rico with his wife. The Governor said that he has found in the new Federal Congress a favorable attitude towards our Island in general. He had the opportunity to speak with the old members of Congress who are part of the present Congress and he also met the newly elected members and all of them, especially the new ones, showed great interest in learning about the Island and asked him questions, mainly about the economic program that is being developed, expressing their desire to visit the country as soon as the work of Congress allows it. The Governor said that the Chairman of the Public Lands Committee (Continued on page 24)
A draft of the plan to rehabilitate coffee growers has been approved. This will be made known during the assembly of coffee growers which will be convened at an upcoming date. -The amount to be invested is not burdensome.
- The amount to be invested will not be burdensome, but will be disclosed at a meeting to be convened soon. These submitted the draft or model of the plan, which received "general approval, after a careful study of it". 1 In relation to this matter, the " agricultural entity expressed that "with what has been done up to the present, it is concluded that the su- . management" made" are feasible, because they are simple, and because the amount proposed to be invested is not too much for the Treasury of Puerto Rico", and added: "It was agreed to record a vote of thanks to the professionals who outlined the plan. Thanks to the professionals who drafted this project and the directors of the Sector were informed of the suggestions that the Jayuya fricóla leader, Mr. Juan de Jesús Medina, had submitted to the Governor on behalf of the Jayuya Workers Union, in relation to the rehabilitation of the plant and the social and economic improvement of the workers of the area. This document was submitted by the president of the Sector, Mr. Mario Canales. "The directors of the Sector disi cuted other problems that affee- ■ tan the coffee growers and which will be submitted to the consideration " of the legislators, in the next ordinary session ds the Legislature."
LIVES NOW IN PHILADELPHIA T :-4 Dr. Katy* Grlnlus, who was President of Lltuánla in 1928 j was recently in camp in Germany, is now a resident of Philadelphia. Dr. Grlnlus, who is 80 years old, is shown here with his brother John, 89, shortly after being found after a separation of 42 years. (Photo P. A.) Pinero insists on economy of public funds He says he will order an investigation into the expropriation of certain land in Caguas.Announces work program Per .IV AN XARTtNÍz "CHAPEL ...... . At noon sharp yesterday began the press conference held by the Governor, ""ñor Piflsro, at La Fortaleza. He wished congratulations to the journalists in the new afto for being é*tn their first meeting in
Sugar cane strike extends to Central Juncos In Santa Juana there is the danger of another strike. - Reports from the Island The strike in the sugar cane industry that broke out yesterday at the Coloso plant in Aguada. "- extended yesterday to the central Juncos, when about two hundred agricultural workers of the latter sugar mill went on strike. This was reported yesterday by Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera, general secretary of the Federación Libre, a group to which the factory workers of the Coloso sugar mill and the factory and field workers of the Juncos sugar mill are affiliated. According to the announcement made by Mr. Nogueras Rivera, the president of the Agricultural Union of Juncos, Mr. Ramón Molina, informed him that the workers of one of the colonies of said sugar mill have paralyzed the work in protest for the uco of the so-called "caimanes", a machine used to collect the caftas and fill the wagons. The workers complained that these devices eliminate "many fathers" from their jobs. Referring to the strike decreed by the Factory Union of the Coloso plant, Mr. Nogue stated that he would continue it "until such time as the employer agrees to negotiate with our union. As has been reported, the strike at Coloso has completely paralyzed milling at that mill, affecting more than 7,000 workers. Yesterday, the Director of the Island Conciliation Service went to the Coloso plant to begin conciliatory negotiations. At the Santa Juana plant, another strike movement is likely to take place next week. as revealed ayeí the sefior Noguera" Rivera, who stated that "an ■ituaclón similar to 1a exile in Coloso prevails in Santa Juana, and it is most likely that the workers take to 1a practice their de(Contlnua on 1a page 4) OUR SUB-DIRECTOR With today's date, the company EL MUNDO has appointed our colleague Mr. José Dávila Ricci, former Director of "La Democracia" and "Puerto Rico llmtrodo" as Deputy Director of the newspaper. The appointment is a confirmation of the duties that Mr. Dávila has been performing during the last months, since Mr. Vargas Badi" lio was exalted to the direction of the newspaper.
It is not until June that UP R Benítez informed the Council that finances do not permit ■ Authorization to purchase surplus equipment" Only 5 to 10% of the total and reasonable value of machinery would be paid By Lula Hamánde" Aquino Editor of EL MUNDO The Superior Council of Confidence "met, taking numerous agreements" of interest to the University of Puerto Rico, Presiding over the meetings was Rector Jaime Benitez, who gave a report on university activities. The Chancellor reported to the Council on the exact amount of the additional expenditure he made, due to the salary increase recently given to both the faculty and the workers of the University of Puerto Rico. The additional outlay is $200,000, including in this amount the employees of Rio Piedras, both by contract and by salary, the employees of the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts of Mayagüez, and the employees of the School of Tropical Medicine, but it is doubtful whether the increase will be doubled for them from the University funds, but it was agreed upon by Rector Benitez. The increase recorded for the employees of the School of Tropical Medicine amounted to the sum of $32.00. Mr. Benitos clarified to the Superior Teaching Council that the increases would be sustained only during the second university semester, that is to say, from December to June, as the expenses of the School of Tropical Medicine would not be paid until the end of the second semester, from December to June, since the finances of the University of Puerto Rico, according to the most optimistic calculations, would not allow the maintenance of an additional bonus for the next fiscal year, which would represent an outlay of $400,000, or $1,200,000 for each semester. According to Rector Benitez, he has made the situation clear to the Governor of Puerto Rico, as well as to legislative leaders, university faculty and university workers. <Benitez informed the Council that, in the event that the Government understands that it must maintain the increase to the staff and employees, the University of Puerto Rico would request that the benefits of Act No. 2, of the special session of the last Legislature, (which increases the salaries of public employees) be extended to all employees of the University. In accordance with said law, only the employees of Agricultural Extension and of the Experimental Station of the University of Puerto Rico were covered by the same, within the plan of cooperation of the American universities and other agencies, on the basis of a payment by the University of Puerto Rico of 5 to 10% of the reasonable value of the articles purchased, and by virtue of said authorization, the Superior Council of Education authorized the University to acquire machinery for the Industrial Schools, equipment for the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts of Mayagüez, and office equipment and other materials for the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts of Mayagüez. Office equipment, and other materials necessary for said educational center. The Board of Trustees approved an appropriation of $200,000 for such purposes," which will be used for the construction of the school, and which will be used for the construction of the school. Cordero, and the President of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, delivered yesterday to Governor Plftero the letter "Sefior: In today's edition of "El Imparclal", January 31, 1947, page 3, an article is published under the title ''EXPROPRIATION OR CORRUPTION? ÉL PUEBLO LO DIRA LO! which contains a series of imputations or insinuations"" relative to our participation in the acquisition by the People of Puerto Rico, for escotares purposes by means of -1 recourse of forced expropriation, of lands belonging to the Caguas Development Company, of Caguas. Whereas, the aforementioned charges -which in our opinion constitute libelous libel against public officials- present, independently of any other angle, a public accusation (continued on page 7).
Measure allows $9 tax on gallon of insular rum to continue General tax gives $1,130,000,000,000 Republicans accused of not keeping promise to lower taxes WASHINGTON, 31 (FU). - The House of Representatives* passed by 373 votes* to 35, 1 an indefinite extension of the sales tax, which has so far provided the Treasury with an annual revenue of $1,1304,000,000 from sales of furs, jewelry, liquor, railroad tickets and other so-called luxury items. President Truman requested such an extension, but the Republicans intend to grant it only until the tax reduction program is completed. The measure affects Puerto Rican rum, since it maintains the tax on this product at $9 gallon. Although there was no direct opposition to the bill, Democrats and Republicans engaged in a heated debate, as the former took advantage of the occasion to denounce a political adversary for the latter's stated purpose of reducing taxes. Democratic Representative Walter Lynch accused the Republicans of basing their electoral campaign on the tax reduction "because they are already being forced" to offer excution for not having fulfilled what they promised. Democrat Aime F ora nd "o referred to the Republicans" as an individual who "finds everything perplexing and doesn't know which side to take. The Republicans in turn argued that they want to continue the sales tax system, so that later they can reduce it on income and labor. It appears that the Republican leadership is hoping that by keeping the sales tax high on those people who can afford to pay it, as well as those who can afford luxury items, they can build broad electoral support by promising to reduce the tax burden on low-income taxpayers! The tax vote was the most important action taken so far by the new Congress. It is expected, moreover, that the Senate will act in concert with the House, quickly, to complete my cnngreoional action on this measure and thus prevent the taxes from ceasing on July 1, due to the terms of President Truman's recent proclamation declaring "1 the end of World War II hostilities. The President requested an extension of these taxes so that the national treasury would have sufficient reserves to pay off part of the huge public debt. After much debate, 149 Democrats finally combined with 224 Republicans to pass the bill. Voting against the bill were 28 Democrats, 8 Republicans and the American Labor Party representative, Viito Marcantonio. The Democratic opposition centered on the issue that the Republican majority on the Ways and Means Committee had supported the bill for the sole purpose of obtaining revenue or making it impossible for them to meet their campaign promise to reduce the income tax by 20 percent. The Republicans countered this argument by pointing out that President Truman, in his budget message, had asked that the sales tax be continued. "This is indeed a very significant occasion,*" exclaimed Harold Knutson, Republican of Minnesota and chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, "here is an unusual fact that Republican representatives are being criticized by Democrats for carrying out the recommendations of a Democratic President. 1 It appears that the Democrats are preparing to throw a political Jonah into the water." The debate also served to reveal the political battle ahead if Rep. Knutson introduces legislation aimed at reducing the individual income tax by 20 percent. Michigan Republican Rep. Albert Engel warned his party colleagues that passage of a 20 percent income tax cut could mean "defeat for the party in 1948. Rep. Robert W. Keen, R-N.J., a member of the House Ways and Means Committee, cited current tax rates to defend the proposed 20 percent reduction against the Democrats' argument that it would be the wealthy who would benefit from such a reduction. Under the current rate, Rep. Koan pointed out, the portion of income that a person* receiving *2,000 a year can spend is subject to a 10 percent reduction; for those receiving an income of K,000 or 15 percent; for those of *50,000 or <0; and for those of *100,000, 48 percent; and for those of *100,000, 48 percent. *100,000, 48 percent. Doesn't it seem juití manHestó e! representative Koan? (Continued on page 24)
Administrator of the Diocese of Poncé
i ' /' The Most Illustrious and Most Reverend Monsignor Mariano Vassallo. Proto- . Apostolic notary and Chaplain of the Military Department of the Anti1 lia", has been appointed by the Holy See Apostolic Administrator of the Diocese of Ponce, replacing in the direction of the diocese) the South the Most Excellent and Most Reverend Monsignor Luis A. W(linger, who has been appointed Coadjutor Bishop of the Diocese of Monterrey-Fresno, in California. Monsignor Vasallo will assume office today, Saturday. Monsignor Willlnger will leave the island on Monday at 8 p.m. in an Eastern Airlines plane, bound for Miami. Miami This was reported by Monsignor Vicente Murga, Chancellor of the Dló- , seals of, Ponce.(Photo EL MUNDO). It is probable that the city of Guayama will be enlarged; ' Studies of the adjacent land are being carried out. -The ' location of the hospital The probability of expanding the city of Guayama is being studied, using 31 acres of land at the edge of the road that leads to the Carite hydroelectric project, and 19 acres of adjacent land. The" management" for ad- > qulrlrlr e "to" that" land" have been ■ carried out before the" agency" gui bernamentale" corresponding, ■ by the Municipal Government of that ' population. Yesterday returned from Guayama Mr. Santiago Iglesia" son, member of the Junta da Planea, who made an inspection of the land. He also visited the land proposed for the location of the new hospital in Guayama, which is projected to be built at a cost of $180,000. He was accompanied in this work by the head of the - Sanitation Division of the Department of Health, Mr. Juan G. t Figueroa, and Engineer J. Tormos, of the Department of the Inter "ir. On the latter matter, Mr. Iglesias reported yesterday that he has recommended a joint meeting of the representatives of the Departments of Health and the Interior, the Municipal Government of Guiyama, the Design Committee, the representative to the House, Esmerald Gon. i zalez, and the Planning Board, (Continued on page*24) eban in July differences that arose erferench of works with Avenida Norte i.bían hindered the development of this project, were based on the rei location of the pipes matri- , ce", so that this" not Interflrie- - ran, at some" point", with the traj yectorla of the projected Avenida Norte. To this end, con- ' ferences were held between the engineers of the SIA and the Planning Board, and a final agreement was reached on the matter. s "We are very satisfied," said Mr. Cuevas, "with the cooperation that the Department of the Interior has given us with these important works. The project is already approved by the Planning Board, and we are finalizing the plans." In my opinion, we will have the construction of this additional sanitary sewer system for Santurce by July or August of this year. In the" work" the sum of $800,000 will be invested, which is available, A large residential section! A large residential, commercial and industrial section of Santurce, located in its northeastern part, from Park Street to the hamlet of La Casas, that is to say, to the south and north of Eduardo Conde Avenue, will benefit from these works, The project, as explained ayCT, will also solve the problem that for many years has been facing a large population center in the entire secotr called San Juan Moderno, Canta Gallo and Tapia, with the existence of the creek called Borda, which crosses all this residential section, and which for years has represented a serious public health problem.