THE NONDO
pama la ISLA, TODAY i Good weather hov early, followed by cloudy weather with "r "ac*roB this afternoon. Winds b m A* miles per hour. AVER: High temp, 82 i low, 78i rain 1.18 inches.
40 pages 5/
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII.
I check the trains. I cooperate with the Automobile Inspection.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MAY 31, 1947
Entered is second class Biattar, Post Office, Bao Juaa, P. IL
NUMBER 10962
Veto expected for Income Tax rebate
Equal prono Mí co circulates rñn relation to union control measure Congress may uphold this id tima George says Senate ño would alter veil applied to first w For LYLE C. WILAON Correspondent ri* Fren*" United Washington, May .m. (pu> ¡ *to* pr*"lri*nci "l** " the Republican" bills" num control the* reíaclona" of labor and to reduce the "l enntrlhucione" "ohr* ingre "o", were-, were forecast today as *1 Congress recessed on the occasion of the Memorial DaytJ Aítihoa bills, it is expected,! will reach the hands of the Fr*"lrfcntn during the course of the coming week, Snn very little chance that r|"*Mr. Truman will accept any of such legislation. But the Con.I prego may be able to get the labor bill passed, over the veto, with some help which he hopes will come from the Democrats. Both the House and Senate passed the labor legislation with majorities of more than two-thirds, But in the Senate, the tax bill did not command such a proportion of Jos votes. -Senator Walter F. George, of Georgia, the leading exponent of the Democrats on tax matters, said he believed that Mr. Truman would veto the income-tax measure and that the Senate would sustain his veto. George voted in favor of the tax legislation, but stated that by not voting for it, he would override the veto, because the President has responsibility for the fiscal condition of the Government and his leadership on tax matters must be followed. Senate Democrats have enough votes to sustain the veto. The projected change of attitude by , George seems to lend strength to the Democratic mo. ' vtmlent to kill the , legislation, should that be the desire of the , President. ¡ But Representative Harold R Knutson, Republican of Minnesota - and chairman of the House Ways ( and Means Committee, said that . Mr. Truman should sign the tax bill because the nsclrtn is demanding "that the present, almost confiscatory, rates be feiucidns." Since there is in, -prospect a surplus for both this fiscal year and the next, Knutson said that "a ve. to 'the Income tax** bill* would have to be Inter-' pretended to be dictated by political considerations " The tax bill and the one tending to control labor relations have been drafted in -au_ final form, in the House and Senate conference committees*. The House yielded substantially to the Senate's insistence that the* reductions in the Mel "income-tax" rates be more equitably distributed and also that some of the drastic provisions of the labor loggia, lation be eliminated. - The Republican leadership of the Senate and the House agreed that they should go as far as possible in drafting the bill so that it would have some chance of being approved by the President. The House will be the first to act on both measures, next week, as Truman will be the first to act on the bill to eliminate the "skin-to-skin" cough from portal to portal. The crganlized labor protested, pem decided - (Continued on page 24"
Waterman work stopped Lor workers of said company belong to the ILA* which declared strike UTM continued to work yesterday Movement does not affect the other shipping lines.¡ Thyvaert For I l ls SANCHEZ speaks. CAPPA Reducer of EL MUNDO The" work" portuarls" of Ir rompañi" W "term "n were yesterday completely paralyzed" throughout the I". la, when the International Longshoremen A*"ociallon Initiated a huetgario movement. as a result of 1a dispute arisen between said union and the Union of Workers" Dock", They could not put "* of agreement amha" unions, as for 1a acceptance of the offer" d* salaries made by the company" shipping company". The workers affiliated with the UTM continued to work normally at the other companies, both at the San Juan dock and at the Ponce, Mayaqllóz, Fajardo and Humaran docks, while those affiliated with the ILA abandoned the work of loading and unloading ships. Although originally the TLA and the UTM did not accept the day labor offer made by the employers, thus giving rise to the strike, the UTM later agreed, in a meeting held yesterday, to continue negotiating with the employers and to desist from the work stoppage that both unions had announced for next Monday. The UTM has agreed to accept the offers, but will continue to negotiate. The TLA has reaffirmed its position of rejecting (Continued on page 21)
HAVRE DE GRACE. Manlsnd, May .30 (PU)-The Maryland State Police * Maryland reported tonight that -at least .32 persons were killed when an In Eastern llr Lines DC-4 plane crashed and crashed in a section of forest* near d* qul The plane was flying toward Miami, Florida, and had .32 persons aboard. Sgt. W. R. Chapele, of 1a 'nll state police, reported that .",0 bodies have already been rescued* d* tuinas riel plane and that apparently no so. -survivors. "The corpses rescued were badly burned and mutiBrio," he said, and one of the men on the salvage line was prevented from doing any work for a long time by the heat. Earlier 1" Mr-| yland Police had reported that a DC-3 aircraft was involved, but it was later clarified that it was a four-engine plane.
News Digest
The Attorney General will render a report to the Governor on the maladies affecting horse racing in Puerto Rico. * The Governor of Puerto Rico will be visited by a hero of the Parifico, whose father trained at the Lafayette during the First World War. - - - Treasury spending for next year is raised by $138,229. a * - Rev. the act in honor of the fallen university students during the war. - For the lack of a translator in the District Court, the lawyer for one side acted as interpreter for the other. "During the proceedings in honor of the war dead. Bessel - urged to protect American democracy, - " - New plants will sign contract with professional sugar mills, paying a forty-five percent increase. - The case of the new cemetery for Ran Juan was raised to the JP - or - Strike of the ILA stopped the work of the Waterman in all ports. The strike does not affect the other shipping lines. - Graciela Rivera has been booked to sing in St. Louis and New Orleans in the summer and fall, respectively.
It is expected that the President will veto the income tax cut and union control. Congress, it is anticipated, may pass the latter over the President's veto, but not the former. In a report submitted by the University's Department of Rock Research, it is stated that it is a myth that the insular economy is growing. Washington attentive to the conclusions. Airport "meetings" to be resumed in early June. - The Department of Instruction amended the regulations for the selection of teachers. * Eva Argüello de García, daughter of Dr. Argüello, returns to her home on the island, reveals how the removal of Somoza, by her father, led to the coup d'état against the constituted government of Nicaragua, - - - - Uncertain still the question of economic aid for the School of Tropical Medicine. * * * 108 one:. died yesterday in accidents occurred in the United States. ♦ a * De Gásperl formed government in Itelia without the communists. * * * * Re caJcuia qua 32 people were killed when a plane of the Eas- । tern Air Line*, flying from i New York to Miami, crashed and Incenj dlsrse yesterday.
| HONORING PORTORRICAN HEROES General Wlllliini W, Beasell, who yesterday, during the act of remembrance to the "cuídn" of both wars - act organized by In American Legion - paid a tribute to the" Puerto Ricans who died "Irviendo n the nation. Bessel urges protection of freedom During arlo yesterday at military necropolis, attacked foreign doctrines In the tribute paid yesterday by ■ Ir American Legion, the Army and i Ir Navy n lo" fallen" in Ir" rio" | last" war", Brigadier Gen-1 ral W, W. Re""c|, son, lefe riel De- 1 Military parliament rie Ir" Antilln", i riedaró: "We must be 1|"to" at I torio time to protect lo "I Idéale" ri* freedom and rionincracln da any nlaqu* by an enemy, | "*whatever the source from whence it arises, - outside n within ri* núes-i tro territory, who would permit i his* personal Irieaa** over the Government to predominate over the volun-1 tari riel people." He also expressed *1 brlgadl"" General Resíol that "when considering 1s" threats from aggressor nations", we must be prepared to combat the Infiltration of dubious political creeds", Insidiously plotted" and skillfully managed" to hobble the" principle." that have guided the* Executive" branch. Legislative and Judicial ri* our Government through the" afto""t The act ri* yesterday *at the military cemetery rie Santurce was organized by the American Legion, participating in the same *1 Army and Navy. After the ceremonies, the director of public relations of the Legion, Mr. Mario Fuentes, introduced the speakers. The President of the Tribunal Su "continued on page 24)
ÉAL plane crashes on route from New York to Miami
The tragedy occurred near Havre de Grace at dusk yesterday, and the number of casualties is estimated at 32. - Plane caught in flames
It is understood that the plane "- crashed about four or five miles" north ri* *"t* small town which e" a center d* rie horse racing.". The accident occurred about* 7;00 F. M. (Eastern time) v 45 minute" later the plane was still burning. State Police had earlier identified *t plane as a DC-3 but when they were able to approach the plane they found it to be a DC-4. According to EAL officials, *1 plane flew into Newark at 4:04 p. m. and the accident occurred at 7:00 p. m. M. i "S*' seen when the plane exploded ' and began to burn an t eg of । crashing," said Police ¡ From the naval base in Bainbridge, Md, immediately dispatched a firefighting team to the Slnle "tro and nearby towns of Perryville, Havre de Grace, Ravenna Sun and Port Deposit, beginning preparations to set up a temporary morgue. The Perryville Fire Department sent out its equipment but was forced to call on the Havre de Grace Fire Department for help. The first reports sent to the Ha' vr* rie Grace Fire Station said that the wreckage of the plane was scattered. The area of the rlemtre ué described as i a rie hills and woods, i.e.. the kind rie territory that badly destroys an airplane when it falls." At" 9:00 P. M" two hours" after the crash, the plane was still burning. Another United Press dispatch reports that the plane had 32 people on board. At 9:30 P. M. the Police reported that "30 bodies had been rescued, but that the rescue patrol was hampered by flames in its efforts to rescue others. New landing gear produced By Charles Corddry United Press Correspondent i WASHINGTON, May 30 (PU). - An $8,850,000 federal project which successfully produced a landing gear against the wind could force a* drastic revision of the government's program for airport construction nationwide at a cost of $500,000,000. The Civil Aeronautics Administrator, T. P. Wright, announced this non-: night that ""a full consideration of the effects of this new Civil Aeronautics Administration invention on the entire airport problem is now under way."" i The result may be that the! I (Continued on page 17).
A study made by the University concludes that the version that the island economy is growing is a myth.
Treasury expenditures increase by SI 38,229 - Pure fund next fiscal year amount to Ruma $2,527,083.50 Increase for income Tax is $52,770.50 Not including items for RiiddoR. In authorizing the Department of the Treasury a budget of $32,527,083.3.50 for the next fiscal year, the Governor of Puerto Rico approved an increase in operating revenues of $13R, 1229 over the current budget, or $2,3W,R54.50. The Hxlgtyiclnnos approved for the Division of Investigation of the ।clandestine rum will permit the expansion of these activities, The number of internal revenue agents for this work has been doubled, as well as the appropriations for our expenses. Another department which has received a substantial increase for its operating expenses is the Income Tax Department. This agency currently has a budget of $590,821.50, which the Governor has increased in the new approved budget to $843,592, Included in the authorized increase is an item of $50,non for additional sums for the operation of said Bureau. The appropriations for the Bureau of Internal Revenue have also been increased. For the next fiscal year, this subdivision of the Department of the Treasury will be allocated funds amounting to $.380,751, as compared with its present budget of $.346,814. The budget of the Department of the Treasury was finally approved by Governor Fifteen with the following salary appropriations for its respective subdivisions: Treasurer, increased from $41,145 to $58,025. Legal Division, decreased from $37,125 to $36,675. The General Accounting Bureau, is reduced by $287,680 to $241,590, and the following salary allocations are approved for each section; Personnel Services, $12,600; Disbursement and Collection Division, $118,300; Public Debt Division, $12,240; General Expenses, $96,720. The Bureau of Property Taxes, $96,720. The Bureau of Property Taxes approves the following apportionment for payment of salaries: Bureau Chief, $27,840; Accounts, Collections and Statistics Division, $20,46(1); Levy and Claims Division, $22,82.5; Receipts Preparation Division, $48,900; Inheritance Division, $15,420; Administration Division, $344,015; Collection Inspection Division, $70,800. The total appropriation for the Bureau of Property Taxation is increased from $512,615 to $568,280. The approved appropriation for the Bureau of Property Assessment is $232,950: I _Oflcina of the chief d*1 Negociado, ■$17,940; Division rie Corporations, i ¡$16,920, Division of Appraiser**, $115,' ¡450; Division rie Review rie Schedules, $.33,060; General Expense*", $47,300, The budget of $380,751 "pro-, (continued on page 24) was distributed as follows to cover salaries" of the ।personnel; Central Office, $27,600; Settlement Division, $61,970; River I (continued on page 24) 1
ron in World War II. The dedication ceremony took place in front of the flagpole. In a small makeshift pavilion, decorated with the flag of the United States and Puerto Rico, the rector Jaime Benitez, the assistant rector, Mr. Pedro Muftnz Amato; Colonel Mariano Vassallo, Army Chaplain; Mr. Reece B. Both-well, representing the Army Chaplain, and Mr. Reece B. Both-well, representing the United States and Puerto Rico, presided at the dedication. Both-! well, representative of the Senate, and *1 Mr. Lula A. GarraMegui. president of the Student Council. In the square where the bus. to d* BHldorloty do Castro is located, in front of the pavilion, seats were installed for the relatives of the deceased, to whom he was honored, as well as at another end, several military organizations were represented. Much riel public *e stood during the ceremony, which lasted one and a half hours. The 81st Infantry Band of the Army Ground Force opened the ceremony by playing the Borinquefta, after which Colonel Vassallo gave the invocation, saying that it was a moment of consternation and deep spiritual disturbance. Colonel Vassallo said that he was commemorating the memory of a man who, among other great things, had given his life so that others could live and to perpetuate peace, justice and freedom. "Vassallo said - what we must do is what the Bible commands: to pray for them with the liturgical word of the Lord, that peace may accompany them and that eternal light may shine on their faces". Rector Ronltez then delivered a speech, saying among other* things- "The University rie Puerto Rico today honors the memory of sixteen of "our sons, killed* on' active duty during World War II. They are: Angel F. Espada, Arturo Doliz Juan M Gonzalez, Ignacio Bonlt, Emilio Augusto Gonzalez. Valentín Tulla, Esteban A. Terral", José R. Noble, Ralph Justo, Luí" S. Sierra, Carlos (continued on page 18).
Destitution of Somoza caused the coup against Dr. Argüello This was reported yesterday by the daughter of the deposed President, on her return home to the island, that her father will not sign the resignation.
Eva Arguello de García
I'nr ENRIQUE RAMIREZ BRAU Editor of EL MUNDO In the early hours of yesterday morning, Mrs. Eva Argüello de Garda । 1" Miss Garda Argüello, daughter and granddaughter, respectively, of the deposed President of Nicaragua, returned to Puerto Rico from Nicaragua, via Miami, in a Pan American Airways plane, In her Ocean Park residence, Miss Argüello de Garda does not explain how she was able to leave Nicaragua, even though she has not yet been violated by General Anastado Somoza's coup d'état against her father. Signed by him ml "mo, said Mrs. Argüello de Garda, Somoza, "at the request of the Ambassador of Argentina. 1 extended a safe-conduct so that my daughter and I could leave Nicaragua". And he adds, "We took refuge in the Argentine embassy, because it is not practical dat [ (Continued er page 14)
Remembrance Ceremony at the UPR
Jj- fl"/'WW Moment in which "Mrs. María Molinari de Berrios, mother of the soldier Joaquin Berrios, killed in the war, laid a wreath at the memorial stone of the university professors and students" fallen in the war, - (Photograph by EL MUNDO).
The ceremony in honor of the fallen university students was solemn.
A bronze tablet was unveiled with the names of "hymns and professors who perished during the war. - Relatives laid wreaths For I i IS HERNANDEZ AQUINO Editor of EL MUNDO Yesterday took place in *1 campus of the. University of Puerto Rían, the unveiling of the bronze plaque dedicated to those professors, students and members of the university administration, who fell during the war, took place yesterday on the campus of the University of Puerto Rían.
Case of new cemetery was presented to JP Mayor of San Juan insisted on the use of land in Isla Verde L" Ateslrie"" of San Juan, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier, has insisted before the Planning Board to allow the Municipality to build the new cemetery on land* Jala Verri*. To this effect, he appeared before the body, in a hearing that was granted, exposing *1 problem that confronts the city with respect to the need for space for **- i mer terio. It was explained yesterday that *1 Santurce cemetery, because of its location within a densely populated area, and because there is currently insufficient free space, has been quickly replaced by a new necropolis. The mtin'ciplo has acquired by purchase a property in 1a section rie Isla Verde, not being able to build there *! cemetery riebido to te opposition "le the Board of Plans It has managed the purchase rie another property in the jurisdiction ri* Rio Piedras, 1a which expropriated the Government ri* San Juan, exiillenrin now a litigation on its u*o, which "e ventilate * in the Court ri* District. Before* the Board ri* Plan*", the Al- ¡ calde "a ri* San Juan *xpu "o *1 proi blem, Insisting that *1 cemetery "e build in Isla Verde. where according to expressed, already "e nan built three cemetery" privade". She also said that she asked for the same right for the poor people of San Juxn. that they enjoy in Isla Verde. Another point raised by the Mayoress, "e related to the expenses" in which the municipality would have to incur, to build a cemetery on a farm diítante of its center" of population, since it would be forced to move for its own account, in hearses" 1<>" corpses of the indigent. For this, according to the Mayoress, it would need a fleet of special vehicles. She also argued about the need of the population to visit the cemetery and pay tribute to their dead. The Mayor believes that the relatives of the deceased need the cemetery to be close to the city, where they can enjoy the indispensable transportation facilities. - - - - ■ 1
APC DOES NOT AUTHORIZE TWO GOVERNMENT WORKS ">a Major" work* of the Government, for immediate execution have not been authorized" by Ib AdmlnlRtraelón do Civil Production, for not Bjuatarae to Ib regulations governing the construction of ettruc. tura" of non-essential character. Ron e "t" work" the" new buildings to house the Supply Administration and the Government Printing Office. with an estimated cost of $435,009, and the building to house the Industrial Commission. to be located in front of the VMCA, on Ib Ronco de Leán Avenue, in San Juan.
Chancellor does not accept help from Tulane
Says Increased Admissions Would Not Solve Population Problem Washington is attentive to conclusions
 the Faculty rt* this Institution approved a i*solution, paia requesting d* Ir June rie Sín- > "Ileos d* Ir niismR. which considers* ■ ll*vRr r out an understanding between i ric Tulane University, d* Lul "iana. and the University d* Puerto RI "o. a ]o" fin*" to establish" a cooperative con. venin, so that the School fundon*. *In the field of tropical medicine, in collaboration with the University of Tulane. Rector Jaime Benitez of the University of Puerto Rico, to which the School of Tropical Medicine is attached, is strongly opposed to the plan proposed by the Tulane University faculty. According to the approved resolution, Dr. W. A. Sorterman, of the University of Tulane, has offered his cooperation to Dr. Pablo Mora-Otero, to carry out the agreement between the two institutions, since, on the other hand, the negotiations made for an agreement on the matter with the University of Chicago, the University of Chicago, the University of Puerto Rico, the University of Puerto Rico and the University of Puerto Rico, the University of Puerto Rico and the University of Puerto Rico are in agreement. The Board of Trustees of the Tropical Medicine Institute met this week to discuss the budget of the said Institute. Dr. Brown, of Columbia University, participated in these meetings. *In these meetings the resolution referred to was not discussed. Poublement* to be discussed at the next meeting of the Faculty of the School of Tropical Medicine and the Board of Tr-, T-enor de Enseñanza ce Puerto Rl' co. 1a t implementation of the Cla "f- , .it a" ions of the Island Government in the School of Tropical Medicine! as well as the problem of the failure of the Budget Bureau to provide the necessary $25,900 appropriations to the Blood Bank and the Hospital of Tropical Medicine for the implementation of the classification system at the School. According to information obtained, the university administration intends to make the necessary representations to rectify the omission by the Bureau of the Budget in the next fiscal year. Budget, in the next legislative session. The links between the University of Puerto Rico and Columbia University go back a long time. Columbia University has been providing financial aid to the School of Tropical Medicine for a long [ time, amounting to $28,000,000. [As you know, the] Chancellor of the University of Puerto Rico has been making (Continued on page 21) Graciela Rivera sings in St. Louis and New Orleans. She will sing in the summer in the former city; in the fall, in the latter By Rafael érlaxar NEW YORK, May 30. - Graciela Rivera, portoriquefta coloratura soprano, who last winter caused a sensation on the Pacific coast with the San Cario Opera Company, has been engaged for several performances in St. Louis this summer and in New Orleans next fall with the city's opera company. one of Straus' principal roles, in the St. Louis Municipal Opera Company's summer outdoor season, beginning July 14, she will sing six times, one of which will be broadcast on radio from coast to coast. No date has yet been set for the broadcast. Many of the leading artists । of the pai" are engaged" for the summer season in St. Louis,i which holds a place of similar Importance to the Hol. lywood concerts and those at Lewisohn Stadium, (I* New York. For the Opera Company of New Orleans". Graciela Rivera will perform 'Cilda, from "Rigoletto", *in five performances". Graciela played 1" Gilda, in her tburnée rie the Pacific coast, last winter: and *in that role m presented at the City Center, New York, on me" p"'i sado. Do" of the performances I (continued on page 21) 1
Compares per rápita income and relates it to inhabitant number* For FACL HARR1BON Correspondent d* United Press WASHINGTON, May 30. <PU>Officials in this Capital have been impressed by an economic study which comes to the conclusion that practically no miracle could increase the income of Puerto Rico by an amount sufficient to enable economic forces to restrain the increase in population, and that is the conclusion reached by federal government officials dealing with Puerto Rico's problems, as well as the conclusion of members of the U.S. Congress, It is a study recently conducted by the Center for Social Research of the University of Puerto Rico under the direction of Danie Creamer, a former official of the U.S. Department of Commerce, and an authority on the subject of Nicaraguan "income" The study has been circulated here by the Office of Puerto Rico. The study does not claim to be strictly accurate because of the impossibility of obtaining complete or accurate statistics on all aspects of the economy, but it does present some data and offers certain general conclusions. - In essence, what the study does is to state that the assertion, or assumption, that the economy of Puerto Rico increased substantially during the war, that a great upward movement has begun, is a myth. In determining Puerto Rico's income, the study uses as its principal basis, j 0 , factors which hear*, cen the wages, plus the profits, i.e., the value of production. It does not measure, for example, the value of what is produced by those persons who do not receive compensation for their activity, such as, for example, housekeepers who attend to their own household chores. r The calculations arrive at the " conclusion that the income from cloth * in 194n amounted to a total of $228,000,000 when the population was 1,878,000. According to this, the income per cApita was 5121 annual**. By 1944 annual income in d* dollar terms had reached " 5483,000,000, with a population of 2,034,000 and an average individual i income of $239. This increase in income is remarkable, says the Report, until one s* realizes <1* that $239 in 1944 had the same purchasing power as $151 m 194ó, The important, pue," says the Report. eg that from l*Mn to 1344 *1 annual per rápita income increased from $121 to $151. Trying to prove its thesis. the report presents a preri analysis to show that while" 10" incomes increased by 112 percent by 1944 over the 1949 level, prices increased by 70 percent. "1-a realization of these" facts," says the report, "should serve as [cause for deep meditation to those who maintain that Puerto Rico's "population problem" will be solved when the "family" laborers reach a level of "income" fluctuating between $700 and $800, "according to prewar price levels." The report does not claim that the "population will level off if it reaches that level of "income. "The" income" calculations," however. says the report, "may serve to indicate the enormous economic task which must be undertaken to meet the terms of the premise " The report recalls that an Inquiry made in 1941 "on wage income showed that *1 average Income" of families d* this" was $341 a year. This would be equivalent to $250 a .ft© eft eft terms of 1939-40 price levels, the report says. To reach a level of $700 to $800 per family - in other words, trllnKre "o" Per family of 1941-42 - would be unprecedented," the report says. During the war period, which, according to the balance sheets, was a good time for the expansion of the Puerto Rican economy," the report adds, "the average annual increase in per capita income (at prewar prices) was $5 20 " "Assuming that the 1940 census data, according to which the average family size was $5 2, is correct," this would amount to an average annual increase per family of $28," the report says. "If this average annual addition to a family's income could continue without interruption, it would require about $1 years to reach the target," the report continues. Beginning with *1 year 1941-42 as ha "e. therefore, the report says. 11". we reach the goal by 1980. By that date, and according to the current rate of increase in population, we will be able to reach the target by 1980.