THE WORLD
WEATHER PWOVOSTTCO8 FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY: Cloudy with showers in the afternoon; partly cloudy in the evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 84; low, 75. Barometric pressure at sea level at 4:M this afternoon, 19.89 inches of mercury.
44 Pages 5/
LA MAAANA NEWSPAPER
year xxvm
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN; PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER R., 1947
Softer motorist don't try that harrow, another one killed himself with it.
NUMBER 11119
APA to Submit Island Case to Washington
. Will discuss CCA offer. on readjustment . of 1947 crop. The stability of the industry will depend on it, according to Villamil. On the determination by the Secretary of Agriculture of the United States of the sugar quota for national consumption will depend mainly the stability of the price of this food for the year 1948, according to the executive vice-president of the Sugar Producers Association, Mr. Fernando A. Villamil, yesterday. The sugar industry is not very optimistic that higher prices for the product will prevail next year, indicating that futures market sales indicate lower price levels for sugar in 1948. On Monday, Mr. Manuel A. del Valle and Mr. Miguel Angel Garcia Mendez, directors of the APA, leave for the United States to attend a meeting of the Association's Standing Sugar Committee. One of the matters to be discussed was related to the offer made by the Agricultural Credit Corporation to the Puerto Rican producers regarding the readjustment of the 1947 harvest. As will be recalled, the Sugar Producers Association requested from said federal agency an extension of ten days to accept or reject the readjustment price offered to it. In Wá* shlngton this matter will be finalized personally by Messrs. Del Valle and Garda Méndez, as reported yesterday. The sugar committee mentioned will meet in that city on Wednesday of next week. The national consumption quota is to be fixed by the Secretary of Agriculture in accordance with the provisions of the new sugar law during the first ten days of January, 1948. It is believed that the Secretary's determination in this respect will influence prices for 1948, since the Act itself provides that the Secretary of Agriculture will fix the quota with a view to maintaining sugar prices at a certain level in relation to the cost-of-living indices prevailing in the nation prior to the October 31, 1948, sugar price decontrol. According to local producers, 'on the volume of the national consumption quota which will be fixed in the first ten days of next January, the price of sugar for 1948 will depend in part. That is to say, if the United States Umits its domestic consumption quota, the demand for sugar will be greater, and this will be reflected in the price levels. This latter perspective seems not to be adopted, according to the latest market situation reports. The APA reported that "futures sales show that the price for 1948 will remain lower than the level for 1947, and that the lifting of price controls in October 1947 has not produced any favorable reaction in the market. According to the new Sugar Law, it is not necessary to set hearings for the application of its provisions, before or after January 1, next. Therefore, all the information necessary for the implementation of the Act will be provided by the Sugar Division of the Department of Agriculture, which is the one directly involved in Puerto Rico's affairs. The views of the Puerto Rican growers on the future of sugar prices were recently expressed to the Federal Department of Agriculture as follows: "Apart from other considerations, the outlook for the future has a greater influence on the determination of wages for 1948 than at any other time in recent years during the entire time that wage scales have been fixed under the Sugar Act. "An evaluation of the future, even with all the difficulties inherent in such an evaluation, is highly important in fixing the limits within which other factors have to be considered. "Jutures prices indicate lower price levels for sugar, in 1948 than in 1947. It is true that these prices have* improved somewhat since September 1; but even so, they still indicate that sugar prices in May 1949 will be about .50 cents a pound below the current maximum level. The dollar balances, with which foreign countries can buy dollar sugar, are also an important aspect of the price outlook; and so is the size of the next Cuban harvest, na. Reports on the Philippine outlook, conditions in the European and Asiatic pal. palaces, and estimates of production in our own domestic areas, all make for softer sugar prices, possibly to the extent that marketing quotas will have to be established for the United States. "At the present time, the nation is heading for a new bias in the inflationary spiral. Sugar, paraca now. will have little, if any part in this trend; the flexibility clauses in the Cuban and Puerto Rican treaties having been - "Continued on p. 14)
Compendium of News
Henry Wallace fraternizes with Pietro Nenni
Henry Wallace, former Vice-President of the United States and now editor of "New Roubllc" magazine, watches a waiter serve spaghetti to an enthusiastic Pietro Nenni, leader of the pro-Communist Italian Socialists, during his visit to Boma when Wallace stopped in the capital on his way back to New York from Palestine. (Associated Press photo).
Most of the comments made on his speech agree that if Russia has the secret of atomic, it has no means of making it NEW YORK, Nov. 7 (PU) - The following is the world's reaction to Molotov's remarks on the atomic bomb. Washington-Government officials in this capital do not believe that Russia can still
believe that Russia can still make the atomic bomb. They have not, therefore, been disturbed by Molotov's statement. Although the nuclear scientific knowledge which made the atomic bomb possible, in their opinion, is not the exclusive possession of the United States, they doubted that Ruala possesses the industrial capacity or mechanical skill which would be needed to match the $2,500,000,000 atomic power factory of the United States. Neither the Atomic Energy Commission nor the State Department offered comment on Mr. Molotov's statements. Lake Success- Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Andrei VIshinsky said: "I have not read Mr. Molotov's statements. I merely know what has been said about it. If Mr. Molotov says that the atomic bomb is no longer a secret, it must be. There is nothing special about such statements. Science cannot be kept secret. When I return to the Soviet Union, I will inquire about it. If Mr. Molotov says that the atomic bomb is no longer a secret, that could mean that anyone can have it." Wellington Koo of China said: "Whether or not the secrecy of the atomic bomb ceases to exist is a matter of secondary interest to peace-loving nations. Mr. Molotov's remark is interesting, but there is no way of determining what he meant by declaring that the secret has ceased to exist. What is of paramount importance is the fact that no people desires another world war, and it seems to me that, taking into consideration this single fundamental fact, (Continued on page 74)
4 Vicéns will still leave the bread case pending, says he weighs reasons on both sides - waits for" market to stabilize The director of the General Administration of Supplies, Mr. A. Vicéns Ríos, yesterday authorized statements describing the current situation, in relation to the price of bread. He said that at present it is not possible to firmly fix the price level of flour in the supply market, and that the agency he heads will wait until the last moment to give its decision in the case. Mr. Vicéns Ríos said in part: "The Administration has been listening and receiving the parties and will have to take into account the interests of both in forming its final decision, which is subject only to reality, and this reality is unique. "If we depend on a market over which we have no control and we want to have the article, we will necessarily have to pay the price of that market or else we will have to do without the article and in that case there would be no bread at all. One solution would be for the price to remain static and for the Administration to absorb the difference between the selling price and the higher cost by means of a subsidy, but the Administration does not have the financial means to do this, nor has it been determined that this is the policy to be followed by the Government. The marking of flour supplies has been very erratic; it has had upward and downward alternatives without being able to state, and we believe that no one will be able to state, what it will be in the near future. While barely a week ago a decline began that could have been continuous and would have naturally solved the problem, this week the course of the market has changed and the quotations continue firm and rising. The belief for some is that current prices are speculative and may fall considerably at any time, while others hold the view that grain requirements for Europe will sustain these prices and that they will soon rise further. "The Administration has been able to wait and postpone making a definite decision for several reasons, to wit: (a) There are stocks of flour which, although not of the former low prices, are not of the higher prices, and which would permit the continued manufacture of bread at the price now in force, especially after the amendment recently made to the maximum wholesale prices fixed by Administrative Order 138; (b) It would not have been fair to tax the consumer with the increased price on stocks which have not yet received the full increase of the price increase; (c) It would not have been fair to tax the consumer with the increased price on stocks which have not yet received the full price increase; (d) It would not have been fair to tax the consumer with the increased price on stocks which have not yet received the full price increase. (b) It would not have been fair to tax the consumer with the increased price to stocks which have not yet received the full increase of the current market; (e) The current prices do not at any time justify a request for an increase of 2 cents as requested, and at most would justify 1 cent if sustained at the current level; (d) The Administration has taken its measures and has verified purchases to make up for the importer's refusals to make in the face of market and price doubts, thus assuring that there will be no shortage of flour when current stocks are exhausted and the problem becomes a crisis; (e) Because it needed to obtain more information (Continued on page 14). 14)
Saints and Athletics clash tonight as part of the Final Series. i - - - - Plñero believes that he will crlstalls the housing plan. He says it is necessary to have the foundations of the 10,000 ready for the 80th hand. ♦ ♦ # Ponee Liberal Committee resigned in protest against President's maniCeatactons against merger. ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ Production Subcommittee proposes several activities aimed at increasing food supply.  ♦ - * Vaccination of Guayanilla's children after five cases of diphtheria in the population. - Three hundred workers go on strike at the Central Rolg. * Vicéns says he will leave the decision on the bread until the last moment. * ♦ * The American Legion yesterday announced the program of the events to be held in commemoration of Armistice Day. 8 18 Signed the rules on the insurance for the coffee. * Mayagiles Municipal Assembly exonerated Mayor Barrote, - - - - There is confusion in the Police payrolls when it was discovered that the amount for the raises is much less than what was originally planned by the PDPB.
The cemetery is expected to be ready by the end of the month This was informed by the Mayoress after inspecting the construction work The municipal cemetery being built in Isla Verde is expected to be inaugurated by the end of this month or early December. This was informed by Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gauthier, administrator of the capital city, who upon her return from Mexico inspected the works being carried out by the Municipal Division of Public Works at the site to be used as a cemetery. The mayoress explained that the works are very advanced and that with certainty it could be said that the inauguration of the new cemetery will take place at the end of this month or at the beginning of December, due to the great necessity that there is to put it to the service of the people. In relation to what Francisco A. Arrillaga, president of the Board of Commissioners, informed about the proposals that have been made to acquire from the municipality by purchase another farm located in the Monacillos Neighborhood, the mayor said that it was not her intention to recommend the sale of the mentioned farm, even if a profit was offered. The referred property is the one that Mrs. Emmanuelll, widow of Lienza, sold to the Government of the Capital some time ago, and which was indicated to be used for a cemetery of the Capital. The purchase of this property promoted a litigation, still pending, as to the price to be paid for the same. The San Juan District Court has not yet decided what amount of money the Municipal Government should pay for the land in question. At the last meeting of the Board of Commissioners, Francisco A. Arrillaga, president of said body, stated that (Continued on page 14)
The officials in Washington are not disturbed by Molotov's words about the atomic bomb. * Luce workers do not accept offer, and insist that the use of weeding machines be discontinued. * * * Mayor expects new cemetery to be inaugurated in late or early December. ♦ * * * The Guayama District Judge dismissed a motion of the cafia settlers, in the case of readjustment of wages, - * * * Muñoz Souf front believes that the situation created for teachers who teach veterans is unfair. * It is feared that Russia will withdraw from the United Nations, although in an unofficial way. ♦ - " Republican leadership postpones to January the revision of the bill reducing taxes. - * - " - - - Triarte calls for investigation into teacher's arrest. " - - APA to submit island industry case to Permanent Board in Washington. o o o * Oorto Nocturna secretary ruled not in contempt of Judge Rodrigues Aponte; ordered unconditionally released. 8 0S Ford, Smith will play this afternoon at ol Eocobar for Banturce against Williams, of San Juan, Criollos play at Mayagües and Leones at Aguadilla. o o o o Notre Dame plays today against Army and Michigan against Indiana in college soccer. -
Coffee Insurance Rules Signed
Governor promulgated determination of premium at 5 percent rate Corporation may vary figure Statute will cover non-controversial 1947 operations Governor Plñero yesterday signed and promulgated the regulations to regulate all matters relating to the insurance of the coffee crop, determining said regulations a premium rate of five percent, on the value of a quintal of coffee, piled basis. The Regulation determines, however, that the premium rate may be varied from time to time by the Coffee Insurance Corporation, according to experience, announcing the rate thus varied no later than February 15 of each year. Among other things, it is provided that one or more farms may be included in the same crop insurance application, provided that they belong to the same applicant and are adjacent to each other. The coffee will be covered by the insurance, as long as the grain forms part of the bush, against losses due to hurricanes, cyclones or hurricane winds, provided that the loss is greater than 10 percent. The amount to be insured will be based on the farmer's production estimate. If the crop is less than the amount insured, the premium paid in excess shall be refunded, but the farmer shall be his own insurer for that part of the crop in excess of the amount insured. The policy shall be valid for one year, calculated from 4 o'clock on the afternoon of the day of issue; but any policy issued within the period from June 1 to March 1 of the following year shall be valid only until May 30 of the latter year. Excluded from insurance are grain harvested prior to harvest; rain, downpour, storm or flood damage, except rain, downpour, storm or flood damage occurring during or immediately following a hurricane, windstorm or hurricane winds; losses caused by windstorm, windstorm or hurricane; losses caused by rain, rainstorm, storm or flooding occurring during or immediately following a hurricane, windstorm or hurricane winds; those losses caused by rivers which may be determined to be other than those for which it is insured, and which result in the diminution of the crop before or after the hurricane, cyclone or hurricane winds; and losses not exceeding 10 percent of the total insured value. total insured value. This regulation also provides that arbitration shall be used in case of disparity between the Coffee Insurance Corporation and the insured in determining the amount of the losses. The arbitrators would be appointed by the parties. Under no circumstances may a farm or crop be insured for the purpose of coffee insurance; an exception shall be made in those cases in which it may be determined that the delivery segregated as uninsured* is not in production. The provisions of these regulations may be applied to insurance operations carried out by the Corporation for the year 1947, provided that such operations are not in conflict with the Regulations, or that the application thereof does not prejudice contractual rights: "If the part of the crop recovered, saved, or harvested is less than 90% of the amount for which the insurance has been extended, the Corporation shall pay the difference between the insured crop and the part recovered, saved, or harvested, in the understanding that the insurance shall be paid in full.
Iriarte affirms that the environment is against Populares Reiterates that there must be a merger of the opposition forces to the current government regime. He does not believe in predictions a year before the elections.
For Juan Martines Chapel Redactor do EL MUNDO The President of the Partido Unión Republicana Progresista, Mr. Celestino Iriarte, said he does not have faith in the predictions of the elections. He said he had no faith in the predictions about the results of the elections in a year's time. However, he said that if all those who are currently dissatisfied and unhappy with the party in power were to join forces, the Popular Party would be defeated in the 1948 elections. The Republican Progressive Union Party is the oldest of all the parties in existence today. In order to guarantee its existence, it has had to change its name and insignia on several occasions, with the peculiarity that it has then adopted all the names and insignia it had previously used. The Republican Party was founded on 1899 by the autonomist group that separated from Muñoz Rivera, when the pact with Segaste. When the Americans arrived in Puor. to Rico, the separatist group, under the leadership of Dr. José C. Barbosa, organized itself into a detention party, under the name of Repu. blicanoo, and took the name of the Republican Party, then in power in the United States, for a long time.
in power in the United States, during the presidency of William MacKlnley. At the beginning of its foundation, "1 Partido Republicano Puertorriquo. ño won the sympathies and the support of Washington's shoulders, and thus won the elections of 1899 and the first two elections held under civilian government, in 1900 and 1902. CELESTINO IRIARTE
i- In 1904 a group of republicans, led by Rosendo Metí en ro Cintrón joined Lis Muflo? Rlve1 ra and founded the Partido Unión do >. Puerto Rico, which put an end to the Republican electoral triumphs. The Republican Party lost in the 1904 elections most of the representative districts, having won only 2, while the new Unionist Party won 5. In the 1908 elections and in all those held every two years thereafter, until the 1914 elections, the Republican Party was defeated in all 7 representative districts. In 1914, the Republican Party had a resurgence and won the representative districts. In 1914, the Republican Party had a resurgence and won the representative districts of Ponce, Aguadilla and Mayagüez, and here ended the elections under Loy Foraker. In the 1917 elections, the first elections were held to elect members of both legislative chambers. In the 1917 elections the Republican Party obtained 80,319 votes, against 90,155 for the Union of Puerto Rico, and 24,488 for the So. dalote Party. The Republican Party triumphed in the senatorial districts of Mayagües and Pone" and elected Dr. Barbosa as senator at-large and representative for Aqu. (Continued on page 14).
Cases of diphtheria emerge in Guayanilla
The vaccination of children has been carried out in the said population 5 positive cases have been registered It has been several years since there has been an epidemic of the disease on the island Due to the appearance of 5 positive cases of diphtheria, the health authorities of the population of Guayanilla have proceeded to vaccinate the children of the said locality. Dr. José Hernández Matos, Acting Chief of the Department of Health's Epidemiology Bureau, began yesterday to investigate the diphtheria outbreak in order to prevent an epidemic of the disease in the population. Diphtheria is produced by the bacillus Klevs Loffler and is a disease of the nasal and oral mucous membranes and the respiratory tract of an infectious nature, being extremely contagious, febrile and acute. No epidemic of this disease has occurred in Puerto Rico during the last few years due to the control measures taken by the Department of Health and the use of preventive vaccines. Dr. José Hernández Matos, interim chief of the Department of Health's Bureau of Epidemiology, who replaces Dr. Abel de Juan, who is on vacation in the United States, is investigating the aforementioned cases, having remained all day yesterday at the Guayanilla Public Health Unit in these efforts, Dr. José Alum, Deputy Health Commissioner, when asked for some information about the diphtheria cases that appeared in Guayanilla, said that he did not have the data at hand, since Dr. Hernández Matoa was personally carrying out the investigation and the results of the same are unknown. Yesterday we contacted Dr. J. E. Antomattel, director of the Guayanllla Public Health Unit, who informed that five positive cases of diphtheria have been registered in children under four years of age. Two of these cases occurred in the town and three in different neighborhoods of the locality. Dr. Antomattel indicated that the cases of diphtheria registered lately are higher than those normally registered "in the population, for which reason the Health Department has initiated the appropriate investigation and is taking the necessary control measures. To this effect, she indicated that 200 children have already been vaccinated in the population and that samples are still being taken. According to the Director of the Public Health Unit, the situation is not dangerous, but she stated that it is still an outbreak and that it is urgent to take all kinds of preventive and control measures to prevent it from spreading among the school population. The Commissioner of Health, Dr. Juan A. Pona, when questioned about this situation, said that no official reports had arrived yet, and that the division chiefs might not have considered the matter of such importance that it was necessary to communicate it to him. However, he admitted that five cases of diphtheria is a little more than usual.
Pinero believes that the housing plan can be carried out.
Republicans postpone tax bill Knutaon failed to convince leaders to pass reduction this year WASHINGTON^'Nov. 7. (P. U.)-Representative Harold Knutaon, R-Minnesota, failed today to convince House Republican leaders that tax reduction legislation should be introduced in the special session of Congress this month, and it was indicated that his bill would be set aside until the regular session of Congress in January. Knutaon, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, which drafts all tax legislation, sought to press action on the income tax decrease in the special session beginning on the 17th of this month in a conference with Speaker Joseph W. Mar. tin, Jr. After the conference, Knutson said, "I rather expect that the tax bill will go in January. In osa techa, it will be the first thing, ro in the order of business." The two Republican leaders most (Continued on page 25) Muñiz believes it is unfair to delay teachers' pay He says the situation of those who teach veterans should have been raised in time" The President of the Teachers Association, Mr. Luis Muñiz Souffront, yesterday expressed his displeasure over the fact that it had been allowed to take a long time for veteran teachers to learn that they cannot collect their fees for teaching former soldiers, due to an impediment in the law. The teachers' president called this situation "improper," stating that "it is unfair to have these teachers working so long without being paid. Mr. Muñiz Souffront said that he has urged the Governor to summon the Legislature to an extraordinary session as soon as possible to solve the problem Two thousand six hundred veteran teachers have not yet been paid their three months' salary arrears for working during the afternoon and evening hours teaching veterans in special groups. This is because, according to the Political Code, such teachers, receiving a salary for teaching regularly during the day in public schools, cannot receive another check from the Government for work during the same period of time. In order for them to be paid for their extraordinary service in teaching veterans, the law that allocated half a million dollars to expand educational facilities for Puerto Rican ex-soldiers must be amended, since this law states that the fees paid by veterans for studies will become part of this special fund of half a million dollars. Mr. Muñiz Souffront's comments on the matter, "jlcen: (Continued on page 14)
I Foundations of the ten thousand should be ready by March 30 Legislative session to be held this month I Study grant to coffee growers Tulane approved settlement Governor PIAero told reporters yesterday, at the weekly press conference, that the plan to build ten thousand homes for veterans will be fully implemented by March 30, at least the foundations of the ten thousand homes have been built, and the approval of the Federal Housing Authority will be granted. He stated that he was confident that for the completion of this project there will be the necessary funds. . "There is always cause for concern," said the Governor, "I am confident that the plan that has been initiated will be funded, that the Federal Housing Act (FHA) will be complied with, and that the program will be carried out without interruption. 81 by March 30, M have built at least the foundations of all the homes and are approved by the FHA, there will be dlno- , ro." In touching on the matter, the Governor, in no part of his statements, challenged with facts the information published yesterday by EL MUNDO, under the signature of our colleague Rafael Santiago Sosa, [ in the sense that on or before November 27, the documentation related to the plans of the ten thousand housing project must be filed before the corresponding federal agencies, . Otherwise, there will not be enough funds to carry out the entire program, given that the available balance will be exhausted by the aforementioned date. Nor did the Governor say anything about the fact that the Planning Board is actively working on the preparation of important projects which, under the plan, will be developed with federal funds, trying to reach the date mentioned by EL MUNDO and which is now the basis for the information, which is totally in vain. He added ol Governor, expanding on his statements poiterlor- , mind, quo tomia that in some points of the Island could not comegulrso the land necessary for , certain projects, in view do . that their owners" are demanding k excessive prices; and that tratándo- . He said that, in view of the fact that those who are building are private entities, he could not resort to expropriation, forced by the Government. r eopadal Session 1 The Plftero said that he could not yet specify a date for the extraordinary meeting of the Legislature, but assured that it would take place during the course of this month. He stated that it was proposed that the matters to be considered should be few in number, and exclusively those which cannot wait until February. Among these matters, he said he was considering the Rum Industry, the plan for the construction of homes for the elderly, the affiliation of the School of Tropical Medicine, and amendments to the Aguadilla Port Law. He has under study the matter of the ' Insular Police. He also informed the Governor that he has under study the matter of granting a subsidy of 85 pesos for each quintal of cane to the grain harvesters. Agro- ' gó quo approved and promulgated the map of the Bonus of the city of Río Piedras, which will be published in the Press and which consists of 44 sheets,' ' comprising 43 quadrangles and an index map. The Governor said that on November 3, the Board of Trustees of Tulane University met and approved the tentative arrangement reached with respect to the affiliation of the School of Tropical Medicine of Puerto Rico with said University. This must also be approved by the Legislature. Mr. Plftero said he would make recommendations to the Legislature in accordance with the tentative arrangement. Bread issue The Governor said he was not fully aware of the plans of consumers to organize bread cooperatives, should the bakers carry out their decision to close their establishments in the near future. Asked what action the government would take if the closures took place, the Governor said, "I don't like to cross the river without reaching the bridge," adding, "We can talk as events unfold. Earlier, he had stated that he believed that "in Puerto Rico there is a need for the people to eat bread." The Director of Transportation informed the Executive Council that he "will not wait for the appointment" of the Director of Transportation to implement the Government's "Law regulating the use of automobiles". He said that he is studying several candidates. He also stated o! Governor also stated that he is studying a matter concerning the placement of_ (Continued on page 14)
that he has a matter re!