THE WORLD
WEATHER "FORECAST" FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Generally clear. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 80; low, 73. Barometric pressure at sea level. at 4:3 p.m., 39.94 inches of mercury.
44 Pages 5/
LA MARAÑA NEWSPAPER
NUMBER 11154
YEAR XXVIII
Entered aa second class matter, Post Office. San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, DECEMBER 13, 1947
Automevtiistaa, let us show 1* traditional courtesy of the pals.
CSP hears in first TA case
Arjona Siaca filed a complaint against driver Pedro Loiz Diaz They will try to achieve a good service Talks will be organized for the drivers and films will be shown to them The Public Service Commission began to hear yesterday the first case involving the conduct of the drivers of the Transportation Authority, since it assumed jurisdiction over said public service company. Rafael Arjona Siaca filed a complaint against the driver Pedro Loiz Díaz, alleging that, on December 9, he had to get off the bus, License 53. During yesterday morning, Mr. Arjona Siaca, Mr. Raimundo Lebrón, president of the Authority's Drivers' and Mechanics' Union, driver Díaz and the head of the Bus Division, Mr. Faustino Sotomayor, testified about the complaint. Lebrón held a conference with the President of the Commission, Mr. Jorge V. Toledo. Toledo, and both agreed to cooperate mutually, to implement measures to improve the service provided by the Authority's drivers, "The Commission," said Mr. Toledo, "in the exercise of its jurisdiction, has issued an order to the Transportation Authority and to the Drivers and Mechanics Union, requiring that all" drivers who are not up to date with respect to their licenses to drive passenger buses. It was reported that these licenses will be renewed annually, at no cost to the drivers. The two officials discussed various aspects of the traffic problems; how the Commission will exercise its jurisdiction over the drivers; and what disciplinary measures will be implemented if necessary. Mr. Toledo said that the Commission will endeavor to see that the drivers give good service and comply with the rules of courtesy, "without it being understood that it is proposed to adopt a hostile attitude against them". They agreed that it was necessary to organize a series of lectures for the drivers, and to obtain a number of films illustrating traffic problems and the proper way in which vehicles should be driven for the safety of property and passengers. For this work, they will request the cooperation of the Insular Police, the insurance companies and the Public Parks and Recreation Commission, which has equipment for the filming and exhibition of movies, Mr. Lebrón informed that the premises that their union occupies at present is very small, since it has a capacity for about 300 people.In order to solve this problem, he explained that they are working on the purchase of a building with a large meeting and conference room, which will be equipped with a library and other facilities that will contribute to increase the knowledge of the drivers. On the other hand, it was reported that interviews have continued between Commission officials and the head of the Bus Division of the Transportation Authority, Mr. Faustino Sotomayor, to study the measures to be implemented to improve passenger transportation service in the metropolitan area. Among the measures discussed was the establishment of a new schedule for the buses to leave the garages and the reorganization of their itineraries. According to M, the deficiency in -1 service and the loss of business is largely due to poor organization, especially in terms of the departure times of the buses from the different terminal states, which results in some places where ten buses are seen together, while in other places passengers have to board the vehicles of the independent carriers due to the delay of the Authority's buses. With these activities, the Public Service Commission begins to exercise the pioneer jurisdiction it acquired over the Transportation Authority as a result of the recent agreement between it and the Board of Directors of said Authority. * According to the Chairman of the Commission, Jorge V. Toledo, Esq. Toledo, it is proposed to discuss all the problems related to transit and passenger transportation with the officials of the Authority and to mutually cooperate in the implementation of measures that will tend to avoid them. It is hoped that the person who is appointed to replace Mr. Jose G. Bloise as General Manager of the Authority will assume the same attitude as that assumed by the Board of Directors, cooperating with the Commission so that it may fully exercise its jurisdiction for the benefit of the general public.
The head of the expelled Russian mission ['
< 1 ' I Colonel Nikolai Filatov, a member of the Soviet repatriation mission to France, talks with Ina journalists at the Esta station in Paris( poen before he and other members of the mission who were expelled from France boarded the train which was to take them to the Soviet zone of Germany and from there to Moscow. (Associated Press Photo). i .MK i 111.... MS. ..i.r.ii , m him-ilict . mbm - - - - 1 । m , , , ; Cali fornia is not ready to receive emigration of Puerto Ricans Verdiales reports that he discussed this matter with the head of the Division of the Employment Service.-. Brings good impressions from Washington event By PAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, Dec. 12. (PU)- Francisco Verdiales, of the Insular Conciliation Service, told the United Press today that he left for San Juan this weekend "with many good and new" impressions* and with a great deal of specific knowledge."
Water consumption in metropolitan area drops from 34 million to 27 million. SAA does not now use its reserve reservoirs San Juan aqueduct users' water consumption has suffered a decrease in the last few weeks, averaging 27 million gallons per day, according to San Juan Aqueduct and Sewer Service Director Sergio Cuevas Bustamante. This represents a daily decrease in consumption of seven to eight million gallons per day, compared to an average of 33 to 34 million gallons per day in previous months. Mr. Cuevas said yesterday that several factors have influenced this notable improvement in the supply of water to the population of the metropolitan area. Among these, Mr. Cuevas said that "there is no doubt that the users of the aqueduct are taking more and more care to avoid waste". Also, the heavy rains of the last few days, as well as the (Continued on page 14)
-*After a week's visit to the capital. With Gullermo Allies, administrator of the State Insurance Fund, Verdiales attended a two-day conference on state labor legislation sponsored by Secretary of Labor Lewis B. Schwellenbach. Schwellenbach. They have also held talks with federal officials on Puerto Rico-related problems, and Verdiales declined to disclose details of their talks here, profi1ing to leave it to Governor Plftero and Labor Commissioner Fernando Sierra Berdecia to release their reports if they deem it appropriate. However, he informed the United Press... United Press that he has held talks with Walter Erh, of the U.S. Employment Service; William F. Paterson, director of the Apprenticeship Training Service of the Department of Labor; Syrus S. Chlng, new director of the Federal Conciliation Service; and Hor Ward T. Colvin, associate director. Colvin, associate director. n He also visited several divisions of the > Service. - Verdiales said he discussed the problem of Puerto Rican migration extensively with Erb, and * with the Labor Department officials who attended the conference. He indicated that neither the Department of Labor authorities (Continued on pg. 14)
News Digest
The special legislature will probably be after the 24th. Plftero is negotiating a salary increase for the members of the Cabinet. - The purchase of properties and land for the construction of Avenida Norte is suspended. - Fomento is studying taxation of shares: I can initiate proceedings before the Legislature. ♦ - - Nationalist Party prepares reception for Alhisu Campos on Monday. - * * California is not yet ready to receive Puerto Rican emigration. - - - Mainland airlines increase fares 10 percent. - * - "Price restriction on resale of homes made under veteran's law is lifted. * Veterans given until '81 to renew policies* without medical exam. * * - Reduction in water consumption reported in metropolitan area. - - - Federal Government will accept payment of taxes, by check against Insular and foreign banks*. ♦ * * The general strike that the* communists unleashed in Rome failed. - Today I can decide rae the First Round of the Baseball championship: Bob Thurman will face Hilton Smith and Alonso Perry will face Bin Tome al
colliding colfdere* of Banturce and May agües with Ponce and CaguaeGuayama. - - - - Roberto Varga* came within one punching of equaling 1* Afielo Baseball World Series mark, nado, estrucando to 12 in triumph yesterday over Mexico at Cartagena, 10 for 2. par* fourth victory for the Boricuas against a setback. - The Supreme Court overturned the decision of the Carolina Municipal Assembly to remove Mayor Federico Cordero. They give extension until January 30 to evacuate the land in Vleque. ♦ ♦ * Habeas corpus filed in the case of Tntti Coll. - * Judge Suárea Garrlga acquitted Mr. Eduardo Ménde* Bao. The Governor yesterday authorized to remain open* until 10:00 o'clock at night on December 14 and *1 81 and January 8 - establishments* selling I* Christmas season items*. - - - Truman asks Congress to roll back price level* to June 1947 margins. * * * * Lm Congressman* Butler and Miller leave for 1*1* on * 28th of the present. - - - . Public Service Commission commented to understand in first case involving Transportation Authority. - Ewln W. Pauley confessed to the Senate Committee to have eepaculated on food business.
i Truman calls for lowering prices.
Requests Congress to bring them to June limits Plan applies to vital items Republicans persist in passing own anti-inflation measure By Leo NICHOLS WASHINGTON, Dec. 12 (P. U.)-The Administration today called on Congress to restore basic" items" to the price they were in June 1947, as Republican" leaders" prepared to force passage of their own limited anti-inflation program. The price control program," which was to apply only to "vitally" scarce or "unfairly" high priced goods, was submitted to Congress in draft form by Secretary of Labor Lewis B. Schwellenbach, who said that the program was to be applied only to "unfairly" high priced goods. Schwellenbach, who said he would also submit a plan for salt control. Secretary of Commerce W. Averell Harriman has already taken President Truman's rationing program to Congress. But the Republican leaders in both Houses have condemned the compulsive provisions of President Truman's program to failure, and have paved the way for their own four-point plan. Under the strategy prepared today, their bill will pass the House on Monday with a rule against amendments, a tactic the Democrats denounced as "egregious. The Senate will try to do the same and place the measure on the President's desk in time for the congressional recess around December 19. Mr. Schwellenbach's price control formula restricts maximum price fixing to "items which vitally affect the cost of living, the costs of agricultural or industrial production, and to "items which are essential to American foreign policy. The measure provides that price ceilings will be set only when specific items are "unfairly" above the June price or when their price is "unfairly" above the June price. The lowest maximum price to be set for non-agricultural items would be the lowest between June 11 and June 18, 1947. Schwellenbach recommended that if the month of June did not lend itself as a model for pricing, then the most comparable week of June could be used. Meanwhile, the White House and Attorney General Tom C. Clark took action to clarify the President's objection to the Republican bill's "relaxation" of the Antitrust Act. A White House spokesman said today that the Republican bill is much broader than the Harriman measure, which would require the Attorney General's approval. Clark told reporters after a Cabinet meeting that the Republican bill would offer the industry "immunity" from the Antitrust Act, while Harriman's measure would preserve government control. The" plans of the" House Republican" to force the *probaclon of the bill filled the Democrats with indignation, who^wish to amend it to make the rationing provision mandatory and extend lo" rent controls. House Democratic leader. Sam Rayburn, called the Republican maneuver "egregious," but did not say how the Democrats would fight it. Robert A. Taft, Ohio Republican and chairman of the Senate Republican Policy Committee, said he expected the Senate to pass the bill before Christmas. He conceded that* Democrats could delay action in "u chamber, but added that "I don't think they will." (Continued on page 8.)
JP to Deliver Fifth Economic Plan to Governor Monday
The Fifth Economic Program of the Planning Board, will be delivered next Monday to Governor Plftero and his Budget Bureau, by *1 Acting Chairman of the Board, Seftor Sol Luis D*scsrtes. He expressed seftor Descartes that the'document. according to the Law, a* will be delivered before twelve o'clock Monday night, being also given to eonober to the Press and the public. The program contains recommendations modified by the Board, according to the result of the last public hearing and of the suggestions made by the heads of departments and agencies of the Government who filed written memorials. On the subject of all such changes, Mr. Descsrtes said that they would not be made known until *1 moon, the date on which the document will be submitted to the Governor and to the Chief of the Budget Bureau, Mr. Roberto de Josúa. -
Among the main issues discussed at the public hearing were the projected elimination of the government's direct aid program; the financial problem of the University of Puerto Rico; the program for the construction of district jails and physical improvements to the facilities of the Department of Justice; the organization of the Cooperative Bank; the plan for the promotion of tourism; the appropriations for several of the basic programs of the Department of Health, and others. Yesterday, the Finance Division of the Board was finishing the mechanical work and the layout of the document. In addition, a summary information on the changes introduced to the preliminary program was also being submitted to the Board to be given to PraaM for review.
Vieques island residents granted an extension
Federal judge grants until January 30 for the evacuation of lands Navy personnel to be taken January 5 It is not known if the Government will make a definitive expropriation of lands The Federal court, presided over by Judge David Chavez, yesterday granted an extension to the landowner" of Visque" whose property is to be taken in use through expropriation, by the United States" Government, to be transferred to the Navy. The extension refers to the date for vacating said lands and giving possession thereof - the Navy, which had been fixed by the Court on December 15, when issuing the expropriation lease order in favor of the United States Government. This date was amended yesterday to January 30. The extension was granted by the Federal Court, declaring a motion to that effect, filed by Benlcio Sanchez Castaño on behalf of the following persons, owners of the 4,370 acres of land to be used in Vieques: Alberto Biascoechea, Enrique Cayo, Esteban Diez, Jovito Gonzalez and Tomas Ramirez. The motion in question stated that "the Navy has offered the petitioners a 2,300-acre parcel of land in Vieques, to graze the cattle owned by the petitioners, who have more than 300 head each; that the petitioners have not been able to take possession of this parcel and fence it off de. 1 are compelled to surrender or vacate the land on December 15, damage will be caused to them because if present there is no land available on Vieque to graze cattle, since the United States Government has expropriated more than three-fourths of the land there; that the petitioners need not less than 45 days from the date set, for the evacuation and surrender of the properties and lands, to be able to obtain possession of the parcel offered by the Navy to take the cattle there.5 The petitioners then requested that they be granted an extension of 45 days" for that purpose. U.S. Attorney. Phillip Herrlck, objected to the granting of the extension. and in justification of his opposition brought into the witness chair" Colonel J. P. Brown, District Officer of the Navy. Colonel Brown stated that the Navy is interested in taking possession of the "Vieque land" as soon as possible. He said that the Navy could grant the "landowner" until January 5. The officer disclosed that the Navy would bring the first continuation of men to Vieque on or about January 5, adding that another contingent of Marines would arrive on the island at a later date to complete the total number of men in the force. For his part, Mr. Sánchez Castaño, argued his motion pointing out "the right of the landowners" asking to avoid "the damages that would be caused by having to evacuate and surrender their land" on December 15. Judge Chavez, finally decided that the date for delivery and disposal of the land" could be altered, granting the petitioners 45 days to abandon their land. Mr. Sanchez Caño himself occupied the witness chair yesterday, (edifying in favor of the motion he had made, and in part of his testimony stated that "the Navy may be powerful, and the line of defense of which Vieques will be a part, will be necessary, but above that is the right of these citizens to be protected in their rights and that is what this short of justice is all about. As will be recalled, the United States Government, at the request of the Navy and through the Attorney General, went to Federal Court a few days ago with a petition for expropriation of use, to take possession of 4,370 acres in Visques, (Continued on page 14).
The special legislative meeting is likely to be convened after the 24th.
■General strike declared by communists in Rome failed.
Strike ended after series of street fights between Reds and Police Per Norman Montallier Corre*pon "al of United Press ROME, Dec. 12 (FU) - The general strike in Rome, initiated and led by the* Communists," broke down tonight after a "series of street battles between* the Police and Red fighting squads destroyed the ha "* of the political strike. A spokesman for the Chamber of Labor, a Communist organization, announced that the strike in the city and province of Rome will end at the stroke of midnight tonight. He admitted that the government had not granted all the demands made by the unions. The strike came to an end after a day of sporadic violence, which on one occasion reached 1* Parliament square. Two* Communist deputies were beaten by the police when they led a mob of 3,000 strikers" and marched to the square in front of the Parliament building. One of the delegates was injured in the nose, but none were seriously injured. Outside the province of Rome, Italy remained relatively calm. The only incident* worthy d* mention occurred in a factory in Milan, the Communist capital of Italy, where lo* rioters* forced the bolia to close.their* door" in a demo "tration against the.
[vF W ■ ■xRa. ' JEL PREMIER DE GASPERI speculation. A key factor in the Government's success in its fight against the strike was the organization of truck convoys to transport the workers who joined the "back to work" movement. The convoys worked, despite the fact that the normal transportation system was paralyzed. Squads of "an-tl-romp*huelg" communists countered the Government's measures by barricading the highways throughout the province of Rome and as far south as the city of Albano, twenty miles to the south. In Albano six carabinieri and three civilians*# were killed.
Suspension of the purchase of buildings and lots for the North Avenue
Deputy Commissioner of the Interior stated that this is due to the difficulty encountered by the residents of the area in moving their homes and businesses.
All the" transaction*# and arrangements for the purchase of structure# e x^'. that ** rv,r5Mn "ervldumbre of passage to the projected North Avenue in Santurce, have been suspended" by the Department of the Interior, as announced yesterday the Deputy Commissioner of Jo Interior, seftor Jesus Benitez Castafto, Questioned yesterday on the siatu" of this project,
OFI Removes Restrictions on Resale Lifts Price Control on Homes Built Under Veterans' Law The restrictions that existed on the resale of homes built under the Veterans' Housing Act of 1946 have been removed, according to a report yesterday by the Federal Office of Tenancy in Puerto Rico. The OFI reported yesterday that it had received a notification from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, informing that it had introduced an amendment to the agency's regulations to lift restrictions on buyers of houses built under the Veterans Housing Act who wished to resell them. The new regulation, it was reported, lifts *1 control over the# price# at which the cadasas must be sold in resale*" transactions. The limitation will compel buyers to sell their homes at the same price they have paid. *1 same price qu* they* speak paid for the same. OIF added, that the preference for veteran* *in case* of resale of c***t conatruida* under the 1* above law, remained "in force. E "ta reglatnentaclón obliga * loa propletarioa de laa casa" * dar preferencia a loa vetexanoa, en la tranaaccionea par* resale d* caaaa. According to the diapoaition. "Veterans cannot be charged a higher price than a non-veteran. It was reported that Acting Housing* Accelerator, Seftor Tighe E. Woods, explaining the uprising (Continued on p. 14)
Mr. Benitez Castaño reported the following: "D "d" 1*general difficulty of the residents" throughout" the easement area in obtaining housing to relocate their families" and business premises", "it has been determined to suspend all property purchase activity until such time as a better* 1" pr*val "ci*nte sPuaclón". The Deputy Commissioner of the Interior also expressed that up to the present, very few properties have been acquired by this agency in the boundaries that serve for the easement of the projected public road. This is due to the difficulties mentioned above". No mention was made of any of the transactions for the purchase of property for the North Avenue right-of-way easement. However. *However, Deputy Commissioner Benitez Castafto commented that most likely, "if such" negotiations were to be resumed, there would be a need for a new purchase offer due to the value of the aforementioned properties by that date. North Avenue was projected from the intersection of Ponce de Leon Avenue with the Gulllermo Eateves Bridge, following the entire shore of the Condado Lagoon and, turning off along Wilson Street, until it connected with Jose de Diego Avenue at its intersection with Lopez Landron Street. This first section will then be extended across Calle del Parque, along Calle Izern, to the vicinity of the planned international airport of I*, la Verde. On the other hand, EL MUNDO was informed that the current co*te# ds of the properties were delaying the closing of the purchase transactions. These expenditures* have to be made with funds* from the Island Government, since at the time this was being done, the Department of the Interior had not been authorized to invest funds from the federal share for these* projects in the purchase of properties for such" fine". (Continued on page 14)
Fomento studies taxation of shares; may initiate action
If the recent decision of the Tax Court, taxing for tax purposes the shares held by the corporations organized in the Cove, proves to be an obstacle* 1* industrial initiative, and *if it is determined as a result of an orderly legal study, 1* the Industrial Development Corporation will recommend and take legislative action to correct such situation, according to the President and General Administrator of that company, Mr. Teodoro Moscoso, who informed yesterday. Commenting for EL MUNDO on the
The problem created by virtue of the aforementioned resolution, Mr. Moscoso stated the following: "Our Legal Division is making a quick but careful study of the effects that the recent decision of the Tax Court may have on the industrialization program. If it becomes a fact that such ruling is an obstacle to the Industrial Initiative - and the indications are that it is - the Development Corporation will recommend and seek legislative action to remove it".
Date will depend on matters to be included by the - Governor Pinero would improve salaries Cabinet Says transportation system would establish cab service to apartments E" likely to be held one or two days before Christmas Eve, the s*s)6n lo. gislative "special December . be held one or two days after the 24th. according to statements made by Gov. Plftero, at the press conference held yesterday. However, everything will depend, among other things, on the date on which the Governor can have ready the matters to be considered by the extraordinary lo. glslature, which will be very few, as stated by Mr. Plftero. The Governor said that, among other things, there were two things he had proposed to discuss in Washington, during the trip he had planned to make and which he cancelled at the last minute. One has to do with the "ueldo# of the members of *his Cabinet, and the other with the transfer of the families deplaced* on Vieques by the U.S. Navy. The Governor is studying the problem posed to the Government by the low salaries earned by the members of the Cabinet, in order to see what solution can be found. The Governor mentioned the Commissioners, the Auditor and the Attorney General, to say: "They have had their compensation fixed by the Public Law Act, which was passed in *1 April 1917, and since then these servants of the people of Puerta Rico have been receiving the same remuneration, while those who have been paid more than three times as much. It was my intention to discuss this matter with the competent authority, to seek a way by which they could receive a better deal. I am afraid that if this situation continues, we will not be able to have all the competent authority in charge of the tuna. The Governor added that," not having left for the federal capital, he proposed to deal with the matter by correspondence. I believe it would not be necessary to amend the Charter to take a decision. The Governor was going to inform the authorities, he said, that the Government was fulfilling and would fulfill its commitment that by January 5 the 75 families now residing on the land to be occupied by the Navy on Vieque would be moved by that date. Mr. Plftero understands that 10 or 12 houses have already been built for these families on the property acquired for that purpose near the town of Isabel Segunda. The Governor expressed that it is possible that, due to the fact that they will be in the safety zone of the target practice, the pineapple plantations of the Compaflia Agricola planted on the land that this agency will return to the Navy in Vieques will remain in the same place; that is, while the product of the plantations can be harvested. In response to a reporter's question, the Governor again referred to the veterans' housing construction program. "When the announcement was made that the houses were going to be built, it was because they were going to be built. IF they could not have been done under Title Six of the National Homes Act, they would have been done under Title Two, which is permanent* in nature and for which no new legislation is needed." The new Office d* Transportation will begin its functions by assuming first the control of the passenger cars of the Emergency War Program, as reported by the Executive's Jote. The plan for the regulation of the use of the ot!. cial automobiles will continue to be implemented little by little, as far as the passenger cars of the other agencies and departments are concerned, as the necessary facilities are developed. Subsequently, the control will be extended to the camloi-is. The Governor, confirming a*> news item in EL MUNDO, stated that it will not be until June 30 that the Transportation Office will have its own premises. On that date it will be able to use the building "in the possession of the Army, located on University grounds. Rector Benitez has told the Governor that he has no objection to the transfer of these facilities to the Bureau of Transportation, where a permanent garage building will be constructed. The new system, said o! "eftor Plftero, has the scope do stable, cor a esptoie of cab service for lo# departments and agen, das, which shall annually budget the par.(Continued on p. M)