THE M&NDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy with scattered showers. IN HAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temp. 88; minimum, 76. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 80.00 inches of mercury.
40 pages 5/
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII Entered as second class matter, Y T 111 Post Office, fian Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JUNE 28, 1947
Mr. motorist, don't try that harrow, someone else will kill you with it.
NUMBER 10990
Pinero extends call to Legislature
Proclamation of enlargement - includes fifteen new matters for this session " Coffee promotion; use - Government cars Request funds for the ■"vorational or technical instruction of veterans To include, among others, matters relating to the regulation of the use of Government automobiles and the promotion and reha- " bilization of the coffee industry, the Governor yesterday issued a proclamation, enlarging the original call for a special session of the Legislature. The proclamation of extension includes fifteen new matters and states that they are of "importance to the public interest and require action in this special session. The new matters are as follows: "To provide academic education and vocational or technical training to veterans of the armed forces and to allocate funds for such purposes; to establish the Rio Piedras Property Registry; to authorize and direct the Commissioner of the Interior to acquire, restore, and conserve historic documents and sites of Puerto Rico, and to allocate funds for such purpose; to authorize the Commissioner of Health to provide employment, under certain circumstances, to persons suffering from tuberculosis declared as "detained". To amend Section 13 of the "Health Service Reorganization Act," as amended by Act 156 approved on May 10, 1945, providing the manner in which the regulations adopted by the Commissioner of Health shall be published. - To add subsection (b) to Section 3 of the Automobile and Transit Act, Act No. 279 approved on June 5, 1940, providing that the Commissioner of the Interior shall not register or authorize the transfer or renewal of licenses to motor vehicles with a capacity of more than ten passengers without the Public Service Commission accrediting that the applicant has complied with the requirements demanded by said agency. To regulate the acquisition, use and maintenance of automobiles and other motor vehicles belonging to the Insular Government, and to authorize the adoption of rules and regulations for such purposes. To repeal Section 6 of Lev. 33 approved on November 21, 1941, and to provide that Jos balances as of July 1, 1947, of appropriations made to the Institute of Tropical Agriculture by virtue of certain laws be transferred to the item for "Conservation and Repair of Public Buildings, Public Schools and Lands pertaining thereto, including Postponed Repairs," assigned to the Department of the Interior, for the fiscal year 1947-48. - To regulate the Granting of Permits by the Attorney General * to inmates in Penal Institutions to visit their homes. To amend Section 137 of the Insurance Act, Act No. 66 of July 16, 1921, as subsequently amended, authorizing the acceptance of bonds of the United States of America when bonds of the People of Puerto Rico or in which the good faith of the People of Puerto Rico has been pledged, To authorize the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rico Insurance Authority, as subsequently amended, to accept bonds of the United States of America when the good faith of the People of Puerto Rico has been pledged, To authorize the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rico Insurance Authority, as subsequently amended, to accept bonds of the United States of America when the good faith of the People of Puerto Rico has been pledged.To authorize the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority to regulate, with the approval of the Governor, the operation of airports in Puerto Rico, as well as to adopt, with the approval of the Governor, rules and regulations related to the conduct of persons at airports or in places where any aircraft is located or operated in Puerto Rico. To amend Section 46 of the "Act establishing a system of local government for the municipalities of Puerto Rico", approved in April 1928, as amended (continued on page 14).
Píflero extends the call for a session of the Legislature. > - - - - The -lunfa of Comlalonado" of the Capital approved a budget of approximately S2,543,(H)ó for the next fiscal abo. ♦ * " * Yesterday the work at the port of Jobos was resumed by order of the Guayama District Court. * * * Resolved the problem of representation in the UPR. * * * - Barceloneta Municipal Assembly censures the In- _ - sular Government for the exclusion of ase town in aslgnaclonM. __ te* They are working on determining the site for new schools. eoe They will start first the works for - fixing the Buchanan and Roosevelt roads. I ♦ * ♦ Navy to accept* with pleasure Puerto Ricans, says fiacre- - " Interim Acting Acting Acting Act Sullivan. ♦ me - Truman signed into law more home facilities for veterans. - - - Rules for teachers' scholarships reported. - - - Supreme Court annuls decree I, ~ of wages for the Confectionery Industry. that 8nyder suggests so see charges.
Compendium of News
against the mayors* in the" District Courts. ♦ * * * Five game" will be held this afternoon in the continuation d<V class dnble A amateur baseball championship. The tomen continues tomorrow with game" at 11 I "la parks. .♦ * * Olmo nn dló dló hit in four innings, lowering average to .327 in Veracruz's loss to Tampico, 1-0. ' * * * * Jorge J. Jiménez appointed new ComiRlnnado de lo Interior. - " e The Junta de Gobierno del Servicio de Acueducto" approved a gaatoa preaupueato of 11,444,661.92 for 1947-48. "The Insular Senate approved another liquor Ina project: and more educational facilities for veterans. * The Marahall Plan is being discussed in secret session by Ministers of Russia, England and France. - ( - - - - - - Control over rice expires next Monday. ♦ ♦ ♦ - Grounds Committee studies whether to amend hill of reforms to allow President to continue appointing Supreme Court Justices.
। Molotov goes to Paris for conferences.
i I I - & M 1 ■ w ■■ I J ■o luí " I fe i - i 1 I I I I I । i I ' ! - V. M. Molntov (right), Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Soviet, , leaves the LeBourgat aerodrome in Paris, accompanied by Georges Bi- । dault, Minister of Foreign Affairs of France (left, front), and Alexander E. Bogomolov (center, with glasses), Soviet Minister in France. Mnlotov flew in to confer with the French and British ministers on the U.S. program to aid Europe. (Associated Press photo)
■ Snyder suggests District Courts hear cases against mayors Advocated amendment to Municipal Law by present Legislature." He made a suggestion at the hearing of an appeal against the exoneration of Mayor Barreto By CARLOS REOHANI AGRAIT EL MUNDO Staff Writer.
The suggestion that the Municipal Law be amended, in the sense that when charges are brought against a mayor they should be heard before a District Court, was expressed yesterday from the bench by Justice A, Cecil Snyder, of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, during the hearing of the appeal against the decision of the Mayagüez Municipal Assembly.
nicipal Assembly of Mayagüez, exonerating the Mayor of said town, Manuel A. Rarreto, filed by prosecutors José C. Aponte and Guillermo Gil Rivera, on behalf of the Governor of Puerto Rico, who formulated charges against the referred municipal executive. Prosecutor Aponte was arguing "the intolerable situation we are facing" when he mentioned the way in which these charges were being heard before the Mayagüez Municipal Assembly when he was interrupted by Judge Snyder, who asked: "Couldn't advantage be taken now that the Legislature is in session to amend the Municipal Law in the sense that it is before a District Court and not before a Municipal Assembly that charges made against a mayor are ventilated?" Prosecutor Aponte responded that a bill to that effect had been filed in the last ordinary session of the Legislature, but it did not receive the favorable consideration of the legislators. Aponte's argumentation of his appeal was sometimes interrupted by the judges of the Court. At one time, Associate Judge Todd asked if the hearing of the charges against Mayor Rearteto was to be considered because of the manner in which the case was heard. In one sentence, Associate Judge Todd asked the Court to order the Mayagüez Municipal Assembly to enter fully into the hearing of the charges against Mayor Rarreto because of the way in which the case was developing, prior to the 1948 elections, to which Prosecutor Aponte responded that it was his desire and his hope and that is why he was going before the Court so that when ruling on this appeal, it would order the Mayagüez Municipal Assembly to enter fully into the hearing of the charges, so that the people of Mayagüez and the assembly members and everyone in the world could see the evidence he had to prove that "Mayor Rarreto received more than $800 from money he obtained by illegally leasing the public plaza and street" of Mayagüez in , (Continued on page 18).
i Work resumed at the port of Jobos --_L _ This occurred under the protection of an order issued by the Guayama court. By means of an injunction order issued by the Guayama District Court, the sugar loading work at the port of Tobos, which had been paralyzed on Tuesday, was resumed when Local Union No. 63, affiliated to the Sugar Union, went on strike. The order was issued by the court of Guayama, presided over by Judge Angel D. Marchand Paz, at the request of the Central Aguirre, which appealed to the court with a request for Injunction, addressed to the Sindicato Azu. i carero, to 1a Local Union No. 63 de Johns, to Johns, at the request of the Central Aguirre, which appealed to the court with a request for Injunction, addressed to the Sindicato Azu. i carero, to 1a Local Union! No. 63 of Johns, to Messrs. Pedro Vega BeI rrios, Armando Rlvero and José Cara, president and general secretary of the Union and president of the aforementioned local, respectively, in the name of "Imnedlr that the defendants, their members, the Local Union । No. 63 or any other person, 1 ! acting *in their name or on their behalf, continue to deprive Ja , Central Aguirre of the free enjoyment and enjoyment of its property, and particularly of the wharf". h According to this newspaper yesterday,! the workers employed by 1a Central । Aguirre in the work of transport- ( taclón of sacks of sugar from said ( ingenio to the wharf, speak- । do declared a strike when on Tuesday arrived , at> port of Jobos the steamer Daniel । HUI to take on a cargo of sugar. The workers demanded that the Jobos port workers participate in the loading of the steamship on board. When the workers went on strike, the Central Aguirre sent a letter on Wednesday to the leaders of the Union and of the union on strike giving them a deadline until Thursday at seven o'clock in the morning to return to work, or else declare the agreement null and void. On Thursday, the workers did not return to work, and the aforementioned Central Court declared the agreement null and void while a group of workers remained on the Jobos wharf and on the land near the wharf and in the area around the wharf, and within the area of the union, and the union's premises.
Ministers of France, England and Russia are considering in secret session I General Marshall's plan.
Navy accepts Puerto Ricans, says Sullivan Says he will welcome them as he has always done Entry would be on the mainland Explains to Fernós that only there are bases for recruiting For Charle" R. McCahe United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, June 27 (PU)- Acting Secretary of the Navy, John L. Sullivan, said today that he would welcome the Puerto Ricans as he has always done. John L. Sullivan, said today that the Navy will welcome all Puerto Ricans who wish to enter, but at the same time made it clear that under the prevailing conditions, Puerto Ricans will have to move to the United States in order to enter. This statement was made by Mr. Sullivan in a letter addressed to the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico, Dr. Antonio Fernós Tsern, in response to another letter he sent him inquiring why Puerto Ricans were not accepted in the Navy. Sullivan says in his letter that at this moment the Navy is reviewing its recruiting standards in order to decide if it should expand the physical scope of its recruiting service. "If this is decided in the affirmative, I assure you that Puerto Rico will receive immediate consideration," reads the letter received by Fernós, "In the meantime," he adds, "we will continue to welcome all Puerto Ricans who present themselves at the recruiting stations already established. Sullivan acknowledges in his letter Fernós' interest in the entry of Puerto Ricans" into the Marines. He adds that he is pleased to have had the opportunity to correct the impression of the Resident Commissioner that "Puerto Ricans" cannot enlist and that this is by no means the case. "On the contrary," Sullivan says, "Puerto Ricans are welcome under the same physical, moral and mental requirements applicable to all Merlican citizens. The Acting Chief of the Department of the Navy explains that those who [ apply to join the Navy, coming from civilian life, have to make their presence known at the" naval recruiting stationex. He adds that at present such stations are located within the continental limits. "This means," he says, "that applicants" residing in Puerto Rico, Alaska, the Virgin Islands and the Canal Zone must come to the mainland to enlist. The geographical location of these stations has been governed by the needs of the service, the major population centers and the rigid demands of economics. Puerto Ricans who currently belong to the U.S. Navy have gained their entry through recruiting stations on the mainland. The" efforts of the Commissioner Rexldentr, Dr. Antonio Fernós 1 1 "ern, were aimed at getting the Navy to establish a recruiting station in Puerto Rico, so as to facilitate the entry of hundreds of Puerto Ricans" who are desirous of joining.
The Board of Commissioners" of the Capital approved last night the spending budget" for the fiscal year 1947-48, submitted by the Administrator of the Government of San Juan, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier, amounting to approximately $2,543,000, The model budget submitted by Mrs. Rincón de Gaijtler was accepted by the Board of Commissioners with slight amendments, constituting increases in the salary" of some employees" who in the first place will be in charge of the construction of roads and the construction of a new station in Puerto Rico.
The first work to begin on the Buchanan and Roosevelt road repair will be to
Among the first work projects to be started by the Department of the Interior after the first of next July, are "the reconditioning of the piece of road from the present weighbridge to Camp Buchanan, and the new road that will connect from the Roosevelt neighborhood, in Hato Rey, to Insular Road number two, in the vicinity of the aforementioned camp. All the studies, plans and educations of these two works have already been completed. Also
Both projects have also been approved by the Federal Public Works Administration, which will make an economic contribution to carry out these two works. The reconstruction of the stretch of road from the weighbridge to Camp Buchanan is expected to significantly improve traffic conditions in that area. This road will be divided in its center, in the same way as the rest of the road that leads to Bayamón, in order to distribute the traffic in that area.
The new Commissioner of the Interior was born on The new Commissioner of the Interior was born on October 4, 11908, in the city of Rio Piedra", son of the late gentleman Don Juan ,1. Jiménez, Superintendent of Public Works, Insular, and doña Mils ' TZpez Nussa. He obtained a Bachelor of Science degree in Civil Engineering at the University of Michigan; he was assistant engineer of the aqueduct dam of the Government of. I" Capital, from January to June 1934, and Installation Engineer of the aqueduct in San Juan, from June 1934 to August 1935; Chief Engineer of the San Juan Aqueduct Bureau, from August 1935 to June 1936; Construction Engineer of the Engineering Division of the PRRA, from July 1936 to September 1939. Jiménez was the son of the late Mr. Ramón Valeriano López, founder of the newspaper La Correspondencia de Puerto Rico. Jorge J. Jiménez was serving as assistant state director of the Opera¡clone Division of the WPA when he was sent to serve in the U.S. Army in 1940, where he served for a term of five years and four months. He was transferred to the United States, to study at 1" I , Quartermaster School, and from there he transferred to study" at the U.S.A. (Continued on page 18).
When the aforesaid Committee, meeting in executive session yesterday, failed to report the bill, the chairman of the Subcommittee on Territories, Senator Guy C. Cordon, Republican, of Oregon. Cordon, R-Oregon, told reporters that more information was needed regarding the possible effects of a locally appointed Supreme Court on the island judicial system. While Senator Cordon would not disclose the details of the controversy, it is believed in office circles to have resulted from a move to amend the House-passed bill. The Crawford bill, as it is known, as passed after amendment by the House, would allow the Governor to appoint Supreme Court justices. Some members of the Senate Committee prefer to retain that power, without giving it to the insular Administration, it was learned today. Those" members would have the Puerto Rico Supreme Court appointed by the President of the United States" subject to Senate confirmation, which is the current procedure. Senator Cordon said he intended to consult with the Department of the Interior before taking any action on the bill. An official of that department said, however, that this agency had not yet discussed the new question.
Approved a budget of $2,543,000 for the Capital, $914,139 for welfare and $470,100 for cleaning." Several positions are eliminated and others are created in different agencies.
o The approved budget allocates $914,139, which is equivalent to 36% of the total budget, to municipal charitable services. The amount allocated for public cleaning of $470, or $100; for administrative expenses of $312,318.25; public roads and plaza - $132,162.00; public utilities - $38,930; construction and improvements - permanent - $264,005.82; and municipal debt - $348,601.26. The budget for the fiscal year 1947-48 is $190,298 more than the previous budget, with the estimated revenue for that year being $2,538,896. The new budget will allow the completion of several public works, such as the reconstruction of streets, and it is expected to be able to complete 3,070 meters of complete pavements at a total cost of $76,750. Among these works is the construction of 1.4 kilometers of concrete streets in the center of the city of San Juan. Juan. As to public cleanliness, the i approved budget will make possible i an increase in the number of vei hlculoa . assigned to the collection of ♦ garbage, from 20 at present to 31. The amount has been allocated (Continued on page 24).
i Engineer Jorge J. Jimenez is the new Commissioner of the Interior. He had been serving as director of the Irrigation Service in Isabela. - He crossed the Rhine with General Patton. -Engineer Jorge J. Jimenez was appointed yesterday by the Governor to the post of Commissioner of the Interior of Puerto Rico. Up to this time, Mr. Jimenez assumed the direction of the service.
Jorge J. Jiménez is in the uniform of a colonel.
Appointments of Supreme Court Justices would be made by the President as at present. - Difference with House would delay bill - By JEAN VAN VAN VRANRKN International News Service Correspondent"
WASHINGTON, June 27 - (INS). - Senate action on the elective governor's bill for Puerto Rico was again delayed today as the Public Lands Committee of that body considered a possible amendment to retain the federal appointment of Supreme Court justices.
Protest Barceloneta exclusion No 1p allocated fund by ohrRfi. -By Juan MARTINEZ CHAPEL Editor of EL MUNDO Deep displeasure has been expressed by the public administrators and political directors of Barceloneta, for what they describe as "inexcusable neglect of the people, the Legislative Assembly and the Government of Puerto Rico". During the last legislative session, they express, sa approved lave" to carry out nhra" publica", that he. naflciarán to the municipalities of all the reglones; and Jos only" forgotten towns were Cataño and Barceloneta. The administrators of Barceloneta, according to what they have manifested, raised "a protest" for the forgetfulness of the leadership of the Popular Party, to Governor Piflaro and the presidents of the legislative chambers. A resolution was approved by the Municipal Assembly of Barceloneta on March 19 of this year, requesting the Governor to include in his message calling for an extraordinary meeting of the Legislature, the recommendation to invest $200,000 in public works in the municipality. In that resolution "e said: "During the last" year", the municipality of Barceloneta, without any representation, has been the victim of a total neglect by our Legislative Assembly, while in the" town" "we note the continuous pace of the progress, which comes d" insular aid, and legislative attention, in contrast to the sad abandonment and stagnation that "e warns in Barceloneta, notwithstanding the efforts and sacrifice" made" by the Municipal Administration." "That neglect on the part of lo "I ¡legislators, has created a deep malaise in local public opinion, I qu" is gradually translat-(Continued on Page 18) MORE HOUSING FACILITIES TO VETERANS Ia American Legion In- ' formed yesterday habéraraele notifi- I cated by the na- 1 clonal organization, the signing by President Truman of a bill 1 authorizing another $885,500,000 for the temporary recon- < version of the veterans' home facilities. This sum will be devoted * to the recon- verdation of Army and Navy quar- f teles * into housing for use l by veterans, and veterans c students. '
Supreme Court annuls decree No. 9 of the J.I.S.M. Decides that this agency does not have an absolute power to issue it Covers bread and cookie industry Court's objection relates to different wages per zone The power granted to the Minimum Wage Board to issue and promulgate decrees fixing minimum wages is not an absolute power, resolved yesterday the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, when it annulled decree number 9 of said Board. The opinion in this case was written by Chief Justice Martin Travieso. Decree number nine is the one that sets the "minimum wage", "maximum hour" of work, and working conditions for the bread, cookie, pastry and flour dough industry, which was promulgated on May 5, 1946 and became effective on July 5 of the same year. The appeal was brought before the Supreme Court by the Sunland Biscuit Company Inc. alleging that the decree, as "proved and put into effect, creating two distinct zones", created unfair competition to the industry. And the Court's opinion in this regard states: The appellant is right. The Minimum Wage Board is empowered by law to divide the Island into zones" and to "establish the minimum wage in each one of them", "provided that such action does not grant an advantage of competition to one or the other zone". (Act No. 8 of 1941, as amended). It is obvious that by fixing a higher minimum wage for one zone than for another, as far as the "cookie manufacturing industry" is concerned, a competitive advantage is being granted. It is true that the cost of living in the first zone is higher than in the second zone and that there are fewer facilities in the second zone.and that in the latter there are fewer sales facilities, but it is also true that if a higher wage rate is fixed for the former than for the latter, without protecting the former against such disadvantage, this would be tantamount to creating unfair competition, since those manufacturers whose industries are located in that zone where the wage rate is lower can sell their product at a lower price than those manufacturers whose industries are located in the zone where the high wage rate prevails. "The power granted to the board to issue and promulgate decrees fixing minimum wages is not an absolute power. It has its" limitations. And one of those limitations is that of not granting competitive advantages to one zone, to the detriment of the other zones. In the instant case, the respondent board has not acted within the law, since by promulgating Decree No. 9, supra, it has created a situation in which it has created a situation in which it is not in accordance with the law. 9, supra, has created a disadvantageous situation for those established in the second zone. The granting of competitive advantages to one zone "over another, *" contrary to, and could destroy the main purpose of, the law, which is to raise the standard of living of the workers in the first zone, by granting higher minimum wages than those in the second zone; and could increase unemployment in the first zone, if by reason of the competition the factories in the first zone were forced" to withdraw from business or to transfer "their factories" to the second zone. "We have been able to appreciate that the (Continued on page 24)
The Department of Instruction of Puerto Rico shall grant a limited number of scholarships," in meritorious cases, to teachers of the various categories in active service, to pursue studies or take courses for professional or technical improvement in the field of teaching. These scholarships shall be granted by the Commissioner of Instruction of Puerto Rico, in accordance with the powers conferred by Act No. 61, approved on May 7, 1947. The amount of the scholarship, which shall not exceed $2,000 per year, may be applied indistinctly to the payment of tuition, lodging, subsistence or transportation expenses, or any other similar expense related to the course to be followed in each case. This scholarship plan constitutes an important phase of the professional advancement program for the teaching, technical, and managerial personnel of the Public Instruction Department sponsored by the Department of Instruction of Puerto Rico, in an effort to increase the educational performance of the school. Within the (Continued "n 1" page 24)
Molotov believed to want to know if U. S. will try to weaken Russian grip French Cabinet adopted program Greatest fear is that Soviet will try to stir up political trouble By Joseph W. Grigg, Jr. United Press Correspondent PARIS, June 27. - The foreign ministers of France, Great Britain and Russia opened today the momentous conference on the Marshall Plan for the reconstruction of Europe and immediately stamped their deliberations with the most extraordinary secrecy. In the talks, which may last a week, Russia will be called upon to decide whether to take part in the U.S. Secretary of State's plan, or to widen the dangerous gulf which now separates Western Europe from Eastern Europe. At the time of the meeting, "e announced that not a word of "u" deliheraclone "e" would reach the world "í it" could avilarlo. France "e vló forced to hastily cancel a conference da Prenaa who spoke convened for deapué" da session. The Minister of Foreign Affairs of France. Georges Bldault, the British Foreign Secretary, Ernest Bavin, and the Russian Foreign Minister, Viveslav Molotov, met for four hours and 45 minutes - from 4:15 to 8 p.m. - in the conference room of the Foreign Ministry. It is understood that Bldault, the blunt host, opened the session with statements of a general nature, that Revin and Molotov expressed their views and that the three began work on the preparation of a program to serve as a basis for the conference. The" comment" was made to the effect that Molotov would "aher Immodlntamenta" and in a definite way, the United" State "will have to impose conditions" on the "credit" it grants, in a way that could weaken the grip of Ru'ai" on its eastern "satellites". It is believed that Bevln was the one who "uglrlled the reserve side. At previous meetings of the same nature, he had complained that the delegates could not speak frankly in private. But the secrecy camp was quickly interpreted as a tacit admission of the difficulties-which many diplomats consider insurmountable-in getting Russia to participate in a general plan for the rehabilitation of Europe. It is a known fact that Britain and France are determined to go ahead with the Marshall Flan, even if Russia and the Eastern European countries decide not to go along with it." But no one wants to look into the future to predict when the East and West will be fatally divided. The French cabinet "met this morning, under the chairmanship of Ramadler, and unanimously approved a program of frank policy" which Bidault outlined. It is understood that Bidault and Bevln will do everything possible to get Molotov to continue to participate in the talks on a purely economic basis. The fear is that Molotov will "stir up the big political problems," especially those related to Germany and the Truman Doctrine, and insist on injecting them into the dellheractons. On the same subject Leon Pearson, correspondent of the International News Service" in Parla, writes: The British, French and Soviet foreign ministers, with the United States remaining for the first time on the sidelines as an observer, "met this afternoon at the headquarters of General George C. Marahall, the first time that the United States has been on the sidelines as an observer, and the first time that the United States has been on the sidelines as an observer. Marahall, fiecratarto of State da Entadna Unldoa, whose plan "obre rehabilitation e". ropea a "tendo alendo being considered by loa minister" Bavin, Molotov and Bk dault