THE NINE DO
SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: Low temp. M : minimum, 18. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 W' i"® no ,ndk, °* tropical disturbance whatsoever.
38 Pages 5*
DIAKIO Dt LA MARANA
YEAR XXVIII
í'"í er^ M ?' else* matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1947
NUMBER 11011
Arrival of plane crash victims prompted dramatic scenes at Is la Grande
Five injured still remain in Miami
A specially equipped plane is needed to bring them to the island Government will pay expenses incurred Survivor describes the disaster. Nurse Accompanied Injured By GALVEZ *MATURAN A EL MUNDO Staff Writer Emotional scenes and moments of great nervous tension occurred yesterday at the Isla Grande airport, when moments after the landing of the plane NC79033, of the Porto Rico Airways, which was carrying the bodies of the victims of the Melbourne disaster, was sighted - the Virgin Islands Air Service NC 1075, carrying people who were injured in the accident. At 10:40 a.m. -- a ' d " d -> "vWn carrying Em* " Maldonado, Alejandro Quiflone" Lola Quiñón"", wife of Alejandro Casiano Loronso, the nlAo José Rodrl tusa and n father, José R. Rodrigue" Immediately they lined up in front of the PAWA building with the ambulances, with as many of them, Dr. Victor Cueurella, Director of the Fajardo District Hospital, and Dr. Roberto Jimenez Lopez, Director of the Capital's Hospitals. Afterwards, the Acting Governor of Puerto Rico, Dr. Juan A. Pon", was at the point where the plane was to land. - l F^' rt. tarln of the Governor, Zeftm Emilio Lópes Ramiros and the chief of the Insular Police; Colonel Salvador Rnig A cordon of policemen prevented the employees of the PAWA, journalists and photographers of the Press, from approaching me from a prudential distance, which would allow the free coming and going of doctors, nurses, stretchers and ambulances. At 10:48 a.m., the plane, piloted by Captain E. Dolaingor, was launched and immediately took on board the Governor Pono, the Secretary, Soflor Lopez Ramiros, and Colonel Salvador Roig, who remained on board until the last of the wounded was taken out. The first wounded man to come down was José R. Rodrigues, from Maya¡idos, accompanied by his little son, José Rodrigues Jr. Extremely moved and reflecting on his face the pain of the tragedy he had experienced, he only uttered a few words, among which could only be distinguished:.... I lost my wife and a son...! Seven words that brought tears to the eyes of the nurses who were attending the landing and that made the mature and seasoned in the struggles of life see his face. 1 In the population of Melbourne they speak left his wife Ana Rodrl-' guss and his small Infante, Ivan Jose. Immediately off the plane, held in the arms of Dr. Cueurella, was Mrs. Emerita Crus, who suffered severe burns on both legs. She was unable to articulate words, and covered her tear-stained face with a handkerchief. The third person to get off the plane was Doto E. Dolaingor, who was carrying his plane's fuel for his trip to Miami. The following are the or torms. "oAorltas America Gonzalez, Marta (Continued on page 13)
Compendium of News
Today the burial of the victims of the air disaster will take place, whose arrival yesterday at the airport of 1 Lela Grande, produced dramatic events. The Government has already set up a fund to pay for expenses incurred. Traman vetoed a bill to reduce the Income Tax; the House passed it immediately over a proeidonclal veto. The House of Representatives yesterday discussed in the House of Representatives the Injuetion requested by the Container against the Labor Relations Board. Labor. O tuning ae will discuss oobro ol ET for teachers provision"- . Horn and aorapañero" Nazis transferred to prison do Spandau deoda Nuremberg". University rootoing" ol number of credits to be taken outside. More carao do tifoidea have emerged in Arecibo during July. ■- will fly today loo secretea do Uneohi guarded" during M - eo of bill do su- . ■ % ♦
House Committee approved appropriation for foreign aid. 0 0 0 The sugar quota system will be imposed, according to federal Agriculture spokesman, late in 1MÍ, or in 1M8. - There is vacancy" for Annapolis nominees and White House withdrew Villaronga's nomination. He had already passed linguistic plans. He will announce his "arta do resignation, -- - - 4 Royall succeeds Pattereon, who resigned as Chief of the War Department. too Rúala Insists on the deetruoolon of atomic bombs. American delegate accused Gromyko of misrepresenting reality. - o o The Army resumes recruitment of colored men. e " e Russia will attack "d Marshall Plan within the United Nations. o - * - * Rudolf Hess and other Nazi leaders are transferred from prison. - o - Appeal dsl Audltor Cordero to be issued on Monday. i w
WIHIr.WBllw b UK rlHMK'"r i - - - \ w BBÍtoL; r ■ AMÉ ■ w ■ . B jfl vHB j B hmK B JUB qRb ¿ÍB pr ■ B f? BiB ■ '*"■I ■ | ff ■ Ib i*- r I U -* w If i . í> * iM : - ■ Sj' B/'B B B V vX' -m "*'' - IM J B B w JE , mw-í Kf- ¿ 9 r ■ - ' >í ¿ HÍ|ÍCl?\"'í ■ ; 1 tí ■ b 7 KdB Bf/jB ■" H iLg| H i " w ■ ""*" d * the victims on the page!. (FotogXf?.. from EL MUNDOpo? M¡? "7 " W> ** * *"■ d " >-
White House withdrew d* Villaronga's nomination for Instruction | Pedagogue had already passed language standard plans. - He will release resignation letter as soon as he is officially notified of action President Truman yesterday withdrew the appointment he extended fraíJÍAÍpoMi * r ft " r ar B. no V1,laron ""' p °™ Commissioner of Public Instrunión of Puerto Rico. United Press reports that Casa Blanca withdrew the designation without comment.
More cases of typhoid in Arecibo area Five have appeared in July. Doctor says typhoid is endemic Dr. José ÁTHernández. of the Department of Health's Department of Epidemiology, reported that during the month of July there have been five new cases of typhoid in Arecibo, but that the possibility of an epidemic outbreak has been reduced, due to the measure implemented by the Department in the poor neighborhood of Arecibo, "Typhoid is endemic in Arecibo," said Dr. Hernandez. In response to a question we asked him, Dr. Hernandez said that the Department has not received any request from another municipality to initiate a cleaning and sanitation campaign, similar to the one being carried out in Arecibo. Dr. Hernándea added that Arecibo is a unique case, and that the occurrence of several cases of typhoid there, led the Department's officials to discover the conditions prevailing in the neighborhood. Referring to the United Prenaa Information published by EL (Continued on pg. 22)
Rovall Succeeds Patterson in Cabinet Change in War Department Headship Announced Yesterday By William F. McMenamln WASHINGTON, July 18 (PU) - The White House announced today the resignation of Secretary of War Robert P. Patteraon. Robert P. Patteraon. and said that aubeecretary Kenneth C. Royall has been appointed to replace him. The Secretary of War, Robert P. Patteraon, who according to indications is to fill the first vacancy occurring in the U.S. Supreme Court, has just resigned today, and President Truman immediately appointed the Assistant Secretary, Kenneth C. Royall, to replace him. Patteraon, who had asked that his resignation take effect July 24, said in a letter to President Truman that he did not want to resign before the unification of the Army and Navy was a fact, since he had done "everything in my power to encourage the unity of the armed forces. The legislation to unify the" do" aervlcloa approved by ol Sena(Continued on p. 22)
The Senate upheld T ruman's veto of the Income Tax bill, but the House had earlier reversed the President's decision. - Millikin made a scathing attack on President Truman By Ronald G. Van Tino E ". dM today killed the Republican tax reduction bill Truman n \ r Ta'". wzunda time the President's veto * Pf T* : das * d ® loglsloclón." detpuéi that the House spoke it overturned by 27 vote" mé" of the" do" terrera""
Questioned yesterday, Mr. Villa* P ?P ,M JV® dU * *"P "r*ba official notification of such action, to authorize the publication of the letter he sent to the President, in June. Informing him of his desire to retire from the Department of Instruction at the earliest possible date. He further stated that it would now be up to his successor to determine the language policy to be followed in the schools of Puerto Rico. At the head of the Department of Instruction will remain the Deputy Commissioner, Mr. Francisco Collazo, as Acting Commissioner, while the President appoints his successor, Mr. Mariano Villaronga. As is known, the latter had been on a 15-day leave of absence for a week. In the course of his term as Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Villaronga, among other things, drew up his plans and set up the organization for his program of teaching in Spanish and Intensification of teaching.
i i" । - - - --. ■ .c. i Sugar quota plan to be reimposed This would occur, according to James Marshall, late in the course of 1948 By CHARLES R. McCABE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, July 18. (PU)James H. Marshall, head of the Sugar See- , clone of the U.S. Department . of Agriculture, said today that the sugar quota system would likely j be reimposed late in 1948 or sometime in 1949. He made this revelation during I testimony given before the House Appropriations Committee which is considering a supplemental appropriation bill for 1948. His testimony, given earlier this month in a secret session, was made public today. Marshall told the committee that the proposed Sugar Act of 1947, approved by the Senate Finance Committee yesterday, "is intended to take care of anticipated surpluses, conditions which will arise possibly late next year; or perhaps the year after. He said the proposed bill "does not in any way, however, affect the necessity of reinstating the Mitra quotas see" > , St r in continued, "only when there is sugar in abundance and the problem । is one of surplus as a result of a depression in prices rather than one of shortage such as a surplus" < Continued on p. 22).
Presidential Succession Bill Approved Speaker Republican eg now heir to premiership By JAME8~f7dONOVAN WASHINGTON, July 18. (PU)- President Truman today signed the presidential succession bill, which makes the Republican Speaker- i ¡ no of the House, in this case Jo "eph W. Martin, son, do Masaachu "ets, as au presumptive heir- ' 1 ro to the White House. Mr. Truman has requested the passage of such a measure three" times" since 1945. in order to insure that "a representative elected by the people" would become President as, in the present case, there is no vlceprealden-! The law specifically provides that the Spoafler is next in the line of succession in case of death, removal, resignation or incapacity of both", the Provost i or the Vlcepre "ldonte, to "serve. He will be succeeded in turn by the President of the Senate, now Arthur Vandenberg, R-Michigan, and then by the members of the Cabinet. Under the old law, the Secretary of State followed the Vice President in the order of succession. In requesting the first change in the line of succession in more than 84 years, Truman said that the old law allowed him to actually select his successor, since he could appoint the Secretary of State. He said that such a step was no longer democratic and favored the Speaker of the House over the President of the Senate, because it was a two-party term and, possibly, reflected the most recent public opinion. Efforts in the Senate to place the President of the Senate first in line of succession, after the Vice President, were abandoned at the request of Vandenberg, who agreed with Mr. Truman that the Speaker was more representative of the electorate. When Mr. Truman first asked that a bill of this nature be passed, he soon afterward failed to raise the (Continued on p. 33)
- ...W u uuw IPlVUrM -{necessary parties". . The Senate decision, which has given the President his second victory "over "no tax relief now against the Republican-controlled Congress, in po|Co more" than a me" tigulated the" passage" of the repeal da ,a Cd, P ara ' dad " by a vote of 299 to 108. The repeal of a veto, for the vetoed legltlaclon to become law, requires that both Houses", reject it by two" third" parts of their enrollment. In this case, although the House rejected the bill, the Senate upheld the Republican President, who, taciturn in defeat, planned to take the matter to the voters in the pre-election "teflon*" of 1948. They said that the Senate has not yet killed tax relief for the year, but possibly not until after the next campaign. "This is still the wrong kind of tax relief and this is still the wrong time to propose tax relief," Mr. Truman told Congress in a brief but sharp message that made good on his promise to pass the legislation a week ago. The President, ai the same time- . po. repeated his earlier charges that the bill was Unfair, unhealthy and Unsafe. k The" Republican Party leaders- > did not know beforehand that ettaben defeated," in the Senate; but they wound desiperado" last minute call" to join the House in enacting the pro(Continued on page 11) Colored soldiers are again being drafted WASHINGTON, jqlio IB.(FU). - The War Department reopened the draft for colored men today. It proposes thereby to stimulate enlistments, which have declined by about 385 men a day. The Congress has authorized a peacetime armed force of 1,070,000 men, but it has not been possible to fill that figure, since the Army was short by 5,000 men in June.
Russia again insisted that the atomic bombs be destroyed It accused the United States of being the only country that refuses to accept it. - Osborn maintains that Russia is misrepresenting reality in this matter.
I By ARTHUR GUNDERSON United Press Correspondent I LAKE SUCCESS. New York; July 18 (PU)-Russia made the announcement today that the United States is the only nation among the 12 members of the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission which refuses to agree that all atomic bombs will someday have to be detonated. Eatadoa Unldoa, nogándoao a roa-
He retorted that Ruala was trying to "con-, melt down the public" and to evade the eontralea quootionea of international control of atomic energy. The two great powers" clashed on the podium of the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission's Operating Committee, S ua . n l° -- d *lég*do aovietlco Andró! Gromyko attempted to record on paper a majority agreement that atomic weapons should be de-atomicized at a later date. The atomic delegates refused to vote on a formal resolution of the nuclear issue covering the point. Gromyko pointed out that the Atomic Commission, sooner or later, has to deal with the issue, but did not ask for a vote. One by one, the countries which had endorsed the proposal in debate several days ago announced for one reason or another that they could not assent to a newly proposed Soviet resolution which would provide that: 1- The proposed stable treaty on world control of atomic energy deplores the "deiononor the > (Continued on p. U) I
University restricts credit for extramural courses.
। Considering that such action greatly harms the interest of Puerto Rican teachers in improving their professional and academic preparation, the Puerto Rico Teachers Association will ask the University Administrative Board and the Rector, Mr. Jaime Benitez, to reconsider the agreement taken by said Board, lowering from 7 to 4 the maximum number of credits that teachers may take in extramural courses. T- 7-
In the management of the Aaociaeion of Maeotroa oate agreement of the Univeraltaria Board has produced an adverse reaction. The exiatenele of the mlamo and ol haborao already given the Inatruecionoa portlnentoa by the autorldadea unlveranarlas, fuá revealed yesterday to EL MUNDO, a poca aemanaa do inlclaroo the program of oatudloa extramuros that ' will begin with the new regular year unlveraltario and in which loo .loo .que ae metrleulen aon in au cea! I (Continued on page 33) I
Interim Governor and Dr. Polanco took part in the examination of the body "El Mundo" notified the relatives Olivo Pillot was affected by the sight of his brother's body Crus Roja offers help By R. Santiago Sote Editor of EL MUNDO The Government's pious efforts to bring to the island the bodies of sixteen of the Puerto Ricans who perished in the plane crash that occurred in the early hours of last Sunday morning in a swamp adjacent to the city of Melbourne, Florida, ended yesterday morning with the delivery, at the airport of Isla Grande, of the embalmed corpses to the relatives of the victims. At 9:50 a.m., the plane that brought the victims of the Melbourne air disaster from Miami landed at the Isla Grande airport. Shortly after that, the authorities of the Department of Health, under the direct supervision of the acting governor, Dr. ¿ uan A-Po"'. and the public health officer, Dr. J. Polanco González, began the painful task of inspecting the corpses and issuing the permits" of transfer to different towns of the Island, for their Christian burial, at the 11 'iuv oren claimed" by their" (amillare". The airport of lala Grande was invaded yesterday by people of all social classes, among them the close friends of the victims. The plane, which was scheduled to arrive on the island in the early hours of the morning, had to leave Miami at four o'clock in the morning, due to delays caused by regulatory formalities. Since well before four o'clock in the morning, the Governor's secretary, Mr. Emilio Lopez Ramires, had been communicating with the airplane officials to request the official departure time of the ship. At twenty-five minutes past four in the morning. ! . r by order of the Governor, requested that an urgent assembly be transmitted to Miami, requesting the official time of arrival of the plane in Puerto Rico, informing them that it would be in Isla Grande at 9:30 a.m., to be followed at 12:00 a.m. by the plane carrying the wounded. For the "Tamils" who remained for a long "hour" at the airport in an anxious wait. । the news was fortifying. The news was fortifying. The editors of EL MUNDO fulfilled their duty of informing the in- . terested", as they arrived at the airport, the time was set to expire. At Syrian time in the morning, all the relatives of those who lost their lives in the plane crash were already located by the editors of EL MUNDO. With the purpose of carrying out the transfer of the corpses to their villages of origin as quickly and conveniently as possible, Dr. José Polanco González gave pertinent instructions to the Police and to the personnel under his orders. Immediately after the arrival of the plane, it was taken to the north patio of the main hangar of the civil airport. The coffins were disembarked from the aircraft and taken to the hangar, where they were displayed for inspection by the health authorities. Dr. Jose Polanco Gonzalez, assisted by Health Inspector Victor Manuel Morales, actively participated in the procedure of recognizing the victims, as well as in the inspection of the corpses to determine their state of decomposition. The interim governor and Health Commissioner, Dr. Juan A. Poní, also remained attentive to this painful tñTí*' *helping personally in the identification of the bodies and determining their condition. The serenity of the portents closest to the victims was maintained to the limit at all times. The fourteen coffins, containing the sixteen victims, were placed inside the hangar in meticulous order as they were removed from the aircraft. Immediately after the inspection or identification of the bodies, we proceeded to issue the corresponding permits, a task that was entrusted to the Sanitary Inspectors, José García Rivera and Manuel M. Marceno. As the unavailable procedures were being completed, the Pn. liria notified the closest relatives of the victims, who, maintaining at all times a serene attitude, went to the hangar to pick up the coffins of the missing bus. With the help of the Pollela, a journalist, an airport employee and some military personnel, the coffins were placed in order in the hearses, which gradually began their march towards their destination towns. Even as the faces of the nearest turnpike driver were showing the terrible anguish caused by the death of the dead, the hearses were being carried to their destination towns, and the coffins were gradually being taken to their destination towns.
Mr. motorist, do not try to be funny, another one killed me with it.