THE KONDO
IE"""" north of the lela, late during !f maflana, and in the afternoon, IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: Max temp, Mj min, 1®: rain, o.M of in.
40 pages 5/
MORNING JOURNAL
Entered aa wwmd claa. matter. Pori Offlca, S "n Juan, P. R"
NUMBER
Revi", loa frenas. Coopere coi the Inapeoclán of automobiles.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY FEBRUARY 15, 1947
YEAR XXVIII
SAA Expects $953,000 Deficit
Cuevas submits report - Legislature to amend current law Requests Government to lend it aid Among causes of deficit he mentions open pen consumers XI director of the Water and Sewage Service, ■lo Cueva" Bu "t amante. has * all to the governor Plft.ro a Report making him "aber that the el*"* da eipera the preaente afto a deficit in the aqueduct service, Suit. . J" "¡¡"J- - lo" "tatema" of alcan l* r 2 1 " ';. n £ WW"? a m meted to the, Legislature. t*®®®*"®"* given to Jb ves amendment" tun" gives móntale" to the law that ®J'® a government agency, with m ' r ** to achieve an increase in "u" Ingre■o", Ademé", "o requests the economic aid of the Government, for eseguServed does not charge at present," -declares Mr. Cueva" Bustamante,-- for 45.2 imilloneo of meter" cubic" of wateral year, which represents 58.5 percent of the total production of 80 million. The uses of the service itself and the "imitable" losses represent 12 percent, so that 445 percent of all the water that is supposed to be at the disposal of the community, is lost* on rent" for this served, but to date, it does not produce them. The raione" for this "Ituadón, Mr. Cuevas analyzes in the following way: "Consumers at Pluma abierta consume an excess of 22.3 million cubic meters" per year. with a value of W?0,000, The "public utilities," public use "source," Bogaroo Authorities and miscellaneous, consume an excess of 13.3 btcoa, worth $590,000, which also do not enter the service. Vemoa a "t, that leave us do InSEé* aar all loo afto" a total do >1,880,000 for lack of contadora" and for excess" not charged to lo" conaumldores and to the Goblet itself no. "De cobrara" that water, loa Income" of Mía Agency would be "uficientos to cover the expenses do operation and lo" commitment" contractual" in" that is necessary Incurrir in order to complete the general plan of improvement". "The comparison between what is paid in and what should be paid in is detailed in the following table: Cubic meters delivered" per year, 70,400,000, Actual value. The loss of >1,548,600 occurs as follows: 1-Excess of con "umo over Jo paid by unmetered users, including farmhouse, $970,000, 2-Excess of con "umo over Jo paid by unmetered users, including farmhouse, $970,000, 3-Excess of con "umo over Jo paid by unmetered users, including farmhouse, $970,000.The annual cost of operation of the aqueduct systems will amount to approximately $2,450,000, IF the revenues are to be $1,514,000, it is easy to see that there will be a deficit of $938,000 only in that activity.
As for the sewerage systems, the operating cost will amount to about $250,000 while the revenue will only reach $233,000, thus causing an additional loss of $17,000. It should be made clear that once the new sewage treatment plants are installed, expenses will have to increase greatly: but it is possible that with the extension of existing and new systems, the costs can be comfortably covered by a comparison with the "water charges" in the municipalities' peak fiscal year shows that the Service (Continued on page 17)
, ■* c News Digest h - ..-A JA.BA SlHtni V Alfll fllÓ CMldO* 1
EL MUNDO inaugurated yesterday its teletypewriter airshaft, the first in Hispanic America. Notable" of Washington congratulate this newspaper and the United Press on the indicated step forward in the transmission and reception of íiotlclaa. The water service in San Santurce will be suspended at 1 p.m. on Sunday. The challenged gives the finan"" Inauiaros forces the adoption of a conservative pace in the "roBionas. Picó stresses the need to make savings to maintain service. Spanish citizen loses legal battle here for custody of daughter. ( , Additional lawsuit to railroad rompañi" raises workers' rectamarion $1AOT,OOO. J1 Auditor will send Procuor proof of payments made to Concrete Industrio. Sugar producers are submitting new control to OCA. Committee formed to start immediate cleanup campaign at main airport in U.S. airport.
| JorM® BBHWII V í ib" vwiiMV' nade yesterday to over d. year and "'''"'H® of imprisonment for an accident d. i automobile. - - - There are $00 plasas for "oldadoa in the Military Department. They would go - to serve in the Panama Canal. 11 Taft says the program of the decisive le- "talaclon will be completed before April. You decide that there is eoney- - rrencta to fulfill -¡-" t * n ® ia !. d 2 , Írislón dietadaa before" May I, 1948, in accordance with certain" clrcunstanci"". * ( A blocking movement Hurgo in the House, between re- - presenter" that "logan "er Ignored" by the" "loyalists. - - - - Deogracla" Viera So"" acquired the Quintan" racetrack in "M "4)05. KI SIA expects to have a dlflclt of $958,000. Cuevas asks Legis- । (atura amend law creating ugencta. The first shipment of *"úc "r of 1947 is expected to leave the island tomorrow. * The cegotlsta sector chaired by Colon Gordlsny says that the Government can - and should - ***¥- menta Intervene in the Coloso case,
Taft in favor of balanced economy
Outlines Lincoln Day program in speech in Charleston Advocates tax cuts Calls for Senate committee to examine labor-management relations, charlxstonTí" -In disagreement with some of his Republican Party colleagues on the issue of tax cuts and araBC ®]®* h j?Robert A. Taft, Republican, of Ohio, as speaker of the day at the 1. e.lebraclón of the natallc o "J a coin in this city, u.lined before aver a program to encourage ISi JonwS, "nlwtad,". dn the rr.adon of a Senate sp.romlté esp.¿tal to" study te" relations between employers and obreTaft P 1 ron '* * n *'"L*''?*í''' te in the MbecutadonM "oh™ presidential nomination "P" M * ca ' >na in 1948, it is expected that the Sthtdor's dlscurto wj wd® intimate study do all leaders IC Senator Taft -hú'®®** 1 ®* guiantes points in sU program 1 of the con' tributlva burden "in an amount Equal to 1 20 per cl.nto of the product d. the ' contribution on nersonal Income", or s.a, by >3,500,000,000, and ■ reduction of the budget submitted ' by the President by four or five billion Glares, spllcán' two" two or three billion a te ■ reduction of the national debt. 2- Delegation to the Commission 1 Tariff power ñ® '"P®"* 1 tariffs within "broad ' statutory limits', supplemented by agreements d. reciprocal trade ■ "if the edlclonal reductions which ■ were made, at the judo of 1* Com*- ■ slon, would not violate 1a protection which - deserves the am.r "na industry which " supplies a substantial part of ta ' American demand for the pro- ' ducto which was." In his speech, Senator Taft also "xplained that if control over rents is continued, it should be adjusted so as to provide a reasonable income to landlords for the money they have saved or invested in houses and apartments," he said. - war powers and a yud" " Sonator Taft, in his speech, ' dl "New problems of today are t more complicated than the Ptohl* i mas to .which Lincoln í and Congress faced in 1847. There are six " voices more inhabitants. The P rodu< p s s ction has increased far more than " that and s. has become infinitely > more complete. In.our desire to n rMOlve some of those Problem" to economic" and improve the biene"- । (Continued on page 15).
(Continued .on page w Republican program to be completed by April ? Includes pruning of preaupueeto, labor prdyect", limit for presidency, control, íj of sugar and loa pleltoa workers.
COLUMBUS, Ohio, 14. (PU)-E1 I Senator Robert A. Taft se- < ñaló today .1 first d. April, as a decisive day for finishing the five-point nro- । grama dsl Sensdo, ' among which is .1 bill to control unions d. tra- । under. Taft, as chairman of the Senate Labor Committee, indicated that the labor bill would be taken to the floor by March 15 and that it would include some provisions of the Case Act which was vetoed by Truman. The chairman of the Senate Labor Committee predicted that it would take about two weeks to debate this measure and the other measures in the five-point program that would be included in the bill.
The other measures contained in the five-point program to be completed by April 1 are as follows: 1.-Termination of the budget with a cut of about four and a half billion dollars from Truman's thirty-seven and a half billion dollar, recom- chartered budget, , . Consideration of the conatltuclonal amendment passed by the House, setting a two-term limitation to the pre-aldernclal period. 3r-Approval of projector dr controlea covering sugar, in: cho and other article of first *K' cesldad that a. find eaca*o" 4.-Debate aobre the project qn< covers 1a cueatlón of portal to by such. for within d. doa aemanM. Taft expressed his disagreement with the program for the reduction of the first d
Taft expressed his dissatisfaction with the program to reduce the first installment of the tax levy in July, since there is a deficit in the current fiscal deficit and because the administration is facing difficulties in reimbursing the tax levy before that date. Taft added that he favors a 20 percent cut in the tax rate, but explained that "the Contributions Committee would have to work on the full 20 percent cut, either gradually. As for the labor legislation bill, Taft said, only a few of the necessary positions "orlan aftadldaa to the Case bill. He added that he favors the creation of a committee to study employer-employee relations with a view to improving the labor-management relationship. He added that he favors the creation of a committee to study employer-employee relations with a view to introducing future laws regulating labor unions. Taft met here with his colleague, Senator John W. Brtehor, at lunchtime, and said they had not reached any agreement on the possibility of a unionization of labor and management.
WATER SERVICE TO BE SHUT OFF TOMORROW
The San Juan Aqueduct will be suspended tomorrow, Sunday, on Son Juan and Santurce, starting at one o'clock in the morning. The Service of Acua" . duelos informed that the interruption of the service will continue until the completion of the rational measariai clothes, on three valves of the mains that supply the city. Campaign for cleanliness in San Juan area Committee was organized in act summoned by the Mayoress to that effect By JO8E M. UFRET Editor of EL MUNDO Representative" of ".tonta y cinco agencia" del Gobl.rno, y ontldade" cívica" quo concurred in ta night of ju.v."The meeting convened by the Capital's Administrator, Feltaa Rincón' do Gauti.r, "entaron la" hase" to immediately initiate a campaign of popular education and cooperation with the" municipal authorities" - Iniularo", tending to convert San Juan .n a clean city compl.tamento. To this end, he appointed a committee of nine people, which includes the municipal government, the "civic entities", the Iniular Po- , lleta Iniular, the Army and the Navy. Together with "eñor Salvador Caro and ".ñora Eli "a Mora d. Gadea, prwident. and "ecr.taria, r""p.c. tivamento. do 1a campaña d. limpia , "a, >- will be in charge of developing this" । activity." and make the" ge "tloné" . pertinent", to achieve .1 end qu. . ". persecutes. Contoitando a pregunta" qu. h - , cl.ra one d. w a""tontw, .1 Dii rector d. Obra" Pública" de la Capital, señor Salvador V, Caro, ac.p- - tó as true that .1 pr. "up.u "to ■ d. $498,000 for public llmpina and 1 la" rod.nanta" .n force provided ' the" means" necessary" for* "ten- ' ción d. oto ".rviclo public, co$ ' such d. that the people would cooperate to * ameliorate the" gario" and enforce said" ordinances. ' The Governor of the Capital opened the meeting, and in stating the purpose of the meeting, stated that the Government of the Capital could not bear the burden of the Jimpim, and that the Department of the City of the Capital was not able to pay the cost of the ordinances, and that the people of the City were not able to pay the cost of the ordinances. Itepartment d. Health, .1 W a " a * amount of the Interior, the - mentó d. Inrirucdón, , to the Iniular Service d. Bomberoi, the Comldón " de Parquee, the Army and 1a Navy, - have to perform - excluilva incumbency, in J" lac * " with diitlnto" aipectoi of the labot of cleanliness in San Juan. Mrs. Rincon said that the plans to make San Juan a cleaner place would create dissatisfaction among a group of personnel, but that the high
The island's financial state forced an alteration in the rhythm of expenditures; Picó stressed the need for economies of scale.
Blockade movement arises ' in the House There is displeasure among representatives alleging that mayors ignore them They will go to the Governor Funding bills in the House are already 142 and amount to $6,000,000 í pnr J. García Calderón Reducer of EL MUNDO i i i A má" de >8,000,000 alcanzan lat .asignaciones propuestas en la le11 glslarlón presentada en la Cámara ■ d" Representantes d. Puerto Rico, >ln the first four days of the current regular session of the House of Representatives, 4 As of yesterday, the number of bills submitted reached 142 and more than 95 percent of the same amount is earmarked for the construction of public works in the two municipalities of the island. 1 Notwithstanding the Interest of the re- . presenters in benefiting the 1 municipalities comprised in their . . respective districts, the ' Association ' of Mayors of Puerto Rico is 1 preparing the corresponding studies to present its propt- ' recommendations to Governor Ja- ■ sús T. Plftero and to the presidents - of the legislative chambers on - such needs and works as are ' considered of greater urgency for the various municipal administra- ' tions." d. the Island. 1 Dtacutl.ndn .ntr. "t ant.ay.r .n ■ 1a House, vario" r.pre "entante" - 1 i" a i a lio " Hll #4 i S tX 1 ! M I H M P Í fl I ML
■ manlfMtaron "u útagusto towards the - attitude of Ir A "ociaclón i d. Alcalr de", d. dtacutlr lo" problem" d. i lo" municipality" with lo* ,W !É®L_ d ®J - Government, in ve" d. a -lio" act, with the, authority qu. t as logtaladore" have, P "** n ' . tando legislation affecting ,U A d 1uic¡o°of some *this attitude of lu Al- ;; Chaldean Association is aimed at subtracting "nfluencía representatives on the , electorate of loa municipalities. It was specifically mentioned as one of the cases in which the mayors try to neutralize the authority of the legislators, especially the members of the House of Representatives, the position of the representative for Mayagüez, Mr. Eudaldo Báez Garcia, whom the mayor of the city, Mr. Manuel A. Barreto, was reported to be the first mayor of the city, Mr. Manuel A. Barreto. Barreto, it was alleged, does not consult him about the problems that should be remedied through legislative action, preferring to deal with them through other persons not directly related to the politics of Mr. Baez Garcia's district. In order to counteract the effects of the policy developed by the Mayors Association, a movement has been initiated in the House of Representatives to not approve or to block the approval * of any legislation affecting the municipalities, which has not been presented by the representative whose district corresponds to the one whose district the measure would affect. Another aspect of the issue that was raised relates to governmental public works programs. For example, according to EL MUNDO yesterday, the Joint Plans Board has developed a program to be carried out in a * term of "ele afto". This covers i. all" the" needs of schools, ' roads, neighborhood csmlnos, hos- - l pítale", and public health units in all the municipalities of the 8 Island. :-! The House Committee on Health will meet next March and will begin to consider all those projects that have been submitted to date to the House of Representatives, and which will be submitted to the House of Representatives. There is the purpose of the .... (Continued on page 17)
A greeting from Hugh Baillie, president ofUnited Press NEW YORK. 14. (FU). ¡ - Hugh Baillia, president ¡ of United Front, sent the following message to Angel Ramos, president of THE ■ WORLD, on the occasion of the ■ inauguration of í teletypewriter service for the above-mentioned day1 no: ¡i "On the inauguration of direct teletypewriter service for THE WORLD I extend o । you and your colleagues my ¡ I cordial greetings and congratula- " gifts. This service is a milestone in the application of new forms of ' transmission or distribution of news overseas. The J WORLD is now connected to the United Press continental tronsi system and joins its communications network which serves the daily news to some 2,000 newspapers worldwide. We are proud to be associated with EL MUN- " DO in this pioneering advance.
The first sugar shipment of 1947 is being prepared for tomorrow. It is for plants which have signed the contract with the CEC.
r -- Although most of the sugar producers in Puerto Rico have not signed the provisional contract submitted by the Agricultural Credit Corporation, the first shipment of the current crop is scheduled to leave the island for New Orleans next Sunday aboard the steamship Belgium Vlctory. The shipment is estimated at over 4,000 tons. 1 It was reported yesterday by the Guerta t Shipping Administration that the "Belgium Victory" spoke i loaded at the port of Ponce some 1 1 1 wwia-||| - --J II W!" ! 1111111 I.... 111 1,-1 I
produced ha "ta yesterday. Extete all7,000 xacoa or" raw sugar produced an I" C.ntral Conatancta; and which .1 huqu. 8. moved later to the port d. Mayagüez to fear there another" cargo" of te" cantráte" Plata and Róchetela.... The next steamer to carry sugar to Éitadoa Unido" "erá the Golderf Fte.ce" that -- . "pera can carry one" 62,000 "aco". On the other hand, ay.r -- Reported that a number of producer." nabte signed .1 contract provision *1 for 1a sale of sugar. Haatn yesterday, "egón Ib notified by te CCA, lo" "IgutentM "IgutentM." sugar producers." speak accepted" lo" term" d" cited contract: Conatancla, de Pon. ce: Plata; Róchete!".... Soltar; Rio Llano; Sucesión Serra! lé"; Igualdad. Plazuela; Eureka; and de Tierra". The majority of the producers, in which are included the major producers, did not speak yesterday about the provtalonal contract, they were grinding the coffees and producing sugar that was being stored. The estimate of 100,000 teda) was made as the amount of sugar in storage (continued on page 17).
Sugar producers take < new sales contract to CCA I
L The signing of the final contract for the sale of the "*f" MUMrera. is still pending the outcome of 1a" talks which have been taking place in WáihIngton, between the representatives of the producers d. P""J t ®, the Department d. U.S. Ay.r, the Traffic Association of its representative in Wáshlngton. Mr. /Dudley Smith. Indicating that a new draft agreement has been drawn up, .1 which is being submitted to the authorities.
In the meantime, the sugar producers of Puerto Rico, in the great majority, are crowding their sugar bins, limiting the space available for production for the next few days, and are maintaining a reluctant attitude to the issue of the provisional contract] (Continued on page 18).
This newspaper inaugurated yesterday the new service of news transmitted by wireless teletype W' Twiif 1 Yesterday, at" 8:lt F. M,. was ®t Mrrido ta America hispan" for the "erviolo of a Jtari®- 1 -*", Angel Ramo"; nueatro Director, don
U.S. notables congratulate "El Mundo" and Prensa Unida It is the first service of its kind to operate in Hispanic America - Three years of laborious efforts culminate The transmission of news by radio ."Yesterday was a milestone in the history of Puerto Rican journalism, when EL MUNDO started a news service 8, v®, P "* this newspaper, in the offices" of Prensa Unida, and transmitted directly from New York, by means of wireless teletypewriters. This is the culmination of three years of work.
MSI Lavo ZT. i rious efforts made by EL ' MUNDO, to obtain a communication boiling ¡ that "amlntatraid the" news of greater interest for the Puerto Rican reader, in the fastest way poiibte. It is EL MUNDO's privilege to be the first newspaper in Hispanic America to use the teletype system for news, just as EL MUNQO was the first newspaper in the South to use radio for news. > south that used the radio for the reI Mpclón of news", system that Inaugurated ten afto" ago and that game spread to the other páK pa*" íntinoamericsnoi. Lhs excellent results obten!The excellent results obtained in this first raoepclón pur I means of the teletype, which took place yesterday in our radio room, put us in a position to give a service not only faster, but perhaps more important-"> i pcclalmente prepared to satisfy the" need."Puerto Rico, because of its political, commercial, financial and cultural connections with the United States, requires a comprehensive information service that will make its inhabitants aware of all the events and facts of the United States and the rest of the world that are of interest to the country. EL MUNDO, as of today, offers to "your" reader." .". service, with information." collected and s.lecwO-, nothing" by journalist" experts, expressly applied" to cover te"; 1 sources Informative" domestic" and i foreign, in that "" originate 1"" news" that Interest to the portorriqueños. . Before being able to inaugurate this service, tests were carried out for several months to perfect everything concerning equipment, on-i das, schedule, etc., so that it could be guaranteed, where it is possible in the wireless, a reception P"> r-,<;ta. , í. The curve of 1a tranamtaMn of r I news" to Pu.rto Rico, for pe-¡ J riódhtlcoa purposes, is a process aichd.nto d. progress. The first mensa te . received in Pu.rto Rico, p*r" te . Pr.nsa, by wireless, was in 1921, when the Inaugural message was received from then," pre , ' sld.nte Warren Gamaliel Harding, . That message was hardly le- : glbte, because of the conditions we would say .' (Continued in the s l ilrn decides that ; there is concurrence i. 1 Judge Federico Tllén, d.l Tribu- ¡ nal of the Diatrito de San Juan, has just " delivered an opinion ruling -1 qu. tas sentences handed down "n Puer. o to Rico, before d. estar en vigor ta - Law Num. 108 of May 12 d. i-i 1943 were or are complied with coni. * currentem.nt. with sentences d. i presidio, when this" sentencie" j were pronounced" after h.r". previous sentence was pronounced against .1 same defendant. s i The opinion of Judge Tllén was. eml. 1 (Continued on page 17)
Ananannouncement by the Vice-President of the United Press Sfateris of progress i of 50 words a day to Teletype crew By JOSEPH L JONES Vice-President of the United Press. - NEW YORK. 14. (P.U.)-Since .1 year 1924 I have been observing the - continuous and triumphant efforts of EL MUNDO to keep the Puerto Rican community informed of all" events of importance and interest, both local and foreign. Today EL MUNDO takes a new step forward. Since the time - twenty years ago when the speed and cost of cablegrams allowed EL MUNDO to receive only fifty words a day of news bulletins from abroad, I have seen the editors of the newspaper structure plans aimed at giving their readers more news. In this work, the United Press has had the privilege to cooperate constantly. . Ten years ago, the development of radio communications enabled EL MUNDO to greatly increase the amount of information it published from the United States and the rest of the world. This process of giving more in exchange for the data from the press continued with the improvement of communications, with the establishment of special EL MUNDO radio stations in Washington and New York. i Today EL MUNDO inaugurates a special teletypewriter circuit from New York. Erie special circuit, the only one of its kind for any (Continued on ta page 24.) Great Britain thanks for but does not accept offer WASHINGTON, 14. (INB)The First Mhitatrn of Great Britain. Clement R. Attire, communicated today to President < Truman qu. England not ptied. accept earbón qua reta . destined for another, European pairea, In his message, the Prime Minister thanks the President for the offer that hire yesterday the American Government to order that lo" navio" of earbón that re on the high seas re dlrl. Jan to England instead of to the ports of the European continent to which they were sailing. Attlee told the President that England could not ask for the shipment to be transferred because the Europeans for whom they are destined are as short of fuel as Great Britain.
Explains how the problem was foreseen Government economic program was not followed as Board outlined No censure in his words, he says Various* service programs are affected by situation Pnr r/saNTÍAGO SOSA Editor of EL MUNDO The passage of .ip.clataa laws by the last ordinary Legislature involving a .The passage of laws by the last ordinary Legislature involving a public service appropriation of five and a half million dollars, and the authorization by the special Legislature last December of an additional appropriation of a little over four million dollars to cover the salary increase for public employees, has created a difficult situation in the public finances which will undoubtedly alter the rate of appropriations maintained by the Government during the last fiscal year. The special "law" increased the expenditures recommended by the Planning Board for the operation of the departments and agencies of the Government and for the public works program, by a little more than nine and a half million dollars. The problem that this legislative action has created - motivated by the "flood" authorlMclone - is that the "background" appropriation was not included in the financial framework adopted by the Planning Board and approved by Governor Tugwell for the fiscal year. The "flood fund" not included in the financial framework adopted by the Planning Board and approved by Governor Tugwell for the current ■cal year, and will be under the direction of the Bureau of the Treasury and the Office of the Governor. Although a portion of the )ma was submitted by the Planning Board well in advance of that body's submission of the Fourth Economic Program to the Governor in late December, no specific recommendation was made by that body to the Chief Executive, leaving the final determination of the matter for further study by the Governor, the Bureau of the Budget and the legislative bodies. The continuation of high legislative appropriations" would cause a deficit in the Government's budget in the near future. Such a deficiency would be aggravated by the repetition of appropriations amounting to a nu.v. million and a half dollars contained in a number of - important." specific laws" which were not specifically recommended" by the Planning Board - "1 drafting the financial schedule for the current fiscal year. This fiscal problem is the one that currently occupies the attention of the official circuits of the Government related to public finances. The Chairman of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, did not hesitate to comment on the matter ■ he declared that this increase should not be interpreted in any way. Ina terpretars. .n .1 aentldo d. qu. hai- bria de originara, un déficit .8t. e fiscal year, ni aún al terminar "I a afto flacal próximo. - Both the Board and the Governor Plfl.ro," he said, "have emphasized that if a conservative program is not adopted by the Government, the time will come, within a year or two, when the resources will not cover the expenses. The "operating funds to which Dr. Picó referred are those for the general budget of the Government and to cover expenditures under special laws, separately from the" appropriation" for the government's public works program. -- . confronts is not that of an immediate deficit. The procedure that has been instituted in Puerto Rico in the last year of planning the public finances beyond one year does not show a clear path towards the need to avoid the occurrence of deficits in the future, or the inability to operate the permanent improvement programs that have been authorized by law, or that may be authorized by law or otherwise. The Chairman of the Planning Board also explained that a tendency to maintain the slow pace of the Government's budget "would have the effect that any surplus that might be available to be used for permanent improvements" would be absorbed by the high operating expenses, being necessary to reduce the permanent improvement program",' Dr. Picó believes that, had the Government's economic program been followed as stated, the announced "deficit" would not occur. He added that the" ob "ervaclones do ta Board contained" in .1 fourth program of the Government, in pod.r d.l >®i" a rnador PMtaro aon clear" as to 1a Indicación de qu. m recrearlo recortar ta" "rogé, clones public". "The approval of specific laws" of "ailgnacione" outside the economic program," warned Dr. Picó, "would be a (Continued on page 18) A,/