THE DAILY MORNING MONDO
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY; Partly cloudy with light showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 84; low, 76. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.98 inches of mercury. No signs of tropical disturbance.
.40.pages 5/
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1947
YEAR XXVIIK
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan. P. R.
Mr. Motorist, I did not try that grace, another one killed me with it.
NUMBER 11039
Mexico advocates plan for mutual defense of American nations.
Torres Bodet asked that it be adopted at once at Brazil Conference President Dutra opened session UN Secretary General urges to give an example of peace to the world By RICHARD DYER PETROPOLIS. Brazil, August 16 (1NS)- The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Mexico, Jaime Torres Bodet, in his speech in response to the opening of the Inter-American Conference, delivered by the President of Brazil, General Eurico Gaspar Dutta, called for the immediate adoption of a plan for the defense of the Hemisphere, because weak nations, because of their economy, cannot individually take swift and decisive action against aggression. The Mexican Foreign Minister said; I "It was also to the Brazilian land) that the American Foreign Ministers came in 1942) us, in the face of the indignation provoked-1 each by Pearl Harbor. The hatreds that the tyrants, parodying the sorcerer's apprentice of the legend, were able to unleash, but not to overcome and repress, presented an immense risk to all free men. The bullets that haunt the Chinese in China, the Greek in Greece and the United States soldier in Guadalcanar, threatened in each one of us, the cap-, dal of human pain. The declarations of Urna and Havana, endorsed in Rio de Janeiro, made us ready to proclaim that peace is not enough, because not even peace, being so pure, could be enough for those who abdicate the postulates of Justice in the face of the challenge of evil. We ex- ¡ tortured our heroes and the Hemisphere stood up. Rough years of war followed. In order to intensify the collaboration affirmed by Brazil, in 1945, the Philippines offered the continent the house in which it preserves the clearest relics - of its history." "There, among the peanuts of the millenary forest, the delegates of the American nations approved the Act of Chapultepec." Later Mr. Bodet said: "It is urgent to learn to live again. Unfortunately, countries once again feel their poverty as a stigma and their resources, when they have them, are a scarce element to render universal restoration, we need to abolish above all in man the horror of man, distrust and fear of man". Then he said: "No, because it is modern, the world in which we live is young. Burdened with centuries and conflicts, what the contemporary world needs most is the cordial ferment of youth. The gift of youth will be the best contribution of this continent to the world. We understand that the Ideal stature of this new world will never rest on aggression, but on the dignity of its resistance to aggressors." Further on he declared, "In the agreement being prepared, nothing could alter either directly or indirectly the defensive intention of the Act of Chapultepec. It is not a warlike alliance that we have come to sanction but a juridical association of free and sovereign nations in their de. slgnlos. united for the loyal defense of their territories and their de. rechos. Our republics will not use such a union to threaten' (Continued on page 24)
(Continued on page) The President of the United States, Dr. Cordero, was originally appointed by the President of the United States and authorized by the Director of the Puerto Rico Office, Mr. Emilio Colon. Dr. Cordero was originally appointed by the late President Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Dr. Cordero's is the first insular nominee to be extended by President Truman after signing into law, with his signature, the reform of the Insular Charter. Dr. Cordero last night expressed his appreciation for the distinction conferred on him by the President. "It is a great demonstration of confidence on the part of President Truman," he said, "especially if we consider that by virtue of the reforms to the Island Charter of all the executive officers of the Island Government, the only one who remains within the President's appointing power is the Island Auditor, and no one would have questioned his selection of a mainlander for the position I now hold. The President reiterates his confidence in the Puerto Ricans," he said. (Contlnd> on Page 34)
on non-jurisdiction. The Board also maintained its original decision that the municipal cemetery should be built on the property in the process of purchase located in the jurisdiction of Rio Piedras, according to the project that was approved by this body a few months ago. The President of the Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, when questioned yesterday, expressed that he gave careful consideration to the matter raised by the Government of San Juan, as referred to the Board by the Executive Council. He said that it speaks ' pina legal issue involved, namely:) That the land on which to locate the new cemetery was purchased by the San Juan munlcl pio before" the zoning regulations came into ■vigor and therefore the Board had no jurisdiction; q. for that reason, it has little jurisdiction over the) i actual construction of the new necropolis. "The Board believes," said Dr. Picó, "that the actual construction of these works is a separate matter from the procedure for the purchase of the property, and therefore it has jurisdiction to approve or reject the building project. The construction project originated long after the municipality had acquired the property in Isla Verde, and when it was submitted to the Board, the zoning regulations were in effect. (Continued on page 24).
News Digest
AGS authorizes an increase of -two cents per pound of rice for local consumption. Sets maximum of 14 cents. Includes rice received as of today and rice purchased at higher price. - - - - : A minimum wage of 85 cents per hour has been suggested for truck transportation, and 25 cents for rail transportation. - - - The Planning Board maintains its criterion that the cemetery of the Capital should be located in Rio Piedras, Veterans groups may enroll in the rural zone. "- - - Rice prices are expected to drop; there are offers of the new harvest grain, at prices below* 512 quintal. Twenty-eight lawyers will appear on Monday to take revalidation before the Supreme Court. - - - The Director of the Experimental Extension has been called to conference in Washington. - 1,045 UPR students will enjoy scholarships. Of these, 212 will receive honorary tuition for their academic index. - Senator Colón declares that his resignation is Irrevocable. - McClelland war unit arrived in the Capital with more than ?non-commissioned officers and members of the Naval Reserve.
James R. McManus was installed yesterday as Bishop of the Diocese of Ronce. - The doctors of the Aguadilla District Hospital are expected to resign at the end of the month, if Dr. Martinez continues to direct the center. Mexico ahngu in Brazil, for a plan for the mutual defense of the American nations. President Dutra opened the session. Trygve Lie urged to set an example of peace. I Plftero sailed for Sánto Domingo. "Tomorrow the Central Board of the Puerto Rican Liberal Party meets in San Juan. - A Federal Jury found Communist agent Gerhart Eisler guilty of fraud. ' - - - - A strong hurricane has been ravaging the city of Tampico. - * e Netherlands strictly refused to accept further United Nations intervention in Indonesia. - - - - Mountbatten delivered** ' the sel 1 on of his office of Viceroy to the new Hindustani regime, thus signaling the birth of Independence for that people. - ♦ Senator O'Mahoney preempted President Truman against the rapid expansion of industrial monopolies. * * * * Myron C. Taylor left yesterday for Epropa on a mission sent by Truman.
< Auditor Cordero is appointed i for new term by Truman l Island official received two days ago an advantageous offer from private firm. He considers his appointment a demonstration of confidence in Boricua 5 .1.... I I n.. ■I, S.l.l ,L J n lí J! ... The President of the United States, Hsrry S. Truman, yesterday extended । appointment for a second term to the Island Auditor, Dr. Rafael de J. Cordero, according to dispatches received in San Juan prora-
ML Ib dap 3% "V W ■■ * 43 1 ' Dr. Rafael de J. Cordero
Plans maintains cemetery must be located R. Piedras Distinguishes between purchase of land and construction of the necropolis and affirms Junta has judisdiction over the latter. Municipality to appeal to Council The Planning Board considered in a meeting held yesterday the matter referred to it by the Puerto Rico Executive Council regarding the construction of the new San Juan cemetery in the Isla Verde area, agreeing to reject the legal questions raised by the Board.
Senator Colón says resignation is irrevocable He expects Muñoz to follow the course of action established by law. - The Cerro Gordo case AGUADILLA, Aug. 15 (By Gilberto Cruz Igartúa) -The Municipal Assembly of. Moca met last night in special session and gave a vote of confidence to] the senator for the district of Aguadilla, Luis Alfredo" Colón, and agreed to request the aforementioned legislator to withdraw the resignation he presented to the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, on August 7. At the Assembly meeting, it was announced that the Department of the Interior will again submit the Cerro Gordo road project to auction, including the bridge over the Culebrinas River, in order to fulfill the promise made to Senator Colón. Regarding the statements made in another newspaper by the Subcommissioner of the Interior, Mr. Jesús Benitez Castaño, Senator Colón said that, in fact, as Mr. Benitez Castaño stated, he did not discuss with the Subcommissioner anything related to the Cerro Gordo road project.He also stated that his friend, Senator Bernardo Méndez, should not be held responsible for the elimination of the bridge, "since the interest of Mr. Méndez in the Moca project runs parallel to that of Senator Colón. . When asked if he would withdraw his resignation due to the new turn that the matter related to the aforementioned project has taken, Senator Colón stated that, "my resignation is irrevocably submitted to Mr. Muñoz Marín and he expects it to be processed as provided by law".
Twenty-eight people will have to take the revalidation exam to be offered next Monday, at 8:00 a.m., by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico. Twenty-four of these persons are graduates of the University of Puerto Rico Law School and four of American colleges. There are two women in the group. The applicants to take the exams will have to take an oral and a written exam, according to the rules of the Supreme Court. The examining board will be composed of Justices Angel R. <- Jesús and Borlnquen Marrero ' 3íos, of the Supreme Court, and attorneys Héctor González Blanes, Raúl Matos and Carlos J. Matos. Raúl Matos and Carlos J. Faure. The list of candidates, provided by the Supreme Court, is as follows: José Castro Figueroa. Vicente Pérez Díaz (Tulane University), Luis Felipe Rivera, Ge-
Twenty-eight will appear Monday to take the revalidation before the Supreme Court.
rardo Méndez, Jr., Carmelo Avila. Medina, Feliciano J. Gonzalez, LeoSoldo C. Delucca, Carlos A. Todd, enjamin Rodriguez, Carlos N. Souffront. Miguel Alberto del Toro. Augusto Palmer. William O. Santana, Gustavo Cruzado Pujols, Gerardo Santiago Fortis, Fernando Martínez Vélez, Charlea Cuprill, Luís C. States, Tomás de Jesús Castro. María Valentín Collazo. Luis Rubén Apellánlz. Efrain Rivera Maldonado, José Córdova Mercado, Otto B. Seda (from the University of Chatanooga), J. Gallart Mendla, María A. Torres (from the University of Pennsylvania). José Raúl Canelo and Antonio J. Bennazar (from St. John's University). The aforementioned persons are those who have applied and have been admitted to the examinations before the Tribunal, but those who so desire do not have to take the examination now.
An increase of two cents per pound in the price of rice is authorized.
1,045 UPR students will enjoy 1 scholarship 212 of them will receive honorary tuition for their academic performance 406 students will receive financial aid 600 students will have their tuition extended. - Requirements for scholarships About 1,045 students, of those who will begin studying in the next university year, which begins on the 25th of this year, will enjoy the scholarship system of the University of Puerto Rico. Another 406 students will receive financial assistance, and close to 600 will benefit from the "tuition deferment service. Of the 1,045 students mentioned above, 212 obtained honorary tuition because they have studied at the University with a grade point average above 3.50, which entitles them to waive tuition fees for as long as they maintain the aforementioned grade point average. Mrs. Carmen Rivera de Alvarado, director of the Office of Student Services, reported yesterday on the scholarship system for the students of the University, in connection with the course to be inaugurated on the 25th . Of those "students" there are 108 who were previously enjoying the reference enrollment, maintaining their rights with the academic index of 3.50. The rest, i.e. 104, obtained the honor registration for the next semester. The rest, that is 104, obtained honorary tuition for the first time. According to the Director of the Office of Student Services, Mrs. Rivera de Alvarado, 200 students have received tuition waivers. This exemption is granted by the Student Services Office based on a study that determines that the student is in need of financial aid. In addition, in order to obtain the exemption, the student must have a 2.50 grade point average, which corresponds to a B or Cx, and have previously studied at the University for one semester. To date, 213 legislative scholarships have been awarded. For these scholarships to be awarded, the student's total family income must be less than $1,200, with preference given to applicants whose parents have incomes of less than $500. Those students who have been studying for one semester and are not tested for these scholarships, and those entering the UPR for the first time, coming from high schools, must have an average of 3.00 and receive a proficiency test. Of the 213 legislative scholarships awarded, 65 have been renewed, others are from high school students who received them and are keeping them to study at the University of Puerto Rico. In addition, 325 legislative scholarships have been granted to high school and ninth grade students who have not yet entered the University. These scholarships are for $100. per year, which are given in installments of $10 per month to the students. For the legislative scholarships mentioned above, the minimum is $20 and the maximum, in exceptional cases, is $40. 20 free housing scholarships have also been awarded to students whose Index has risen from (Continued on page 24)
Washington rejects Russian offer Threatens to proceed with its own plan in case of Japanese treaty State maintains original attitude! i The eleven nations in - Go Orientation Commission would go to conference 1 By DONALÍUjTgONZALES United Press Correspondent ) WASHINGTON, Aug. 15. (PU) -United States" rejected today the" ¡ Russian proposals" for the drafting of! peace treaty for Japan and made a veiled threat in , leí sense to go ahead with । its own plan should the Soviets refuse to cooperate. The Secretary of State, George C.. Marshall, denied the Russian request that preliminary treaty discussions be limited to participation by the ministers" , from abroad of the United States, Russia, and Japan. Marshall informed the Soviets, in a note delivered in Washington to Russian embassy officials, that the State Department adheres to its original position that all eleven nations of the Far East Commission participate in the treaty conference proposed to be held in Washington or San Francisco next month. The discreet note condemned the accusation by Soviet Foreign Minister V. M. Molotov, who alleged that the U.S. plan was the result of a "unilateral decision". Marshall said that the nine other nations invited to the conference had accepted in principle the American proposal. "It is expected, therefore, that the Soviet Government will also indicate its willingness to attend the conference for the purpose of considering the Japanese peace treaty to be concluded in the near future among the eleven nations comprising the Far Eastern Commission," the American note said. The Russian position was apparently based on the Soviet desire to take advantage of its veto power, a right it would have if questions relating to the treaty were decided by the Council of Foreign Ministers. On the other hand, the United States has proposed that a two-thirds majority prevail in the Far East Commission. On the other hand, the State Department published reports from unidentified sources in Romania, making the charge that the Communist-dominated government of that Balkan country is brutally mistreating political prisoners in a campaign to exterminate all opposition. Lincoln White, State Department spokesman, said the reports were gathered by American diplomats in Bucharest, the Romanian capital, but did not indicate that the U.S. Government has official confirmation of them. White quoted Roy M. Melbourne, acting U.S. representative in Romania, as saying that opposition political leaders "are evidently being subjected to third-degree methods" in an effort to extract confessions to be used against them in the upcoming treason trials. White pointed out that this (U.S.) government has prevented (Contlnued on page 24).
Funds for municipalities will be delivered next week They will have $1,500,000 corresponding to them according to Law 76. - Budget approved and only the Governor's signature is missing
In the course of next week, the municipalities will receive, as reported yesterday, the funds in trust that correspond to them from the allocation of one and a half million dollars provided by Law 76, in accordance with the latest amendments that were introduced. ) The Budget Bureau has already collated and approved the budget breakdown of the million and one-half million dollar fund, and it only remains for the Governor to affix his signature. It is considered that it will not be until Monday that the Chief Executive will give his definitive approval, since yesterday he was in P-once and today he will be present at the Governor's Day ceremonies, which will be celebrated by the Governor.
Governor's Day ceremonies to be held by the Puerto Rico National Guard in Tortuguero. The Acting Director of the Bureau of the Budget, Mr. Guillermo E. ufret. notified yesterday the approval by said Bureau of the budget breakdown submitted by Instruction, sending him a copy of the same. The Department will thus have the opportunity to go ahead with its work, in order to act definitively, when the Chief Executive signs the budget next week. The delay in the approval of this budget has adversely affected municipal school services, since the school year began on August 4, "without the municipalities having received their share of the funds, as trust funds, to attend to works such as minor repairs in the schools and other matters. Yesterday, it was reported that the Department of Instruction has been submitting this budget to the Budget Bureau since last June. It was also reported that the delay occurred mainly due to the implementation of the new Personnel law. The Department of Instruction will now be able to work on the distribution of funds to the municipalities and will notify them during the course of next week, the amount of funds that will correspond to each one. In turn, the i* ■ will be able to initiate their local school services, which were entrusted to them when Act 76 was last amended. From the budget of this I Act, as reported yesterday, they collect more than two thousand employees.
McManus installed. yesterday in Ponce ■Bf*&&■ \ t ; O \ K' 'i' Moment in which the Mayor of Ponce, don André" Grlllaaca, read a message welcoming Bishop James R. McManus on behalf of the city. The ceremony took place under an archway erected at the entrance to Ponce (Photo .dr Rtju MUNDO, by Cnwennve). A large crowd greeted him on his arrival in the Pearl of the South Among those attending the installation ceremony were Acting Governor Pons and Judge Travieso. - Banquet held at the Sports Club
PONCE, August 15 (By Miguel Rivera)-The new Bishop of Ponce, Monsignor James R. McManus, arrived in this city at 9:50 in the morning. Under an arch that was erected at the entrance of Ponce, he was received by the mayor, Mr. Andres Grillases, by the municipal and ecclesiastical authorities
and ecclesiastical authorities, and by a great multitude. Present were the interim governor, Dr. Juan A. Pons; Colonel Joseph M. Tully, interim commander of the Military Department of the Antilles; Monsignor Mariano Vassallo; Monsignor James P. Davls, Bishop of San Juan; Monsignor Rafael Grovas, chancellor of the Bishopric of San Juan; delegations of the Knights of Columbus of San Juan, Ponce, Caguas, and Caguas. Ponce, Caguas, and Mayagüez: Niños Escuchas, represented by the council, Rev. León O'Neill, Father Victor Manzano, Father León, Ramón Montaner and Juan Alberto Wirshlng; nurses from the Asilo de Damas; delegations from the chapters of the Holy Name Society and numerous members of the public. Mayor Grillases welcomed him on behalf of the people of Ponce and Bishop McManus thanked him for the reception and told Mr. Grillasca that he needed the help of everyone, but especially of the municipal authorities, to solve the problems of the community. Under the direction of the organizer of the reception, Mr. Miguel Marcos Morales, the procession began to parade. In the first car were Monsignor James P. Davls, Bishop of San Juan, Monsignor James R. McManus and the Mayor, Mr. Andrés Grillaseis. The committee toured Guadalupe, Salud, Sol and Union streets, arriving at the plaza at 10:15 in the morning. Dressed in his episcopal finery and under a canopy, Monsignor McManus went around the "Plaza de Las Delicia" and then entered the Cathedral, followed by an entourage of priests and Sisters of Charity. Also part of the procession were the visiting priests who had accompanied him from the United States. The Cathedral was completely full of parishioners. There were also Monsignor Noel, Monsignor Murga and Monsignor Aguilera, from whose residence in Juana Díaz the new prelate left yesterday for Ponce. j 1 Monsignor Vicente Murga read the bull of His Holiness Pius XII naming Monsignor McManus Bishop of Ponce. The Bishop of San Juan, Monsignor James P. Davis, installed the new Bishop on his episcopal throne and after i the 38 parishes of the Diocese of Ponce paraded in front of him to! (Continued on page 14) Hurricane hits ciudacUleCTainpico 15. (P. U.)-Eighteen feet high waves battered the port city of Tampico today, as hurricane force winds moving at ninety-five miles per hour lashed the coast of the Gulf of Mexico. At eleven o'clock in the morning, the center of the hurricane was twenty miles north of Tampico, according to the Federal Weather Bureau in this city. The situation in this city of eighty-five thousand people was officially described as alarming". (The control tower at the Mexico City airport reported that a weather bulletin from New Orleans located the center of the hurricane twenty miles south of Tampico) Heavy rains, which have lashed Tampico for several days, continued to fall this morning. Visibility was totally impossible. As gigantic waves swept over the Tampico waterfront area, obli(Contlnued on page 24)
The Governor left for Santo Domingo He hopes to strengthen the bonds of affection between the two brotherly peoples At five o'clock this afternoon, he left for the Dominican Republic, in an airplane of the *1 Governor of Puerto Rico, Don Jesús T. Plftero. Accompanying the Chief of the Island Executive were the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, Mr. Luis A. Izquierdo; the Executive Director of the Transportation Authority, Mr. José G. Blolse; the President of the Parks and Recreation Commission, Mr. Julio E. Monagas; the Colonel of the Island Police, Mr. Salvador T. Roíg. who will act as Military Aide to the Governor; and Mr. Emilio López Ramírez, Secretary to the Governor. Seftor Plftero will attend the official acts of the installation of the President of the Dominican Republic, General Rafael L. Trujillo Molina, and intends, also, to visit -1 interior of the neighboring Republic. Minutes before boarding the plane, Governor Plftero made the following statements: "I will attend the installation of President Trujillo in my official capacity as Governor of Puerto Rico. I am sure that the two fraternal peoples, in their' same democratic yearning for justice, can derive mutual benefit" from their mutual (Continued on page 24> Sale of ammonia nitrates authorized Izquierdo suspended the 'Regulations. More than 8,000 tons expected On the occasion of the forthcoming arrival in Puerto Rico of a shipment of ammonium nitrate, the Comlsnonado of Agriculture and Commerce, seftor Luis A. Izquierdo, has made the following statements: "In view'of the fact that a.large shipment of ammonium nitrate exceeding eight thousand tons is about to arrive on the Island, and taking into account that part of Section 3 of the Regulations'promulgated September 10," 1946, prohibits the sale of said product for direct application, we have thought it advisable to decree the temporary suspension of said Section in order that the farmers. may take advantage of the opportunity presented to them to obtain this raw material." "This step has been duly in. formed to the houses to lai to which the shipment comes consigned, speaking notified by letter, that they are authorized to sell the ammonium nitrate to be applied directly to the land, if aal requested by the farmers. In addition, they are urged, in said communication, to try to sell as much of said product on the wharf and they are also re(Contlnued on page 24)
Covers grain received as of today and that which was paid at the higher price Maximum fixed to the product is 14cts. Agency explains that the action is due to current misalignment of situation Consumers of rice in Puerto Rico will begin to pay today an increase in the price of grain, based on a 12 percent on the prices at which the food is delivered to retail stores, by wholesalers. This was established in an order issued yesterday by the Acting Administrator of the Supply Administration, Mr. Julio Perez Garcia, raising the maximum domestic price by two cents per pound for short grain rice. The order issued states that the new price will cover "all" rice received in Puerto Rico after August 15, 1947, as well as all those prior to that date, which, with the authorization of the General Supply Administration, were purchased at a price higher than that provided for by Administrative Order number 152. With respect to rice received in [Puerto Rico prior to August 15, 1947, and not included in the prices set by the Administration for rice purchased at a price higher than that fixed in said order, shall be at the price fixed in said order 152, provided, further, that in no case shall rice sold at a higher price in Puerto Rico be sold at a price higher than 14 cents per pound to the consumer. The Centro de Detallista" de Provisiones Informed yesterday that with regard to the rice of the Japan type. that is to say of the short grain, which constitutes the largest quantity of grain purchased at the price of 12 dollars a quintal according to authorization Cío maximum of sale for the endowed implies an increase, of do" cents pound. This rice was selling, according to the original maximum price order for the grain, at 12 cents per pound to the consumer. The price increase will affect a shipment of about 200,000 quintals of rice currently being received in Puerto Rico. It will also affect all those purchases made at the $12 quintal price in the U.S. market. The president of the Retailers Center, Mr. Ramon Nieves Alices, declared yesterday that in his opinion the AGS should not impose the restriction on sales" to consumers" at the maximum price of 14 cents per pound. He said that this could lead to violations of the order, since the profit margin for retailers, of 12 percent, is reduced due to losses and distribution expenses. "It seems to me that this new situation in rice sales," he said, "could lead to resistance on the part of many retailers to sell the grain, limiting their operations only to what is strictly necessary to meet the demand of their customers. The Supply Department explained that the limitation of 14 cents per pound to the consumer is based on the analysis of costs and expenses of the grain, acquired at the price of $12 per quintal, placed in San Juan. To this price, 10 cents is added for letter of credit and transportation expenses, bringing it to $12.10. Also, the 6 percent profit margin for the distributor, which represents 72 cents per quintal, which means a price of $12.82. The 12 percent markup )to the retailer, of $1.54 quintal, brings the maximum to the consumer to , $14.36, which is reduced to 14 cents a pound to the consumer ,since . The order issued by the AGS states that "when the resulting price to the retailer for sale to the consumer originates a fraction greater than half a cent, this fraction may be added up to the next whole cent and vice versa; when the resulting fraction is less than half a cent, this fraction will not be taken into consideration and the selling price will be reduced to the previous whole cent". The Supply Administration, in decreeing the new price for rice, declared yesterday: ■ "The elimination of the federal price control on rice in the United States has created a chaotic situation and an economic imbalance in Puerto Rico, which depends for the supply of this article on subslsten&a of that market. -In view of this imbalance, which offers no guarantee of sufficient supplies at reasonable prices, the General Supply Manager, for the purpose of avoiding the paralyzation of necessary imports, hoarding and unjustified and abnormal speculative price increases, and for the purpose of averting as far as possible the shortages which would result from such economic imbalance, in accordance with Lev. 228 of May 12, 1942, as amended, determines that as long as the present situation subsists, it is necessary to limit the selling prices on all classes of rice, and in particular, to limit the prices of rice at reasonable prices.