ILL, MLliNlJlJIJ
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, HOVi Partly cloudy, with scattered showers over the maflanai winds from the east at 11 to 20 miles per hour. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M: low, 70. Barometric pressure at sea level, 80.02 inches of mercury.
40 pages 5/
DIARIO Di
THE MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
Check brakes. I cooperate with the Automobile Inspection.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, MARCH 29, 1947
Entered at second oíaos matter, Poet Office, San Juan. P. R.
NUME
O 10900
Restriction on picket line activity
Belaval granted writ of injunction in Abarca and Portilla cases Concluded that there had been improper conduct
Protects employers in the free access to and egress of clients to the plants By Lulo Hernándes Aqulnn Editor of EL MUNDO
After a careful study of the evidence presented during the hearings held yesterday, the District Court, Extraordinary Appeals Chamber, which was presided over by Judge Emilio S. Belaval, issued yesterday a preliminary injunction to reinstate the activities of the picketers. The lawyer Hipolito Marcano, representative of the striking workers, declared to this editor this morning that due to the great importance of the case, which is one of transcendence, and taking into account that the ruling in the case could set a fatal precedent for workers who "go on strike in Puerto Rico, it would be necessary to consult with the Executive Council of the Federación Libre, to which the workers are affiliated, and with the leadership of the union. The injunction order is issued by the Puerto Rico Metalworkers' Union, the Metalworkers' Union and the Mechanics', Auxiliary and Related Branches' Union, in order to take the case on appeal to our Supreme Court. The injunction order is issued against the aforementioned union and its directors Juan Fantauzzl, Andrea Vanderpool, Erbeato Laboy and Ramon Rondon, and is extended to the affiliates, employees, agents, propagandists, announcers or picketers of said unions or of any other unions related to the aforementioned, ordering them to refrain from interfering with the free access to the, or egress from the establishment" of Sobrino" de Portilla Inc., the Portilla Corporation or the Abarca Warehouse Corporation, or any other dependencies or related businesses, allowing free access to and egress from the land", establishments, workshops, stores", offices, not only to directors, employees, non-unionized workers, but also to all clients" or related" of the mentioned companies who are interested in carrying out commercial transactions with the" petitioning them. The order states that the transit of vehicles or the transit of persons must also be allowed, as well as the access and egress of materials, merchandise, cargo and any other tools, tools, objects or goods that need to enter or remove the petitioners and their clients in order to continue the ordinary course of their commercial relations, under threat of contempt. However, the workers will peacefully approach the "teeth and vehicles" that transit or are engaged in traffic between said facilities" and the rest of the city to try to perauadir customers and drivers" who are "olldarieen with the strike or the workers' protest. Judge Belaval ordered the Abarca, Portilla and Portilla labor unions to post a $1,000 bond in favor of the defendant labor unions in each case, in order to respond to the damages that may result from the issuance of the preliminary injunction. The following is the opinion issued by Judge Emilio S. Belaval in relation to the case: "All we have to resolve in these cases" is the constitutional right of the" workers to plquete the premises of their employers during a strike. It includes the right to interfere with access to and egress from such premises, prohibiting vehicular traffic and the transit of persons who have not voluntarily joined in the strike between the premises of said employer and the comutldnd's premises. The" minimum" proven" facts" that must serve as a basis for our study are the" following; (Continued on page 12.) I
The document includes a summary of expenditures for the" various" branches" of Government, in the following form; Legislative Branch, IS80,149.S2; Judicial Branch, $1,880,948; Executive Branch, $50,080,875.51. The recommendations which make up the general budget of expenditures are in conformity with the message on the" expenditures of the Government for the year pró. xlmo, recently submitted by Governor Plftero to the bodies * v o "u alendo published" by EL MUNDO. The largest aalgnaelon of funds corresponds to the program of Instruction and libraries, for which $19,930,035 is provided, followed in amount by the budget of the Department of Health, hospitals and Public MS'lWíT, with a total of $13,979,869. The new budget is characterized, mainly, by changes in employee salaries, which have been motivated by the new clarification plan put in place by the Governor's readjustment of some public services, especially in general expenses. An analysis of the most" important" change" introduced" in the Government's" new budget" plan reveals the" following: All" personnel positions of the Senate of Puerto Rico are eliminated, recommending for the next fiscal year an aggregate amount of $289,045 for the administrative budget of said agency. The same situation prevails with respect to the expenses of the House of Representatives, whose positions are eliminated, providing it with an allocation of $281,214.82 to be redistributed administratively. In both cases there is no increase in the allocation lot ®l" In the Bureau of Translations, the position of first stenographer clerk is created, with $1,500. In the Supreme Court, the following positions are created: Clerk, $1,440; 9i <,c, £& b J "9Ullographer, $1,140. In the District Courts they create the" position" of two general district judges, at $7,200. and a general clerk, at $7,200. In the District Court of San Juan they create a clerk, $1,920; they eliminate two social workers, and a typist clerk, $1,200. In the District Court of Ponce they eliminate the social worker, $1,800. and a typist clerk, $1,200! These same positions are eliminated in the other district courts of the island. The Municipal Court of San Juan is totally eliminated, and in its place is created the Municipal Court of San Juan, with two judges at $4,200 each; an equal number of clerks and marshals, and an increase and reorganization of the positions. A suhmarehal, $980, is created in the first section of the court ' (Continued on page 10.)
Secretary Marshall makes explanation.
TIMES W I wUt '< i Mi 4 "y* j The American Secretary of State. George C. Marshall (isquleré">. P SoViet's Foreign Minister, V. M. Molotov, at the formal luncheon held in connection with the foreign ministers' conference.
(Photo P. A.) 1 New budget has a large number of personnel changes For Senate and House points out funds encompassed by eliminating all positions. - To Instruction and libraries, "19,930,035? Health, "13,979,869 The head of the Bureau of the Budget, Mr. Roberto de Jesús, yesterday submitted to the Legislative Assembly the details of the Governor's "spending budget" for the fiscal year that begins next July 1. The amount of the expenditures recommended to the Legislative Assembly is 152,381,10883.
Géigel alleges obstacles by physicians i He claims is blocked the law to hire - a foreign galen* The "enador Vicente Géigel poten- ; co authorized yesterday the following "obre , te actl dutadl.mbckFn TMAR ls attitude of the Aaoclaclón Médi- . ca "? n . r, * ac lón with the P. of S. 881. A the Senate minutes I have U "van® "n ®J r ? a < ' u " to doetor M. Guemán Rodríguez, President of t A *® c,ac ó n Médica do Puerto Rl-H-M? a J d,rt|Elda , a ,UB ""ociado" "o "ut0,,i""ciún to proceed "in a dráetica "o manner,"| proel "o with the coercion of a general strike, against the proposed legislation to facilitate and expand medical" services in Puerto Rico, In the legislative session of the afto ??í ado ?? "In the legislative session of the last adjournment of the Legislature, Act No. 383 was approved, empowering the Commissioner of Health to hire foreign physicians willing to work in the Island and municipal welfare services, subject to the issuance of a certificate by the Board of Medical Examiners. The law provides that the doctors must be of recognized sequelae by the Board and that they must prove their medical knowledge, including by means of an examination when required by the Board. (Continued on page 13) The price of sugar is raised by 1 cent per pound.^2r¿ adon da ,a Office oe Temporary Controls, the price nrH" aíuca ' ,. r * ,íl ""da increased a wmñtae * n ? r "' * n v f nt "" "" ■' con "nuncio made by . " dna yesterday ' Cash from dL.iii.tf lo " trader" f ta ' P, odr *n sell pl sugar Hhro? d ñ/ ro c n "*"vo" pound, and do" pound" for 19 cents, in contra"-! te ron the uniform retail price. ne 9 cents which has been prevailing. The price of the product, both at the refinery and at the wholesaler's sale to the retailer, increased by 15 cents a sack. The official note! authorized yesterday ex P re '" following: The Office of Temporary Control" announces to the trade and the public in general, that effective March 31, 1947, the" -Igulent prices for the sale of refined sugar in Puerto Rico will be in effect. Refined sugar, of all kinds, packed in 100-pound sacks, sales per oulntal, $8.05 for refinery sales; $8.25 for wholesale sales; 10 cents per pound, and two pounds for 19 cents, packed in 100-pound bags. Bags of 25 llhraa: $8.20 per quinta! at refinery," $8.25 wholesale, and $2.30 per 25 pounds, at (Continued on page 10.)
The Governor is in favor of all Authorities being self-sufficient. New budget contains a large number of personnel changes. Eliminates Senate and House nlasas, fixing funds englobado". - * * * lides Garcia protested yesterday that the leadership of the Popular Party does not invite him, as it does others, to discuss the legislation by ól presented. ♦ "" On April M day will be sworn in the Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, ledo. Borinquen Msrrero. - * Doctors organize emergency services in the metropolitan soné. ♦ ♦ ♦ Completed negotiation of the sale of $50,000,000 River Springs bonds. They will pay an average interest of $.67. ♦ - Pan American has increased the daily flights between San Juan and New York from $ to $. - e - Chives stated yesterday in regard to Mariano Villaronga. No hlso opposition to the appointment is confirmed. - - - A threatened strike looms over the telephone service.
News Digest
between Han Juan and New York, and * * * Judge Belaval granted the injunction requested by Abarca and Portilla against labor unions on strike, restricting picket line activities, or * * The losses of workers, employers and various industries are estimated to be considerable, due to the train strike. - The transfer of the remains of Puerto Rican soldiers who died and are buried overseas has begun. In July, San José Street will be repaired, among other routes that the Government of the Capital will make. "Emanuelll's land expropriated for the municipal cemetery of San Juan is returned to Vda. Emanuelll. 0*4 ' The AFF will build a new steam plant in Guaynabo, valued at áT.oon.ooo Sugar rationing will continue in the United States. " - - The price of gasoline is increased by one cent. The Senate approved the abolition of selective service. - 8o announces major legislation on strikes.
Piñero is in favor of all Authorities being self-supporting; Cites River Springs as an example.
Train Company's loss, 8250,000 Creese will reduce part of the staff because stoppage reduced business Workers lose "125,000
Losses in several other industries estimated to be substantial
By L. AánchM Cappa When the railroad workers return to work, after the Union's labor board ratified the agreement signed by the parties the day before yesterday, they will no longer be paid their wages. The company, on the other hand, will have lost more than $250,000 of its "income" from the "employee's" wages, which is estimated at $125,000. The "loss" ocarionada" ■ lo" worker" by the strike, not -- limited to unearned wages," riño que todo Indica que una reducción en el personal puede ""r otro reaulta- , do de la huelga, ya "e informa , The total increase in the payroll of the Company's employees, as well as in the number of employees in circulation, will be necessary to reduce the number of employees in the Company's payroll, as it was reported that due to the loss of a considerable number of employees during the strike. The total increase in the annual payroll of the American Railroad due to the increase granted to the workers is estimated at $70,000, since, according to the company's claim, the company receives a total of $70,000. The Company receives the bulk of the income from the tranaporting cycle during the harvest, it has been stated by Mr. Ettlene Totti, General Manager of the Company, that the "loss" is not "consistent" - in addition to the "annual deficit that has been accumulating. As for the" loss" in the" other" industry" affected" by the stoppage of the train, ae reported by the" source" related" to the" mlamaa that a definitive calculation ea difficult Jtacerlo. It was added "ln embarg.o that reapecto to the !nduatrla sugar, éata has experienced. In addition to the "setback" and difficulty*" brought about by the stoppage, "loss" with "lderahl*" eapedaly in "letters" that were lost in the wagons that were left for a long time stranded on the track", Lo" coato" de tranaporlaclón de carta" y azúcar en loa que Incurrieron la" céntrala" azucarero" y colono", aumentaron notablemente । al utilizar otro" medio" de locomotion.
The Iria's commerce, which used the train to send and receive a large quantity of goods, suffered losses, being obliged to purchase trucks to transport "a cargo in many places, and pay higher freight in others. On the other hand, the aeflor Fernando A. Vlllamfl declared yesterday that many sugar mills that "have been prevented" during the strike from transporting "a letter" and "sugar by train, will resume shipment by that means. But he admitted that many millers and many settlers had bought some "mlone" in some cases and in others had signed contracts with trucking companies to transport the letter and sugar, and that they would probably never again use the railroad as a means of transportation. As to the ratification of this stipulation by the workers' assembly, Mr. Tottl stated yesterday that after having signed the letter, the company is of the opinion that such ratification will be made by the company, and that it will not be possible for the company to use the railroad as a means of transportation.
The Puerto Rico Power Authority will build a new steam electric power plant, at a cost of seven million dollars, in the Puerto Nuevo neighborhood of Guaynabo. With the purpose of speeding up the approval process for this project, the Authority's director, Mr. Antonio Luchettl, submitted a report on the construction of the new plant in the Puerto Nuevo neighborhood of Guaynabo.
Puerto Rico Department of the Legislature to begin transfer of Puerto Rican soldiers' remains
The Puerto Rico Department of the American Legion has begun to provide assistance to the families of those members of the armed forces who lost their lives overseas and who are buried in military and naval cemeteries outside Puerto Rico, and is working on the transfer of their remains to Puerto Rico. The government is notifying all local chapters of the organization, in an effort to ensure that the remains of the missing Puerto Ricans receive burial in their own land. The action is being facilitated by the direct intervention of the War Department, the Navy Department
The action is facilitated by the direct intervention of the U.S. War Department, the U.S. Navy Department, and other U.S. armed forces. To this end, the United States Congress has authorized the Secretary of War to carry out "all feasible wishes of the next of kin for the disposition of the mortal remains of all Americans who made the supreme sacrifice during World War II. The War Department is requested to give the next of kin of the deceased to make their wishes known in this regard. The American Legion has in (Continued on page 24.)
The American Legion has in mera claso and a good teacher." He added that he did not know srVIllaronga personally, but that he based his opinion on reports that had reached him from ta Iria from persons who deserved his full credit. Chavez appeared at the invitation of Senator Hugh Butler, Republican of Nebraska, in view of his expertise on the Spanish language problem, since Chavez is a Spanish speaking Senator. After Chavez's testimony, the hearings were adjourned. Butler, who chaired today's session, expressed that he did not know when Senator Guy Cordon, chairman of the subcommittee that has under "condition the appointment, will convene the aforementioned body to issue a final decision. The subcommittee's decision, whatever it may be, will probably have the concurrence of the full committee and the Senate. Chavez expressed the opinion that seventy percent of the people of Puerto Rico, who favor permanent association with the United States, are also in favor of Statehood, adding that the "only sure way to achieve it is by learning English, 1 ' Chavez, who is no longer a member of any committee that has direct relation with the issue, said that the "only sure way to achieve it is by learning English, 1 ' Chavez, who is no longer a member of any committee that has direct relation with the issue, said that the "only sure way to achieve it is by learning English," he said, "is by learning English.
The bill, which has been prepared by the Public Service to regulate the functioning and operation of the sugar mills. The project, which has been prepared in the offices of the Land Authority and whose printing has not yet been done, transforms the entire procedure followed up to now to regulate the commercial operation relations between the sugar mills and the settlers or charter producers. According to Article 8 of the draft, any contract entered into between settlers and mills, by virtue of which they deliver their coffee to eataa for the manufacture of sugar, fixes the minimum participation of each settler in the sugar and honeys produced by their charters in the following manner: (a) on charters producing a yield of 12 percent or more of sugar of 98 degrees of polarization, the settler shall receive a minimum of 85 percent of such yield; (b) on charters producing a yield of less than 12 percent of sugar of 98 degrees of polarization, the settler shall receive a minimum of 83 percent of such yield. Provided, That this share, of the settler in the sugar produced by his charters shall govern so long as the price of sugar does not exceed $5.00 C. I. F. New York. When the price of sugar is higher, the (Continued on page 17.)
AFF to build new steam plant valued at $7,000,000
It has already submitted the project to the Planning Board and is processing an application for land improvements. - It will have a maximum capacity of 22,000 kilowatts.
The project will be submitted to the Planning Board for consideration and approval. The Fluvlale Source Authority has begun preparation of the project's "layout and plan". In addition, it has submitted a request to the naval and military authorities for authorization to carry out such improvement works as are indispensable to the selected land. The amount of seven million dollars includes only the cost of the Inatalaclón of the p'anta, and the improvements and structure", without including the value of the land". The site selected comprises the area in front of the bay adjacent to the east side of the Army pier, in the area known as Puerto luevo. The land is located on the right side of the road leading to the Army pier. The BPP is of the opinion that the demand for electric power, after the end of the war, has increased at the rate of 10,000 kilowatts per year. It is estimated that the generating capacity at the site, together with the production of the Caonlilas addition project and that of the new plant being installed in Mayagüez, will add up to 10,000 kilowatts per year (Continued on page 13).
Chavez makes no opposition to Villaronga's confirmation; asks the Island to master English
To a question on whether he is pro-independence, Mr. Villaronga answers that he is in favor of the plebiscite technique -Dr. Osuna stated By CHARLES R. McCABE Cnrro "pon "al of the United Press. - Senator Dennis Chavez, Democrat, 2 Mexico, appearing as a Guest before the CoIT. Pübric ®' dtl s *n "do that he considers the appointment of Mariano Villaronga. said quo Villaronga is "a citizen of pri-
DRNIS CHAVEZ rrltorlales, said; "I've tried to get a sense of (Continued on page 13)
Bill to repeal Law 221 on sugar mills would transfer to a special board the powers now held by the Public Service Commission to regulate the operation of the sugar mills By JOSE M. GARCIA CALDERON Editor of EL MUNDO P I M '" 1ta . d .a by P etle,ón P° r *1 senator Samuel R. i. number 858, to repeal 1a Law 221 approved on May 12, 1942. and transfer to a Board which will be attached to the Department of Agriculture and Commerce the powers of the Comlilon.
Gasoline prices to go up another cent on Monday
Standard Oí! explains this and other increases in its products A spokesman for the Standard OH company of Porto Rico, announced yesterday, to be effective Monday, March 31, increases in the fixed prices of the following products: Gasoline, 1 cent per gallon; keroslna, from 1 cent to 1 1|2 cents," but the" most" current" delivery" will suffer an increase of "only 1 cent; the "Dleaael Olí" "ufrlrá an increase of 112 cents to 1 1|2 cents in the" different" classes of delivery; the "Industrial Fuel OlkC", will have an increase of 20 cents in each barrel of 42 gallons. According to the company's representative, these increases are due to Jos increases made by the refinery suppliers in the United States. "They are also a consequence," our informant continued, "of the substantial increases in crude oil prices, since the price of drilling oil fields has risen and production costs have also risen, as well as the freight costs for the transportation of these products by tankers. According to the company's spokesman, it has been the company's practice to reflect in its prices the highs and lows that originate in the supply market, which is none other, as far as these products are concerned, than the Gulf market, which serves as the basis for setting prices in the world oil market.
Marrero (will be sworn in on 8
Borinquen Marrero Rios, whose appointment as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court was confirmed earlier last night by the U.S. Senate, paid a courtesy visit yesterday morning to the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, where he greeted the Justices who sit on the court, where he will take the place of former Justice Jorgo C'rdova Diaz, who retired some time ago from his position as Associate Justice. Judge Marrero Rios reported yesterday that a technical matter will delay his appointment for at least a few days. The matter in question is that the President has not yet signed his appointment, which will prevent him from taking up his new position for the time being. In this connection (Continued on page 8).
The negotiation of AFF bonds is completed. They pay an average interest rate of 2.67, which Lucchetti considers satisfactory (]each bond will be worth one thousand dollars.
The BPP loan does not entail the need to increase rates He explains the case of > Telefónica > He has not changed his mind about the Cía. Agrícolas Airport plans By ELISEO COÍoÍAS GUERRA Editor of EL MUNDO That all authorities should support themselves in their enterprises and in their future development was the criterion expressed by Governor Jesús T. Plftero in his meeting yesterday with journalists". Such manifestations of the Governor came as a result of an explanation he was offering to the representatives of the Press regarding the project for the sale of the present telephone system of the Island Government to the Porto-Rico Telephone Company. i When the Governor was asked by a reporter if he expected the Legislature to approve the bill providing for the sale of the Insular telephone lines, which, as has been reported, was requested by the Chief Executive himself, he simply replied that "the Legislature is due for its decision," but, immediately afterward, he made known his views on the situation, saying: i "I personally believe that it is a good deal for the people of Puerto Rico, especially if one takes into account that the revenues from the federal tax on rum have decreased considerably. . "It seems to me that the business is brought to Puerto Rico to develop an efficient communications system in all the municipalities and in the barrios that do not enjoy this service. I would like to know the number of towns where automatic telephone service is to be provided and the number of fields where telephone service is to be provided. It seems to me that this list has not been made public" i The Governor then explained that the step taken by him did not tend to diminish the effort and the actions initiated" by the Communications Authority, but "if the Authority were to continue with the program which it had begun," he said. If the Authority were to continue with the program it has already initiated, the people of Puerto Rico would have to invest eight million dollars in the facilities and projects of the Porto Rico Telephone Company and more than five million dollars more to replace the obsolete equipment of the Porto Rico Telephone Company". WSobornador was asked if he did not believe that the Communication Authority" could continue its operation through the omission of bonds as the River Source Authority has done, stating that "possibly, but I doubt if it could have been done at this time". He then added: "All such Authorities should be directed to support themselves in their enterprises and their future development, so that they can be put in a position in the shortest possible time to catch up with the River Springs Authority." -Do you refer, Governor to all" the Authorities? -All of them. -Including the Transportation Authority. -Yes, sir, including the Transportation Authority. We make this observation because it is our understanding that the Transportation Authority is operating at a loss, and to continue to do so would be a very heavy burden on the public purse. -Well, that's the point, that all Authorities should be aiming to support themselves. In answer to another question, the Governor said he was in favor of the Authorities paying contributions to the public treasury. In opening his lecture, the Governor spoke of his approval of the Governor spoke about the approval of the fifty million dollar loan for the River Springs Authority. He said that this loan will be paid from the full revenues of the Authority, until 1977, and that the properties of the Authority will not be encumbered. The Governor estimates that it will not be necessary to increase the lighting and electric power rates for the payment of the loan, since all these details have been foreseen. The interest," he said, "will be higher than what was paid in previous times. I have information that several companies that have floated loans in the United States have had to pay more or less the same interest rate that we are going to pay, which will be 2.67 percent. "The money borrowed, in addition to consolidating previous borrowings, will be devoted by River Sources to a five-year program to develop new sources of electric power. The program is aimed at substantially increasing water-fired electric power. It also contemplates the establishment of at least one steam plant to balance the demand for electric current. "In addition, the Legislature has passed measures with appropriations for a fairly extensive rural electrification program, and it is my hope that this program, which is also being continued on page 13, will be continued in the future.
They pay an average interest rate of 2.67, which Lucchetti considers satisfactory Each bond will be worth $1,000.
Maturity dates begin July, 1947 through January, 1977 By Juan Martinos Chapel Redaotor of EL MUNDO Last night the negotiation for the sale of $50,000,000 worth of Puerto Rico River Springs Authority bonds was completed. In the early hours of the night an agreement was reached after a prolonged meeting of the contracting parties at La Fortaleza which began at 11:50 a.m. The United Press reports from New York that the new Puerto Rico Water Supply Authority bond issue was put up for sale in New York this morning, and $59,000,000 of the $50,000,000,000 total had been purchased by financial dealers before noon. The officers of the First Boston Corporation and B. J. Van Ingen Company, the investment houses heading the syndicate which has placed the notes on the market, said that the market acceptance of the issue had been "excellent," and the first favorable reaction among traders was recognized on Wall Street as an indication of the apparent soundness of the issue. The $80,000,000,000 issue, the best ever negotiated by a Puerto Rican entity, is dated January 1, 1947 for interest calculation purposes and the final maturity date is July 1, 1977. The offering of Jame" G. Couffer, as Vice President of B. J. Van Ingen and Co, Inc. and representative of that corporation and its associates and of First Boston Corporation, was accepted. Each bond will be worth $1,000, maturing from July 1, 1947 to January 1, 1977. Bonds" maturing from 1947 to 1985 will pay interest at 2.75 percent per annum per annum until maturity; bonds" maturing from 1988 to 1973 will pay interest at 2.50 percent per annum; and bonds" maturing from 1988 to 1973 will pay interest at 2.70 percent per annum. The $50,000,000 bond matures monthly in the following amounts and maturities: July , 1947, $50,000; January 1, 1948, $270,000; July 1, 1948, $280,000; January 1, 1949, $430,000; July 1, 1949, $435,000; January 1, 1950, $490,000; July 1, 1950, $495,000; January 1. 1950, $495,000; Jan. 1, 1951, $550,000: July 1, 1951. $555,000; Jan. 1, 1952, $550,000; July 1, 1952, $580,000: Jan. 1. 1953, $640,000; July 1, 1953, $650,000gen. 1, 1954, $655,000: July 1. 1954, $670,000; Jan. 1, 195Ú, $680,000; July 1, 1955. $685,000: Jan. 1. 1958. $895,000; July 1, 1958, $705,000; Jan. 1, 1957, $715,000; July 1, 1957, $725,000; Jan. 1, 1958, $735,000; July 1, 1958. $745,000; Jan. 1, 1959, $755,000; July 1, 1959, $785,000; Jan. 1. 1960. $780,000; July 1. 1960, $785,000; Jan. 1, 1981, $795,000; July 1. 1961, $810,000; Jan. 1. 1962. $280.000; July L 1962, $830,000; Jan. 1, 1983, $840,000; July 1, 1963. $855,000; Jan. 1, 1964, $865,00; July 1, 1964, $880,000; Jan. 1, I960, $890,000; July 1 1965, $905,000; Jan. 1, 1968, $915,000; July 1, 1986, $925,000: Jan. 1, 1987, $935,000; July 1, 1967 $950,000; Jan. 1. 1968, $960,000; 1968. 1 $975,000; January 1, 1969, $985,000; ju(Continued on 1st page 10) To be made in July the arrangement of the; San Jose i Street i
The Government of the Capital has included in its preferential public works for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1969, the recon "traction of the section of San José Street between Salvador Brau and Tetuán Streets, as well as the sections of Tetuán, San Justo and Recinto Sur Streets through which the track previously destined for the electric tramway passes. The director of Public Works, Mr. Salvador V. Caro, informed yesterday that the reconstruction of these avenues, deteriorated because the tramway tracks have not yet been removed, is scheduled to begin next July. Mr. Caro said that the Municipality will have approximately $225,000 available next fiscal year, from municipal funds, for the reconstruction of the city's streets. From this allocation, funds will be obtained to carry out the aforementioned works, thus continuing the paving program of the main streets of the city, using reinforced concrete. He also informed the Director of the (Continued on page i)
m of aslg- " pa*
"The floating power plant that actui AFF will have to be
The floating power plant that will act as a