ELMmW
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Occasionally cloudy, scattered showers in the evening, partly cloudy this afternoon. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temp. 80; minims, 74. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m.. 29.91 inches of mercury.
44 Pages 5/
JIARIÓ LA MASANAO : : 1
year xxvin
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San' Juan. P. R.
UNJUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, DECEMBER 6, 1947
Motorist", let's show ta - cortea!"! tradition"! of the pal".
NUMBER 11
Governor approves coffee fund
He also signed a bill creating the Office of Migration and Employment Merit system for personnel In all, the Executive signed into law 14 different measures The Governor last night signed a total of fourteen laws, among them the one granting a coffee subsidy and the one creating the Office of Migration and Employment in the Department of Labor, with a branch office in New York. The latter law establishes the public policy of the Government of Puerto Rico with respect to the migration of Puerto Ricans to the United States and other countries. The Governor also signed into law the Act allocating $82,000 to the Office of Personnel, for the purpose of implementing the new merit-based system for the promotion of employees in the Government and to carry out with greater efficiency the other services of this governmental agency. The Act to grant the coffee subsidy allocates for this purpose an amount not to exceed $900,000. The subsidy shall not exceed 85 per quintal, piled basis. From this subsidy the farmer shall pay to the laborer a compensation equivalent to 5 cents per bushel of coffee grapes harvested during this year's crop. The 14 laws signed last night were: P. Con. 7 (Act 13), to allocate from any available funds in the Treasury of Puerto Rico the sum of twenty-eight thousand (28,000) dollars for ordinary operating expenses of fiscal year 1047-48 of the Personnel Office of the Insular Government of Puerto Rico, created by Act 345, approved on May 12, 1947; to authorize the Director of Personnel to appoint the necessary personnel, under this allocation, and for other purposes". P. of the C, 5 (Act 14): "AN ACT to appropriate the amount of One Million Seven Hundred Thousand ($1,700,000) dollars from the Insular Treasury not earmarked for other attentions to be paid into the 'Fund for Articles of Prime Necessity. Deposit Fund', created by Article 17 of Law number 228 of May 12, 1942, known as the 'Insular Supply Law'; to invest part of said amount for the payment of aid or compensation to the coffee harvesters and workers of this Industry as determined by the General Administrator of Supplies in accordance with the powers conferred by Law number 228 of May 12, 1942; to fix the maximum amount to be invested in said aid or compensation, as well as to fix the maximum amount to be paid per quintal of coffee, piled basis, for the concept indicated; to authorize the entry of the remainder of the amount invested in the aid or compensation, as well as the part of one million seven hundred thousand (1,700,000) dollars not allocated to said aid or compensation, to the general funds of the General Supply Administration, to implement the program and other needs of the General Supply Administration, and to authorize the payment of the amount of the aid or compensation, as well as the part of one million seven hundred thousand (1,700,000) dollars not allocated to said aid or compensation, to the general funds of the General Supply Administration, to implement the program and other needs of the General Supply Administration. General Supply Administration, and for other purposes*'. P. S. 8 (Act 15): ''AN ACT appropriating the funds necessary for the payment of the extraordinary expenses of the House of Representatives of Puerto Rico, during the Fifth Extraordinary Legislature of the Sixteenth Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico, and for other purposes'' P. S. 1 (Act 15): ''AN ACT appropriating the funds necessary for the payment of the extraordinary expenses of the House of Representatives of Puerto Rico, during the Fifth Extraordinary Legislature of the Sixteenth Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico, and for other purposes. 1 (Act 15): "AN ACT to extend the two appropriations under the title 'Puerto Rico Scholarship Commission: General Expenses' in *1 the general expense budget for the support of the Government of Puerto Rico, fiscal year ending June 30, 1948, and for other purposes". P. S. 13 (Act 17): "AN ACT to - establish the Puerto Rico Office at Washington; to abolish the Puerto Rico Office at Washington created by Act 224 of May 12, 1945, as amended; to abolish the Puerto Rico Information Office created by Act 225 of May 12, 1945, as amended; to repeal said Acts 224 of May 12, 1945, as amended, and 225 of May 12, 1945; etc." P. S. 3 (Act 18): "AN ACT to amend Title and Section 2 of Act 500, 'To allocate the sum of three million three hundred thousand dollars to be invested by the Emergency Island Council in projects to serve it in accordance with the provisions of Title I of Act 18 of November 27, 1942, as subsequently amended; and to repeal the provisions of Act 18 of November 27, 1942, as subsequently amended; and to repeal the provisions of Act 18 of November 27, 1942, as subsequently amended; and to repeal the provisions of Act 18 of November 27, 1942, as subsequently amended; and to repeal the provisions of Act 18 of November 27, 1942, as subsequently amended. (b) To allocate the sum of three thousand dollars to be invested by the Emergency Island Council in socio-economic study projects, in accordance with the provisions of the aforementioned law; to authorize the Emergency Island Council to dispose after June 30, 1948, and until invested, of any surplus which may result from the appropriations made to said Council on previous dates for projects of ■arvieio and for administrative" operating expenses, and for "other fimi', approved on April 30 * of IMS, P for other" purpose*"'". 4"; dO íTt. 11 (An Act to amend Section 25.A of Act number 8, known as the "Spirits and Alcoholic Beverages Act", approved on June 30, 1936, as subsl(Contlnued on page 28).
Aranha was passing through Puerto Rico
Dr. Oswaldo Aranha passing through San Juan, on his way to Rin de Janel, ro. Here we see him in the company of his daughter, Miss Dedal Aranha, during his brief stay at the Isla Grande airport. (Photo EL MUNDO)
President ONV said that perhaps he will circulate the island memorial He expressed that the assembly of nations triumphed in the sense of strengthening the conscience of the people. - A greeting to the Puerto Ricans
By S. Gálves MATURANA Editor of EL MUNDO The memorial raised to the United Nations by the delegation of Puerto Rican intellectuals, calling for the termination of the colonial regime in Puerto Rico, was not considered at the last session of the UN, chaired by Dr. Oswaldo Aranha, according to what was reported yesterday morning by him, on his way through Puerto Rico, on his way to the city of Rio de Janeiro, in one of the planes of Pan American World Airways. Dr. Aranha informed that the Puerto Rican delegation arrived when the work had already been completed and that because of this no action was taken. He added that in the future, "perhaps for the next session, the memorial will be circulated among the United Nations, so that they may study it carefully". The President of the United Nations Assembly, Dr. Oswaldo Aranha, analyzing the work of the World Organization in its second session, chaired by him, said that the Assembly has strengthened the conscience of the peoples against the misunderstanding that vitiates the root of the problems affecting the world. However, the prominent Brazilian statesman also said that the Assembly has managed to harmonize the parts into which the world is divided, although this task also corresponds to the peoples and individuals. In a special interview for EL MUNDO, during his brief stay at the airport of Ilha Grande, Dr. Aranha answered the corresponding questions as follows: -Do you believe, Mr. President, that this session of the United Nations Assembly has accomplished the task that you assigned to it in your inaugural speech, when you said that its work should "instill in all peoples and in all men everywhere, a vigorous confidence in the Organization? -The United Nations is the only hope of the world.
The United Nations is the world's only hope for obtaining and maintaining peace and security. It must be borne in mind that the United Nations cannot achieve its purposes unless it is supported by all who believe in those ends. Every man and every woman should especially co-operate in rejecting any Idea which would further alienate nations rather than bring them closer together. - In this sense I believe that the ?bra of this session represents considerable progress in the direction you have mentioned? -What are, Dr. Aranha, in your opinion, the most notable achievements of this Assembly? -It indicates that you would like to mention some of the specific decisions that have been approved by the Assembly. However, in my opinion, the main successes achieved refer to the strengthening of the conscience of the peoples, against the incomprehension that lies at the root of the problems that afflict the world. And so true is this, that even those who seem to sense a war in the immediate future come to the United Nations to reassure themselves against such a disaster. -In what respect, Dr. Aranha, do you consider that the Assembly has not achieved its purposes? -I believe that the Assembly has not yet succeeded in harmonizing the parties into which the world is divided. But this does not depend only on the Assembly, but rather on the effort of each people, of each individual, to understand and to accept some sacrifices that the common welfare demands in these days, for social stability and political order. When we were about to submit another question to the remarkable Brazilian statesman, we were forced to take our leave, before the call of the Pan American World Air (Continued on page 28).
Compendium of News
Oswaldo Aranha, president of the UNO, was in Puerto Rico; he said he will circulate the island memorial. * * * Social Welfare will discuss the problems of the Industrial School with the Governor. ♦' * * * House directed Secretary of Commerce to furnish a list of vital defense exports being made. ♦' * * * APA Board will consider tunee, whether to send delegate to hearing on cunte seucarére. - The inscription of the new voters will be effected during January 17 and 18. * * * Gerona asks the Attorney General to reveal the reasons why his nomination was not sent to the Senate. oes The American Legion is campaigning for Congress to enact unlver* aaL military training. - o * The APT is encountering difficulties in being able to acquire electrification equipment. o They asked the CSP to increase gas rates. 0 0 0 Health investigates diphtheria outbreaks in Patillas: is vaccinating children. o Governor signed a law authorizing the hiring of engineers to conduct a study on works at the port of Aguadilla.
Vlcens thinks that the participation in the subsidy should be for all coffee workers and not only the coffee pickers. * * * Indians and Cangrejeros start crucial series today; Ferry will pitch for Mayagüez. o. " ♦ . Not re Da me and Southern Cal ae face off today before 102,000 spectators. * . * * * > . . . ' Roy m Inaugurates island tennis championship. * * * CSP accelerates setting of permanent tariffs for Central Plata, as a means of accelerating work to implement Law 221 this year. * The prosecutors delivered to the Attorney General the Report on the Ln' veatigaclón practiced in the District Court of San Juan. ♦ * * * Strikers' revolt broke out in the south of France, where violent battles were fought, with advantage for the Communists at some points. The French Assembly gives a vote of confidence to Schuman; they mobilize dosclen. toa thousand acidados. - Legislative commission to recommend legislation to further facilitate development of new industries. * * * Administrative Board agrees to request that Commissioners be summoned to hear charges against the Mayor. * - *. Senate Republican Committee is drafting a program to focus inflation without including pe. Traman Melons.
APA board to consider whether to send delegate to hearing
The Board of Directors of the Sugar Producers Association will consider next Monday the need to send a representative to the hearings to be held in Washington next December 18, on the distribution of the direct consumption sugar quota among the local refineries. As is known, the United States Department of Agriculture, d* ftending to a recent proclamation of President Truman, set the aforementioned " date for these discussions, Another hearing, to determine domestic consumption, will be held *1 December 18. * It is probable that a representative of the local sugar refineries will participate in these discussions, it was hinted yesterday, This will be joined by the permanent representative of the growers in Wáshlngtoh, Mr. Dudley Smith, who will present the views of the local growers. In the distribution made in previous years, the quantities of sugar refined for a certain period of time by the industrial plants on the island were taken as a basis. The Department of Agriculture has announced that it now proposes to measure marketing ability on the basis of the highest
of refined sugar to the United States in one year, analyzing deliveries during the period 1935 to 1947. Specifically, the setting of the domestic quota for Puerto Rico under the terms of the Sugar Act of 1948 will be discussed. An analysis of the requirements for Puerto Rico will be made at this hearing. With respect to the domestic consumption quota, special interest is given to the determination to be made in this regard. It is the hope of sugar producers in all areas that the quota to be fixed will have a direct influence on the stability of the price of the product. Too high a quota would cause the price for future deliveries, which remains below the price currently prevailing, to continue to fall, thus harming the economic stability of the industry. At the meeting of the Board of Directors of the APA to be held next Monday, the Sugar Union's list of demands will also be presented. In this document, it was reported yesterday, a request for a day's wage of 83.30 per day for the factory workers and $5 for the factory workers.
C.S.P. accelerates work on bill 221.
Will set Central Plata rates; will use this case as a guideline Will decide on carry-over pay T oledo believes éolbnoir-bi* difference in rates should be made up The Ucenclato. Jorge V.'-Tole "M president d "ía Comisión de Servirlo Público, declared yesterday that said organism in its determination to Implement in its full force Law 221, which made the sugar mills public service companies, Íe proposes to accelerate the work and ijar la" -■taclias permanentes para la Central Plata, so that this case trace the guideline to be followed in the other cases. A study is being made in connection with this plant and the Accounting or Engineering Divisions of the Commission have been instructed to complete the valuation and accounting statistics for this sugar company by June, 1947, and then proceed to fix its permanent rate. In accordance with the provisional tariff fixed by the Commission, the plant shall not make less than five percent profit. The proportion in milled sugar corresponding to the settlers and to the plant will be established. When the case of the Central Plata is decided, several fundamental questions will be resolved, which will serve as a guideline for deciding the other cases. One of these is whether the rate base will be the reproduction cost or the original cost of the plant. The law in force provides that the capital usefully invested shall be taken as the basis. It will also be considered whether to maintain or definitively eliminate the compensation that the plant gave to the settlers for dragging and dragging. If this compensation were eliminated, the plant would have less expenses, but the settler's share in the product of his canes would increase. Up to now, the proportion of milled sugar fixed by the Commission is 85 percent for the settler and 35 percent for the sugar mill. The colonos sector of the Asociación do Agricultores and the Asociación de Productores de Azúcar have been studying and discussing what should be the participation of both in the milling product, without taking into account the Commission's decision. Mr. Toledo stated that the final decision of the Commission in the case of Central Plata, may influence the decision made by the federal Secretary of Agriculture, to whom the Colonos Sector will submit the case, "even though the decision of the Commission, regardless of what the Secretary of Agriculture determines, will be the one that will have the force of law". Mr. Toledo explained that if the determination of the Secretary of Agriculture as to the participation of the colonists is greater than that set by the Commission in the provisional tariff, the provisional tariff itself provides that it shall govern the determination of the Secretary. If, on the other hand, the determination of the Secretary of Agriculture is greater than that fixed by the Commission, the determination fixed by the Commission shall govern. The Chairman of the Commission went on to explain that if, when the permanent rate is finally fixed, the settler's share is greater than that fixed in the provisional rate, the plant will be obliged to compensate the settler for the share which it has failed to give him for the time during which the provisional rate has been in force. If, on the other hand, the share is less, it will be the settler who will have to return the share he received from the power plant in excess of that fixed. (Continued on p. 28) ,.
signed a law on the port ' of Aguadilla ' * ' A*" *
The Governor yesterday signed P.O.C. No. 4 (Act No. 12), which makes it possible for the Department of the Interior to begin studies related to the development of the Aguadilla port works. This measure amends Section 4 of Act 480 of May 15, 1947, so that the Department of the Interior may engage, for the purposes expressed, the services of any firm* cor-pjp^ldn-part leu lar de Ingenwns. also the Governor signed yesterday P. of the C. 2 (IT Act), eff- < mondando el título y el articulo I de la Ley 85 del 7 de mayo de 194T, para qu" pueden usarse parte de los fondos asignados por esta Ley, jp estudios sobre el desarrollo de B zona portuaria de San Juan, 4 La Ley 480 de 1947, relacionad"' con el Puerto de Aguadilla, asigna dólares para que el Coml-j alonado de lo interior proceda m realizar un estudio de Jos hechos %ue puedan hacer económicamente! recommended the dredging of the port of Aguadilla and the construction of breakwaters, docks, piers and other works necessary for the same; so that said official, with the approval of the Governor, may proceed to the study and preparation of plans for this dredging and works; and so that the said official, also with the approval of the Governor, may proceed to the execution* of the project. The Commissioner, Mr. Jorge J. Jiménez, said that iodo ready to begin the studies determined by the Law and that (Continued on page 28) 4 Aicéna incluve. i w '! p obTeros ¿el; café en Cree participación eni í aubddio no debe aer í para loa cogedores ; El Administrador General de SuV ■ministros, señor Antonio Vicénr Ríos, ha fijado en 20 por ciento la participación da los obreros en el subsidio de 85.00 que habrá da darse a loa agricultores de café por cada quintal del grano producido en la cqsecha de 1947-48. In reporting the foregoing to Governor Piñero, to the Presidents of the House of Representatives, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin and Mr. Franclaco M. Susonl, and to the Chairman of the House Finance Committee, Mr. Heradio H. Rivera Colón, the General Administrator of the Board of Directors, Mr. Heradio H. Rivera Colón, the General Administrator of Supplies expresses that, in his opinion, the participation of the workers in the subsidy should not be limited to the coffee pickers and that, on the contrary, it should be extended to the workers who were employed in the works of pulping, weeding, clearing, fertilizing, etc. The delivery of the part of the subsidy that corresponds to the workers will be made by the farmers themselves, who will have to provide the General Supply Administration with a list of the benefited workers. This list must contain the name of each worker, his residence and the number of days worked, among other information. According to the regulations prepared by Mr. Vicéns Ríos, submitted to the aforementioned officials, "the farmers, owners or lessees of farms that accredit the origin and production of the grain and that have rendered the Declaration of Existence and Harvest of coffee for 1947-48 will be eligible for the subsidy. In order to obtain the subsidy, it will be essential to verify the sale of the coffee to the AGS. In cases where the farmer has sold his coffee at the time of the publication of the order on the administration of the compensation, he may apply for the subsidy, and the General Supply Administrator will approve it.
Strikers' revolt broke out in southern France
The health department is investigating the cases in Patillas It is vaccinating against diphtheria - One died On the occasion of the cases of diphtheria registered in the town of Patillas, which amount to six, the epidemiologist and chief of the.One of the "kitimas -4" this disease died on Thursday afternoon, so the Department of Health has been taking the necessary prevention and control measures. The school population in the Mamey neighborhood of Patillas is being vaccinated. Due to the fact that this population was hit by an epidemic outbreak a few months ago, with the death of 30 children without any official information as to the origin of the outbreak and the disease, the local health authorities are proceeding to attend to all suspected cases. Our correspondent in Patillas, Pedro FéUx Velázquez, sent us yesterday morning the following telegram about Jos. cases of diphtheria in that town: "One of the (continued on p. 28)
Board agrees to request that the councilmen be summoned Administrative body of San Juan dea to hear the Mayoress's case Yesterday the Administrative Board of the Capital met, agreeing to request the Governor of Puerto Rico to summon an extraordinary meeting of the Board of Commissioners to hear the charges filed against the Administrator of the Capital by Rafael Carie and Manuel Vlssepó. The Board has been mentioned in said charges, in the course of its" administrative actions. It was also agreed to give a vote of congratulations to the Mayor", Mr." Fell"" Rincon de Gautier, for "Ja magnificent work done by her durartte the year she has been in the administration of the Government of I" Capital." The Administrative Board met yesterday morning to conai der "r some auctions of food and groceries for the Municipal Hospital. Two of these auctions," that of milk and bread, were declared void," because no bidders were found. As for the "ice, meat and vegetables, the p.upo. altions were passed to Dr. Rooorto Jiménez López, Director of Municipal Beuiflcencía, so that he may study them and make the pertinent recommendations. Once the matter of the auctions had been discussed, Dr. Jimenez Lopez stated that the charges against the Mayoress, which had been made public through the press, mentioned the Administrative Board, for which reason it was convenient that said body consider the question of requesting from the Governor of the Island an extraordinary session in which the charges would be aired, so that the management of said body in the aforementioned matter could be determined. Dr. Jimenez Lopez made the clarifications in the form of a motion, which was seconded by Mrs. Elisa Mora de Gadea. School Director The Board agreed to make this request. Another motion by Dr. Jimenez was to congratulate the Mayoress for the work done during her first term as Mayor of the Capital. This motion was duly seconded by the Treasurer, Mr. Angel Diez de Andino, and was duly approved. The Administrative Board of the Capital is composed of the Mayor and the Mayoress of the Capital. (Continued on page 28)
The registration of the new electors will be on January 17 and 18.
At its last meeting, held recently, the Island Board of Elections set the dates of January 1? and 18 for the general registration of new voters in Puerto Rico. Saturday the 17th will be dedicated to the registration of men and Sunday the 18th to that of women. From one moment to the next, the Board shall proceed to group or divide the rural and urban zones of each electoral precinct for the purpose of assigning the registration colleges. In accordance with*the new. According to the new Electoral Law, this year there will be registration polls in all Jos barrios of the Island, provided that such polls can be seized at the roadside. Previously, the citizens of these
previously the citizens of these rarate areas had to go down to the city to register. Mr. Charles H. Terry, General Superintendent of Elections, has requested that all local boards report the estimated number of new voters in each municipality to determine the number of polling places to be set up in each precinct. The new law provides that not more than 200 will be registered in each polling place, when previously up to 300 were allowed. The registration petitions are now simpler, with fewer questions; but all those who register must mark on the ballot the fingerprints of both thumbs, exempt from (Continued on page 28).
Violent battles broke out in seven of the area's cities Colonial troops on the alert in Marseilles
In Arles the Police were thrown out: weight this Iqgró recapture the town For Joseph W. GRIGG -* PARIS, December 5 (FU) --Vio- ' slow battan"" bordering" on civil war broke out today in at least seven southern French cities, but the Government kept control of 1" situation in Marseilles, by e| sending 10,000 colonial troops withdrawn from Africa to the port disturbed by tas hv.elga". The" strikers" seized power in Arles and Saint Etienne for most of the tUa, but were later dispersed. Similar attempts in Marseilles were suppressed by tanks and troops. At Avifon, the Police' succeeded in driving off a crowd of centonare" of Insurgents, by the use of tear gas. Fighting was also reported on Bezlers. Narbonne and Porplrtán. Nice was isolated. While the troops were fighting the revolt in the South, the Communist-dominated Confederation of Workers was making new peace offers, requesting an audience with President Vincent Aurlo! Meanwhile, the Council of the Republic crushed the Communist opposition to the approval of the drastic anti-strike government bill and sent it to the printers, which is the last step before it becomes law. The most violent fighting was reported from Arles, 44 miles northwest of Marseilles, where the strikers seized the entire city and drove the Pollda out of town after serious encounters. The strikers seized the federal railway station, interrupting all the main lines of communication with Marseilles, but failed in an attack on the Pollda barracks. Military reinforcements were urgently sent from Marseilles to Arles, to help the policemen, who reorganized on the outskirts of the city after having been driven out by the strikers. The main target of the troops was the railway station, a control point for sending reinforcements and food supplies to Marseilles. Late in the night, the police claimed to have regained power in Arles, but the situation remained tense amidst the threat of new irruptions. Fifty thousand strikers seized Saint Etienne, an important three-track railroad junction 150 miles north of Marseilles, sacked a military factory and held control of the city throughout the day before they were dispersed by the police and military reinforcements. The strikers, armed with clubs and iron bars, kept the city under control of their movements. Some detained passers-by in the streets, demanding that they show them their identification cards. Others remained at intersections to stop automobile traffic, while other groups obstructed the roads leading in and out of the city, not allowing vehicles other than food trucks to pass. The brigades that remained patrolling the streets seized an arms factory, where they took combat instruments. Workers in other factories were forced to abandon their jobs. A train was stopped, but was not overturned. Passenger service, which began in the morning after several days of strike action, was stopped again. Newspaper workers, including typographers and distribution truck drivers, established a Censorship Committee to scrutinize what happened to newspapers before they were allowed to publish. The Committee threatened to order a strike of all typesetters if anything they disliked appeared in the papers. Police reinforcements and mounted guards arrived early in the evening and restored order. Violence also occurred in Marseilles, but it was promptly crushed by the Pollda, mounted guards, detachments of French paratroopers and 10,000 African troops who were sent to the city to take up permanent positions, in order to guard the streets and public buildings. Groups of strikers tried to attack the San Carlos station and stop railroad traffic but were held at bay. Another group, this time.of students, tried to start a demonstration on the 4 port area*, but 1" same fi" .A suppressed at the memento. "The 1 1 Msrsella was vlrt'* >0 Continued on next page
I The Industrial School case will be discussed!
Welfare Division to present the problem to Governor Value of work is over $500,000 Mrs. Goodsaid reports progress in the state nor ental of the work has not yet been started on the Industrial School improvement of the May "gÜ6z Youth Industrial School. The officials of the ÑVfcoetedOd de' Ríenestar Público of the Department of Health intend to meet with Governor Piñero for the purpose of discussing the improvement plan for this public institution, as reported yesterday by the Chief of the Institutions Negociarlo, Mr. Zenón Orflz. The problem of this School was described in the following way by the director of the Division of Public Welfare, Mrs. Celestina Zalduon'do de Goodsald, in a report given to the public. "In the implementation of the philosophy that the Public Welfare Division has outlined for the organization and operation of the service, we have encountered innumerable problems, many of them of long scope, and consequently still unresolved at the end of the fiscal year, Figure among the latter and in an outstanding manner, due to the seriousness of the situation and its effects: both in the population of the institution and in public opinion, the problem of the disastrous conditions in which the buildings that compose the Industrial School for Young People of Mayagüez are found. Even though the Puerto Rico Legislature approved the amount of $8250,000 for the reconstruction of the old buildings that today house a population of 283 youths, the reconstruction of the old buildings and the construction of new buildings has not yet begun. For all the work to be done, more than double the sum indicated, ? if we add to the poor state of the buildings, the water shortage suffered by the students and employees of this institution, we will have an idea of how difficult is the task of dealing with a large number of young people, who can not feel great physical well-being, when sometimes they can only take one bath a week and when they have to walk around dirty for lack of water for washing their clothes. We hope that the many efforts made during the past fiscal year will bear fruit during the current fiscal year. "In spite of the conditions already noted in the Industrial School for Young People, we consider it a source of satisfaction that a notable change has been achieved in the mental health of the students, Anyone who unexpectedly visits this Institution will notice that most of the young people who are seen ('"minando por los alrededores de, los edificios, en la finca. In the sports fields, in the classrooms or in the workshops, they are respectful, helpful and friendly boys, and that their faces reveal a certain serenity that may even be surprising to find in people with a past so full of bitter experiences. "Of course, there are problems in our Industrial School which are typical of any institution for delinquents and we could even say of any type of organization which houses a growing number of students of different ages and personalities, with different tastes, attitudes and interests and, above all, with marked mental deficiency. Thus, in the Industrial School of Mayagüez there are fights and escapes, just as in the best industrial schools in the United States. These fights and runaways have been on a sharp decline as the school has strengthened its services. The explosions of violence which were frequent in the Industrial School, and which were due to the methods of confinement and repression which were used, have almost entirely disappeared. "For the achievement of the objectives" that the Division has outlined for its institutional program, it is necessary to readapt and repair the buildings now occupied by the institutions, and in the case of the Industrial School for Young People in Mayagüez, the reconstruction of the buildings that now exist, and the rebuilding of the buildings that were used for the school, as well as the construction of the new buildings.