THE WORLD DAILY NEWSPAPER, THE MORNING
nONOincos del tiempo taba LA ISLA, BOY: Partly cloudy with scattered showers. Winds from the east, 14 to 18 miles per hour. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 80; low, 72. Barometric pressure at sea level, - 4:30 p.m., 29.94 inches of mercury.
48 Pages 5/
MORNING
MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
Check brakes. Cooperate with automobile inspection.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MAY 3, 1947
Enterad m aeeond elaaa matter. Pm* Offloa, San Juan. P. B.
NUMBER 1093'
'Muñoz Marin - - - - to meet with liquor dealers.
Reports received" yesterday by the Central Consumers' Committee" reveal the prevailing tendency in "1 Island commerce toward a reduction in the" price" of articles" of primary" necessity. Information provided by the leaders of the consumer movement to force a reduction in the price of foodstuffs reveals that in several towns in the interior of the island there have been reductions in the price of foodstuffs. It was indicated, however, that in other" places of the Island "the prices" are frozen at the previous level, while" in others, "the low prices have been registered".
Compendium of News
Ponce has new Director of Beneficence in Dr. Castalng; nine municipal secretary, in Vicente Ruis. 1a Mrs. Grillases de Rolg replaced Martínteno García in the Homes Authority. - - - ün festive atmosphere characterized the reopening of Park Street to public traffic ~ after repairs. Tomorrow was the start of the Music Week. - - - - - Local industry fears lowering of tariffs on Cuban reds. - - - _ ~ I smallpox vaccination temporarily halted, except for those who are going to embark. - Yesterday was unveiled the tribute plaque to the island heroes who victoriously defended the silver against the attempted invasion of the English in 1197. "The Army will be governed by a merit system for all ranks as of January 1, 1949. - * - -- < . ~ The Territorial Committee of the URP has been convened for - next Wednesday, 1a afternoon. - o - ■ Reports in possession of the Committee - of Consumers" reveal a _ trend toward a general downward trend in prices.
The Sugar Producers' Association holds meeting next June". * The Association of Members" of the Insular Police supports the bill reorganizing the Corps. - National Guard, Organized Reserve and RO TC units from Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands will participate in summer exercises at bases of the Military Department of the Antilles. - Public" employees who were affected by the 1982 reduction of "ueldna nrde- 4 nothing in 1982 by then Governor Beverley go to the Supreme Court to demand that they be paid what they were paid. . a group of merchants will discuss the price reduction plan" in order to, no matter what the Commerce and Industry meeting decides, organize "u Implantation. - Muñoz Marín said yesterday that next week he will meet with the liquor dealers to discuss the rum crisis. - Benitez upholds the suspension of Msyagties students. Miguel Aleman was thunderously acclaimed yesterday in New York City.
The President of the Senate, Mr. Luí" Muñoz Marín, declared yesterday to a commission of workers of the '.liquor industry who visited him that he proposes to meet with Jos ' members" of the Institute of the Rnn in ■ the course of the next week to discuss with them the situation prevailing in that industry. The meeting of the liquor workers' commission was held at the offices of Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, at the request of the leaders of the Unión de Trabajadores de la Industria Licorera Nfllte<j3 to the Federación Libre, to grant them an interview with the purpose of discussing the difficult situation of thousands of workers in said industry due to the existing crisis in said industry. The workers' commission was composed of CarIns León, president of the union; Entilo Graciano Galán, secretary; Pedro Torres, vice-president; Felipe Alméstlca, vice-president for the Ponce district; and Octavio Padilla, vice-president for the San Juan district. After the workers raised with Mr. Muñoz Marín the problem of the "unemployment" of thousands of workers in the industry due to the decline in rum sales in the mainland market, Mr. Muñoz Marín declared, according to the workers, that "the industrialists have not yet raised the existing problem in the liquor industry with the Island Government". He indicated that [the industrialists have not approached the Government about the payment of taxes and other issues related to the crisis in the industry. Mr. Muñoz Marín stated, the workers reported, that he nevertheless proposed to meet with the members of the Instituto del Ron to consider the whole matter next week. The workers also said that the President of the Sonado stated that "something must be done for the Industry and the workers, v had the Industrialists approached the Government, it would have discussed the problem with them". That "he is not convinced that the practice of paying federal taxes on rum in the United States can save the industry" he told Mr. Muñoz-Marin to the committee, adding that "if the industry is to be saved by paying taxes there and he is convinced of this, he would be willing to accept such a change". i Regarding the allegations that (Continued on page 24)
In some* points they are still frozen* at the previous level-Juana Díaz offers lower* prices* than those of San Juan Díaz.
i Consumer Commissions of the" town" of Guayama. Bayamón. 'Juana Díaz, visited the directors of the consumer campaign| re" rendering Reports on 1o" nl- । vele" de precio" existing in di- ■ chas poblaciones, while communications on the particular werei rreceived from San Germán. ! As reported yesterday by "Mr. Alberto E. Sanchez, leader ' i of the movement of the ronsümldo1 res, the commission of Guayania revealed that in that city "the ten' dáñete of the commerce is to maintain - the prices at the previous level. However, fats, lard and butter have been reduced somewhat. Butter is selling at one dollar a pound, while lard is selling at 38 cents. Meats maintain the" former prices of 90 cents" for steak and sixty-five cents for chu- ! Jetas. From Bayamón it was reported that "in spite of the fact that this town is so close to the metropolitan area, prices continue to be stable". The price of butter in Bayamón is one dollar ten cents; lard sells for 39 cents." Pork chops are sold at 80 cents a pound. It is reported that there has been a 15 percent drop in grain prices. Remarkable reductions in maniera and butter were reported by the Juana Diaz commission that "e have been recorded in that town. z-The first line item is selling at 33 cents while" the second is J (Continued on page 32)
Jews to be allowed to present case
So agreed yesterday by the General Assembly of the United Nations Achieve harmony of the Big Three Trygvie Lie spoke against it. -Indian delegate made an admonition By James McGlincy . UNITED NATIONS HALL. Flushing, New York. 2, <PU). ■- Loa Tren Grantleg, in one of those rare bursts" of harmony, decided there is to give the Jewish people an opportunity to, to state their feelings as to the Palestine situation. before the United Nations General Assembly. The agreement also gave the Jewish Agency a voice in the matter. The powers remained divided as to when the Jews should be allowed to speak. The United States favors the argument that they should be allowed to appear before one of the committees of the 55-nation assembly to present their case. Russia, on the other hand, supports the Polish plan to hear them before the General Assembly. The difference is really technical and the American and Soviet representatives were in confusion, looking for ways to reach an agreement. Britain remained more or less aloof, but, albeit reluctantly, acceded to the American initiative to divert the controversy and hear the Jews. The" British admit that it would be good to hear them, if there were a "constitutional" means of doing so. The Big Three seem to agree that the Jewish Agency, which is the official spokesman for the Jews in Palestine under the mandate of the former League of Nations, should take the lead in representing the Jews. Al. The Hebrew Committee for National Liberation and other organizations have been granted the privilege of making a statement. The program of the plenary session of the General Assembly for today was cancelled, and a special session was convened for 11 A. M. tomorrow, in order to pay a visit to the President of Mexico, Miguel J Aleman. The Helm Committee, composed of delegates from 14 nations, met this morning and this afternoon to consider the question of permitting Jews to speak at the United Nations. The delegates were obviously influenced by the tenor of the debate on the Palestine question before the General Assembly. The Arab delegates have penetrated deeply to the heart of the matter, while they were supposed to be subject to a procedural debate. The Jews, of course, have not had an opportunity to respond to the Arabs. It is generally believed that the United States had its own reasons for tilting its policy toward the Jewish Agency, given the powerful representation in Washington of Zionist and other groups. The U.S. delegate, Warren R. Austin brought with him. The United States delegate, Warren R. Austin, brought with him the new policy when he arrived after an interview with the Secretary of State, Georgk C. Marshall, in the national capital. \ The Polish delegate. Joseph Winiewics, initiated a debate in the Helm Committee, arguing that the Jews be allowed to address the General Assembly. The fact of in--vltarlo," he said, "would not only be in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations but would be in accordance with the spirit of the Charter." He added that, Poland in the face of the memory of the "death camps which covered our land like cobwebs," we will continue to fight for the Jews. Jan Papanek, of Czechoslovakia, explained Poland's position. The Slavic bloc's position was deduced from this. The Latin American "nado- > - ne" had already indicated that they favored the idea of (Continued on page 24) I
I Upper House gave him । yesterday a victory.
9" Robert A. Taft Leader of the Republican majority in the U.S. Senate, credited with a victory in approving the drastic bill to control the actions of labor unions. Miguel Aleman cheered in New York yesterday O'Dwyer greeted him in Spanish - Columbia gave him an honorary degree - NEW YORK, 2 (PU)-Mexican President Miguel Aleman received a thunderous ovation from 1,500,000 New Yorkers today as he paraded in the pouring rain in a caravan of 10 cars down the "Avenue of Heroes" - lower Broadway - to the city's City Hall. Alemán arrived from Washington in President Truman's private railroad car at 6:24 a.m. and was greeted at the Pennsylvania Statehouse by Mayor William O'Dwyer, Grover Whalen, chairman of the Mayor's Reception Committee, and other dignitaries of the city. O'Dwyer greeted Alemán in Spanish. The first Mexican chief executive to visit this pal" while in office, and his entourage, then left in Mr. Truman's private automobile for the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel for breakfast. MU There are plans to hold parades, receptions and other ceremonies in honor of the smiling German for the duration of his three-day visit. The" streets were colorfully decorated and the lamp posts adorned with the seals ofl' cíale" of 1a" 22 republic" of the he- । western mystery when the Mexican President's party emerged from"! hotel to head for the rasa alcal. day. Bands of music and military units joined the motorcade, motorist. It was one of the largest welcoming ceremonies that have taken place in many years. In the council hall of the Mayor's Office, Alemán was invested with । (Continued on page 20)
Senate tightens bill ! 1 '' aimed at controlling Unions? Another island group will discuss prices
- New adherents to reduction idea Messages received from San German, Santa Isabel merchants Independently of what the Council of Commercial and Industrial Associations agrees on Monday, the leaders of the metropolitan area and Rio Piedras who head the local price reduction plan will meet that same day in the evening to draw up a general organization of the campaign that would cover the entire island. This other meeting, which was reported to have been held yesterday, will be held in the halls of the Federation of Commerce, in the capital, to which leaders of all the branches of commerce in Puerto Rico, and of all the commercial associations of the country, with a central office in this capital, have been invited. Also, to the leaders of the other commercial organizations that operate independently in different parts of the Island, urging them to cooperate in the general organization of an insular character that is projected to be established. The Commerce, considering the reports it has received, considers that the atmosphere is favorable to the establishment of the plan throughout the Island. The "Comerciante" of Ponce and other towns are already within the movement, mentioning among them Santa Isabel, San Germán and Aibonito. Mr. José R. Nlr., a Santurce merchant, who led the first demonstrations of the price reduction plan in Puerto Rico, summoned by telegram the leaders of the commerce of San Juan and the rest of the Island, for the aforementioned meeting on Monday night in this capital. He said he will propose at the meeting that the effective and definitive instrumentation for the price reduction be established. Mr. Nin hopes that consideration will also be given to the advisability or not of any committee of a general nature] to be organized to determine reasonable and fair prices to be fixed for the various articles consumed by the people. I In San Juan, the Unión de Deta- । lllsta" de Puerto Rico, presided over by ! Mr. Manuel Borrero, will meet next Thursday night, at the Eugenio ¡ María de Hostos library, in. The meeting was called as a result of an agreement of the board of directors. As announced by EL MUNDO opor- ¡ tunately, the board of directors of the Retailers Union was also summoned to an extraordinary meeting, which was held on Thursday night, and it was agreed to convene a meeting to consider, preferably, the matter of the implementation in the country of the Newburyport plan. The Puerto Rico Retailers' Union is composed of grocery retailers. Its president, Mr. Borrero, who has publicly stated his support for the plan, owns a store in Obrero. í From Aibonito, where it is reported that many retailers favor the Newburyport plan, a telegram was received from the local com-, lem-, lizar the test is to be carried out jointly throughout the country, "avoiding as far as possible the possibility of the Newburyport plan being implemented.
1 The request for a 50% reduction ■ in the" customs duties, made by Cuban ' Ins- ' licorista" to President Truman, if granted, would greatly affect the country's industry, as was reported yesterday by spokesmen of the Ins- ' licorera Insular liquor industry. > It is expected that from one moment to the next this concession will be made to the Cuban "roñe" manufacturers since, lately, pressure has been exerted on them by powerful interests in the Conference.
Music Week activities to begin tomorrow
Puerto Rican dances occupy a place of preference in the inaugural concert of the Music Week to be offered tomorrow, Sunday, at La Fortaleza. The program includes two dances by composer José Enrique Pedrelra, to be performed on piano by the author; and two by Morell Campos and Rafael Alers, respectively, to be interpreted by the Carme Díaz Soler Orchestra under the baton of Mr. Alera. The program will begin at 8:30 a.m. and will be broadcast by all radio stations.
radio broadcasting stations. Governor Plftero and the chairman of the Music Week Executive Committee, Mr. Ernesto Ramos An. tonlnl, are in charge of the opening remarks for the occasion. The complete program of the evening is as follows: I WORDS OF SALUTATION; Hon. Jesús T. Plftero, Goberna- । dor of Puerto Rico and Honorary Chairman of the Army Committee (Continued on page 21).
The Department of Health added that it expects to be in a position, by the middle of next week, to resume the vaccination campaign in the metropolitan area and gradually intensify vaccination in the towns of the island. ! of the island. The Department has reserved, however, a quantity which it considers sufficient to continue to serve all those persons who intend to embark for the United States and who are required to present a certificate of vaccination on disembarking in the United States. Persons going on a voyage may come for vaccination, as heretofore, to the station established in the building occupied by the Health Department, Pnnce de Leon Avenue, stop 19, Santur* ; "- The following is the" Daily Report ! of the vaccination practiced on Thursday, May 1, 1947, in the city of Santur* ; "- The following is the" Daily Report ! of the vaccination practiced on Thursday, May 1, 1947, in the building occupied by the Health Department. May 1, 1947, in public and private schools" and Public Health Sta'clones: i Public schools: G. Benitez, 580; Muñoz Rivera, 84; Castelar, 183; Asenjo, 387; Gómez Brioso, 870. Total, 2,104. Private schools: Iglesia del Cristo. 30; Academy of the Sacred Heart, 181; Padre Bej i rlo". Public Health Stations: San Juan, 622; Puerta de Tierra, 335; El Fangulio, 708; Barrio Obrero, 1,386; San Torre, 2,352; Tota, 5,403. Municipal capital: 217. Total number of people vaccinated: 8,117,
. - aMMwa -- ■ - - - - . MaMMWMM" ■ x.- > y 5" ■■■ -r.-r-n i Local industry fears lowering tariffs on Cuban rums (Island spokesman believes this would contribute even more to affect Puerto Rican production. - The matter is in the hands of the Geneva Convention
--- The issue is in the hands of the United Nations "Trade and Employment" Convention, meeting in Geneva. 1 The granting of this 50% reduction in tariffs, the increase in freight rates, already established, and the payment of federal taxes on the island, is estimated to deal a mortal blow to the island industry. According to these por- । tavoces, the Cuban liquor industry is working for the suppression of the "Internal Taxes" on the exportation of alcohol and liquors, and to obtain a better treatment for Cuban liquors in the foreign market, using as a strong argument that while American whiskeys pay only 85.18 to enter Cuba, rum from dleho pal" pays J57.00 per case when crossing the border. The Puerto Rican liquor merchants base their fear on the fact that at the Conference which is being held in Geneva, it is probable that a permanent agreement will be reached on the organization of international trade in the future, accepting that the fundamental basis of such agreements should be a substantial reduction of customs tariffs, and that trade agreements, even when made between two countries, should have a multilateral character; that is to say, that the benefits to be granted should be of a multilateral character, and that the benefits to be granted should be of a multilateral nature: that 'l benefits granted to - a pals shall be deemed to be extended I (Continued on page 15).
-BW----W--"M--WWW--■- m-WM-W-li "ln > II ----W-W Vice Admiral Barbey visits Piñero K i a -b' ■III K V: J i i i Z -/o wwrff I ? 'BLrl I bH 1 .... ' The new commander of the Tenth Naval District, Vice Admiral D. E. r Barbey, visited La Fortaleza yesterday morning to pay his respects to Governor Plflern. In this photo we see him (ísqulerda) converging with the Chief Executive during 1" visit. The smallpox vaccination is temporarily halted because the Department of Health has not received the vaccines it had ordered. -The Department of Health reported yesterday that due to not having received new" deliveries of vaccine tips for inoculation against smallpox, "it will be necessary to paralyze for one day" the mass vaccination, as it has been practiced to date.
The case of the Container was submitted to the judge It was alleged that the workers* assaulted the customer.- Extends interdict After being ventilated throughout the day yesterday, the case of the request for preliminary injunction, । directed against the Union of Workers of the Hato Rey carton packaging factory, Porto Rico Container, was finally submitted to the judge, announcing the judge EmlJiri S. Relava! Judge EmlJiri S. Relava, who heard the hearing, announced that in order to resolve the request for preliminary injunction, the Court extended the injunction order issued against the Union de ...Operarlo", until Wednesday afternoon. In the ra "o in question, Porto Rico Container alleged that the Union do Operarlos, presided over by Jose H. Rodriguez, has its" affiliates located, and intends to continue to locate them, in increasing numbers," in front of the plaintiff's plant, in a violent and injurious manner, preventing the plaintiff and its" employees, as well as its directors, the free entry and exit of the property, denying the defendants to the plaintiff,'ron such attitude, the free and peaceful use of "u property. The Union of Operators and the workers belonging to the CGT Sector of Senator Barreto Pérez were represented by attorney Ernesto Ramos Antonlni; the plaintiffs were represented by attorney Gaspar Rivera CeateI ro. - . The first witness for the plaintiff was attorney José M. । González Ang "1, lawyer and merchant, officer of the González Padln House. The witness testified that on April 22 he was called by Mr. Santos Zuhlllaga. manager of the Porto Rico Container, who told him he could go and pick up some merchandise he had at the factory, where he arrived at ten o'clock in the morning -- the president of the luh X-13 returned (Contlnued on page 5) Crawford introduces Governor's bill WASHINGTON, 2 PU)- Representative Fred Crawford, Republican of Michigan, today introduced a bill providing for the manner of electing the Governor of Puerto Rico. Crawford's bill would amend the Organic Act of Puerto Rico by providing that at the 1948 general election and at each succeeding election, the Governor shall be elected by the voters of Puerto Rico and shall hold office for a term of four terms. The following shall be required to hold office: be 30 years of age, be a citizen of the United States, be able to read and write (Continued on page 7).
Claim TA fares will raise travel costs Airline company says island airport would pay more* than in U.S. They are conducting a study of the case. The fee charged by the Navy was $1.50 for each landing By José M. GXivIm Calderón Editor of EL MUNDO Mr. J. Sierra, manager of Caribbean Atlantic Airlines, said yesterday that the fee proposed by the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority at a hearing held Thursday in the hearing room of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce to impose fees for the use of its airports "may cause an increase in fares" for air travel. In the tariff proposed by the Transportation Authority, the price is set at 18 cents per thousand gross pounds of cargo for planes providing local service, and 20 cents per thousand gross pounds for planes providing long distance service, such as those serving the route between Miami and Puerto Rico. According to what was reported yesterday by Mr. Sierra, of the Caribbean Atlantic Air Line, the landing fees to be paid, proposed by the Transportation Authority for the use of its airports, are higher than what is paid in the United States for air services. Another objection raised by the Caribbean Atlantic manager against the lower rate is that it should take into account the frequency of use of the airports, as is done in the United States. As reported yesterday by Mr. Sierra, the company he represents, whose planes make an average of 270 landings monthly at the San Juan airport, would have to pay about $1,100 to the Transportation Authority for airport use." Mr. Sierra also said that his company has a lower rate for airport use in the United States, where the frequency of landings is one of the factors considered when setting rates for this type of service. Lawrence, general manager of Pan American Airways, said yesterday that he was studying the tariff proposed by the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority to impose a landing fee for aircraft landing at its airports, and that he had asked the United States for the rates in effect at U.S. airports for comparison. The number of Pan American Airways planes landing at San Juan each month is 400, according to Mr. Lawrence, who said yesterday. The airplanes of this company, which are of the DC-3 and DC-4 classes, are supposed to pay, according to the tariff proposed by the Transportation Authority, fees of $3.94 for the former and $4.94 for the latter. Previously, when the airports were under the jurisdiction of the naval authorities, the fee imposed for the use of the airports was $1.50 for each landing. Mr. Alberto Lebrón, manager (Continued on page 2(1) Students' suspension not revoked Benítez says that after studying the appeal, he finds just cantigo e* In a resolution issued yesterday, the Rector of the University, Jaime Benitez, sustained the disciplinary measures imposed by the administrative authorities of the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts of Mayagüez, against the students suspended for their participation in the strike of the college student body during Holy Week. Consequently, Rector Benitez adversely resolved the appeals submitted to him by said students. Also saying that, after studying all the evidence - Investigating ln" students or "us representatives, he found no grounds to justify the revocation of the punishments imposed. the Rector of the University stated: "I have read all the documentation and written testimony related to the strike incident of the Colegio de Agricultura y. Artes.Mecánicas de Mayagüez: I have met with the Investigating Committee, with the suspended students or their representatives and with the Vlcerector, Mr. Luis Stéfanl. I find no basis whatsoever to justify revoking the measures adopted by the administrative authorities of Mayagüez. All appeals are adversely resolved".
A. Taft Democrats anticipate Truman veto i * , -. " Measure prohibits use of threat in acts of organizing unions By RAYMOND LAHR United Press Correspondent . WASHINGTON, 2. - (PU).- . The drastic labor union control bill in the Senate was tightened further today when the upper house, in its first test vote, adopted an amendment to prevent unions from using threats, violence or false statements in their organizing campaigns. -- The vote was 60 to 38 *. and proved a clear victory for Senate Labor Committee Chairman Robert A. Taft, ■ Republican of Ohio, who had been defeated by a coalition of Republicans and Democrats on the floor of the committee when he was defeated by a coalition of Republicans and Democrats. I no of the committee when he "nterlormenIy tried to include that amendment in ( the measure. The amendment specifically calls it an unfair labor practice for any union to ''restrict or restrict'' the nbr". ros in the selection of a union. Employers are already subject to a similar dlapoalclon. The Senate gave its approval to '- that clause in the face of Democratic warnings that with each amendment the possibility of a presidential veto increases. Taft argued that the proposal was in accord with the Democratic theory of the whole bill; to create i. 1* Equality between employer and worker. Taft argued bitterly with "enator Wayne L. Morse, Republican of Oregon, who maintained that the amendment would prohibit all" read k organizing strikes and subject unions to "obsta0 ' cullzaclón' actions before the National Labor Relations Board. Taft replied that it was impossible for him to see how it could be possible to see how it could be possible to prohibit organizational strikes unless they involved coercion. He said there was no reason for JNRO not to file a "hindering" lawsuit against the unions so quickly or " romo tes filed against the employers. The meeting between Taft and Morse '■ was a continuation of their battle in the Committee where the "ei- nator for Oregon was the leader of the Republican-Democratic coalition. ■ Taft. "e now shows himself confident '- that he can get 1a- '■ clone of three other restrictions that l " the Committee bloc objected to, but he 8 and other" Republican leaders are not sure of amassing aufl- " cient strength to pass te measure over the veto. The threat of a veto was raised by Senator Carl A. Hatch, Democrat of New Mexico. Hatch, Democrat of New Mexico, who said that, "with each amendment that is adopted, the prospect of a veto increases as the chances of a veto decrease. Morse also warned that the Sa. nate should "try the bill "pro1 hed by the Committee to the e" that it wishes to . avoid a veto which would prevent you from appro- . bation of labor legislation of al- . guna kind. Recalling that he was defeated do do" dte" ago when he tried to A , to have the bill divided into four sections, he said. "I'm getting used to being told I'm right as a matter of principle and wrong as a matter of policy. Taft said he was not making a plea for "party discipline - my request is based on the merits of the amendment. He said he did not consider the measure in general to be a "hard bill," and that he was not "proposing anything other than ) correcting injustices.' The Senate bill is a softer than the House-passed measure, and the final version to be worked out in a confe- . renda between the Senate and House is expected to be "something that is between ' te" do". But "e believes certain a veto. ' on the part of the President. The prealden- . ta Trúman has stated that he will not fin" 1 mar any bill which he conside- ' re punitive. > Taft gave notice that he was ready to compromise on one of his three remaining amendments. As drafted, the proposal would prohibit "jurisdictional strikes" and "holco- . theos seconding" them, allow employers to file injunctions against them, and permit lawsuits against unions that violate the law. ' The Labor Committee's version - would make such violations unfair" labor practices and only peí'. ■ mltirla that the JNRO would apply for Interdicts." i Twft is already decided now to ur- > glr that private employers should not ■ be 1e" si given the right to apply for in' terdicts. The other two amendments restrict general contracting in ln- ; dURtria" making it an unfair labor practice for national unions to coerce local unions, and would provide for some regulation of union welfare funds.