THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY i Good weather. IN ST JOHN'S. YESTERDAY: high temp. St; minimum, 77: rain, plot. Barometric pressure sea level, at 4:69 p.m., 29.96 inches of mercury.
38 Pages 5<
TOMORROW
YEAR XXVIII .
Check brakes. Cooperate with the Automobile Inspection.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MAY 24, 1947.
Bnterad aa aacond claaa natter, Post Office, Ban Juan. P. R.
NUMBER 10955
The school year ends on the 30th day of May.
On The infamous date cease ~ in even activities the School Canteens Fact* highlights of present course The Commissioner continues - unconfirmed-Resolved problem of Directors Cnr DARIO CARI O Editor of EL MUNDO Next Friday, 30 nmvn the school year of 1040-17 hl Depart amonto of Instruction in. _ formed that, with Ira school* piiblicaí, will end their actiVldade" of the year the commodore" esmiare" of the logging. A new academic period o", ta near the end, it was warned yesterday, without having been appointed and ' confirmed a Commissioner d* lnstrucclón The current Incumhonte, a", nor Mariann Vlllaronga, as snbe, took office on December 13 last aln having sldn cnnfliuuiJn his appointment, Now num. - It is also two" years since the previous Commissioner, Dr. Jose M Gallardo, left for the United States, after resigning the post, leaving an acting Commissioner, Herbert A. MarJlm ~ It is generally known that in the course of the last month it has been said several times that the confirmation of Vlllaronga will take place on certain dates. Recently, it was said that it was to be on May 13, but this did not occur. This situation has created the consequent concern and uncertainty in the circuits of the Department. Among the outstanding issues* of| aflojen as regards the* hc. Dvldade" of the Department, *!gurated the passage and implementation of Act 76, which transferred to that agency all municipal school property and municipal school services, and appropriated to the Department, in order to meet the new obligations which were imposed, the sum of one and one-half million dollars. The implementation of this law led to a conflict in the relations between the municipalities and the Department of Instruction, as the mayors and school directors protested strenuously that the latter should be deprived of the intervention which for many years they had exercised in municipal school affairs. This problem seems to have been revived by the recent approval of amendments to Law 76, by virtue of which the state principals are offered the intervention they had been advocating since the time the aforementioned statute was put into effect. ) Another striking event was the appointment of Dr. Mn--nano Vlllaronga as Comhlnnñdo of Instruction: after he was installed as Head of the Department of Instruction: "- installed as Head of the Depnr'amentn, although without having been confirmed. there came the announcement of the de- _ completion of introducing - changes as regards the teaching vehlcUio, romo part of a general plan of reforms in the school usterpa - school. The announcement, it will be recalled.' fixed specific to the effect d* that at the beginning of the next school year English would be taught in Intenslfic form and the other aslgnatui'is would be / conducted in the SpxAnl Language, It was also produlo legislation, which the Governor signed, pain to make a study of |ns ad- . The current academic year ends next Friday, but not all schools will close their doors on that day. According to the Department's instructions, graduation exercises may be held at any time next week, which indicates that the schools may conclude their school activities on or before Friday. In conjunction with the public schools, the school cafeterias will also close their doors on May 33, 2010.
Compendium of News
The House Lands Committee will act next Tuesday on the reform project Work continues on the road and detour plan. The Interim Governor, Father", believes the federal M,MWt,ooo will be saved. - ¿ ♦ It has been erected in San turre the parish of San .luán Rnscn, in charge of the Saleslanoa Fathers. Argentina deports eight agents" naiia; seeks another" appearing on U.S. list. Thus clears the way for the Rio Conference to be held. - The "Instruction will give preference to teachers" who wish to improve their English language skills, in the scholarship program - " - Anderson nn expects a change in the price of sugar. Rus said rations before a House Committee lead to believe that tntal decontrol of the commodity is near. - ♦ - Irtdrucclon accelerates plan on purchase of land for schools. - Federal Agriculture appropriated M7tMS.lt for cooperative agricultural extension work in Puerto Rico during next fiscal year.
\♦ - Doctor ( arlo" Muftnx Me (nrmlck has "Ido Invested by the University of Rostnn with the honorary degree of Doctor of CleneliiR, - * - Drought causes a daily deficiency in the aqueduct of 4 million gallons. Cueva reports." - ♦ ♦ Next Thursday will be reopened to public traffic Salvador Rrau Street, of this Capital. - ♦ ♦ Ohrern" and shipping companies resumed I*" negotiations to sign agreement. - ♦ The Puerto Rican pitcher -luán Páre" provided triumph to DeLand, of the Florida State League, with a three-base hit, as a starter. - s - The Belmont Stake" - the third jewel in the triple crown of American horsemanship. - The House Appropriations Committee cut the budget for the U.S. Department of Agriculture by 32%.
Drought causes aqueduct deficiency
Ao expects change in price of antear , J| I - / L ib Clinton P. Anderson It is believed that shortly eí rationing will be dining Chief dr Agriculture tie United States speaks on Cuban zafra By Charles McCabe United Peen"" Correspondent WASHINGTON. 23, (PU). -Clinton P Anderson, United States Secretary of Agriculture, told the House Appropriations Committee that sometime after the sugars from the Cuban crop begin to move to the United States, all controls on sugar may be abolished, Anderson made the statement in a closed session of the House Committee on Agriculture." closed session of the i i i Committee on March 17, e| "re-¡ । enrd of which was made public 1 on d" hny day, i "We believe," Anderson told the Co- i niíté. "that eq sometime after the 'next crop ru- । baña begins to move nacía | M ; ! refineries, we will be able to abandon without ' riésgn all controls on ( sugar." - ' Commercial circuits dr e*t" rltt- ' dad calculate that the Cuban harvest, has moved by about a fit) ¡ percent to the refineries ñor- , teamericanas. and add that if Andersnn's statement is to be taken literally, distrust! can be expected at any nin- . ment and nn the di" October 31, . 1347 date fixed by law, "We nn believe," Andersnn added. "that there is anything yet <>in the picture that would safely aban ' donate controls before that 1 time (when the cuba-) 1 na crop begins to move). "Rather I like I" dlsposi-, ; cion of) Senate bill which provides that at any time ' when the Secretary dr Agriculiu- 1 ra ere" that the supply is sufl-' cient he can suspend the < aclonnment and remove the other controls. "I believe there may be some change in the situation which will permit the early abandonment of raciona(Continued on page 22).
This rises to four million gallons a day, reports Cuevas - Cites improvements in the Río Piedras area Gándara gives report on work done in extinguishing fire The Water Service is reporting a deficiency of five million gallons a day of ¡ igua, in the service provided to the San Juan metropolitan area. The director of the Service, Mr. Seigio Cuevas Buslamante, stated that "a prolonged drought has resulted in a decrease in the flow of water in the Rayamón and R'o Piedra rivers," with no rain having been recorded in the last few weeks, to improve the situation in the Cidra and Aguas Buenas areas.Mayor Augusto P. Alvarez's) wise deficiency of the water service to extinguish the incident, Mr. Cuevas stated that at that time, "the service was normal in Rio Piedra" and San Juan not ptidlcndo be provided tuertes jets of the pipes, because several" fire pumps were installed at the same time to the pipe. He added that he "was pros m " in the area of the incident, reinforzóndj "e the servio.o ron a lino" do omoigsncla. directly from ia m "nta." In explaining the current shortage of water, which means that "n algmi <s hours of) ni" l the city 'nmzea tie e.without service, e¡ Mr. Cuevas do clarified the following: "Ln rúen'.a of the Ravarón river has decreased no, V'.hro ' te in cvidyl and is only orove? "lo an average' of 12 to 15 nilones da gahne" p?r day, no obstan e ctaise pumping water deade Santa Ro "á, er, Guáy. ¡ nabo. Norma.mirto. "c obtained from this source of supply, from 22 to 24 million gallons per day representing an average of 10 million gallons of water per day. "We have in np>,'<(|on two deep wells in Hato Rey, Insta Hos recently, ios that pinzaan us four million gallons per dio, that with two million gnlon"" additional that estáme" acquiring of I" plant rt" Rio Piedras reduce the Jeflc.anj" to four million galonr" daily. Therefore, even when r o cm tamos -! service, in some sections the i water in the whetias circulates 'on such low pressure q :- not p<"i ni te a normal supply to 'oa UAUárloe i "This is a "h miclon -k cnutganda motivated by the and 1a which is coping c' Service ron all" the means at its "leanre," "It will be noted that even when "atamos in the rainy period. 1 "s recorded lately do not compare with the volume of rainfall rl* previous years," The drought, said "1 Mr. Cuevas, is more serious in the "uen(Continued on page 12)
Esteves says law 345 is not in conflict with that of the Police Secretary of (,SC rila opinion rendered by former Solicitor Beverley in 1932 on dr Lry 88. Function new measure
Cor Po lque Ramirez Drxu i < Editor of THE WORLD < The scftnr Osea) Esteves, secretarlo' 1 d" the ('omission dr Civil Service, or.' canism that by lay, de|má de exl". ' Ur the dlxs3() of next June, sien. ' do sustit>u|do by the Central Agency d* Pergonal for r| (loblerno ' Insular, Informed to EL MUNDO that ' the officers and numbers of ln Poli- ' ¡cía Insular are Included in the ' Civil Service, without opposition, Infor- ' mó Mr. Esteves that in said , i classification are not Included the ' clerks, the janitors, the chó- ' fries", the managers of i" property, lo" payers, ot. He added that
"i nn nn guard is lending to serve him rnmo scribe, typist, etc. nn will not be ronslderad' romo such guar, day, but as a clerk v romo such must be selected by means rl envln of an Irma. "We di lo d Mr. Esteves we classified the Police and this was known to the tnleresados. Numerous positions that are being filled by guards were considered as clerks." Mr. Esteves added that in rl Service without Opposition, comn ha que. <Udo classified the Pnllcla, will continue the Commission dr the Pollrla and the pollrlaca jefatura making the nomtiramientos, promotions and transfers, except for those caigo" that currently perform the guards as scribes, typists, chauffeurs and other services that require submitting ternas for the selection d" candidates, The Office d" Personnel, continued Informando el señor Esteve", rcglnmentará the hours of work of pnHelas and firefighters. As to Law 345, which has been passed, and the special law which created the Police, Mr. Esteves said that the former does not conflict with the latter He further informed c| Secretary of Ja Civil Service Commission that "I January 26, 1932 the then Attorney General, Mr. Jame" R Beverley, issued an opinion on whether the Civil Service Act amended the Civil Service Omission Act, with respect to the appointment of certain employees. Mr. Beverley's opinion was to the effect that it was amended. It was believed that a general law did not amend other laws, as in the case of re-'rencta The Legislature's criteria-said Mr. Esteves (Continued on page 10)
Proposed Federal Agriculture budget cut by 32%; House Committee disregards Anderson
The DopArtamenfo do Instruction HcolctHrÁ cl program" do Acquisition of land pnrn fine" escola-, res, to Fully invest, duc during the next economic nftn, the "urn that r| effect will have dlapnn¡ble. Ln existence of plans in that sense fuá revolada "ser by the Co. missionary, Mr. Mariano Vlllaronga. To the ends consigned, o] De. parlament of Instruction will tone a total allocation of about six hundred thousand dollars. For the fiscal period about to close, the Legislature appropriated a total of $Rúó,000. for the acquisition of land for school purposes. Of this appropriation. 3471,377 have been invested or committed, leaving a balance of $326,022. At its recent regular session, the Legislature, a recommendation of the Commissioner approved a nu "vs allocation of $245,000, <e| Gober, nndor signed I" lev al bid), to raise to $573.It is our purpose," said Vlllaroógn, "to accelerate the purchase of land" and the construction of schools for next year, so that we can make use, as quickly as possible, of all the money we have available." Vlllaroógn said that he and Julio Enilque Monagn, pre'Idenfe of the Public Recreation and Sports Department, "It is our purpose," said Vlllaroógn, "to accelerate the purchase of land" and the construction of schools for next year; Angel Barasorda, director of the Servicio Insular de Páranos; Rnfttrl Picó, president of the Junta do Planes; Luis Rivera Santos, director of the División d" Industrias y Servicios de la JP; and Podro .1. Besares, official admlnls'rnflvo of the Department of Instruorión. were yesterday examining certain lands in Hatn Rey, for the construction of 1" Middle School of Rio Piedras. This educational facility will consist of fifteen classrooms, but eventually its size will be increased to 25 or 30 classrooms, to adequately serve the growing school population of the University City, The towers, which were the object of the survey, will possibly also be used for the development of a public park, The parcel examined is located between the south side of the Hippodrome and the south side of the Hippodrome. The inspection was made in order to determine the suitability of the land for its intended use. The investigators were very impressed with the inspection. The Board of Plans will draw up a plan of the plot, more accurate than the current one, in order to proceed with the corresponding consultations with that body and to request an appraisal by the Department of Housing. The land has an estimated area of six acres. With respect to the Augusto P. Alvarez School prrthlamn, (Continued on page 22>)
As part of the activities of the reform program of the present administration, with respect to the teaching of English, the Department of Instruction will give preference to teachers who are interested in the supervision and teaching of the said language in Puerto Rico, by granting professional scholarships for advanced study, provided by the law which allocated one hundred thousand dollars for this purpose. Arrangements are being made to implement this program immediately. The first group of teachers to benefit is expected to leave for the United States in time to take the courses this summer. "In the next week" - reve-
Brail Street will be reopened to traffic next Thursday.
Salvador Rrau Street will be reopened to public traffic of motor vehicles next Thursday, in the early hours of the morning, The director of Public Works of San Juan, Mr. Salvador V. Caro, reported yesterday that the reconstruction of this urban road has been practically completed, being able to start using it from) next Thursday. The reconstruction of this road has been carried out jointly by the 1
Government of San Juan and the Emergency War Program have worked together in the reconstruction of this road. Mr. Caro said that "the help that the PEG is giving and has given in the past for projects of this nature, has been very valuable and has made it possible to improve many streets in the city." Yesterday, municipal and PEG employees were busy cleaning up the street and collecting materials that "" used "" n this" work. Also 1 (Continued on page 22.)
Instruction has Argentina opens accelerated plan the way for on schools Rio meeting It will fully invest the next year sum that Johan Harnish and others have to deported a few days ago deported to Johan Harnish and others has for land seven Rondo Axis agents rises to Other obstacles near <le $600,000 removed Vlllaronga cars and a group Police seek more than advisers examined Nazi agents on the list yesterday Hato Rey area that gave U.S.
i By HUGH IF.NCRM Cnrrespon""! of Piensa Unida RUENOS AIRES. 23 - (PID । Johann Harnish, claaiflcado as . o| most" important Axis agent "n South America, was depot !Mo two days ago. June with ntro" s'ete German agents, as announced boy the Minister of Ext" Affairs; Horea. Juan A, Rramuglla. The news has been oñnsld"''ad" as leaving the way fran "o paia the convocation of the so many times nospuest" conference of Rio de Janeiro, of the Ministers d" American Foreign Affairs, which has to consider "| plan of the de. continental tension, since" s" has removed "1 main obstacle pata j that the United States" to participate in that meeting. The" other" two obstacle" - e|iI mlnation of Axis schools and sources of propaganda and control or elimination of commercial and financial interests" riel Axis . will speak aldn eliminated to WáAhlngton's entire satisfaction, in addition to Harnish. RramujHa announced that the Argentinian nuque PJü Teuco, which sailed <la Buenos Alus bound for Antwerp, carries on its edge the following Nazi agents: Gustav Utzlnger, Heinrich Rich- ' ter, Johann A. I.lehcrth. Anna A. I Rommermeyer, Aliu -, h) Treus'-n v Johann Knapp, mdns "leniine", and AlIrTHso Chant rain, tie nationality unknown. With the removal of Harn'sh. tzlnger and Chantrain it is believed that Argentina has cleared the house of all those German agents who operated here during the last war, with the exception of Johann Siegfried Recker, whom the national police and special service agents have searched for in vain. The ofroA five deported", "deported", "deported", "deported", "deported", "deported". The five ofroA deported, which in one way or another were associated with the most important agents, were considered to be of secondary importance. Previously already/Argentina, there pnra 21 d" mavo speaks of. carried 4R German agents" -- 29 of which were aboard the Argentine ship Pampa o! 21 December 1346. One aiilori/sdn source described Harnish as "probably the most important German spy agent in South America, IF he was second only to someone else, it is none other than Recker, but there is doubt whether Harnish or Recker was the most important. ' Rocker is believed to have crossed the Argentine border and infernado on one of the neighboring countries." In addition to the" eight deported," another German agonist by the name of Erlk G. Kan is under arrest to answer for tuna" sabotage carried out in the port of Rué (Continued on page 22.)
Preference to be given to English teachers in scholarship program Regulations will be published soon to determine requirements* for Puerto Rican teachers to improve their language skills in the North.
The Department expects to publish the regulations that will govern the granting of these professional scholarships. Once the regulations are published, teachers interested in obtaining this Act will be able to file the corresponding applications. Vlllaronga explained that the teachers who apply must fill out a form that is being prepared, which will require a description of the candidate's study project, the name of the college or university of his or her preference and pertinent information. With regard to the scholarships to specialize in the supervision and teaching of English, it was reported that upon completion of the studies, teachers will be offered the opportunity to work in the school system as language supervisors, since it is the intention of the Department of Instruction that in each school district there be one or more English language supervisors under the direction of the general supervisors, under the direction of the general supervisors in the subject and the curriculum division to be created, will be responsible for implementing the plan for intensifying the teaching of English in the public schools of the palp, in line with the objective stated by Commissioner Vlllaronga at the last general teachers' meeting and at the Washington appointment meetings. "The Department"-said the Commissioner yesterday-"va s" has i (Continued on page 22)
! JUDGE J MARRERO'S REPORT IN THE DEMENDEZ CASE IS READY.
if/ I 1 a
X""* renaira to Governor Ptñero in the raen of the" esrro" that the Executive h-fe .ui formulated to the Commissioner of ln Interior, aeftor Orlando Méndex, for alleged" violations of the Political Code, the Code dr ( omerclo v the of Supply, in relation to sales made to the Government by the Concrete Industrie" 1nc., of which e" "only the "eftnr Méndez. F.l Judge Marrero reported yesterday that he would await the regrean to the 1.1a of the Governor riftero to deliver to him the Report Re will recall that the Governor appointed Judge" Marrern arbitrator in the Méndex raso yours representation, rnmo defense counsel, e" ostentada by lns ledos Francisco M. Rttsonl. Pahln Defendlnl v Juan Luis Canelo. The prosecutor José C. Altante anatuvo the artisaclon formulated by the Governor. The aeftnr Plftero is not obliged to aegulr the reeomendarlnnea made by the joes
The Plenipotentiary is not required to follow the recommendation made by Judge Marrero, and may make, at his own expense, a review of the magistrate's findings. House Committee, in plenary, acts on 27th on reforms A*íthis was announced yesterday by the Presidentr of the Coinfaión himself. representative Welch-Fernós welcomes the news pleased- Represents a special raso Poc Charle" R. McCARF (orresfMtnsal of United Press W ASHINGTON. -, 3 >PU) Representative Richard J Welch, re. pub. cano of California, announced today that the Committee on Public" Grounds" in peno "e will meet next marte". May 27, to consider "1 elective governor's bill, which was favorably recommended this week by the subcomm.
In the Capital Island circle, including Fernós, there was complacency and even some surprise at the attitude of Rep. Welch. The immediate meeting of that committee was set for June 3, before the chairman of that group decided to make the Puerto Rican Legislature a special case. The bill recommended in the coming week would give the people of Puerto Rico the power to elect their own governor, and the governor the power to select all executive department heads and Supreme Court Justices. Only the auditor would remain a presldenclal appointment. Further. "<- would empower the Legislature of the Island to decide the judges of| the highest court d" justice hnn to be by election instead of officers by appointment, if a "f they wished. Commenting on Welch's attitude, Dr. Fernós said: "This is great news indeed. We have never harbored a shadow of doubt in President Welch's attitude of frank sympathy toward Puerto Rico and its problems, "And, moreover, although it is not intended to belittle the importance of calling a special committee meeting, I would say that I am not surprised, In any event, I want the people of Puerto Rico to understand that it is no ordinary thing for projects approved by Jo" subcommittee" to be the subject of special "e")onr" and special consideration as has been the case here. "In the normal course of aeonteelmlentoa we would have had to wait an extra week for the ensuing action. And. since the legislative session "e nearing its end, time is of the utmost Importance to us in this case. "Undoubtedly, I "feel more and more Grateful and hopeful both of Chairman Welch and the chairman of the subcommittee, Crawford, whose group passed the measure with such promptness, and of all the other members of| the committee." It will be recalled that, in regard to Senate action on the reform bill, Senator Guy C. Cordon, chairman of the insular "ubcommittee" of the Public Lands Committee of the upper house, predicted the day before yesterday that the measure would meet with no obstacle in the Senate, and anticipated that it would "e. ria passed during the present session of Congress. An indication that the bill will not be delayed in the upper chamber is the fact that the House has waived hearings, in keeping with the record of those held by the House Insular Affairs Committee, chaired by Representative Fred Crawford. A review of the legislation recently approved by Governor Plftero and reviewed by the Planning Board's Division of Insular Affairs reveals that the Planning Board gave its approval to appropriations bills involving an expenditure of $2,796,169.61 million. Said expenditures correspond to the general budget for the next fiscal year, which amounted to M$ 961,505; to the Government's contributions for the continuation of the public works plan and to 1o" funds sprohsdo" psrs Isa empress" púhllcs" of the Go- ( Memo. I l "" lll " IBIIIIIIallllllllllla,BaBallllaaaBaMBH "
They advance the proceedings for the diversion plan I * Acting Governor eMá i confident that ne avoids í loss of S3.OOOXMM) 1 . The Acting Governor, Mr. Msi nuel A. Perez, He reported yesterday that ■ e proceedings to put into execution 1 * program He roads and des- । vm urban ron with a view to avoiding the i i i loss of $3,000,000 dollars ' allocated by the Federal Government 1 o PueitG Rico for such work". Mr. Perez expressed his opinion ■ that the projects should be ready for public auctions within a short period of time and that they should be started within a short period of time to eliminate the danger that the Island would be deprived of the necessary funds. . funds. Mr. Perez said that the interim Comism.nado de lo Inferior, Mr. ■ Jesus Benitez Castaño, spoke yesterday the first Report abatca[dor of the. work done until in 1 matter of last) lo" procedures pa. - He revealed that the" appraisers and lawyers of the Land Authority 1" have been recruited to cooperate in the work, and that the General Prm-uradpr ■ has also given instructions to the en- ■ gazetted by the" Registry" of the Pro. The company's "Register" of the Pro- ■ mercy in the sense that they will work overtime if necessary. - The company will work overtime if necessary. The "Government" officials in charge of the job. Although the expiration date of the federal allotment for roads and urban diversions is set for June 30, the Acting Governor । indicated that he has asked the government officials in charge of . The Governor said that the "officials" in charge of processing everything related to the projects to be carried out have been asked to finish all the work by June 20 , so that there will be a period of time during which any unforeseen events could be taken care of, Mr. Perez informed that the 65 students in Vega Baja will be able to attend to their needs.Sixty-five sixth and ninth grade students from the Second Vocation Unit") of the Pugnado Afuera neighborhood of Vega Baja who went on a graduation tour yesterday morning to Guajataca, in Qutbradillaa, in Qutbradillaa. In Qutbradillaa, in two trucks and five buses, were intoxicated with the food they took with them, which reportedly included pork and sandwiches. Numerous' students could not return because they were confined in clinics and hospitals in Arectbe and Manatí! Dr. Fructuoso Sánchez Caatafto, who assisted students Juana Torrea in his clinic in Vega Rala. Hilda Maldonado, Víctor Ma. nuel Arroyo. Luciano Rosarlo. Héctor Manuel Rey, Leonarda Otero! Carmen Luisa Ferrin. Petra Carrillo. Alda Luz Rey. Alma Sanchez. Ana María Otero. Apolonla Otero). Irla Della Rosado. Genoveva Rivera. Pablo Martínez. Roberto Cancel, Félix Rafael Tirado. Angel Manuel Arroyo. Jorge Luis Martinez, and teachers Luis Rafael Sanchez and Fanny Gonzalez, I reported' last night that all have had food poisoning. Dns of the et- (Continued on page 7.) i
Attack overstaffing in ■ Department On the other hand demand Asignarionra a better deal for farmers Suggests secon fie in individual action Fondon dr loa dining room?* wolarm lowered* to $15,000,000.00 W ashington, 23. - n omits of Asígnacione" of I* r*. ™ r " -cnon" hftv I." Chnilñ n Apiculture virios ryñ, ' T * nn - y "3 rí >bó a du rion of .a 12 percent in the budgeted Het Department z ™ ,n "' ur " Mr * - l ""> .A. T "''" r /* warning" of 1 nu * r * r * rt '"''''ión inuprograma gubernamen. I r- .5 and Y d *.," Io * farmer*"*'. < omitted. inclined to 1a economic ' 0,rt p™'ectn of a "lgnac|nne" of only WO7,143 476 for the Depar(ament in the year to begin nrimern of .Iu1|" - SW 427,742 per dehaio of ln" SL1R6 5TL31R originally requested, ñby President Tru1 man's negotiated nreaupueslo. The' (omit. in effect, demands a new deal for the nation's farmers in the nu" e|)n" samemn" _ and nn the federal gn. hiernn - determine "u" prnpio" destinn" Although the reduction was a t>ntn lessnr nue the expected", that has "idn the largest in loa" funds for lo" department" of "de "de that the enmité, controlled by republican" podó e! pre "upue "tn dg! Departa I menta de |n Interior by more" than 43 per denlo । That reduction rises to |2.3610ftñ ono e| total savings that" lo" IL I deres republican" have made to date in "u" effort" to reduce $"onononnonon pf> supposed submitted pnr the presldcn1 '" r " the <1e . 1346 amounting to $37.500 WW , There are five more appropriat clone projects _ Including e| militare" supply project" - awaiting Cnmittee action The main target of the Republican Party economic axe in *1 Department of Agriculture was 1* series of so-called addon" <ea programs. 1a partlcipa- , cmn of the Administration in agricultural arti- , Vldsde. such" as soil conservation*, insurance sohr" corocha" and forest care Andorgon warned the Committee that his estimates" "ohre those function" of "avud* * 1ns farmers" had "been "reduced if possible" to the "smallest possible size". He said that any reduction would result in the olí. my nation of service* that "on "mnndatorlos by lev". In its Report to the House, the Committee said that it did not agree with Anderson's view that agriculture should not be without service because the Committee has too much confidence in the ability and self-respect of the American farmer. The Report says that the problems of agriculture should be solved by individual or community action rather than through federal cnnre.The following" were 1a" major reductions effected the* various agency" of] Department i Agency Allocation-Reduction Soil Conservation" jiñnnnnoqn St 17,6311 tm i Crop Insurance*" ii.nnnnnnnft. 8J30.M3 Farm Home Administration" Bintmnnn laianpqqqn 1 ndustna Animal 15.S15ASO á ,Vk4 60" Forest Service tRfiT'ann "1FTW Research and Marketing finnn.nnn i.inncrw) The Committee also reduced e1 budget of the Department's Econnmis Bureau d* $2,433 "W" to $1 743("n, eliminating entirely the $35,nonoon for loan" * tenant" farm, and reduelen, do the funds" for the school eomedore" program" from $75 000 000 000 " $45.Its report states that the Committee believes that the States are in a better financial position to provide for the school grant program, the Committee also made public" trait "cripcíone" of statements by various experts d" 1o" ''cnartámonto" who testified at the" public hearings" E "a" transcripts r "V*' lan that 1 - Anderson m believes that man m necessary to finalize "l 1MB la" governmentai purchases to support the price*. He said, however, that the" price" of trig® pp. will drop as much as 20 per d "o-l Un for the next autumn and #n 1346 may 'with great difficulty" in the price of such" items as v ai domestics, " such 'don V IMaBM 2. > Anderson and otratj *XMn|| Rirnroi"" of i" Administration eg. tén laboring for the astableciüdeil" te d- i", programs srrleaWBa tew--A arene" qu" may IWHTV a b. agí -u'tores un* gain nat> reble " include a ftínrinnamlant ( lUon'in-.a on pageÜ