THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: Mostly cloudy with scattered showers early in the morning. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: High temp. 80; minimum, 77. Barometric pressure at sea level, 4:80 p.m.. 38.88 inches of mercury. No signs of tropical disturbance.
40 pages 5/
LA MARANA DIARY
YEAR XXVIII
Entered aa second clsss matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1947
Sefior motorist, no* Try that harrow, another m killed eon olla.
NUMBER 11025
More classrooms for the new school year
246 were built in the last fiscal year - Most of them are in the rural area
The Island's public instruction system will begin operations for the next school year on Monday, August 4, with a total of two hundred and forty-six new classrooms, according to official data authorized yesterday by the Department of Instruction. -These additional classrooms were built in the course of the last fiscal year, and some of them were used immediately after their completion to decongest the existing enrollment in the schools of the towns in which they were built. Of the 246 new classrooms, the largest part corresponds to rural areas: 116 were built in the urban area and 130 in the rural area. On the other hand, according to the Department of Instruction, the construction of another 134 classrooms has been started in different municipalities. Some of them have possibly been finished,' considering that the construction of the totality of this other number will not be concluded until next January. As they are completed, they will be used to partially solve the problem of enrollment congestion. Of the 134 under construction, most are in the urban area, as follows: 83 in the urban area and 51 in the rural area. Of the classrooms whose construction has been completed during the last school year, the municipality of Cayey took the largest share, with 31, 20 in the urban zone and one in the rural zone. It is followed by Umaeao and San Lorenzo, with 14 and 12, respectively. In the following towns no new ciase halls were built by the Go- < biorno, according to data : held by the Department of Ins- < truction. during the past afto fis. । cal: Yauco, Yabucoa, Villalba, VieUtuado, Trujillo 1 Ito, Santa Isabel, San Juan, San < Germán, Salinas, Sabana Grande, ; Quebradillas, Orocovis, Naguabo, i Mayagüez. Maricao. Las Marias, La-| las, Juncos, Jayuya, Hormigueros, i Gurabo, Guayama, Fayardo, Culebra, l ( Ceiba, Bayamón, . Barceloneta and ( Aguadilla. In all the other towns, i.e., a total of 46, new classrooms were built last year. The number corresponding to each of them is given below: Adjuntas, 2; Aguada, 6; Aguas Buenas, 4; Arecibo, 5; Arroyo, 2; Barranquitas, 1. 1: Caguas. 2: Camuy, 4: Carolina, 3; Catafio, 3; Ciales. T; P 0 ?!"?,',, 6 ' Corozal, 5; Guayanilla, 2; Hatillo, 4; Humacao. 14; Isabela, 4; Juana Diaz, 2; Las Piedras. 4; Loiza, A, Manati. 4} Peñuelas. 2; Toa Baja, 9; and Vega Alta. 6; all built in the rural area. In other towns the following classrooms were built in the urban zone: Aibonito, 8; Aftaaco, 3: Cabo Rojo, ÍÁ 9 dra ' 4: Comerlo, 1; Guánlca. 10: Lares, 1: Maunabo, 2: Moca. 4: NjranjltOi 11; Patillas. 4; Rlneón. 2; Río Piedras, 8. The following is a list of the number of classrooms built and corresponding to the rest of the ' 46 towns, with those built in the urban area in first place and those built in the rural area in second place: Cayey, 20; 1; total 21; Guaynabo, 2 5 Luquillo, 3; 1: total. 4: Morovis. 2; 4: total. 6: Ponce, 1: < 7; total, 8; Rio Grande, 9: 2: total, 11; San Lorenzo. 10; 2; total, 12: San Sebastian. 4: 6: total, 10; and Toa Alta. 4; 4; total. 8. ' Nearly one-half of the 134 new classrooms now under construction. correspond to the towns to which no classrooms were assigned, of those built in the course of the past i! -fiscal year. The 134 classrooms in the process of (Continued on page 24)!
Nine decrease in "1 aqueduct reservoir flow aggravates the water supply situation - metropolitan area. Additional reduction Reaches one million gallons per day. * There are 248 more classrooms for the new school year. 131 more are being built in different municipalities. .... ♦ - * Medical exam required for UPR students for definitive admission to the institution. - o e . Charges against the head of the Ponce Homes Authority will be read on Monday. - es Femó" declared that he never considered the reform bill as a solution to the political status of the island. Government to pay expenses of Melbourne victims. They will return to Bosaly- 8800 he had donated for that purpose. """ President of the Federation of Commerce suggests convening entities to discuss the water shortage problem. * The Supreme Court dismissed the motion of the Municipal Assembly of Pones requesting the dismissal of the appeal against its tall" in the Grillases case. The Attorney General nplns last law repealing the statute of reinstatements and payment of 10% to the Police.
News Digest
Roig and Herrick discussed 1* Police jurisdiction in cases occurring on federal land. ♦ ♦ ♦ - New classification plan for the student body will be discussed by the University Board. * * * Mrs. Jean S. Whittemore was reelected president of the American Red Cross, Puerto Rico Chapter. *** General Motors announced, yesterday, a new increase in the price of its automobiles. - The Police, Police Corps in "I service to the opposition. Staff will discuss e| cazo on Tuesday. All Indications are that Taft and Dewey will contest the National Republican presidential nomination. - Captain Edward Rickenbacker, president of Eastern Airlines, arrives in San Juan this afternoon. - - - Health will begin smallpox vaccination for all school children on the island, - * - Public Service authorizes passenger cufia in 8-passenger vehicles until June 30, 1848. - Shipments of 1 jute sacks to the Island began.
CSP authorizes the passenger wedge in vehicles for 5 passengers.
For the case of the "pisa y corre" it orders that only three passengers can go in the middle seat. - Order expires in 1948
The Public Service Commission resolved to authorize until June 30, 1948, the driving of six passengers, in addition to the driver, in tourist vehicles designed for five passengers, and the driving of nine passengers, in addition to the driver, in vehicles known as "pisa y corre" or "station wagons", providing that in no case may there be more than two passengers in the front seat next to the driver and that in vehicles known as "pisa y corre" or "station wagons "* only three passengers may ride in the middle seat. The resolution was approved by the Commission on July 1, 1947. After mentioning the petitions of various groups of registered drivers in favor of amending the regulations to authorize the additional passenger, known as the "wedge passenger", and the public hearing to that effect held on July 23, the PSC states the following: "Considering the testimony offered by the Interested Parties as well as communications received in connection with this case and the report and study of the Commission's Inspectors, the Commission understands that there still exists a crisis in the public transportation of passengers and that consequently the state of emergency that prevailed on the date in which the Commission authorized the transportation of the additional passenger, still prevails, is still valid.
- still prevails. It is further understood by 1* Coi mission that there has not been a sufficient increase in the number of automobiles dedicated to public air- - /Vice to absorb this passenger congestion", that the prospects are that sufficient numbers will not be received to meet it within a short period of time. Even though it was shown that economically the additional passenger is necessary for the driver's own subsistence, this factor was not considered in a decisive manner, since it was necessity and the best public service that prevailed in the decision we have adopted. It was also demonstrated that the condition of the additional passenger usually occurs at the "rush hour" when the passenger himself insists on boarding the vehicle for reasons of necessity and speed. । As for the vehicles" "pi "a and runs" or "station wagons", ends the resolution, "the Commission entlénde that an additional passenger in the middle seat constitutes a danger to the safety of other passengers. This additional passenger in the middle seat of the "pl "a v runs" is the one who occupies the "Mito cue cue used to put "nhre the new space gives access to the rear seat of the vehicle, and that in accordance with 1a tiim-i !ón cited above. will remain the'mi -tarto in ol mam onado type 'le voHculn".
Fernós did not consider the draft I reform solution to the status I ' ■ - -7™- -- ■.... . I Clarifies his position on the Federal Coordinator, in view of the criticism formulated by the President of the ('.amara Ra¡a" Dr. Susoni By PAUL HARRISON United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, Aug. 1. (PU)-The Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico, Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern, said in an authorized statement today that he considers the draft reforms to the Organic Charter approved by the recently completed session of the U.S. Congress to be a "no-brainer" for the status solution.
c approved by the recently concluded congressional session as a solution to Puerto Rico's political status. He said emphatically that he never understood that the bill should be considered as such. Rather, he said, the measure brings Puerto Rico closer to its meia. I ■ Fernós' statement was issued to clarify his position on the Federal Coordinator provision as it appears in the measure and which, he said, had been censured by House Speaker Francisco M. Susoni. The Resident Commissioner expressed the hope that Dr. Susoni would reconsider his own opinion of the measure and the interpretation given by Fernós. The text of Dr. Fernós' statement is as follows: "A few days ago I was quoted as having said that I could understand the justification for the appointment of a Coordinator of federal agencies in Puerto Rico, once the Governor and the heads of departments in the Insular Government are locally elected or appointed. "I recall having said that I could understand the justification for the Federal Government's desire to have someone to coordinate the activities of the various Federal agencies operating in Puerto Rico, or. for that matter, in any area where various and sundry Federal agencies operate. "I have also said that according to the bill, as approved, the Coordinator is not intended to diminish the authority of the island Governor and that only by abusing his prerogatives could he be objectionable. This has earned the disapproval of my very distinguished friend and colleague, Dr. Susonl, Speaker of the House of Representatives of Puerto Rico. "I have the highest esteem for Dr. Susoni and his July. He has shown reciprocal feelings towards me. It is sensitive that at this moment we do not see eye to eye.
Zegrí, síndico de la Compañía: del Ferrocarril I 1 ■ I ' Federal Court appoints him - on an interim basis. - J. G. Gonzalez, abobado i Confirming information dí- - da ron exclusive by EL MUNDO. e| Acting judge of the Fe- . deral Court. lic. A. Cecil Snyder, issued uña order approving l" nei tfdón bankruptcy of the" comnaftfas i American Railroad Cn. v Comna-. ► Ola of the Puerta Railroads . Rico v'd "g|wning the "eftor Ferneni do Zegrl "indico temporary pen- ¡ ■ diente of the appointment da a permanent sín- ■ dlco, L" Federal Court set a bond of sm.onn to the "indico, who d "herá 1 assume "his duties as soon as the ' nreste. Ordered 1a Cnrta to Mr. Zegrí ou" continue to manage the" business" of 1a petitioner in ' the form u "u "l until further order" l 1 v to prepare as soon as "o" possible, a comnleto Report of the financial status of the petitioner together with all the" relevant recoi mendaclones"" Order" furthermore" that an ■ account be opened in the amount of 81.000 1 per month in favor of the "indicated, which will be liquidated with 1" final payment to be granted ' by the Court, To act as counsel for the trustee, Judge Snvder appointed Mr. Jose G. Gonzalez, Esq. President and Secretary, respectively, of the Unión Obreros Unido de la Ferrovla de Puerto Rico yesterday authorized statements, offering the cooperation of the Union to the Indico, Eftor Zegrí and calling on all members of the Union to go to the point of sacrifice in the cooperation that we must offer the Sindico. The "efiore" Meléndez and Ducreft| reiterated yesterday that the responsibility for the failure of the Railway Company must be placed squarely on the" homnroa of the di-L rection that the company has had during its fifty years of existence. The present situation । of facts, as is evident from the bankruptcy petition filed in the Federal Court, can in no way be attributed to the workers of the Com- 1 ¡la Compartía. They reaffirmed their desire to give to Mr. Zegrí, or to the person who will ultimately be appointed permanent trustee, all the cooperation that the workers can render for the reconstruction of the railroads.
New decrease in the flow of aqueduct reservoirs aggravates the water service situation in the metropolitan area 1
Medical examination required for UPR students It will be a requirement for definitive admission to the educational institution They will be made by a doctor of the University Until now, a certificate from the Public Health Unit was enough By LUIS HERNANDEZ AOUINO Editor of EL MUNDO. According to university authorities, no student will be admitted to the University of Puerto Rico who has not previously undergone a physical examination by the Medical Department of said educational institution, under the direction of Dr. Enrique Pérez Santiago. This procedure will begin the next university semester, with the new students who will enter the first year of college. Later on, it will be extended to the students who are studying" in all" years. The purpose of such a project is to prevent the enrollment of students suffering from contagious diseases, as well as to identify in time the physical defects, diseases and other pathological conditions in the candidates, so that they can undergo adequate treatment as soon as possible, without having to wait for the defect or disease to reach such an extreme that any treatment attempted would be delayed. The measure, according to the university administration, has been adopted both for the benefit of the individual student and the student body in general. The "exams" will be held in the gymnasium, which is located behind the theater, on the athletic field, and will begin from the 5th to the 15th of the current month. Each student will receive a card specifying the day and time to take the exam. No candidate will acquire student status if he/she does not undergo the physical examination. Dr. Enrique Pérez Santiago, Director of the Medical Department of the University submitted to the Board of 1" UPR an admissions plan, by virtue of the medical examination of candidates" for study* at said educational institution. Dr. Perez-Santiago suggests that the administration provide a complete physical examination, which is considered an integral part of the University's admission requirements. According to Dr. Perez Santiago, at present the University accepts instead of a complete medical examination, a health certificate issued by a Public Health Unit of the Island - The director of the Medical Center of the University objects to the procedure followed to date, based on the fact that the medical examination to which the candidates for admission are submitted in.The University is obliged to complete this partial examination, subjecting the students to the general medical examination, to complement and rectify the partial examinations made in the units," Dr. Pé-1 rez Santiago reports in his plan, that the procedure followed at present allows "Continued on page 24).
The chief of the Uniformed Police, Salvador T. Roig, visited yesterday the federal mayor Phillip H. Herrick, to determine to what extent the Inaular Police has jurisdiction in those lands that are property of the Federal Government, and which are administered by agencies of the Insular Government, as in the cases of the "Eleonor Roosevelt and Saint Just" neighborhoods, the latter located between the municipalities of Rio Piedras and Carolina. While Col. Roig was visiting prosecutor Herrick, police deputy, "eftor Guillermo Afroyo, "was on his way to the offices of the Puerto Ríen. tam Attorney General.
Health to begin vaccinating school children
In a note sent by the Department of Health, it is reported that in compliance with the provisions of the Health Regulations, which make compulsory the vaccination against smallpox" of every child who wishes to attend a public or private school on the island of Puerto Rico, said Department has been carrying out a mass vaccination in the" public and private schools". "Considering that the next school year is about to begin, the Department of Health has requested the Chiefs of the Public Health Units to make the necessary arrangements.
Public Health Units to make the necessary arrangements to commence the immunization of school children in their respective districts as soon as possible, beginning with children in the first grades in both the urban and rural areas, then moving on to the higher grades until all available vaccine is used." "Thanks to these repeated vaccination campaigns," says the Department of Health's press release, "the Island of Puerto Rico has not only (Continued on page 24 ) h
'"Ir । I I \ * I ROBERT A. TAFT
Republican presidential minaclon . in 1948. His face burned by his one-month journey through the Midwestern states and the Rocky Mountains, the Governor jumped nimbly from the train, smilingly posed for photographers, and brushed aside all the political questions that came his way. í "I have enjoyed this trip," was his only comment. He went immediately to the Capitol to hear a petition for clemency and to study another" ""unto" i urgent. Tonight he dhonnia to ■ head to his fine" of Powling, - New York. " restAlthough Déwey made no 1 comment, his friends" said what ""e shows confident quo his ""non politic"" excursion" speaks solidified his position among delegates to the national convention from at least 15 state"", The forces d" Dewey ""legan that this will go ""Fllanelfla convention next me"" June, with the votes" assured" of 420 delegates for the first ballot, or "e" 127 votes less than required for a first ballot nomination, They believe that "t "he poll is already set for a final fight between Dewey and Senator Robert A. Taft, of Ohio. Taft, of Ohio. Taft's surge in his home state was not surprising to Dewey, nor was the endorsement of John W. Bricker, Ohio's first senator. It was reported, however, that the Go'"rn "dnv n "o' ni'qvtno h "bta done any work on the Gesture cara dose'e "e "tar the sentiment favorable to Taft. Dewey was said to believe that he had no prospect of being nominated on the first ballot because of the candidates called "favorite" "thread". His political high command was hoping that 1"" delegation"" favorable"" to the"" favorite"" son"" "" would decide for Dewey on the second or, third ballot. The Governor's strategy has been to line up delegates"" to : of all pressure"" that would be maintainedI (Continued on page 24>
Police jurisdiction in federal zone cases discussed Herrick Roig said the federal court had an obligation to prosecute violators of island laws violated on federal land.
to know the jurisdiction of the police in the same cases. The Uniformed Chief informed that U.S. Attorney Herrick is of the opinion that the Federal Court has the obligation to prosecute those who violate island laws on federal land. Chief Roig informed that, according to Mayor Herrick, a violation of an Insular law, committed on federal land, immediately becomes a federal violation, and he offered his cooperation to enforce the Insular laws in this regard. On the other hand, the Attorney General informed the aide. Guillermo Arroyo, that the police have criminal and civil jurisdiction against persons who commit violations to the island laws within federal lands that are being administered by civil or island organizations. Colonel Roig informed that these consultations were due to the fact that a few days ago he ordered the suspension of games of spades in the Saint Just hamlet, and interested persons from the hamlet visited him and raised the question that they understood that the Police did not have jurisdiction over federal property, and that they considered the actions of the insular agents null and illegal, and therefore requested the Colonel to abstain from intervening in the jurisdiction of the hamlet. A
The 2 outstanding candidates
K wy ■ THOMAS E. DEWEY
iaft and üewey will vie for the GOP presidential nomination Forces backing the New York State Governor are already claiming 420 votes, 127 fewer than the nomination By Kirtland T. KING Corr""pnnnal of Preña" Unid" ALBANY, Aug. 1 (PU) - Governor Thoma" E. Dewev returned to this" city today, smiling and confident- that his ex-tJ-weíiclal campaign excursion, which covered 7,000 mile" of western Na- < t.>n, 1" had made a substantial saleI" in "u struggle ñor achieving the non
iv. r juniR pwi juglar in nol ; Commenced shipment " of jute sacks ' Aspara the Island .1 ■ 1.a first consignment is ; loaded at Calcutta. The shipments of jute sacks for Puerto Rico, corresponding to the 1948 harvest, began yesterday, August 1, according to information supplied by the Vice President of the Sugar Producers' Association, Fernando A. Vlltamll, ' The steamship Hughll, which is loading the first shipment for Puerto Rico, ' at Calcutta, ' at the port of Calcutta. - The steamer Hughll, which is loading the first shipment for Puerto Rico, will arrive at the city of Calcutta in the next few days for the next I "la. Questioned about the effects of ' a" substantial "nuncl "da alz" in the price" " regir "n "1 future, the i ¡ "eftor Villamil He reported that the" ml"- ( mo", according to information received from Wáshlngton. will remain * with very little fluctuation "I same level of the present. ' On the other hand e| Journal of Commerce newspaper publishes a nrtlcu- * In Indicating that the future of I" In' In' du "trla de| jute- as to the 1 price to govern- is very- Uncertain ' and that it is to continue so until ' Ir political situation in the In1 day is resolved. He adds: "If the British hand over control of India on August 16, it is likely that there will be a great deal of change in the jute industry, since while the mills are in Pakistan, the mills are located in Hindostan. Much will depend on. whether or not "e agree I the do" governments of India. "Half of the sale of jute is made to the mills, and they sell to the consumers of the processed product through the port of Calcutta, while the other half is exported as jute through the port of Chittagong. The prevailing mood in Calcutta is that both these governments will try to take the greatest advantage of their monopolies and it would not be surprising if both imposed taxes on both raw and manufactured jute. The Government of Bengal intends to keep prices high," to avoid "dtaturblo," and also - if necessary - to go to the extent of restrictions, to avoid imbalances between supply and demand. Before the war the consumption of jute was 10,000,000 bales, while today it is 7,500,000 bales, of which the Indian flax absorbs 5,550,000 bales and the remainder is exported to manufacturing. It is estimated that the next harvest will amount to 9,000,000 bales. Government will pay ; casualty expenses ! WASHINGTOÑ, Aug. 1 (PU)- ) The Resident Comliionate, Dr . Antonio Fernós Isern, declared today that the decision adopted by the . Government of Puerto Rico, to pay the expenses of transporting the body of the victim of the Mol- { bourne air disaster from Florida to Puer- f to Rico, has eliminated the need for a public subscription. In that regard, Fernós said, he was returning to the aeftor Peoro <¡ Juan Roaaly, manager of the Banco da r Ponce, the 8500 check which had been made out to him by the bank.
Attorney General renders opinion on Police
Latest reduction amounts to one million gallons per day Dams have completely dried up
Latest law repeals specials on reenlistment and 10% Staff to discuss case on Tuesday 5 Koig held meeting with Inspector Records. Disappointment in the Corps The Attorney General rendered an opinion to the Personnel Office to the effect that the "specific laws" of the Insular Police on reenlistment and ten percent were repealed by the Uniform Compensation Law and that both the number and the officers of the Uniformed are in the service unopposed. According to the information obtained, the opinion of the Fustic:" with respect to this" point was rendered" yesterday to the Director of Personnel, Mr. Manuel A. Perez. The Oft "in" of i Personnel, as reported", immediately began " to make a study of the whole question relating to the Police personnel, in the light of this opinion, it being proposed by seftor Perez to discuss the matter with the J mía of Personnel, *at its regular meeting next Tuesday, at three o'clock in the afternoonJ 1.The opinion of the Attorney General as to the legal questions raised by the Director of Personnel is not binding on the Personnel Office and therefore need not necessarily be followed by that Office. After the Director and the Personnel Board study the entire problem, they may resolve all "u" aspects, in "accordance with their prompt conclusions. The Police matter, as to its final solution, was pending this opinion of Justice, since the Personnel Director wished to have the legal opinion of that Department on the question of the special Police laws and on the issue of whether Uniformed Officers were in exempt service or in unopposed service. All other aspects of the problem, the Director of Personnel said on one occasion, could be resolved by administrative procedures, without the need for legal consultation. The Uniform Compensation Act "provides that no employee of the Government shall have his pay docked on the ground that, according to the classification and pay plan for the position he occupies, his starting pay is less than the salary he has been receiving. On the other hand, it establishes that the salary must be increased when it is less than the initial salary determined by the UnPornie Remuneration Law. This fundamental issue in the Police problem, in light of the previous decisions of the Uniform Remuneration Law, will have to be studied and resolved by the Personnel Office. While 1" Police in 1" service "In opposition, the Personnel Office will have only a limited jurisdiction over 1" matter" of 1" Uniformed" personnel. The" member" of 1" force "shall be appointed" v "enerado" freely by 1a" corresponding authorities" of 1a PoHr!a, I." Intervention of the" Personnel Office" will be limited" as to" the" classification of our" members," the" granting" of "licenses," promotions," transfers," and others," which" will be made following the" current" rules" of civilian service. Disappointed Police Upon "learning yesterday of the opinion that "1 D "nartam "nto of Justice spoke to the Chief of the Personnel Office, disappointment spread among guard", corporal" and "argento", because (Continued on page 6) Will see Monday the case of the head of AH in Ponce It relates to charges made to Mayor Grillase" by Executive Next Monday; at the new da da maftana, will be read before the District Court of Ponce, qu" presiding Judge Ramón A. Gadea, will be read before the Ponce District Court, over which Judge Ramon A. Gadea presides, the five indictments for felony "grava" that the prosecutor Jose C. Aponte has filed against Luciano Martlnlano Garda. The prosecutor Guillermo A. Gil "atará pre "ente in the act in repreientadón of the prosecutor José C. Aponte, who that same day will be in San Juan carrying the accusation in the cases that by libel will be seen before the judge Luí" Ap "llániz. of the Municipal Court, con- . tra el seftor Antonio Ayuso Valdivieso. In the hedge of the" reading" d" the" , "cutadona", sefior Martlniano , Sarda will be represented by au ibogado, which he announced, will have to be probably one of ; Ronce, but whose name i has not yet i been disclosed. । 4 Martlniano Garda will be 1" impu- i a, in the fiscal charges, in- । Fractions to articles" 86 and 94 । leí Penal Code, constátente" "n । Íua "lendo Secretarlo and Director i of the Muñid- I Authority (Continued on page 8.) é
Difficulty with Hato Rey wells. Distribution tanks increase By R. SANTIAGO SOSA Editor of EL MUNDO T The water available for the population's consumption by the metropolitan aqueduct had another decrease yesterday of one million gallons a day," I" I daily", "1 again reduced 4.flow in the reservoir of the aqueduct> । to. The Water and Sewerage Service reported that it could only serve about five million gallons per day to the reservoir, in view of the fact that this other notable decrease has occurred in its reservoir. It was further reported by SAA that exploration has continued throughout the Hato Rey district in an effort to locate subway sources of the liquid. It was indicated that another new well has been sunk in this region, but that the results obtained have not been ""ttafactorloa,"" since only 640,000 gallons of water per day have been obtained. This figure is considered minimal, in proportion to current needs, and to the costs involved in digging and exploiting these wells. On the other hand, the Aqueduct Service faces the problem of not having pumps on hand to operate the new wells, and has difficulty in obtaining this equipment on the local and foreign markets. । Yesterday, in shared of the "eftor Al- , berta Hernández, chief d" the Dlvtalón . of Engineering of the SAA, visítame" three of the"" main"" repreta" of the ( San Juan aqueduct, uhicadar । in Rio Piedra", Trujillo Alto and Ci- , dra, capturing our partner , Luis de Caaenav" several" photographs í of the" condicione" in which "- eneuan" These "swamp" will go. Lo" tre" embaí- . I ae" are practically dry, allmentándose only d" a minimum eanJ tIdad of water, qu" previous- , n" of loa rloa that tos aurten. Therefore, there is no stored liquid that can be used. The dam at Rio Piedras was । built by the Government "spaAoL , and enlarged and improved by the government of the Island. This dam is supplied with water from the artificial lake Laa Curfaa, in Trujt- , lio Alto, which was built to increase the flow of the Piedras River in times of extreme drought. The water obtained by the Rio Piedras plan* ta, therefore, comes from the scarce natural flow of the river, which has diminished alarmingly. -The Las Curias dam, with a capacity of 370,000,000 gallons of water, is completely dry, and the little water observed from the natural flow of the river, estimated by Mr. Hernández at 15,000,000 gallons, cannot be used because the level of the liquid is much lower than the drainage gates. The same problem prevails "n the Cidra dam, even though its pro* portion is greater, due to the capacity of this reservoir. The Army designed this dam to accumulate 1.8 billion gallons of water from the Báyamón River, * coming from its largest tributary in the Aguas Buenas and Cidra region. With such a reserve of water, he calculated that he could feed the Bayamón River, which in turn would bring water to the reservoir and filtration tank in Guaynabo in conditions to face about ten days of continuous rainfall. The lack of rain only allowed this reservoir to accumulate about 300,000,000 gallons of water, which began to be used by the month of March and was depleted several weeks ago. The entire surface of the La Curia reservoir is also in the same condition, except for the water that regularly flows through the regular channel of the Piedra River. We note that the tanks of the filtration plant at Rio Piedras have dropped about two feet from their normal level, and that at both the Las Curia and Cidra dams, one can clearly distinguish the base of the foundations of the enormous walls that serve to contain the river water, and the enormous concrete funnel that serves as an escape route for the water when it reaches its highest level. Hernández explained that the last major downpour in Cidra occurred in August 1945, just before the dam was completed. "Since then," he added, "there has been no favorable rainfall in this region." Yesterday, the 15,000,000 gallons a day that were being delivered to the population came from the following sources: Guaynabo plant, 10,000,000; Rio Piedras plant, 2.5 million and Hato Rey deep well, 2.5 million, which is less than half the amount normally required for the aqueduct's rivers. The number of tank" mounted" on rolling units" s" increased yesterday to 5, as "e reported. Two of these were owned by the SAA: one by the Fire Service, one by the municipality and one volunteered by Shell Co. The latter has a capacity of 3,000 gallons of water, and began to be cleaned to operate as quickly as possible. In addition, urgent arrangements were being made by the Aqueduct Service to acquire, by lease or purchase, two other tanks which were located in a town on the island. (Continued on page T) A