THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS PAMA LA ISLA, ROY: Partly cloudy, non scattered showers* *1 sunset. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temperature, M: low. 79. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:99 a.m., at 4:99 a.m.. 29.88 inches of mercury.
40 pages 5/
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII
I review the fronoa. I cooperate with the Inapeccióe do aotomóvUoa
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, JUNE 21, 1947
Entered m second oíom nutter. Poet Office, San Juan. F. M
NUMBER 10983
The House passed the labor bill over President Truman's veto !
Governor Colonel Roig reorganizes strong xa Opinion was confident approve police; Rafael Emmanuelli divided over reform soon named chief of the Detective executive veto,
Villaronga believes plans for Vieques base not ripe; will go to Hawaii Gov. He will go to Hawaii Gov. Piftero is hoping that the U.S. Senate will approve the reform bill before it reaches Washington. He told Ina pe-1 rlodlitai at a press conference yesterday, and added: "I believe reform will come before I return, and I would like my visit to the federal capital to coincide with the signing of the bill," The Governor, who yesterday issued the proclamation calling the Legislature into special session, expressed his intentions to return to Washington at the end of this month. After Washington he will travel to Salt. Lake City, where he will attend the governors' convention - which will meet during the June 13-19 dials - and then, at the invitation of the Navy, he will go to San Francisco to board a war unit which will pay a visit to Hawaii. Villaronga case Mr. Piftero was very sparing in his comments on the attitude adopted by Mr. Mariano Villaronga in resigning from the post of Commissioner of the Interior. When questioned on the matter, he said that he had transmitted Villaronga's letter of resignation through the Department of the Interior, and that he had only limited himself to "expressing my feelings for Mr. Villaronga's decision". I' Art "r "I think the Sugar Producers Association must be better informed than I am about this situation," the Governor began when asked about the sugar situation, adding, "But it seems to me that we are going to have quotas through legislation to be introduced in this session of Congress. -Are you going to oppose it* -Depends on the* circumstances If the quotas do not* harm, we will protest; but we hope that the quota which I point out to us will be the largest possible, and that we will be treated as a domestic and not a foreign area. Vlequm Project Questioned by Mr. Piftero regarding the status of the Navy's plans to use Vieques as a training area, the Governor said: "I believe that these plans are not very mature, and that here they have gone ahead to make conjectures". He added that, when questioned in Washington about his criteria regarding such purposes by a Navy officer, he said that he believed that he believed that Vieques would be a training area. Navy, he had said that he believed that Vieques was a very populous island and that we were in need of as much land as possible. "It seems to me," he said, "that* plans depend on how the Navy Department's budget is finally approved. It could be that this project would be economically better and we would also have to weigh the needs of national defense." Fennell Explaining the current stay of! aeftor Thomas A Fennell, executive director of the Agricultural Company, an Venezuela, the Governor said that said funcionarlo had to go to Mexico and discussed with him the advisability of visiting the School of Agriculture in Costa Rica, and that from Cnata Rica he would have to return via Venezuela. H Tropical Agriculture - so nu" explained yesterday the GofContinued on page 12."
tive in property. This same position had been held on an interim basis. Chief of the Uniformed were the following: Captain Saturnino Ros* Vélez, from San Juan to Aguadilla; Captain José D. Ríos, from Rio Piedras to Aguadilla. Ríos, from Rio Piedras to San Juan; district chief José Martines, d* Aguadilla * Rio Piedras; district chief Santiago Martínez, Public Relations officer of the General Headquarters, * the district command of Fajardo; district chief Jo "é Barrado, from Fajardo to San Juan; district chief Benigno Soto, from General Headquarters to the Detective Bureau to take charge of the position of the Detective of Puerta de Tierra, which the Chief of the Uniformada created only yesterday. He also transferred Sgt. Victor Quiñones from the Detective to the Uniformed and assigned him to the San Juan barracks. Sergeant Quiñones had been working at the Detective barracks at stop 19. The district chief Rosario Loyola has been transferred from San Juan, to stop 19, With the transfer of the chief i.oyola dissolved chief Roig the Esfuadrón del Vicio, and the members of said squadron now pass, by orders of the Colonel, to render regular service to the district. The Detective posts of Earad* 19, Hato Rey, San Juan and Ayamon have been consolidated in । an solo apesto and the Puerta de Tierra barracks is assigned for use by the same. The Uniformed personnel in Puerta de Tierral are transferred to the San Juan post. For the purpose of giving * the metropolitan rnna a better serzlcío, Colonel Rolg has authorized the centralization of the force 1* the Deteetive staclerta" "n the posts* of San Juan, Santuree. Ha(CnnttnáA an the návlna
Reopen part of San Jose Street on Monday It will be the stretch from Brau to San Sebastian. They will make, intersection arrangement On Monday morning I* will be open to public traffic of motor vehicles San Jo "á street *in the stretch from Salvador Brau to San Sebastian. Salvador Brau Street will also be open, between Cruz and Cristo, since the reconstruction of the intersection of these streets, which is being carried out by the Government of San Juan and the Emergency War Program, will be completed by that date. It will not be possible, however, to open to public traffic on Monday the section of San José Street between Salvador Brau and Fortaleza, according to the Public Works Division of the Government of San Juan, since the concrete will not be ready by that date.)
News Digest
The House passed the labor control bill by an overwhelming majority over Truman's veto. B "o* Raelon extraordinary of the* chambers called for Monday. ♦ * ♦ Governor did not accept resignation to Senator Mendez. * e "Muño* Marín warned against alan "n at the price of ama al decretare* federal decontrol! an June to. * The Department of State adopts Cuba's opinion on the quota. ♦ * * * Legionaries do not oppose Da-vid Chávea, says Juila. * * * * o Formalized documentation to ensure use of federal highway funds * * * *. - The Capital's budget will be considered on Wednesday U. "es They will make a new study of the Government offices and *1 rent paid for them. i ose
Monday reopen to vehicular traffic* part of San Jo*á Street. Vleén* Iniela survey to* decide if coffee will be imported. ♦ * Piftero expects reform* to be approved before he Uegar to Wá "hlngton on his next trip. Sent Villaronga's resignation to the President. Will visit Hawsll * end of month. ♦ * ♦ Colonel Roig éeorganlsó I* Detective - hl "p trasladoe in the Uniform. The Governor appointed Rafael Emanuelll jete de le Detective. ♦ ♦ ♦ * Rafael Hemándes and his Mexican artists will arrive on the Island today " 1" 1 P. M. Fernóe yesterday expressed displeasure that ee ignored loe representative* portorriquefloe in the* dlacuelones on the a*úear quota. e - * Prosecutor finished presenting his evidence against Mayor Gríllasca. The defense will present theirs next Wednesday
i Vice Squadron was dissolved with transfer i of Loyola to the barracks stop 19.- I41 central office 1 of Secret will reside in Puerta de Tierra The Chief of Police, Colonel Salvador T. Rolg, made yesterday A reorganization of the services* of the Detective, and proceeded ai ml*mo time to make some transfers in the Uniformed. Conjunamonte with these changes ordered by Rolg, Governor Piftero appointed aeftor Rafael Emmanuelll to the position of Chief of Detec-
* SALVADOR T. RÓTG
Formalize documentation to ensure use of federal funds Proceedings for the expropriation of rights-of-way for the highway construction program filed in various courts Yesterday, Acting Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Jesús Renitez Castaño, formalized all the legal documentation to ensure Puerto Rico's share of the $3,000,000 federal allotment under the combined program for the construction of island highways and diversions, which is to be used for the construction of the new highways.
Itreteras Insulares y desvíos urbanos, which has been implemented with the federal government. Part of this allotment was in danger of being lost because of delays in the acquisition of rights-of-way, which are essential for some of the work included in the federal and island highway program for the 1946-47 fiscal year. The amount of funds available* for such program during the aforementioned fiscal year, by "securing the federal appropriation of $3,000,000, will be raised to $7,000,000 and* that the Insular Government will contribute $4,000,000 for these works. Mr. Benitez Castaño expressed his satisfaction with the work done and the cooperation given to the Department of the Interior by other governmental agencies to prevent the federal contribution from being fully utilized. Yesterday afternoon, accompanied by officials of his Department, Mr. Benítez Castaño visited the district engineer of the Federal Highway Administration, Mr. K. B. Fo "t*r, and formalized all the documentation securing the total of 3,000,000 of federal funds, which was not mentioned. It will be recalled that EL MUNDO recently reported that Puerto Rico ""has been exposed to lose a substantial part of said* fund*, due to the delay in the acquisition of rights of way for important projects included in the island and federal highway plan*. Immediately thereafter, the Department of the Interior called a meeting, which was held in Fortaleza, * to discuss this problem with the Governor. As a result of a* conference* of all* island officials willing to assist in the success of, program convened by Governor Plñero, it was outlined (Continued on page 11) See San Juan budget on 25 L* Junta de Comislonadoe de la Capital agreed, in its extraordinary session held on Thursday night, to refer the model of the budget submitted by the Administrator of the Capital to the Treasury Committee, composed of the members, Mr. José Rodríguez Olmo, Mr. Miguel Meléndez Muñoz and Dr. José F. Corres, who will study it. Corres, who will study it and submit a report to the Board next Monday, October 25. The Board approved at its meeting last night the budget of the Capital Administration (Continued on page 23) i
Several" leaders in Congress attacked presidential action Labor hailed repudiation of bill Halleck believes delivers Democratic Party to Wallace and his group Pnr Raymond Lahr United Press Corre*pon**l WASHINGTON, June 20.-(PU) - The leader of 1* majority in the House of Repie "entant, Chsrle* A. Halleck, commenting on President Truman's veto *1 bill "on control of labor unions," said that the President's action "practically handed* the Democratic Party *Wallace and his followers," referring to former Vice-President Henry A. Wallace. '"Wallace and his radical adherents are the ones who vsn to now * crack the whip. And Truman will follow," said Halleck. On the other hand, Republican National Committee Chairman Carroll Reece interpreted the veto as "a* bid for a fifth term for the New Deal." "I.* "presidential cclone constitutes a clerical Attempt to preserve the allanz* of 1* administration with the Political Action Committee and its assorted subversive* allies. Con "titutes a clear challenge * to the will of the people of the United States, as expressed in the 1946 elections, and as reiterated by the overwhelming vote of the people's representatives in the House of Representatives during the past few weeks. I For his part, the chairman of the House Labor Committee, Fred A. Hartley, Jr." Republican, of New Jersey, and co-author of the vetoed bill, said that "it is difficult to understand a veto by the same chief executive who, a short time ago, recommended that striking railroad workers be drafted into the army. It is indeed most unfortunate that the President should have smoked the opponents of this legislation who find fault with any action Congress takes to correct a situation which everyone knows needs to be remedied. The American Federation of Labor and the Committee of Industrial Organ- iztttions adamed the President's veto, but the National Association of Manufacturers" declared that it was surprised that "President Truman had remained deaf to the wishes of the majority of the American people." William Green, president of the FAT, declared that the veto "is a masterpiece of good government." CIO President Phillip Murray said that "the President deserves congratulation for his excellent men. The president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Earl O. Shevre, said that "the veto is a test of strength. "Such a test, however, is not between e| legislative power and the executive po-, rier. It is a test, of the strength of the people which the" do"'ramas riel government will have to abide by or ignore," Shevre said.
Truman's reasons for vetoing bill to control labor unions
WASHINGTON, June to (P. U.)-The following is a summary of the main rasonea on which President Truman based his veto of the Republican bill for* control of 1** labor unions: Strike": The bill would increase strikes. "It contains seeds of discord which would sicken this nation for many sfto" to come." Communists: "I am convinced that the bill has an effect exactly opposite to that which Congress proposes to achieve. Although the Congress proposes to help the workers' union to eliminate the communal dlrec. torea, the effect of the bill will be very different. The mere refusal of a single Indlvlvl duo to sign the required affidavit would strip the entire union of its right to collective bargaining." Economic freedom: "At the" time when we are determined to eliminate as rapidly as aea practical, the federal controls established during the war, the project would involve the Government in the free process of our econo, mical system, to an extent unprecedented in times of pas." Human relations: "Cooperation is not achieved by force of law. We cannot create mutual respect and reciprocal trust by legislative flat. Rata legislation foster distrust," suspicion, attitudes," arhltrarlas." Impracticability: "The national law of labor relations would become a maze of complex prncedlmlentoa. Employers and workers" would be confronted with new* harreras, to arrive at a
Pinero returned! resignation all Sen. Mendez - I Lf writes resignation is processed by mediation President of the Senate E1 governor Piftero has written to "enador Bernardo Mendez, ha- i riéndola "aher that "romo Governor I can not araptar renunrlaa of I 'enadoras, that are not trasmi- i tldai by the Preildanta riel Senario"; and ademái. that if it were in "his power to accept his resignation, "I would not do so either, even as a friend and friend". The text of the letter to Senator Mendez, which was distributed yesterday to reporters in Pelsclo, is as follows: i "Dear Senator and friend, I received your letter dated June 14, 1947, presenting me with your resignation from the office which, with honor to that high body and to Puerto Rico, you occupy in the Senate: , As Governor I cannot accept the resignation* of a senator* that has not been "eemitted* to me by the President of the Senate. Now, as a Puerto Rican and a friend, I assure you that if it were in my power to accept it, I would not do so either. I believe that you are one of the best public servants*, both in *your eaplrltu and in your attitude as well as in your ability to do what you have to do.
Prosecutor finished presenting his evidence against Mayor Grillasca The defense will start presenting theirs on Wednesday. - Probably on Thursday there will be an ocular inspection of land reclaimed from the sea.
PONCE, Puerto Rico (By Darlo Cario and Miguel Rivera) -- The prosecutors finished presenting the evidence of the charges filed by the Governor against Mayor Grillase*, which have been heard before the Ponce Municipal Assembly on Tuesday this week. On motion of the prosecuting attorney, Cayetano Coll Cuchi, the Assembly recessed until Wednesday of the next "emann at 1:00 p.m., when the dehn "a will begin to present the evidence in defense. We can inform you that the purpose of the defense is to summon as witnesses in the presentation of its case the Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Luis Negrón Fernández; "1 Island Auditor, Dr. Rafael de J. Cordero; the aenadore" for the district of Ponce, "eftores Antonio Rodríguez and Eduardo García González; in addition if Mayor Grillases, among others". The InterInn President of 1* Ponce Municipal Assembly, Dr. José A. Lanauze Rolón, who has been presiding over 1* hearing of these* charges, informed when questioned by EL MUNDO, which will probably be on Thursday of next week, that the assembly members will go to the* land of the Sara pier to make an ocular inspection, during different* hours* of the day, of the 40-acre* parcel, as a transp""o *1 Municipality of Pence, object of one of the* charges, for the purpose, in. 1 among other cosss, of observing the manner in which the same is sfectads by the 1 tide. The prosecution's evidence was terminated when the prosecutors presented the 1 last charge, which was numbered 1
The last count, which was number 17, and the total count, which had been left pending because the prosecutors' main witness in relation to it was still alive. The recess was decreed at 2:45 p.m., after a brief discussion between the defense attorneys and the prosecutors. The latter insisted that the recess should be decreed until Monday * two o'clock* in the afternoon, but the defense attorneys asked that it be recessed until Wednesday or Thursday," because they did not have fully Hita- , Hita their evidence and also had to have time to summon their witnesses. Mr. Coll Cuchi stated that the defense needed time due to the fact that it was likely to subpoena the Attorney General and the Audltor of Puerto Rico and that it was of the utmost importance that there be any day for the defense to be able to subpoena their witnesses.
The Administrator General of Sumlntatroa, "eftor Antonio Vleén" Rio*, has issued an order "dminlatrativg, in order to know thea axiltenciaa of coffee in Puerto Rico and to the same" "on auficlentea for* the conaumo of I* civilian population h*"ta 1* next coaecha. By means of this order, by requesting the pertinent information from all coffee harvesters in Puerto Rico, ei "eftor Vleén" Rio" intends to determine, in addition, ai ha de
HARRY 8. TRUMAN rntandldoa. I believe that the Congress h*t*t*do dem*"l*d*d*"tention * tas Inevitable frictions and difficulties accompanying *1 period of reconversion. It has ignored I* unmistakable evidence that such difficulties are disappearing. There would be a danger that we would lose the progress we have made." Unjust: RI bill provides unequal penalties psr* workers and employers, for 1* same offense. It would require that the National Labor Relations Board give prinrld*d*d* to grievances against Ins workers over Iss grievances against the* employer," with both relating to each other.
that no one should take advantage of the "federal price control" to sell more expensive rice under the "price control" conditions. Mr. Muftoz Marin added, "I am sure that all measures will be taken, up to the limit of the legal powers of the Government and the determination of the consumers, to overcome the dangers that this situation has for the livelihood of our people" 1 . Below , We insert the full text rie , the statements authorized by the . President riel Senario: । "Se rfa for sure that the rila 30 ■ !de junln to the Federal Government will remove the control over the price of! - rice. This commodity, which Puerto - Rico consumes in large quantities, and - "sugar, which Puerto Rico produces - in large quantities, are the only ones ■ now left hnjn control. With the elimination of control over the practice of the "arroja", the consumers will be left without control, while the "producers" of Puerto Rico will remain under control. This could produce a serious injustice if our government had the means to prevent it from not using such means. Fortunately in the insular legislation there are powers to at least try to remedy this situation, and "If there were not, to ask the Governor to put the Assembly on call so that the Legislature could provide for it. About es- : tn I have conferred with the Island Administrator of Supply," and 1 1o" rio" Together," an union rie another" lag|"lators, hamas conferred with the Governor. I "m "e sure , that action will be taken. "The situation, as I in- , form, e* coma follows: By eliminating- , will the contrnl federa! sabré rice. t the price could rise by several , dollars per quintal. This increase . would mean a positive evil for hundreds" of thousands, especially for the great m""a poor of Puerto . Rico which has *1 rice per hase । nrlnclpal of "ostento. But in ,1 Puerto Rico there is enough rice for seventy ten, that is, until mid-August. The new one begins in August and by mid-September the first shipments may arrive. 11 "On this basis, the problem that arises is twofold: (1)1 - That there will be supplies of rice between mid-August and mid-September. And, (2) that the price of rice which is already 1 (Continued on 1* page 12.)
Vicéns initiates survey to decide whether to import coffee
a*r nec*a*a*re to resort to the Importation of foreign coffee as well as the quantities that would have to be imported, in such a ca*o. The order of Mr. Vleén* Ríos for the* farmer**, majorityte* or any holder of raw coffee in the lilac to supply the* data* concerning* *the* existence* of* coffee*in*his*possession*was put into effect yesterday, June 20.
Incurred in discrimination against the workers. It has been "bequeathed to me that the project Equal shares of the worker and the employer. A careful analysis shows that this claim is unfounded. Contri burl o nee policies: The bill would prohibit many legitimate srttvidaden of these unions and corporations. A labor newspaper would not be able to comment on rsndldsto" or progr*m*s that intervene in national elections, a dangerous" interference with freedom of speech. Ineffective emergency procedures: The methods provided to prevent strikes in vital industries are ineffective. If followed, the procedures pro. tended to culminate in a public confession of failure. The proposed public inquiries about impending work stoppages would only serve as a springboard for dramatizing the positions of the participants. Dangers for employers: The bill would open the way to an endless multiplicity of factory elections. This would adversely affect employers and generate jurisdictional disputes. Unfair Labor Practices: The bill would allow an employer to discharge a worker, under the pretext of a* slight infraction of shop rules, "even if his real motive was to incur d'scrlmen against the employee for his activities in the union. The bill allowed, ri* furthermore * the employers To initiate elections at times of greatest strategic advantage to them."
> Muñoz Marín warns against rice hike by removing control Declares that agiotista* will be under oversight of law and asks for consumer cooperation. Control will cover existing rice already purchased for the island, and will cover existing rice already purchased for the island, and the "Ituaeion that could be created in the" price" levels" of rice, to the "Ituaeion that could be created in the price levels" of rice, by removing federal control, expected for June 30. President of the Senate, said yesterday that there is "no reason why the Borinquen
The Borinquen will not leave for the Island until "I 26 NEW VDRR, June JO. (P. U.)--The Borinquen, which was scheduled to leave this port today for San Juan, Puerto Rico, will not leave until June 30. Puerto Rico, will not leave until the 29th. L* firm owning the jar, New York A Porto Rico Steamship Company, explained that dehldn to the maritime strike which affected to-day * New York and other ports in the country.". had been delayed ta rare* of the Qnrln. quen. The steamer is expected to make the voyage in four days. Arriving at San Juan early on the 80th, fe : 1 ' State adopts Cuba's thesis on sugar Threatens inadequacy of rule to fix quota on fluctuating scale For CHARLES McCABE United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, June 20 (PU)~ E1 Department d* State has adopted the same view da the ,The State Department has taken the same view as the Cuban Government in considering as unacceptable the 1* sugar quota proposal agreed upon this week by the Department of Agriculture and the domestic sugar industry, the United Press has been told by a* credible source. In the conversation between Under Secretary of State Will Clayton and Secretary of Agriculture Clinton P. Anderon, the former reportedly tried to dissuade Anderson from submitting to Congress the ideas urged by the domestic industry as a means of meeting the insistent demand of Cu| ha for a larger share of the postwar sugar market in the United States. The proposal, "reportedly endorsed by Anderson and attacked by the Cubans and the Department of State, provides for fixed quotas for all domestic areas and a sliding scale for Cuba, depending on whether postwar consumption exceeds or falls below *1 total of 7,500,000 tons". According to this proposal, which has been drafted in an idealistic form, although it has not yet been submitted to Congress, Cuba will provide for all excess consumption. Cuba would supply all consumption in excess of the 7,500,000 tons; and. in case consumption fell short of that amount, the tons in shortfall would be dis- < counted" rie the minimum quota of । 2,2000,000 tons allotted* to di- i . cho pals. In addition. Cuba particip- i (Continued on page 11).
Measure achieved large majority of 331 to 83
The Administration is now concentrating on convincing the Senate Taft believes it will pass in the Upper House He has summoned 8Ú Rudder Committee to make a review of the prospect By RONALD G. VAN TINE Correspnns"! of Prense Unid* WASHINGTON, June 20. (PU)President Truman vetoed hov *1 labor control rie bill T "ftH*itley, deeming it "un* cl*- > amen "ze" to democracy, but ■ ta House of Representatives, de "*- ' fiying the President's action, stepped over the veto quickly, by a thunderous major!* of* 331 votes to 93. However, Senator Wayn* L. Morse, of Oregon, chief Republican sponsor of the bill, temporarily called for a joint Republican-Democrat move to bring the veto issue to a vote tomorrow * 5:00 p.m. *. Senator Mora* said the bill was "a* legal monstrosity" and urged the Senate to "stop, look and listen." He added that he would do whatever he could to delay I* enatorlal action on the veto next week. However, Senate Republican lld "re "re "re" a* prepare to extend I* "ession of the 1a Alt" House until nnc" o" nnch" rie tomorrow, "I "lio "lio" necessary to get the vote to occur. The decision as to whether or not this much-discussed measure will become law now rests exclusively with the Senate, which may vote on it as early as tomorrow. It is *sp*pected that the Upper House will also pass over the veto, but by a much tighter margin, "eftor Truman made fu "rt*" objec "ons to nearly every provision of the Republican bill. Among other things he said that it would "cause more strikes, not fewer," and that it would be "a dangerous step toward a totally command economy." "It "contains seed" d" dl "cordla that would afflict this nation for a long" year," he said. But the House of Representatives turned a deaf ear to all these arguments. It mustered 55 votes" more than was needed for a" majority of the" third" party. The vote would have "gone four to one, -L had he not been one vote short. Far more members of the President's party voted against him than voted in favor of his criteria. In the vote to override the veto, 225 Republicans and 109 Democrats voted, while 11 Republicans, 71 Democrats and Representative Vito Marcantonio of the American Labor Party of New York voted to sustain the veto. Not content with launching a broadside at the Republicans and Southern Democrats who coalitioned to pass the bill, the President decided to bring the issue before the nation in a broadcast over all network stations at ten o'clock tonight. Senator Robert A. Taft, a Republican from Ohio, one of the sponsors of the measure, plans to give a 45-minute response to the President on Mutual Broadcasting stations. The Republicans wasted no time in launching their attack on the veto. House Majority Leader Charle" A. Halleck, I of Indiana, said that "eftor Tru- [ man was handing "1 Democratic Party to "Henry Wallac* and "u ganga." Republican National Committee Chairman Carroll Reeee called the President's action a "public bid for a fifth term novotratlsta" Regardless of what* happens in the Senate, the issue is assured of first place in the* preslriential election of" 1949. along with the veto previously given by the President to the Republican tax reduction bill. Amid a general surprise the House of Representatives* "sustained that veto Tuesday, by a margin of two votes. Administration leaders had long since given the nod for defeat in the House and concentrated their efforts on the Senate, which passed the revisions to the labor bill by only seven more votes than were needed to override the veto. While the lower House was voting, "eftor Truman was having lunch at the White House with 13 Senators. This is a significant fact. "I that 11 of them were from-i mócratai who had originally voted for the bill. Some* of them would have to change their attitude to kill the bill in the Senate. Only one of the "pede "s was a Republican, "enator Mtlton R. Young, of North Dakota. The president sent your 5,000-word men "aje, explaining the" reason* for the veto to the lower House at noon. The* repre "entants* already knew what they had to* e "perate. They listened with impatience to vote, while an oflcini*ite read the message. The*gallery*quoted ateitadaa (Continued on page 12)