THE
forecast, weather for the island. TODAY: Partly cloudy, with scattered showers during the day. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: High, 83; low, 19. The barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., was 80.02 inches of mercury. No sign of tropical dlstirt-Mo'.
36 Pages
DAILY MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII
Entered a" second class matter. Post Office, Ran Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, JULY 12, 1947
Sefior automovUlata. do not try e "a grace, another "e killed non ella.
NUMBER 11004
Retailers A bsolved by the municipal executive of Ponce
will organize a cooperative They intend to buy products in the North for their sale Island They would start with a sum of $500,000 They hope to lower the price of groceries." They denounce 1st official competition By R. Santiago Sean Reductor of El. WORLD The merchant* doiallluta" rie Puerto Rice, affiliated* to the Provl "lone" Retail Center, agreed, at a meeting of its Board of Dlreetnre". held Thursday night, to organize a cooperative for the purchase and distribution of food* imported* and pal", ron jiña initial investment d* half a million dollars". In the meeting that led to this agreement, which was presided over by "efior Ramón Nieve* Alicea, "a denounced "an abnormal catado in all* 1a* operation** of the Inaular market of vivare*, aggravated by the dealeal competition that has initiated" the Compartía Agrícola through* its markets* and the ln*o "tenlble órohlema of the convoy to which it has e*. "The dtrefore* d*l retail trade appointed a committee of its Board of Directors, to initiate the organization of the cooperative. Said committee is formed by the" merchants Amárlco R, Badillo, Teófilo Rivera, Lui* Hernández. Manuel Ramo", Aniceto Valentín. Tomás Agosto Otero j Francisco Hernández, They were named" advisers of the committee, e! public accountant Juan C. Vlllarinl and the lawyer Antonio Qulró" Méndes, luí first meeting to organize tas base* of this cooperatlva "e will celebrate the marte" next, to" seven and a half d* the night. "n 1a residence of the sefior Agosto Otero, in Guaynabo. Yesterday the president of the Retailers Center, sefior Ramon Nieve" Allcea, visited the president of 1a Chamber of Commerce, sefior Flllpo L. de Hostos, celebrating with him a conference in the rua! notified him of the adopted agreement and imposing to 1a ves 1o" motive" that forced to this action. The sefior Nieve* Allcea informed that he considered it a duty on his part to notify the Chamber of Commerce, to which the wholesale merchants of Puerto Rico are affiliated. It was considered yesterday in commercial spheres"" the step " taken by the retail trade, as a threat against the traditional union existing in Puerto Rico, between the retail trade and the *retail trade. According to the retailer, the step will lay the foundation to face the low price levels offered to the consumer by the government's chain of stores that will operate the Compartía Agrícola. "The Provision Retailer* Center "* - *- reported e* an Institution operating in Puerto Rtco since "l afio 1RDI. It has more than 600 associates, most of which have their business* established in the San Juan metropolitan area. In addition, it also has a "lócale" merchant" organization" established" "in almost" every" town* on the island. It is very likely that. once the operating program of this cooperative is organized. "It is very likely that once the operating program of this cooperative is organized, other independent grocery retailer organizations will be invited to participate in its benefits: among them, the Liga Insular de Detallista of Ponce, the Retailers' Association of Caguas and the local entities of Aguadilla, Sabana Grande and other local entities of Sabana Grande. Sabana Grande and other towns that are not affiliated with the Provision Retailer Center. The president of the Center, neftoi Ramón Nieve" Allcea. authorized yesterday on behalf of the Board of Directors of the entity the" following statements: "The Puer(Continued on page 20) retail trade.
! The P.R. Lme will not increase its service now. Perhaps in 2 years' time it will put more passenger ships on an inular route. The probability that another passenger harem will be put in service between New York City and San Juan, Puerto Rico, has been ruled out by the mena" until within the next two years, according to information supplied to THE MUNDA. According to information supplied to EL MUNDO by Mr. Lewi* D. Parmelee, president of AGWI Lines, a subsidiary of which the New York Puerto Rico Line is currently in the process of establishing a subsidiary. co Line, and who is at present on the Island in negotiations related" to said shipping company, informed *1 "*ftor Parmelee yesterday that since e| afio IMS required the Bethlehem Steel Corporation to submit the" plans for new passenger harebs" to be included" in the route between New York and San Juan. The plans were prepared in accordance with drawings submitted by the Company, in cooperation with the Company's Naval Architecture and Maritime Engineering Divisions. Although the plans have been completed, nothing more has been done to build the ship," continued Parmelee, "The current conditions of the maritime industry in the United States are unfavorable, so it has been necessary to halt the construction of the ship for the time being," he said. Added AGWI President ■ Lin "s that immediately it was , (Continued on page 10>
- wr vninr-in, i|ur e-mir- iri lacking in guiding principles and directors in the normative order and declares to have lost his faith in the capacity of said Superior Council d* Ensefianza, one of the members of the referred body accepts its failure, dn" remained without making statements, two admitted that the Superior Council has done good work,,and the other do" do" could not be interviewed", as one of it" is in the United" State" and another was not located. The Consejo Superior de Ensefianza is composed of the Commissioner of Instruction of Puerto Rico, sefior Mariano VUlarong". who is its president: do" educators, sefiores Lindsay Rogers and José G. Padln. residing in the United States and four citizens" who reside -in the Island, licenciado* Emllln S. Rolaval, Eplfanlo Fernández Vanea, Manuel García Cabrera and dor. toi Jo*é N. Gándara, El Rector of the University. II■enclado Jaime Benitez, when questioned about the* manifestations of Dr. Manrique Cabrera, refrained from commenting, alleging that he was unaware of the situation. However, he informed that the Council "will meet tomorrow, Sunday, The President of the Council; Senior Mariano Vllaronga, refrained from commenting on the above-mentioned manifestations, indicating that on Sunday, at half past one o'clock in the afternoon, the Superior Council will meet to discuss various matters" that are on the agenda of its resolution, Dr. Jose G. Padln, who recently arrived at the University of Puerto Rico. Padln. who recently arrived from the United States", to attend the" meeting" of the Superior Council, indicated in English, when questioned: "no comment". Dr. Padln said that the Council, at its next meeting, will deal with some pending matters, among them the budget of the University, recently approved by the University Board, the matter of the professor of the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts of Mayagüez, Senior Rafael Rivera Valiente, who was separated from the service by Rector Benitez and who appealed to the Council, and other matters. On the other hand, the prisoner Epifanln Fernandez Vanga accepted that he has personally failed in the Superior Council of Education. When asked about Dr. F. Manrique Cabrera's "manifeztaclone* riel, he said: "As far as I am concerned, I have been a failure, personally, in *1 Superior Council:" but I believe that my* colleague" has done a good job. In principle, it is true that I have not paid attention to the Superior Council. And as for) success, it is true that no one has been successful anywhere. You will see, that in the face of the general failure that there has been in the world, it is not strange that a blunt man should fail. The amount of adversity in the world is very great; no one succeeds completely in anything. Mr. Manuel García Cabrera declared that the manifestations of Dr. Manrique Cabrera are wrong, because he does not know the work carried out by the Superior Council and its actions. He also indicated that when he has time he will make more am- । pithy statements about the partlcu- ! lar. He referred to a plan presented by Dr. Manrique i (Continued on page 20)
mmnb "i "mwsmmmmmmmw M|l ■■!■■■■ ■ I >■ I Mil ■■■,,..1 ,| News Digest.
Truman prepares new message raising the nation's economic situation to Congress. - The conference convened to implement the Marshall Plan is being held in Paris. - Izquierdo is notified that an agreement has been reached for the 1947 tobacco purchase. - . - - The hearing of the Porto Rico Container v. JRT case in Federal Court was postponed for tea. Be studied the relocation of a number of families from El Tanguito to the San José project. - - - Governor's Office Instructs on precautions to be taken in case of storms. - - - Amendments to 18 federal minimum wage rates to be considered on Monday. - - - Road program during the last fiscal year was carried out with an investment of W.7M.877 says Interior. ♦ - * Transit Committee requests the elimination of traffic lights in the San Juan hull. - - Hundreds of Continental soldiers stationed in Puerto meo are taking courses da eapa "ol. They will not increase in the next two years. Ine passenger ships on the San Juan-New York route.
Retailer" "e propose to organize cooperative, with capital d* M00.0O0. They denounce official competition, practice" of convoy. Inaular quota covered 'e Red Cross, montant " 9186, "no. House'approved hill azu carero, with amendment empowering Secretary of Agriculture to fix salary." -- Caen Grillase" will go to the Supreme Court. There were scenes of excitement at the cnnooerze acquittal ruling of the, Municipal Assembly dr Ponce. None of the 17 charges was found proven. - Member" of the Board of Ensefiansa oplnan on the" statements of Professor Manrique Cabrera. The "liquor" met in Fortaleza. They will submit reflnanclamiento plan to the Banco de Fomento. - Marshal) says Rutila's refusal has created a serious situation Crea the nation must prepare for any test. - In" extorslonlsta" Investigation Failed. - " * Republican leaders" announce that the Senate will approve today the I reduction in the Income Tax. - " * Harriman denies political motivations in the Marshall Plan. Griswold predicts end of guerrillas fried as supplies circulate.
aVz¡ " 'v"' \ y 1 ' ll" fe ' - y rt . % * ¡-í" ;■ - B< ¿ a ■ ' ■ - -- BRp-'Wtew. v ® - v- IImI Á ' Otk-e > ■ I To the judgment of acquittal on the charges against him for millar" the Governor of Puerto Rico, .rgfm mera uronunelado by I" Municipal Assembly yesterday, in Ponce, followed a moment of intense drama when the wife of Mayor Grillase", dofi" Angelito Tranl de Grillase", filé to be confused with his compafiorn in an embrace, Ms tears clouded the eyes of the Mayor of Ponre. Of eximidas to the photographic lens is 1" sister of the sefior Grillase*, the lady, dofi" Fllba Grillase" and Salas, who joined the scene of intense emotion that developed there. - (F.L MUNDO photo, by Uasenaye>....
Fernandes Vanga says failed in Superior Council Teaching Two other members do not make statements on Manrique's accusation. Two state that Council has done good work. The Rector's opportunity By LUIR HERNANDE/ ÁQUINO Editor of EL MUNDO In 1" survey made by this editor among the members" of the Con "ejo Superior de Ensefianza, to learn of their" reaction to the statement"" made by the university professor, Dr. Francia
irnw pj siNirma vinivFriirnno a<" Miar The liquor dealers met in) la Fortaleza S? agreed to submit refinancing plan to I Raneo de Fomento Under the presidency riel interim governor, Dr. Juan A. Pona, a meeting was held in Fortaleza, which was attended by the joint committee riel Government and 1* Industry, which studied lo* problems rie 1" Liquor industry rfe| pats. There were present, in addition, lo* aefiores . Esteban Bird and Salvador Vivó, of the Raneo do Fomento, e| sefior José (M, García, riel Instituto riel Ron. v the Acting Treasurer of Puerto Rico, sefior Santos Ramírez. The discussion revolved mainly! around riel pían rie flnanclaml "n-। i to which establishes one of the projects before the Interim go-l hernador, to alleviate s 1a (Continued on p. 10>
Truman to address Congress on national economic status; Grillasca case to go to Supreme Court; House approves sugar bill; amendment was introduced to empower Secretary of State to approve the bill.
Amendment was introduced empowering Secretary to set ¿tariff* Gives Cuba 98% of Philippine deficit Femó* has requested a Senate change, in favor of Puerto Rico For CHARLES R. MeC ABE ' Uorrespon "el rie United Press WASHINGTON, July 11 (PU) -| The House rte Representan! The House of Representatives today approved the 1947 sugar bill, which extends the domestic quota system for five years at a fixed tonnage and gives Cuba a larger share of the U.S. sugar market. The measure was approved by a voice vote and the number of votes was not counted. The measure now passes to the Senate, where its passage is almost assured, since it was filed under the formidable auspices of 33 "enario, res, most of it" from the western beet-producing area, The bill replaces the sugar law of 1937, and the main difference between the new and the old measure is that the 1947 sugar bill fixes sugar quotas for the domestic* area* on the basis of stable tonnage and not on the basis of the percentage of the domestic sugar market, The measure approved by the Lower House today distributes among the domestic* area* 4,268,000 tons* of raw value. The measure passed by the Lower House today allocates between Is* domestic* 4,268,000 tons* gross value. 1,1500,000; Hawaii, 1,052,000; Puerto. Rico, 910,000; and Virgin Island, 6,000. Before it was submitted to Congress, the bill was approved by the beet and charter area and by a large part of the offshore carte-' nary zone. Since it was introduced, and during the hearing before the House Committee on Agriculture, there has been criticism of the distribution of the quota, mainly from the representatives of the Island Government and the growers of Puerto Rico. The* Puerto Rican* centralists* have consistently supported the project as "the best we can get." j It also provides that Cuba will net 98.64 percent of the Philippine sugar deficit. Under the 1946 Commerclel treaty, the" Flf llpinas are guaranteed a quota in the United States of 952,000 short* ton" for the next 28 years*. Under the present sugar law any Philippine shortfall is allocated to foreign pal* pal*e*s, except Cuba. I Representative Clifford Hope, Republican of Kansas, and chairman of the House Agriculture Committee which approved the measure, has estimated that the Philippine deficit will be 700,000 tons during the next harvest. The bill "tested by the House of Representatives provides that Cuba shall receive not less than 28.6 percent of U.S. domestic consumption during the next five years. Most ' "zAicarero experts believe that the consumption of sugar in the United States during the next five years will be at a level high enough for Cuba's ' ' quota to exceed 28.6 percent, and that there will be] (Continued on page 20)
Road program during I; O I' 1946-47 was "5,788,877.00 i Interior formalized 30 contracts dr works qpe < covered bridge construction and 67 kms. of ) roads. -Municipal secondary roads '
The road construction program in Puerto Rico, carried out by the Department of the Interior during the fiscal year that ended on June 30 last year, was carried out with an investment of 877, according to figures released yesterday by the Subcommittee. "efinr Jesús Benitez Castafio. The Depar-] ment announced that during the affin were formalized 30 contract* of, works, with a cost of execution rie $2,861,925 par" cover the construction rie "7 kilometer" rie roads, and were carried out another" project". | The "efior Benitez authorized lis following statements on the par-! tlcular: ! "At the end of the economic arto 1946-1947, we consider it pertinent to make known, to the general public. the vast a Importante" activities of the Department of the Interior as regards - le. by all concepts, beneficial construction of roads and bridge", carried out by the Division cofre". । pondlente in almost all the Island. "On different" date", "uceslvamente, 30 con. ¡trato" de obra", whose co "to de eje'cuclón "e rises to the total sum of ■$2,861,925.00, for a length of 67 kilometers, according to the detail "L ! gulent" in which is expressed *l" denomination of the contract, the name of the | Municipality and the longttud.de la obra en kilómetro". I Road contracts: Ponce- Ja.
yuya de Ponce, 1,383; Mufióz Rlve-!, ¡ra de Patillas (1st. contract) 2,559; , Orocovis-Coamo-Villalha, de Coamo, . 2,613: El Fangulto, de Santurce, 0. ¿ 676; Pasto de Guayanilla, 2,095; Ca-i cao, de Cíala", 3,999; Fraile, rie Sabana Grande. 2,025: Saltos-Varga", ¡ rie San Sebastián y Moca. 7,522: Ta-; namá. de Artjuntas. 1,946; Mameyes, de Jayuya, 3,41)0; Tea, rte Lnjas. 1,R40; Rf n Prieto, de Lares, 2,1,414: Variante La Plata, de Cayey, 2,141; Guayahota" de Yabucoa, 2-¡ 652: Guanajfbn, de Cabo Rojo. 2,131; Muñoz Rivera, of Patilla* (2nd contract), 1,294; Saltos-Caguana, of Utuado, 0.660; Cerro Gordo, of San Lorenzo. 1,594; La Rosa, rte Tos Alta, 1,610; Poza", of Ciales, 3,138; Florida-Utuado, 6,250; Río Hondo, of Comerlo, 2,170; Húmala, Añasco river, 2,007; . Agua Buenas, Cidra river, 2,850; Trujillo Alto-Gurabo, 2,123; San Lorenzo-La Piedra, de La Piedra, 1,216. Bridge contracts: Cibuco de Vega Baja, 0.822; Bairoa de Caguas, 0464; VivLCaonilla de Utuado, 0.823; Maracuto de Carolina, 0.238: Ponce-Jayuya de Ponce, Mufioz Rivera, de Patilla", (per. contract) Orocnvls-Coamo-Villalba de Coamo, "1 Fangulto de Santurce, and that of the Fuente Cibuco. va "e have been completed--v lo* ¡ ¡otro" twenty-five are still under construction in varying degrees of progress, some" of (Continued on ¡a Page 20) I
Scenes of excitement at the news of the Assembly exonerating Mayor FírchIcr called for a quick transcript of the record. - Councilors found that they had not proven any of the 17 charges brought against them.
Susonl Lens, who remained seated next to them. "They embraced effusively. Susonl was "1 first to congratulate him. The scene that followed immediately after the sentence was pronounced was truly moving. Some ladies" pre "ente" also cried. The wife of the "efior Grillases" came immediately to his side and they embraced each other. The public wanted to invade the part of the room destined to the Assemblyman, where the Mayor was, in order to approach him, but did not succeed in their purpose, as they were stopped by the Pnllels, who intercepted the passage. Several assemblymen, among them *1 president Lanauze Rolón, congratulated the sefior Grillases, who, if step that rilrlgta to his hflclna, continued being object rie warm congratulations. The prosecutor Guillermo Gil Rivera announced that the prosecutors would appeal to the Supreme Court to request a review of the sentence, and asked the Assembly to proceed as soon as possible to the transcription of the stenographic record, in order to perfect the sentence.
By DARIO CARI.O Editor of EL MUNDO PONCE, July 11. - Amid great public speculation, the Municipal Assembly rendered verdict, today after two* days rt* lnt*n*a" dPilhcrHcion**, ab*nlvlvl*nrtn Hhr*m*nt* to Alrald* rt* Pone*, rton Anrtré* Grillase" y Sala*, rie torio" y caria uno rfs. lo" rilecislel* charge* formulated to him by the Governor rie Puerto Rico, rion Je*ú" T. Mayor Grillasca heard the abaolutorlo falio, from the mouth of the Acting President of the II Assembly, Dr. Jo "é A. Lanauze Rnlón, standing in front of the Assembly, at about fifteen minutes past twelve o'clock today. The president had not finished pronouncing the "last" sentence of the brief "entonela", when the audience gathered in the "calones" wing burst into delirious applause, in evident approval of the ruling. Mayor Grillasca, greatly moved, could not hold back the tears, which he wiped with his handkerchief, while numerous "migo" eorri "h to embrace him. The Mayor and "u drowned defender. lIcenclHrio Francisco M.
Marshall says Russian refusal has provoked serious situation He warned the Senate Committee dr Foreign Relations" that the United States must remain prepared for any test in the future s For JOHN L. STEELR United Press Correspondent WASH1NTON, July 11.- (PUfeIt was reported today that the a "cretarlo of State. George O. MaahaH, testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that Rusta's refusal to participate in the Senate's debate on the
I Senate expected to pass income tax cut today Republican leaders say . threat of a vetn For Ronald G. Van Tin" WASHINGTON, July- IL <PU) । Republican leaders announced ea" tonight.'" except rte tarto challenge rte opposition, that *1 Senate will ignore President Truman's veto promise and pass mafta- ; na *1 new tax cut bill set for the GOP by a landslide majority, said leaders called a "eslon for tomorrow morning," which will continue until 1" vote is taken, according to the Senate Finance Committee's Chairwoman, Eugen* D. Millikin, R-Senate Finance Committee Report. Millikin, Republican for ' Colorado, The measure in question, which would result in a reduction rie $4, 000,000,000 "1 national Treasury, prni reliably will reach the House BlanciLel moon" or mars". Prohable. jm*nte the President return it if Congress Immediately, accompanied virtually "a carbon copy" riel veto Truman enacted in connection with the earlier bill last me". Although Democrats agreed that the Senate would pass it by a large majority, they claimed to have enough votes to support the President's likely veto and kill the plan until next year. Some Republicans admitted that, taking the present sentiment as a basis, such demonstrations were justified. 1 A majority rie la" do" third" part" rie lo" vote" "e needed to pass the measure into law despite rie la" objections' of the President, A Republican Wayne L. Morse, of Oregon- asked the Senate today to scrap the project now, claiming that it "tral(Continued on page 7) REQUESTS ELIMINATION OF TRANSIT LIGHTS IN SAN JUAN HULL The Transit Committee meeting at the Fortress"". under the chairmanship of "efior Elmer Ellsworth, unanimously agreed to request the elimination of the traffic lights in the Capital and that they be installed in the Inaneeeione" of Santurce. The committee adopted this agreement because it came to the conclusion, as reported yesterday, that the traffic lights on the San Juan road are slowing down the traffic. i - The Parts Conference has been held at the same time.
 He soberly warned the mlem| broa of the Committee, in an ae "lón "ecret that went on for ninety minutes, that the United States must / be prepared for" any test that may be in store for it to come. But at the same tl*mpn he expressed the hope rte that Russia and "u" satellite* tnrtavla may be induced* to take part in the Mar "hall Plan for the recovery rie Europe. ' It is reported that Marshall rtijo I" the senators, that he wishes to go ahead in *n *1 plan despite riel boycott by the Soviet bloc. The : ! Russian attitude has hurt, but '■ it has not disused the efforts" of * E "tate" the United States to help Eu- * clothes to be helped " to mlama. * Indeed. Marshall left the door open for Russia and the" nations it dominates to subscribe to . the Paris decisions," Mlentrak tanta, Secretary of Commerce. W. . Averell Harriman, derla in Londr*s that Eatadoa the United States has never incorporated" poll■I tic conditions into the program and that the door , I does not speak "ido cervaria to any r nation wishing to join the effort in *1 future. . S* knows that the Department H (Continued on page 15) Are guarded 1 o i] the ¡I laboratories in England Surroundings declared ; forbidden zone. - They are [ testing with atomic । LONDON, July 11. (1NS)- The . The Home Secretary of Great ! Rretafia J. Chutar Ede, revealed today . that "e has established a very strict surveillance over the British laboratories where atomic experiments are * being carried out. ' For example, the British government, ' invoking the '"Official Secrets Act" enacted in 1911, declared "no-go areas*", the Harwell experimental station in Berkshire, the nuclear physics laboratory at Risley, in Lancashire, and the Ministry of Supply factories at Springfield, also in Lancashire. Meanwhile. Str Wallace Akers, director of the" Atomic Inveatlgactons during the war, revealed that the United States and Great Britain a" have objected to the discussion of problems related to" atomic energy - at the scientific conference which will open soon in London, and to which representatives" of twenty-eight nations" will be attending". He said Aker"; "Both" Governments", which participated in the development of atomic energy, are opposed to the discussion of problems related to the functioning of the atom, pending the conclusion of a preliminary agreement"""""".
New Message Drafted with Study of General Situation Held Meeting with Advisers Considered Miners' Contract and Possible Influence on Prices By MERRIMAN SMITH Cor responso I of United Press WASHINGTON, July II. (PU)-President Trumon has decided to bring Congress up to date on the economic condition of the nation, so that he will have all the facts and figures, prices and production to think about during his summer vacation. Although not required by law, ■ *1 **fior Trum "n will probably send a mid-term report covering economic developments on January 1 to the Senate and House within the next day. Because of the closeness of the date on which the Congress will adjourn, which has been set for July 26, it is expected that the report will not recommend any immediate legislation. The Secretary of the White House, Charle" G. Rom, said that the President speaks arrival at the "meeting" of a long meeting "ata mafiana with the Cabinet and the Council of Aae-l-aorea Económlcoa. The" lecturer" spent much time considering the ¡ perepectlva of agriculture and *1 effect ponlble that ojona on -o" price" the Jornale" egg contract signed by John U l*wl" with lo" operadoto" of the nation's coal. "IF lo" price" "tibiarán " ro-ulta" of the coal pmbloma anludón, ean eerie a aaunta of concern", - said Rom. Faro added that the consensus at the meeting was that "there was a tendency to exaggerate the importance of the coal deal in the overall picture of the day. Dr. Edwin G. Nourae, chairman of the Economic Council, presented a detailed report on the day's wages, prices and changes in coal production at the first of the year. Ro"" said that *1 "efior Truman had decided that "it would be advantageous to Congress - and to the people, too - to publish the Report "hour, even though the law requires that he submit, once a"। time. an economic analysis ¡ron his" recommendations, to the Senate and the House. The President submitted his report a few days after Congress met, on January 3. The agricultural outlook was presented by "1 Acting Secretary of Agriculture, Norrie E. Dodd. Dodd said the corn crop estimate, given yesterday, showing more than 600,000,000 bushels less than last year, was based on figures compiled in the previous two weeks. Since then," he said, the weather has been more favorable and conditions have improved. He added that the wheat outlook is now much better than when the last crop estimate, which was announced about two weeks ago, was made. In addition to the Cabinet and the Economic Council, the President invited several of the most prominent oxRerto attend the conference, among whom were Larry S. Eccles, Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, 1 Budget Chairman James B. Webb, and James B. F. B. B. B. B. B. B. B. C., President of the Federal Reserve Board, and the President of the Federal Reserve Board. James B. Webb, and John R. Steelman, assistant to the Chief Executive. The presence of these advisors indicated that the discussion also involved the prospect for future government financ- ing. Particularly the disbursements that may be made under the Marshall Plan for economic aid to Europe. But there was no confirmation of this, either from the Roas or from the speakers. I With the signing of the contract between John L. Lewis and the coal mine refineries, a period of peace in industry which will last at least until July 1, 1948, seems to be assured. The nation's major industries - steel, automobiles, shipping and railroads - signed agreements with their respective labor unions long before Lewis and his miners reached an agreement with the operators of the bituminous coal mines. The conflict between the workers and the telephone companies was also recently settled. In the agricultural machinery manufacturing industry, there is also a contract signed between the unions and the main companies engaged in these activities. . Although in the opinion of the coal mine operators, "1 the price of fuel will rise by a dollar a ton - representing an additional expense to the conaumtdnrea of $600,000,000 a year - "1 the supply of coal for industry and for private uses, such as heating, has been assured. The Union of Minoroo contract also covers the coal "producing" company, (Continued on page 20)