THE MOON
rSONOSTlCOS MY WEATHER PASSES THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy, with scattered showers over the Interior and the northern part. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: High, low, 74. Barometric pressure at sea level at 4:80 p.m., 29.98 inches of mercury. *
44 Pages 5/
YEAR XXVIII
Check all brakes*. Cooperate with the automobile inspection.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, MAY 10, 1947
Entered m eecond 61aaa matter, Poet Office, Ban Juan, P. B>
NUMBER 10941
Retailers Union Adopts Price Reduction Plan
I 1 They will inquire of the* wholesalers* what their position is on the matter They condemn high freight rates on cargo They will commit memorial to federal authorities asking for lower rates _The Retailers Union of Pu*ren meeting held last night, declared its sympathy and TTdw adopted the price reduction plan, and passed a motion to inquire of the wholesale trade of the island, as to its position in connection with the same matter. The motion was prompted by the fact that, as they stated, the retailers are proceeding to discount the prices of articles and are then confronted with the situation that when they run out of merchandise and visit the wholesale establishments for purchases, the prices of the articles, when not higher, have remained at the high levels at which the retail trade bought them orlgln "lmen-i te. "The question of prices was discussed at length. More than one hundred and fifty delegates from San Juan, Santurce and Rio Piedras considered the question at length and passed a resolution to submit a memorial to the appropriate federal authorities, through the Council of Commerce and Industry, requesting that the provisions of the cabotage law, which impose onerous tariffs on shipments to Puerto Rico, be amended. The memorial, according to the assembly, should state that in adhering to President Truman's call for prices, the commerce of Puerto Rico understands that the Government of the United States should also cooperate to the purpose, approving the lowering of the rates, so that the businessmen of the country may be in a position to comply with the recommendations of the Chief of the National Executive. The Assembly considered as too high the payment of more than a dollar freight for a quintal of cargo brought from California. The high freight rates, the meeting was told, are affecting prices in Puerto Rico. "SLPresident Truman-is insisting that the trade and the producers lower their prices, we believe-of justice that "e lower the fintea for Puerto Rico, so as to cooperate with our trade in the continuation of the lowering of prices." -ae stated -The assembly having welcomed the plan for lowering prices, the May 1 risDr commerce of the country which has not acted in that direction was invited to do so immediately. The assembly instructed the president of the Union, Mr. Manuel gorrero, representative of the misW in the Island Council of Commerce and Production, to emphasize at the next meeting of the Council, the matter of the request for price reductions -by the wholesale trade. A~meeting of this council is; --scheduled for the fifteenth day of mu. me. = --The assembly emphasized a com-, alon* of au seno, presided over by Senor Rorrero, to inquire ron the General Supply Administration as to the present stock in Puerto Rico of coring grain rice since, se- 1 gún_í" said, some retailers are-' (an_confronting difficulties in getting it on the island market _ The "commission called yesterday on the Acting director of the AGS. Mr. .tullo peT "z'García, who told the group that supplies of this rice riase are "quite normal". He also reportedly informed them that the Administrator in pro(Continued on page 19)
The public and members of Congress," Crawford said, "are "quite normal. Congress," Crawford said, "are! being bombarded with half-truths and with falsehoods ' "For example, it is urged that Cuba is the only source of sugar for the United States on which "a can depend, and, therefore, that it is being given a near monopoly in this market, "Proponents! de_"sts fahe- । dad cite the 1 wartime sugar record of our domestic 1 airs and claim that this de. í i shows the Impossibility do d "pen-, dar dr the domestic producers' i as sources of sugar.' Crawford, on this point, inserted "n e) official record of the proceedings of Congress the "figures for the production of Cuban cane sugar, "<ifta sugar and domestic beet sugar during the past ten years. "Now, let's see what he darned"- : Crawford continued. "In 1940 emprimar year of the war, the domestic ¡ ' beet area set a new production record. ¡ ¡ (Continued on page 21)
.a subcommittee of eleven nations, which । is drafting the terms of reference for the commission of inquiry into the Palestine problem to be set up by the United Nations. This demand has been the strongest of all the gestures Russia has made during the course of the current meeting, which is laying the groundwork for consideration of the examination of the British regime in the Holy Land when the matter comes before the full Assembly in September. Gromyko did not Ingr-, tadoa great results, but stated that he was le-' jos to feel defeated. The chairman of the committee, Lester B. Lester B. Pearson, decided that the Soviet delegate was out of order because he was raising a substantial question. Gr:myko objected to the decision, but withdrew from the field temporarily, Son that he would renew his demand nnthe 55-nation Political Committee. . The Political Committee met in the afternoon to hear the Arab High Committee representing the Arabs of Palestine. The Arabs chose Henrl batan as spokesman. The designing committee met last night. this morning and during the pri1 met as hnras this afternoon, and presented an outline to the -Political Committee. No nation s" pledged to accept it. The outline contains six important points: 1. The committee Investigating the Palestinian problem should have the broadest powers to make its investigation, 2. It should have ta opportunity; to collect such testimony as it ne(Continued on page 21.)
News Digest
For the fifth week conaaeu. For the fifth week in a row, wholesale prices in the U.S. continue to fall. House Representative Eugenio Font Suárea. elected in Santurca by the Popular Party, made his entry in *1 Independent Party =Andar were installed the new judges of the Diatrito Court, José M. Calderón and Antonia R. Barceló, son. a Diatrito Court issued yesterday an injunction aimed at restricting the activities of the plquctcadorao at the ease da ItForlo Rico Container. - ♦ - Permit granted for construction of the new Puerto Rico Casino. - ♦ " ~ -Agustin Ramos, the most decorated Puerto Rican soldier of World War II, received on Thursday another decoration: the American Defense Medal. "Colonel Harry S. Snnnions retires from the Army. Col. Frank A. Jones will assume command of the Pudrio RL eo Regiment. Rector Benites, dismissed Professor Rafael Rivera Valiente, of Mayagües College. Rivera will file an appeal* before the Superior Council on Monday.
In April, the exportation of sugar cane to the United States increased, but this does not solve the crisis faced by the industry in that market. - The new patent law is of general application. Lite "laalflcaclonae in ln" ml "mns ile the law of 11)14. Only lem types have varied. Roela challenges the U.N. on the fall of Palestine, asking it to resolve "the delay". - The small fortune that a Rio Pierdas farmer kept in banknotes in a safe was almost completely destroyed by mold. Five preeoa ae escaped last night from the district jail 1 dr Aguadilla. " - - The Union of Retailers agreed to adopt the plan of reduction, price" It will inquire wholesaler" which r" "ti position. - Yesterday, the mandamus filed against the Rector of the UPR, in which the regulation that covers the administration of the academic "index" was challenged, was decided in the Supreme Court. - Judge Pulo explains that the lack of a courtroom is hindering the work of the District Court. One judge has to wait for another to finish,
i Crawford against giving Cuba ! monopoly in sugar market Says Congress rat being bombarded ron mrdiaa truths and with falsehoods. Cites "record" of domestic producers during war By CHARLES R. MCCABE (United Press Correspondent) WASHINGTON,, 9. (PU). - Rep. Fred L. Crawford, Republican, of Michigan, has told Congress that it is a "falsehood" that Cuba is the only source of sugar supplies for the EsLadns Unlrtns of In oue se n tied a denonder. -
k it "j ■ FRED L. CRAWFORD
Russia issues challenge to U.N. by asking it to settle Palestinian case Gromyko said it should find means of ending Britain's regime there "without delay." Arab loa spokesman* ea Henri Katan For "JAMES MCGUNOY (United Press Correspondent) LAKE SUCCESS, N. Y. 9. - (PU). - Russia today challenged the United Nations to find a means of putting an end to "1 Britain's regime in Palestine, "without delay," Soviet delegate Andrei A. Gromyko made the demand before
! E. Font Suárez dissociates himself from the Popular Party Harp his entry to the Indppendpntista Party by letter to Concepción Eugenio Font Suárez, representative to the House for Santurca, yesterday made his formal entry to the Independently" Puerto Rican Party, abandoning the ranks of the Popular Democratic Party. Font Suarez came to the House of Representatives, elected in the 1944 elections as the Popular Party candidate for Santurca, a precinct in which some fifty-five thousand women voted. His entry into the Puerto Rican Independence Party was made through a letter addressed to the president of that party, Dr. Concepcion de Gracia. This is the fourth legislator elected by the Popular Party to leave the ranks of this political organization, in the term of one year, to join the Puerto Rican Independence Party. He was preceded in this determination by Representatives Baltasar Qulftoi nes Elias and José Luis Fellú Pesquera. and Senator William Córdo. Chirino. Questioned yesterday about the entry of Representative Font Suarez to his party, Dr. Concepcion de Gracia, president of the party, authorized the following: "It is with great joy that we receive in our clean tents the brave fighter for the cause of our Independence, Don Eugenio Font Suarez. Font Suarez. Font Suárez is, in addition to being a champion of Independence and an exemplary citizen, a notable writer, an austere legislator and organizer, and one of the most connoted leaders of the progressive forces of Puerto Rico. "With the formal entrance of the distinguished comrade Font Suárez to our Party, the number of legislators who, (Continued on page 19.)
Governor Piftero signed yesterday the following bills: i P. del S. 42 (Act No. 8), allocating funds for the construction of a building for the second rural unit in the Mariana neighborhood in Naguabo, P. riel S. 124 (Act No. 87), allocating $150,000 so that together with a previous appropriation from the Legislative Assembly, the 'Eacuela Vncaclonal de Oflciña e Industrias in Ponce may be built. P. S. 358 (Act No. 88). authorizing the Housing Authority to purchase and develop land and to sell or lease land to persons of moderate income". P. S. 438 (Act No. 89), to regulate the hiring of workers or employees whose services are to be used in any state of the United States or territory.
Pinero signed yesterday appropriation measures for $16,573,850
-i P. riel S. 458 Act No. 90), a "lg. ; - nando $8,850.00 to pay the muni-L i ripio de Bayamón for the use of the lo. The District Court ( i rie said city, । P. of! S. 581 (Act No. 9D. "slg- । ' nando $240,000 for the design, ad(qúislclón of land and equipment and ¡ construction of a" vocerío- । ■ nal school oflrlos and Industries in Hu- | ' macan. | P. S. 524 (Act No. 92). aslg- i ■ nando $200,000 for the equipment and construction of a vocational school of trades and industries in Mai yagüez. P. S. 570 (Act No. 93), aslg- : i nando $100,000 for the conahrucclon i and equipment of a vocaclonal school < i of trades" and industries in Aguadilla. || P. s. 578 (Law No. OI), aalg* । i 1 (Continued on page 21).
i The new patent law is general ■* l ■■■■ - I l ■■■ ■.■MI" ~
Classification groups have not changed; they are the same as in the 1914 law Only the rates lian varied How the old law affected business t, and how the new law affects them By Juan Martinez Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO The new patent law, dn by Governor Piftero on April , 3() wing , and which began to take effect ■ on the same facha, is a general iey for all" lo" municipalities of Puerto Rico and the Government of the Capital. As a reply to innumerable letters from municipal officials and merchants of the Wa ** 'es Informa that the groups "A 1 , 1 B and "C", in which are divided the stable, commercial foundations and Induítria--íes, are the same as determined by the law of 1914. Neither in this nor in any other section of the law has there been any alteration, except in the tax rates to be applied according to the turnover of each establishment. The differences in tax rates between the old law and the current approved law are as follows: Group "A" businesses (Purchase and sale of articles of all kinds). The calculations are made by eliminating the first $500 that does not pay. For each $1,000 or fraction thereof up to $20,000, previous rate $2.50, contribution $50; current rate $2; 20 percent is deducted. For each $1,000 in excess of $20,000 and up to $50,000, previous rate $150, contribution $45; current law rate $2.25, contribution $07.50: a 50 percent increase. Amount of total contribution, current law $107.50, former law $95, an au- । ment of 13.5 percent, For each j $1,000 or fraction thereof in excess of $50,000 and up to $100,000 former typn $1. contribution $50; au* । fual type law, $2.50, contribution, $125; un increase of 150 percent. Amount I of total contribution, octual law $232.80, former law $145, an increase of 80.4 per clanto. For each $1,000 or fraction thereof in excess of SIGO...000 up to $1,000,000. Upo above; $0.50 contribution $450; Upo ac- : tual law ■ $2.75, contribution $2,475, an ' increase of 450 percent. Amount I total eontrlbuclóx current law I $3,707.50, former law $595, an auI ment of 355 percent. Per caria $1,000 or fraction thereof in excess of $1,000,000,000 unlimited by prior law $0.25, current law $3. A business ' | having a volume of $5,000,000,000, ' by prior law pay on । the $4,000,000 in excess of the first million a contribution of $1,000; I by net vial law will have to pay $12,000, an increase of 1,100 percent. The amount of the total " contribution by the old law Mris SL* j 595, by the present law, $15,707.50. an increase of 884.80 percent, 1 Business riel group "R", (banks, I factories, puliblico service companies). The first $500 is exempt. - I For each $1,000 or fraction thereof up to $100,000 the tax rate in am. For each $1,000 or ' fraction in excess of $100,000 up to $500,000 the rate of the former law, $1, contribution, $400; rate of ' the present law, $1.25, contribution ' $500, increase of 25 percent. I 1 Amount of contribution, ante. law. ¡ ' rior $500; current law $800 an au- ¡ - amount of 20 percent. For each ' $1,000, or fraction of $1,000, in ex' I cessation of $500,000 up to $1,000,000.000 ante. law rate $0.50; contribution $250. current law, rate $1.50; (Continued on page 30) I
Lack of a locale hinders District Court's work ' - Judge Po1n explains how one of the two available judges has to wait for the other to finish his day's work before starting his - ;-
' I Judge Luis R. Polo, of the District Court, yesterday denounced the absence of a "criminal chamber" (the root cause of the obstacles that the administration of justice in San Juan suffers, notwithstanding the fact that it only has the services of two judges. >Judge Polo immediately explained that one of the two judges has to wait for the other to finish his work before starting his own. Judge Polo is one of ■ rio" the magistrates who hear criminal proceedings. Apropos of this situation el| i Judge Polo further said the following: - ! "An examination of the dossiers" of the criminal cases of the San Juan District Court reveals that for the month of May
for the month of May, there are 59 cases of felonies in relation to some of which there are also misdemeanors, carrying weapons and violation of the Weapons Registration Law, for a total of 28 cases. ! "For the month of June, a total of 14 felony cases have been reported so far, with corresponding misdemeanor cases related to felonies. It has been the custom in the District Court in San Juan and in almost all the courts of Puerto Rico to report a limited number of cases, both civil and criminal, during the month of June because during the last days of that month the clerks of the District Courts are busy preparing the annual statistics which should be completed by the last day of that month. ' I "There are pending "eftalamlen-. lo until the 8th day of the present; .31 cases of" felonies, which *u-¡ imated to the 59 cases indicated for the month of" May and the 14 for the month| of June, make a total ri" .104 cases pending" final resolution' by said Court. In addition to these 104 cases pending for hearing and resolution, there are 15 that cannot be reported because the accused are military personnel stationed outside Puerto Rico, 7 in which the accused are confined in the Insular Insane Asylum suffering from insanity and 18 in which the accused have been declared fugitives and their arrest could not be made by the police or the marshals. Tale" caao" make a total of 40. which when added to the 104 cases would make a total of 144. "It is considered that this number of cases in a Court of the lm(Continued on page 20)
University professor removed from office '
Rivera Valiente filed an appeal to the Superior Council on Monday. Judgment rendered by Rector Benitez Says Rivera's attitude was a challenge to University rules By Luí" Hornándos Aquino Editor of EL MUNDO Resolving that the conduct of the rsfarirátlco Rafa"! Rivera Vnl'ente, riel Colegio rie Agriculture and Mechanical Arts rie Mayagüez, during the days March 31 and Tuesday 1 and Wednesday April 2, when the movement occurred huelgsrlo in that Institution, "has represented a challenge so evident ins ins nor- 1 mas and rie the university authority in Mayagüez", the Rector rie the Un! versldarf rie Puerto Rico, Mr. Jaime Benitez, definitively separated Mr. Rivera Valiente from service, making effective h sepa, radon since April 7, 1947. This is the first time that a professor of the University of Puerto Rico has been charged and dismissed since the new university administration has governed the Institution, and sections 9 and 16 of the University Law are invoked in his attitude. Mr. Rivera Valiente has been working for some time in the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts. In the budget rie the Unlverslriari is listed as mnestro rie type ríe permanent contract. On one" occasion he was interim head of the Biology Department of the College of Agriculture, 1" which he resigned due to a vacancy that occurred in the same, for which he submitted applications that were not accepted, deciding to appoint Professor José A. Benitez Rector Benitez. Ramo" for the position of Interim Professor in the Biology Department, in substitution of Rivera Valiente, who continued in "his BloIngia" professorship until the Holy Week strike, which led to charges being brought against him by Vice Rector Stéfanl. According to the opinion issued by Rector Benitas, the charges referred to the conduct of Professor Rivera Valiente during March 31, 1947, and on Tuesday, April 1 and Wednesday, April 2, 1947, in connection with the strike movement at the College of Agriculture. The first charge accused Mr. Rivera Valiente of hsb-r lnchatio and encouraged in fact and in word, the students in the strike movement; the second, of not having attended his classes during March 31 and April 1 and 2, and the third attributed to the aforesaid professor tleslealUri - Indisclpllna in his conduct. Mr. Rivera Valiente denied the charges, under oath, and a dispute arose regarding the alleged facts, which led to an administrative hearing for two years. Nineteen witnesses participated in the hearing, including Vice Chancellor Stéfanl, who was represented by Hcenrlado Víctor Gutiérrez Franqui. Professor Rivera Valiente used three witnesses, represented by Brother Enrique Báez García. Rector Renltez says in his opinion on the case: "I consider it de| Unitively established that the se. । ftor Rivera Valiente did not attend । " any of the classes scheduled in his program for Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, only in relation to one of these absences", Mr. Rivera Valiente presents explanations. I - (Continued on page 12.)
The House gave its approval to the Greek-Turkish aid project.
Truman receives birthday cake t A J I A '.... .'L ■■Su®í'X*" - Qj-
President Truman smiles while" displaying the tltrochn presented to him by the photographers" covering the White House on the occasion of his snxsgésimntércerc birthday, the day before yesterday, Thursday. The Chief Executive gave the group of photographers the name of "The Uns Má Club" because the photographers say, "One more, please, Mr. President," when they ask him to pose for additional pictures. (Associated Press photo). Court condemns the attitude of the strikers in the Container case Concludes that they exceeded their right to persuade and issues the writ of injunction restricting the activities of Ins piqueleadores.
Judge Emilio S. Belaval, of the District Court, yesterday issued a writ of preliminary injunction against the striking operators of the Ható Rey carton factory, Porto Rlro Container, ordering the union of operators of that factory, its president, José H. Rodríguez, José Rivera rie León, Enrique Ortlz, Luis Topre" Ramo" Manuel Feliciano, and the workers of the factory, its president, José H. Rodríguez, José Rivera rie León, Enrique Ortlz, Luis Topre" Ramo" Manuel Feliciano, and the union of operators of the factory, its president, José H. Rodríguez, José Rivera rie León, Enrique Ortlz, Luis Topre"
Ramo" Manuel Feliciano, Ramon Jarc'a, Carlos Rodriguez, Fernando Garcia, Paula Adorno and Ramona Tlvent, > to the affiliates, employees, agenles, propagandists, simpatlzariores n piqusteadore" da riiirh" Union, to "e refrain by "i n by means rie the aforementioned persons,", to interfere with the access to and egress from the sfablec'mlen'o rail of the petition, located in Hato Rey, allowing the Pbr" arcc "o or egress, ri" io" grounds private" road", estahleclmiento", tallera", offices, not xólo to Jo" directors, employee" and oorero" not unlonarin" or employees -jtiionarinz who have not "a hayan "nlld". rtzariii with the strike, but also to those" related" or related" to the aforementioned company who are interested in doing business with Porto Rico Container. It is included in the order the traffic of vehicles" or the transit of persons" or the access and exit of materials. The order includes the traffic of vehicles" or the transit of persons" or the access and egress of materials, merchandise, cargo or any objects or goods that the petitioner or its customers need to enter or leave in order to continue the ordinary course of its commercial relations, under contempt of court, leaving the workers" right to board customers and vehicles" that transit or traffic between the premises and the rest of the city, in an attempt to persuade customers and drivers to support the strike. Below we publish the oplnlór nal Judge Emilio S, Relava): "It is not:(Continued on page 20) Pinero extends appointments The Governor has extended the following appointments: Antonio N. Pérez and Julio Caballero Bernard, members of the Board of Examiners of Plumbers; Dr. A. Olivera" Guerra, member of the Board of Examiners of Physicians; Francisco J. Ramírez Silva, member of the Board of Examiners of Engineers, Architects and Surveyors; Ramón Muftoz, Chief of Police, Fourth Class; Secundino Vélez, Chief of Police, Fifth Class; Ramón Ortlz Fuentes, Chief of Police, Sixth Class; Carlos Ramo*, Chief of Police, Seventh Class; and Domingo Carrero, Chief of Police, Eighth Class.
Wholesale prices fall in the United States Mr. Rrdurrion in nlgiinoñ food*.- WASHINGTON, 9 (PU) - Wholesale prices of some food and construction materials rose last week, but overall wholesale prices experienced a small decline for the fifth consecutive week, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported today. one percent during the week ended May 3, bringing the total increase during the past month to 41 percent. Wholesale food prices rose one and a half percent, due to increases in the prices of meats, butter, vegetables, apples, oranges, onions and tea. The total increase in wholesale prices during the past year was 47 percent. The prices of cheese, evaporated milk, fruits, bananas, sweet potatoes, Irlgn beef flour, maize, caréale and coffee fell by 47 percent. A drop of one and seven tenths percent in the market prices of farm products, such as grains, animals and cotton, contributed to the decline in the average of 900 items by one tenth of one percent. This represents a five-week decline of one and eight tenths percent, although the commodity index is still 33.5 percent higher than a year ago. Prices for most grains were lower during the week ending May 3 and "brokers anticipated further price declines," the bureau said. Declines in the wholesale price of corn in the markets were "especially large"; hog prices were down five percent, and cotton prices were down more than four percent, according to the report. The increase in the "cost" of the "piece goods" that "sold by the piece" drove up the wholesale price of men's suits.
Coalition Republicans and Southern Democrat*s panned it, 287 to 107 A challenge to the Soviet Ru*ia to make the best of it, said a Republican congrr*i*!a For Sandnr *. Klein United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 9,.(PU), - Challenging Russia to "make the best of it," the House ri* Representatives rie 1na United States*, tonight, passed President Truman's Greek-Turkish aid rie bill, rie $4nO,non,iY)O, authorizing the transfer rie American arms and money to entrench Mediterranean countries against *1 Communism. In a roll call vote of 287 to 107, a coalition of Republicans and Democrats in the South shouted down the opposition's alarming protests against the aid, to the effect that its passage meant "a declaration of war against Russia," "If Russia thinks this "" a ri* gtieri" declaration, let her make the best of it" - said a representative of the Republican Party to the cheering facto,res of the bill. Before the roll call vote, the House defeated on taps, by voice vote, a motion by Representative Chef Holifield, Democrat of California, to kill the measure, sending it back to Committee. Voting " for the bill were 127 Republican" and 18(1 Democrat"> against the bill were 93 Republicans, 1.1 Democrats and Representative Vito Marcantonio, a Labo-rlata-amerlcana from New York. The House action puts the stamp of congressional approval on the so-called "Truman Doctrine" of opposing American power and influence against the further expansion of Soviet totalitarianism. An identical bill was passed by the Senate weeks ago, and the minor differences between the two bills will be ironed out in joint Senate-Republican conference.
Both versions, however, are precisely in line with the program laid down by President Truman in his message to Congress on March 12 of this year, when he proclaimed his new policy of entrenching free nations "everywhere" against Communism. It is expected that the joint Senate and House conferees will send this legislation, in its final form, to the White House next week for signature by Mr. President, after which American arms, rilnero and relief supplies will have to begin shipping almost immediately to the Near East. The program does not involve the sending of any American troops, but rather small missionaries, in the capacity of altante", will be sent to Athens and Angora, to supply the Greek and Iurian armies, in *1 use of the American arsenals. As in the Senate version, the House bill invites the United Nations to participate in the crl "isk, and provides for the termination of American aid as soon as the United Nations so orders. JE1 further authorizes the Financial Reconstruction Corporation to establish an interim appropriation of $100,000,000,000 to be used pending Congressional approval of the $400,000,000,000 to be used pending Congressional approval of the $400,000,000,000. The bill also authorizes the Financial Reconstruction Corporation to establish an interim appropriation of $100,000,000 to be used while Congress approves the $400,000,000 total needed to carry out the program, and gives the President of the United States a relatively free hand in deciding how much aid to give to each country and on what funds. The State Department-which has been urging passage of this legislation, dead* that *1 President recommended it to Congress-has stated that three-fourths of the total amount allocated will go to Greece-half in economic means and half in military aid-and the other quarter, not to exceed $100,000,000, will go to Turkey, virtually all of it in military aid.000. to Turkey, practically all in military aumlnlstrna", of which the nation is badly needed to defend its independence from the anti-Nazi threats. Before giving final approval to the bill, the House defeated a determined effort by a small opposition bloc to push through a series of amendments that would have rendered the program null and void. Passage of the measure was assured before the final ballot, when a coalition of Republicans and Southern conservative Democrats killed an amendment to the bill that had placed the Mediterranean problem in the hands of the United Nations. It is a triumph for President Truman's and Secretary of State Marshall's foreign policy, as well as for the bipartisan Foreign Policy Caucus, who have supported this program without reservation from the outset, notably Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg, President of the Senate, and Senator Tom Onnally, Democrat, of Texas.