THE MBNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: Partly cloudy with scattered showers later in the afternoon. Winds east to southeast 12 to 18 - mph. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: High, 88: low, 74: rain, 8. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:10 p.m., $9.92 inches of mercury.
40 pages 5/
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII
Check the brakes. I cooperate with the Automobile Inspection
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, APRIL 5, 1947 ... . ■■ . ,
NUMBER 10906
Entorte as ""oond oiass matter. Post Offloa. San Juan F. R.
More than 20% of AFF bonds unsold.
Ten and a half million remains on account of First Boston Corp. I Report on the : AFF income I Up to the year 1951-52 will go up, after covering obligations By WTLU8 HOMAN NEW YORK. 4. (PU), - A little more than twenty per cent of the River Source Authority's bond issue for rlnruonta million dollars remains unsold. The" bonds were auctioned at the sale here last week . The First Raton Corporation, one of the principal members of the board of directors which is "underwritten" the sale, reported that $10,500,000 of the issue remains on the board's books. The balance of $35,000,000 was sold in the market during the first day the issue was offered for sale in New York. The largest volume of business was withdrawn on the first day the offering was made. The Flrat Boaton Corporation reported that the amount at the sale was normal for this type of issue. "The market requires some time to digest the first $35,000 and there is no doubt that the bond rate was taken in the ordinary course of business," said the representative of the board. Meanwhile, in San Juan, the official report of the Director of the Fiuvlaloa Springs Authority, ao- . Antonio Luchettl, on the - "sta. | The report, prepared in connection with the sale of 550,000,000 in revenue bonds, reveals that as of fiscal year 1948-47, the BPP will have revenues which will continue to increase steadily during the following fiscal years. The estimates prepared for this purpose comprise the following fiscal years: 1945-47: $3,295.7. 1947-4$: $3,917,000. 1948- - 49: $4,833,000. 1949-50: $4,960,000. 195WJ1: $5,285,000.1961-52: $5,450,000. J It is further shown that the Au- - torty will have an annual balance- J i after covering all its obligations, including the payment of cap-. J tal and interest payments on the bond issue that has been arranged. These " begin at $175,700 and continue b gradually ascending to al- ' tired $370,000 in 1951-1952. 1 1 1 "The present cistern of the Autorl- r dad do Fuentes Fluviales," Reports ' softor Luchettl, * which now In- f duye laa properties formerly owned by the Ponce Electric < Company, Is Porto Rico Railway t Light and the MayagOes Light, Power i and Ice Co. serves a territory with " an Area of 3,435 square miles t and a population estimated at just i over 2,000,000. The most r"- ( cent addition to the system was the 30,000 KW generating plant known by i "Soapower," acquired from the Admi- ) nlstraclon do Haberos do Guerra t for $2,500,000. and the steam plant t dfc "X" KW which has been r leased from the United States Marlha ■ । under a clneo t year contract quo ea t effective June 1, 1948." . . . . t "To distribute the electricity f which Ia Authority generates I own and operate 44.2 miles of 115 K trans- * mission line. V.: 554.93 miles of r lima" of 38 K. V. and r transmission circuits of 22 K. V,. and 5,104 mi- t llas.de lineas.de linea" de distribution de meñor voltaje." . A minute detail "on the for- . mi in which the $50,000, . 000 acquirer will be invested is given by Mr. Luchettl in the following list. Luchettl in the following relation: i The Revenue corresponding to the vonta of the bond issue of - $50,000,000.000 will be used for the following line: j For ledhnlr $18,490,000 of bonds r on rents d" I* Unpaid Authority." at 2 and 112 per cent, dated January L 1944. to be announced- . to be redeemed "n July 1. 1947 ; $18.490000, ' To pay $320,000 of said" bonds at 2 and V2 per cent, dated ' January 1. 1947. due July 1 1947. $320,000 i (Continued on page 17)
Compendium of News . . -- ■ -
Insular trade closes dk 9. will hold, with Industry. congress in San Juan against the" plasaaPRACO project The protest has been elevated to Washington. Crawford will discuss the matter with Plflero. - " Boy a public hearing is held on Bill 848 creating the Otlclna de Perennal, U Federation of Government Employees capono their objections to the measure * - - - They will shortly present the bill for the Puerto Ricans to elect au Governor. Krug will insist that the final status plebiscite also be approved. The seizure of the U.S. telephone industry is being studied. The Planning Board approved a project to build eight model homes in Ponce. More than 28 percent of loa -- bonds of the Autoridad da Fuentes Fluviales remain unsold. - ♦ - F ruinan rejected 14iwía's demand that Kmg be dismissed, - - - - Marshall submitted memorial on Germany's reparations " Rusta. "The Senate approved the rare dbwntendo measure for a ferry boat service between Puerto Rico and other Antillean islands.
other "West Indian Islands". Do Hoato" Invites Muflo" Marin to define the rule that Ins- 1 pira la" PRACO. " - - - * । The Senate Committee on Foreign" Relations" i riore." approved the plan i of aid to Greece, giving In- t torvendon to United Nations" ( to stop it whenever it wants. Federal officials found a firearm on the island in the possession of a Palauan. The Board of Comlalonado" m < meets next tune". t House approved a measure to convert PEG sewing workshops in qooperattv"", - * * * Ra "Ido restricted summer enrollment on the Univomi- l dad of Puerto Rico. - Governor Plflero left last night for the United States. Plflero and Pona submitted the hospital bill for the island. I to the cliujano general Parran. * I Olmo hit a double in the game that Veracru" won Thursday against champion Tampico. * * * * The Senate declined to file the destmsrMn of a - -* tnv "tan ana lto to put Inyeceionee without needle.
7rat to avert telephone strike in U.S. -rr - - - - - - - - m- T -, - BÍSí
MBr 1 n Bk ■Rr 1 V w > 1 W Kt J xrX < A JB aBF *f¡gs|4| '2 ■ ; 'I Edgar L. Warren ("I second, from right to iMulorda). Chief Conciliator of the United States", hahl while Joseph A, Belrne (second, from Isqulecda to right), president of the National Federation" of Telephone Employees, listens to him naked of a two-hour conference and motila, in Wáahlngto" The conference was attended by John Moran (laqulerda), president of the American Union of Telephone Employees, and J. J. Krull, of the FNKT. After the conference, Iteirne said that "as things stand" now," the next lunea will comment a nationwide strike of telephone employees, t Attorney General Clark declared yesterday that President Truman has powers to seize( t telephone if the employees go on strike, - (P. A.)
Excess of firearms found on Island Federal officials surprised. Since the office in charge of enforcing the federal statutes regulating the possession of firearms in Puerto Rico has been installed in the island, federal officials have been surprised to find an excess of firearms on the island. Since the office in charge of enforcing the federal statutes regulating the possession of firearms by civilians was installed in Puerto Rico, the United States Department of the Treasury has been in charge of enforcing the National Firearms Act, Osborne and Rurstelrt, initiated here the registration of firearms in possession of the "eluded", work that was discontinued after the "founders" brought to their "registry", a number of weapons of various calibers and types, owned by civilians. The registration was suspended and "eftors Osborne and Burstein hope to resume it in some time. In addition to proceeding to register the guns, the Federal Inspectors have been considering or investigating the alleged violations of federal law or the ar- P mas that have been submitted to them by the police and prosecutors of the Insular and Federal Courts. As of yesterday, 52 of these "riso" are in the hands" of federal inspectors. Four of these 52 cjio", have already been duly investigated and submitted" to the prosecutor teleral for the prosecution of the" alleged offenders. t | The federal officials" have been surprised" not what they describe as an extraordinary habit of the portorrlqueOn", "detenor in their possession firearms." Mr. Burstein and Mr. Osborne have indicated that proportionally, in Puerto Rico the number of firearms in possession of dudo, damage" is greater than in the E "tndo" United States etmtlnentalea. A1 disclose that do do the coso i nuo a single person in Puerto Ríen lien* in his possession three and Insta four firearms, they stated that "there are more guns in Pu "rtn R|. co than inhabitants." < L" majority of lo" cases so far submitted" to the diode" fun- 1 (Continued on page 17) 1 KM ' I I I I 'lH I I' 1 ' ■' I" ---
Senate Committee approved e/ plnn of aid for Greece Authorizes United Nations to stop it by majority vote in General Assembly Security Council. State gave backing to measure iwM.iwn.iw and ♦ । By ROBERT F. LOFTUS WASHINGTON, 4. - (PU), - President Truman's bill । to grant aid of four hundred million dollars to Gre- i I I cia and Turkey was approved yesterday by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee with an amendment authorizing the United Nations i
। to halt the American program at any time by a simple majority vote of its General Assembly or Security Council, The amendment, which the U.S. Department of State approved at the last minute in a gesture of contempt for the United Nations and congressional critics who said the world organization was being ignored, stipulates that the United States shall not exercise its veto power over any order of the United Nations to abandon the aid program. This has been hailed as a starting point with respect to the U.N.'s relationship with the United Nations. If approved by Congress, it would be the first time that one of the Big Five countries has waived its veto power over Security Council decisions. However, the amendment, drafted by Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg, R-Arizona, would be the first time that one of the Big Five countries has waived its veto power over Security Council decisions. Vandenberg, Republican- । not of Michigan, ties the hand" of, । the" United Naclonea" in an "entldo, । Provides that the United Naclonea । will not terminate the Greek-Turkish program unless" In ( world organization ( world organization steps into the breach by medi- ( i te the provision of aid for am- ( I boa palies or takes any other , | | Action which would make "Unnecessary and In- , desirable*' American aid. It is ( believed that under such a provision, the United Nations could assume the ( responsibility if it granted to Gre- < cia and Turkey a lesser amount than that projected by the United States; or it could act if a United Nations commission investi- ¡ gated the conditions in both pal- ' se" and determined that American aid was no longer 'necess- ; rlcana 'nece- 1 sary or desirable." The committee's bill. \It also authorizes the Financial Reconstruction Cor- ' ration to advance one hundred million dollars for the purpose of initiating the 1 program. In addition to sanctioning the United Nations veto, the bill empowers the President of the United Nations to approve a veto of the bill, and to authorize the President of the United Nations to approve a veto of the bill.
UÑERO DEPARTED FOR THE UNITED STATES AT IM eleven o'clock Thursday night MOW 1WH* Wáahington, the Governor of Puerto Rico, Don Jesús T. Plflero. Kl Governor will make official representations on Island affairs, the nature of which has not been disclosed by the Fortelea. We know, however, that he will intervene in the Interior Department's bill, now before Congress, to amend our Organic Charter, and will hold some interviews on the sale of the telephone service of the Communications Authority to the Porto Rico Telephone Co. This would tend to avert general strike set for next limen By CHARLES H. HARROLD , United Press Corre "pon "al WASHINGTON. 4. (PU). - President Trum "n declared yesterday that the Government is trying to determine whether or not he, as President, has powers to seize the vast telephone Industry in order to avert the general strike set for the" sel" of Monday's maltona. Truman said he doubted he had eia authority. The President told a press conference that the Labor Department was studying the legal aspects of the federal seizure, but that he doubted he had the power to seize the telephone facilities. He declined to answer when asked if he will seize the industry if it is determined that he has the power to do so. He said he would deal with the situation as it developed. Secretary of Labor Lewis B. Schwellenbach, also doubted that the Government had the power "at this time" to take over the telephone industry. He told a press conference that he had no present intention of recommending seizure. "I am not satisfied that there exist- , have that" powers, but the question , will definitely be decided by , the Attorney General," said H Schwellenbach agreed with the ( federal conciliators who have been trying to avert the strike < (Continued on page 17) . I
Island trade closes on 9; Elevates to Washington protest against bill of squares "PRACO."
The director of the Nonresidential Construction Division", of the Office of the National Housing Accelerator", "eftor Ramon Montaner, reported yesterday that the changes" originated" in the adminlitratlva organization, being eliminated the OAP and the Admlnlitraclón of Civil Production, in nothing have altered the (láteme and the" restrictions regarding the approval of structures for commercial uses or
Truman rejects John L. Lewis lawsuit; will retain Krug.
WASHINGTON. 4 (PU"'-' Resident f S Truman today rejected John L. Lewis' emendation that Secretary of the Interior J. A. Krug be removed for "criminal negligence" in connection with the Centre'la mine explosion. At the same time, the attacked Se,'referred moved to prevent a* repe Melon of that disaster by rlau.ur.ir 318 coal mine" hltltmlntwo of "toradas as unsafe. The President reported in his Press contorenrn that he did not fear inlandón da remove Kru" from an "irgo romo 1n haM" nryidn the II give oh- - a-'? o- -iibcommittee congreslonal hours earlier. 1
He declined to comment on the sad charges of "butchery" or incompetence raised by Lewis against Krug, in which the former held the Secretary directly responsible for the deaths of 111 miner" in the mining disaster of last "emena" at Central!* Illinois . But "eftor Truman said that Krug would remain in the Cabinet and that he considered him a very efficient civil servant. This opinion was contested by Lewis, who challenged it before the House floor to testify on the legislation, and was followed by a public hearing today on Bill 648, which was introduced in the House.
Public hearing today on bill 648 Government Employees Federation points out flaws in the measure Says it tends to centralization Claims it leaves employees to the will and whim of bosses L* Commission d" QvIL Service of the tañado, chaired by Senator Bertardo Mendez, will hold hearings oúillcas today, at do" o'clock in the afternoon, at <1 Capitol Insular, for the purpose of discussing P. del S. 848 nuo croa ta Office d" Persone! of the Government. The seflor Justo Pastor Losa .18, president of the Federation of Employees of the Insular Government, declared yesterday that Corresponding to the Invitation that I have been made to you,' will appear before said body to 1 expose loa point of view of the public employees. The Civil Service Commission of the Federation, chaired by Mr. Pastor Losada, and advised by Mr. Walter Rivera, will make the corresponding presentation at said hearing. According to Mr. Pastor Losada, "the Board of Directors of the Federation, assisted by its permanent Civil Service Commission, the Council and the personal experience of some of its members, has made a thorough study of the aforementioned project". He also stated that "we, the employees, are not trying to overthrow a measure of the Administration. What" we wish is that it be amended in particular clartoe "* so that it tunes the success sought in its epllcoolon and operation." He added. the "eftor Losada, ademé", the iltuiente: "Most of ias amendments" that proponemo" have aldo moti vadea by the? lack of full perception of our Idloslncracla tetina by the continental civil service technicians who tedactaron the measure. We do not blame them for this deficiency. They will believe that they have done it in good faith and we will not dispute their good intentions. But the reality of all the technical studies that have been done by non-resident experts so far is that they are done theoretically or statistically, usually ignoring the human factor, a very important factor to which the suggested standard is to be applied, which will pay for the consequences of misapplication of such standards and for which, ultimately, they are studied, prepared, prepared, prepared, prepared, prepared and prepared. "s qu" that such measures and standards are studied, prepared formulated and finally "e approved. "The four principles láslcos that we anticipate now and from which suffers the P. of the S. 848 ;.on lo" "Igulentee: First.- There is an undue consolidation, or confusion, m an Office of Personnel, of funcinnv pertaining to a Director of Personnel (administrative and executive), and of functions inherent in a Personnel Board, which has nothing to do with the Director; of Personnel, and the functions of the cu*i are regulatory of the" Director's rules, legislative, appellative" and quasi-judicial. Our suggestion is to draw a clear demarcation between the two fields. This would be easy to achieve and it would be difficult to achieve with the first amendment we are submitting. Second, the bill tends to (Continued on page 15)
The restrictions on non-residential buildings are maintained; Montaner says he will commit a violation of the rules to the federal prosecutor. -Puerto । Rico's quota increased to $188,000 Remanales i
---- i industrial, or see non-residential types. Said Seftor Montaner i that his office is studying nu- i numerous cases of violations of the i rules, committed after A.iun- < ciarse by President Truman ta । consolidation of the Civil Production Administration I and the tradado i of its obligations to the Office of the । National Housing Accelerator, l consisting of the commencement of works < without prior authorization of the Division which he directs. "It is the purpose to elevate those cases in which s" manifest unwarranted violations." -He said, "to the federal prosecutor's office, so that they can impose the corrective measures indicated by the law. Therefore, I must warn all those who have initiated works without our approval; or to those who, contused by the changes that have occurred, attempt to do so and without following the procedures required by federal law, should refrain from doing so and contact this Administration immediately." He also stated that federal inspectors are carrying out an investigation throughout the island to prevent the situation from becoming even more serious. On the matter the M-; 1 lor Montaner authorized yesterday the" of- ' following iterations: 1 1 "De "de "de October 21, 1948. date < "n cue began - to operate the Di- i vision of Intervention of the Adml-i (Continued on page 15).
They will present shortly the for elective Governor Krug pledges his support for the earliest 1 approval of the measure. - Inaiatirá. says on passage also of plebiscite bill By 'CHARLES R. McCABK United Press Correspondent" WASHINGTON, 4, (PU)-In a major policy pronouncement, Secretary of the Interior, J, A. Krug, announced that he will "nérglcam "nte" support any measure tending to extend the gohler-
own for Puerto Rico. He expressed I* hope that such a measure-presumably based on *1 simplified bill to grant the elective governor- reI dacted in the Department's TerrltoLrlos Division, will soon ' be ' introduced "in Congress. "You may be assured," says Krug in a calta addressed toi Dr. Fernó" laern and published by the Department, "that I will urge I" Immediate passage of such a measure." Al mlsmn time. Krug gave strong support to the idea of a plebiscite for the final solution of the political problem of the island. "I am i" sure' that you realize that I strongly hold that the people of Puerto Rico should have 1" oportum 'dad to express their desire as to '■I final political status," says Kruu ■I reply a" communication from the doctor congratulating him for au teatimo nlo regarding the d" statehood project for Hawaii. I "In fairness to" it" (the people of Puerto Rico) I believe this can only be done after Congress has set forth in term* ctaros the" alternatives they are in a position to extend to Puerto , ■i (Continued "n page 18)
BE /mW ' JULIUR A. KRUG Secretary of the Interior
I - ' - ' - -- - - - I De Hostos invites to define the standard that inspires the PRACO " I lUMHUPlil - "■! - The President of the Chamber of Commerce, Seftor Fllipo L. de Mostos, yesterday invited the President of the Senate, Seftor Luis Mufloz Marin to define, "without euphemisms", the norm that inspires the purpose of establishing the "PRACO" markets. Expounding 1a attitude of the Commerce. "1
L* new expo "lclón that acere" of the" places PRACO made" the President of the Senate, seflor Mufloz Ma. rln, in the edition d" the day before yesterday d< IEL MUNDO comes to confirm li i justified alarm of the commerce " the time that to reaffirm us in núes¡tra conviction d" that "n ""te matter is very badly advised and worse Informed. | We are in complete agreement with Mr. Mufloz Marin that the matter is of general interest and it is precisely this circumstance that prompts us to take up the matter again. "In this regard, it seems appropriate to point out the evident contradiction between this statement of the President of the Senate and his proposed attitude regarding the holding of a public hearing on Senate Bill No. 836, which was requested by the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce more than a week ago. Precisely because the matter is of such consequence, the hearing should have been held on the Senate's own initiative in order to demonstrate in a reliable manner that it recognizes its importance and that it is prepared to act with full and complete knowledge of the cause. "The manifestations of Mr. Mufloz Marin establish clearly and categorically that there is an unbridgeable gulf between his head and reason and reality: that resting, as the former wishes, on a theory that ignores the fact - known by all economists of the world and proven throughout time - that competition is the predominant and decisive factor in the involvement of commerce and the determining force of a mode of life, it is not poalhle to deny its effectiveness in trying to prove part of its thesisthe existence of a fantastic situation that could not exist where there is no competition- and then invoke it and use it in support of the other part of it: the need to establish a PRACO "plaza" whose only purpose would be to compete with the legitimate established commerce, "In the" last months" all; the commerce of the Tita has aufrider strong" loss" by the fall in the market abaitecedor of the" prlnclpale" basic" article". In these losses, which total no less than $2,000,000. were not previously the smallest 1or" the most" expensive" nor the largest" the best spared," but in a falling market, the need to" aligo(Continued on page 18) Without fixing the debate on Hawaii WASHINGTON, 4 (PU) - The administrative chairman of the House Rules Committee said today that he did not know when to debate on the floor of the House of Representatives the matter of the "stadldad for Hawaii I He said no request had come before the Rules Committee to allow debate, but that there had already been informal discussions between Farrington, the chairman of the Rules Committee, and the House Rules Committee. The Chairman of the Public Grounds Committee, Richard J. Welch, and the Chairman of the Public Grounds Committee, Richard J. Welch. Richard J Welch, and the Chairman of the Rules Committee". L "o Altan, ''-nubllcani of Illinois. The employee who speaks to you stated (Continued on page 17).
1 Restricted i- . o , ■ Summer enrollment at UPR n The Jimia UniverailRria ¡! The University Board, in its last meeting, held last Thursday, agreed to restrict university enrollment during the next summer classes at the University of Puerto Rico * ' Gustavo Agralt, in interim charge of the "Faculty of General Studies" at the University of Puerto Rico, when asked about this matter, reported that the University of Puerto Rico, "-.- When questioned on the matter, he reported that since the number of applicants is very large, there will not be room for all the applicants. - There will therefore be restrictions in the enrollment. According to the information provided by J. Axralt, those who will be graduating next summer, whether they are teachers or not, will be eligible for their studies "in the first place. >Whether or not they have graduated from teaching. In third luj (Continued on pgtna 15) i House approved measure on ; PEG workshops / 7 - ' . assigns to convert them into cooperatives. - Works ! in various municipalities 'i 1 P The House of Representatives 1 met at" 4 o'clock Thursday afternoon. under the presidency of Speaker. doctor Francisco M. Suaonl. ■ Imparting its approval to lo" following bills to eubrlr deficiencies: P. of the C. 796 - of .flor Benjamin Ortiz, allocating the I amount d" $3,970 of cuatosquler funds available "n to the Treasury DtI author, to expand the line item Expenditure" of the Board of Appeals"" ■obr" Construction"", for the "flo -conómlco 1948-47: P, d" the C 795 -d "l ""ftor Orti", by allocating the amount d" 818.000 d" cuatosquler" ' funds available "n the Treasury tn- ' sular of Puerto Rico, for the purpose J of extending the appropriation for the expenses d" operation of the N "g"- J ciado d" Permiso", during the fiscal afflo " . 1948-47; P. of the C. 794- d "l ' seflor Ortlz. appropriating the sum F of $72,794 for the purpose of covering deflclenclas etv*w ordinary expenses" *1 of the Department of Juetlcla du 'I r during aflo fl "cat 1945-48; P. of f C. 793. d "l ' seflor Ortlz. appropriating 11 the sum of $51,000 to extend 11 oartlda" for fee" of ota tes 4 fleo" v jurors of the di" "i trito court", for expense" of fun- n travel (Continued on page 17) J
Crawford offers to discuss matter with Governor Congrego dd Comercio e Industria to be held in San Juan on Wednesday, April 9 Federation to meet on Monday Ponce Chamber of Commerce invites to rea defeated bill 836 The Federation d "l Comercio reported yesterday that "l closure of" the commercial tabtoclmlento" oa" Puerto Rico, to take place on! Wednesday, April 9, on the occasion of" I" "'riebraclón of the congress imitar of the commerce and the Induttrla "has assured its success, "egún the telegraphic communications, visits, llnmadns and interview" held" by" lo" Director" of the"" Industrial and commercial"" association"" sponsoring the event, with" the"" trade'""" - Industrials "n all the Island." The "eftor René Polltvln, director -j "cutlvo of I" Federation of Commerce, declared yesterday qu" "ta protest for ta determination of the Pr"-. -Idente d "l Senate of "oa'ener Inalterable au position in what resp "cta to P. del S. 838, qu" nutocba a la Compaftta Agricola 1 establish and operate eatabtoclmtenioa oomerctal"", ea general in all trade and Induatrla Puerto Rican, and the reaction will be Je elemoatrarae in a otarra qu" will cover all commercial activity - Induatrtal on April 9," Tas associations cqmerctale" that ' organize eate movement according i s" Reported yesterday ■ EL MUNDO, have ; communicated ta determination of the Government to establish pincer" market, to leader"" of the Congr""o. It was reported yesterday that ae has "o!t "Itado copy" of the P. of the S. 838, of tet "1 are autorea loá "enadore" Luí" Mudo" Marín and Juan Dávlla Díaz. The Federation of Commerce notified by telephone International Republican Rep. Fred L. Crawford, of Michigan, of the situation in Puerto Rico between commerce and the Government, announcing Crawford's unfavorable reaction to any action aimed at establishing Government competition with private commerce, announcing that he would discuss the matter with Governor Plflero, who left for Wishing! on Thursday night. The committee qu" organizes r| Congraso d"| Wednesday, presld'do by the "eftor Ramón Nlevea Al'Ma made aaher that in all toa populations of the Tata, loa commentante" and 1o" Industríele" lócele" lócele" eriái celebrating Assembly", agreeing to join the general closing and designating comtalone" that will represent them in Ins arts to be celebrated in -< park Sixto Escobar of San Juan. A commission that toured ej eastern district, of the Federation of Commerce, formed by the seflor"" Ramón Rivera Casal, Victo- M. Farnéndez v Juan Méndez, visited ny "r to ET, MUNDO nara to inform that all"" the eastern towns of ta Tato have joined the de-re A formed by the seflore" Ramón Nieves Alinea and Lts Camacho, covered from Thursday all" the other towns" of the Island, having Informed to ta Federation d-1 Commerce that "the attitude is unáni me n "ra to close the commerce on 9 rio April and to attend the Congress Insuter," The President of ta Federation of! Commerce seflor José M, Rivera d. yesterday to a meeting dr ta Insular Board of Directors of the o-ganlza-rión. of 1a" Board" Incale" of San Juan v Santurce. and of all the "orio" of the metropolitan area, which will take place on Monday ■ l"" seven in the evening, "to finalize details related" with the commercial closing and with the Insular congress of the millernole" ' Another communication dollor Rivera, directed to the "comerotante" "ocios of I" entity, expresses the Instructions retaclotuda" with the" acts of Wednesday v sgée. -The "moment that I" live new trade is of a slghlflcadón and transcendence that not vadlamo" in affirming deddlrá life and ptnr."° 'V* verija class. You are, therefore, authorized to bring to that locality all the ideas and resources possible, both in terms of organization and in terms of campaigning, so that Wednesday, April 9, will be remembered in Puerto Rico as the most virile protection that any citizen's group in history against an unjust and abusive clone of your government. For its part. 1" Chamber of Commerce d" Ponce, qu" presiding seflor Juan Lula Roído, has d rigid nn telegram to lo" senator c" and r". presenters of the district in the House and the. Senate, subscribed by "l secretarlo José de la Cr't" expressing the following: "This House d" Comerc'o reunlda in general assembly last night agreed to direct" to you in "u ca- ; r character togtalador representative this district par" to prevent arriving í your vote the approval jel P del S. I "38 which seeks d" togltlmar the arbi- 1 u '"a Pincers I PRACO that would make it ai Gobler- 1 not a merchant in -ompetencta 1 unfair to pals commerce and J <iue fundamentally interfere ■ ron the riemocrá'lm principle of |". | free enterprise The Law te -tert" 3B ia demand is Is únfea basis dril -tessrrnllo del rnmerclo v ta deteBcM se of the consumer v io pedontril J less than trust that our" 1". 1 (Continued on page 15) "