THE WORLD'S DAILY MORNING NEWSPAPER
40 pages 5/
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Clear today, except for some cumulus clouds and light "scattered" showers, over the mountains, this Urde. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 84; low, 72: rain, none.
MORNING
MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
Check brakes. Cooperate with the Automobile Inspection.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 8, 1947
Enterad ai second claw matter, Port Office, Ban Juan. P. R.
NUMBER 10851
Grinding Delay at Two Plants
-By CHARLES McCABl- WASHINGTON. 7. (PU'. - Oscar Chapman, undersecretary of the Dcparliament of the Interior said today that ">anytime during the "coming emana a review will be made, of the "reform bill" to 'a Charter, which was approved by the previous Senate in 1943, with
Compendium of News
There has been an increase in the number of deaths from tuberculosis. Rodrigues Pastor urges rapid hoanltallraclón of lo* cuso", raises the problem durarte Public convention. The Rupreme Court declined yesterday lnve "tlgbr the profealonal conduct of Attorney Negrón Fernándes and Judge* Villares Rodrigue* in connection with the case of expropriation of the Cae "*" Development Co. It says that lo" facts "deposed in lab petitions and in the copies of "El Imparcial" do not Justify the encuesKl racionamiento del arros will be temporarily suspended the tune" next, at" 19:01 A. M. t t t t ' 141 CCA offers to pay raw asúcarea to quintal. - - - The Republican Union yesterday terminated the management of "ua delegates at WAahlngton. - The cost of the goods at Ran Juan plus the expense of transportation to the branch is the actual cost of the goods at the branch, says the Supreme. - The debate between the HVP and the Legion will not take place, as no agreement was reached as to the "conditions" of the debate. - The "Impose párolis" milling workers. that could not be initiated in the" Canóvanas and Victoria plants.
I,na farmers can challenge ln" freight" maritime" before a court, explains Plftero. School directors reached agreement with Vlllaronga "on amendment" to In law 76. ♦ ♦ ♦ " Alken's bill "ohre education in state" and territories would give the Island an Immediate appropriation of M,M4,M0. * - * For harassment was denounced yesterday the Auditor of Puerto Pico, Mr. Rafael de J. Cordero. * * ♦ Butler protests at the low tariffs which he considers detrimental to domestic industry. - - - Arjnna Sises submitted reply to the last plea of the Comlnlonado of Instruction. in the cano of Language. Al * * * * Part of the exn'llclón Fird salo of Little America, - - - " Clark blames Congress for the j ; overstaffing. lions and Senators eomlensan decisive nerlr today. - - - Cold snap continues in the United States. - Argentina and the U.S. improve relations. - . a Ucence canceled for the pugilist Rocky Graciano.
Labor in Canovanas and Victoria paralyzed by impasse in negotiation Situation affects twelve thousand workers No information yet of possibility of settlement in 1a central Coloso The effects of the strike that ptovalses in the Central Coloso, of Aguada, on the sugar industry sn general, have been complicated lately, due to the fact that. " 1" time that continues in that r ' strike decreed by the Union of Irabajadora" of Fact orla. Via" y Obra", '-affiliated the FLT - the harvest in the" ' sugar mills" of Canovanas and Carolina, has been "stalled for several" days", due to the impossibility of the" contract" Canóvana" and Victoria to reach " an agreement with the Unión Obrero" Unido" de Puerto Rico, for the signing of the collective bargaining agreement. An impa "e exlrie in the" negotiations" that "e have been held between the representatives of the Unión Obrero" Unido" de Puerto Rico, v the" aforementioned plants". This affects the work of the sugar industry in the 194 harvest in the entire sugarcane area of the town and Rio Grande. Obreros Unido" controls all of the aforementioned sector in which the cutting, harvesting and milling of cane" did not begin yesterday. The" negotiations are being conducted between the "presenter" of the Lolz" Sugar Co" subsidiary of the Fajardo Sur" 1 Co., and the" representatives of 1" Union, which is presided over by Mr. Lorenzo Fernandez, with the participation of the conciliator Adolfo Collazo More than twelve thousand agricultural" and factory workers from the Canóvanas, Carolina, Ulo Grande and Loflo. Carolina, Ulo Grande and Lofza Aldea, p-.-manectan yesterday occlosos, in esnera of the result of the negotiations that are celebrated between their leaders and the employers, The existing controversy between the union and the Central Canóvanas v Victoria is due to 1a" demands of salarlo" made by the" workers, the" which have not been accepted by the employers. The conciliator Collazo was conducting yesterday, aimed at reaching an agreement between the management of the Central Canóvana* and the leaders of Obraros Unido" regarding the "wage" clause to be inserted in the collective bargaining agreement. Meanwhile, the start of the harvest at the Canóvanas sugar mill has been delayed since January 21, when the mill proposed to start the agricultural and manufacturing work. As for the Central Victoria, the harvest was scheduled to begin on Monday, January 3. A considerable number of small* settlers in the jurisdiction of Carolina, Canóvana" and Rio Grande. Canóvana" and Rio Grande. have not been able to start cutting sugar cane" yet, which has created great uneasiness among the farmers of that coast, who fear a considerable decrease in their" income" from the sale of their" sugars, due to a drop in yields caused by the delay in starting the cutting. I It was reported yesterday, by oH-n side. (Continued on page 10"
Chapman announces they will shortly examine reform bill It will be determined what of it may merit, congressional approval. -Believes Puerto Rican leadership will be consulted on governor's elective governor
In order to determine what of it may merit the approval of the U.S. Congress and the Puerto Rican Legislature, Chapman said he believes the Puerto Rican leadership "will be consulted on the question of resubmitting the elective governor bill. Taft, in an interview last week, said he had previously discussed the "status" issue with Chapman and that Chapman's views seemed to coincide with his own, that is, that the bill would pass in this session of Congress providing for an elective governor for the island and other reforms aimed at establishing a "more state-like" form of government in Puerto Rico. Chapman said that after the "reform bill®" is examined in light of the realities of 1947, he will confer with Taft. He said he wants to determine at the conference "just how much we can get out of Congress. Chapman did not indicate the nature of what* changes," if any, the Interior Department might make in the "reform bill*" before it is submitted to) . . ua on page 24).
Butler's protest of the baio tariff.
State says domestic industry should not be harmed Tariffs affect rum and sugar Senator moves to postpone Washington hearings Lumberman Hugh Butler, chairman of the Senate Public Lands Committee, has been actively lobbying Congress to carefully consider the schedule for negotiating a new "tariff rate" with the 18 panel. To this effect, "egtin Information received here yesterday, Lumberman Butler has lollclclclcled the adjournment of |*i hearing* which "A holding him at Wáshlngton. The referred tariff treaty;, legon "* has been reported by THE M1IND0. affect it loi most important* export product*, such* as sugar and lo* roñe*, to the United States market." To this effect, and to present the Island Government's* point* of view, Puerto Rican* delegates* will attend this* public* meeting. In addition, both the Puerto Rican rum industry and the sugar industry have presented their views on the final determination that may be adopted, affecting these important export items. It was reported yesterday that Senator Butler's request was denied by the State Department, in a communication addressed to him by Assistant Secretary of State William L. Clayton, and that Senator Butler will now move to expedite congressional action to secure the participation of this legislative body in the prospective negotiations. Yesterday a copy of the communication addressed by the chairman of the Senate Committee on Public" Grounds" was received in San Juan. Mr. Butler, to the Assistant Secretary of State. In the said communication Mr. Butler stated, among other things, the following: "I am writing to urge that the negotiations be temporarily suspended until the new Congress has an opportunity to formulate a new foreign trade policy. The announcement for discussion of tariffs apparently indicates an intention to continue with the present tariff reduction program, despite the repudiation of such a system by the voters". Ta) Intent surprises me. "The commercial covenant* program in its present form, e" a "dovish" political wounds . - To attempt to use the authority of the Trade Agreement Act, previously wrested from a Democratic Congress, to destroy our system of tariff protection seems to me a direct affront to the will of the people, as expressed in the me" nasado. The list of products on which tariff reductions may be made during such negotiations covers 56 pages, and appears to include at least three-fourths of all our import trade. The list includes dozens of items in which the people of my state are vitally interested. Among these are cattle, hogs, and meats: cheese, butter and other livestock products: wheat and other grains: wool: and a long list of fruits and vegetables. In a tremendous number of cases* tariff reductions of between 40 and RO percent have already been authorized for the pn "ado* twelve years*. Apparently "r you propose to reduce rates by a substantial amount even on that* line item, up to 50 percent of the remaining protection. "The reductions already made under the trade agreement program have eroded protection on about half of our" producers who benefited from the" tariffs, and those teducclone" average between .30 and 40 percent. In other words, "our program to date has constituted a substantial revision of our system of protection, as far-reaching* as the Tariff Act of 1955.
Raises incidence of tuberculosif
Dr. José Rodrigue* Pastor, who in a report presented to the Public Health Convention currently under review, described the increase in the number of deaths from pulmonary tuberculosis on the island, and urged a rapid attack on the problem. I ■ I ■ Il ■ ■ ■ * - '■' ■- L - - - Agreement on amendments to Act No. 76 Bill introducing changes already drafted.- A spokesman for the Mayor's Association reported yesterday that the Commissioner of Instruction and school principals have already reached agreement on the proposed amendments to Act No. 76, so that the municipalities will again have some say in local school matters. According to the informant, the bill to that effect has already been drafted, and its author is the Senator for Humacao, Mr. Cruz Ortiz Stella, who is also the author of the aforementioned law, which, as is known, transferred all municipal school property to the Department of Instruction. The reports obtained indicate that Commissioner Villlaronga has acceded to several demands made by the school principals, and that he has accepted that the fund of one million five hundred thousand dollars, assigned by Law 76, be administered in a manner similar to that of the school lunchroom funds. In other words*, that the Department of Instruction send a periodic remittance to the municipalities*, against which the latter would draw to cover the corresponding local expenses. The funds would be distributed on a per capita basis. The bill also provides that the school principals shall only submit a nomination to the Commissioner for the appointment by the latter of the custodians of the public schools. By virtue of the present Act 76, the municipalities" do not have any influence in the administration and expenditure" of the $1,500,000 fund, nor in the appointment" of the" janitors". It is reported. on the other hand, that with regard to other personnel (Continued on page 10)
There has been an increase in the number of deaths caused by tuberculosis; Rodriguez Pastor exposes the problem.
PM reports on the vicissitudes of Puerto Rican Informa are arriving in New York at a rate of 1,500 a month Photographs of life in Harlem Point to need for organization to protect Puerto Ricans in the city NEW YORK. 7. (PU)- The newspaper of this city, "PM", published an article with the headline "Puerto Ricans* flock to New York to face misery and live in squalor". The story carries eight photographs* that occupy two full pages* of the tabloid,' offering a frightening picture of the* conditions* in which the majority of the local Puerto Rican colony lives. This condition is aggravated by the wholesale exodus from Puerto Rico to New York. PM newspaper reporters Leon Edel and Jame* Parlattore say that Puerto Ricans are pouring into New York at the rate of 1,500 menauale*. They say that "the great bulk of it* flies "over a distance of 1,000 miles" of water to Miami in a cheap 'crate'" landed* on a passenger ship". THERE they "wait, sometimes for a long" hour, "until they get a bus or plane to transport them to New York. The full trip costs from S80 to $75. Fixed route airlines charge 1125 for a trip from Puerto Rico to New York. * One of PM's "reporter" said he had spent a week among the Puerto Ricans, studying their conditions for an article. He said that from July to November of IMS. 60,000 Puerto Ricans have arrived at the* U.S. port* in "the first migration by air in history." He added that 7,233 arrived by sea and 40,669 by air. Of this* figure" 6,573 came by sea* New York and 12,655 by air. The "reports" we obtained indicate that once the "Puerto Ricans" arrive in New York they are housed with friends and relatives in the already congested Latino section of Harlem: sometimes as many as 15 people crammed into a small room devoid of air and light. The reporters liken this "migration to that of the 'Okies' (nom-, bre given in Oklahoma " the laboring emigrants as described in John Steinbeck's novel "The Vineyards of Wrath who squeezed in carriage* and c "mlonc* struggled in Oklahoma and Arkansn* to gain the road that would lead to * California, for all! to attain any cla*e of work. They added that "ari lo* portorriquefto*. fleeing the Iria whose* c° n ' dlcione" economic" "e have deteriorated profoundly in the" last" "ño". They invest "a" last "penny" to buy a plane ticket, "and they wear "a Sunday suit to set "foot" in Manhattan, full of "great" eepe-, ranzas and "oftacloné" pleasant-' bles." The reporter points out that if lo" Puerto Ricans were foreigners there would already have been an outcry before Congress requesting the fixing of the quota," but our writers remind lo* readers that lo" Puerto Ricans" have been American citizens since 1917. The informants go on to say (continued on page 24).
Aiken Measure Would Give Island $5,534,680.00 I apiiiMiMlh - Aims to Aid Development of a Comprehensive Educational Plan The United State Senate bill" number 199. by *Ehador George D. Alken. of Vermont, which authorizes a "uatancial appropriation of funds to assist the states* and territory* in "u educational program, by establishing at 16, see a uniform level in the participation of all the* cited -" current per pupil expenditure base, according to the prontedlo of attendance at elementary* and --cumlary* leicuela* and --cumlariaa. In addition, on the basis of the federal apportionment which provides for 1952 and subsequent years, based on an average of $60 per pupil, the Island will receive from the program a fund amounting to $604JO40, beginning in 1952. "According to the statistics prepared by Governor Alkon in presenting his educational project. - The bill, according to a copy received in San Juan yesterday, will be known as the Education Finance Act of 1947, According to explanations given by Senator Alken in introducing his measure, the bill represents "a new and different approach to the problem of providing federal aid for instruction to the states, no similar policy having been previously adopted by Congress. The measure establishes, also, more uniform and adequate "educational opportunities." In commenting on the bill. a copy of which was received in ban Juan also, Senator Alken < -'■ i clarified that "the need to provide - Continued >on _ page a.)
Pinero says the press should be given all the information "Not as a favor but as a right," he says. - He investigated the Caguas case. - Limits sales of PR ACOs
By Juan Martine* Chapel . In his conference with the press yesterday afternoon, Governor Plftero stated that he is already well ahead of schedule in the preparation of his message to the Legislature, which begins its sessions next Thursday, and that he expects to appear and read it on Tuesday at 10 o'clock in the morning.
i rtan". A , The Governor delivered cnphs of the 11* opinion rendered by the Acting Attorney General, concerning the operation of the" store" which; , operates the Agricultural Com-party known" under the name of "FP.ACO ' In accordance with that opinion the se-, flor Riflero He reported having ordered that as of yesterday afternoon the sale Je all articles of foreign or United States origin be suspended and that purchases and sales therein "e limited to products cultlvdaoai or produced in Puerto Rico. The Governor said that on Thursday afternoon he went to Caguas to make an ocular inspection of the land, expropriated, for the fin* e "col "re* da la finca F i verde" and that he was accompanied by the Puerto Rican, "eflor B is- ' 1 caglia, and the district appraiser, se-! flor Medina Mora. He stated that he has spoken with several neighbors of Caguas and believes he is already in a position to give the report of his administrative investigation, which he has not done due to the excessive work he has before him in this matter, but that in the shortest possible time he will give the Prenia his conclusions on the case. ( ( Dló couplets of the petition filed with the Federal Maritime Commission by the companies that carry < (Continued on page 2) ।
§400,000 paid by Fomento for the land for the new lodge.
The Compañía de Fomento Indus- 1 . trial will have 44,000 square meters* of firm land, and 11,000 square meter* addition* -to be filled in, for a total of 55,000 square meters, to locate the new 300-room hotel to be built in San Juan for the Hllton Hotel Corporation. This land was subleased to U.S. Navy Lt. Cmdr. VlrgM Baker, for a period of 975 years, paying for it 1" Industrial Development Company the sum of $400,000. Baker, । originally leased the San Jeronimo land for the period of 999 "years. । The assistant to the President and Ad-
ministrador de la Compartía de Fomento. aefior Francisco de Jesús, informed yesterday * EL MUNDO that the average cost per square meter is $7.27. "Before closing this transaction," added seftor de Jesús, "the , Compartía conducted Investigations leading to determine the price of subarandamlento of another" adjacent" parcel", "egún contrato" previously eatablecl* by sefinr Baker. It was concluded that this land had never been subleased for less than $10 per square foot. "We also obtained information," added De Jesus, "to the effect that since the beginning of the .1 (Continued on page 24) I
h 1 - - - y - ' " Messersmith received by Argentine officials ■a M y F \ j > f í ■ wr " r ; \ - ; F.,' " -V Wl \ X--. ; F r ■' - 0 4 (t Sk 11 I MgW O Ambassador George Me""ersmlth (second, from Irqulerd* to right, in front row), received by President Perón upon my regre*o to Argentina this Remana, after an official visit to Washington. Other officials* who received him were General H. Soto Molina, Minister of War (second from right to Itqulerda) and J. A. Rramuglla, Minister of Foreign Affairs - (Photo by P. A.). _ "- 9a a _ f
Supreme Court declines to investigate the conduct of Negrón and Villares In yesterday's opinion it resolved that the facts stated in the petitions and copies of "El Impartial" do not justify examination After having examined a request of the Acting Attorney General, Mr. Negrón Fernández, and another of the Judge of the District Court of Caguas, Mr. José Villares Rodríguez, they both decided * that the said Court should conduct an investigation of the professional conduct of each of the petitioners in connection with
the petition for compulsory expropriation of some land owned by the Caguas Development Company, the Supreme Court issued a "no cause" decision, finding that the facts stated in said petition and in the area of "El ImparciMl" submitted by them do not justify an investigation of the professional conduct of the petitioners. The petition filed by the Acting Attorney General alleged the following: To the Honorable Court: í Your petitioner appears. I Luí* Negrón Fernández, and respectfully submits: FIRST,- That your petitioner e" drowned admitted to the practice of the profession by this Honorable Tribunal since "1 June 22, 1934 and occupies the position of Assistant Attorney General and Prosecutor of the Supreme Court. Since October 1, 1946, he also acts as Acting Attorney General of Puerto Rico. I SECOND.- That Antonio Ayuso Valdivieso is an attorney admitted by this Court "1 to practice law in the Iria of Puerto Rico since December 21, 1923 and is also a notary public admitted to the practice of said profession since January 26, 1926, being D "ra on January 31 and the first of 1947 and after those dates one of the* directors* and prerideiite of the corporation, clón Prensa Insular de Puerto Rico. Inc. which is a corporation organized under the laws of Puerto Rico and duly registered as such with the Executive Secretary, whose purpose is to edit and publish the daily newspaper "El Imparcial", which is published in San Juan, Puerto Rico, and circulates daily in said city and in the can of Puerto Rico, of which newspaper Antonló Ayu "o Valdlvle "o was on the aforementioned dates and is Director. THIRD.- That *n edition of the newspaper "El Imparefal" ¡ diente "I 31 de eñero de 1947. Article XIV. Volume 25. No. 5654. the Prensa Insular de Puerto Rico, Inc. and Antonio Ayuso ValdlI vieso as Director of the newspaper "El Imparclal" allowed to publish and circulated in the Island (Continued on page 7). against the Commissioner of Instruction of Puerto Rico, known as the Language suit, the plaintiff's attorney, Rafael Arjona Slaca, filed yesterday in the District Court a "le-| cat of reply to the plea of rafu- 1 ; tacifln I p> "seated by the Commissioner of Instruction. Pursuant to said pleading, it is, । argued that the plaintiff understands,! that it should not leave without adequate reply "1 pleading filed by the opposing party in the case, due to the Imputation made therein in the sense of the plaintiff having resorted to what the < defendant's lawyers qualify ¡ ' of "Improper practice", "1 bringing to < consideration of the Court hachos J (Continued on page 24)
BERRETA SAYS SAN JUAN IS AN OUTPOST OF URUGUAY MIAMI. 7. - The President-elect of Uruguay, Don Tomas said today that Miami and San Juan are the starting point for tourist traffic to Montevideo, predicting that an increasing number of Americans will travel by air route. "One of the first acts of my government," said Barreta, will be to appoint a consular representative in Miami, which, together with San Juan de Puerto Rico, will be the outpost of our Uruguay. The avians are unaware of the dlstanciss and it is so - pleasant to travel on the Pan American "vio na" that it can be said to be the best means of transportation". AS suspends rice rationing system on Monday Rice rationing will go into effect at 12:01 a. m.-Mon. next Monday, rice rationing in Puerto Rico will be temporarily suspended, according to an order promulgated yesterday by the Administrator of Supply, and all transfers of rice from importers to wholesalers and wholesalers, and to the consuming public, will be free. As you may recall. EL MUNDO advanced in an exclusive way in one of its last addenda, the action taken yesterday by the AS. In its order mentioned, the aeflor Vicén" Reports that "the free tranaferencla of rice does not eliminate nor should it be confused with the price control and fixing of preoloa for this" item of prime,.i need. which remains in force. "Rice brokers will continue to forward at the close of ope radons on Friday of each "emana a Report of their" oparacUne" ' d" rice, as they had been doing. । "All violations of Administrative ()r-i den 136, which is temporarily repealed, or of any rules or orders issued by the Administrator which have been committed prior to February 10 will continue to be prosecuted, The order also states that "the current conditions regarding the availability of rice in the market and the possibility of new supplies", as a result of the information given on pending orders for shipment, determine a situation in which "the supply of rice in the market and the possibility of new supplies", as a result of the information given on pending orders for shipment, determine a situation in which the supply of rice in the market and the possibility of new supplies are not available.
Urges rapid hospitalization of the cases Suggests for this purpose the military camps currently in disuse Positive reaction in 90% of adults Tuberculosis causes the death of 50% of young people between the ages of 15 and 35 The Puerto Rican physiologist and former head of the Tuberculosis Bureau of the Department of Health, Dr. José Rodrigues Pastor, raised the serious problem of pulmonary tuberculosis in Puerto Rico before the Public Health Association, which is meeting in its annual convention in San Juan. Dr. Rodriguez Pastor said that "the hospitalization of those infected with pulmonary tuberculosis is an issue that should deserve preferential attention from all budgets as a vital matter for our community, which should occupy first place among all the public health problems pending solution. Dr. Rodriguez Pastor revealed sensational data on the incidence of the disease currently in Puerto Rico, and advocated that the military camps abandoned by the Army be urgently enabled to hospitalize the sick, and that the results of notable experiments carried out by well-known foreign scientists with drugs such as streptomycin, and others, and the Calmette vaccine, be used to alleviate the dreadful problem of tuberculosis in Puerto Rico. - He said that in Puerto Rico more than 90 percent of the adults react to the tuberculin test, and that the percentage of tubercular infection in Puerto Rico reaches a very high figure, by age group. He added that the "coefficient of tubercular mortality," which had been falling, rose from 20(1 in 1945 to 206 in 1946. "It could be a question of such common variations," he said, "in the mortality curves; but it could also be a new tendency for tuberculous mortality to rise. If the latter is the case, the tuberculosis campaign will have suffered a severe blow." He added that in the last arto, "not a single additional bed has been made available for the hospitalization of contagious cases* of pulmonary tuberculosis." At the end of his presentation before the delegates to the convention of the Public Health Association, Dr. Rodrigues Pastor received a warm ovation and was congratulated by numerous professionals and scientists present. The text of his presentation is transcribed below: "Some time ago, I had the privilege of addressing this Public Health Association on the problem of tuberculosis, which today again occupies our attention. I pointed out at that time that one of the most regrettable deficiencies in our public health work is the shortage of beds for the hospitalization of contagious cases of pulmonary tuberculosis. He said that our shortage of tuberculosis beds is so notable that we have barely one-fifth of the beds needed. In appearing before you again, I have to report that in the last arto not a single additional bed has been made available for the hospitalization of contagious cases of pulmonary tuberculosis. Let us be as we were a year ago, let us be as we were a year ago, let us still be at the planning stage. There is no lack of plans. Every now and then a new plan for the hospitalization of tuberculosis patients appears in the press, but very little has been done to implement these plans. I want to bring to the amount of you. And I would like to repeat it where I can be heard by all those who have to do with the solution of this vital problem, that the hospitalization of contagious patients with pulmonary tuberculosis is an emergency; it is a matter which must deserve preferential attention in every budget; it is a matter of vital importance to our community, which must occupy the first place among all the problems of public health pending solution, For the infected patient, for the homeless patient who lacks shelter, there is no possible waiting. For them, the care required must be immediate. The Government has at its disposal a number of empty military barracks which could very well be used to house at least a thousand contagious patients. This should be done as soon as possible this month. In the meantime, plans should be activated for the construction of modern hospitals, where every kind of care and comfort can be offered to the patient. The hospital in the military quarters would be an emergency measure, a resource to be used only while the permanent quarters are being built, which would take years to construct. There has been talk of using these military barracks for schools. It is true that there is a need for schools in Puerto Rico, but not as great a need as there is for military barracks (continued on page 3.) i