THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND. HÓF: Weather " SAN JUAN, TODAY: High temperature. M: low, 74. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 20.90 inches of mercury.
44 Pages
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII
Check the brakes. Cooperate with the Automobile Inspection.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, JUNE 14, 1947
Bntered m oeoond elaao matear. Poet Ottlce, 8an Juan. P. B
NUMBER 10976
Washington is ready for emergency
Although no danger of war is hinted at there is of alert The measures that have been taken Preparedness reaches the-defense of the entire hemisphere -By KEN HUNTER Ipfer* ¡"ñlclonal d" Notician Service Correspondent WASHINGTON, jurlo 13. (INS) -The United States is today in a state of wartime alert. Even though the Department of War and the Department of the Navy has been diplomatically removed from any hint of a third world war, these combat departments intend not to be caught napping. They are determined to mobilize American industry quickly. One" sixty days" ago, and without fanfare; the Maritime Commission began negotiations for leasing ships to private industry on a "if-if" basis; and a" are forming, contract-fixing the con.¡ dlclones. insurance and cost to the U.S. Government, which will enable it to take over the ships, at sea. Similarly, a few months ago, the owners of the eastern seaboard shipyards received a new type of coniraTo from the U.S. Bureau of Shipping.
The new type of coniraTo of the Navy Department's Bureau of Ruque". That contract contains a national security clause, in which the shipyard owner who agrees to maintain facilities built with Navy funds agrees to recognize the Government's dormant right to these facilities. (The shipyard owner agrees to maintain facilities for the construction of warships, subject to the Navy's right to take possession of them on one week's notice). A Kansas factory which is now engaged in the production of rocket bombs, but which, during the war, produced rocket bombs, has agreed to keep on hand the basic personnel for the reconversion to "status" required by the war contracts. Representative Paul Shafer, of Michigan, chairman of the Industrial Mobilization Subcommittee of the Armed Services Committee, said: "My staff will report favorably. Píamente to the full Commission, the June, on the re. ■ solution leaves House number 3471. It? bill permits the Secretaries ari.osrd* lo" War and Navy Departments to extend beyond the existing 5-year limit any rio-factory" lease of war production which contributes " national defense or to the public inte- - te#. There is no doubt that the Navy is currently in a state of alert, hoping that a third world war will not occur, but fearing that it is inevitable, given our foreign policy. - ~"Guando-expired the Compulsory Service Act; the" Local Recruiting Boards were warned to keep their records in order. *Other members of the Armed Services Committee, who did not wish to be named, indicated that the defense of the hemisphere was organized for the same reasons, President Miguel Aleman of the Cuban Army Maynr and other high Latin American personalities have been in Washington this summer on courtesy visits. The offer of the President of the United States of similar "equipment and armaments" has put the whole continent* morteamartefno on alert. That same thought is the one which has inspired the efforts to settle the difference" around the regime of President Juan Domingo Peron of Argentina. (Continued on page 31.
i ~ . - 1 jCpmpendio de Noticias
I Piftero formulated charge" and sus- , pendió da empleo y sueldo al ' Auditor Municipal de Ponce. Ani- । bal García. I -♦ * * * । Lu chamber "legislatives will meet in special session next week. -- -♦ * * * , Governor Piflero deatitu- - I yó Orlando Mánde", Commissioner of 4o?3nterlor. . ~* * ♦ . Slruen-sumentandn tas probaI bflldsdes-of not being approved i is afio aLproject of reforms. I * * ♦ . / 8virtdovTontest note of E "4 "tados Unido. -~ " .1 Truman returns from Canada to Wáahlngton. ~ * * * * Cordero returned to his office in i lnsular Audit. * * - - England warned Russia that it would be disastrous to try to stop the plan for the reconstruction of Europe outlined by the United States. * The UFR Council studied employee pension plan"; spro- । bó summer budget: revb only Rivera Valiente case. Supreme Court set for the 23rd the hearing of the appeal of Mayor Barreto's case. * The Uruguayan plenipotentiary ambassadors, General Edgardo Ubaldo I Genta and Senior José Heguy Ve-
- ♦ e * L" APA. ♦ e * L" APA insists,that the Island should be considered a domesttcs area. x * * * w Employee" propose that the new compensation eaeala not apply. * * * ♦ They have seen only IMS employee appeals," _ Mt Hi * * ■ . APC approves more classrooms; and expansion of the school of Medicine-Tropical. * a * * Ponce submits project" for two" hamlets; disposes of 81,000, 000. I * * * CCA will allocate 14 ships to load sugar. It is revealed that the United States . " is in a state of . war time" alert. . - * - a í - State" United States to England have new weapon as powerful as the atomic bomb. The Ku Klux-Ryan was formally abolished in the state of Georgia. j Vandenberg endorses Secretary Marshall's plan to challenge communism. i - - * - * - The labor bill unleashes a barrage of " i messages on the White House.
Uruguayan ambassadors visiting the island.
m i r - H u I I I H H H I H 1 1 1 ■ ! ■i Upon their arrival yesterday in this country, on their way to Mexico, Uruguayan plenipotentiary ambassadors, General Edgardo Ubaldo Genta (second, left to right), and Mr. Jose Heguy Velazco (extreme right), were captured by the lens of Luis de Casenave. In first place is Mrs. Josefina Genta, wife of the General and notable Uruguayan poet, and in third place is Mr. Manuel Ixipez, Consul General of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay in Puerto Rico, (Photo EL MUNDO) j .
They have seen only ■! 50 classification appeals [ * "- After June 30, the review will be made by the new Personnel Board. That the" appeals of the "m. r picados of the Government that have not been seen" on June 30, will be "resolved" by the Personnel Board of the new Central Personnel Agency, said yesterday the Acting President of the CSC, Gustavo Cruzado Silva. He added that "notwithstanding the diligence with which the Commission has been ra "forgetting the cases of appeals that have been elevated" to it, by the "employees of the Island Government, the number of cases seen" so far is considerably low". The total number of appeals to the Civil Service Commission is 873: and of this number only fifty had been considered as of yesterday, "because the Commission has been listening with the greatest liberality to the arguments and contentions made by the appellants in each case. Until July 30, when the Civil Service Commission will be abolished, the Civil Service Commission will continue to hold hearings on Tuesday, Thursday and Friday of each week, hearing appeals. ' __ Although it is not yet known in what form the Personnel Board will be constituted, in accordance with the law creating the Central Personnel Agency, it will have the power to hear appeals which the Civil Service Commission has not been able to hear. This Board, as you know, will have powers analogous to those of the present Civil Service Commission, and । will be able to review the decisions, both of the Heads of Departments and of the Director of the Central Personnel Agency; and at the same time it will exercise quasi-judicial powers, its decisions and resolutions being unappealable when they are based on questions of fact. Although no mention had been made yesterday of candidates to head the Central Agency of Peri "onal, nor for the Central Agency of Peri "onal, nor for the Central Agency of Peri "onal.
The two plenipotentiaries, Edgardo Ubaldo Genta ¡ and José Heguy Velazco, will unveil a monument to the liberator Artigas in Mexico. The former holds the rank of General and is a great poet. -They left via Cuba By G?MIRANDA ARCHILLA Editor of EL, MUNDO
Yesterday morning they left re" .Edgardo Ubaldo Genta and Jose an" hour" in this pal", coming from the Oriental Republic of Uruguay. Edgardo Ubaldo Genta, general of the Uruguayan Army and general director of the Military Institute Je General Staff of the mentioned Republic, goes to Mexico in the title of Ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary of his Government, to inaugurate a monument dedicated to the leader of the Independence of his country, liberator José Gervasio Artl-, gas. This initiative is the tenth in a series of civic ceremonies throughout America: Uruguay has dedicated and" ten monument* of Artigas to the following" nations: lixpanoamericana"-Venezuela, Psrhguay (2) Cuha, Peru, Colombia,! United States, Argentina, Chile and Mexico. ' I We are informed by the General -that in the Republic of Paraguay two monuments were installed because the liberator Artigas sought exile in the Paraguayan jungles, so as not to surrender to the tyranny vic-| i torios" at that time, remaining thirty "ños, until his death, in that country. A monument was erected at the point cqnocido by tbyrapitá, tree in whose shade rumiara "u anguish the exiled. । Regarding this tjaclón of Uruguay to the sister republics" of America Genta expresses that the monuments of reference are the work of thousands of bronze offerings made by the Uruguayan students" and that these symbols embody the e". plritu d* America, translated in love to the cause of freedom, justice and the right that the American caudillos bequeathed to us. The General adds that the ideal of Uruguay in this struggle for a great homeland is the commitment to worship unity and fraternity in this America, which has become a port of all the dreams of the world. It should not go unnoticed that Genta awaits the moment when his homeland selects Puerto! Rico as the inn of the liberator Ar- , tlgas, Although the Genta. scion" of Itarila, were always distinguished by the, arrest of arms, it" does not lag behind the spirit of 1a" Fine Arts, and ast is the case that this, son of the people" (Genta) also deicuelle in the empire of the laLtrgs. Trainer of the officers of । General Staff and of the' high# command# in the Uruguayan Army, this mill' tar does not forget to be forger of the epofieya of America in song# that goes in its continental resonance. We knew him as a poet before" than as a soldier. He sent us some time ago his works and in time we looked at his heroic deeds. After long centuries of silence, he wanted to revive the American epic, with all its victorious "vigorous" courage. A "i was born "The Epic of America", divided into six triumphal "works": Prologue of Man, Platanlada, Amazonia, Epic of the Amazonia, Epic of the Amazon. Amazonia, Epopeya de Bolivar, Lo# Mayas y Epilogo de.Dios, a selection of which will be included in the Antología de loé Génta. a nun1 to see the light in Montevideo. And when "e speaks of the Genta (Continued on page 27)
The Genta family is on its way to Mexico, via Cuba, the "Heguy Velazco, who were Ponce submits projects for two farmhouses They will have at least 446 units. The Ponce Municipal Housing Authority will invest 81,513,280 in a major low-cost housing project. This* project* will provide at least* 446 new* units* of housing* units* that* will be leased* to* low-cost* tenants. -These units will be leased to low-income families at a low rent of 8339 to $612 per year. The agency has completed studies aimed at solving the slum problem and has formulated a plan under which construction may begin within the next few days on one of the projects. >The plan and specifications are nearly completed, and there are reports that one of the most important projects will be advertised for public bidding as soon as it is approved by the Board of Pianlflcaclon. One of the projects to be carried out । will consist of an expansion to the Roosevelt Center, located at 36th Street. It is planned to construct 26 additional buildings, to house 86 one-bedroom, 74 three-bedroom and 6 four-bedroom units, for a total of 166 units, at an estimated cost of $600,000. - The second project will be located on 25 de Enero Street, corner of Victo-/! (Continued on page 28) ' ! Employees pro new scale of wages and i ..-■■a - Lozada writes to Gov. maintain basic salaries ! bonuses. -Reorga The Fedaution of Employee" of the . proposed yesterday to the i 1 Governor that the new# compensation scales approved by the Legislature for the coming fiscal year be left without effect-1 , to , and that s* maintain the same# basic salaries of ente year, with the bonuses or emergency increase* decreed# *1 pisado. The proposal is based on an informed complaint from a large majority of employees, in the belief that, with the new allocations, it is likely that the reform will not be implemented in the current year.
Chances increase that reform will not pass
WASHINGTON, June 13 (PU) - Recent events have increased the likelihood that the governor's elective bill will not receive final approval in this session of Congress, just as a similar measure did in 1943. Rep. I Fred Crawford, R-Michigan; told the United Press tonight that "time is running out" for consideration of the bill, as it did for a similar measure in 1943.
ting" to consider the bill, in the . House. He added that he has twice approached Rep. Leo E. Alien, chairman¡ of the Rules Committee, to sollcl-, tar an allotment of time on the, "floor" in order to debate the m"-| dida before putting it to a vote. He said he was accompanied on both visits by Rep. Richard J. 1 Welch, R-California and chairman of the Grounds Committee ¡ i (Continued on page 28) i
Pinero ousts Mendez; Bevin endorses Marshall plan, warns Russians
i British Minister endorsed Marshall at Press meeting Soviet doubtful if Soviet wishes to participate Washington project disrupts Russian ties with satellite peoples j -- -w-"■ For WALTER KOLARZ । United Press Correspondent LONDON, June 13 <PU)-Britain's Foreign Minister Ernest Bevin today endorsed the plan of United States Secretary of State George C. i Marshall, to rebuild Eurnn". and In h zo with uft rarn enthusiasm, warning d" passage to 1o# Russian" that" it would be disastrous" e| to try d* stop it. Speaking at a 1a Foreign Press Association luncheon, ¡ Bevin characterized the Marshall plan, outlined last week at Harvard University, as "a conception of cooperation between" Europe ;v the wonderful, great and Powerful Western Hemisphere." I need only say to other nations that as the United States builds a bridge to unite the West and the West, it is disastrous if ideological or other reasons frustrate the United States in this great endeavor," said Revin, obviously directed at the Russians. They have commented on the plan, but the American clerks doubt that the Russians wish to intervene in it: "The essence of Marshall's proposal is that the nations of Europe will reurture and estimate their total aid needs for the next four years, or for such period as may be necessary to restore normalcy. The United States will then underwrite most of the cost, with an estimated $1 billion for the first year. The nations"" taking part would have to share "their surpluses, even those of human potential. The plan would sweep the borders as no other force has ever done in history except war. If such a thing were done, it would upset Ru- । si" with satellite nations. Any surplus of Romanian wheat, for example, would be distributed among all the nations within the plan, *rt would go to Russia alone. That *s why AmerlcanoR officials expect Russia not to join, although, they say, 1a Soviet Union would be "willingly rept. Bevin said he was satisfied that Marshall had said yesterday that Russia was included, because that removed all doubt about it. Ex-, he pressed that in its integral part. *1 plan was the effort of a great nation "to create anew a world sound in body and mind." The speech in which Marshall ! formulated his ' proposal, Bevin said, | "has been one of the greatest speeches in history." He added that the United States "in the most generous manner !" e spoke of taking the Initiative "to save Europe from another ruin." The Foreign Secretary declared that Britain, for its part, was exploring means of responding to Marshail's offer. He said his pala was consulting France and other nations, and suggested the desirability of proceeding on a functional basis to attack the main problems of food#, coal and transportation. Bevin said he favored the establishment, eventually, of । a world parliament by direct read- , clone. "I may not see it but I will always advocate that idea , he declared.! He described "1 minister Britain's finan-1 zas, depleted by¿ the war, adding, "If anyone' in *1 world "e has been put in I (Continued on 1a page 28) i ( ~ ~ ~ T ¿"e í >put in not rule . ! compensation ¡ lernador suggesting se j icos this year, with ¡j inization of Association 1 .that have been made in the new plan )' o" classification, the salaries", as of July 1, 3947,1 are going to "er Inferior to (o" that per- 1 clblan during the last half of the 1946-47 fiscal year, despite the announcement that salaries would be increased." The Special Committee appointed by the Federation to study div*rror RRUntOR pertaining to the" cm- , oleado# public", recommended to the Governor, in a memorial, the inchulon to the effect, in the convocato-1 ¡ría to special legislative session, of amendments to the budget and l "yes of appropriations. It is proposed that positions with current compensation of more than $4,000 be given a "reasonable" salary increase. The Committee further recommends. Under the signature of the Chairman, Mr. J-ustp Pastor Lozada, the inclusion in the aforesaid call for the reorganization of the I ' Association of the Island Government Employees' Savings and Loan Fund; and amendments * to the Personnel Act (Act 345 of 1947). | In regard to the salary proposition, the Federation states: "The reasons which motivated the increase decreed by the Legislative Assembly last December have not disappeared. The i (Continued on page 28)
The duration of the special session, i The Chief Executive expressed his impressions regarding new federal appropriations "#, that at this time he does not "know for sure how they will be for the next fiscal year. He stated that it is ।"u belief that this will not be known until Congress finishes its work." "Such is the work that weighs "o over! <-1 Congre "o," he said-"that "e hair* very difficult to préd*ict what will happen." The Governor agreed that *1 Puerto Rico's school lunchroom program will be *1 service most affected. The matter will not "be influenced *in the call qu* exp*dlrá the next "emana. Mr. Pinero said that "**he will first see how the reeommended cut in federal funds will ultimately turn out and how it will finally affect the Island program. "This question is of such gravity to our children," he warned, "that I shall have no objection to call another special session of the Legislature to consider it." If it is known definitively. in the course of the next extraordinary legislative meeting, which! If the final status is known, the meeting could be extended to (Continued on Page 12)
Auditor Ponce i suspended from employment yesterday Judge Villares Rodriguez | appointed arbitrator to hear charges The Governor proceeded yesterday to suspend unemployment and salary, as Auditor of the Municipality of Pone", Mr. AnlbaJ Garcia. The "pliego de cargo" to "eflor Aníbal García was taken and delivered last night personally by the Governor's secretary, "eftor Emilio López Ramirez. । The Governor formulates eleven charges, all of them similar to those formulated to Mayor Andres GrillasRi, for having authorized certain payments for the acquisition of construction materials to the firm of Garcia and Clntron, "in violation of the provisions of Article 33 of the Municipal Law in force, and knowingly in violation of Article 8, Section 1, of the Municipal Law. It is alleged in said charges that no auction was held for the acquisition of the construction materials from .'Irma Garcia y Clntrón, "which was and is integrated by her brother Luciano Martiriano García, who you also knew was during those dates (the dates that the payments were made) brother-in-law of the Municipal Mayor, Mr. Andrés Grilasc*. and ocu-' Éaba. in addition, the position of Director jecutlvo and Secretary of the Municipal Homes Authority of the firm, Luis J. Clntrón Clavell, "was and is the son of the Treasurer School Director of the Municipality of Ponce, Mrs. Juana Clavell de Spaul-¡ ding, cooperating, "in violation of the Law, to the creation in the Municipality of Ponce of a monopoly, vlrtually in favor of García and Clntrón in the business of selling crushed stone, gravel, and dust to said municipal corporation of Ponce," according to the charges. It is also alleged in the charge sheet that the Auditor authorized the payment to "eftor Juan C. Vlllarlny of certain "urns for professional services. including consultations, preparation of ordinances and documents of a fiscal nature, from .the line item "Services, A Secretary and. Advisor (Continued on page 12) TODD'S ASSISTANT ! IS HIS OWN SON Justice Roberto Todd, Jr. of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, yesterday appointed his son, Carlos Alberto Todd, as his law clerk. The new assistant to Judge Todd received his law degree at the last graduation exercises of the University of Puerto Rico.
The special legislative session will be held next week, as announced yesterday by the head of the Department of the Treasury, who said that the cost of the dining halls will not go to convocatorlA. - Pinero says he will call another session to consider it Governor Plñero will convene for the beginning of next week the special session of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico. Mr. Flftero informed this at the press conference d* "ver. expressing that the call will include several* matters*. 1o* which** will not L™ 1 * 6 J MP ? clf, 5 a í n ?? t * , 1 D1J P bue **but that the Legislature will determine them within the legal term of - -- -- - - -
They are trying to prevent Wallace from speaking Monday WASHINGTON. June 18 (INR) - Re requested today from the Floral District Court an injunction to prevent Henry Wallace from speaking next Monday at a meeting in Wáshlngtnn. The motion seeking the injunction was filed by the Anti-Communist Association against the Secretary of the Interior, Jullu" A. Krug. who extraoflclclcluded the mind control" the "Walter Gate" amphitheater, where Wallace "e proposes to speak, "*- as announced, In "oflclting the injunction, the association alleged that Wallace has great" sympathy" for Communism. He alleges also that the Southern Human Welfare Conference, which is sponsoring Wallace's speech, has been labeled by the House Un-American Activities Committee as a Communist "front" organization. Republican Rep. Alvln E. Okonsky, chairman of the anti-communist group.
UPR Council studied pension plan for teachers " i Approved summer budgets for । Rio Piedras and Mayagüez colleges. -Reviewed the appeal case of Professor Rivera Valiente ~ For LUIS HERNANDEZ AQUTNO Editor of EL MUNDO The Superior Teaching Council of Puerto Rico began to consider the pension plan for the faculty and administrative staff of the University of Puerto Rico. It also approved the pr*"u-"u-
The Board also approved the pension plan for the Summer School of the University and *1 Colegio d* Agricultura y Artes Mecánica" d* Mayagüez, which together amount to $95,000.00. It also discussed the case of the Biology professor of the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts, "eflor Rafael Rivera Va. liante, who was removed from "his position by Rector Jaime Benitez, for "tt alleged participation in the student strike of Holy Week, carried out in said College. Recently the Consejo Superior de Enseñanza met, and Dr. Lind#ay Roger#, of Columbia University, who is a member of said Council, participated in the meeting. The meeting considered a number of matters on the agenda. Among the matters considered by *1 Council was that of the University's Teacher and administrative staff pension plan, for which a sum of $500,000 is available. As will be recalled, *1 j University Senate approved a resolution that was submitted to the Consejo Superior Je Enseñanza, which provides the basis for structuring a pension plan whose purpose is for the UPR to take charge of administering the contributions made by the employees and officials of the Institution, and by the University itself, for the administration of the pension plan, which is to be funded with $500,000. Villamil believes they are not enough The Corporación de Crédito" "obre I Alimento# announced yesterday that as of next "emana will resume the" allocation "# of ship# to load sugar. Mr. Maximino Vázquez, the agency's representative in Puerto Rico, said that fourteen ships will be assigned from next week until the first half of July. He indicated that the# allocations# will be made as the ships, which are now in U.S. ports, arrive and once the docks and ports on the island where they can receive the sugars are known. - These fourteen ships, assigned by the Food Loan Corporation, will transport about 85,000 tons of sugar for the northern reflnerlaa. The "eflor Fernando Vlllamt!, Pr". "(President of the Aaoclgdón de Productores de Azúcar de Puerto Rico, said yesterday that the allocation of these ships will greatly alleviate the sugar storage problem, with which some plants have been confronted lately, many of which have been forced to lease private warehouses in order to be able to continue their operations.)
In a letter he tells him that he exonerates him of any criminal responsibility He affirms Méndez's moral innocence He would have liked to have had diflcretion to act otherwise in the pipe The Governor of Puerto Rico. s". nnr Jesús T. Piflero,- separated aver from his post of Commissioner fl* l n Interior the engineer. "*finr Orlando Méndez, effective the dismissal aJ February 27. 1947. ruando was suspended from employment and salary, p*. ro immediately made the caveat qu* tl*n* (*i Governor) the me" full certainty of the moral Innocence of Mr. Méndez "to such an extent qu* my decision."The Governor said that he would have made a different one if the terms of the current legislation granted me discretion to proceed in accordance with my conviction. The Insular Executive, gave an account of his actions to Is Press in his conference of Is Isj-de d* "yer with his periodl.Vas. and he wrote a letter to him with "£ h V?/ yer #1 "-- hoh Méndez, informing him of his decision, in accordance with the Law, as he explained, but exonerating him at the same time of all responsibility for his actions, and at the same time, of all responsibility for his actions. at the same time d* all responsibility pe2"' that you (Mendez) may have incurred in this case" The complete text of the letter of d¡S*"* rt r r , Pí^ ro 11 * , ' í i o r Méndez is *1 as follows: min I 1 " í 1 " f * f * brero d" 1347. by mandate d* law which left no other alternative to my discretion, formu- * * i * * to you, * in * au character of Commissioner d* Interior of Puerto hlX *n having made vario* contract" for the purchase and sale of concrete blocks, and one for the sale of a mo "rAncr.to 1 " C " rP . 0 ? C,Ó !J Concrete Industrie#. Inc.", v "1 Government of Puerto Rico through f* j U ' d *P* r tem "ntos v a! tol L? l ' ' ,nd0 18 2L . Ml pror ' 1 '' '' ffwip" that Commissioner of the Interior and pii "mhro of the Tala Executive Conaejo, acclonlita, member d" the board and secretarylo of the mendo. "ríe* jnr P ? rar rtn Concreta Indu". j* r^n s were duly P..V1 do " a u,,, * d ' y UR,Frt '°* G>nrJ¿Z'^<2f* d , , , * appoint then* "| Hon. Rorinquen Marrero as Srhltro to hold the corresponding public hearing, study" I" evidence and ni* hlc|*ra the" remm*ndaclon*a qu* a au judgment were nertlnentea. Said hearing was held and said study made, v e| Hon Rorinquen Marrero has rendered his Report in *1 which reaches the 1* conclusion of 1ey that "In* cargo# nan been fully nrohados 0 , v makes the only recommendation that the law allows, that is, his removal from the office of Commissioner of] interior of Puerto-Rico. . "Having studied the record of! disc ,v analyzed all 1< evidence v Hother issues raised", I understand that the evidence sustains In# charges formulated, within 1* lnt*rpretacion Inescapable of ¡n law. for which reason I am obliged, "lo f.enér margoti of discretion for another rose, to separate him, romo asi lo higo, det cargo de Comisionado ríe interior de Puerto Rico, retrotrsvéndm 1 ! U Yes aterios d* this decision to ■ tifa February 27, 1947. date *n qu" you were* suspended from employment and salary. "In trteiar 1a decision qu* !- I report, I strictly fulfill the duty imposed on me by the lev Pero rt * ho theism time fulfill ptro duty, the moral duty that m" Imposes ml conscience, dlclémlol" the following: Ls proof has not shown, in ml judgment, that in the Iran*"cc one# made# between the corporation 'Concrete Industrie", Inc" and the Government of Puente Rjco you ~ ■ acted with corrupt intent for profit or gain, nor that any fraud was committed The People of Puerto Rico * n V "! U J d * transactions, or qu" El Pueblo d" Puerto Rico has "Ido perjudicado en su# Interese" en forma alguna" por dichas transarclone". On the contrary. 1* proof d "mue "tr< that the" sale# of the "Concrete Industrie*. Inc " to the Government were of product# of the highest quality, at lo*, prado# cor. r l*t "le" product*, in relatively small cantldade* and in circumstances in which it was anyway" economically normal and beneficial to the Gomemo to undertake such tran#actions." This is clear from the study * report rendered to ml by the Hon. Rorinquen Marrero, therefore, I exonerate you from any criminal liability in which you may have incurred in *#t* case. I personally have the fullest certainty of your moral innocence, to the extent that my decision would have been otherwise in accordance with the terms of the law in force would give me the discretion to proceed in accordance with my moral conviction. The "eflor Mendez told EL * MUNDO yesterday that he had received the CUW.9 tn from the Governor about half past five o'clock in the afternoon, v qu" nú 1 slowly resolved what liarla more "dolante in relation to *1 case. Mi "ntra# meantime, the aubcomialonú* di do of the Interior, "eflor Je "úa Bo" a nifez Castaño, continue* to direct 1M j activities d*l Department. governor Piñeto expressed, durtll*B te the conference with the Press s yesterday, that he did not have yet < some p "ia to fill Is vacant* OM" alonad" by the separation of SOftMÍ Méndez.