THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy, with some scattered showers over the coasts in the evening and early morning, and over the Interior in the afternoon. IN 8AN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 71; low, 70; rain, late.
36 Pages
MORNING
MORNING ■
YEAR XXVIII.
I check the brakes. Cooperated with automobile inspector.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 11, 1947
Entered ac cecond class matter, Foat Office, San Juan, P. B.
NUMBER 10823
JP studies aqueduct projects.
Expects to have a final decision next Wednesday Will send report to Governor Picó says either project covers 20-year period
The Planning Board did not make a final decision at Thursday's meeting regarding the project it would recommend for the construction of a new aqueduct to supply water to the San Juan metropolitan area. Discussions on the technical report of the two projects before the Board - the Loiza Grande River, sponsored by the Inaular Aqueduct Service, and the Yunque hydroelectric project, sponsored by the Puerto Rico Waterworks Authority - will continue on Thursday, and it is very likely that at Wednesday's regular meeting the Board will issue its final decision. The prealdonto of that body, Dr. Rafael Picó, questioned on the matter, stated yesterday: 7 'The reports of the technicians who have studied both projects have been completed, and the members of the Board are discussing all aspects, on extraordinary meetings, in view of the importance of the matter. We are conducting a complete analysis of all the points involved in the report. We have been meeting until half past one in the afternoon, since half past two o'clock, but we have not yet reached a final conclusion, we will meet again on Monday, so that by next Wednesday's regular meeting, a final decision can be rendered. "It is our purpose to have a final resolution, to be submitted to Governor Pinero immediately upon his return to the island, which will also include the Board's analysis on both projects, with its final recommendations. Dr. Picó added, furthermore, that "whichever of the two projects is recommended, it will provide the San Juan metropolitan area and the neighboring towns to be served by the selected project, from Dorado to Rio Grande, with water in sufficient quantities for a period of not less than 20 years. It is for this reason that, given the nature of the two projects before us, we are studying all aspects of them, since, in our opinion, a definitive solution to the problem must be found that each of them will solve. The Board, moreover, looks at this problem for the achievement of its solution, for a period even longer than the 20 years mentioned." As our readers know, the Puerto Rican engineer Mr. Celestino Castro, who is presently carrying out several water supply projects in Havana, Cuba, expressed his opinion yesterday in the columns of this newspaper that both projects should be carried out simultaneously. In the case of choosing only one, he was in favor of the project to bring water from El Yunque, pointing out its advantages. Both Dr. Picó and Mr. Santiago Iglesias, Jr., who are now members of the Board, since the third member, Sol Luis Descartes, is absent in the United States, are of the opinion that a hasty decision should not be made, and that the importance of the problem whose solution rests with them, demands the most careful analysis of all the issues involved. It is estimated that government investment in both projects, if carried out, would amount to about US$1 million. The technical report on both projects covers some 45 double-spaced pages and contains a complete study of the population, present and future industrial development of the area, topography, engineering description of the projects, budget, water flow to be acquired, present and future prospects, and numerous other important details. It was reported yesterday that the Water Resources Authority, even if the decision on the utilization of the waters of the Yunque for the San Juan aqueduct is adverse, will carry out its project for the project, and that it will continue with the project for the San Juan aqueduct, even if the decision is adverse.
Closed shop and wages 1 delay adoption of agreement for 1947 sugar industry
closed. Yesterday morning the Director of the Conciliation Service, Mr. Francisco Verdiales, and the Conciliator, Mr. Adolfo Collazo, intervened to reach an agreement regarding the aforementioned clause, through which the workers demanded a type of workshop that the employers rejected. The workers alleged that the clause does not provide for the type of closed shop that the employers object to. In view of the discrepancy that arose, the parties agreed to request the intervention of the Insular Conciliation Service, and the aforementioned con:llladore" began the work of bringing the parties together. The workshop clause discussed by the parties was one drafted after the rejection by the employers of the one which had originally appeared in the draft agreement submitted by the workers. The employers objected to a provision in the original clause which obliged the employers to suspend from employment any workers who, having been placed in the Union, did not wish to join the local union. The clause was postponed for further discussion. The clause drafted later, and which was the one that motivated the passage, provides for a form of personnel selection by the employer similar to that of the aforementioned provision rejected by the APRA, and although it is not the policy of the Producer's Association, it is not the same as that of the APRA, and it is not the same as that of the APRA, which was rejected by the APRA.
Although he is not the head of the Sugar Producers' Association in Washington, he will leave for San Juan this week to discuss with the island producers a number of the details involved. Reliable sources informed the United Press that general contract issues were discussed at these conferences but that no agreement was reached on any of the proposals made. The source added that the producers' representatives asked a series of questions concerning the terms of the contract and its interpretation, but that the government representatives were not prepared to accept or reject them at this time. . Attending the conferences for the producers were Dudley Smith, Brooks, president of Central Aguirre Associates, Wallace Kemier, assistant to the president of the Porto Rico Sugar Company, and for the Agricultural Credit Corporation were Lawrence Myers, assistant to the director of the Sugar Row of the Production and Marketing Administration, Charles W. Fowler, acting head of the Purchasing Division, and G. Lamond, assistant to the Purchasing and Supply Division. It was disclosed by the above source that no further meeting in con- ' foronda is expected until Mr. Smith returns from San Juan. Puerto Rico. Meanwhile, according to the United Press, the Government of Puerto Rico has launched a vigorous campaign to stop future tariff reductions on sugars, rum and tobacco from Cuba, which, it is claimed, would ruin the island's program for the development of industry and agriculture on the island. The Puerto Rico Information Office in this Capital released a report filed by the Government with the Committee on Civil Rights, which begins public hearings next Monday to hear the views of businessmen on the advisability of altering the tariffs of certain articles of prime necessity. The said report makes (Continued on page 17)
(Continued on page 17)
Compendium of News
In the impasse of the day before yesterday, official mediators intervene for the first time. - Workers submit new clause on life insurance By Luis Sanchez Cappa The Sugar Producers Association and the Sugar Union resumed negotiations yesterday on the collective bargaining agreement that will govern labor-management relations during 1947 in the sugar industry. The day before yesterday there was a new impasse in the negotiations, due to the workshop clause.
Montgomery saw > Stalin LONDON, 10 (INS). - Moscow radio announced today that Stalin had received an audience with the British Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Field Marshal Lord Montgomary. i ? i classic closed shop clause, < the same meets Isa lines genera- ' lea of éata. It provides among other things that in the selection of the new staff, the new personnel shall be solid- < taris to the Union and in the meantime < employ workmen on an inte- j riño basis. Personnel so employed shall be required to join the Union or otherwise be suspended from employment, in the event the Union is unable to supply the workers so requested. If the Union is unable to supply the requested personnel, then the workers selected by the throne may remain employed, whether or not they are members of the Union. Ade- ( further provides that all those tra- 1 bajadores employed by the patro- r (Continued on page r
There was no agreement at the meeting . on sugar contract for '47 t Dudley Smith will come to San Juan shortly r for the purpose of discussing a number of ' details concerning the situation.
WASHINGTON, 10 (FU)-Conferences for the 1947 Puerto Rican sugar contract and the adjustment of the 1946 price schedule took place in this Capital,' but without achieving definite results as expected. On the basis of tentative suggestions made, however, Dudley Smith, Director of the Office of the Director General, will remain at the Secretariat.
Byrnes will remain at the Secretary's post for two more weeks, pending the arrival in Washington of the new Secretary of State, George Marshall, and the likelihood is predicted that his tenure will be extended further by John Marshall. It is predicted in the Secretary's circles that, although Byrnes is anxious to retire to private life, it is likely that his tenure as Secretary will be extended even longer, at least until Marshall has become familiar with the international problems now confronting the nation. Moreover, when President Traman accepted Byrnes' resignation, he stated that it would be effective tonight, but subsequently this provision was changed so that Byrnes must now remain at the Secretary's post until after the General's inauguration. According to some observers, this change in the presidential arrangement may have been due, in part, to the fact that at present the Secretary of State is the constitutional successor to the President of the Republic, since the accession of Traman to office, following the death of Oosevelt, left the nation without a Vice-President. In the absence of a Secretary of State, the right of succession fell to the Secretary of the Treasury, John Snyder. The decision to keep Byrnes until Marshall's inauguration may also have been motivated by the Government's desire to assure the world that the change of Secretary of State will not necessarily mean a change in the country's foreign policy. One of the first problems to be discussed by Byrnes and Marshall will be that of the nation's future policy toward China. Among the issues to be resolved are the withdrawal of American troops from China and the settlement of the balance owed by China for materiel it received during the war under the Lend-Lease Act. In addition, it is also likely that the $500 million Export-Import Bank fund for China, which so far has not been available to China, will be dealt with.
Washington allocates $413,250 for airports on the island.
Pío. Rico had not formulated any program as of December 9. - The amount for the island is listed as unused balance.
WASHINGTON. 10. (PU) - The "Civil Aeronautics Administration announced this afternoon a program of $71,591,865 for the construction and improvement of 800 airports throughout the nation, according to its Administrator, T. P. Wright. Wright Those monies will be expend- . . ed during the current fiscal year, ■ ending June 30, 1947. i i i The Federal Government contributes $33, ' 899,265 to the program. State and local * governments will contribute $37, - 692,600. The CAA has set aside $9418,250 for Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico had not funded any program by December 9, 1948, however, and this amount has been listed in this afternoon's announcement.
The amount has been listed in this afternoon's announcement as "unused balance". T he legislation passed by the Last Congress provides for the eventual construction and improvement of about 3,000 airports, over its seven-year period, at a cost to the Federal Treasury of half a billion dollars. Not all of the 800 authorized airports will be completed by June 30; but CAA officials said that work at several airports should be well underway by that date, and that funds will be held for as long as necessary. Texas and New York have received the largest federal contributions-$2,237,831 and $2,139,352. respectively. The smallest sum went to the state of Nevada-$45,110 I -for a single airport. The United Press reports that the Civil Aeronautics Administration today reaffirmed its intention to give small city airport projects the main stimulus under the federal Airport Act, which appropriates $85,000,000 for this purpose. The Government will defray one-half of all project costs" up to an amount of $85,000,000, instead of the original amount of up to $100,000,000, Civil Aeronautics Administrator T. P. Wrlght announced today in releasing rules governing the allocation of funds for the seven-year airport development program. The increase in the cantldade* to be awarded* appears as a (Continued on page 17).
For the armed forces, Truman has asked for 111,200,000,000, noting that failure to approve would weaken the U.S. - - - - Washington has increased the aid it will give to stimulate the airport program by a small amount. It will defray half of the expenses up to the sum of I",ooo,000. Previously it gave only $2,000,000. - o - The Director of the 4th Communications Authority reports that Cagues will have automatic telephone in about 4 weeks. Cites meeting of the entities for Monday. Gonsáles Quiñones and Menéndes Remos will go "orne agricultural delegates to the hearing in Wáshlng- ... The Army would accept for enlistment 800 ex-soldiers without dependents. The enlistment -tnplesa Monday at Be San Juan post. -
Wáshlngton is studying the return of the coal mine to its private owners. - Planning expects to make final decision Wednesday on aqueduct projects. - There was no agreement at the Wáshlngton conferences on the 1947 Island sugar contract and the 1940 price schedule adjustment. - The debt of the Insular Government, on January 1, 1947, amounted to 110,176,000 in outstanding bonds issued. The municipal debt amounted to $10,944,000, exclusive of promissory notes and notes for $94,060,062.96. - The Commissioner of Health, Dr. J. A. Pons, leaves today for Venezuela. He will attend a health congress there. - - - Jamos F. Byrnes will continue to act as Secretary of State for two weeks more. It is anticipated that his stay will be extended longer. e - * Dr. Antonio Fernó" Isem, in a speech delivered last night in Washington, advocated the termination of the colonial status of Puerto Rico.
NEW YORK. 10 (INS) - Dr. Antonio Fernós Isérn, Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in the U.S. Congress, last night advocated the termination of the present colonial status of the West Indian island as a means of contributing to the industrial development of that Latin American country, which passed into the hands of the United States as a result of the Spanish-American War. The statement of Dr. Fernós I*érn was contained in a speech read at the opening ceremony of an official exhibition of the sugar industry of Puerto Rico in the Museum of History.
Fernós called last night for the end of the colonial status of the island.
Natural of this city. Dr. Fernós' message was read by the official delegate of the Resident Commissioner, Abraham Díaz González. Dr. Fernós stated that the United States Congress will be asked to grant Puerto Rico the right to a popular plebiscite in its current session to determine the political regime that the Puerto Ricans themselves want for their country. According to Dr. Fernós, Puerto Rico's current economic difficulties can be resolved during the industrialization of the country and the diversification of its agriculture.
Truman and Congress expected to fight over $37,500,000,000,000 budget submission
Welcomes new members
iii íiB Iliil ■ I illil 1 1 " wj ■ Norman J. O. Makin (seated), delegate from Australia and who assumed the presidency of the Security Council of the" United Nations according to the rotating plan in alphabetical order, at the meeting held at I>ke Success, New York, last Tuesday, welcomed the representatives of the three new" member" of the Council admitted" to the "eslon. Ix" new" delegates (from left to right) are: Faris El Khoury of Syria; Baron Robert Sllvercruys of Belgium; and Dr. Alfonso Lopez, former President of Colombia. - (Associated Press Photo).
Enlistment opportunity for 500 ex-soldiers
Commission discussed sugar regulations with the Governor. The Governor stated the Government's point of view, to seize the increase in price. - Meeting of entities to be held Monday
An opportunity for 500 former Puerto Rican soldiers without dependents to enlist in the Regular Army for service in the Arribe 1 area was announced yesterday by the recruiting office of the West Indies Military Department and urges former soldiers to apply next Monday for an interview at the recruiting office, located in the post office building. Accepted candidates will be sent* to Fort Buchanan for physical and mental examinations. - There are openings for "so all specialties in the Army and applicants* accepted* may *be enlisted in non-commissioned grades* up to the rank of sergeant, depending on their previous Army experience. Recruiting officials made it clear that if a shoulder does not qualify for the speclality* in which there are vacancies, he may be accepted if he meets other requirements. The physical examinations are essentially the same as those that were practiced during the last few years.
The "añore* Flllpo de Mostos and Manuel González Quiñones, held yesterday morning an extensive conference with the Acting Governor,' Lic. Rafael Ruscaglla, during which they discussed the position of the Industrialists, merchants, farmers, workers and the Government, in relation to the demand for a higher price for the Island's sugar.
the Island's sugar. Upon leaving the office of the Acting Governor, at the end of the conference, Messrs. De Hosto* and Gonzalez Quiñones stated that the attitude of the Government was the same as that expressed before. Referring to the announced intention of the Government, expressed a few days ago by the Resident Commissioner, Dr. Fernós Isérn, to seize the increase in the price of sugar to lower the cost of basic necessities, Messrs. De Boatos and Quiñones stated that this was *only a detail in the problem under discussion. They also expressed that the impression should not be given that there is a conflict between the Government and the Institutions related to the sugar industry, and that if such impression were given, Cuba would benefit from it. Mr. De Hostos and Mr. Quiñones also said that the mental foundation is to unite the efforts of all parties to achieve the purpose of increasing the price of sugar, and that both the Government and ourselves are in agreement on this matter. Loa "eftores De Hostos and González Quiñones visited the Acting Governor as delegates of the meeting of industry, agriculture, labor and commerce entities, which are discussing the plan of action to follow, to get a better deal for the Island's Sugar Industry. Finally, Mr. De Hostos announced, upon leaving La Fortaleza, that he intends to summon again on Monday "the entities that have been attending the meeting, to inform them of the outcome of the conference held with the Acting Governor. As is known, numerous entities remained together for two days, seeking ways to organize the Puerto Rican demand for a wage increase in the price of our sugar.
5 Provisional agreement of workers with the central sugar mill: cane cutting is expected to begin on Monday. It is expected that, by virtue of a provisional agreement reached by the factory and railroad workers of the Central Rolg, Yabucoa, with the management of this sugar mill, cane cutting will begin on Monday in the milling zone of said mill. i The Central Rolg, i" reported yesterday " a circle" worker", "- prepares, for i "u delivery, to Start au" actlvldaI do" induatrlalo" the mlércoloa, date on quo trusts start milling the , cane cut in the course of the luno", and Tuesday. The agreement provl "lonal between the Central Rolg and the Union Indepon- ' diento do Trabajadora" Indu "trla¿ 1 lea y Agrícola" de Yabucoa, that J proaldo the Mayor of this town, the aofior Erneito Carra "qulllo. pu- ' to begin the harvest in that ' reglón, was revealed ayor. The ruen1 (Continued on page 8.) , ¡ Hostos applauds ■ decision of the . McCormick Co. "-e" - X ' H This shipping company will reopen 0 services with South American ports.
Will study, return of coal mines WASHINGTON, 10, -(FU). - The Government is considering returning the bituminous coal mines to their private owners before June 80, the date on which the Government's authority to retain property taken as a result of the labor dispute expires. Captain S. N. Collison, Federal Coal Mines Administrator, commenting on circulating reports that the mines will be returned to their owners by April 1, told the United Press that "of course, consideration has been given to dates for the return of the mines to their owners, but the date has not yet been fixed.
The Freí! The Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce, "eftor FlUpo de Ho "toa, yesterday authorized the" following" manlfoitaclonoa: "The Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce has noted with great satisfaction the announcement made today - by the McCormick Steamahlp Company that it will soon reestablish the Pacific-Argentine Brazil Line service which it had been providing before the war and which was to be discontinued at the time of the war. "For the lala trade the news is of real interest, since the reatableclmlento do eata line will provide a regular and direct steamship line between Puerto Rico and the ports of Bradl, Uruguay and Argentina, which will allow the Inaular trade to coordinate and regularize its shipment of the product of the aforementioned country."Such as garlic, which has always been obtained mainly from the ports of Uruguay and Argentina. (Continued on page 20).
Republicans had called for less spending Truman warns that reduction in defense would weaken the Nation To that end he earmarks 811,200,000,000,000.
Revealed budget is balanced for first time since 1930 WASHING 7ON?ÍÓ7(INS) The Truman pro■ident "omoved today to the Congroao dolderation a pro-upueate in which loo gaato* total $37,500.000,000,000 for the fl*cal year of 1948 and warned lo" loglala? dore" who are inclined to economize" that any reduction in the defense gaatoa "would immediately weaken our International poaltion." The Prealdonto aeftala quo el preoupuooto e "tá "balanced" for the first ve" deads 1930, psro ol pro■upueato in "1 mlamo mueatra that ae preda of loglalatlva action to make up a small deficit and create a small surplus, by tranaforonda do $379,000. 000 dol alaterna of the federal reserve and the Federal Insurance Corporation, on the nation's treasury, which should be considered as a cash inflow. With this transfer made, the budget will show expenditures of $37,500,000,000,000 and receipts of $837,700,000,000,000. The balance of $200,000,000,000 will be used to reduce the national debt, which already totals 8206,000,000. It seems inevitable that the President's 01 budget will provoke a conflict with the Republicans who dominate Congress, who have indicated that they wanted a budget whose total would be between $29 and $32 billion. Referring to the gesture for national defense, the President says: "While we support the United Nations in making progress toward establishing world security, any reduction in defense spending in 1948 would immediately weaken our international position. This large part of the budget represents, in my opinion, the bulwark between security and economy. Expenditures for national defense total 811,200,000,000, including both the War and Navy Departments, and that figure represents a sharp reduction from the original orders in that category. The War Department is said to have requested a budget of 89,200,000,000,000 and the Navy 86,400,000,000,000, or a combined total of $15,600,000,000,000. Referring to international affairs, the President says: "We must fulfill our responsibilities in the occupation of Europe and the Far East. We must restore the damage" caused by the war in the Philippines, and we must relieve and relocate displaced persons from Europe. We must continue to provide relief to a number of other nations which are greatly distressed. Our budget for international relations is important for peace, security and our own prosperity: to reduce it would be to retard the restoration of a peaceful and prosperous world. The budget reflects the President's declalon to transfer the atomic energy program out of the hands of the War Department and into the "natural resources" category. Truman proposes to disburse $444,000, 000 during the fiscal year "to bring the benefits of atomic Investlgaclone* to Industry and medicine and enrich the general welfare." On that same line 385,000,000,000 was expended during the present fiscal year, and $430,000,000,000 in 1946. In the field of relief to foreign nations, the President proposed" lnv "rtlr $950,000,000,000 in 1948, plus some $300,000,000 which he projects to ask for during the current fiscal year ending June 30, 1947. The War Department will have jurisdiction over approximately half of the foreign relief program, with the Departments of State and Agriculture and the Maritime Commission handling the remainder. Opposing a reduction in taxes, the President says: "So long as business, employment, and national receipts continue at a high level, we should maintain the receipts from the Taxes to nlvelea that they not only collect current tax expenditures, but also leave a surplus for the redemption of the public debt. There is now no justification whatsoever for a reduction in Taxes." The President also asked for authorization to continue to develop an "Interim Universal Training" program - a cost of $10,500,000." For its part, the United Press, summarizing the President's message to Congress - on the budget for the fiscal year 194748 - highlighted, as follows, the main points raised by the President (Continued on page B)
Island debt January 1,¡ $10-175,000
* Bonds were redeemed on that date amounting to the sum of $402,000 Purchase of Isabela Irrigation bonds Municipal debt amounted to 810,944,100. Promissory notes and notes 84,069,502.98 By Juan Martinez Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO The debt of the Insular Government on the first day of the year 1947 amounted to the sum of $10,175,000.00 in bonds issued and outstanding on that date. On July 1, 1946, the bonds outstanding amounted to $10,652,000. On January 1, 1947, bonds amounting to $402,000.00 were redeemed and Isabela Irrigation bonds were purchased, prior to their maturity date, amounting to $75,000.00. This issue of Isabela Irrigation bonds is dated 1937, at an interest rate of three and one-half (3 1Í2> percent, due from 1947 to 1976. The Government purchased these bonds paying a premium of 5 percent, which amounted to $3,750. The sum of $8208,375.00 was paid in interest on Island bonds on January 1, 1947, which together with the premium of $3,750 already paid and S201.2S7.50 which the Government will pay in interest on July 1, 1947, makes a total of $413,412.50 in interest and premiums payable during the fiscal year 1946-47. Of the $10,175,000.00 in bonds owed by the Government on January 1, 1947, the Treasurer of Puerto Rico purchased, and holds in trust, bonds amounting to $163,000.00, so that the interest earned on these bonds is paid into the Island Treasury. On January 1, 1947, the municipal debt represented by bonds issued amounted to $10,944,100.00, On July 1, 1948 that debt was $11,042,600.00: but on January 1, 1947 bonds were redeemed in the amount of $58,000.00 and bonds amounting to $40,000.00 were retired before maturity from the following municipalities: Aguas Buenas, $1,500.00; Barranquitas, $15,000.00; Guayanilla, $6,000.00 and Ponce, $18,000.00. For interest on municipal bonds, the sum of $249,939.25 was paid on January 1, 1947, and the amount of $8248,714.25 will have to be paid on July 1, 1947, including interest for the period $498,853.50. of the TtWNNKInoMkn" bonds to which Sue's municipal debt amounts, the Puerto Rico Development Bank has $545,500.00 and the Treasurer of Puerto Rico has H,786,500.00. In addition to the aforementioned debt, the municipalities had outstanding on January 1, 1947, promissory notes and other documents amounting to $4,069,062.98. This municipal debt, represented by promissory notes and other notes, amounted to 84,142,724.32 on July 1, 1946. During the six months from that date to December 31, 1946, notes or promissory notes were issued in the following amounts: Aguada, $4,369.00; Aibonito, $810,000.00; Arecibo, $200,000.00; Coamo, $2,277.00 and Rio' Grande. $6,000.00 raising the debt to $4,365,370.00. During the same period, the following municipalities paid before maturity, loans amounting to $286,007.54: Arecibo, $40,000.00; Bayamón, $89,000.00; Guánlca, $18,283.30; Guayama. $2,00000; Juncos, $30,000.00; Naguabo, $3,000.00; Ponce, $183,724.24. In addition, promissory notes amounting to $10,300.00 were paid at maturity on January 1, 1947, reducing this municipal debt to $4,069,062.98 on January 1, 1947. Interest on this municipal debt was paid on January 1, 1947 in the amount of $85,302.03 and will be paid on July 1, 1947 7 (Continued on page 20)