THE WORLD
40 pages 5/
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY: Partly cloudy, becoming mostly cloudy with showers this afternoon and evening <N SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: Max temp, Min, 7A H.*onsotropic sea level pressure, at 4M this afternoon, 39.91 in.
01 ARIO 01 MORNING
YEAR XXVIII
Entered as second class mattar, Post Office, Ban Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 1, 1947.
Mr. autamovUlota. no Attempts eon gneis, another o* mattar oon it.
Committee on sugar is to cite hearings.
Meeting yesterday noted need to mechanize industry Will meet again Thursday Will make recommendations as to unemployment * that may arise By Jo "é M. Garrí" Calderón Editor of EL MUNDO The Ennecia! of the CAmnin de Representan tea, appointed to study the problem of unemployment in the sugar industry and the effects of the audit of this problem, which is expected to result from the mechanization process which has already been started, held its first meeting yesterday at the Capitol Insular, under the chairmanship of Representative Ernesto Ramos Antonlnl. This first meeting was attended, in addition to Mr. Ramos Antonlnl, by Representatives Celestino Triarte, Heracllo Rivera Colón. Pedro Vega Berrios, Alfonso Bujoaa and Mrs. María Libertad Gómez. Absent from the meeting was representative Fernando Bauermelster, who is the seventh member of the Committee. The meeting began at a quarter past three o'clock in the afternoon, and Mr. Ramos Antonlnl gave an explanation of the purposes for which the Committee was appointed and expressed his wish that all the entities and persons concerned with the problems of the sugar industry and traffic, as well as private persons who could contribute to the Committee's work, should participate in the hearings to be held by said body, as well as individuals who could contribute to the Committee's work. The work of the Committee will formally begin on Thursday of next week, when it was agreed to hold the second meeting of the Committee. The various members of the Committee presented their different points of view on the project. । the problem of unemployment in the sugar industry, which was accepted by all members of the Committee. The sugar industry, which, as accepted by all the members of the Co- 1 mlté. is exposed to suffer a fatal crisis, unless it is mechanized and raised to the highest level of efficiency, in order to be able to compete with the other producing areas. Pedro Vega Be. rrlos, a member of the Committee and president of the Puerto Rico Sugar Union, made the statement that the sugar industry of Haiti produced the same amount of sugar as Puerto Rico, employing only 30,000 workers, while the sugar industry of Puerto Rico employs about 120,000. The Committee agreed that in order for Puerto Rico to be able to face the new competitive situation in the sugar market, it is necessary to review the case of Rivera Valiente, according to a decision of the Superior Council of Education. A new hearing will have to be held in the formulation of charges against the former professor of Bio-' logy of the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts of Mayagüez, Mr. Rafael Rivera Valiente, according to a decision of the Superior Council of Education. The same, as reported yesterday by the rector of the University, will be held on October 18. On April 25 began the hearing of charges against Professor Rivera Valiente, at the "Colegio de Agricultura y Artes Mecánica" of Mayagüez, accused by the Vice Chancellor of the University, Mr. Luis Stéfanl, of having participated in the student strike registered during Holy Week at said school. The hearings, which lasted two days, were presided over by Mr. Benitez, who was advised by Dr. Frank A. Bowles, with Mr. Stéfanl being represented by Mr. Víctor Gutiérrez Franqul; and Professor Rivera Valiente by Mr. Enrique Báez García. Later, resolving that the conduct of Professor Rafael Rivera Valiente, during the 31st of March and Tuesday the 1st and Wednesday the 2nd of April, when the strike movement occurred in said InrtltucKn, "has represented an evident defiance of the norms and of the university authority in Mayagüez."The University Rector, Mr. Jaime Benitez, definitively separated Mr. R.vae VaA "nté from his position, making effective the separation of April 7, 1947. The former professor Riven Valiente appealed to the Superior Council of Teaching of the '"ctor's deei úói. After a careful study of the matter, the Board issued its opinion, concluding as follows: "The Board having reached the above-mentioned conclusions of law, we do not deem it necessary to issue any opinion on the evidence produced at the hearing of the charges, since it is our opinion that the said hearing will have to be reconvened and the testimony under oath will have to be received again (see page 34).
Vieques evacuation postponed to January
By JEAN VAN VRANRBN WASHINGTON, Oct. 3 (S. I. N.)-Governor Jesus T. Pibero disclosed today that the Navy has postponed the evacuation of Vieques to January. Pibero disclosed today that the Navy will allow the inhabitants" of Vieques to remain on the land claimed by the Department of National Defense until Jan. 1 of next year. The Governor made the announcement before leaving Washington for New Orleans. During a half-hour conference with Secretary of the Navy John L. Sullivan yesterday afternoon, the Governor was assured that the final date of November 15 for the evacuation of the affected population would be postponed for about two months. Plftero stated that he had not received any assurances as to the Navy's cooperation in the resettlement of the displaced persons. The Navy insists that the Department of the Interior and the Government of Puerto Rico must assume full responsibility for the purchase of new land for the construction of the necessary homes for the displaced persons. UPR Board to hold 2 public hearings Tuesday and Wednesday next week. The law makes them mandatory Next week, on Tuesday and Wednesday, at half past four in the afternoon, public hearings will be held by the University Board, in the Piolo Hall, in the Ciencias Natura building. According to the law that reorganizes the University of Puerto Rico, both the University Board and the University Board of Mayagüez are obliged to hold hearings during the academic year on university activities and problems, and members of the faculty and the student body, graduates and persons interested in the good progress of the institution may attend to present their points of view and make suggestions and recommendations. As for the Mayagüez meetings, it has not yet been announced when they will take effect. The Rector, Mr. Jalm" Benitez, was yesterday at the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts, where he went to discuss with the authorities of that college about general matters of that school. The Vice Chancellor, Luis Stéfa ni stated that the Mayagüez University Board did not meet yesterday, and that those were not the purposes that brought Mr. Benitez there, indicating that the Rector was visiting the college to discuss current general matters. He also stated that things were going well at the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts, with no problems whatsoever. The University Board is not the only body of the University that is required by law to hold public hearings every year. The Higher Council of Education, as the body that draws up the administrative and teaching policy of the Institution, is also required by the statute that reorganized the University to hold hearings during its annual sessions. This requirement has been complied with regularly since the said Council replaced the former Board of Trustees.
UPR expects a deficit of ) $450,000
Transit Committee to discuss new plan for bus entrance to the Capital. * Sugar Advisory Committee to meet Wednesday. 9. Mayagüez College graduates will collect for two constructions. - Next week, work will begin on the reconstruction of San Agustin Street. - UPR tells Planning Board that it expects a deficit of 9450,000. It asks to authorize a 10 percent of the tax on the taxes on the oiga, rrlllos. PEG will initiate 39 improvement projects at a cost of 9802,410. - ♦ - - Rivera Valiente's case to be reviewed on October 8. ♦ o - Existence" of alcohol in the Nation totals 408,000,000 gallons. 0 0 0 E! Tuesday" and Wednesday of next week the University Board* of Rio Piedras will hold public hearings, as required by law. * The University Board will hold public hearings on Wednesday and Wednesday of next week, as ordered by law. - The University Board of the University of Rio Piedras will hold public hearings this week, as ordered by the law.
News Digest
Benites made case to Planning Board when he submitted list of expenses Pide 10% of what cigarettes pay For the year 1948-49 he proposes improvements amounting to $3,016,000 The University of Puerto Rico has recommended to the Planning Board that it be allocated, in the fifth economic program of the Government, the amount of $8,480,000 to cover the deficit in expenses of the University of Puerto Rico.000 to cover the deficit in operating expenses which it expects to be incurred at the end of the present fiscal year, in view of the decrease in the income received by our first faculty member from the federal tax on alcoholic beverages. It has also been recommended by the Chancellor, Mr. Jalma Benito, that legislation be passed at the next regular session of the Legislature to secure for the University not less than $800,000 for operating expenses during the next fiscal year and thereafter. The economic situation of the University, as previously stated, is not entirely satisfactory, due to insufficient funds to carry out its physical expansion plan, and the constant increase of enrollment in all the services it currently provides to the country. This situation has been complicated by a notable decline in its income, due to a considerable reduction in the number of distilled spirits produced in the country and exported to the United States. Accompanying the above recommendations, Rector Benitez submitted to the Planning Board a program of spritual improvements, which represents an estimated investment of 310,249,500 over the next six years, of which 93,813,400 has already been authorized for 1948-49. - For the fiscal years 1949-50 through 1953-54, it has proposed to authorize an investment of 83,011,000, leaving 83,421,100 for "Home*" in the portfolios of the fiscal years 1949-50 through 1953-54. For operating expenses of the University, Rector Benitos has proposed that he be authorized to increase the funds currently available to him to $4,861,059.87. In this regard, he has submitted a program of operating expenses, which involves an expenditure* of $30,588,000 during the six years of the governmental financial program, distributed by fiscal years, beginning in 194849, in the following amounts: $5,008,000; $5,080,000; $5,100,000; $5,140,000; $5,140,000 and $5,140,000. For the expenses of the public improvement* and operation plan, the resources coming from the special fund of the University of Puerto Rico would be used: special ""lgnacione"" and contributions authorized by the Insular Legislature; and small contributions from federal funds, which this educational institution regularly receives. The works proposed by Rector Benitez are as follows: Library buildings, at a cost of $800,000, for which he is requesting $300,non "I abo fiscal next). Two dormitory buildings" for women," at a coate of $600,000, having adgnado* $20,000; proposes $300,000 for the next abo,) I (Continued on page 24).
Federal building to be built across the street from the post office. - La Marin" postpones evacuation of Vleque" to January. * * * * Committee on unemployment in I" cane industry proposes to hold hearing". Discuss mechanization needs. - - - The local office of the federal Conciliation Service will be eliminated" within a few days. Goldsmith will be transferred to Or. lando, Florida. "The Civil Aeronautics Board is threatening to suspend several non-routing airlines, including some operating between Miami and San Juan. - Farmers urged to fix minimum labor to be performed by workers in the sugar cane industry. The Institute of Rum declares to be surprised by the manifestations of Dr. Fernós. Favors that the problems of the industry be solved by the Insular Government. o - o ... Committee recommends to Truman strict control of "opecu. lotions in grain markets. * Lavagetto's double in the ninth inning, off I outa, drove in 3 runs to give Brooklyn a triumph over the Yankees, 8-3, and tie the World Series at 3 games. It was the only hit that Sevens allowed,
1 The local office of Federal Conciliation will soon be eliminated.
Conciliator Goldsmith, who reported yesterday, will be transferred to Orlando, Florida, but will intervene in cases under his jurisdiction.
For Luis Mánche* Cappa Editor of EL MUNDO i Within a few days" the local office of the Federal Conciliation Service will be eliminated. This was reported yesterday by Charlea A. Goldsmith, aobor. Goldsmith, under whose direction the office has been operating in Puerto Rico. Mr. Goldsmith recently returned to Puerto Rico from Washington. As Mr. Goldsmith explained yesterday, the new policy outlined by the Taft-Hartley Act is to bring under the jurisdiction of the territorial and state conciliation agencies all cases of a local character in which interstate commerce is not involved. The Federal Conciliation Service will be limited, in accordance with the new law regulating the employer-employee relationship. The Federal Conciliation Service will be limited, according to the new law regulating the employer-employee relationship, to those disputes intimately related to interstate commerce. Until recently, the Federal Conciliator in Puerto Rico, Mr. Goldsmith, has intervened in all those disputes in which intervention was requested by the party to intervene. The softer Goldsmith, in the performance of au" funciono", lent his cooperation to the Puerto Rico Department of Labor, intervlnlen. do in conjunction with the conciliadora" ln "ula rea in a considerable number of caana throughout Indole. Mr. Goldsmith added, however, that he will continue to provide this cooperation by intervening in those cases in which he has been denied by the Labor Committee its cooperation in making the necessary arrangements.
The Labor Committee will continue to cooperate with him in the settlement of labor disputes. Mr. Goldsmith's office will be transferred * * * * * * to the regional office of the Federal Compilation Service in Orlande, Florida. From there, Mr. Goldsmith will have to be attentive ■ to disputes within his jurisdiction on the Island in order to intervene in such disputes. The jurisdiction of the U.S. Conciliation Service in Puerto Rico will be limited, according to the law, to cases occurring in interstate commerce, namely, maritime, sugar, (both manufacturing and agricultural), railroad, and all others that fall under the definition of the term commerce, as inserted in the new law. Explaining the provisions of the Taft-Hartley Act relating to the intervention of the Cond. Marion on labor disputes, Mr. Goldsmith said that employers and labor are required by the new law to inform the service of the date on which they are to begin their negotiations for the signing of agreements. Agreements, he said, must be commenced 60 days prior to the expiration of the existing contract, and upon commencement of negotiations, the parties must notify the service. If, within ten days after the discussions have been completed, the parties have not reached agreement on the agreement, the Condlliadon Service will be obligated to enter into an agreement with the parties.
Recommend strict control of grain speculation Committee told Truman that this is the only way to help foreign countries and prevent runaway inflation. - Urge doubling of margins "For GRANT DILLMAN Correaponaal of United Press ,^ brt 31 Lo * advisers to President £? aC al "Utrior, recommended today !íJ mp i ant 7 ón controls over" speculations an d- da * v,Ur qu * -' P ro " r "m* American da a ~ a * ao * xtr,n J* rn * cana" a* runaway inflation in the.
The U.S. government plans to build a new federal building in San Juan, the U.S. government plans to build a new federal building in San Juan, the U.S. government plans to build a new federal building in San Juan. Ayvr ae revealed that the federal authority", tl "n "n "n "n under consideration. plans for the erection of a federal building, to Inatalar in the miamo the offices of the federal agendas in Puerto Rico. The building, it was reported, will be constructed on the site across the street from the Post Office and Federal Courthouse, which is currently vacant and used for vehicle parking. Said lot is centralized at Comercio, Recinto Sur andanca de San Juan Streets and is owned by the Federal Government, 1 According to what EL MUNDO was informed, an amount has already been allocated for the plan and the building's eapadfleaclones, which, it was added, will have an area of 70,000 square feet and several floors. The number of floors was not reported. As will be recalled, the need to group in a single office building the agencies of the Federal Government that provide services in Puerto Rico, in order to facilitate greater efficiency and at the same time allow for savings in terms of space, has been repeatedly pointed out in the past.)
The Secretary of Commerce, W. Secretary of Commerce W. Avorell "arrimen, chairman* of the Foreign Relief Committee, said at a* press conference that his group is unanimously in favor of an immediate doubling of the" margin requirements in the grain markets. Margins should be increased further, he added, if that were necessary to control speculation, Harriman agreed with Agriculture Secretary Clin. 1 ton P. Anderson, that I* new* sliding scale* of margl. nal requirements, adopted by the big grain markets of Chicago, , Kansas City and Minneapolis, , , "is not enough" to curb- ,,, te I" emergency. । Unless the prices of essential . commodities- such as gra. I nos-so bring down, Har- . riman warned, the cost of the vast I Marshall Plan for the rehabilitation of t Europe, will be no less than two thousand , mllloqes of dollars higher than l estimated -$22,400,000,000,000- by the 16 nations do 1* Europe Oci ciden such that have embraced *1 plan. / He explained that the requests of eyu. He explained that the U.S. requests made at the current Parliamentary conference were based on an expected drop in U.S. prices. 1 Harriman said that "more pressure" should be put on the three major grain traders to increase marginal requirements. He declined to be more ex. - But the committee's recommendations will go to President । Truman, and, presumably, to the Congress, too. At this. . to" time the Government lacks . power to compel the markets to increase mor. . gi nal requirements. "The committee is not fed up with 1a recomen. The committee was not satisfied with the recommendation because it was not convinced that the speculation was (Continued. on page 14).
JAC threatens to suspend lines that operate without a fixed itinerary
WASHINGTON. october~3 - (PU)- Several airlines operating non-scheduled aircraft between San Juan, Miami, New York and New Orleans, received notice today from the Civil Aeronautics Board, *1 effect of which is to suspend their operations within fifteen days, *1 as soon as they file their fares and other required economic information. These aircraft are often called "non-routing" transports, but are officially known as irregular transports without certificate, and are engaged in carrying both cargo and passengers. The Board's order does not apply only to cargo aircraft. The JAC told the carriers that their non-observance of the official regulations "contributes to unsatisfactory economic conditions" between the "carriers" and the "Jewish" - "interferes with" its Board's functions. Les compabíu Ureas without fixed itinerary have letters of lu-
The Board issued them with letters of lis- - tion, in accordance with the regulations which came into force on June 10 last. These regulations also required the filing of tariffs and reports on operations. The first report on operations was due on June 30, and the next on October 30. The rates were supposed to be filed immediately the regulations came into effect. The Board said the following carriers were among those whose permits to operate have been suspended: American International Airways Inc, New Caribbean; American Airlines Inc, Miami; Hawaiian Air Transpor Service Ltd, Honolulu; Hemisphere Air Trensport, New York; Puerto Rico World Airways, San Juan; Nu-Way Air Expresa, New York; Sabihon Aviation Ltd, Wahiawa, Oahu; Eduardo E. Saldaña. San Juan; Skiways International Trading and Transport Company, Miami; Southern Air Transport Ine., New York.
Decision 'there were' mistakes in the Mediterranean.
Eisenhower ordered to correct situation with U.S. soldiers Gen. John C. H. Lee exonerated Inspector reports no malicious intent on his part By William F. McMemanln Cormponaal da United Press WASHINGTON, Oct. 3, (PU) - Gen. Dwight D. Elsenho. Elsenho. wer determined today that there was evidence of "errors" made in the treatment given to the North American soldiers in the Mediterranean Theater, and ordered that they be immediately corrected. He reported, however, that he could find no "misconduct" on the part of Lieutenant General John C. H. Lee, former commander of that theater of operations, who is now in the United States, awaiting retirement to enter religious work". The Chief of Staff joined Secretary of the Army Kenneth C. Royall in endorsing a report by Major General Ira T. Wy. che, Inspector General of the Army, who found no basis for the most recent accusations made against Lee and his aide by Scripps-Howard newspaper columnist Robert C. Ruark. Wyche, who recently returned from a three-week investigation, conducted at the scene of the alleged events, as to the" conditions prevailing" among the" occupation troops" in Italy, said he had discovered "one" how many" isolated cases of maladministration and probable miscarriage of justice" which he could determine were neither "condemned nor encouraged" by L*e. But he dismissed, one* by one, almost * *all" the accusation*" general*" d* I Ruark in *1 aentido d* that lo" "ol. 1 given" of Le* army speak* i been victim" of "brutal, d*- < gradant and humiliating treatment" and that Lee hebie sanctioned "open misuse of rank" by officers, "violate- । clones affronted?' of Individual rights, and "flagrant misuse of 1* government property - des. lost of government funds." Wyche's report says that *1 column lité, on a* rápld* excursion through the theater of the * * * finals of July, had gathered "a few" facts, half-truths, rumors and men. tions which he accepted as truth" and had written a series of articles" for publication in the United States "in which he gave * his" readers "a totally erroneous picture of general conditions". Elsenhower and Royall promptly accepted the Inspector General's recommendation that no action be taken against Lee. They praised the former commander for being a stickler for strict discipline, and called attention to his "long and unblemished record of service in the Army, in peace and in war". The Chief of Staff admitted that, "within dlstln. conditions," some of the measures used to m*ntonor *1 soldier "obro au" feet as "ambassadors to Italy" might be considered "extreme, if not actually harsh."" Poro the Army high command apparently shares 1* Wycho's view that it er* essential 1* imposition of strict methods, particulermento in places of international hardship such" as Trisito. Wyche repeatedly indicates throughout his 12,000-word report that at least 60 percent of Lee's soldiers were juniors - between 17 and 20 years of age - and that the average age of all soldiers combined was 21.7 years. "The control of these young men must be strict," he says at one point in his report, "or the Army will be subject to severe parental criticism if soldiers are involved in dubious activities of any nature that were or are associated with people of undesirable character. Nevertheless, Eisenhower found cause to reprimand the officers at Mediterranean Headquarters for what he called "errors of omission or commission" in the treatment of the soldiers. And he blames *the entire Army higher command, including himself, for some of the other "undesirable" conditions that Ruark's articles brought to light. Elaonhower ordered *1 Commanding General Lawrenco C. Jaynes, suee(Continued on page 24)
He will be appointed Director of the Island Lottery Ki Mñor Je "ú* Benít"" Rexach, who, as reported *1 Teaorero d* Puerta Ríen, ""Aor Rafael Bu "csglia, will have been appointed in hrevo Director of the litaría of Puerta Ríen to replace Mr. Harman U Cochran, who resigned the post. (Photo EL MUNDO 1 ) Committee discusses entry of buses to the Capital Plan would allow entry of many 10 A. M.; then it would be suspended until 2 P. M. A new plan for the entry of the "guagua" to San Juan was discussed yesterday at a meeting held in Fortaleza by the Transit Committee. According to this plan, the buses would enter the Capital until ten o'clock in the morning, at which time their entry would be suspended until two o'clock in the afternoon, in order to permit freely the loading and unloading of merchandise in the commercial establishments of San Juan, the loading and unloading operation to be carried out exclusively during the day. The operation of loading and unloading was to be carried out exclusively during the four hours between ten o'clock in the morning and two o'clock in the afternoon, at which time the buses would re-enter the capital. Whenever this plan affects commerce, it is being submitted to a referendum among the merchants of the Capital. The matter will be discussed again by the Transit Committee next Thursday. Another plan which the trade has submitted, and according to which loading and unloading could be done in two independent two-hour periods, one in the morning and the other in the afternoon, has apparently been dropped by the Committee, it was reported yesterday. In connection with the entry d* the" guagua" ■ San Juan, according to r*v*. 16, *1 Director of 1* Authority d* Transportation, Mr. Jose G. Blolse, raised the question do that, the buses re-entering the Capital, would involve an increase in ol service or kiss the same fare. The Committee d* Transit also discussed aiuntoa related to the system of lights to regulate ol transit in It eluded, addressing the possibility do install a new light in Ponco do Leon, corner - the street of the Park. On the other hand, the Committee continues its efforts to achieve the construction of a building for car parking. The site for this project is a vacant lot near the post office. One of the steps to be taken by the Co. mlté will be to try to obtain the transfer of the site to the Island Government, since it is owned by the U.S. Government. The Committee for the Defense of the Capital met yesterday afternoon to consider the proposal made by the Transit Committee to allow buses to enter San Juan during all hours of the day, with the exception of those between 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. The proposal was unanimously accepted, and it was agreed to favorably recommend it to the assembly to be held this afternoon at 3:00 o'clock at the Puerto Rican Athenaeum.
Alcohol stocks total 468,000,000
total 468,000,000 gallons of alcohol
WASHINGTON, Oct. 3. (PU)-Speaking on the appeal to be made to the nation's distillers and brewers to cooperate in the food preservation campaign to enable emergency relief to be sent to Western Europe during the coming winter, a spokesman for the distillers said that at present alcohol stocks total 468,000,000 gallons. However, most of this alcohol is fresh and will not be able to be shipped "* to market* until two or three years hence. The liquor industry used a core* of 36,300,000 bushels of grain through July of this year, including 37,200,000 bushels of corn.
200,000 bushels of corn. The remainder was wheat, barley, malt and cash. On the basis of these figures, the industry is expected to consume about 90,000,000 bushels of grain during the year: provided that it does not suffer from conservation. Wallacé H. White, a publican at Malno, suggested strongly that distillers should use seeds instead of grains, as Jo did during the world food crisis of 1945-46, which was just as severe as the present one. Potato alcohol is not a substantial economic burden, since five bushels of potatoes produce only a small amount of alcohol.
NUMBER 11085 ■ । ■ ...L-."-"gB==gggga
PEG will start 123 improvement projects
The work will begin within 2 weeks at a cost of $302,470. Additional expenditures The Director of the Emergency War Program, Mr. Mari" Marrero, stated yesterday that "the necessary steps are being taken to initiate, within the next week, a velntitréa project*. He added that during the last month, they will begin a public works project in the municipality of Lela, which will represent a total investment of $302,470,000. He added that during the next two weeks, the project will be executed at a cost of $403,589.50, and that the work will be completed within the next two weeks, therefore, at a cost of $706,059.50. These public works will be aimed at providing additional sources of work in the municipalities of the lo* I la, as well as to improve the public utilities, according to Mr. Ma. i rrero. In addition, the PEG has submitted for the approval of the Planning Board six other public works projects, which represent an additional 9214,000 pesos and which are expected to be carried out within the shortest period of time possible once they are approved, and has in preparation the plans and studies for fourteen additional works, which involve an additional expenditure of $617,844 pesos. Mr. Marrero said that his technical staff has been extremely busy in the preparation of ostudies, plans and specifications, in an effort to put into practice, as soon as possible, the entire program of public works* entrusted to the agenda by the Executive Council of Puerto Rico and the Department of the Interior, which involves an in. The program involves an investment of a little more than $1 million. It has also kept the PEG in communication with the municipal government, accelerating the work in the municipality that has been entrusted to it, and promoting the use of other organizations to carry out their own projects. ■| La* aigulentoa obraa. een a !nLvoraión total do 8403,589JO, ao pu. - alerón in execution during the paI aado mea do aeptiombro: . Conatrucdón de acoraa oa Loiaa "' Aldea, $8,000. Conatrucelón do . I Loiaa Aldea recreation plan . WO.- , ooo. Conatrucdón del alcantarillado j pluvial do Aguadilla, 1135,000. Conatrucdón do plaza do rocroo . d* Quebradillo", 5,189.80. Conatrucdón ' of a hospital with an annexed medical center in La* María*, 882,400, ' The* following* 23 project*, at a * cost *n 8302,470, will be put on ojecudón within the pro-. Repair of 1.8 kilometers of the Laa Cuevea road, in Lajea, $8,900. Repair of the plaza de re. I croo de Moca, $19,740. Repair of , la q*lle San Diego de Aibonito, $10,000. Conatrucdón do hoapital con . centro médico anexo, en Aftaaco, $67,063. Conatrucdón de hoapital con centro médico anexo, en Vtllal' be, $75,000. Conatrucdón do un con. ' tro médico rural en el barrio Quoi brada, do Camuy, $15,900. Conatruo* . dón do un centro médico rural en . el berrio Indlora Boje, do Maricao, > $16,290. Conatructuon of a two-unit . . school in the Anón neighborhood, . of Ponco, $7,350. Conatructuon of a four-unit school in the Viví Arriba neighborhood, of Utuado, $13,. Construction of a stairway in the Dues Bajo neighborhood, in San Germán, $7,850. Construction of a house for an agricultural teacher in the Pájaros neighborhood, in Baja, $5,000. Construction of a gate to the Manuel Hen- , riquoz oacuola, in Toa Baja, $3,477. Construction of a house for an agricultural teacher in the Cuchillas neighborhood of CoroMl, $5,000. Construction of a cemetery in Cataño, $10,000. The following six projects, valued at $214,000, have been proposed and are under consideration by the Planning Board: I Construction of curbs, sidewalks and street pavement in the Obrero neighborhood of Fajardo, $90,000. Construction of a fence and extension to the rural cemetery in the Pajuil neighborhood of Hatillo, $8,000. Improvement* *1 Insular Children's Home in Guaynabo, $75,000. Construction of a house for a teacher of vocational agriculture in the Mameyes neighborhood of Jayuya, $5,000. Canalization of the ditch leading to the Lincoln Water in Ca- guas, $4,000. - The following are estimated at $617,844; 1 Expansion of the San Juan Government hospital in Santurce. Canalization of a waterway in Añeoeo, $80,000. Repair of 1.834 kilometers* of Frailee Road in Guaynabo, $9,844. Mojoraa to the municipal capital of Aftaaco, $13,000, (Continued on page M).