THE NONDO
eaoNosTico" weather eaea THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy, with some scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M; low, 76. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.87 inches of mercury.
36 Pages 5*
DIARIO Di ua MANANA
YEAR XXVIII
Entered ae second elass matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 27, 1947
--Mr. automovUlata, no Intente oao , gracia, otro m maté "on ella,
NUMBER 11078
Liberal Party seeks to unify oppositionists
Appointed a committee to hold talks to that end Mrs. Barceló against merger Nor is she in favor of creating new party. They organize the assembly L" Central Board! of the Liberal Party -- met yesterday, e in Ran Juan, hajn Ir presidency of the "adora Jo-eflna Rerreló de Romero, .giving consideration to dtveraoa aauntoa related" with the celebration of the next extraordinary aaamhlen of the collectivity, that will have to efectuara" the day 12 of October of -ate year. At the meeting of 1a Central Board, "- Reported the procrean da the work that "e has been developing in relation to the reorganization' of the" board" lócale" of the Liberal Party: work that is alendo dl- ! rigid by a committee chaired by the lawyer Antonio Quiró" Méndez. According to what was reported yesterday, the Central Board has already begun to receive the names of the people who will attend as delegates to the Liberal assembly, representing the different towns of the island. In this assembly, as it is known, will have to conaiderarae, among other" matter" of importance, the resignation of the president of the Liberal Party, "cñnre Barceló de Romero, who in different" occasions has reiterated her decision to retire of the position. The Central Board of the Liberal Party has been giving intense attention during the last few weeks to the political situation intab - and in a previous meeting, it appointed a Contact Committee, "1 which has been invested with the authority to hold talks"" with the other opposition parties, with a view to organizing a new political party. The referred committee is integrated by Mrs. Barceló de Romero, Mr. Félix Ochoteco, Mr. Antonio Quiró" Méndez and Mr. Luis Pérez Matos: and Mr. Andrés Rodri-: guez Vera. Inocencia Blanco. Santiago Iglesias Silva and Rafael Rodríguez Pacheco. Although she is a member of the Contact Committee, Mrs. Barceló de Romero said yesterday that she was not in favor of the organization of a new political party, nor of alliances or coalitions, and that the Liberal Party should "go only to the elections 1 '. Expanding her thoughts on this matter, Mrs. Barceló de Romero said that: -'I have the sincere conviction that the Liberal Party, going alone to 1a" elections, best fulfills the aspiration of the majority of the Liberal people."'" Although the exact place where 1" assembly of the Liberal Party will be held has not yet been decided, it was reported yesterday that the same will be held in San Juan, and the' negotiations have already been initiated to obtain one of the" theaters of the capital to hold the assembly. Notwithstanding the reservation that has been maintained about the person who will succeed Mrs. Barceló do Romero in the presidency of the Liberal Party, if she maintains her inflexible attitude of retiring from office, yesterday it was reported that Mrs. Félix Ochoteco and Luis Pérez Matos were the most likely to be elected.
Only 6 Patillas patients remain asylum" Dr. Jo "é A. Alum, Deputy Health Chief, indicated yesterday morning that "only six people" who were victims" of the recent epidemic in Patillas remained asylum" at the Fajardo District Hospital. He also said that no deaths have been recorded and that another three people have been discharged. As for those who were hospitalized at the Ponce District Hospital, the Lafayette and the San Lucas Hospital, he said that no reports had been received at the central office, so it was presumed that they had been discharged. The epidemic in Patillas lasted for about a month, and the Department of Health had deployed its technical and epidemiological personnel to the town to control it. During the most intense period of the epidemic outbreak, a total of 30 deaths and about 459 cases were recorded. The Commissioner of Health, Dr. Juan A. Pona, made two visits to the town of Patillas, where he made a study of the situation, promising an official report that has not yet been made public because it has not yet been completed. In addition to the six people from Patillas who have been "asylum" in the Fajardo Hospital, there are six others suffering from malaria, belonging to the following towns: LuquiHo 4, Fajardo 1, Rio Grande 1.
The water problem in the San Juan metropolitan area has not improved substantially enough to allow a continuous service to the population, according to the Aqueduct Service Director, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, who informed yesterday. Therefore, the water will continue to be rationed hov. and most likely the population will be able to receive service "only until eight o'clock at night, Regarding the supply tomorrow Sunday, the Director of the SAA said that every effort will be made" to not suspend service, since there will not be a large commercial and industrial consumption. However, if there is no rain this weekend in the Piedras and Bayamón river basins, rationing will resume on Monday. Mr. Cuevas also informed that on Thursday it was necessary to change a defective valve in the main pipe on Borinquen Avenue, which is why the service was suspended at six o'clock in the afternoon. He also warned that yesterday's service was irregular, due to the fact that the distribution system took time to obtain sufficient flow to allow normal pressures. Today the service will be extended until eight o'clock in the evening. "Although there has been a lot of rain in the basin of the above-mentioned rivers", said Mr. Cuevas, - (Continued on page 20)
News Digest
Perennial Board recommends that the Police stop exempt service while legislation brings the Corps into compliance with the current personnel statute. Favors payment of reenlistment and 10% bonus in San Juan. - Cuevas informed that the water rationing will continue today, Saturday. - Farmers held a meeting to outline their position before the salary hearings". Great Britain announces it is ready to leave Palestine. - The Liberal Party appoints a Contact Committee to initiate the union of opposition forces in a single party. - The Nation activates the preservation of the mountains. - House Committee will call for trial of Hanns Eisler, for fraud and perjury. It will also recommend his deportation. - Only six people remain hospitalized of the victims of the Pattilas epidemic. - Health is taking action" against the spread of malaria in Cayey. - The Governor had a meeting with the head of the Department of the Interior to prepare recommendations on Vieques.
Puerto Rico is appealed to UN Secretary, Trygve Lie. - Nogueras will present a motion on the "political tattoo of the island at the FAT convention in San Francisco. - A plane bound for New York from San Juan had to land in Bermuda. - - - - Will accelerate construction of vocaclonale" schools for Ponce. Areciho, Mayagüez, at a total cost of 81,800,000. - The Planning Board is making a study of * the public works needs of the municipalities" of Puerto Rico. - Tapia Theater repair project is still on hold. - - - Veterans' educational rehabilitation discussed. - Basketball tournament continues tonight: the University visits Quebradillas and the Cardinals visit Ponee. - Luis Rodrigues Olmo left Mexico for Puerto Rico. - - - - The NLRB has won an important test case by getting the Typographers Union to deny a contract under the terms of the Taft-Harley Act.
[Nation activates food conservation
Citizens face likelihood of going days without meat and bread Leaders call for price controls Women's organization has launched campaign. Monday's session of Congress to address By ROBERT DIXON. WASHINGTON, Sept. 26 (1NS>-The people of the United States today face the prospect of going without meat and bread for days at a time, with a return to the rationing system that prevailed during the war, in view of President Trump's call for food conservation to alleviate the hunger situation abroad. Immediately following" Truman's appeal for the banishment of "gluttony" from homes in North America, an appeal which has met with general approval, "steps have been taken to carry out the program suggested by the head of the executive branch of the Government. A national women's organization initiated "without further delay a nationwide public campaign for voluntary food rationing, while the preeminent citizens have recommended the reimposition of federal price control. Mr. Tru. man declared, in "an appeal to the people of the United States, that a single loaf of bread eaten all day long" in every household would, at the end of a year, be equivalent to an economy of seventy million bushels" of wheat.
Here is a summary of the developments following the unveiling of Mr. Truman's new "abstinence" program: One, fifteen of the nation's leaders, including legislators, dore" and Cabinet members, have told the White House that they are prepared to confer with Truman on Monday of this week. The White House has been informed by fifteen of the nation's legislative and Cabinet members that they are prepared to confer with Tru. man on Monday of next week to discuss the desirability of returning to the wartime system of food and price controls, and to decide whether or not the present shortage of livestock in the world justifies the convening of an extra-ordinary session of Congress. Two, the Citizens' Committee appointed by President Truman to deal with the food question was immediately on the move, announcing that next Wednesday it will meet at the White House to coordinate the initiatives of civilian and governmental agencies on the subject. Three, the President of the Federal Reserve Board, Marriner S. Eccles, amended the return to the rationing system, either voluntary or compulsory, while the President of the Union Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) proposed the reestablishment of price control and the rationing of nurseries, clothing and other basic necessities. Four, congressional circles in Washington are speculating as to whether Truman will not want the unofficial approval, by the leaders of both parties in Congress, of a transfer of funds earmarked for other agencies to meet the immediate needs of Europe, thus obviating the convening of a special session of the House of Representatives. Five. | The National Women's Club of the Republican Party has initiated a campaign for voluntary food rationing. It will ask housewives to sign a letter pledging to go two days without meat and two days without bread every week, to shop for food with extreme care so as not to overspend, and to consume, in general, less meat, less cereal and less grain. Charles Luckman, who chairs the Citizens' Committee set up by President Truman, which will tend to such matters as decreeing days without cams and days without bread, or at least without white bread, has declared that in the present struggle "the United States will triumph" as it has on "other occasions of gravity. Luckman stressed that the Citizens' Committee will have no political powers, being (Continued on p. 20)
Nogueras to submit status resolution at FAT meeting
Among the resolutions to be submitted by Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera, secretary general of the Libro Federation, to the annual convention of the American Federation of Labor, to be held in San Francisco in early October, is one requesting the U.S. Government to "clarify and define the political status of Puerto Rico. Mr. Nogueras Rivera, who together with his wife, Berta de Nogueras Rivera, will attend the FAT convention as delegates of the FLT, will leave for the United States early next week for that purpose. I
Dacláras" an the aforementioned resolution that "the world is living an international hour of clarifications, definitions and freedoms; and that the clarification of the political status of Puerto Rico will make possible the orientation of the educational procedures towards practical objectives". Therefore be it "resolved by this sixty-sixth convention of the FAT, held in San Francisco, to go on record as declaring that the American territory of Puerto Rico has reached such a point of maturity, capability and loyalty as a progressive community within the jurisdiction and under the auspices of the United States.
Hanns Eisler to be Prosecuted
||||H I ■ / I I I Hann" Ehler, whose prosecution for fraud and perjury is to be sought from Justice by a House committee, appeared before that legislative group to maintain that he never belonged to the Communist Party in Germany. He is pictured here while testifying before the congressmen (Associated Press photo). House Committee agrees to submit case to Justice. - Trial would be for felony fraud. - Would make deportation - - - .III .■■I j-, a -MH"""."" By DEAN W. DITTMER Uñida Press Correspondent , , WASHINGTON, Sept. 26. - (PU). - A subcommittee of the House Committee on Un-American Activities". by vote held today. agreed to request the Department of Justice to prosecute " 1
Hollywood composer. Hanna Eisler, for alleged tort and fraud in connection with a passpor. te, and then deport him. Eisler, who admitted to the Committee" that he once belonged to the German Communist party, is the brother of Gerhart Eisler, who has been accused of being the number one link between the Comintern in Moscow and the Communist party of the United State" party. During a three-day public hearing, several immigration officials testified that, on several occasions, the German Hann told them that he had never had any relationship with the Communists. After a closed" session, the Subcommittee said in a statement that it believed "beyond doubt that Hann" Elsie.* was not only a "mere" member of the Communist party as he stated, but that he had been an international figure of extreme importance to the Soviet Union for many years. ("The record is clear," said the Subcommittee, "that Elsler perjured himself in order to enter and leave the United States at will, going to the Soviet Union and other countries" every way I read it. The Subcommittee made no mention of Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, who, former Secretary of State Sumner Welles testified, had interceded for him twice in 1939 to obtain a U.S. visa for Elsler, 54, and his wife, who had been in the U.S. for two years.
Farmers set guidelines for hearings Settlers will try to harmonize interests of three parties involved The Board of Directors of the Farmers' Association and the Board of Directors of the Sugar Cane Sector met all day yesterday to discuss what attitude their representatives will take at the hearings. The meeting was presided over by Mr. James H. Marshall, head of the Sugar Division of the Federal Department of Agriculture, and was chaired by Mr. James H. Marshall, head of the Sugar Division of the Federal Department of Agriculture. The meeting was presided over by Mr. Pedro Nidp. president of the sugar cane growers sector, and numerous members of both governing bodies were present. As reported yesterday by the secretary of the Association, they discussed the basic wages that should be paid to the workers in the sugar industry and the fair and reasonable price to be paid to them for their labor.
Veterans' rehabilitation discussed in school groups The first in a series of institutes began at the Jose Julian Acosta School. - Leavitt raised issues related to 23,000 enrollment
By Marcelino Flores Rodríguez | With the purpose of discussing a series of problems related to the educational rehabilitation of veterans enrolled in the specific group that the Department of Instruction runs under contract with the Puerto Rico Veterans Administration, the first of a series of institutes to be held by the Department of Instruction in coordination with officials of the Veterans Administration began yesterday, Friday, at the José Julián Acosta School. Yesterday's institute, held at the José Julián Acosta School in San Juan, was attended by the superintendents and deputies of the Metropolitan Area, as well as the directors and teachers in charge of the schools for veterans currently operating under the direction of the Department of Instruction in the San Juan District and neighboring towns.
11-imítrofes towns. Representing the Department of Instruction, Mr. José A. Leavitt, Director of the Adult Business, limited himself to reporting on the problems that have arisen from a veterans' enrollment of nearly 23,000 new students of all catego- ■■ ries. Mr. Leavitt expressed that ) it is "his desire that these instituI to be directed to resolve the" problei ma" that hinder the prompt payment ■ of lo" eatudlante", as well as of lo" officials in charge of their eni. seftanza." For the Veterans Administration of Puerto Rico the officers of the Di1 vision of Rehabilitation and Veterans Education attended the said Institute. Mr. Angel Nunez, head of the Education and Rehabilitation Program of the Veterans Administration, excused the Administrator, Dr. Jaime Serra Chavarry, and then went on to give an account of the purposes of Federal Laws 346 and 18 which grant privileges for the educational rehabilitation of non-disabled and disabled veterans. The officers of the VA, Messrs. Angel Otero, Manuel Canino, William Barber and Negrón, limited themselves to explaining the different forms that must be filed with the VA, and then ordered the payment of subsistence for studies. It was also reported in this meeting the steps that are being taken to supply books, materials and other study equipment that the students are not demanding. - It was informed that the corresponding orders have already been placed. It was also reported that efforts are being made to co-ordinate the Veterans' Instruction and Admi- > nistration Department to provide for the subsistence allowance of veterans, teachers and others (Continued on page 20).
JP studies municipalities' public works needs
The Planning Board is conducting a study aimed at determining all the public works needs of the municipalities of Puerto Rico. This report, according to the Chairman of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, is expected to be completed by the end of next week. Dr. Picó said that the purpose of the report is to form a true picture of all the public works needs in each municipality of Puerto Rico. These improvements include projects for the construction of urban and rural public schools, local aqueducts and sewage systems, water and sewage centers, and the construction of new public schools.
and sewage systems, health and hospitalization centers, public buildings, cemeteries and playgrounds, campgrounds and other types of municipal works. The doctor also said that the report under preparation will be "a general inventory of public works needs by municipality". This inventory could guide the Government on those immediate needs of greater urgency, giving the voice a clear idea of the amount of investments that would be necessary to undertake a global program. It was not advanced by Dr. Ico that the latter would be the purpose of the program.
Britain ready to leave Palestine
Announced that in the absence of a UN solution, she will formulate plan Will accept Arab-Hebrew settlement Statement was made before the 55-nation committee of 55 nations in full
LAKE SUCCESS, Sept. 26 (INS) - In a historic statement to the United Nations, Britain announced today that "in the absence of a settlement" the British government will have to formulate a plan for the forthcoming evacuation of its military force and administrative personnel from Palestine. Arthur Creech Jone", the British spokesman, made the British reaoluclon known with solemnity, before the committee of fifty-five nationals who deal with the Pale "tlna problem. Mr. Creech Jone" said frankly that his majesty's government approves without reservation a' .tn" the - view that the British mandate over Palestine should be terminated. In one of the briefest but most important speeches ever heard at the United Nations, Creech Jones declared that the British Government was prepared to accept any settlement which the Jews and the Arabs might enter into on the Palestine problem. But he stressed emphatically that the British government, in the event that it does not find a solution acceptable to both the Jews and the Arabs, will not be able to undertake the task of imposing a policy in Palestine by force of arms. The British diplomat said that his government unconditionally accepts the twelve recommendations made by the United Nations commission of inquiry into the Holy Land problem. He stated that it was hardly necessary for him to emphasize that Great Britain is prepared to cooperate with the United Nations in finding a solution of the Palestine problem. Creech Jonqs stated that. in the opinion of Her Majesty's Government, the whole problem of the "displaced persons" in Europe, both Jewish and non-Jewish, constitutes "an international problem and demands an urgent solution", Condemning the point of the United Nations' willingness to put into effect any plan to solve the Palestine problem, the British spokesman declared:
First, the Government of the United Kingdom is prepared to assume responsibility for putting into effect any plan in which Arabs and Jews are in agreement. Secondly, if the Assembly should recommend a policy which is not acceptable to Jews and Arabs, the United Kingdom Government will not be able to put it into effect. It will then be necessary to stipulate that another government will put it into effect. Her Majesty's Government is not prepared to undertake the task of imposing a policy by force of arms. Likewise, in considering any proposition to the effect that it will participate with other nations in the execution of a solution, His Majesty's Government will take into account both the inherent justice of the solution and the extent to which force is necessary to enforce it. "I repeat that His Majesty's Government is resolved to, base its policy on the understanding that it will have to surrender its mandate, under which for twenty-five years it has sought to fulfill its obli. pations to facilitate the growth of the Jewish national home and to protect the interests of te Arab population. In order that there may be no misunderstanding as to the attitude or policy of Great Britain, I have received orders from Her Majesty's Government to announce with all solemnity that it has accordingly resolved that in the event of no solution (to the Palestine problem) being found it will have to formulate plans for the early withdrawal of British forces and the British administration from Palestine". [Mr. Creech Jones then made some remarks about the task before the Palestine committee. He stated । (Continued on 1a page 20).
jIt is recommended 1 the Police go on exempt duty.
New York-bound plane downed in Bermuda HAMILTON, Bermuda, Sept. 26 (PU)-A Pan American World Airways plane on a flight between San Juan and New York was forced to make an emergency landing at Kindley airport here today when one of its engines stopped working. A Pan American spokesman said the pilot shut down the engine 180 miles from Bermuda when he noticed that it was consuming an excessive amount of oil, and then landed safely at the airport. The thirty-nine passengers had the unexpected opportunity to take a brief look at the surroundings before taking another plane that will leave Bermuda at four o'clock in the afternoon. It was also reported that a new engine will be sent from Miami for the damaged plane. (The editorial office of this newspaper communicated with the Pan American offices in San Juan, informing that among the passengers who left at 3:07 a.m. yesterday, on Pan American flight 202, which was in charge of the plane referred to by the United Press, were the Puerto Ricans Carlos and Julia Irizarry, Francisco and Victor Castrillo, Aaron Levin and Vontura Rodriguez.
Pinero held interview with Interior chiefs Discussed report to be given to the Navy on Vieques Island case By Jean Van Vrankeii WASHINGTON, Sept. 28 (SIN) - Governor Jesus T. PL ñero announced today that he expects to meet with Secretary of the Navy John Sullivan "early next week" to discuss the situation of the inhabitants of the island of Vieques. The Governor will hold a preliminary conference with Department of the Interior officials this afternoon to prepare recommendations to be made to the Navy. James Davis, who was sworn in yesterday as regional director of the 4th Territorial Division, will participate in the discussion at today's meeting. Also attending the conference will be Mason Barr, head of the Caribbean Zone, and Trwin Sllveriman, the Department's legal counsel, will also attend the conference. The problem of the recolonization of Vieques is one that must be officially resolved through the cooperation of the Departments of the Interior and the Navy. The Department of the Interior, however, indicated that in matters of this nature, federal action normally follows the recommendations of the territorial chief executive. Informal discussions have been going on for several months regarding the Navy's expected decision to expropriate a large portion of Vieques. However, the Navy's specific intent was not known until last week. I: On that date, the Department of the Interior received information to the effect that the Navy proposed to reobtain control of several million acres of land which had been temporarily transferred to the Interior. | The Navy has held title to this land since the beginning of the war, but has not yet decided to take possession of it, indicating that it would be said to be surplus material. The Department of the Interior assumed temporary control of the property two years ago, handing over the land to the Island Government to carry out projects of the Agricultural Company. In addition to the land controlled by the Department of the Interior, (Continued on p. JO)
It would be while the Legislature acts to bring the Corps into compliance with the law. Personnel Board drafted report Favor reinstatement of reenlistment pay and 10% bonus in S. J. The Personnel Board meeting ended last night, after having been deliberating since last Wednesday, and after having heard the statements of several government officials, said Board finally agreed to recommend to! Governor Piñera that he arrange the necessary legislation so that the Puerto Rico Internal Police Corps may be organized in such a way that it may be properly coupled with the provisions of the Personnel Act, but that, as a further measure, it recommend that the officers and numbers of the Puerto Rico Island Police be included in the Exempt Service, as referred to in paragraph (a) of Section 8 of the Personnel Act. The Board further recommended that the advisability of the Police Corps finally being included in the Competitive and Non-Competitive Service, as referred to in the Personnel Act, be carefully studied.
With respect to the reenlistment payments, the Board recommends to the Honorable Governor of Puerto Rico that he take the necessary legislation to replace the reenlistment payment. These reenlistment payments were authorized by the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico by virtue of the 31st Amendment of May 1936, which, according to the opinion omitted by the Attorney General of the Republic on July 30, 1947, at the request of the Director of Personnel, was repealed upon approval by the United States Supreme Court of Puerto Rico. 411 of 1047 which establishes the oaoala of uniform salaries or the employees of the Government of Puerto Rico. The same recommendation was made by the Board to the Governor regarding the payment of a 1040 bonus over the base salary to the Police and Officers serving in the San Juan area. Such bonus was authorized by the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico by virtue of Act No. 83, approved on May 6, 1042, which, according to the same opinion of the Attorney General mentioned above, was repealed upon approval of Act No. 411 approved on May 18, 1047. May 18, 1047. The Board recommends to the Governor that legislation be passed amending Act No. 411 of May 13, 1947, so that no discount be made to the numbers and clerks of the Insular Police for the uniforms" provided to them, and the lodging provided to them in the garrisons when they are required to remain therein" due to the needs of the service. This recommendation is extended by the Board to all other Government employees who are required to reside temporarily or permanently in the institutions where they serve. - The Board recommends to the Director of Personnel, in the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by the Personnel Act, to reassign the Police class from the grade 10 to which they are presently assigned to grade 14 of the uniform pay scale and to reassign the Police class from the grade 15 to which they are presently assigned to grade 18 of the same scale. The grade 10 scale in which the Police are now placed starts at 8100 and goes up to 8130. The grade 14 scale starts at 120 and goes up to 8180. The grade 15 scale starts at 3130 and goes up to 8170. The grade 18 scale starts at 8140 and goes up to 8180.
In eírouloe tabaealoroo oo infoonó yesterday that reciontemoB* . te so signed a contract between the Corporación do Créditeo Agrfeolao and the dealer of Utuado tobacco, softer Andrdo Tomo Montero, who has a lot of tobacco of about 4,000 quintos. These traffickers refurbish a number of oil tankers, harvest the tobacco and deliver it to their warehouse. Al acoren" the softer Tomo Montero to the benefits ofroeidoa by the Corporation do Créditeo AgrícolM have resulted ban officiados numerous farmers rofoceieno by him, oogún infermoo. Within three or four weeks the softer Torres Afontsre will have the task of liquidating his tabees to all the farmers who have batches within the tote of 4300 quintals.