THE DAILY WORLD DB the MORNING
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Fair, except partly cloudy over the mountains in the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 7"; low, M; rain, none.
38 Pages
SATURDAY, MARCH 8, 1947
Entered as "eeond elan matter. Post Office, Ban Juan. P. R.
NUMBER 10879
YEAR XXVIII
I check the brakes. I cooperate with the Inspection of automobiles.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
Train I Strike Unaltered
Farmers' President calls it deadly blow to sugar industry Urges end to conflict Goldsmith to report in Washington, where he left yesterday The railroad strike continued yesterday "undisturbed, while the efforts being made to find a solution to the conflict were completely abandoned. Ten days after the strike began, all indications yesterday were that a possible settlement of the divergence between the American Railroad Co. and the United Railway Labor Union was far from being reached, following the rift which arose between the two parties at their last meeting to negotiate a proposal submitted by the company. There were no reports yesterday of any moves by the Government to end the stoppage. Yesterday afternoon the Federal Conciliator, Charles A. Goldsmith, left for Wishing on official business. It was reported that Mr. Goldsmith is to make a report to the Federal Bureau of Conciliation on the railroad strike and his efforts to conciliate the parties. Exhorting the parties to Declare that the railroad strike constituted a movement to end which the general interest must prevail over the particular interest, the president of the Farmers Association, Mr. José Ramón Quiñones, made an appeal "to all those participating in this dispute, to all the economic factors of the pala, to the Government, to Puerto Rico as a whole, to put an end right now to this ruinous and disastrous strike. To this effect, Mr. Quinones made the following statements! "We do not wish nor can we now judge the merits of the controversy which exists between the Railroad Company and its employees, on account of differences as to the amount of wages and salaries which may or should be paid by said Company to its employees. "But Regardless of the merits of said controversy. Regardless of who is right in this case, what is certain is that the stoppage of railroad activities in the middle of the harvest is a death blow, a disaster not only for the parties involved in the conflict, but also for the cane farmers, for the mills, for the cane workers, both in the fields and in the factories, for commerce and for the entire economy of the country. For many years now the sugar industry of Puerto Rico has been living a life of anguish and uncertainty. Low prices "Hos production costs, work stoppages, strikes, low productivity of the boom, lack of fertilizers, lack of equipment and materials; a whole host of adverse factors that have diminished and increased the cost of the harvests "We have lost the opportunity offered by the war period to have stabilized the sugar harvests" of Puerto Rico at a level equal to the productive capacity of the country's sugar industry "This year, when we finally see a glimpse of the future of the sugar industry in the country, we will be able to see the possibility of a new sugar harvest in Puerto Rico. This year, when at last a slightly better harvest is in sight, in terms of price and volume, when the time is more propitious for harvesting the 1947 harvest and preparing in time for the 1948 harvest, comes now as a final blow, which will have repercussions now and for many years to come, a stoppage in a vital part of the industry, in the transportation branch, such as the railroads. "It is a fact that in Puerto Rico all adverse factors have accumulated to strangle the sugar industry, to kill the goose that lays the golden eggs, to annihilate the industry that sustains almost half of our population. We do not wish to lay the blame for this country on anyone in particular," says Nigaglioni.
Nigaglioni affirms that no employee will suffer reduction in compensation Explains fund recommended by Pinero Item of "5,000,000 would serve to cover enacted increases Even though he did not disclose the" salary scales recommended by the new uniform compensation plan, Civil Service Commission Chairman Guillermo Nigaglioni reaffirmed yesterday that no employee will suffer a reduction in compensation. He reaffirmed yesterday that no employee will suffer a reduction in the salary established by the current scales, despite the fact that the new plan recommends a lower remuneration. "The specific recommendation of the governor, Mr. Jesus T. Plftero, in his message to the governor. Plftero. in his budget message and in ¡o that pertains to the Civil Service, refers to an item of $5,000,000 for the Implementation of the new classification and uniform compensation plan," Nlgaglionl stated. "Upon adoption of the new legislation 'le uniform compensation for Insular employees, no employee will have less salary than that enjoyed in accordance with the scales of the current law (Law 322 of 194h>, nun ruando the classification of the position in the new plan entails a lower remuneration. However, all those employees occupying positions that have received a classification that will entail a lower remuneration in the new salary plan will receive corresponding increases. The $5,000,000 appropriation patched by the Governor will serve as a general fund to supplement other salary increases." Nlgaglionl expressed he is "extremely satisfied and pleased" with the recommendation made by the Governor. and that he awaits corresponding legislative action. "It satisfies "aber. furthermore," he concluded, "that the labor rendered by many employees" will be fairly remunerated and that they will result in higher salaries than they have been enjoying up to the present. I must insist that no employee shall receive less salary than he/she has been receiving normally, in accordance with the scales of the present pay plan, even when his/her position entails a ciaflflflcaclon with a lower rate of pay".
Consider plan on boricuas an Nuava York NEW YORK, 7. - (PU). - The Christian Science Monitor, Boston, Massachusetts, reports today that a plan is being considered to channel Puerto Ricans migrating to New York "to another area" of the United States where the climate would be more suitable for them and where there would be adequate employment opportunities". The author of the article, Robert M. Hallet, the newspaper's New York correspondent, does not reveal the source of the information. He says that New York social workers are considering "the advisability of attacking the problem on a national scale". He adds that they are considering holding a conference of representatives from all over the country. Truck strike aggravates crisis at the docks The leadership of the strike yesterday considered the attitude expressed by Muñoz By Lula Mánche" Cappa Editor of EL MUNDO The truck strike that began" the day before yesterday in Arecibo by truck owners in protest against the price of license plates and gasoline continues to spread to other towns in the area, continues to spread to other towns of the Island, becoming more serious the threat that several sugar mills in the north of the Island will be forced to suspend milling, threatening to seriously complicate the problem of the shortage of space on the docks of San Juan. The Arecibo Strike Committee, chaired by Mr. Juan Santiago Guzman, which met yesterday afternoon to consider whether to continue the protest movement or suspend it, agreed to "persist in it, and to communicate by radio, press and telephone with all the truck pioneers of the island so that they would join the strike. Mr. Guzmán Sentíai go reported that "the committee made up of 25 : Arecibo truck owners, after considering the declararsHonM of Mr. Muñoz Marin with reaper- , lo to our protest, agreed unanimously to continue the stoppage Indefinitely. until our" claims are heard, and we proceed to 1 reduce the additional tax on gasoline and the excessive price of the" license plates" ' The leader of the strike announced that the "nueblo" of Hatillo, Quebradillas । and Utuado were on strike, "and mIU not a single truck is moving, but because they are stored in their garages the protest does not "" make itself felt."" On the other hand, although not with great force, began to be felt yesterday in the docks of dan Juan, the effect of the oaro of trucks It was reported by funcionarlos of the shipping companies that hsbla nolado yesterday the absence of trucks from the towns" acetados by the strike. The" leaders of the shipping companies expressed the fear that "if the truck stoppage is extended, our problem will become more complicated, since the excessive cargo that is currently on the docks cannot be stored in public warehouses because they have no warehouses, and the practice has been adopted of depositing it as soon as possible in trucks on the island that will take it to its destination. Meanwhile, yesterday the mills Los Daños, Rio Llano, Pellejas and Pellejas continued to be forced to stop milling. Rio Llano, Pellejas and San Vicente. The Acting President of the Public Service Commission, Mr. Juan F. Peftagarlcano. He informed yesterday that "a commission of bus owners that came to visit me (Continued on page 7).
News Digest
The White House announced that "President Truman has postponed indefinitely her trip to the Oribe region. Railroad strike stalled again. Quiñones urges an end to the conflict, calling it a 'dead blow to the sugar industry. Savage riots have caused hundreds of deaths in two Indian cities. The British are evacuating Lahore. Pay scale plan does not reduce present wages, says Nigagllonl. **- spent PEG in Ins last six months of 1B4M. Explains to Senate how they were Invested. --- Measures to amend the auto law passed on first reading "n the Senate. Rrug yesterday cited twelve reasons why the United States should admit Hawaii as a state. --- On Monday the House of Representatives begins consideration of the budget for the next fiscal year. Villa rong a found Inde-eahles conditions "u two oso- centers.
The suburbs of Aguadilla. The slum penetrates to the courtyard: and the health problem is to be. "*- Instruction has organized new vocaclonal courses in Aguadilla and Santuree. Veteran students are admitted. Lewis offered to negotiate new contract for loa miner." - - - Consideration is being given to diverting Puerto Ricans migrating to New York to other areas. * More than $1.5 million is being contributed this year by the federal government for public health programs in Puerto Rico, and "* Vote postponed in the David IJIIenthal case. - * - Short dictates interdicts against unions of the Abarca and Portilla foundries. ♦ - ♦ Taft does not wish to be considered for the presidency. - ♦ - Judge Polo yesterday issued interdicts" directed at striking labor unions at the Abarca and Portilla foundries. - - - Business activity is expected to decrease.
The non TA salary plan appears to violate the current lease commitments.
Notwithstanding clause to the contrary filed expropriation lawsuit Deposited check for payment Legal counsel says Government cannot waive a right By Cario" Recha ni Asralt Editor of EL MUNDO Violating, according to all appearances, the Puerto Rico Land Authority, on September 17 of last year, initiated a compulsory expropriation action on the Ortega farm, located in Barrio Pueblo, Toa Baja, Puerto Rico. The hearing of the case has been scheduled for the 24th of this month before the Bayamon District Court. On July 9, 1945, before Notary Public A uraliano Rivas Rosario, attorney of the Land Authority, appeared, on the one hand, Mrs. Jullta Saldarte Skerret, Mrs. Mercedes Saldañn Quintero, Mr. Pablo Lloverá" Soler, Mrs. Isabel Saldaña y Ortiz de Záraté, Mrs. Rosa Maria Garda Saldaña and Mrs. Vella Muñlz de Garda, and, on the other hand, Mr. José Acosta Velarde on behalf of and as Executive Director of the Land Authority: as de Puerto Rico, The grantors signed on that date a public deed by virtue of which a lease was passed on to the Land Authority, for the 1 term of six years with extension for another" six additional years, for a monthly fee of $400, the farm .Ortega with a capacity of 205 cuerdas and 75 centésimas. Doña Mercedes Saldaña de Quintero, wife of Don Pablo Lloverás Soler, is the owner of eleven sixteen plus ducklings of the farm in question, the other five sixteen ava" parts corresponding to Isabel Saldarte. Víctor García and Rosa María Garda Saldaña, the latter being the wife of the Acting Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Luis Negrón Fernández. | Clause number 14 of the deed executed before Notary I Rivas Rosario reads as follows. ! "The a: i endatarla, Puerto Rico Land Authority, undertakes not to expropriate the property that is the object of this lease, nor to initiate against it any proceedings whatsoever against - (Continued on page 22)
The Board of Directors" of the Employees" Association of the Insular Government, yesterday authorized the following statements: "The newspaper "El Imparclal". in its" editions of March 6 and 7, published two pieces of information related to the actions of this Board of Directors, containing a series of statements that we must rectify in some extremes" while at the same time" not" obliging us to make clear" and precise" other facts" before public opinion, to avoid twisted* interpretations. The" readers may well receive the impression that in said" publication" the following facts" are stated: That this Board of Directors" now decided to publish a Report of yours answering at the same time the Report rendered by the Public Utilities Service of Chicago and the press campaign waged by the Auditor of Puerto Rico contracted Association nine months" ago, that is, in June of the year pa "ado. That "Governor Perez himself communicated with the Secretary of the Aaoclaclón, Ramón Rolg, so that he would prevent the publication of said report at all costs," that the Secretary, Ramón Rolg, had to follow the briber's order.
Budget Study Begins Monday "-* IMI1IIIMM - 1 House Treasury Committee To Meet With Director De Jesus Discouragement Among Legislators j Piéhsase On $4,000,000 Increase For Roads By José M. García Calderón RL MUNDO Staff Writer Next Monday, at 2:00 p.m., the House Treasury Committee, under the chairmanship of Mr. Benjamin Ortiz, will meet to discuss with Budget Director Roberto de Jesús the model budget submitted to the Legislature by Governor Jesús T. Plftero last Wednesday. Plftero, last Wednesday. On the policy to be followed by the House in connection with the general budget of expenditures for the fiscal year 1947-48, Representative Benjamin Ortiz said yesterday that he was in favor of not exceeding the estimated Revenues and of adjusting the expenditures to the reality of the available economic means. On the other hand, other legislators have expressed discouragement upon learning of the Governor's model budget, considering that the amount of $1,500,000 appropriated for roads, together with another estimated at almost the same amount for the gasoline fund, would not be sufficient for the execution of numerous projects for the construction of roads and highways, which would involve an outlay of about two million dollars. According to "e reported yesterday by one of Jo" member" of the House Finance Committee, the line item i for road" and road" munlcl-i palé" is likely to be" increased by one" forty million dollars. Some of the legislation presented for the execution of public works of a diverse nature seeks to ensure the execution of projects which, despite having become law in previous legislatures, have not been carried out, either because they did not have priority within the program of the Planning Board, or because they have expired in accordance with existing legislation to that effect. Among other legislation of last year which has not been implemented, in addition to that which provides for public works, is Lev number 198, approved on March 26, 1946, which establishes in the Department of Agriculture and Commerce of Puerto Rico the Puerto Rico Commission for the Rehabilitation of Industry and Commerce. Rehabilitated of the O- 1 fetal Industry of the Island, for the fund- ¡ namlent of which the amount of $800,000 was appropriated, which has not yet been made available to the Commission by the Bureau of the Budget. In connection with this Act, Representative Mario Fnnnle yesterday expressed to this editor his discouragement at the failure to implement the statute expressly approved to help solve the problems of the coffee growers. The prevailing opinion among the majority of the members of the House of Representatives, as they have insistently expressed in recent years, is that most of the legislation so far presented, destined to solve the problems of roads and schools in the different municipalities and districts of the island, will have to be discarded to adjust the legislative action on said problems.
Employees Association Denies Intervention by Manuel Perez
The Board of Directors recalls that the report adopted nine months ago, in connection with the Auditor's criticisms, published by EL MUNDO
Manuel A. Perez, provoked a meeting of the Board held last Tuesday. That it was agreed to leave the matter on the table without taking agreement until such time as we interviewed the Governor Manuel A. Perez, "to know what he wanted to be done with the document. That this exclusive information, regarding the content of our Report has been published by the newspaper "El Imparclal" without any other newspaper having previously published anything about the same This" "with the afflrmacione", categorical" one", by Inference another", that result from the reading of the" two" publications, A brief review of the" previous" facts" ■ the" my "most" will be enough to establish, clearly, the truth before the public opinion. Pursuant to a law passed in the year 1945, a Committee chaired by the Auditor of Puerto Rico, commissioned the Public Utilities Service of Chicago to study the various pension schemes of the Government of Puerto Rico. This audit yielded a report in June of last year. The Auditor of Puerto Rico issued an "Inte'"'" tion in ET- MUN(Continued on page 10) I
The transfer of the airport to the Insular Govt.
■ ■ ■ ■ 1 . j CU ■fl b Assistant Secretary of the Navy, John I. Sullivan (seated, right) participates with Gov. Plftero (seated, left) in a ceremony in Wáshlngton Wednesday to mark the transfer of the Navy air base on Isla Grande to the Gohler no Puerto Rico. Standing. Left to right are: A. Fernóa'Isern, Resident Commissioner in Wáahlngton: José Blolse, general manager of the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority, and Erwln Ra Iluden vice president of Pan Anierlcan Airways.
Truman Postpones Trip To Island; Will Ask Congress To Approve Loan To Greece
Krug Argues for Statehood in Hawaii
Points out twelve reasons why it should be given such status No place -diet*- perpetual htela i After speaking to Congressional Committee comments on Island case By Charle" R. McCabe WASHINGTON. 7 (PU)-Secretary of the Interior, J. A. Krug, told Congress today that "there is ¡ i no place in our form of goblcr-l . not to keep a territory' incorporated in a state of perpetual tu- , fabric." I In testimony before: the House Committee on Public Lands, which is considering a legislative measure to admit Hawaii into the Union as the quadrennial state. Krug went so far as to quote the historic phrase "taxation without representation is tyranny," Krug said Hawaii has overstepped the line of guardianship. He added that the American Ideal of clean place does not include "the standard of the Roman Empire and its refusal to recognize the right to enjoy self-government for prostrate pro-, vinels."
* ■ Jml mH <¡fí bL ' ' JHI JULIUS A. KRUG i Secretary of the Interior Krug added that the historical norm of evolution from territorial status to full statehood has not been broken since the beginning of this administration, "This plan is part of the very genesis of our government,'' he said, "and it is in harmony with the fundamental principles, "I am not concerned with the "tandard that (Continued on page 22)
Hundreds die in riots in two Indian cities British are evacuating Lahore in the Punjab, while well-equipped troops are on their way to cities of Multan, Amritsar By JAMES MICHAELS United Press Correspondent NEW DELHI, India. 7. (PU)- Resident" hrltanlcos are evacuating to Lahore in the Punjab and 24 hours' stay has been declared in Multan and Amritsar in order to put an end to salt riots which have blindsided between 500,000 and 500,000 people.
The picture of the fighting, which blinded between 500 and 800 virias yesterday, according to report" arrived" here today. The picture of fighting, arson and mass murder painted by these reports is so serious that the British authorities have ordered the dispatch of fully equipped reinforcements from New Delhi to Multan. 350 miles "1 northwest rie this city. The troops left today. InforIme" indicate that Multan is in flames and that looting and pillaging gangs cannot "er controlled It is also reported that Amritsar,! 60 miles east of Lahore, is ar-1 dlendo. Four markets in the city of 389,000 inhabitants were mcendinded yesterday and flames blazed all night. Lo* slhks and Muslims fought m !. "angiientamenfe during the night. but today reports indicated that the city was under the control of British battalions scouring the streets to enforce the curfew. Extraordinary precautions have been taken in New Punjab province to prevent the riots from spreading to this capital of the British Government in India. Troops have orders to shoot to kill against anyone violating this order, an official statement rie Bit Ev "n Jenkin , governor of Punjab, says i that the situation in Lahore is more 1 calm today. Private sources say, however, that fires, looting, plunder and crime continue to spread and panic reigns in the city. Lahore is in its fourth riot, with a minority of slnhka and Hindus fighting the Muslims. The private sale of gasoline was banned today to prevent the activities of arsonists, who set fire to them with rags soaked in the liquid. An eyewitness, a young pe-, 1 rlodlsta sinhk who managed to flee rie La¡hore aver in an airplane, reports that the" British famlmlias are being moved to the gn-Iblerno's house. With all speed PO"' h le Uas are being taken to safer. This same source says that| British troops with ■ war armaments have succeeded in overpowering _the 1 slhks. Hindus and Moslems, after a five-hour battle 1 against a contingent of Sinhks who tried to fight their way into the city to join the battle with the Moslem ' lo" Muslim". The informant adds that the "best" family" of Lahore has turned their homes into arsenals, erecting barricades of 1 (Continued on page 22) Aponte and Úmpierre left Ponce. -Prosecutors José C. Aponte, of the San Juan District Court, and Angel R. Umpierre. of the Department of Justice, who have been in this city since last Wednesday, left yesterday morning. | On Thursday afternoon, Mr. Martiniano L. Garda, the aodof I (Continued on page f)
Measures to Amend Lev Automobiles Passed on First Reading in Senate.- Bills Assignments In the first session held on Thursday, numerous bills were approved on first reading, among them, S. P. 416, by Senator Ortiz Stella (by petition), to amend Law No. 279. known as the Motor Vehicles Act, which regulates the issuance of licenses, the collection of fees and the transit of such vehicles; and P.S. 421, by Reps. Barreto Pérez and Ortiz Stella, to amend Article 16 of Act 279. These two bills, as reported, have provisions that cover some of the grievances currently being grieved by striking truck drivers. The other bills introduced in the Senate at Thursday's session are as follows: P. riel S. 401. rio) Mr. Hat challenge Perez <pnr petition), appropriating $"tX) for payment rie services rendered it" I (Continued on page 7.) Lewis offered that he would negotiate new agreement Before Senate committee condemned legislation restricting workers _ By RAYMOND LAHR United Press rie Correspondent WASHINGTON 7, (PU)-lmper-turbable at the thrashing given him by the Supreme Court, John L. Lowl" today exploded against the Government, declaring that it has "cachiporreado" to "a miners with entredicho" antlhuelgarlo"; but offered to negotiate a new contract with the Government or with the" riuefto" da mine" at any time, and "t declared against all" the changes contemplated by the legteladón pending before Congress, on questione" The corpulent President of the The burly President of the United Mine Workers Union spoke at length on this and other facets of the labor situation at a public hearing of the Senate Labor Committee, which subpoenaed him as a witness to testify on labor problems in general and those of the coal miners in particular. Lewis was in excellent spirits, despite the crushing blow to his personal prestige and his pocketbook that the Supreme Court's decision yesterday, upholding the coal miners' case, has dealt to his personal prestige and his pocketbook. (Continued on page 22)
Hellenic crisis discussed by Cabinet Judged America's first diplomatic problem Another meeting called for 10th President to ask for total appropriation of $250,000,000.00 By UNITED PRESS WASHINGTON, 7,-The projected trip of President Harry S. Truman to the Caribbean area-including a visit to San Juan, Puerto Rico-has been indefinitely postponed. This was officially announced by the White House. When asked what reasons had led to the postponement, White House Press Secretary Charles G. Ross replied, "Because of events." Ros" declined to elaborate further on his statements when asked about the nature of the" events. The White House announced the suspension of the cruise shortly after a Cabinet meeting was held during which the Greek crisis was discussed. Cabinet members merely said that the Greek issue was only one of those discussed by the Cabinet. They refused to disclose whether and in what form a decision had been taken at the meeting. Shortly before! formal announcement of the postponement of the trip, White Cata speaks reported that the start of the presidential cruise speaks "<do delayed. Signed to begin tomorrow Saturday at ten o'clock in the morning, has been postponed for an hour in the afternoon. The delay, as reported by ''oss, was ordered so that the President would have more time to attend to office matters. Later, the announcement of the indefinite postponement was made. | The United Press correspondent in Washington, Frank Eleazar, reported yesterday that, according to information gathered in the national capital, early next week President Truman will address a message to Congress requesting that Greece be loaned $250 million in order to avert a major diplomatic crisis in the Mediterranean. The decision became public knowledge shortly after the President indefinitely postponed his fifteen mile trip to the Caribbean, scheduled to begin tomorrow. Simultaneously Mr. Truman summoned to conference the Republican and Democratic leaders of Congress, the senior members of the Senate and House foreign relations committees and members of the appropriations committees. The conference will be held at ten o'clock tomorrow morning. The postponement of the Caribbean trip "due to developments" was announced after the President considered the Greek situation with his cabinet. Eongressional sources report that a tombstone action on the loan to Greece is necessary to prevent the collapse of that country's weakened democratic government. The President is reported to have prepared a draft of his message. He expected to meet with Congressional leaders tomorrow, Saturday, but many will not be in Wáshlngton. The Greek vnslsls, resulting riel withdrawal rie Britain's economic and military aid, was revealed to the" Democratic and repu| bllcan leaders at a secret conference held at the White House last week. Senator Alben W. Barkley, Democrat of Kentucky and the President's chief spokesman in the Senate, predicted days later that Congress would be asked for a loan for Greece. Senate President Arthur H. Vandenberg, who is at the same time" chairman of the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, and Speaker Joseph W. Martin, head the list of Guests" for Monday's meeting. Secretary of State George C. Marshall, en route to Moscow to take part in 1" Foreign Ministers' Conference. said before his departure that the Greek situation, with bu" threats of increasing Communist Party influence in the Mediterranean, was a matter of "capital importance." Marshall said the problems involved" were "so far-reaching and of such momentous importance" that a statement on the government's request could only emanate from the President; Congressional leaders" who have spoken with President Truman say he sees the situation as "the number one diplomatic problem, especially in the light of the recent Moscow conference. The decision to suspend the Caribbean trip was therefore no great surprise. Some members of the Cabinet said that the Greek issue was one of the most important.