THE
FORECAST, DHL WEATHER FOR THE ISLAND, HOT: Partly cloudy. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M; low, 73; rain, trasaa. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:30 p.m., 23.35 inches of mercury.
36 Pages a
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII
second class matter, Post Office, Ban Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 5, 1947
Dancer motorist, don't try that grace, someone else killed you with it.
NUMBER 10997, =
Ernest Bevin faces provocation
Implicitly tells Russians what they can't take it very far He spoke yesterday at a Fourth of July rally Announces desire to achieve settlement on reason and discussion By J H. HIGGINBOTHAM United Press Correspondent LONDON. July 4. (PU)-The British Foreign Secretary, Ernest Revin, tonight warned Russia, implicitly, that "you cannot carry provocation too far,'* and stated that "we are tired.of those who think they can Play with the par-loving peoples too long." Revin made his speech at an American Fourth of July luncheon, a few hours after the British and French envoys had delivered formal invitations to 22 European countries to attend the Marshall Plan conference in Paris on July 12. In addition to Minister Bevin's plain speaking, the British Foreign Office warned Russia by implication that any attempt to intimidate countries that might wish to attend the Paris conference would be considered a violation of the sovereignty of those countries. The invitations, emphasizing the urgency of the European economic situation, called for acceptance or rejection of the invitation by next Thursday, and provided that the co. mités should begin work by July 15 on a four-year plan for the rehabilitation of Europe. A report is to be made to the United States by September 1 on Europe's available resources and needs for the next four years. Italy officially accepted the invitation only a few hours after it was delivered to the Foreign Minister, Count Carlo Sforza. Bevin's speech was the first pronouncement he has made since his return from Paris, where England and France decided to go ahead with the Marshall Plan, despite Russia's boycott of it. "We are tired of, those who think they can play long with peace-loving peoples," said Bevin. They have to study their psychology. The time may come when we may say we have had enough. Therefore, I say to my friends: don't provoke that situation." Both the United States and Great Britain," said the Secretary, "will discuss a plan "to settle everything on reason and discussion." "We will continue to discuss until we have come to an agreement," Bevin added. The Foreign Minister praised U.S. Sec. of State. George C. Marshall, 1 , as a man "honest and straightforward," although "he. like myself, has not been trained in such subtleties of diplomacy," "In my dealings with the United States,* I find that there is an obsession there, that of building a world without the constant threat of war." continued Bevin. "The people are not going to be captained. led or commanded, and as long as the people maintain that great spirit. Is freedom will be a greater prize than material gain." Bevin went on to tell his co-diners at the American Independence Day luncheon, most of whom were Americans, "Nothing will ever separate us, no matter what you do." The Secretary then appealed to the United States, on behalf of Euro-; pa, to "come and help us,",, And urged the European peoples to "get their act together and show their plans." (Continued on page 10)
News Digest
England yesterday issued a warning to Russia not to intimidate the nations invited to the Paris conference on July 13. On the other hand, Eisenhower calls on the peoples to unite for the common good, warning that if they do not do so, war will ensue. - é - The Insular Government must obtain money to develop the veterans' housing program from a source other than the Financial Reconstruction Corporation. The law extending this Corporation expressly prohibited loans for programs such as this one. - Movie actress Judy Canova will pass through San Juan tomorrow, Sunday, with her husband, on her way to Rio de Janeiro. Marshall's aide predicts greater control of trade, based on a possible failure of the Geneva Conference. It is denounced by Reps. Marte and Felirt Pesquera. It is defended by Rep. Ortte The Chancellor explains a reorganization program to be implemented in divisions of the University. . * - * One hundred and twelve people died yesterday - the first of three
of three holidays - in the United States, in a violent manner. - In the "commemorative acts" of the 4th of July, the governor in-terlno, Dr. Juan A. Fon", "eI "aló the importance of medical work for the dinfrute da" new" libertado". Piflern left a recorded message hailing the reform bill". "s - Russian" have forbidden the Austrian Police to give report" "ohre a wave da kidnapping" in the zone of occupation "oviética in the country, - - - - Full text of the legislation on the" Government cars - - ♦ It divorces for the third time the actress Hedy Lamarra. - The next week will be sent to the island a shipment of nitrate of ammonta. - Civil Aeronautics has rendered a pessimistic report on the "airline" in fixed itinerary. * Governor Dewey, of New York, the GOP candidate for President, left last night on a tour of the state," Lorenso J. Noa begins new term as Superintendent of Insurance. A standard fire policy has been adopted throughout the state.
[Pons points out the importance of medical work for the full enjoyment of the freedoms awaiting the island.
r - '1 HF .... U If Bf -MS aeJSswEsw " . * - - ■JOU . ■ W W' Moment when the Acting Governor of Puerto Rico, Dr. Juan A. Pone (dressed in black), was about to ascend the steps of the Capitol, to deliver the main speech of the 4th of Julln, acomnnftedn d " i G J u d " P J on "'2M ,a -**"':* Feliciano (center). In the background, softer Emilio Lopez Ramires, secretary to Governor Flflero and the Interim Executive (Photographs from EL MUNDO).
4 amendments to Lev de Tierras are in effect < é - j One provides for added term extension to extend fos benefits By virtue of tes provisions of L "y 357. Pifloro, the term "aggregate", as defined in said law, may be extended by the Land Authority to persons residing in urban areas provided they earn their wages in agricultural work, and to persons residing in rural areas who do not earn wages in agricultural work, The definition of the term "aggregate" has been established by amendments to the Land Law, in order to broaden the benefits in this regard. The new law establishes that "for the purposes of the Land Law, the term 'aggregate' means any head of family residing in the rural area, whose home is located in another's house and land* or in his own house built on another's land, whose only means of livelihood is day labor earned in agricultural work, and who does not own land as an owner. No more than one property may be granted to a head of household, nor may he transfer it without the consent of the Authority, under the Regulations approved by the Authority". The new law establishes that "the Authority may, at its discretion, extend the benefits of this law".
Advocates for slum elimination and improvement of nutrition In a speech on July 4, he recapped the problems he faces. By R, SANTIAGO SOSA Editor of EL MUNDO That "it would obviously be better if the proposed reforms to the Organic Charter, pending approval by the U.S. Congress, included other clauses containing the right of Puerto Rico to self-determination of its destiny," he said yesterday in a message to the Puerto Rican people in which he said that "it would obviously be better if the proposed reforms to the Organic Charter, pending approval by the U.S. Congress, included other clauses containing the right of Puerto Rico to self-determination of its destiny," he said yesterday in a message to the Puerto Rican people.
the people of Puerto Rico, the Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Jesús T. Piftrro, on the occasion of the commemoration of the independence of the United States. "But obviously," adds *1 message, "the election by the people of Puerto Rico of their own governor and the opportunity not to knead volitively the leaven of their own education represents a step forward in their democratic life''. (More photo of the July 4th commemoration on page 7.) The day's address was delivered yesterday by Acting Governor of Puerto Rico, Dr. Juan A. Pons, who stressed the importance of medical work for the full enjoyment of these new freedoms. "As we celebrate today the anniversary of the complete political freedom of the great American nation of which we are a part," said the Acting Governor in his speech, "I exhort my fellow citizens of Puerto Rico to meditate on the maximum contribution that each one of us must make to the full enjoyment of our new freedoms. I exhort my fellow Puerto Ricans to meditate on the maximum contribution that each one of us must make to the purpose that all of us may enjoy to the maximum degree the supreme freedom to be healthy, the supreme freedom to be well, to feel well - physically, mentally and socially - in preparation for the enjoyment of other freedoms to come. Although yesterday in San Juan the volume of public of previous years did not congregate to observe the parade and the commemorative acts I of the 4th of July, the official festivity was a bright one, participating in the official parade units of the Army, the Navy, the governmental agencies, the civic organizations and labor entities. The parade program was not carried out in the order in which it was printed, in some cases, nor did many of the organizations that appeared in the official program participate in the parade. The parade began at half past nine o'clock in the morning, starting the parade with a motorized escort of the In. sular Police. The Acting Governor, Dr. Juan A. Pons; the President of the Court of Appeals of the Republic, Dr. Juan A. Pons, and the President of the Republic of Puerto Rico, Dr. Juan A. Pons, took their places in the pavilion erected in front of the island capitol, from where the parade was supervised.
Government Car Legislation Excludes Authorities from Provisions- Creates! office of Transportation The following bill, designed to correct the misuse of Government automobiles, was passed last Thursday night by the House of Representatives, 1 i passing to the consideration of the Go- ; : hernador of Puerto Rico for its approval or rejection: P. S 20-Ordering the promulgation of regulations for the acquisition, use, maintenance, sale and all matters relating to motor vehicles of the Insular Government, to create the position of Chief' of Transportation, to establish penalties, to repeal Act 361 of April 5, 1 JD41, and for other purposes. I (Continued on page 20)
England warns Russia by inviting for meeting in Paris; Eisenhower calls for unity i .
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * At half past ten o'clock last Thursday night i ' । resumed its" tra-: low the House of Representatives, 1 under the presidency riel Speaker, Dr. Francisco M, Susonl, Impar- ' ting its approval of the pro- ' bills P. of S. 14. To amend subsection (f) of section 12 of Act No. 464, entitled the ' Reasonable Rent Act, approved '- on April 25, 1946, as amended by Ksy i. No. 476, of May 15, 1947; I " P. of S. 15. to add subsection 12 of section 2 of Act No. 464, entitled the ' Reasonable Rent Act, approved '- on April 25, 1946, as amended by Ksy i. No. 476, of May 15, 1947; I
Next week will be sent shipment of ammonium nitrate.
। Consigned to one of the shared! insular manufacturers of abo' us will be sent next week ; hada Puerto Rico a shipment of nitrate of ammonia, in one of the ships of the Waterman Line, according to a cable received yesterday in Fortaleza. The cablegram was received by Senior Jalma Balano, adviser to the Governor on maritime affairs, directed by Senior Donald O'Connor of the Port Office at Washington. Shipments of nitrate of amo-
' níaeo. fundamental element in the । manufacture of fertilizers, have been Interrupted, owing to the refusal of the continental workers! i to load them as current shipments. They have been asking that this matter be considered as explosive and that they be paid for ' taking it to the ships as if it were explosive matter. Senior Balano reported yesterday that during Governor Pifiero's previous trip to the U.S., he made about two dozen shipments of explosives.
University divisions reorganized Mellado to be administrative assistant - UPR editor is Dr. Colorado! Appointments in the College of Law and Research Center will be transferred to the jurisdiction of Social Sciences - The Rector of the University of Puerto Rico, Jaime Benitez, informed yesterday about a reorganization to be carried out in several divisions of the University, especially in the Rector's Office, since he cannot attend, he said, to matters of general orientation of the UPR, due to several administrative tasks that do not allow him enough time to attend to them. The Rector reported on the changes of jurisdiction that will take place in the Public Administration program and the Serial Research Center. Rector Benitez will appoint as his administrative assistant, Ramon Mellado, who will be in charge of office duties at the Rector's Office, attending to administrative matters" of the University, which have been on the shoulders of Rector Benitez during the past few years. As administrative assistant, Mr. Mellado will also attend to all administrative matters of the other university offices that are being handled by Mr. Benitez. Benitez. The new administrative assistant will attend to the university catalog, licensing, course of study and university budget matters. Mr. Ramon Mellado has served as Deputy Commissioner of Education of Puerto Rica and is currently assistant to the Dean of Pedagogy of the University, Dr. Pedro A. Cebollero. Mr. Mellado will soon complete his doctorate in Public Administration. According to Rector Benitez, the University's Social Research Center will be under the jurisdiction of the Dean of Social Sciences. The Research Center formerly functioned through an executive committee consisting of the Rector of the University, the Dean of Social Sciences and the Director of the Center itself. In September 1946, when Governor Tugwell left the governorship of the Island, the Center was created, being appointed its Director, who served the position based on certain arrangements with the University of Chicago, where he was the Director of the Institute of Planning of said University. After Dr. Tugwell resigned the directorship of the Research Center because his work at the University of Chicago did not permit him to continue the work of the Center, Senior Clarence Senior, who was the Director of Research, was appointed to replace him. Senior will continue to direct the Center. Senior Benitez reported that he will also propose the reorganization of the Public Administration Program, which is headed by Senior James R. Watson. This program used to operate directly with the Chancellor's Office. It will now pass under the jurisdiction of the Dean of Social Sciences. i The position of Dean of the College of Social Sciences will be held by Senior Pedro Muñoz 1 (Continued on page 20).
Iriarte and Febú Pesquera object I the bill on official cars l ■ . - I Argues that approved measure will not prevent the * misuse that is now occurring." Rep . ' Ortiz defends it in wide debate in the House i . . . . .. --y- _ -
130, of May 8, 1948, as , has been amended, relative to the Island Aqueduct and Sewer Service of Puerto Rico, The referred subsection reads as follows: "If the technical, clerical and any other employees of the Puerto Rico Insular Water and Sewerage Service are included in the Service by competitive examination, upon request of the Board of Directors of said Insular Water and Sewerage Service and with the approval of the Director of the Central Personnel Agency, as to the rest of the employees and employees of the Puerto Rico Insular Water and Sewerage Service, the Board of Directors of said Insular Water and Sewerage Service shall appoint them by competitive examination, as to the rest of the employees and laborers, the Puerto Rico Water and Sewer Service shall be considered as a corporate instrumentality of the Government of Puerto Rico for the purposes of Sections 2 and 11 of Article 2 of the Puerto Rico Labor Relations Act, and the employees and laborers not included in the Service by Opposition shall have the benefits of said Puerto Rico Labor Relations Act": P. S. 19. to add the following paragraph to subsection (c) of Section 48 of Act No. 53 of 1928, entitled Act Establishing a Local Government for the Municipalities of Puerto Rico, as amended: "To defray expenses incurred by reason of a contract between the (continued on page 20)
Legislation to give independence to India was introduced Attlee filed it yesterday in the House of Commons. Would create two independent dominions. -Debate on the measure set for next Thursday.
For HAROLD GUARD United Press Correspondent LONDON, July 4 (PU)- The Prime Minister of Great Britain, Clement R, Attlee, has filed the bill in the House of Commons yesterday. Clement R, Attlee, today introduced on first reading the independence bill for India before the House of Commons, enshrining the Fourth of July as the day of independence for that vast subcontinent of some 389 million people. In essence, the project would create two independent "dominions" in India, to be established on August 15. One would be India (consisting of Hindus: and the other would be Pakistan (consisting of Muslims.) Specifically, the measure would apply to British India, which comprises 55 percent of the entire Indian subcontinent. In fact it affects the entire subcontinent, because the princely and tribal states can join India or Pakistan, or become independent states. The text of the draft has not been read. It will be available, however, before the second reading and debate next Thursday. There is no doubt as to its passage, as the conservative opposition is expected to support it in its entirety. The measure contains 25 clauses or sections. None suggests a new constitution for India. Pakistan, as defined in the draft, will comprise the provinces of East Bengal and West Punjab, as defined by the border committees.
The border regions. It shall also include the territories which, at the date of the approval of the Bill, were included in the Siod and Baluchlatan provinces, in addition to the territories of the North-West Frontier Province, to be decided by referendum. The draft provides that at no time shall any area of ta India, outside the present British sector, be prevented from joining any of the dominions. with the consent of the dominion. No area shall be excluded without the consent of the dominion. Each dominion shall have a governor general. The same person could be the governor general of both dominions, unless a dominion demands a governor general of its own. Each dominion would have full authority to make its laws, including extraterritorial operating laws. No law could be annulled on the ground that it contravened the laws of Great Britain or any future act of Parliament. The Governor General or Governors General would have the power to enact, in the name of King George the Sixth, any law passed by the Legislature of a dominion. No act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom would be a law of a dominion unless the dominion itself adopted it. From August J5, the British Government shall cease to be responsible for the Government of any part of India Bri(Continued on page 20).
Government will have no CRF money for veterans' homes The legislation extending the life of the Corporation expressly forbids it from making loans for ex-servicemen's homes By WILLIÁÑTDORVTLLDEB Staff Writer of THE WORLD in Washington WASHINGTON, July 4. (By Wireless Teletypewriter). - The extension of the Financial Reconstruction Corporation by Congress until June 30, '1948 contains a provision which will force the Insular Government to apply elsewhere for financing
J . J , the Mortgage Company of the Corporation and various officials of the Insular Government presided over by Governor Pifiero have reached an agreement during the past few months under which the Reconstruction Finance Corporation will guarantee mortgages for half the cost of building 10,000 homes for veterans in a program primarily to house the families of 30,000 veterans of Puerto Rico. When Congress passed the bill extending the Corporation for another year signed by Resident Truman on June 30, it limited the Corporation's lending powers to those projects and programs that could not be financed by private charters. Congress specifically prohibited the institution from financing housing for veterans. Under the homes program, veterans may have taken advantage of their Bill of Rights, section 501, which provides loans for 50% of the cost of the homes, provided that the total bond on a loan granted by the Veterans Administration does not exceed 32,000. The Finance Corporation's Mortgage Pool, according to the agreement, would have guaranteed the other half of the loans if such homes were built within one year of the approval of the veterans' application. The L. G. Long Construction Company. of Charleston, South Carolina, and San Juan, have agreed to begin delivering the houses, sixty days after the commencement of the above program, at the rate of fifty thousand houses per day, continuing that amount until the first 10,000 houses are delivered. FARIB, July 4. (1N8) - It is announced that the French government intends to publish next week the full minutes of the tripartite conference which has just ended in complete failure in order to show that the nation to blame for the lack of success was Rome and not France or England. In the meantime Qual D'Oraay is preparing for the conference of twenty-four nations which will take place in the next few days. The new conference is expected to last only three or four days. The delegates will merely fix the number of committees, and subcommittee and designate the nations on them.
Dewey goes on tour of ten of the states Twice will be in President Truman's residential state By KIRTLAND I. KING United Press Correspondent _ ALBANY, N. Y. July 4 (PU) - Governor Thomas E. Dewey, leading Republican contender for 1a 1948 presidential nomination, sata tonight on a tour ¡ through dtaz states to prepare for delegates to the GOP convention next arto. Accompanied by 1a Mr." Dewey and his" two sons, he will visit Oklahoma, Mlsurf, Colorado, Utah, Montana, Wyoming. Idaho, Illinois' and Michigan before returning on Aug. lo. Dewey claimed the trip was to "show the children the wonders of the West," but declared that he would confer with Republican leaders of the nine states where his (Continued on Page 20) McGhee foresees greater control of trade He based the prediction on a possible failure of ¡ Geneva discussions; By R. H. SHACKFORD WASHINGTON, July 4 (PUL - One of Secretary of State George C. Marshall's chief advisers on economic affairs warned that he would not be able to meet with the President's top economic advisers. Marshall on economic affairs, warned today that failure of ta International Co- ( market Conference at Geneva would "Inevitably" lead to greater government control of American foreign trade tending n ta creation of a state i trade system. ( George C. McGhee, a pedal aide to Assistant Secretary of State ( ,o to economic affairs, : William L. Clayton, and recently appointed Wá- j shlngton's coordinator in connection with the aid program for Greece and Turkey, । issued such a prediction in a special article in the State Department's official bulletin 1. The < article reflects not only the views < of Marshall and Clayton, if- ( not the latter's uneasiness that ti 1 failure of Geneva may tan- c ce to the world atrociously tn t a tremendous economic conflict r (Continued tn page 20) 1
London warning is against intimidation of invited nations Assure countries will go to conclave Eisenhower says if peoples do not unite war will ensue By William R. Higginbotham ' Correspondent dt United Prtnsa LONDON. July 4. (PU). - Lot diplomatic envoys of France and Great Britain today formally handed over to 22 European nations invitations to take part in the Paris Conference, to be held July 12, on *1 Marshall Plan for the rtcohs* trucclon of Europe. Rome, Italy, July A (FU)- Italy was today the first of 23 nations summoned by the Great Britain and France to attend the Paris Conference to reply to the invitation, accepting. The purpose of the conference was to discuss the Plan for the Rehabilitation of Europe, sponsored by the United States Secretary of State, George O. Marshall. The Foreign Minister, Count Cario Sfona, received the invitation this evening. He immediately conferred with the Prime Minister, Alcide de Gasperi. After thirty minutes, Sfona announced that Italy officially accepted the invitation. At the same time, the British Foreign Minister implicitly warned । any effort to intimidate nations wishing to attend will be interpreted as a violation of their sovereignty. - The invitations to the conference state that a working committee and several technical subcommittees" under the direction of the first. d3b4T4n begin work on July 4 so that the main committee can be in a position to report to the United States in September 1 on European resources, plans for mutual aid and cooperation, and American aid needs. The invitation was delivered to the foreign ministries of all European countries except Russia, Spain and Germany at one o'clock in the afternoon (British time) by diplomatic envoys from England. Their French colleagues did the same. In Paris and London, the Invitations were sent to the envoys of the invited countries and to the U.S. ambassadors in both capitals. The first replies are expected over the course of the weekend, some" possibly tomorrow. Spokesmen for some nations informally indicated that the acceptance of their governments was certain. These include Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Greece, Holland, Ireland and Italy. Ireland and Italy. A Foreign Ministry spokesman, speaking about 1a conference, said, "Mr. Molotov has emphasized that the great powers must not influence 1a sovereignty of such less powerful powers. This is an excellent principle. It is to be hoped that all governments invited to the Paris Conference will be free from any influence on the part of a great power to make their own decisions in the light of their own interests and in accordance with what they consider to be their economic needs". The spokesman made it clear that Britain and France have left the invited countries completely free to take their decision!" "We are not pointing the gun at any of them. It's up to them to decide," the spokesman said. But, faced with the possibility that Russia might exert pressure against the countries under its sphere of influence, trying to influence them not to attend the conference, the spokesman added: "The invited nations will make their decisions one way or the other. Countries that choose to straddle the fence, trying to get in on the plan but not antagonize Russia, will not have the right to send observers to the conference, the British spokesman explained. "It would be impracticable for a country to have at the conference other than full-fledged delegates," the spokesman added, adding that although the UN's European Economic Commission would be informed of Parts' deliberations, it would not be officially represented at the event. . Foreign Minister Ernest Bevin today briefed the Cabinet on the Paris talks, which ended in failure when Russian Minister Molotov decided to boycott the Marshall Plan. Bevin conferred with Premier Attlee. On the other hand, the United Press reports from Vicksburg, Missouri, that Army General Dwight D. Elsenhower, Chief of Staff of the Army, said there that unless the United States helps to outline and build a structure for world peace, mankind may have to suffer a third world war. Speaking from the courthouse in Warren County in the heart of the old Confederacy, Elsonhower said in a speech commemorating Declaration of Independence Day that either the nations of the world would work together for the common good. "or they will perish one by one. (Continued on Page 20),