THE
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy in the morning, becoming mostly cloudy with scattered showers in the afternoon and early evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 87: low. 74. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.M inches of mercury.
44 Pages 5/
LA MAÑANA NEWSPAPER
ano xxvin
Entered as second class matter. Post Office. San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY NOVEMBER 1, 1947
Mr. motorist, don't try that grace, someone else was killed with it.
NUMBER 11113
Pinero To Wait For Bills Before Convening Legislature
Wants land acquisition to be expedited for new airport Says pickets are within their rights Says he does not "give much importance" to issue promoted by Chavea In his first press conference after "his last trip to the United States" and Mexico, the Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Jesús T. Piftero, reported yesterday that he is receiving bills from the different departments and agencies of the Government for the special session of the Legislature which he intends to convene shortly. The Governor declared that he expects to have in his possession all the bills that will be submitted to him and to finish those which, in his judgment, cannot wait until the February regular session, in order to then call the special legislative meeting. The Governor said that he does not yet know when the special session should take place, since it is his intention to have a program of matters to be submitted to the Legislature beforehand, so that no time will be wasted. Answering a question from reporters as to whether he would accept to be nominated for elective office, if selected as a candidate for the post, Mr. Piftero said that "I have not yet thought of that." The Governor is confident that by the end of December the Puerto Rico Homes Authority will be ready to hold the public auction for the hamlet which the Government plans to build in the vicinity of Laguna San José, at a cost of three million dollars, to house families from the Hoare and El Fanguito neighborhoods, with the purpose of preparing the land in the latter two sites for works which the Government intends to develop there. On the other hand, the Governor said he expects that a commission of Mexican experts in sugar production will visit the Island for the next harvest, on a trip to study the techniques and procedures used in Puerto Rico in sugar production. "When asked about the issue raised within the University Board in connection with the autonomy of the University and the Governor's efforts in the United States regarding the affiliation of the School of Tropical Medicine, the Chief Executive declined to comment. Regarding the picket that university students intend to hold today in front of Fortaleza, in protest against the statements made by Mr. Piftero in the United States, in relation to the political status of the country, the Governor said: "They (the university students) have a perfect right to do that. We are in a democracy. It is a right they have." The Governor declared that he did not give "much importance" to the issue promoted by Senator Dennis ChAvez, on the occasion of the raising of the Puerto Rican flag at the University, on the occasion of the celebration in ' our first educational center "two commemorative events of the Grito de Lares. The Chief Executive Officer stated that he has under study the idea that has been submitted to the effect that the Transportation Authority be placed under the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission. The Governor also informed, in connection with the Vivianas plan for veterans, that he expects that shortly, probably within the next week, the construction of houses for veterans will begin in Ponce, after having initiated the project of 5,500 houses in the San Patricio estate, at the intersection of the Guaynabo highway, for the San Juan metropolitan area. The plan was later extended to other towns on the island. The Board of Directors of the Servicio Insular de Acueductos met yesterday in Fortaleza, under the chairmanship of the Governor. He informed that they discussed the improvement of the administrative phase of this Service, with the purpose of putting it in conditions to raise funds" by means of the issuance and sale of bonds. A resolution was approved authorizing the Head of IS A, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, to take the necessary steps for the issuance and sale of these bonds. The Governor said that the idea is for the SIA to be self-supporting, like the Water Resources Authority, so that it will not be a burden on the public treasury. In addition to the help from the bond issue, the Island Aqueduct Service will receive a loan from the Development Bank in the amount of three million dollars. Finally, Governor Pifiero said that he was waiting for the last official documents to be submitted to him to initiate the procedure for the acquisition of the necessary land in Isla Verde in connection with the development of the San Juan International Airport. He reported that a commission of landowners from "osa son" went to visit him the day before yesterday? to request a definitive decision on whether or not the land will be acquired by the San Juan International Airport.
McG
idenci
The Public Service Commission will meet with Governor Piftero to request an administrative resolution of the case regarding the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission over the Transportation Authority. The Chairman of the Commission, Lic. Jorge V. Toledo, and associate commissioner, attorney RomAn Díaz Collazo, stated yesterday that they consider this to be the most delicate matter pending resolution by said agency. They added that if the matter cannot be resolved administratively, they will resort to the courts to request a declaratory judgment that will resolve definitively whether or not the Commission has jurisdiction over the Transportation Authority. This judicial remedy is considered more appropriate than a legislative proceeding, although the Legislature could also be called upon to clarify the law creating the Transportation Authority in this regard. The commissioners contend that it is unfair for independent public carriers to be required to comply with all provisions of the promulgated regulations (Continued on p. 28).
Controls on credit on purchases cease Commerce does not intend to liberalize sales conditions much CHICAGO, Oct. 31. (PU)-Ma. ñañaña (Sunday) midnight government controls on consumer credit expire, marking the end of six years of regulation "on installment purchases, but a survey made today reveals that merchants are reluctant to establish the easy credit conditions of the pre-war days. Since September 1, 1941, under a law passed by the Eightieth Congress, the governors of the Federal Reserve System have been deciding the amount of the down payment on purchases by consumers of a long list of items, from household goods to automobiles. Signs urging installment purchases with small down payments have all but disappeared. And the survey reveals that merchants and bankers will not rush to restore them. The main reason for keeping down payments high is the fear felt by many merchants that the controls will be res. ■ tableted as credit grows dama- ■ alado and accelerates Inflation. The ae. C. Douglas Buck, a Republican (Continued on pAg. 28)
News Digest.
* Governor Piftero expects to receive all bills from agencies and departments before deciding when the special session will begin. The general closure of bakeries will be discussed tomorrow in the assembly of bakers. - The discovery of a drug that can "be the ally of streptomycin. It is one hundred percent effective against the germ of tuberculosis. - The method of appraisals related to the acquisition of easements for roads was investigated at the lela. - Roy will hold a picket against the Governor, by UPR students. The President of the Chrysler Export Corporation arrived on the island. - Cubans intend to achieve a reduction in the tariff for their sugar. - Rector Benitos conferred with the Governor on the matter of the School of Tropical Medicine. * Castro Perez asks for postponement of the case for the death of Cris- - tino Colon, alias Ladrillo. - The Mulemberg Victory, which had run aground off Isla de Cabras, was set afloat yesterday. - B - The Mayoress and several commissioners favor the gua- - - gua" to enter the catechism.
gua" to enter the San Juan cateo. - The age limit for Army officer candidates is extended. - The new Personnel Office "rule" is to be "implemented" at a public hearing on Tuesday. - - - They hope that. Sierra Bordela will return at the end of next week. - - ♦ Public Service Commission will ask the Governor to resolve administratively the she has jurisdiction over the Tranipnrte Authority. - The federal Tenancy Office in Puerto Rico has not received official notification of approval of any recommendation to continue rent control. / Federico Tilén was appointed judge for the additional court to be located in Ponce. - Today, four teams begin a fight for the first division in the professional baseball tournament. Aguadilla plays here against Santurce: San Juan in Cague" and Mayagüez in Pone". o o o o Invicto" Atlético" and Cardenalee m face each other today in a game of the Final Basketball Series. The Miebol do Estrellas Juveniles champion emerges tonight. " " * "Puerto Rico's choice to participate in 1" Ninth Amateur Baseball Bario in Cartagena, Colombia.
McGrath assumes chairmanship of the Democratic Party & - W-' / w * x i jpUl <l. Howard McGrath (right), Rhode Island state senator, takes over the symbolic gavel of the chairmanship of the Democratic National Committee, presented to him by Postmaster General Robert E. Hannegan, during a meeting held by the Committee in Washington, Wednesday of this week. As reported, Hannegan resigned the chairmanship of the Party due to his failing health. (Associated Press Photo).
Democrat
ata
Colonists and sugar growers failed to reach agreement yesterday on the scale to be recommended to the U.S. Secretary of Agriculture regarding the participation of cane growers in sugar production during the next harvest. After a discussion which lasted from 2:30 p.m. until 5:00 p.m., the meeting of the growers and settlers appointed a sub-committee to discuss the matter again and draw up a new proposal to be considered by the Settlers' Committee and the Sugar Producers' Committee, separately. According to the report, yesterday the settlers' committee submitted one proposal and the producers' committee submitted two proposals. Having discussed" the three and not having reached a final determination, as to the "choice of one of the three propositions, ""' resolved to appoint the "ubcomlté of produce, beef and settlers. This "uhcommittee "will meet next Monday, to commence its work," and to work out a new proposition which will harmonize the views of the parties on the scale to be recommended to the Secretary of Agriculture. The latter, in a (Continued on pAg. 28)
Two thousand people picketed the World Telegram building. Mostly Puerto Ricans, they were protesting articles the paper has been publishing about Puerto Ricans. - Personalities at the parade ' i . I ■ - ,1 "
NEW YORK, Oct. 31 (From our N. Y. Newsroom) - (By teletypewriter) - Approximately two thousand people, mostly Puerto Ricans, gathered this afternoon in front of the New York World Telegram newspaper building to protest peacefully against the articles that the paper has been publishing for more than a week, written by Alian Keller, which they consider vexatious to Puerto Rico. Since the appearance of the" first" articles, various meetings have been held in New York among Puerto Ricans" all" in protest, taking agreements to distort the" veracity of the" articles" and to publicly protest them. Almost daily a new group is formed in the different sectors where Puerto Ricans live, mainly in the Bronx and Brooklyn. In Washington Heights and Harlem, our compatriots are offended by the exaggerations that are allegedly made in these journalistic works. From - one of these meetings, held last Sunday by the Asociación Patriótica Acción Puertorriqueña, arose the movement that took place today, agreeing to plquetear the newspaper for two consecutive hours, to demonstrate to the city of New York that Puerto Ricans are seriously resentful of what has happened to them.
resent what is alleged to be an injustice that harms us considerably. In spite of the hurricane winds, the cold and the gusts of rain, since noon began to arrive in front of the World Telegram building, on Barclay St., the first Puerto Ricans to arrive in front of the World Telegram building, on Barclay St., the first ones to arrive in front of the World Telegram building. Barclay Street, the first group of picketers, carrying banners and posters in which they demanded justice, imputed Nazi procedures to the author of the articles and explained that the Puerto Ricans constitute a dignified and industrious group of this city; also claiming our contribution to the war effort and to the cause of democracy. Hundreds of members of the Maritime Union, affiliated with the CIO, took part in the public demonstration, which extended in two directions: toward the front of the building, on West Street, next to the docks, and on the side façade of Barclay Street. The picketers chanted a rhythmic tune, in English, which translated into Spanish was more or less: "Who is a great liar?" and all answered in chorus: "Keller!" Several members* of the Police mounted the parade from horses, and an Inspector, with whom we spoke, stated that he had seldom seen a demonstration of protest in the past (Contlnued on p. 28).
General closure of bakeries to be discussed tomorrow
No official notification has been received from the U.S. Housing Accelerator regarding the approval of the recommendation made by the Puerto Rico Rent Advisory Board to the Accelerator not to lift rent control on the island. Jorge Benitez Gautier, Regional Director of the agency, said yesterday that his office had not received the official notification, but that it was expected at any moment. Mr. Benitez Gautier added that the order of continuation of rent control in Puerto Rico will remain in effect until the expiration of the federal law on February 29, 1948. Mayor is in favor of entering the guaguas Will ask Transit Committee decision - Commissioners in favor Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gauthier, administrator of the Capital, pronounced yesterday etfc against d". the decision of the Transit Advisory Committee, indicating that she agrees with the entry of the gua-, gua" to the center of the population, so it will ask the committee to reconsider the decision taken, in the sense of not acceding to the request that has been made to recommend to the appropriate authorities to provide for the extension of the bus service to the Baldorioty square. On the other hand, the Commissioner of the Capital, Mr. Luis V. Pino, presented in recent days a resolution in the Board of Commissioners, to revoke the ordinance that limits the access of buses to the limits of the Plaza Colón, adopted during the war, and to request the Transit Committee to fix the number of buses that it deems necessary to enter the city and to fix the schedule of entries so that the activities of loading and unloading of trucks may be carried out without interference of the transit. In a survey conducted among seven of the nine members of the Board of Commissioners, before the Transit Committee decided to deny the petition, some of them were in favor of the entrance of the buses into the town. Mr. Luis V. Pino, author of the resolution, stated the following: "I am in favor of the entry of the buses into the town. It is necessary and convenient. The public "iri vehicles, the poor, need to attend the Churches of San Juan, like the Cathedral and other evangelical temples located" in the caico of the population, and they do not have the opportunity to aque. Iloa who own vehicles. The children who attend the "Colegio" in San Juan, also need to have the opportunity to enter the school, and they do not have the opportunity to go to the Cathedral.
The problem of the flour industry is to be discussed at an extraordinary meeting to be held tomorrow by the Puerto Rico Manufacturers' Association at the "a. lón de audiencias de la Asociación de Industríale", in San Juan. The Secretary of the Association of Industrialists, Mr. Vicente Leon, Jr., declared yesterday that because of the number of telegrams and letters received from San Juan and the island, a large number of bakery owners from all over the island will attend the meeting.* In response to a request from the ' President of the Association of Tahoneros. Mr. Sañudo Plñero, district directors of the organL "ation have been visiting the owners of bakeries of their" púa. biela. respective, inviting them to the, meeting tomorrow Sunday. One of the main points to be discussed will be the attitude assumed by the General Supply Administration, in authorizing an increase of one cent in the pound of bread in the sale of the bakeries, and the Intermediaries, in this case the distributors of the food. The Association states that such an increase is insufficient to cover its current expenses. The Association states that such an increase is insufficient to cover its current production costs, mainly because of the rise in the price of wheat flour in the supply market. He is therefore adamant that the price of bread be raised by two cents a pound above its present level of thirteen cents to the consumer. It is very likely that at tomorrow's meeting arrangements will be made to secure a general closing of all bakeries on 181a. after a reasonable time has been given to the Supply Administration to settle the baker's demand. The produo. I production of bread in many bakeries, especially those in the metropolitan area, has been quite reduced in the last few weeks, due to the fact that the normal quantities are not being distributed to the stores at the moment. Questioned on the matter, the Secretary of the Association of Industrialists, Mr. Vicente Leon, Jr., declared yesterday that it is to be expected - "a crisis in the whole textile industry by mid-November, date on which a great majority of these establishments will have to close down irremissibly, because they will not have wheat flour to continue - operating". On the other hand, ae in. - On the other hand, it was stated that this situation could accelerate an agreement to go to a closing as from the next moon. _. Yesterday we consulted two major flour importers. - Yesterday we consulted two important importers of wheat flour, and were informed by them that the first quality flour continues to be quoted at still high prices, although the product has registered a small drop in production. J. Arroyo Morales stated that the last quotation received was for a price of 818 per 200 pound sack and that last week flour was quoted at $15 per sack. He expressed that 4 minimum quantities, in comparison with the consumption of the Island and that sales are practically at a standstill. 1 ' For its part, the house Fernandez " | and Company reported that the flour. of wheat recorded a drop of 40 to ' 50 cents a sack, upon learning of the presidential proclamation last aobra cheapening of the. food, pe. ro that yesterday the price returned to its. blr, to reach a level of $ 18 he aaco of 200 pounds, for , flours of first quality. He said that the price reduction was only for lower grades of wheat flour, and that the current situation, as can be seen from the mill receipts, was upward. He also stated that h;. all" sales of flour" d" tri- * go are at a standstill and that his salesmen, in view of the situation, J do not make any propaganda to* place orders, due * to * the retic", tencla of the purchaser" motive, given by the high prepioa. As is well known, "1 Central Consumers' Committee has put forward to the General Supply Administration the idea of organizing consumers' cooperatives dedicated to the production of bread. The Committee's delegates were met by the Head of Supplies, Mr. Antonio Vlcéns Río". D""pués de la contémela lo do lor consumed \manifestaron que.la ley facilita el estábil Y 1M menciona, das cope ■ Aúblicas.
Neighbors of San Juan Street cut off when the road flooded.
The photograph shows a water pool that frequently forms, with the rains, on San Juan street at the corner of Navas street, at the 18 and a half stop in Santurce. When the photo was taken the day before yesterday afternoon, the waters had gone down quite a bit, rising again yesterday to such a height that the cars got stuck and the children swam as if they were in a river or in the sea. - (Photo EL MUNDO).
-- -- - - W- W -w- 'OT.a.w ■ By Benjamín Santana Editor of EL MUNDO . There are many sites in the metropolitan area that are frequently flooded when heavy rain falls; but these sites, generelment" are in the" swampy areas or near the sea. The site illustrated in the photograph above, however, is located at
"V ...... .w W one of the most central streets of Santurce and a few steps from the ave. nida Pone" de León. It is San Juan Street, at the 18 and a half stop, a street that starts at Ponce de Leon Avenue and goes to the Santa Ana neighborhood (antea Trae Tallerea), crossing Fernandez Juncos Avenue. In the northern part of this street there are
euiw "*-"wwx? ""aa a iv w <?aa vi >M "aa" quite pronounced slope, forming a hollow in the ritió that shows the engraving, following a small elevation immediately after and then a flat and straight level, until the termination of the long cali* in Tras Talleres. This street, which is one of the most populated and busiest in Santurce, is flooded in this ritió,
wj wav an wj - even with little rain. Several years ago, when the street was tarred, it was believed that the problem had been definitively corrected, but it was not. The iltuadón worsened because previously, at least. the sandy soil ae sucked the water and avoided the prolonged sogginess of today. (Continued on pAg. 28)
1 Uescúbren drug that may be the ally of streptomycin.
-23 or omi cetin is the name given to the new product, which is one hundred percent effective against the germ that causes tuberculosis.
For PAUL F. ELUS United Press Science Writer NEW HAVEN, Connecticut, Oct. 31 (PU)-The discovery of a powerful new drug which may become the ally of streptomycin in the great battle against tuberculosis was announced tonight. The drug has been subjected to preliminary experimental tests. Chloromycetin is the name given to the new product. Like streptomycin, it is extracted from soil. Preliminary reports on the isolation and laboratory testing of the drug will be published tomorrow in the journal Science, official organ of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. The authors of the paper are Dr. Paul R. Burkholder, of the Osborn Botanical Laboratory, Yale University; and Drs. John Ehrllck, Quentin R. Bartz, Robert M. Smith and Dwight A. Joslyn, of the Park and Davis Laboratories, Detroit, Michigan. In the report they describe the isolation of the drug from a soil sample obtained from a manure-covered farm near Caracas, Venezuela. The Detroit scientists found the drug to be 100 percent effective against the germ that causes tuberculosis. They also discovered that the drug is 100 percent effective against a bacterium known as "brucella abortus," the germ that causes undulant fever. Experiments have also revealed that the drug is 50 percent effective against certain negative bacteria, including germs that cause some types of pneumonia and infections.
Some types of pneumonia and superficial infections, such as pimples and tumors, are caused by streptomycin. Streptomycin was discovered in late 1043 by Dr. Selman A. Waksman and the discovery announced early in the following year. The use of the wonder drug for the treatment of tuberculosis was gradually increasing throughout the nation and in foreign countries, to the extent that its application is now considered imperative in certain types of tuberculosis. However, it was recently discovered that certain tuberculous lesions possess a resistance that cannot be overcome by the drug. Experiments have shown that it was essential to find an ally of streptomycin which would have the effect of overcoming the resistance of such tuberculous lesions. A few days ago Dr. Waksman himself announced that he and his "assistant" were working on the discovery of the new bacterial killing agent, but that they had not yet achieved the desired success. Dr. Waksman expressed the hope that if he could not discover the necessary streptomycin ally, another scientific group would find it in time to save thousands of lives. Today's revelation of the discovery of the new drug - chloromycetin - seems to have solved the problem and it may be expected that from now on streptomycin will not have to work alone in the treatment of the dreaded whitefly. From the same base from which the streptomycin was extracted - from the soil - the chloromycetin has been extracted. (Continued on page 22> (Continued on page 22>).