THE WORLD
THE ISLAND, TODAY: Fair weather, except for some haziness and short showers, developing over the Interior Mta afternoon. Winds from the east-northeast, ' - 14 mph. Moderate breakers along the north coast IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: High, 18 j low, 74 j rain, none. -
38 Pages
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 1, 1947
Entered a" racond clan matter. Poet Office. Ban Juan. P. R.
NUMBER 10872
Check brakes. Cooperate with the Automobile Inspection.
Conflict with railroad workers at a standstill
The merchandise is immobilized in several stations of the Island CSP studies case of the Villamil Company expects closure of other plants, if the strike continues - The head* of the train section of the Compafiía del Ferrocarril, in a report he submitted yesterday to the company, The head of the train section of the railroad company, in a report submitted yesterday to the company, states that since yesterday afternoon, cars, locomotives and equipment have been immobilized in the main stations of the island, and that a large quantity of perishable goods, as well as sugar cane, sugar, and other materials, destined for commerce and commerce, have been on strike.*The Union 1*0 strike refuses to unload the wagons, which are destined for commerce and industry. The head of the Transportation Division of the company, Mr. Enriqu* R. Carmoega, made it known yesterday that it is estimated that the company's property abandoned by the strikers when the strike was declared, as well as the cargo that remains in the wagons, is worth approximately one million dollars. He added that this property is not under any surveillance, being practically abandoned in local stations and remote places on the Island, since the company cannot employ personnel to safeguard it from damages and depreciation that may arise with the prolongation of the strike. Numerous passenger and freight trains, as well as locomotives, are out in the open. It is alleged that the strikers, on the expiration of the time limit fixed for the beginning of the strike, left their lahoms without completing their respective routes. It was reported that there are loaded freight cars, as well as complete trains and engines, at San Juan, Santurce and Martin Peña stations; at Arecibo, Quebradillas, Agugtala, Mayagüez Playa, Sabana, Sabana and San Juan. Mayagüez Playa, Sabana Gran Le, Yauco, Ponce and Lajas. The company reported that in Lajas the stoppage was declared before six o'clock Wednesday afternoon, and that at the Talleres station, the personnel of locomotive number 6R did not abandon it, but left it on the general track, forcing train number 12, coming from Humac "o, to leave parked wagons, because it could not continue on to San Juan. Among the cargo in the cars were also large quantities of sugar destined for merchants in San Juan and other towns on the island; fertilizers for settlers and farmers in the sugar cane industry; for the mills; packages of express mail; beer, food and other foodstuffs; empty bottles, empty dry goods and a variety of articles for food and industry. Yesterday the negotiations for the settlement of the strike were still in progress. The island conciliator, Mr. Fi anrlac. Verdiales, reported that, after the last meeting has not emerged so far a basis for convening a meeting with the parties. He expressed that they are firm in not yielding in the position they have assumed, and that the government conciliators continue in contact with the workers and employers "to see if an acceptable proposal is urgently needed that will permit a satisfactory solution to the conflict". The Acting President of the Co- 1 nmión de Servicio Publico, Lic. Juan Tomás . Peftagarlcano. has been studying in the last two days the file related to the Railroad Company, raised on the occasion of a petition of said company, formulated a few months ago to study its financial conditions as a public service company. The Pefiagarlcano lawyer said that the file shows that Mr. James R. i (Continued on page 15.)
Protesting the * ! 1 buyers of cigars in the U.S. They allege that new manufacturers are flooding the market with an inferior product They request action from Agriculture They claim that the accredited and superior brands of the Island are being harmed For IL SANTIAGO ROSA Important American firms importing tobacco manufactured in Puerto Rico have been complaining to their representatives on the Island that they have been exporting tobacco manufactured in Puerto Rico. I that they have been exporting large quantities of Puerto Rican cigars, elaborated" by new" producer", that cause discomfort to the market of this product in the United" States". Several of this" firm" have made it known that such situation causes hindrance" to the sale of Puerto Rican cigars" of reputable brands in the United States" market. It was reported that some accredited" producers" of the pala" are making representations" with the Federal Government, in the sense that those federal regulations" which cover the export of tobacco to the continent, and which require that the cigar be made with fumigated tobacco, of good quality, and under acceptable conditions, be applied. The export of cigars" had been resumed in unlimited quantities, since an accelerated demand for this product in the United States" market suddenly arose again. This situation occurred after a slowdown in the pace of exports, due to the end of the war. In the last few months, the demand for cigars has been renewed and exports of cigars have resumed in unprecedented quantities," forcing numerous new manufacturers to flood the market. Complaints" have been made to the Federal Department of Internal Revenue", in the sense that "cigars of poor quality have been exported, made with unsprayed tobacco, in many cases with "cellophane", and demanding the intervention of said Department so that this situation may be corrected. It was reported that the situation has reached such an extreme, that some of the tobacco factories in the area are now in such a state of disrepair, that some of them have been able to sell their products without fumigating the tobacco.
By DARIO CARLO I Editor of EL MUNDO | A motion presented by the proprietary member, Mr. Antonio Re-1 xe" Rulz, to the" effect" of appointing a special committee which, among other" things" would study the advisability of granting the right to speak and vote in the general meetings and to be eligible for the administrative" positions, to the full members, the vast majority of whom are members of the Association.The motion, which was passed to study by the board of directors of the Casa de España elected at the last general assembly of proprietary members of the Institution, was passed to study by the board of directors of the Casa de España elected at the last general assembly of proprietary members of the Institution. The original motion was amended so that the study would be carried out by the board and not by the board of directors.
News Digest ,
-The House-at WAahlngíon-approved the measure which would prohibit Isa claim** for pay, portal to portal, and would limit to a minimum the foot M oa in demand for unpaid "nourishment and overtime pay. District Judge Borlnquru Marrero Rios was appointed yesterday pm Truman, Associate Judge of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico. * The conflict with railroad workers continues while the merchandise remains immobilized in the stations. CSP studies the report rendered by the train company some time ago.... * D* Jesus informs that the budget will be submitted next week. Independent" tobacco growers cannot find anyone to make them offers. The agricultural entity affirms that pressure is being exerted to lower the markup. The Polytechnic Institute installs today its new president, Edward G. Seel. Peñagaríca no president tnterl no den CSP. - Iriarte alleges Incomplete data were given to Cordon, since the VPR favors the classic horned. without claiming special economic" concessions.
Miss Josefina Quiñones Jlménes accused in Federal Short of trying to influence several Jury" * * * * They study to give the" partners of number of the House of Spain - in "u great majority Puerto Ricans-vos and vote in the General Meetings. Stopped" the" appropriations bills in the House, for not yet knowing the possible" income. Cuchi hopes Congress will pass and Truman will sign an 88,000,000 appropriation for I "la veterans. The "Betty Jo" plane covered the distance from Honolulu ¡i New York in 14 hours" and 84 minutes. Exaubtreasurer of Puerto Rico, Jorge Rermúdes, is Muilnt Marín's can dldatn to chair the Civil Service Commission. - ♦ Northern "firm" protests that new elabor'doro" are shipping an inferior product to the mark, to the detriment of the" accredited brand" of cigar* Puerto Rican Río Piedra" beat Arecibo, 35-18, in the Inaugural Game of the Ja TJga Puerto Rican Basketball qualifying tournament, held last night in Arecibo.
Study to give full members voice and vote in Casa de España 78% of it" is made up of Puerto Ricans who currently cannot be part of the board of directors. -They advocate for a new orientation
The original motion was made by the President of the Casa de España, "efior Rafael Martínez Domínguez. The original motion also proposes that the special committee should not include those who intervened in the drafting of the "clauses of incorporation and regulations in force of the association, as well as the members of the board who were elected at the assembly. We are trying to obtain specific reports on the agreements and decisions made in connection with this motion. One of the members of the Spanish 4 (lasa) who was present at the meeting at which the motion was considered. He reported that the original motion was amended to the effect that the proposed special committee would be appointed by the president, Mr. Martinez Dominguez, rather than by the assembly, as proposed in the motion. We had an interview with the secretary of the Ca "a de España, Mr. Manuel Fría, but he declined to give the requested information, stating that he had to see the president. Mr. Martinez Dominguez stated that he did not remember exactly what happened, finally dictating to us that he believed that the motion had been passed to the board for study. First of all, he had not been informed, and when we asked him if he had named the members of the aforementioned committee, he said that he had not yet done so. In the argumentation of his motion, Mr. Reyes Ruiz stated that it was legitimate and convenient to extend the right to voice and vote to the regular members, "who have helped us, help us and form more than 78 percent of our enrollment". Mr. Reyes Rulz advocated for an "orientation of the Casa de España, changing the" । (Continued on page 22.)
House Approves Measure That Would Prohibit Portal-to-Portal Pay Claims; Would Limit Overtime Lawsuits
Iriarte alleges Cordon received erroneous data.
Ledo, Borlnquen Marrero Rio" i Appointment Generally Welcomed Marrero Ríob is 47 years old now-He served 16 years on the Supreme WASHINGTON~28~ (PU)-The nomination of Borlnquen Marrero Rio" for Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, made today by President Truman, was immediately hailed as an excellent appointment in 'o" insular" circle" and *n the" center"; of government in this Capital. Marrero will replace Judge Jorge L. Cordova Diaz, who resigned. It was generally expected that the appointment, long awaited in Puerto Rico and in the central islands of Wá "hlngton, would be warmly welcomed. It was known that for many months Governor Plftero, Resident Commissioner Dr. Femó" Isérn, and other leaders and insular entities gave their support to Marrero Rio". Marrero Rio" is now a San Juan District Court Judge. Marrero Rio" received from EL MUNDO the first notice of his appointment. Shortly after, he authorized these statements: "I consider it an immense honor to be known by the President in appointing me as an Associate Judge or our highest court. "Returning to the Supreme Court is for me like a return to my beloved home. There I worked 16 years" in a mode "to to" office and there, of "er confirmed by the Senate of the United" States, e "p-ro spend the rest of my" days. "I will go to work to the best of my ability and with the cooperation of my colleagues and the members of the Court, I am confident that my work will be a success. "My most sincere gratitude to all of the members of the Tribunal,
Says 1a URP favors the classical state. The president of the Republican Union, Celestino Irlar- ) te, declared in referring"" to the"" manifestation"" of Senator Guy Cordon, chairman of the subcommittee on Insular ।Territories and Posesione",) ' of the Senate Committee on Public Lands, released" in yesterday's edition, that "it seems that the information received by Senator Cordon on the Island is incomplete, with respect to our" problem", both politically and economically". Mr. Triarte reaffirmed his Party's position regarding the attainment of statehood, "classic style, on equal terms with all the other states of the Union," and added that "the National Republican Party will fulfill its commitments to Puerto Rico, as stated" in its platform. "The statements of Senator Cordon," said Mr. Triar, "have several angles that justify a detailed and thorough commentary. They are very interesting. It seems that the Information received by him is Incomplete with regard to our problems, both in the political and in the { economic order. "It is natural that this should be so, for the period of time that the members of the Congress delegation were in our Island was very short. The attentions to which they were subjected reduced the time for them to be duly informed of all our problem. That is why they have expressed their desire" to return to the Island soon, in order to obtain all the information that in their opinion ""a necessary to be able to approach our"" problem"" consciously. Senator Cordon's "comments" regarding the teaching of English deserve our consideration in the first place. Our status as citizens" of the United States" obliges us to know perfectly the English language, 'which is the national language. This was recommended by President Roosevelt to the former Commissioner of Instruction, Dr. Gallardo, when he extended his appointment as such; and it was also recommended by President McKinley, when he extended his appointment as such to Governor Alien. "If the political problem raised by the then Speaker of the House, José de Diego, on the occasion of the appointment to fill the vacancy of rector of the University, had not arisen in 1915, we would not be discussing today whether teaching in the schools should be in Spanish or English, it was that political debate, essentially political, It was that political debate, essentially political, between Representatives De Diego and Huyke, which gave rise to all these consequences that the poor children of Puerto Rico are now suffering. Senator Cordon would not now have had to worry about the solution to this problem, nor would Commissioner Villaronga have had to explain his intentions to use Spanish as a teaching vehicle in the public schools; Nor would Mr. Villaronga have had to offer to intensify the teaching of English as a subject, since at this point, all the Puerto Rican people, especially those in the United States, would not have been able to understand his intentions to use Spanish as a teaching vehicle in the public schools.
Alliance between France and Great Britain
Great Britain Includes mutual defense, for a period of 50 years. Bcvin's announcement By Karol Thaler 1 United Press Correspondent 1 LONDON, 28th (PU).- Foreign Secretary Ernest Bavin announced today before an overjoyed House of Commons that Britain and France have agreed to the conclusion of a treaty of alliance which he expected to be signed on March 4 in the historic city of Dunkirk. Revin's surprise announcement came just before the House recessed for the end of the week and immediately drew praise from Anthony Eden on behalf of the Conservative opposition. Bavin did not disclose the terms of the treaty, but the Paris dispatches indicate that it contains the following points: 1-A 50-year alliance instead of 20 years, as originally proposed. 2-Britain and France will give the French and the British the same amount of money. 2-Britain and France will take all necessary steps to eliminate any future threat of war as a result of German aggression, 3-If both France and England were the victims of German aggression, the other power would come to their aid immediately with all the military, political and economic force at their disposal. I 4-The" do" pal"" agree not to enter into any alliance or coalition directed against either" do" power". 5-The two countries agree to provide each other with economic and political aid for the reconstruction of both countries. In connection with the treaty, it is believed by British sources that it settled matters relating to the Anglo-French oil problems in Asia Minor. France recently protested that the Anglo-American oil negotiations had ignored France's legitimate oil interests in that region. "Some adjustments are now being made,'' Bevjn told lo" Cornu ne". "I expect that the treaty will be signed by the French Foreign Minister and myself on Tue" 4 do March at Dunkirkquo." Revin's departure from London (Continued on page 16.)
; Pinero to meet hov with vain members of Congress ; He also expressed in Washington desire to rular ! in touch with officials in charge of the ; sugar situation. - Explained BPP bond*.
' By PAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, 28. (PU)- Governor Plftero informed the United Preni "a today, that I" prl- , ¡mordlal reason d* "u mission in the Contl- , nent is to help float .ila issue d" honos in the sum of ,[$50,000.000 for the . He said that this is the largest bond issuance in the history of the United States in a single operation.
The bonds" d"|lngre "o" ""n obligaI clone" to be paid from the income" ■ "e obtained, through the opera-i - clones d" a given public service ■ - in the present case, lo" 1 income" derived" from the sale le * electric energy and other" servi" cio" of 1" Source" Fluvial" Authority. He indicated that he will leave for New York at the end of this week, accompanied by the Island Treasurer, Rafael Duscagtla. in the hope of being able to take the necessary steps to place the issue through a New York syndicate and complete it at the beginning of next year, possibly on March or March. The fact that the River Source Authority has decided to undertake a business of this magnitude," said Plftero. "is indicative of its current conditions." | With the funds from the bond issue, River Springs will be in a position to extend its service considerably. * The money will be used for the construction of new dams, the development of new river power systems, the extension of electric transmission lines and the extension of the power lines.
Quiñones Jiménez tried to influence jurors, alleging!
Charged with several violations of section 241, Title 18 of the United States Criminal Code, Ms. Josefina Quiñones Jiménez will be indicted in Federal Court for allegedly "corruptly attempting to influence" several jurors in connection with the case against her brother, Mr. Fernando Quiñones Jiménez, which was heard in said court. The latter was accused of carrying a firearm while on trial in the island courts for a felony. r
The Federal Grand Jury, sitting last Thursday, found cause of action against Miss Quiñón" Jiménez, and yesterday a summons was served by the Marshal's office to that effect. Sel" cases have been filed against Miss Quiñones. Jimenez, who is charged by the Grand Jury that on various dates she attempted to influence sel" persons who were, at the time her brother's case was pending in Federal Court, on the Federal jury. (Continued on page 16)
Flew from Hawaii to New York in fourteen and a half hours.
'-W-M,,,, Jr En - Jr Ik a m* H ■ Vl.
The hlmotor plane "Betty Jo", which flew direct, the distance from Honolulu to New York in 14 hour" and 84 minute". (Associated Press Photo).
The "Betty" nearly made a crash landing.
The twin-engine plane arrived at La Guardia airfield yesterday morning at 11:08 a.m., after having exhausted its entire fuel supply. NEW YORK. 28. Tpül- The "Betty J(A hlmotor fighter plane which took off last night from Honolulu, Hawaii, from Hickman landing field, arrived at La Guardia airfield this morning at 11:08 a.m., completing a non-stop flight" of more than five miles" to New York in 14 hours and 84 minutes.
five miles over the Pacific Ocean, along the Great Circle route. Unofficially, it has been reported that the flight lasted fourteen hours and 34 minutes, with an average speed of 350 miles per hour. Lt. Thacker, chief pilot of the double-cockpit plane, which bears the name "Betty Jo rn honor dr h< e "po "a dr Thacker, made a perfect at<"rrl- ¡ zaje at La ¡| Guardia airfield after the entire field area was ? dr "congr "tinned to avoid any delay. Only a few gallons of gasoline from the large fuel supply equaled the weight of the airplane with which the "Betty Jo" took off from Ho- ' nolulu last night. There was a moment during the course of the flight - when , the plane passed over the Grande" Lakes - when Thacker and copi' i loto, Lt. John M. Ard, of InJ glewood. California, believed that , i would have to land before reaching their target. But ai flying so- [ hre Erie, Pen "flvania, Thacker com¡ checked his stock" of gasoline ? .decided to proceed to New ork, telegraphing that it would be noce- ¡"arlo to strip the area for the raso . of an emergency landing, since i had no fuel to fly in circles snhre the field. The wives of both aviators were at La Guardia airfield to receive them, when they jumped out of the cockpits where they were seated for fifteen hours of consecutive flight. The plane passed over the city of Sioux, in the state of Iowa, at 6:32 a.m., flying at an altitude of 1,000 feet. At seven and Ucee i minute" the "Betty Jn" Reported by! ■'radio that it was one" -32 kilometers ni west of Rockford, ¡ i Illinois. The message was picked up by! - the Civil Aeronautics station at¡ ■ Do" Moines, Iowa. The plane "hates! information on the state of the! weather. At nine o'clock eleven mlnu-| - tos in the morning the Air Baso Ml- - litar- at Selfridge, Michigan, Informi mo that at this time o| ''Betty Jo" was about seven thousand feet above the town , of Ronton Harbor, Michigan. The pi-¡ i lotus said the plane's] speed was 312 miles per hour as it flew sohro Detroit. From California to New York the craft covered the distance at a speed dn over three hundred! miles per hour. On the other hand. o| International News Service reports that the official time do| "Retfy Jo" in | . its flight from Honolulu to New York ' was fourteen hours" and thirty do" minute." " I In the" slguienfos ' doclaraHuiei, i made" by Lt. Col. Ro-| bert. Thacker to Dorothy Doan, rrespon "al of the 1NS. one of the va-! - "I "lente" pilot" of the "Betty Jo" reye- ' which he was determined to "terrier | ■ at Ellle or Wlllkesbarre (Pen-i - ¡"llvanla), but was dissuaded from it > by his partner, second pilot.! " Lt. John M. Ard. A contlmri- - clone we give the brief account given by ha-, i ce Thacker of "u sensational non-stop vue- 1 lo from Honolulu to New 11 York. "I do not like people who ■ after such a flight as this "n- ■ len ron excu "as, saying that if this or that had not "ucedldo '!"- they would have looked mAs. The new trip was magnificent and pleasant. Everything went smoothly and chronometrically, and we have nothing to apologize for. The.tlemoj i 1 was unbeatable. I did not plan i ■ to land in New York, but my ' partner, who is very expert, said that this was feasible. Land- ■ moa when no" sixty galonea dé gaaollna remained. "A hundred miles" from San Francls-n ("over the Pacific) we tried to throw by means of a device, electric, one of the tank" of fuel to reduce the reais- 1 । tencla of the wind. Twice" we tried it and the second time we tried it and the second time it was thrown. I wanted to throw too! i the" other" after tank", but they didn't - . "oltaron. We kept an 'average (Continued on page 16.) ¿
MENDEZ ASKED TO BE CHARGED F.L MUNDO yesterday picked up the version that the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Orlando Mánde", had' sent, or rNtnh" about to send to Governor Plftero, the ranúncln da au cargo. When asked about the matter, Mr. Mánde" said: "He has not submitted his resignation". On the other hand, a reliable source informed EL MUNDO that Mr. Mánde" visited Governor I'lñeró shortly before he left the day before yesterday for the United States and asked that, if the investigation ordered by the Governor into the payments made to Concrete Industries Inc., of which Mr. Méndez is a director, were justified, he be charged. We know that Attorney Negron Fernandez held an interview yesterday with Prosecutor Aponte regarding the results of the investigation. Appropriations Bills Stalled j The House has not been able to consider them, ignoring the possible revenues Due to the fact that so far the possible revenues" of the Island Treasury for next year" have not been reported, the House of Representatives" has not been able to approve any of the appropriations" bills" that have been filed by the different representatives", most of which" are to provide funds for the construction of public" works. The appearance of the Treasurer of Puerto Rico and the President of the Puerto Rico Planning Board before the House Treasury Committee was a great success. "In view of this, the House took in its session last Wednesday the agreement not to consider any appropriations bill until it was aware of the revenue estimates to be submitted by the Treasury and the Treasury Board. 'rT' -0 d, \ Puprl ° Rico. "eftor Rafael i Bmcaglla and the Chairman of the Planning Board, "eftor Rafael l Picó. On the other hand, it has been reported that all legislation not included in the program of the Planning Board is destined to die in the House Treasury Committee, because even if it were approved, it would still not be approved by the House of Representatives.) A delta" Monserrate Anselml, president of the Puerto Rico Board of Pharmacy, reported that he intends to address today's meeting to all pharmacists and pharmacy owners in San Juan, to invite them to cooperate with the administrator of the Capital, Mrs. Foll "a Rincón Rincón, who is the president of the Puerto Rico Board of Pharmacy.Mrs. Foll "a Rincón de Gautier, in the establishment of the night service of pharmacies in all the ¡zona" of San Juan. i The president of ¡the Board of Pharmacy also informed that, in the cities of Mayagüez and Ponce, they have been operating for some time with be(Continued on page 16) i _ ,
The Senate has a bill which is milder It would also prohibit portal-to-portal lawsuits, however There are cases for more" than #6,000,000,000,000 The pending measure* would "feriate the present" and future Pnr DEAn" w7 DITTMER United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, 28.)-The U.S. House of Representatives today passed a bill to prohibit claims for portal-to-portal pay totaling nearly $6,000,000,000 nationwide, and to set a one-year limit on all lawsuits brought on claims for unpaid wages and overtime. The measure was immediately sent to the Senate, which next week begins debate on a softer version that virtually bans all portal-to-portal pay lawsuits but sets a two-year limit on back pay claims. A strong Republican* and most of the ur" Democrats pushed the measure through the House, defeating a series of "llberallzing" amendments. InapIradaR by a flood of CIO lawsuit" covering portal-to-portal back pay already amounting to nearly" $6,(MM),0()0,00Ú, in" Senate and House bill* would vlrtually prohibit all" lo* . The Senate and House bills would prohibit "all future lawsuits," claiming pay for the time it takes workers to walk to their workbenches, unpack their tools and other activities prior to starting work. Claims may be filed only on the basis of existing contract provisions or the ordinary practice of the industry. The statute of limitation - which is included in the House bill and in the Senate bill - "" applies to all "pl "lto" filed" within the "dlsposlclone" of the Wagnér Act to recover "ala- I r o" Htra "ado", overtime, and other "form" of compensation. The House vote on the bill to declare the "Regale* the" Portal Law" was 34 to 56, reflecting a strong detrrmln "ci6n and a sound judgment on the part of the representatives on the contentious issue. In the Senate, even though the proposed 1"- - - "lalation is not so drá*t icn. coincides in fundamental |p with ■ i" of the House, both senator* . and i apresen tan te" seem to be ' in agreement on 1* elimination of the" portal * portal lawsuit". The only difference in the two legislative bodies' criteria is in -1 limit that """" will eventually be placed on the" reciarua-" tion" for Balarlo" backlog" and ho- . ra" extras. The House wants a one-year limit and in the Senate m Y has proposed a limit of two" years, I The House bill, con- '< trary to that of the Senate, contains a j provision to relieve sponsors- í nn" from liability in e) payment f back claims" ai it* | they can prove that they acted de hue- ! na ta. as a result of a court decision or a regulation l of a Government agency. The only significant opposition to the bill was on the point of extending to two or three years the limits for back wage and hour actions. Representative Emanuel Co- ' Iler, Democrat of New York, introduced an amendment to extend the limit to do" afto", By a vote of 124 to 73 it was defeated. Rep. Francl* E. Waltsr, 1 Democrat of Penailvanla, suggested I that the limit be extended to tro* a year." A vote of 145 contri 1 40 defeated this amendment. In view of the fact that all" Jas enmlen- í da" were defeated, Rep- 1 te Ceiler tried his last maneuver. He proposed that the bill be referred back to the Legal Committee with a request that it extend the limit to three years. By a vote of 219 to 42 the motion was defeated. Rep. Jacob Javits, R-New York Publican. rs., moved an amendment, which was also defeated, to exclude from the provisions of the law workers who are not covered by collective bargaining agreements. He said that the unions are strong enough to protect their members, but that Congress is obliged to protect workers who do not form an organized group. According to estimates" made" by persons" who have testified" before the" Congress" who had" these" measures" under study" and" consideration, 1o" lawsuit" from portal to portal - would" have" come to" include claims" worth" one" forty" billion dollars". The lawsuits* w filed" h""h""t the time ;D "ganfl to about sel" billion" disdóla- d ra". As of today's date some four-, J hundred" thousand workers" are named as plaintiffs" in the" above-mentioned lawsuits, but all workers are covered by the Hours and Wage Act (Continued on page 1&).
Appointed Supreme Court Judge