THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy Sr morning, becoming mostly cloudy this afternoon, with occasional showers. IN SAN JUAN, AYEB: High, M; low, 80; rain, 0.05. Barometric pressure at sea level at 4:80 p.m., 29.68 inches of mercury.
38 Pages 5<
lx ma r ana diary
YEAR XXVIII
I check the brakes. Cooperate with the automobile inspection.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JUNE 7, 1947.
Sntorad a* eaeond elaaa matter. Poet Ottlea, Saa Ju*n. P. B.
NUMBER 10969
Muñoz is believed to aspire to the
Eií Washington persists speculation that he will be candidate in 1948 Pinero would return to the Commissariat The latter neither denied nor affirmed version. Fernós would be president Senate - By CHABLE8 MeCABE -■-Washington, June 6. (pu>In Island circles here much speculation that Muñoz Marín will undoubtedly be the Popular Democratic Party candidate for governor in 1948, if the elective gubernatorial bill is approved: and today a U.S. official concurred with this opinion. A government source close to Puerto Rican affairs expressed the opinion that Muñoz Marin would be the candidate instead of Piftero. He said he had little doubt that legislation to provide for an elective governor on this point could be passed. Emphasizing the fact that he was expressing his personal opinion, the source said he understood that Piftero wished to resume his work here as Commissioner-Realdent" and that he would try to get on the ballot for that office, along with Muñoz, in the 1948 election. This speculation has intensified since Piñero's arrival in Washington two weeks ago. Many of the speculators agree that Piñero greatly enjoyed his stay here when he was Resident Commissioner, and he would like to return to Capitol Hill, if possible to relieve him of his duties as Governor. । In many centers it has been mentioned that the candidate of 1" opposition to the popular democrats, ■ in the event that the legislation of the elective governor । for 1948 was authorized, would be Supreme Court Justice Martin Travieso, । This view is held in some circles, despite a recent statement by the judge, indicating that he had no intention of resigning his office. |Travieso was one of the candidates considered by the House of Representatives to replace Rexford G. Tugwell as governor when? this matter came up last year. < Another possible candidate mentioned- i do to face the Pallar Democratic Party's is Supreme Court cxjudge Jorge L. Cór- 1 dova Díaz. However, a considerable se'ctnr 1 of politico-insular observers are inclined to rule him out as a possible candidate. Although they concede great ability and integrity, they ignore the extent to which he will have the strength of attraction to win votes. One of the unknown factors in the proposed Piftero Muftoz Marin gubernatorial combination is the role that Dr. Fernos will play in the event of Piñero's possible candidacy for the post of Resident Commissioner. Some observers have suggested that Dr. Fernós would be offered the Presidency of the Senate Instilar, in the eventuality that Muñoz would be a candidate for Governor, and Piñero for Resident Commissioner. He neither confirmed nor denied them, but when asked by the United Press whether he would be a candidate for governor in 1948, he replied, "It depends." The only thing Piñero ventured to comment on the matter was that he harbored a deep conviction that the governor's project (Continued on page 21 '
Compendium of News
United States writes strong note against partisanship in Hungarian coup. Co rosal ge" farmers. Honor extension of minimum price guarantee plan. - - - - Eastern Air Unes reports that it will put into operation on the San Juan to Miami route, the new Constella-Han, 60-passenger type. - - - Veterans Island Office to seek amendments to Veterans Bill of Rights. - All indications are that the Government will cover its revenue estimates for fiscal 1946-47. On the other hand, department heads are preparing to request increased appropriations to meet servicemen's expenses. - - - * ~F. Matos Paoli awarded scholarship to pursue literary studies in Paris - - - - - - Superior Council to consider UPB budget and Rivera Valiente's appeal on Monday, TA check for Fajardo SuMr. * , e Expolicía Pablo Elmo Hernándea found not guilty. - English will be intensified next school year. Vlllaronga already has the plan to that effect,
Deada tomorrow night ♦ 0 will lend aervlcloa the night pharmacy da San Juan, Installed in the building annexed to the da la Blbliotoca Municipal, at stop 18. * Tomorrow is held in San Juan the meeting of labor leaders" aimed at laying the foundations for the unity congreeo of Is CGT. * In Washington, speculation persists that Muño" Marín will be a candidate for governor in 1948. ♦ - - - Rum collections have fallen sharply in recent months. - - - - lx)s Benedictine Fathers will open a school in, and take over the direction of the HUmacso parish. - - - - Taft blames Truman for the rise in prices. - - - The killer of Dr. Jose Jx>remo Casalduc, Gilberto Cortes Marin, was sentenced yesterday to life imprisonment. - The New York Giants beat the St. Louis Cardinals, 7 to 4. The Double-A amateur baseball championship continues tomorrow. Olmo struck out in the 4th inning in Aauiea's victory over Mexico.
Hungarian minister repudiates coup d'etat.
■ I * I Aladar Szegedy-Maazak, Hungarian minister to the United States, who in a radio interview with him in Washington, said that his attitude of refusing to go to his homeland for the time being was not because "I still want to stay where I can raise my voice in defense of my country. Reportedly, r! President Truman yesterday con-í denounced as an ahuso the coup d'état by which the Communist mi- ¡ noria seized the government of that pala, (Photo P. A.) । A settlement is expected soon (leí ILA strike at the docks Conciliators last night considered the wage scales submitted by the parties, with a view to : finding the formula acceptable to the Union All prospects" pointed last night toward a prompt liquidation of the strike decreed in the ports of the Island by the International Longshoremen Association. The eonclllators Francisco Verdiales (island? and William McAllister (federal) were last night working on a formula that would be acceptable to the ILA. Meanwhile, the Union of
The conciliator Verdiales reported that he had received the scale of the negotiations with a view to adopting a collective bargaining agreement between the ILA and the shipping companies, and that with these in sight he was meeting with conciliator McAllister to prepare a compromise formula. No date had been set yesterday for the resumption of talks to consider the conciliation, but all indications last night were that the two sides would meet again today. The legal advisor of the Comité Naviero, Mr. José Novas, said yesterday that "the negotiations are progressing and it is probable that we will soon reach an agreement". From Ponce, the correspondent of EL MUNDO, Mr. Miguel Rivera, informed that the board of directors of the Dock Workers Union met last night and agreed to support the ILA strike. As a result, no work was done yesterday at the Ponce docks. > Yesterday, Friday, an assembly of dock workers was held at the Ponce Beach Theater to decide if the workers would continue on strike. The Union, which is integrated by members of the ILA and the UTM, could not reach an agreement, producing numerous incidents in the assembly, At an indication of Mr. Ramón Mejias, president of the ILA in Ponce, the workers who were in favor of the strike left the premises following him, while those who were in favor of returning to work remained in the assembly, the latter could not reach any agreement regarding the strike, finally dissolving the assembly. The workers affiliated to the UTM, meeting in their local, agreed to return to work at one o'clock in the afternoon. Before one o'clock in the afternoon a meeting was held at the Police headquarters on the beach, in order to seek a settlement to the conflict. The meeting was attended by the captain (Continued on page 22).
Rio conference to be in July or August George C. Marshall expected to take part in drafting treaty WASHINGTON, June 6 (PU)Diplomatic centers prnnnaUcd today that by the end of July or early August a? 11a. y will be in effect 1a long-delayed Rio He Janeiro Conference, to re- . dact an inter- ■ American defense treaty. It is expected that Secretary of State George C. Marshall will meet with the other foreign ministers in Rio de Janeiro to prepare the text of the treaty. Plans for the Conference were accelerated by the termination of the old feud between the United States and Argentina. President Truman signaled the beginning of a new era by declaring that this country was once again on good terms with the South's warring nation, the disagreement was provoked by the fact that Argentina and the United States were in good terms. The disagreement was provoked by the fact that Argentina, during the war and since its termination, had not purged itself of Fascist and Nazi elements as rapidly as the United States had wished. These officials were never in agreement as to the course to be adopted with respect to Argentina-Brai den stifling for a firm hand and Messersmith for a friendly approach. | The Department ri" State Department announced last night that Me" resignation, sersmlth has been accepted and that the packer will return to the United States soon, The 64 arto" old diplomat llene already acquired the right to retire, but "a proha. ble that he be offered a new car- । go. E1 Mr. Truman has refused to ¡discuss his plans to replace Jos two officials. It is expected that Norman Armour, retired Foreign Relations Service officer, will be appointed to replace Braden. Jame" Bruce, commercial execl- _ I of New York City, is among the" candidates" to fill Messers¡mith's position as ambassador to Argentina.
' Heads of Departments set to ¡ request increased appropriations to i cover expenses of some services.
Taft blames Truman for price hike DeáRta vigorous attack on 1a Government policy on procurement Repudiates blaming Commerce Considers it essential that Government expenses be lowered. Provides for vast borrowing Pnr Raymnnd M. Ijahr United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, June 6. (PU).- Stung by President Truman's charge yesterday that he was stifled by a defeatist economic philosophy and held to the old idea of sudden prosperity followed by economic ruin, Sen. Robert. A. Taft, Republican of Ohio, answered the attack today in angry tones. contending that the President's policies are responsible in the highest degree for the rise in prices. Opening the third round of an economic debate *in which both contenders seem to have their eyes fixed on the 1948 presidential election, the Ohio Republican senator said in a formal reply that the scathing attack launched on him by the President yesterday contained an adulterated exposition of Taft's philosophy. He categorically denied the assertion riel Fresiriente to the effect rte that he (Taft) believed that the only way rie bring down nrecloses was to reduce the demand for goods. "Of course, I never made any such statement," said the Senate Republican leader. The senator then unleashed a fierce attack on the President's economic policies and their effect on the national price and wage structure. He said that 1s "stupid policy rie purchases rie! Government" was keeping the prices of basic materials high and listed the following ways in which in his opinion the President is encouraging the rise in prices: 1. Abandoning control of the Office of Price Administration" after Congress gave it full power to regulate most prices. 2. Encouraging a policy of general wage increases. ,7. Opposing all Congressional efforts to reduce Government expenditures and contributions. 4. Verianrio the Case Bill and other Republican measures to limit the power of labor leaders. 5. 5. Extending large credits to foreign countries, beyond the test of their specific needs. Taft dismissed as inconsistent the repeated appeals of the (Continued on page 22)
The Veterans Island Office, headed by Col. Miguel A. 1 Muñoz, will recommend to the governor amendments to the Puerto Rican Veterans' Charter of Rights," Muñoz said yesterday that he is holding conferences with the heads of the various veterans' organizations operating on the island to gather their impressions with a view to improving the charter at the special meeting of the House of Representatives. To this effect, he has already met with the directors of the American Legion and the Veterans Brotherhood. Yesterday he held interviews with the directors of the Veterans of Foreign Wars Association and the Crippled Veterans Association. Muñoz said his office is very interested in learning the views of the entire veterans' organization on the island, especially on the positions of the bill of rights. "From these impressions," he added, "will come the Report that I will submit to the
San Juan's night pharmacy will be in service as of tomorrow
Tomorrow Sunday, at eight o'clock in the evening, the San Juan Night Pharmacy will be inaugurated, in an act in which will participate, among others, the Administrator of the Capital, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier and the president of the College of Pharmacists, Mr. Adolfo L. Monserrate Anselmi. The night pharmacy is operated by a corporation organized by the pharmacy owners of San Juan, Puerta de Tierra and Santurce. This service was repeatedly requested by EL MÍUNDO. Mr. Celestino López Pérez, president of Farmacia Nocturna de San Juan, Inc. will offer the new service to the public of the metropolitan area, at tomorrow's event, on behalf of the pharmacists and the Municipality of San Juan.
The Night Pharmacy, which will be installed in the building annexed to the Municipal Library, stop 18 in Santurce, where the Inauguration acts will take place, will remain serving the community during all night hours, that is to say, during the time in which similar establishments remain with their doors closed. Tomorrow's ceremony will be opened by the Administrator of the Capital, Mrs. Rincón de Gautier, who will explain the need for the new night pharmacy service and the steps that the local administration has been taking to provide it. The president of the San Juan Local Board of the Medical Association, Dr. Ramon Ruiz Cestero, (Continued on page 21)
! United States prepares note against Soviet Strongly protests ¡f "u participation in i the coup in Hungary Truman acted at request Congress Adelantan Sviridov will be asked to consent i for an investigation For RONALD J. GONZALEZ Cnrreeponaal of Frena* Unid* , WASHINGTON, June 6- (FU) H - President Truman today continued his angry indictment against the i coup rt" estarlo rte lo" comunls- ■ 1as in Hungary, by approving a strong not* da protest* against i 1 rte Russian involvement in the de-1 Troc- and suggesting that the United Nations might "ej Jia- 1 madas to restore Hungarian so1 berty, The President took that step, in ' vísta ri the clamor coming from Congress asking the United States" to do more than talk. The Hungarian minister, Aladar Szegedy M*"zak, who broke off his ties with the new communist regime in Budapest and announced that he would remain in voluntary exile until the democratic forces regain control of the government in his homeland. The minister declared, during a Prenaa conference, that Hungary's only hope to free itself from Russian domination is in the United Nations," and he described the "erial" as one that would completely affect the future course of the world organization. In the" diplomatic" eatera" ae said that 1* prealdenclal note has- . bi* "been drafted in the State Department, and that it will be des- , pached soon to Lt. Gen. V. P. Sviridov, Soviet military commander in Hungary, * who is accused as the author of the manipulations carried out one* "emana before, which resulted in the overthrow of the Hungarian democratic government and the seizure of the" Communists. - The note is said to state: I.-To ask Sviridov to consent to an investigation, by a joint American, British and Russian commission, of the Hungarian situation. The Russian commander has previously rejected two similar American requests for an investigation into alleged acts of terrorism against Hungarian political leaders who were not Hungarian granddaughters. ' 2.-Accuse Russia of having violated the terms of the ' 1 (Continued on 1" page 22.) ''
IVO Chief to ask for amendments to the Veteran's Bill of Rights In order to gather the demands made by ex-soldiers, Colonel Muñoz meets with representative entities of ex-soldiers, the Governor on the need to introduce a bill of rights for veterans.
The Governor on the need to introduce certain amendments to the statute, according to improvements that are being demanded by the veterans" for- i . torriqueftoa". I ¡ 1 He also said that" he has been dnn- t ■ ¡ rio lo" steps necessary for the me. i . i . ¡ jor application rie the provisions i i rie said law, having recommended to him t- t . ■ recently given to the Acting Governor 1 > , Mr. Manuel A. Péraz, < u to formulate the" Instructions I which the latter transmitted To the governmental depend- l i ¡ cía" aobre lo" he- i i i ñafíelos that in accordance with the eitat'l- i r I I lo, rtehen receive lo" veterans by- ¡ - torriqueftos, i ' "I am also making ges- I ■ tlnnea directly with the agon- < cías del Gobierno," He added, "for : that veterans receive attention ; - prompt attention to the requests they radl- 1 , qu "n and have it resolved >ua probles mas. We have already presented several test cases, related to the new law, in order to determine in practice all those difficulties that must be overcome," 1 either by regulation or by legislation, so that our ex-soldiers may enjoy these benefits fully. Colonel Muñoz is awaiting the arrival on the Island of the Treasurer of the Island, Rafael A. Bus- ( caglla, to discuss with him the participation of the Banco de Fo- ■ mentó in the program of loans and aid to veterans. He stated that, to this end, he would be pleased to discuss with him the difficulties faced by the veterans in applying for and processing the auspicious loans, and was informed that both Treasurer Buicagll* and the Bank's director, Mr. Donald Bonnlwell, would be discussing these matters at the Bank's headquarters in Washington, D.C., and that the Bank's director, Mr. Donald Bonnlwell, would be discussing these matters at the Bank's headquarters in Washington, D.C., in the United States. They will be dealing with these matters in the United States and will return to the Island in the next few days to understand the matter. In referring again to * the Bill of Rights approved by the " Governor, Coroné! Muñoz In- ■ - formed that the main complaints u of the veterans are formulated a ba- l 1 se of the following: s - ! That the tax exemption, as 1 , and as it appears in the law, reaches (Continued on page 21).
De Jesus notes instability in the Island's revenues He alludes to the prevailing situation in the rum market and foresees a decrease in Treasury revenues during the first half of 1947-48.
The head of the Budget Bureau, Mr. Francisco de Jesús, declared yesterday, when asked for his opinion on the fiscal outlook of the Government for the fiscal year which begins next July 1, that the revenue estimate of $71,950,000, as formulated by Governor Piftero and contained in his message to the Legislature of Puerto Rico during its last meeting, has remained unchanged up to now. He made it known, however, that the line item which up to now has served as the main source of income to the Treasury, i.e., federal revenues, has been characterized by instability. In Mr. De Jesús' opinion, this situation makes it difficult to firmly determine a more or less stable financial framework, since, according to him, there is instability in the Puerto Rican rum industry. "We are working on a report to the Governor that covers the current financial picture," said Mr. De Jesús, "which we will present to him upon his return to the island. The Budget Bureau chief added that next year's revenue estimate for the Island is
The head of the Budget Bureau added that the estimated income for next year is more or less the same as that of the Planning Board, which submitted a probable income of $71,952,338 for the next fiscal year. As of yesterday, the Bureau of the Budget has not received any official request from any department or agency head for additional funds to be provided by the Legislature in the special session to be convened in the near future. However, Mr. De Jesus did not consider the likelihood of such demands to be desirable. When asked what effect new requests for funds for some public services could have on the government's fiscal picture during the next fiscal year, Mr. De Jesús said that such specific question could be answered once the report to be submitted to the Governor on Monday is completed. The head of the Budget Bureau commented on the situation regarding * the rum industry, stating that the revenues from internal revenue" (Continued on page 22).
Closed the transaction for the purchase of lands from the Fajardo The Supreme Court ordered (foot "e e enmendara eLDecréto por Consentimiento, and was delivered the check for $5,500,000 deposited by the AT Tí v * r " la /urstda entré al Dñiwtamanto rie Justicia v la Auloiidad rie Fierras da Pumto Ríen, con motivo da la transacción entre v '¡i' y " Fajardo Sugar Grower". Loiza Rugar Co v fajardo Sugar Grower", whose" land" *"| as eoulnn v JSS
Committee reviewed voter registration This aspect of the electoral law will have to be amended by chambers The committee that studies the" amendments to 1" electoral law, met again at the island Capitol, continuing discussions on 1" measure that will be "ommitted to the Legislaturs in its next extraordinary session*. According to what was reported yesterday by the Vice President of the Senate, Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones, in Thursday's meeting they continued discussing the system to be implemented for the celebration of registrations, which, as previously reported, will replace the current one, with the registration of voters * through the Demographic Registry, by sending to the Insular Board of Elections the corresponding information on the voters, "egúnW*. yan reaching the age of majority, to include them in the voter lists. The amendment in connection with the system rie inacripcinnea h* been proposed by the" representatives of the Popular Party in the Commission. It was also authoritatively reported yesterday that the legislative leaders are awaiting the return of Governor Jesus T. Piftero to the island tomorrow. Piftero to the island tomorrow, Sunday, to discuss with him the different issues to be included in the extraordinary session of the Legislature, and to agree on the date of the meeting. The date tentatively chosen by the legislative leaders is Monday, June 16. Senator Quiñón said yesterday that the Commission studying the amendments to the Electoral Law should finish its work next week. In this Commission, as I have said, there are representatives of the political parties with legislative representation. The last meeting of the Commission lasted from 4:00 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. Agreements on rent law WASHINGTON, June 6. (PU)The congressional conferees studying rent control legislation today eliminated the provision in the House bill authorizing cities and towns to terminate rent control at will. That rent control be extended until at least December 31, next, under the direction of the Home Accelerator. 2. To authorize homeowners and tenants to make arrangements by mutual consent to increase rents by 15 percent. 3. Establish local rent advisory boards to perform the primary work of rent control. The Senedo conferees nodded tentatively to accept a House decision to repeal all federal building controls except for amusement buildings. Senator C. Douglass Buck, re- i (Continued on page 22)
..... rijuipn and ntm" own, rfades acquired by purchase, was finally resolved yesterday, *1 ordering the Supreme Court, - as requested by Jos abngados rie I* Authority, - that the second paragraph, subparagraph seven, of the Consent Decree issued by the Tri-. bunal on June 18, 194& The resolution handed down by the Supreme Court yesterday in this case, was evacuated* by Chief Justice Martin Travieso, Esq. By virtue of the resolution, a check for $5,500,000 was delivered yesterday to the representatives of the Fajardo Sugar Growers and Loiza Sugar Co. companies, which the Puerto Rico Land Authority has deposited with the clerk's office of the Supreme Court, as part of the price of the properties acquired from the aforementioned corporations. "The delivery of the check was made possible when the Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Attorney Lula Negrón Fernández, agreed to amend the Consent Decree issued by the Supreme Court in connection with this transaction. The Land Authority acquires 27 mi) cuerda" of land, bringing the total amount of land it owns to more than 90 thousand cuerdas. The total price of the properties involved in this transaction is $6,040,000. Of this sum, the Land Authority has retained the amount of $540,000 as a guarantee against any deficiency that may exist in the land's size, once it has been fully measured. In the resolution issued yesterday, among other things, the Supreme Court ordered the aforementioned corporation to make full delivery of its properties to the Authority (Continued on page 22) Villaronga already has a plan for English language 1 teaching will be intensified in the next school year I The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano Villaronga, has signed in his norier a new plan for the teaching of English in the rural schools of Puerto Rico. The study which culminated in the formulation of this plan was carried out by "1 Dr. Eliseo Berrios, supervisor of the teaching of English in the rural schools of the Island. Dr. Berrios subsequently submitted his plan to Commissioner Villaronga. The details of the new plan have not been disclosed, as the Commissioner has not been able to complete a study of it as yet. It is understood that if approved and implemented, the plan could also be applied in urban schools. The new administration of the Department of Education, under current Commissioner Villaronga, as aeabe, plans to develop a program to intensify the teaching of English in Puerto Rico. This follows the policy announced by Mr. Villaronga to teach English in an intensified form, conducting the other subjects in the Spanish language. Lo" plan"" of the Department "on al (Continued on page 22,).
Everything indicates that the estimates will be covered It is assured that the surplus of $13,944,369 this year will not be affected Agencies attentive to federal measures Picó studies effect of probable lawsuits on public funds Fnr B. SANTIAGO MORA Editor of EL MUNDO Torio seems to indicate that the island government will cover the estimated revenues from the general fund form for the Fourth Economic Program for the fiscal year ending June 30. It was also understood yesterday that Hustancinlment will not be affected by the surplus fund estimated at $13,944,369, which the Government estimates will be available by July 1, 1947, and which will serve to fund expenditures during the coming fiscal year. For the present fiscal year the Government has made an estimate of $82,389,362 in the general fund. Its principal source of revenue during the last few years, namely, the tax on alcoholic beverages, cigarettes and cigarettes, has suffered in the last few years, meso" riel presents economic exercise a* notable decrease with reason" rio the "úhlfA reduction of the shipments" da ions portorriqueño" n Estado" United States, This will cause, according s" Informed yesterday * EL MUNDO, a* bnj* in the" Income" "sumarios by this concept, that s" calrula in around three milliona ri" dollars. It is expected that by June 30 next year, federal internal revenue will only reach $20,000,000, which will reduce the $23,000,000 included by the Planning Board in the Government's fourth program by the aforementioned sum. Notwithstanding this situation, it was reported yesterday that the "estimated" amount of the program "would" have already been exceeded. Yesterday the Treasury Department was working on the preparation of the fiscal table on such revenues, and it was reported that, although the final figures were not yet finalized, it could be assured that the $19,000,000 estimated as probable revenues for 1946-1947 had already been comfortably exceeded. Also, 1* income tax has* exceeded the estimated collections which served as the basis for* the preparation of the Government's economic program. Revenues for this fiscal year had been estimated at $20,500,000 for this item, and it was reported in EL MUNDO at the Bureau of Income Taxes that the estimate has been more than covered, having been exceeded by more than one million dollars. As for the fiscal year beginning next July 1, the outlook is also that the available Revenues will not be substantially affected. For the current period, the estimate of domestic federal revenue receipts was raised by only $20,000,000, since the Government's physical calculations are under the impression that shipments of rum abroad will be maintained at the level of normal periods. It is also estimated at $18,000,000,000 Jos. excise revenue and $10,000,000 for income tax, and it is felt that these figures, when compared with those collected so far in fiscal 194647, are quite conservative. Of this figure, $171,952,338 represents the estimated receipts for the general fund while the balance, or $13,944,369, Jos. funds will be free at the close of business on June 30, 1947, available for use in 1047-48. The estimated income to the general fund for the latter year, $71,952,338, is $11,436,924 more than the estimate for the year ending June 30, 1947, of $82,389,362. According to the studies so far made by the Planning Board, Governor Piftero approved appropriation bills for the fiscal year 1947-1948, involving an expenditure of public funds amounting to $82,796,180.81. This indicates that the budget of $85,896,707 to cover governmental expenditures during said period, will only leave free, at the end of the next fiscal year, the sum of $3,100,517.19, which will not be approved at the next special meeting of the Legislature. * Governor Piñero will "call" for new laws to be enacted to force a reduction, or the total absorption, of said balance. The chairman of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Pioó, whom we questioned yesterday about his views regarding the effects that this latest action on the part of the Legislature to be convened will have on the finances, informed that he is awaiting the results of fiscal studies being conducted by the Board's Finance Division before authorizing any comment. Said! studies involve the entire spending program recently approved by the Governor: the present problems of the Government and the effect which an increase in the operating expenses of the Government would have on the public finances (Continued on page 22) i