THE WORLD DAILY MARAÑA
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR IBM, BOY: Partly cloudy. to occasionally cloudy with a few scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 73; low, 70. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:30 p.m., M.M inches of mercury.
44 Pages 5/
ASO XXIX
Entered aa second clase matter, Poat Office, San Juan, P. R
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, APRIL 24, 1948
motorists, let's show 1" traditional courtesy of the pals
NUMBER 11284
Supreme Court upholds law on suburbs
The Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, in an opinion issued yesterday, in which Presiding Justice Martin Travieso was the rapporteur, upheld the constitutionality of Law No. 264 of 1945, on the elimination of suburbs in the municipalities of the Island. The opinion was issued in the case followed by the Municipality of San Lorenm and its mayor, Mr. Pedro Borges, against the Planning, Urbanization and Bonus Board. According to the facts summarized in the opinion, on April 9 of last year, the Planning Board issued a resolution declaring a parcel of land located in the urban zone of the municipality of San Lorenzo, with an area of 41,700 square feet and on which 33 buildings are located. Prior to the issuance of said resolution, the Board notified the owners of land, plots and buildings within the zone, and the Mayor of San Lorenzo, informing them of its intention to declare that area of the municipality as a shantytown zone and summoning them to a public hearing, which was held on March 14, 1947. Not being satisfied with the Board's decision, the Mayor and three other persons filed the present appeal, in accordance with the provisions of Article 6 of Law 264 of May 14, 1945. The appellants alleged (1) that the aforementioned Law 264 was unconstitutional for having been approved by the Legislative Assembly in excess of the powers conferred by the Organic Charter; (2) that the Board's actions did not comply with the constitutional guarantee of due process of law; and (3) that the evidence received by the Board was not sufficient to sustain the resolution appealed. The alleged unconstitutionality of the referred Law number 264 of May 14, 1945 was based on the fact that, in the appellants' opinion, it deprives them of their property without due process of law and without adequate compensation, in contravention of the provisions of the Organic Charter. The appellants' attack was directed especially against Article 9 of Law 264, which provides: "It shall henceforth be unlawful to construct any building or structure in an area declared a slum area, in accordance with this Act, and it shall likewise be unlawful to sell, lease or in any other manner assign land in said area, for purposes of ' building thereon, and it shall likewise be unlawful to carry out repairs or improvements in houses located in a slum area, without a prior written permit or authorization from the Puerto Rico Homes Authority; provided, however, that in no case may improvements consisting of additions to any house, building or structure located in a slum area be permitted and that no Land Registrar may investigate or register any sale or transfer of any land or dwelling in a slum area without the consent of the Puerto Rico Homes Authority.consent of the Puerto Rico Homes Authority". 1.a contention of the appellants was that the procedure provided by the transcribed article is one of expropriation, since it deprives the citizen of the right to enjoy and dispose of his property; that this procedure is unconstitutional, because it suppresses the intervention of the judicial agencies and does not guarantee a fair compensation to the expropriated; and that the law is null for the additional reason that it confers to the Homes Authority, absolute powers "to determine the form to which the owner must adjust in the enjoyment of the property". On this allegation the Court states: "The elimination of slums prejudicial to the safety, health, welfare or morals of their inhabitants is a public purpose for the accomplishment of which the State is compelled to exercise two of its most extraordinary powers - police power and eminent domain. In the exercise of the police power, and for the purpose of protecting the health and welfare of the community, the State is empowered to regulate and restrict anything which constitutes or which, if not restricted, may become a danger to the health and safety of the citizens. Rights of the State "Numerous authorities hold that when in a particular section of a city sanitary conditions and housing are so deficient as to endanger the health, safety and morals of its inhabitants, the State may expropriate the area where such conditions exist, paying due compensation; or may, in the exercise of police power, order reasonable changes to be made in the buildings therein for the protection of the community. (continued on page 11)
1,700,000 bond issue auctioned for Guayabal
The Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Rafael Buscaglla, informed that yesterday morning the auction of a South Coast Irrigation bond issue for the amount of $1,700,000 was awarded to Chemical Bank, which has already begun to sell them. These bonds carry the good faith of El Pueblo de Puerto Rico. The proceeds of this transaction will be used to expand and improve the Guayabal dam of the South Coast Irrigation Service. The award was made in New York City, by telephone from San Juan, by the Treasurer, and later confirmed by cable. The Treasurer was represented in the New York City office by Mr. D. R. Bonniwell, Economic Advisor of the Banco de Fomento de Puerto Rico, advised by attorneys Mitchel and Pershing, who certified the legality of the bonds. Different banking syndicates were presented as bidders, among them The Chemical Bank and Trust Company, First Boston Corporation, The National City Bank, The National Bank of Puerto Rico, The National Bank of Puerto Rico and The National Bank of Puerto Rico.
TREASURER BUSCAGLIA of New York, and The Chase National Bank of New York. The good pro was awarded to the group represented by The Chemical Bank and Trust Co., which offered a premium of 39,350 for the total amount of (Continued on page 14)
There is talk of making the festival of 'El Mundo 9 , show of the year Ello is due rI infer is created in the New York city, and to the* figures that intervene in it. It will serve to bring together Puerto Ricans By" RafaelSAUtZAR NEW YORK, April 23 (PU) -Today arrangements were being made for the festival of "Puerto Ricans famous in the world of music," to be held at Carnegie Hall tomorrow, Sunday, April 25.
The concert, under the auspices of EL MUNDO, San Juan, Puerto Rico, will reach the homes of thousands of Puerto Ricans on their own pals, via station WEMB, under arrangements with New York stations WOR and RCA. WOR will capture the program at Carnegie Hall, and transmit it to RCA, which will rebroadcast it to WEMB in San Juan, beginning at 2:00 P.M. This way, Puerto Ricans will be able to enjoy the program in their own homes. M. In this way, Puerto Ricans, from their homes, will delight in this extraordinary musical feast. They will hear the keyboard wonders of the famous planista Jesús Sanromá, the trills of coloratura Graciela Rivera, the expert playing of the Figueroa Brothers string quintet and the smooth lyric soprano, Riña de Toledo, who are featured in the first part of the program. . In the second half, you will also hear the sentimental voice of Rosita Rios, Puerto Rican cantatriz, well known in New York nightclubs, and the Invltador rhythm of Noro Morales and his orchestra, which is garnering acclaim at Broadway's China Doll. And presiding over the astro constellation" will be Jose Ferrer, one of the brightest suns in the Broadway firmament, well known for his impersonation of Yayo (and a most gifted emulation of Paul Robeson, in Othello a few years ago); Charley's Aunt. Cyrano; and for his most recent activities at the Repertory Theatre. It was learned today that the festival will be more than a mere exhibition of Puerto Rican musical talent, in its popular and more serious genres. It will serve as a fraternal gathering for hundreds of fellow Puerto Ricans, because in addition to those from the local colony, there will be many others from various places in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Maryland, Virginia. New Jersey, Maryland, Virginia. Connecticut, (Continued on page 14)
Hostos against 15% increase in freight rates Reminds shipping companies of recent increase imposed on cargo The President of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Fillpo L. de Hostos, declared yesterday that "the increase of 15% in freight rates is a violation of the law. de Hostos, declared yesterday that "commerce and public opinion have been surprised by the news of the petition for an increase in maritime freight rates, which the shipping companies have just filed with the United States Maritime Commission;" and we say surprised because even though on one or two occasions there was talk of the possibility of such an increase, no one could have imagined that it was such a high increase, given that a relatively short time ago maritime freight rates were subject to an increase of 25 percent. "It could not have caused less than a painful impression on the Island commerce", said Mr. Hostos, "that while the shipping companies graciously imposed their purpose on the Government, they did not carry out a Germanic and logical act, which would have been to offer the commerce, through their representative organizations, an equal opportunity to know the new rates, and to obtain the cooperation of their customers on the Island. As the Government has also not, been careful to take a step which the most elementary sense of prudence (Continued on page 14)
Compendium of News
31,700,000 honoa issue auctioned for Guayabal dam. * * * Russians blame English for the air crash. me * * Carlos Muño" SantaeLla will join the PIP. ♦ * * Gandhl's murderer to be tried next mea. * * * Delegates from Argentina thank for attentions received here, * * * Senate Committee approved Harriman's appointment. e * * * Finieres opponents ordered to surrender, arms. ♦ * ♦ Government decrees truce in prosecution of John L. * * * * Supreme upholds as cono tltuclonal the law to limit suburban tarpaulins. ♦ ♦ ♦ * Property owners on the proposed North Avenue plan to resort to the courts to make the Government define itself. e " o A group of forty policemen yesterday contained to render services for the first time. eee Descartes explains that the commercial dissatisfaction of the Island does not indicate an economic crisis. The President of the Colonist Sector announces a campaign in defense of the interests of the sugar cane farmers.
There is talk of making THE WORLD festival in New York, the show of the year, ♦ * * * * Red * * * Italian * * * * face a likely split in south row. X * * * UN to consider measures for the protection of Jerusalem. ♦ * * * Numerous ships are assisting the Arab evacuation of Haifa. * * * Farmers against bill on unemployment insurance. * * * The President of Brazil called for the adoption of anti-terrorism laws. * * * Basra is ranked eighth in the rankings published by The Ring magazine. He will fight Cocos Rld if he beats Henry Chemel. seo Today they condense the University Relays at Escobar Park. * - ♦ Mickey Harris blanked the Yankees, 4-0, yesterday; Harry Brecheen blanked the Cubs, 1-0. * * ♦ Benites decrees the suspension of 19 students, for the events of the 14th. Veterans Assembly approved request for resignation of the Rector. 0 0 0 President of the Chamber of Commerce against IB % increase in freight rates. * FLT signed agreement with original clause, which provides for selection of employees. .
FLT sets a precedent in an agreement that provides for employee selection.
The Free Federation of Women Workers signed a collective bargaining agreement with the Land Authority, with a new type of shop clause. It provides for the selection of employees. The clause, which was described by Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera, General Secretary of the FLT, as "revolutionary", was introduced in the agreement signed between the FLT and the TA to be in force in the San Cristóbal and Fe colonies, in Naguabo, and Domingo Rulz, in Arecibo, where the FLT was authorized by the workers to negotiate with the employer, in elections held for that purpose. The clause, submitted by Mr. Nogueras Rivera to the TA and accepted by the latter, provides for the creation of a "Social and Agrarian Action Advisory Board" composed of three members of the contracting union in each of said colonies, one representing the minority union or the workers not affiliated with the federationist union, and another representing the employer. The Advisory Board will be in charge of preparing a list of all the workers employed in each colony, without discrimination of race, political affiliation, religious belief or union grouping, in order to take from it, in rotating order, the workers to be employed by the employer. In this way, all the workers of the colony will have the opportunity to work in the same, without being obliged to be affiliated to the contracting union, as would be the case if the union and the employer agreed on a closed union shop or with maintenance of enrollment. It is "slow precedent: The precedent is that never before has a labor group submitted for the consideration of the employer, in the course of negotiating an agreement, a similar shop clause, which is equivalent to an open shop, i.e., one under which all workers, without distinction, would be entitled to work. Among other things, the agreement also provides for the creation of a consumer cooperative in caria una rie las colonias, by means of a loan to be obtained by the administrador rie las fincas, En torno a esta nueva clausula sobra talle)', made statements yesterday by Mr. Nogueras Rivera in which he says the following: "We begin by establishing this healthy precedent in jurisdictions where the Free Federation of Puerto Rican Workers has obtained overwhelming majorities in elections held by the Puerto Rico Labor Relations Board, where we have contractual and organizational strength, we are dispensing with lawsuits on closed shop, unionized shop, preference shop! We are not requesting the dismissal of workers because they are not affiliated to our Federation or because they do not pay dues to our unions. We are striving for total employment of the workers with absolute guarantees and for distributive justice. "We know the scope of the precedent we set. We go to its implementation confident in the good faith and honesty of purpose that animates us. "What will be the practical results of this proposal that we have put forward? Among others, I would point out the following: "1-To assure an opportunity for employment to every working man regardless of his political affiliation, religious belief, racial status and trade union affiliation; "2-To coordinate the efforts of all for the realization of the social and economic objectives of the Land Law; "3-To lay a solid foundation for industrial peace and to put an end to the (Continued on page 14)
General Marshall leaves Inter-American Conference
. By JOHN REiCHMANN BOGOTA, April 23. (INS)-U.S. Secretary of State Marshall this afternoon said farewell to the Inter-American Conference, reporting that he must return immediately to his post at Wáshlngton "from which I have been too long absent." The announcement of Marshall's withdrawal produced the effect of a bombshell at the Conference, since it was generally believed that he would remain in Bogota until the final act was signed in a week's time. However, as most of the important business of the Conference was concluded last night, and with the passage of the anti-Communist pact and the resolution on the European colonies, rumors had previously circulated that Marshall would return to Washington this weekend, Marshall took leave of the Conference at a session of the Committee on Initiatives, after a lengthy speech by the Cuban delegate, Ernesto Dihigo, on economic aggression.
~ I GEORGE C. MARSHALL Marshall asked for the floor as soon as the Cuban delegate had finished speaking, and all present (Continued on page 14)
Russians Blame British for Air Crash
They talk of limiting aircraft traffic - Alexandrov goes so far as to say they tampered with evidence in Berlin By JOHN B. McDERMOTT BERLIN, April 23 (PU)-Commandant General Georgi Alexandrov, in the first press conference held here by a Russian general, today blamed the British for the April 5 crash between a British passenger airlift and a Russian fighter plane. He said that the new restriction rules for air traffic over the Russian zone between Berlin and the West had to be adopted. Alexandrov, head of the Air Service of the Soviet Military Administration, Illustrated his remarks in Russian, with aircraft, models and maps. and secret photographs. He attempted to prove that the British unofficially altered the evidence so as to make it appear that the Russians were to blame for the collision. The British have blamed the Russians for the disaster near Gatow in the Soviet zone, in which 14 people aboard a British Vlking, and the pilot of a Soviet fighter plane, were killed.The following are other developments in the war of words between the West and the West: (1) An official American spokesman said that Soviet commanding general Alexander Kotlkov admitted at a meeting of Allied military commanders in Berhn that Russian agents had been sent to the American sector of the German capital to kidnap several Germans there, (2) The Taegllche Rundschau, official organ of the Soviet Army, alleged that the British had committed new violations of the air corridor connecting Berlin with the British zone. The paper renewed the dqpanda of air restrictions over the Soviet zone of Germany.(3) An American spokesman said that the "Soviets Indicate believe that the Allied Control Council has ceased to exist." The Council is the supreme governing body in Germany. Alexandrov occupied the Soviet Press Club, in a Berlin suburb, for the unprecedented press conference. This was the third mass interview held here by Soviet officials since the end of the war, > the first in which a general has spoken. For the most part, his explanations were based on statements reported by Tass, the official Soviet Information Agency, and by the Taegllche Rundschau. These statements included the following: (1) The British intentionally moved parts of the Soviet fighter plane from the wreckage to tamper with the evidence. (2) The British Vlking was definitely to blame. The plane was flying through a restricted air zone over the Soviet Datgow airfield when the disaster occurred. (3) New restrictions on air traffic over the Soviet zone between Berlin and the West should be activated. (4) Parts of the British report on the crash were falsified. The American observer at the Command meeting said that Kotlkov's admission that the Russians had kidnapped Germans was in response to an American request for information about 50 Germans believed to have been abducted by Soviet agents, Kotlkov is reported to have said in part as follows: "Since the Americans prevented the German Polida from arresting these criminals, I sent men to the German American sector, and now we have them in our hands," It was also said that Kotlkov described the American sector as co(Continued on page 14)
Rector Benítez Decrees Suspension Of 19 UPR Students
Cancer Treatment Will Cost Less
David E. Lilienthal (left), chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, talks with (Erroll Wilson, the commission's general manager, in front of the Cana Blanca, in WásKlhgton. Lilienthal told reporters* that cobalt, a common metal, can have the same radioactive effect as radium and offers possibilities in the treatment of cancer at little cost**. Lilienthal discussed the discovery after he gave a report to President Truman on the use of atomic energy in times of need. (Associated Press photo). All kinds of ships help evacuation of Haifa Newspapers in Beirut clamor for regular armies of Arab states to go into action. By SAM SOUKI BEIRUT, Lebanon, April 23 (PU)-- Fishing boats, schooners and sloops left today for Haifa from Beirut and other coastal towns of Lebanon, to evacuate Arabs from the Palestinian Y, the Jewish-controlled "hourly" port-tro-lero rail.
It was a scene reminiscent of the British evacuation of Dunkirk in France. Boats of all sizes and descriptions covered the blue Mediterranean on their journey south. The ships left as soon as news spread that the Jews of the Haganah organization had gained control of the vital port of Palestine in a lightning offensive after all but a small group of British troops evacuated to Haifa. The Lebanese President, Blsharah Al-Khuri. went to Tyre, Lebanon's ancient port 50 miles south of Beirut, to personally supervise the erection of refugee camps-and to organize the co-, mltés rie receipt. The dramatic loss of Haifa merely confirms the growing belief among many Arabs that only the participation of regular Arab armies, particularly the Transjordanian Arab Legion, can save the Arabs from Palestine and prevent the creation of a Jewish state in the Holy Land. The loss of tie Haifa also demonstrates the weakness of the Liberation Army, Its poorly trained and equipped forces do not seem to be able to confront the Jews. All the newspapers in Haifa are imploring the dispatch of regular armies to Palestine because of the reaction this might have in the United Nations. Unconfirmed reports reveal that some units of the regular Army rio Syria, Lebanon and Transjordanla are already on their way to the Holy Land. Meanwhile in Amman, the capital of Jordan, Iraq's Crown Prince Abdul-ilah, the King of Jordan, Abdullah, and other prominent Arab leaders are reportedly meeting to discuss the situation in the Holy Land.
Owners of Avenida Norte will go to court They want "the Government to decide definitively whether the avenue will be built Several owners of the residences located in the area affected by the construction of Avenida Norte. intend to take immediate action to request the Government, through legal channels, to decide definitively whether or not the avenue will be built in the near future, , Yesterday afternoon, Rafael Pastor, representing the aforementioned owners, made the following statements to El. MUNDO: "According to what has been informed by the Commissioner of the Interior, the construction of the North Avenue will not begin until the construction of five other urban roads in San Juan is finished and which will take approximately two years to be completed, "Only a few weeks ago the Governor of Puerto Rico assured us the owners of the North Avenue, that the construction of the North Avenue will not begin until the construction of the other five urban roads in San Juan is finished and which will take approximately two years to be finished, For almost three years we have tolerated serious restrictions to our property rights arising from that project in suspense and now we are informed that we have to wait at least two more years, suffering the encumbrance that we have to pay for the construction of the aforementioned avenue. We are now informed that we have to wait at least two more years, suffering a lien that reduces our property rights to a theoretical value in almost all cases. (Continued on page 14)
Plans Urged to Draft Everyone in Case of War
By LEE NICHOLS WASHINGTON, April 23. (PU)The War Research Committee today urged that plans be prepared immediately to draft the whole world in case of another war. It called for "strict legislation to prevent "illegal gains" from being made in this new war. . The Committee made its recommendations in a report on mobilization for World War II. It said that several plans were made after World War I, only to be eliminated when the second conflict began. Then, the report said, the plans were duplicated.
Meanwhile, the air force continued its crusade for a fleet of 70 groups. General Hnyt S. Vandenberg, the new Air Force chief of staff, said in a speech in Chicago that the results of a conflict with Russia depended entirely on the strength of the 70-group force and said that the decision "rests with the American people and Congress." Congress received "otherwise, the (Continued on page 14)
Veterans Assembly has not yet decided to reopen the Rector's resignation. Dissident group By Lula Hernández Aquino EL MUNDO Staff Writer The University of Puerto Rico was guarded yesterday by the police, and no one outside the university administration was allowed to enter the campus. On the other hand, 200 to 300 veteran students of the university held an assembly in the Hatuey Theater, in which a resolution requesting the resignation of the Rector was approved. The Rector of the University, 11" bandaged Jaime Benitez, decreed yesterday afternoon the preventive suspension of 19 students, who allegedly participated in the acts of April 14 at the UPR. Five are women. The rest include "1 President of the Independent Society, Mr. Julio Cesar Lopez and the President and Vice President, respectively, of the Student Council, Mr. Juan Noriega Maldonado and Mr. Jose M. Tejada. Vlrtually, the student body is left without representation before the University Board. The University Rector issued the following information yesterday: "The Committee of Deans, composed of Felix Luis Alegria, Facundo Bueso and Manuel Rodriguez Ramos, deans of Men, Natural Sciences and Law, respectively, investigating the acts of indiscipline that have occurred at the University, has recommended to the Rector the suspension of the following persons: Juan Noriega Maldonado, Luis Lopez Rosario. Venancio Medina. María Magdalena Castañer, José A. Villar Greco, José Aulet Concepción, Rafael Viera Medina, Julio César López, Cándida Rosa Guzmán, Jorge Arroyo Ramírez, Julio Flores López, Gregorio Rivera Aponte, Alina Valés Hernández, Juanita Meléndez OJeria, Nolli* García Bisbal, José M. Tejada, Harry García Dominiccl, and Santiago Quiñones Ellas. "1.he participation of these persons has been outstanding and very principal in teles events and the Committee has reached the above conclusions on the basis of the testimony of deans, professors, students and members rie the "rtmln 1st ration, in addition to documentary evidence and photographs. "These suspensions are preventive v the list is, preliminary. The continues, and if it is determined that other students are actively involved, additional suspensions will be recommended. In the event that the Committee, after completion of the investigation, considers recommending the expulsion of any students from the University, they will be given every opportunity to defend themselves by attending a hearing, as stipulated in the Regulations. "Antonio Esteves Hurrlno has also been suspended, on the occasion of the incident of aggression "I student José Florencio jileó", On the other hand, the prosecutor José C, Aponte, who conducted the official Investigation, reported last night that the same has been completed, and that he will render his Report today to the Prqcurador General. He said that arrests will probably be made as a result of his investigation. The President of the University was in bed yesterday, victim of a kidney ailment. By prescription of the doctor, he remained in his room all day, where, in spite of his illness, he continued to work actively on the speech to be delivered by radio. . . . #The Rector of the University has not yet been informed when the academic year will be resumed, since the date of the opening of the University has not yet been decided "ñn Veterans ask for resignation Rector: The assembly rio students university veterans, eclebr' i yesterday in the theater Hatuey rio Rio Piedras, agreed by means of a to support the request of resignation of the Redor rio the University, acorriada in the assembly riel unlversltai* > celebrated rios weeks ago in the paraninfo of the Uníversidari. It also agreed to request the immediate resumption of classes in our first educational center; condemn 18 presence of the police force on university grounds and "the pardal or unfair interpretation of the facts, by the university administration, which points to the students and " sue leaders, as those responsible for the events of April 14 at the University" The assembly, in which there were d* 2(X) to 300 veteran students, "e developed in an orderly manner, except for one occasion, when one of the resolutions finally approved was being discussed, when the veteran Jose Mariano Rios, accompanied by Juan A. Diaz Marchand, and 31 other veterans, withdrew from the assembly, after a strong discussion, "l "legarse que "Ja asamblea no cumplo los propósitos para que fué citada, "I "banderizarse a una de las partos, y entrar en la cuestión política." (Continued on p. 14)