THE WORLD
WEATHER NONOlTICS PAMA LA ISLA, TODAY, - Partly cloudy, with a few light showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: Maximum temperature, M; minimum, 7", Barometric pressure at sea level. at 4:88 p.m., 80.M inches of mercury.
44 Pages 5/
DAILY
MORNING
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO-SATURDAY, JULY 24, 1948
Motorists, demoatremoi I* courtesy tradition*! dol pala
NUMBER 13375
iÑO XXIX
Enterad as sscond class matter, "->st Offiee, San Joan, F. R.
Cost of living has reached maximum level.
Truman reviewed case with Cabinet
Appoints Porter as his adviser. - Index is 171.7% over 1935-39 For MILTOÍFmAGBUDBB WASHINGTON, July 23. (PU)-The 1* Cost of Living Index disclosed today by the Government reached a new alea record, thus offering ammunition phraseas *1* President Truman, with which to fire at Congress in defense of his demands for control of Inflation. Meanwhile, the President* offered his Cabinet a picture of his antllnfladon programs, still kept secret, as well as other programs which he will submit* Tuesday personally, to the special meeting of Congress. Press Secretary Charles G. Roas announced Charles G. Roas, announced "complete agreement on the proposals." The President appointed Price cxAdmlnlstrator Paul A. Porter as his adviser on cost-of-living problems, and for the duration of the coming struggle with the Republican-dominated Congress. Power attended the Cabinet meeting®, and is to take a temporary leave of absence from the practice of law, to serve as a presidential aide, without pay. His] principal duty will be to explain the President's anti-lnflaclona- : ry propositions to Congress, and the statistics and facts of the present in order to support such propositions when public hearings are held. - So far, White House Information sources have advanced only that President Truman will seek* authority to enact price controls on meats, an item which has preceded the .rise in the cost-of-living index. But-prevalent, too, are reports that Truman may seek authority to lower prices through a program of government subsidies. Republican congressional leaders, who have already returned to Washington to attend" the special session, are reluctant to dl"(utir the problem "for the public!- , dad", until the congressional strategy plan is reallded at the ( opening of Congress on Monday. But even if their names cannot be cited, some predict that there is little chance that any anti-inflation measures will pass. In his address to lawmakers on Tuesday, President Truman will probably quote at length from the report released today by the Labor Department, which shows that retail prices of nearly all consumer items rebounded in June 15 to unprecedented levels. Preceded by a flat increase in food prices, retail prices paid by model income families in 58 major cities rose to 171.7 percent above their average of 100 for the 1935-1939 period, according to the Labor Department. This represented an increase of 9.3 percent over the figure for June 15, 1948 before price controls expired and 74.1 percent over the figure for August 1939, when World War II began. The Department pointed out that nearly all food prices rose 1.5 percent from May 15 to June 15 to rank first in ol advance. The only exceptions were butter and fresh vegetables. Fuel and home furnishings prices also advanced six-tenths of one percent. Rents rose three-tenths of one percent overall, as a result of individual readjustments, decontrol and the 15 percent voluntary increase on rental rates. Agriculture Department experts, meanwhile, pre- i "said today that milk, butter- ¡ keel and cheese may not follow the upward inclination, for the month of | January. They said this year's large corn crop will enable farmers to obtain cheaper cattle feed, thus boosting dairy production. Senator Joseph C. O'Mahoney, Democrat of Wyoming, called for increased endorsements of his proposal to require large corporations to establish a price freeze period before announcing any new increases. His idea is to give both the public and the government time to determine whether such increases are justified. O'Mahoney, accompanied by Senator Cail Hayden, D-Arizona, visited the White House to discuss "general Congress business" with President Truman. He did not state that his own plan had been discussed, but noted that he was "making some progress" in rounding out his endorsement of it. Philip Murray, president of the Congress of Industrial Organizations, was another White House visitor. He presented President Truman with the LOC's legislative proposal which included: 1 >Consolidation of prices to the challengers, with corporate contributions to "restrain corporate greed.
Clay is of the opinion that the Russians do not want war and will give in if they see the blockade countering
Ai A ' ' L W ■F > wjB JM B General Lucius D. Clay (center), U.S. military governor of Germany, was greeted upon arrival at Wáshlngton airport Wednesday night by Secretary of the Army Kenneth Royall (right) and General Omar Bradley, Chief of Staff. General Clay briefed President Truman on the crisis in Berlin. Yesterday he stated that he believed the Russians would relent in their position if the blockade could be countered. (Associated Press photo).
House approved! bill on doctors
Sokolovsky denies that he gave a formal interview to correspondent United Press, or made to anyone statements of a political nature FoTdONALD J. GONZALEZ WASHINGTON, July 23. - (PU) - Shortly before leaving for Berlin, after a laborious day spent in a series of d* fast conferences with President Harry S. Truman and with other top United States civilian and military officials, who have stressed the deter-
The House of Representatives yesterday approved by a majority vote the bill number 34. of Representative Ramos Antonini, authorizing the hiring of American or foreign citizen doctors for the island or municipal welfare service. A lengthy debate took place between Speaker Ramos Antonini and Representative Celestino Iriarte, during which the former argued the convenience of hiring foreign physicians to provide services to the poor classes of the island. Representative Iriarte, on the other hand, maintained that the legislation under discussion would allow incompetent physicians to occupy positions in the Health Department and in the Municipal Charity for which they were not properly trained. Mr. Triarte referred to the fact that House Bill 14 authorized physicians hired under legislation passed in 1946 to practice the profession without meeting the requirements currently required of other physicians authorized to be hired under the bill under discussion. Other bills passed last night were as follows: S. P. 10 - To amend Sec. 12-B of the Reasonable Rents Act: S. P. 5 - to amend Sec. 4 of Act No. 20 of June 7, 1948: S. P. 12 - to assign to Americans the right to practice medicine in the United States.
General Ludus D. Clay, commander-in-chief of the American occupation troops in Germany, declared today that, in his opinion, the Russians do not want war, and that they will be ready to negotiate with respect to the Berlin * erisi* when they are convinced that the Western powers can and will counteract the starvation blockade imposed by the Reds on the civilian population of the German capital. Clay left Wáshlngton at ten minutes past four in the afternoon, accompanied by his diplomatic adviser, Robert Murphy, and Charles E. Bohlen, the most prominent of the State Department's experts on Russian affairs, who, responding to instructions from Secretary of State General George C. Marshall, discussed* in London the forthcoming diplomatic démarche of the Western powers with regard to the crisis in Berlin. On the other hand, Walter Rundle, PU correspondent in Berlin, reports that. as a new implicit challenge against Russia, Anglo-American aviation today set a new and surprising record, moving to Berlin in twenty-four hours 2,811 tons of supplies, and that, commenting on the statements made yesterday by Marshal Vassily D. Sokolovsky, Russian commander in Germany, that the Russians would lift the blockade if the Americans would allow the Soviets free passage through the American zone of occupation, a senior Allied officer declared in Frankfurt am Main: "This is probably the first time that the Russians will be able to move through the American zone of occupation.
National Labor Relations Board unanimously ruled today that the Distillery Workers Union-affiliated with the American Federation of Labor-conducted an illegal secondary boycott of the Schenley Distillers Corporation, New York, in violation of the Taft-Hart Act. The decision is the first by a government administrative agency against a labor union for unfair labor practices, and came exactly eleven months after the Taft-Hartley Act went into effect. The Board granted Distillers' Laborers Local No. 1 of New York a ten-day period to take the necessary steps to comply with the order, and to post notice that it is complying with the order. The order is enforceable in the federal courts, and failure to comply with a court decree on the matter would render union officials liable to fines or imprisonment for contempt. The decision is a decisive blow against the secondary boycott which is one of the most powerful weapons at the disposal of organized labor. and is 1* first* to put into effect 1* provision of 1* Loy TaftHartley declaring it illegal for a labor Union to go on strike for the purpose of compelling the employer to cease doing business with a third person. (Continued on page 16 )
News Digest
Cost of living has peaked; Truman discussed the case with the. Cabinet. Wallace says He would go to discuss peace with Stalln. - * ■ Federal agents intensify house of three Communist leaders. " Or " Turned himself in who threw a bomb* against U.N. barracks. - - - - Health tries to subdue an outbreak of maT.aria developed in the Algarrobo neighborhood, in Vega Baja. - S ♦ President of FEGI denounces misapplication of laws on subsidies and raises. a 0 o The Boston Court upheld the Supreme Court in a ruling ordering the Auditor to allow the examination of documents by "El Imparcial". - o - Clay believes that the Ruaos do not want war and that they will give in if they see the blockade effectively countered. - o - The fear of war in Europe is subsiding. & - - - - Former VPR professor will embrace** the priesthood. - Fernós proposes that married doctors from Europe be brought to the Island. ।
They asked *1 Third Party to offer 1* independence to Puerto Rico. - ♦ - Government is likely to desist from borrowing M.000,000. - They are sure that the Congress will approve aid for education. - I" Navy selected Boricu* to serve as aide *1 Argentine Admiral Carranza. - - - L* renewal of motor vehicle licenses produced IL382,831.80. - " - German official visits Island; Inspection* tobacco * send to Europe. - * - Hourly pay* staff raises at salary, say IEB officials. - It is likely to make an investigation of insurance on the island. Today ends the summer session at the UPR. - Cuban harvest surpassed last year's record. - - - - - 1*4 Military inscription will start on the Island on August 80. - - - Another estuary to settle the island longshoremen's strike was thwarted. . - . - - - Group of Puerto Ricans in New York to form pro-Dewey committee.
Enrollment to begin Aug. 30
Explain case of students - Island quota to be uua. fraction of those drafted during Second War For WIELÍAm"'dÓRVUXIER Correspondent of EL MUNDO in i Wáshlngton WASHINGTON, July 23. (Esperial for EL MUNDO)- The national peacetime draft will begin about the first of , October with the enrollment of men- ¡ bree whose age ranges from IR to 25 years, inclusive, beginning August 30 and ending September 18. The privilege of Voluntary Enlistment for one year and then entering one of the organized parishes has been extended to 18 year old men who, although required to enroll, are not eligible for conscription until they reach the age of 19 years. The law sets an annual limit of 161,000, of them for all services. 1 Monthly dues During the first month. the Army will admit 10,000; the Navy and Marines, about 3>000; the Air Force, 1,301." Monthly quotas will thereafter be announced by the Selective Service. Since Congress passed the i new draft law, some questions have arisen in the minds of prospective recruits and their parents. Not all questions can be answered at the moment, because the details of the movement are still being worked out. For example, the number of volunteers will largely determine how many men will be recruited to fill the requirements of the armed services. Puerto Rico's quota will certainly be a small proportion of the number of men who were drafted during the recent war. At that date, 50,235 Puerto Ricans were inducted between October 1940 and October 1946. In addition to that number, 12,456 Puerto Ricans entered voluntarily until April 1, 1945. In the World War II draft, which began in post-war tie and continued through the war, 587,383 men registered with Puerto Rico's Selective Service boards. The Selective Service was* this time under the direction of the state director, Lieutenant Colonel Rafael Jiménez de la Rosa, appointed by President Truman on July 20 on the recommendation of Governor Jesús T. Piflero. Piflero . Registration on the Island, the last time, under the direction of the late Colonel Harry Besosa, was perhaps the most effective under the American flag in the opinion of Selective Service headquarters at W*shlngton. Governor Piftero told EL MUNDO, before leaving *W*. shmgton this week, that he felt sure that Registration and recruiting would be as efficient this time under the direction of Lieutenant Colonel Jimenez de la Ros*. Initial enrollment, proclaimed by President Truman in the United States, in Alaska, Hawaii. Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, and the District of Columbia, is set for the period from August 30 to September 18, both dates inclusive. Dates of Registration The persons to be registered and the dates set for reporting to the Boards are as follows: August 30: men born in 1922, after August 30, 1922. August 31, September 1: men born in 1923. September 2 and 3: men born in 1924. September 4 and 7: men born in 1924, men born in 1924, men born in 1924.
A former university professor decides to embrace the priesthood.
By LUIS HERNANDEZ AQUINO Editor of EL MUNDO Last night, Roberto Beascoechea Lota, a former university professor, left for Spain by air. He is on his way to Salamanca, where he will study for the priesthood at the Colegio de Santiago, a seminary for late vocations. The news that he would embrace the priestly career came as a surprise to many of his friends, but not to the most intimate, who knew his vocation since his early years, and who attested to his religiosity and mysticism. Mr. Beascoechca Lota was born in Arroyo and attended high school in Guayaquil. Later, he attended university studies in our first educational center, where in 1940 he did his Bachelor of Arts and in 1942 his Bachelor of Law. Later he did specialized studies in Political Science at the University of Chicago and then studied for a year at St. John's College in Annapolis, Maryland, which, together with the University of Chicago, initiated the return to a humanistic orientation in university studies in the United States. 1 As far as teaching**, ol 11-
Y P W y ■ s ' w'íífeW' ' is i B/ Roberto Beascoectoea Lota r cenclado Beascoechea practiced it at the College of the Mothers of the Sacred Heart, in Santurce, where he was professor of Social Clenelu during 1944-45. From 1945 (Continued on page 16)
Another effort to settle the island longshoremen's strike failed i
Govt. likely to abandon $8,000,000 loan
A review of the fiscal situation reveals that it is not necessary to do so at this time. - Treasury conditions are "more flattering than previously thought".
The Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Rafael A. Buscaglia; the Island Auditor, Dr. Rafael de J. Cordero; and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, Mr. Roberto de Jesus Toro, have made a review of the fiscal situation of the Government of Puerto Rico, as a result of which they have reached the conclusion that it is not imperative to make this borrowing for $8,000,000,000.
that it is not imperative to make this borrowing, for the time being. This review of the fiscal condition of the Island Government, as reported, was made recently and has provided the basis for the official belief that the Government's economic conditions "are more favorable than previously believed. This being so, it is considered that for the time being it does not seem essential to commit the good faith of the People of Puerto Rico in a loan of eight million dollars.
Dr. Fernós proposes that displaced physicians be brought to the Island.
He also favors nurses, dentists and experts in arts and crafts among those who will be allowed to enter the U.S. from Europe.
In the opinion of Commissioner Reild "nte Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern. 1* current European Displaced Persons Act allows doctors, dentists, nurses and other professionals, as well as persons skilled in arts and crafts, to be obtained to serve in Puerto Rico, which it is advisable for them to enter the U.S. from Europe.
Acts, that it is advisable to bring to this pals. Dr. Fernós' remarks on this matter were as follows: "Congress passed a law in its last session to allow 200,000 displaced persons from Europe to enter the United States by suspending the application of immigration quotas. These are people who, as a result of the war, today have no homeland or cannot return to it for political reasons. They are being supported in camps in Europe by the United States. Among these 200,000 people will be doctors, dentists, nurses, and many other professionals, as well as people skilled in arts and crafts. "Since the law was passed, I instructed Mr. O'Connor, of the Puerto Rico Office in Washington, to obtain from the Department of State and the organizations that are to administer the transfer of these people to the United States, the pertinent information regarding the number of doctors and other professionals available, thinking that it might be in the interest of the Government of Puerto Rico to hire some of them. I have indicated this possibility to Governor Piftero upon my arrival here and also to the Commissioner of Health, Dr. Pons. About experts in arts and crafts I spoke with Mr. Sierra Berdecia in Washington. I expect to hear from you shortly. "Now, the organization of the transfer of 200,000 people from Europe to the United States is not a simple matter. It will take time to organize such an undertaking. And it should not be expected that peremptory needs in Puerto Rico can be met with medical supplies that could be procured, which would take time to become available. The amendments to the Displaced Persons Act spoken of would not alter the circumstances pointed out, that is, with the law as it stands the doctors could be obtained, but it will still take one or two years to see the results of that law. However, I have (Continued on page 16)
Boston upheld right of access to documents
BOSTON, 7uTlo "23~"(PU) - The U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the ruling of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico that certain documents of the Auditor of Puerto Rico were public documents, and therefore open to examination by the Press. The opinion in the case was written by Judge Calvert Magruder. The opinion upholds a decision issued by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico ordering Rafael de J. Cordero. Auditor of Puerto Rico, to allow a San Juan newspaper to inspect certain records in his office - The newspaper in question was El Imparcial. which had sought to examine details of some records of transactions between the Government of Puerto Rico and the firms Concrete Industries. Inc. and Caguas Development Company, related to a campaign that the newspaper in question was carrying out against "corruption" in Puerto Rico. The newspaper alleged that the Insular Government had acquired by expropriation procedures, at an exorbitant price, a property owned by the Caguas Development Company, a firm in which the then Commissioner of the Interior of Puerto Rico was a partner. The newspaper to which we refer is published by Prensa Insular de Puerto Rico, Inc. of which Antonio Ayuso Valdivieso is president and at the same time director-admi-nistrator of the newspaper. (Continued on page 18)
Wallace Platform Committee recommended independence Island
PHILADELPHIA. July 23. (PU) - The Platform Committee of the Terca." Party today included in tentative draft an Unequivocal demand declaring Immediate 1* Puerto Rican independence. The Committee briefly discussed sl recommending self-determination or Independence without reservation. The majority of the Committee voted in favor of Immediate Independence. At the same time, the Nationalities Division of the Party, which supports the Puerto Rican postulate. -It issued a statement stating: "We condemn the bipartisan policy toward Puerto Rico and demand independence for the unhappy and oppressed land, and offer such economic guarantees as will provide permanent political and economic independence for the island. Rexford Guy Tugwell, former governor of Puerto Rico, chairman of the
Platform Committee, recommended Independence for Puerto Rico Observers here recall that in his recent book "The Stricken Land" Tugwell said that independence for Puerto Rico slgnl ficahe hunger. The members of the Platform Committee stressed that the postulate of Independence for Puerto Rico is tentative. They indicated that they could not guarantee that it would be in the platform as offered to the convention. The new party had its formal inauguration in an assembly of former NovotratIslas, followers of the Third Party of 1912, communist socialists, democrats and republicans and some who have never before professed a political affiliation. The Inaugural session of the Conveudon was devoted to the. establishment of the new party, 1* selection of its name and 1* explanation (Continued on 1* page 16).
Shipping companies appeal to the President, ask him to decree a state of emergency, agree to another meeting.
By Lula Sánchez Cappa EL MUNDO Staff Writer Federal conciliators Charles A. Goldsmith and Willjam McAllister, and the island conciliator, Adolfo Collazo, yesterday made another unsuccessful effort to reach a "solution to the labor-management dispute between the shipping companies and the dock workers, which has kept port work on the island paralyzed since last Wednesday. While Mr. Salvatore Cosentino, agent in Puerto Rico of the National Labor Relations Board, was hastily preparing a preliminary report for the agency's headquarters in Washington on all charges filed by the International Longshoremen's Association and the shipping companies, the latter yesterday made a plea for presidential action to stop the strike. Presidential action requested. The shipping companies addressed the office of Acting Federal Flscqí. Francisco Ponía Feliú, in requesting that he manage through the Attorney General of the United States the Intervention of President Truman, so that this one declares a state of emergen- ; cía on the occasion of the strike. Under the Taft-Hartley Act, President Truman is empowered to do so, if he deems it necessary, and to appoint an investigating committee to hear the dispute, and to seek an injunction against the strike. Although Acting Federal Fiacal Ponsa Feüú reserved his position on the matter, it was authoritatively reported that the above petition had been made by the shipowners, and that it had been referred to Attorney General Tom C. Clark, the United Press reported from New York that Governor Ptflero sent instructions by cable yesterday to Acting Governor Negrón Fernández on the longshoremen's strike in Puerto Rico. The dispatch added that e| seftor Piftera was pn". stopping to return to San Juan today, Saturday, leaving New York at nine o'clock in the morning on a Pan American plane. The details of the cable sent by Governor Piftero to Seftor Negron ■ Fernandez were not disclosed. With loe conciliators On the other hand, the meeting held yesterday at the initiative of the conciliators between the representatives of the shipping companies and those of the ILA to resume negotiations regarding the demand for an increase in wages made by the workers, began at half past two in the afternoon. It was held in the offices of Mr. José L. Novas, legal advisor of the companies. For two hours the parties discussed the workers' demand. The companies proposed to the workers to submit the matter to an arbitrator who would render an award to be complied with by both parties. The ILA, through its leaders, reiterated its refusal to submit the matter to arbitration, and the meeting was adjourned. The workers and employers agreed to meet again next Wednesday at 2:30 pm. For his part, conciliator Goldsmith, in reporting on the outcome of the meeting, indicated that he would continue to make efforts to find a formula acceptable to both workers and employers. Another dispatch sent by the United Press from New York yesterday afternoon reported that the shipping companies serving the Puerto Rico routes were anxiously awaiting news today on the strike declared by the ILA on the island. The companies were hopeful that the strike would be short-lived. A spokesman for Porto Rico L1-. ne in that city said he understood that efforts were underway to submit the dispute to an arbitrator. Other lines, the Waterman, Bull and Lykes, were in contact with their representatives in Puerto Rico, inquiring about developments at the meeting scheduled for yesterday. Meanwhile, two of the shipping companies involved in the conflict agreed on Thursday to increase the wages paid to stevedores. This made it possible for loading and unloading work on a steamship consigned to one of them to be carried out on that day. - The companies are the Caribe Shipping Co. and the San Juan Dock Co. According to Mr. Eusebio G. Moreno, leader of the ILA. Moreno, leader of the ILA, both "came to increase the wages by five cents per hour and to readjust them according to the solution reached in the controversy with the other companies. This settlement, affected a ship of one of these companies** which --- "(Continued on page 16.)