THE NÜNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy, becoming occasionally cloudy, with scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 84: low, 11. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 28.94 inches of mercury,
42 Pages 5/
DIARIO DE^"á*^|LA MARANA
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 21, 1948 "
NUMBER 13403
Russian Consul General J. Lomakin is asked to retire ■
U.S. U.S. charges him with rude conduct Drastic action came at Truman's request.Diplomat does not comment By DONALE J.~GONZALES WASHINGTON, Aug. 20. (PU) - The State Department, on orders of President Truman, today demanded the recall of Jacob M. Lomakin, Soviet Consul General in New York, for his "gro--ra" * "Improper" conduct in connection with the three "fugitive" Russian teachers. The unfortunate Consul General, who led the Soviet Foreign Minister, V. M. Molotov, into an awkward international dispute over the said teachers, was given three or four days to dispatch his business and leave the pals, probably leaving* for Moscow next week, to face certain counterclaim. The peremptory American note was delivered to the Soviet ambassador Alexander S. Panyushkin last night, and given to the public today at ten o'clock in the morning. Lomakin is second in rank to Panyushkin in the Russian diplomatic corps e n this pals, His eviction has been the most drastic action taken by the United States Government against the Soviet Union since diplomatic relations were established between the two countries in 1933. Lomakin is the first senior Soviet diplomat to be ordered out of the pals by this Government. Ña thought of Russian reprisal Soviet reprisals against American diplomats in Russia were first considered. But their consideration was eliminated in response to Mr. Truman's insistence that Lomakin be removed. White House Press Secretary Charles G. Roas said that "it was all done on President Truman's orders. The American note repudiated as completely false all accusations made by Molotov, Panyushkin and Lomakin against the United States in the case of the three teachers who refused to return to Russia: Mrs. Oksana Stepanovna Kosenkina and Mr. Mi, guel Samarin and his wife. Tacit repudiation of Panyushkin The note mainly blames Lomakin, who sparked the dispute two weeks ago by accusing the Federal Bureau of Investigation of "colluding" with a group of White Russians ("nllcomunietas") in the "kidnapping" of the teachers. But it also contains an implicit condemnation of Panyushkin, who took Lomakin's protest and exaggerated it into an international incident of the first magnitude. The note says that the continuing investigations not only prove the falsity of the Soviet accusations, "but also indicate that Soviet Government officials have engaged in highly improper conduct". The case of the teachers The three teachers are said to have returned from New York to Russia on July 31, aboard the Soviet ship Pobeda, but disappeared shortly before that date. Mrs. Kosenkina, who taught with the Samarins at a school for the children of Soviet diplomats in New York City, turned up at an antlcommunist farm in Cottage Valley, New York, from where she was "rescued" by Lomakin on August 7. The Samarins and their three children fled for the protection of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, thus taking refuge under the sovereignty of the United States. Lomakin fired all sorts of accusations against the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the White Russians. He said that Mrs. Kosenkina had been drugged and kidnapped, and presented her at a press conference held at the Soviet Consulate to back up his claims. Molotov backs Lomakin Molotov intervened in the case on August 11, and stamped his official approval on Lomakin's accusations. Molotov demanded the immediate surrender of Mrs. Koaenkina and the Snmarlns, and demanded that anyone who had anything to do with their "kidnapping" be punished. That was the day Mrs. Koaenkina chose to jump from a third floor window of the Consulate, shouting that she preferred death to "slavery" in the Soviet Union. Currently, Mrs. Kosenkina is in serious condition in a New York hospital, protected by New York City police officers. She stated that she is being held prisoner in the Consulate and that Lomakin has forced her to lie to American journalists in her "con(Continued on page 14)
Tí gsrv < \ já "mi BBV s , The Consul General "ovlétlco in New York, Jacob Lomakin, whose retirement has been requested by the U.S. Government to the Soviet Russia. (Photo P. A.) 35 students will not be allowed to enter UPR University Crusade prepares to declare strike Monday Mils Hernández Aquino Editor of EL MUNDO Next Monday, when the university course of the next academic year begins, despite the threats of a student strike, the Insular Police will not be used within the grounds of the Institution, according to the Dean of Administration, Dr. Ramón Mellado. Thirty-five students who were preventively suspended and four who were expelled, will not be able to enter the University campus next Monday, according to orders given to the university guards. Yesterday the" final touches were given to the preparations for the strike in the chapter house of the University Crusade, which will close with a rally on Sunday in the public square of Rio Piedras. The loudspeaker campaign was initiated at noon yesterday. Declarations of Dr. Mellado Questioned yesterday Dr. Mellado in the sense of if the university administration would have resorted to the Insular Police on Monday, he manifested that the University will open its doors as usual. He explained that only the university guard and those detectives who have served during the enrollment period would be used on the institution's grounds. Dr. Mellado went on to indicate that outside the campus there would be Island police, as he understood, but he did not want to continue commenting on the case, expressing his wishes that "everything will take place as normally as possible.
They demand the recall of the Russian Consul Lomakin, at the request of the pro- ' pious Truman. - * * The Governor signed 13 promotions in the Uniformed yesterday. - - - JSM to review the decree on salaries in clinics and hospitals. - The PIP board of directors will not accept understanding with other opposition parties. Truman to investigate accusation of Typographers Union against Taft. - Cattlemen" will ask Vicéns not to preside over milk hearings. - Selective explains questioning of registrations. ♦ - - Three groups of non-communist workers threaten to withdraw their reapa'do to the Government finncéa. - A machine that will revolutionize the steel industry is invented. - Roig reports 14 percent increase in automobile accidents. - The Invisible was arrested in the middle of a shootout; he was wounded. - Insular Delegates will manage retroactive payment of 25 percent. Housewives will organize subcommittees in neighborhoods of the Capital. * * * Doctor Concepción left for New York.
News Compendium
Governor designated Judge Gonzalez to register the Creole Party. * 85 suspended "eatudlante" will not be allowed to enter the UPR on Monday. . * It was Kravchenko who arranged Samarin's escape. - * - Governor signed the projects of verdicts by majority of the Juries and the Trial by Jury to the accused by gag laws. - * - Ruaos kidnapped seven German policemen in American sector of Berlin. * - * They see opportunity to employ borlcuas in the sons of the Great Lakes. Health started syphilis treatments with penicillin. - Three novotratlstas lawyers refused to testify before congressmen. - Triarte believes the attitude of PEP leaders in Ponce is unfair. - Another small car appears on the market. - - - UN ordered ceasefire in Palestine. - GOP congressional candidates would come * la lela. - - - Truman defers married, parents and singles with dependents. -
Roig reports increase in accidents.
There were 11,625 in the last fiscal year Police reveal a general rise in the number of crimes committed By Enrique Remires Brau EL MUNDO Staff Writer In the Annual Report of the Insular Police rendered to the Governor of Puerto Rico; the Colonel of the Uniformed, Salvador T. Rolg, says that Ja force during the year 1947-48 conalatló of 1732 member", including loa employee" civile". Based on a factual and statistical analysis compiled by Headquarters, Chief Rolg says that for the past 25 years the island police force has been, and still is, below the normal acceptable levels on the mainland. While the average number of police per 1,000 inhabitants in a large number of U.S. cities is more than 1.5 police officers, in Puerto Rico the average is about .5 guards per 1,000 inhabitants. Based on the research and studies we have conducted," states Colonel Roig, "we maintain that the force should be increased in Puerto Rico. The Department reports 170,163 persons charged" this year, compared" to 169,228 the previous year. This shows that there was an increase of .6 percent. Included in the figures for persons charged during the year ended was a considerable number of persons charged with traffic violations. There was a 1.5 decrease in crimes against the person and a 4 percent increase in crimes against property, compared to the previous year's figures. In the number of murder" there was an increase of 6 percent; in Involuntary homicides there was a decrease of n percent; the number of cases of serious assaults was unchanged; burglaries increased IR percent; robberies. Police seized a total of 20,514 quarts of clandestine intoxicating liquor; destroyed R88 stills and seized 521 stills, to be taken as evidence in court. A total of 2,535 firearms were registered during the year that ended. This number of weapons includes 1977 revolvers, 545 pistols, 11 rifles and 2 shotguns. Deaths in accidents A total of 227 persons" lost their lives and 7,089 were injured on the highways and streets of Puerto Rico during the year 1947-48. These figures represent an increase of 5 and 15 percent, respectively, over the previous year. Automobile accidents jumped from 10,183 cases last year to 11,625 this year, an increase of 14 percent. The traffic situation," says the annual report, "has become so dangerous that it is the duty of every citizen, whether he is a driver or a walker, to know definitely what he can do to save his own skin, as well as the lives and health of others. Statistics prove conclusively that speeding is the best way to save your own skin and the lives and health of others.
Signed the bill of verdict by majority vote
Governor Piftero signed the bill that provides that in the case of a jury trial in Puerto Rico, a verdict may be reached by a majority of not less than three-fourths of the jury. A total of ten bills were signed by the Governor, among them the one that establishes trial by jury, and not by a court of law, for those accused of violating the so-called "gag" legislation, and the one that allocates $20,000 for those who incur in the office's efforts to hire a foreign doctor to attend municipal welfare services on the island. The laws signed The laws signed by Governor Piftero are the" following: P. of C. 3 (Act 4)- To amend sections 16 and 17 of the Banking Act, as subsequently amended. P. of C. 6 (Act 5)- To allocate and make available to the Puerto Rico Insular Water and Sewerage Service, from any existing funds in the Insular Treasury not earmarked for other purposes, the amount of $100,000, which shall be used by the SAA for the construction of the sewerage system of the low-cost homes for veterans project to be built in the Turabo neighborhood of the Municipality of Caguas. (Continued on page 14) 10% increase in air fares recommended JAC announced decision after one-day meeting. WASHINGTON~s7 August 20. (PU) - The Civil Aeronautics Board today recommended that airlines increase their "airfare rates" by 10 percent. Chairman Joseph J. O'Connell, Jr. announced the Board's recommendation after an all-day meeting with representatives of the 16 major domestic airlines. He said there was no unanimity of opinion among the airlines as to whether such an increase should be made, but that he had "every reason to believe" they would all agree. O'Connell also said that the Board would favor charging air passengers for meals served to them if the matter came up for a vote, but that he had not yet recommended the matter. The 10 percent increase was recommended for the five major airlines - American, Eastern, Northwest, TWA and United. O'Connell said the smaller airlines, which in some cases have higher fares, are supposed to match their fares at the proposed new levels. The industry average is now about 5.5 cents per passenger-mile. It will be increased, to approximately 6 cents. American Airlines announced today that, despite the government's recommendation, it will not raise fares on its luxury DC-6 aircraft, on which it carries about 65 percent of its passengers. But American reaffirmed (Continued on page 14)
Triarte believes the attitude of PEP leaders in Ponce is unfair
Speaking about the resignations of the candidates of the Statehood Party to the Legislature for the Ponce district, as well as those of the Local Committee and the municipal candidates of the same party in that city, Mr. Celestino Iriarte said yesterday that evidently "an injustice is being committed by wanting to question the performance of the convention that legally and democratically nominated Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa, PEP candidate to the House, by accumulation". Iriarte also said that in the "nominations made" at the convention of the Statehood Party, only the delegates with the right to vote participated, and that it was this" that decided with their "vote" the nomination between Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa and Mr. Ramiro Colón. The convention," he added, "acted at all times under personal influence" and this is clear to all the delegates". Regarding the demand of the resigned leaders of Ponce to call for an assembly of delegates to elucidate again the question of the candidate * for the House at-large, Mr. Iriar said he is not willing to accept this demand.
te stated that he is not willing to call, and will not call another assembly of his party, "to discuss a matter that has already been discussed and resolved by the convention in a clear and definitive manner". Mr. Iriarte ended by saying that he is willing, as soon as he has the time available to do so, to go to Ponca to meet with "u" co-religionists of that city. As it is known, the Municipal Committee of the Statehood Party in Ponce, as well as the party's candidate for governor and representative for the city, as well as the candidate for senator for the district, resigned outright, in protest for the way in which the recent party convention was carried out. The "resigning" demanded that a new assembly of delegates be held "to proceed to elect Ja Isla's candidate for at-large representative. They added: "Then and only then will there be neither a winner nor a loser" and the Party will go straight to victory next November".
UN strongly ordered ceasefire in Palestine
LAKE SUCCESS. New York, August 20. - (PU) - Convinced that it has extended the Palestinian truce temporarily, the United Nations Security Council recessed today to begin a one-week vacation. The Council ended its work at Lake Success with a 10-hour session in which it refused to consider the Yugoslav protest against Anglo-American policy in Trieste and passed a resolution, couched in strong terms, ordering a cease-fire in Paleitlna. Before the challenge, which will end in Parla shortly before the beginning of the National General Assembly, the Council warned the Palestinian belligerent that the side which violates the truce will be severely punished.
the truce will be severely punished by the international organization. The Council adopted a resolution jointly submitted by the United States, Canada, Britain and France, notifying the Palestinian government that the United Nations will not tolerate, under any circumstances, the continuation of the war in the Holy Land. The Council, which met late at night to consider an urgent report from Count Folke Bernadotte, mediator in Palestine, to the effect that the truce was about to end, instructed the "belligerent" to compel * their "irregular" corps to respect (Continued on p. 14).
GOP candidates would come to Isla
l BwKI* B v B B 1 A ' ¿ Wfew ■ 1 BH . Sb I From Left * right: lic Juan Pedrosa, Jr; Richard A. Erickson, of Minurí; Gov. Thomae E. Dewey, and Albert C Jones, of New Jersey.
- There is unanimous opposition in the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rican Independence Party (PIP), a version circulated yesterday to EL MUNDO that the party will not, under any circumstances, enter into negotiations with the Statehood, Socialist and Reformist parties for the purpose of choosing common candidacies for the next elections. The "lucid" independent leaders said that recently the Board of Directors of the PIP "had met and agreed that it would not even enter into talks with respect to the" common candidacies, and that it was still the norm of said Party, which would go completely alone to the elections. They admitted, however, that on different occasions several leaders of the opposition party had approached the PIP leadership with the intention of discussing the possibility of the PIP entering into common candidacies, but that the PIP had always rejected the proposal. In fact, during the last few days a rumor has been circulating in San Juan that conversations were being held between the leaders of the PIP and the other three parties mentioned above" to the effect that the PIP was committed to vote for the candidacy of Judge Martin Travieso for governor of Puerto Rico and they would vote for the candidacy of Rafael Arjona Siaca for Resident Commissioner. Five of the members" of the PIP Board of Directors with whom we communicated yesterday stated that such proposal would not be accepted, reiterating that the PIP would only go to the" elections with the candidacies that were selected in its assembly, that is, with Dr. Francisco M. Susonl, Jr. for" governor, and "1 Rafael Arjona Siaca for the Commissioner in Wáshlngton. There are leaders" in favor - The" leaders of the PIP with whom we did not" communicate stated that in the Board of Directors there is unanimity of criteria to the effect of going alone" to the elections. However, it has been said that some leaders" of said political collectivity who do not belong to the Board of Directors have expressed their opinion in the sense of entering into the" common candidacy" with the other opposition parties in order to defeat the PIP in the elections.
Governor Dewey reiterated to Mr. Pedrosa, Jr. that he will help Puerto Rico to become a state of the Union Po7 sTgalvez" m aturan a Rodador de El, MUNDO The Governor of the State of New York and current candidate for the Presidency of the Nation for the National Republican Party, reiterated to Mr. Juan Pedrosa, Jr. his promise to "help Puerto Rico in its aspirations to become a state of the Union Po7 sTgalvez" m aturan a Rodador de El, MUNDO The Governor of the State of New York and current candidate for the Presidency of the Nation for the National Republican Party, reiterated to Mr. Juan Pedrosa, Jr.
in its aspirations to become the 49th State of the Union," Mr. Juan Pedrosa, Jr. met with Governor Dewey on the occasion of a meeting of the Executive Committee of the Young Republicans in Albany, which he attended on behalf of the Young Republicans of Puerto Rico. During his interview, Governor Dewey, according to Mr. Pedrosa, showed great interest in the problems of Puerto Rico and very particularly in what concerns the definitive resolution of its political status. Governor Dewey reaffirmed in all his points, the promise made at the Philadelphia Convention to promote the conversion of Puerto Rico into the 49th State of the Union and ratified his disposition to put an end to the influence of the regime of former Governor Tugwell that still remains on the Island. Unwavering Decision Mr. Pedros", Jr. declared that from the interview held with the National Republican Party presidential candidate, he was pleasantly impressed by Mr. Dewey's decision to confront the problems" of Puerto Rico, being completely sure that in Dewey the people of Puerto Rico "have an unwavering advocate, who on more than one occasion expressed his decision to support the Puerto Rican Statehood Party in its struggle to achieve Statehood as the final solution to its status". Leaders will come to the Island Several" leaders" of the National Republican Party* will come to the Island, according to a promise made to Mr. Pedrosa during the Republican Youth Convention in Albany. Several" Senate and House candidates will also come to Puerto Rico in order to become duly acquainted with the situation in the country in the event of a Republican tnunfn in the next elections in the Nation, something that is taken for granted there. Among the latter are Messrs. John Bills, candidate for the Lower House from New York City; Albert Jones, candidate for New Jersey; Robert Hendrickson, candidate for the Senate from New Jersey; Richard Erickson, candidate for the House from Missouri, and Phllllp Wlllkie, candidate for the House from Indiana. The first to arrive will be Mr. Robert W. Waitt, president of the Republican Youth in Virginia, who will arrive in the Island on September 5. Upon his return, Mr. Pedrosa also informed that the general atmosphere among the presidents of the Republican Youth in all the states is in favor of statehood for Puerto Rico. Likewise, from his visits to the different candidates for the Senate and the House, he was able to confirm that, if the National Republican Party wins the elections, as expected, there will be in Congress the best opportunity to achieve Statehood for Puerto Rico.
| . , .... L . - i r r r - - - - " - ■ i Judge Appointed to Register Criollos Governor Appointed Jesus Gonzalez after an interview with Seoane On orders of Governor Pifie- , ro, the Attorney General of Puer1 lo Rico, Lula Negron Fer- , nandez, gave instructions yesterday to the ! Judge General of Dlitrlto, Jesú" A. González, to go to the city of Caguas to take the Oath of Law to the voters who are being registered by the Criollo Party organized by Mayor Manuel Seoane. Yesterday, at about six o'clock in the afternoon, Judge Gonzalez left for Caguas ! to act in the Inscription of the aforementioned Party. Mayor Seoane met yesterday afternoon for about three hours with Governor Piftero, to whom he complained "about the little cooperation he was receiving from the four judges in Cagua*. for the ins- ' cripclón of his party." Likewise, Mayor Seoane made it known to the Governor that he had "the genta for the Inscription of the Crio- ! lio Party, but that the obstacles that the judges were putting in his way would prevent the Inscription of the same," ' While Seoane was conferring with the Governor, the procura- ; dor Negrón Fernández arrived, who immediately went to the office in ' i where the conference was being held, i i i Half an hour later Judge González arrived, who also participated J in the meeting. ' No comment chmo Around five o'clock in the afternoon Mayor Seoane and Judge Gonzalez left. Neither of them qul- , so as to make any comment for the , Press, However, EL MUNDO . was later informed that both officials were leaving at that moment for Caguas to continue the registration of the Criollo Party. Yesterday it was certain that, if a Judge had not been appointed to dedicate all the time to the registration of the Criollo Party, it would not have been possible to register, since there are only two days left - the 25th is the last day to file the petitions, counting Saturday and Sunday* - to file the registration petitions at the Executive Secretary's office. As of yesterday, only about 700 petitions have been sworn in, and there are already six days of registration. To register the Creole Party about 2,000 petitions are needed. The situation was such that at times there were hundreds of voters lined up in front of the office where the registration was taking place.
Parents and married people were exempted.
Also singles with dependents Exempt farmers and industrial workers. - Order for registration By FRANK ELEAZER - WASHINGTON, Aug. 20. (PU)President Truman today deferred all married men and all fathers from the peacetime draft, but they must register jointly with all other eligible voters. It also deferred to all "aoltero" who, "in good faith," "or" have a brother, sister, grandparent or other dependent. His executive order, which included most of the "dispoiiclone" related to the "World War II dlferimlento", also deferred to Tos following: "Exempts farmers (1) All those who are engaged in agriculture and who, not being reemi plazables, produce a substantial amount of food" science!*(2) To all industrial workers whose employment is considered essential to the health or national security. (3) All members of the Armed Forces and all veterans who served more than 90 days in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, or Coast Guard between December 7, 1941, and September 2, 1945. (4) Only children of families whose other sons or daughters died while serving in the U.S. Armed Forces during World War II. (5) Ministers and clergy. (6) Conscientious objectors. (7) Public officials, such as state and territorial governors, members of Congress and state legislatures, and judges. (R) All mentally and physically disabled persons. Flexibility 4* the order The President said that *1 Commanding General Lewis B. Hershey, director of the Selective Service, may* order the reclaslficaeirtn of any Registrant, without taking his dlferimlent petition. - "The" cyclicals said the order llene to be 'flexible', to allow the Armed Forces" to take advantage of the qualifications of some individuals, who might otherwise be left out. For example, doctors, lawyers and scientists needed for specific military positions can be recruited even if they have dependents. I* law provides that all men between 18 and 25 must register. Those from 19 to 25, "if not deferred, are obliged to serve 21 months, at home or abroad. The 18-year-olds can escape compulsory service by volunteering to serve an arc in the territorial limits of the country. Truman ordered local draft boards, which have not yet been fully organized, to classify the men "in the spirit of the law." The President noted that the law provides that "in a free society, the obligations and privilege" entailed by service in the Armed Forces and in its reserves," should be shared by all, according to a system of selection that is fair and consistent with the maintenance of an effective national economy." Against Discrimination The President also stipulated that there shall be no discrimination on the basis of race, color, or religious creed of enrollees. Nor shall there be discrimination against any person because he or she has participated in the activities of an organization. "Each such registrant," he said, "shall receive justice." Although most of the" provisions of the new order "on "lmllar to those of World War II, the provision relating to dependents is much more liberal. Specific "dlferimlent" In World War II, local boards had a great deal of discretion in dlferimlenting per* sonnel with dependents. On this occasion, Truman ordered the dlferimlent of any person who: (1) has a wife or child, with whom he maintains a 'bona fide family relationship." The term "child" covers "illegitimate," "adopted," "foster," and "hljaatroa. (2) has assumed, "in good faith," the ability to support a divorced wife, a child, a brother or sister, a grandparent, or any person who is physically or mentally incapacitated. These dependents must be citizens of the United States or reside in the United States, its territory or its territory. United States, its territory or possilone. Other dlferlmlonts Agricultural laborers who cannot be replaced will be deferred, ""1 produce a substantial amount of food necessary to the health, interest, or national security."" These deferments" will not be for more" than one year and may be revoked if the status" of the farmer changes. The same conditions apply to industrial workers. D* tiem(Continued on page 14)