THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy to mostly cloudy with scattered showers*. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 87: low, 78. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:8" in the afternoon, 28.85 inches of mercury.
46 Pages 5/
LA MAÑANA NEWSPAPER
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MAY 22, 1948
Antomortliitaa, damoateanoa the traditional cut of the duck
NUMBER 11312
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second clase matter, Poet Office, San Juan, P. B.
Gas thrown in UPR Law School
Benitez orders investigation of the case Today exams will continue without police. - Library Closed
By Lula Hernández Aquino Editor of EL MUNDO New* Incidents took place in the c*mpu" of the University ' yesterday afternoon, due to the strike situation, The librarian of the Inatltution, "eftor Thomas Hayes, declared the closure of the General Library, because he "feared that the strikers* would sow a state of panic". At half past two o'clock, and for an ■ hour, the strikers sabotaged the law students who were examining in the library of their college, throwing firecrackers and flasks containing chemical*, odor-producing compounds. The "eftor José Guelts. accompanied by the Dean of the College of Law, Manuel Rodrigues Ramo*, put an end to the situation without the intervention of the Insular Police. The Rector of the University, Mr. Jaime Beniter, declared that "the conduct of these* strike leaders is contrary to the minimum requirements that must prevail in the Institution". He informed that an official investigation has been opened in order to apply the corresponding sanctions, as well as to inform the judicial authorities so that they may carry out the corresponding investigation, alleging that "serious crimes have been committed, both by strikers and by persons outside the institution". Situation in the morning: The Z morning examinations proceeded normally. In room number T^ít "Hostos Building, from eight o'clock in the morning, there was a final examination in Social Work. . in charge of Miss Georgina Pastor. Out of twenty-nine students, enrolled in this subject, 3S. Several of the examinees ' were employees, public*. In room number two of the aforementioned building; and from day to day in the morning, in another examination of Social Work, in charge of Professor Carmen Rivera de Aivarado, 14 students were examined, out of a total enrollment of 17. The class is also attended by employees of the Island Government, some teachers, and visiting teachers, who attend the class on Saturdays. From nine to twelve o'clock in the morning there was also a final examination in notarial matters, in the College of Law, in charge of Professor Domingo Toledo Alamo. The student Luis Miranda Correa, who, despite being a striker, had taken a law exam the day before, withdrew from the classroom, but not before explaining to the Dean why he had withdrawn. Mr. Miranda and students Manuel A. Barreto. Jr. and José Quiñones Ella* speak authorized statements during the morning stating that "in the edition of the newspaper El Universal, of the day 21. appears a front page information, given officially by the administration. eq the sense that the students of Law, Luis Mjranda Correa. Barreto, Quiñones Ellas v Garrastegul. who days before had written a public letter supporting the protest movement, had taken the first exam at the College". They stated that "we feel guilty, and that guilt we carry as a burden of conscience" and added that "the fact that the Law group took that exam, h*as been capitalized by the university administration in the official government gazette, as an example for the* other students; the truth has been told, but the intention has been neither noble nor sincere; rather twisted and ill-intentioned, resorting once again to 1a ruse of the most undesirable politicking." The aforementioned students also stated that "in the face of this affront, we return to our former position, active and militant, together with our comrades* in protest". They also condemned the aggression against Juan Mari Brea by a policeman during Thursday's incidents. For his part, the student Luis A. Garrastegul informed that "I want to make it very clear that I am in the student movement as fully as ever; that I have not given up, that if I went to the exams it was because I will not help the administration to get rid of me; that I need my student status, to continue fighting for a better University, where the pedagogical norms and not the criteria of a tyrannical authority and party politics govern the university functioning." Closure of the general library From half past one to half past three in the afternoon, in a room in the Mostos Building, the final examination in the History of Social Work was given, only two were missing. Several of the examinees were public employees. At 12:20 p.m., the University Librarian, Mr. Thomas Hayes, ordered the library closed. All the es(Contlnued on page 23)
Sugar Industry Wage Increase * An increase in the* minimum* wage* for the manufacturing phase of the sugar industry in Puerto Rico will be in effect July 19, 1948 The San Juan office of the Wage and Hour Division of the United States Department of Labor announced yesterday the appointment of the Wage and Hour Administrator. "eñnr William R. MCComh. to approve the" Minimum Wages for said In- ' dustry recommended" by the committee de "lgned by said agency. and which some" me*e" ago studied the* Balarlo* in various* industries. with a view* to recommending what* wages* for the* mlama*. The* recommendation** of the committee as to the sugar industry's manufacturing fa "e, was to increase the minimum hourly wage from 35 cents* to 40 cents* an hour. As of May 22, "e granted 15 days* to submit objections or justifications. Again broken off negotiations on railroads Anti-strike order will be in force only until next 28th WASHINGTONMay 21. (PU)- Negotiations in the dispute over wage increases in the railroad industry were abandoned today *not having reached agreement. Within half an hour of** resuming the* negotiation**, Alvanley Johnston, spokesman d* the three* unions involved, told lo* perlodlita* that* "na f Y*m "k reach s u.". convent. *4Loa railroads** have "nt "n lnt*ré* in that a* eatrffble an agreement. "Corrljamo* e "o",- int*rpu "o D. P. Looml", president* of the Negotiating Committee** of lo* f*railroad** of* the Oe*t*.- "Lo* railroad** have*no*interest*in*going*beyond*the" r*com*nding*" of* pr*"ldent Truman's Inve "tlgating Board. I.s brotherhood*" r*"slét*n to accept e "a* recommendation""". lx""" negotiating"" did not plan any further meetings. Ix" train*" **are currently operating under *1 nominal domination of the United States Army. The tr*" union*" - the brotherhoods of Mechanics", Stoker" and Engine*. and Switchmen* are under a court order forbidding them to strike. The operation of the "Irene" under the government will continue Indefinitely, until a wage contract allows it to return to private ownership. The White House, whose officials investigated last Tuesday's resumption of talks between the unions and the employers, will now have to decide on the outcome.
University Graduate* Association regrets that its efforts to resolve the university strike were unsuccessful. - Two writers** of movie plots sentenced for contempt of court. - - - Taft accuses Army of trying to bulldoze recruiting. * State to demand immediate release of 40 Americans arrested in Lebanon. - Navy withdrew its objection to the construction of the airport in Isla Verde. No place for the habeas corpus writ of students, due to the incident at Central. - - - Quintuples Dionne will be 14 years old in a week's time. - De Gásperl formed a new Cabinet in Italy. - - - The vote on the citizenship bill in the House is canceled indefinitely. Vlcéna pledges to r\i "ar several orders of the AG8. \ Can Planist triumphs in Wáshlngton. ■ 7 - - - - Harry L. Hopkins' memo--rias are being published. - - - - Planning has no jurisdiction over hospital program. - Á - - Protest in Pakistan against Israel.
News Digest
The Ochoa Fertiliser Company will build a factory in Guanica at a cost of 11,190,000, - - - - The man accused of having kidnapped a child was released from jail, The Court of Expropriation will consist of tree aalaa. The Pueblo del Niño paid a póatumo tribute to Father Flanagan. ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ Farmers condemn new tax laws and double overtime pay. "♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ Farmers condemn new tax laws and double overtime pay. - - - I xi and ton homered in Giants' setback and Doby in Indians'. * Flladelfla beat Ina Tigres. - - - - Olmo tied for first place in batting. - - - - - - " Tensan petardos y gsaes en Colegio de Derecho de la UPR. Benitos orders investigation. Examinations to continue today without Police. - - - - Chambers recessed early in the morning, three to approve bill to prohibit all activities directed against the island government or any of its political subdivisions, - - - - - 25% alaa of Correa's personnel from territories studied, - - - - Court rejects non suit in UPR vs. Landing injunction,
Expropriation Court to have 3 chambers
The Expropriation Court of Puerto Rico, created by Act 223 i of May 15, 1948 (P. S. 825), authored by *1 Senator Cruz Ortiz Stella, will consist of three* chambers, each presided over by a judge. The three Judges of the Court, which shall be located in San Juan, shall have the same powers and attributions as the District Judges, and may act as such, by appointment by the Attorney General, to hear any civil, criminal or special case. The Court of Expropriation*" shall exercise jurisdiction over the whole of Ida and shall function as a district court, and may appeal "* "*"its" decision" to *1 Supreme Court. All expropriation cases shall be filed at the seat of the Tribunal in the Capital, but at the request of the defendant, the hearing on the merits may be held at the seat of any judicial or municipal district within the same. The Law shall enter *1 July 1, 1948, with the exception of section 8, which shall apply immediately, in order for the Tribunal to be duly installed by the aforementioned date. The complete text of this Act is as follows: The Expropriations Tribunal of Puerto Rico is hereby created with headquarters in the capital of the Island. The Expropriations Tribunal hereby created shall be composed of three Chambers, each presided over by a Judge, who shall be an attorney duly admitted to practice law by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico. Said Judges shall have the same powers, prerogatives and attributes that by law correspond to the Judges of the District Courts. The Judges of the Court of Expropriations of Puerto Rico shall be appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Insular Senate for a term of 12 years and until they take office, unless sooner removed. Said Judges may only be removed from office for just cause and in the manner provided by law for the removal of District Judges. The Judges of the Court of Expropriations may not engage in the practice of their profession of notary public, nor hold any other office during the term of their incumbency, Judges shall earn W000 The Judges of the Court of Expropriations may be appointed by the Attorney General, when the circumstances so require, to act as Judge in the Court of the Judicial District of San Juan or in any District Court, and when so designated said Judges shall have Jurisdiction, power and competence to hear any civil, criminal or special matter within the jurisdiction of said Judicial District Court of San Juan and the District Courts of Puerto Rico, and shall retain jurisdiction until the final resolution of the matters of which they are a Judge (continued *on page 25). 25)
Before Pinero i there is numerous legislation
Also two of log that "e relate to acts against Government Yesterday passed before Gov. Piflero for consideration House Bills 23 and 24. declaring as a felony the Incitement to commit an act constituting a felony; and the willfully or knowingly advocating, encouraging or preaching the necessity, desirability or expediency of overthrowing, destroying or paralyzing the functions of the Insular Government or any political subdivision thereof, by force or violence. This legislation also has the scope of declaring it a felony to print, distribute or publicly exhibit with such Intentions, any es| erlto or publication in which the above is advised or preached. The legislation which the Governor has under consideration d* the present special Legislature, which Includes measure" of benefit to the । Island Police is as follows: From the House:* । Bill number 10, To amend Article 4 of Act number 455, of April 2S, 1945, regarding* tobacco quotas. Bill 12, To ratify the* reallocation "* made* to the D "partment of Juttlcla, to Enter into the Fund of the Pritione* Industry* Corporation*, etc. Project 13, Authorizing the Office of Personnel to classify, in accordance with the "dl "po "lclone* of Act 345 of May 12, 1927, the positions belonging to the competitive service and the competitive service, created in Act 55 of April 29, 1948. Project 14. To allocate the amount of $100,000 to the Lottery Bureau of the Department of the Treasury of Puerto Rico, for the construction or improvement of a building. To amend the title and Section 1 of Act No. 323, approved on May 10, 1947, entitled: "An Act to allocate the sum of ten thousand (10,000) dollars or such part thereof as may be necessary to endow the available funds" in the Island Treasury not destined for other* purposes, so that the Commissioner of the Interior of Puerto Rico may proceed with the repair of the old building of the Municipal Hospital of Puerto Rico.the repair of the former building of the Municipal Hospital of Utuado, to be used as a four (4) classroom urban school; and for other purposes,". Bill 22, To amend Sections 4, 5, 9, 16 and 17 of, and to sever Section 25 (a) of, the Banking Act. Project 23, To declare as a misdemeanor the fact of inciting or urging the commission of an act that constitutes a felony under the Insular laws. Bill 24. To declare it a felony to willfully or knowingly encourage, advocate, advise, or preach the necessity, desirability, or expediency of overthrowing, destroying, or crippling the Insular Government, or any political subdivision thereof, by force or violence; and the 'printing, publishing, editing, circulating, circulating, selling, distributing, or publicly exhibiting with intent to overthrow, cripple, or destroy the Insular Government or any political subdivision thereof, any writing or publication wherein the necessity, 1desirability, or said Government etc. is promoted, advocated, advised, or preached. Bill 25, To amend Article 62 of the Penal Code of Puerto Rico and increase the penalty provided in said Article. Bill 26, To amend sections 2 and 3 of Act 21, approved on May 15, 1940. From the Senate: P. 2, Fixing the pre "upue "to of the Land Authority" I (Continued on page 14)
Taft accuses the Army of trying to force conscription.
(PU).- Senator Robert A. Taft, Republican of Ohio, said today that there would be no need for a peacetime draft, "1 the Administration would give more impetus to volunteer recruitment into the armed services. The Senate Republican leader discussed the 'problem' of national defense in a speech at Princeton University. He said the Army's ground force needs more men and that, although he opposed a peacetime draft, he would vote for the measure "if it were the only way to protect the men. He said there is a "strong suspicion," however, that the Army has not tried to get lo" Volunteer Revenue, d* good faith because it wishes to show that there is a need for compulsory methods. "They have raised 1os patrons for the admission of mena, above what they were during the war,"-he said. - "Their anun clos campaign has been intense, but not persuasive.
1 - - - V i ... - - B w -hÍ' ROBERT A. TAFT , b "I believe that an executive, dlspues- - to make the voluntary admissions system work, could do so " without resorting to Selective Service reciu- - tion. An- ' te the present attitude of the Admlnls- ' । traclon, we may not* see obli| (Continued on page 18).
Victim of a beautiful Russian Soviet spy.
- The State Department announced that Sgt. James M. McMillIn, 21, formerly of Boulder, Colorado, had refused to leave Russia to return to the United States. According to State Department reports, his refusal was because he is in love with a Russian woman, believed to be an experienced Soviet spy. McMtlIn, who e" son of an Army colonel. was a student at the University of Colorado, and had been a member of the staff of the Military Embalada in Moscow. (Photo P. A.) Vicens promises to review several orders AGS One ea on rice price to retailer. - The sugar case The "*ftor Antonio Vlcén* Rio*. General Administrator of Supplies, promised yesterday to a commission composed of representatives* of fourteen organizations "* of* merchant* retailers* who visited him, in the course of the next week will review the administrative order which fixes maximum prices for rice. to fix in the same the" prices that should govern in the traffic of this* article *between *1 storekeeper and *1 retailer. The" (Maniatas presented to Mr. Vlcens Rios invoice" in which ron "ta that* the wholesalers sell at $13 quintal, to sell it at 14 cents pound, which, according to them. produces them a gross profit margin of 7'4 cents", which they consider Inguflclent* to sustain the increasing operating expenses, such" as high salarlo" and contributions. In response to this presentation by the retailers, the General Supply Manager" urged them not to pay more than $12.50 per quintal for rice at any time, arguing that according to their data, there are enough rice stocks on the Island to supply the consumer for four months. Likewise, the retailers" presented the case of sugar, which, they said, they have to pay at a price that reduces their profit margins. Mr. Vicéns Ríos said he will review Administrative Order 174, which affects the price of sugar, within fifteen days. He expressed that this fifteen day period "*will be a trial period, to experiment the operation of the order in question. In the same manner, the commission exposed its complaints" in relation to the poor quality of the codfish that "is dispensed in Puerto Rico, to which Vlcens Rio* said that the prevailing illination in that line is due to the price control" established in 1a T "la, being the case that* Santo Domingo and Cuba, who pay it at 32 cents per pound (in Puerto Rico it is paid at 23) consume the best quality codfish. Mr. Vicéns Ríos also promised that in a month he will decontrol potatoes and onions. On the other hand, the" merchant* asked that the agenda tes consult on those* issues* that affect the retail trade of the pal*, especially on price control and price decontrol, receiving the (Continued on page 14)
Chambers approve bilis punishing any action against the government
Court rejects non suit in I injunction of UPR vs. Landing
Ledo. Curet alleges it is the first time in Puerto Rico that an injunction is used to restrain a party, in a public dispute, from asserting its rights.
By ANGEL CRUZ CRUZ Editor of EL MUNDO At the end of yesterday morning's trial of the University of Puerto Rico in the appeal filed by said institution against the expelled student Jorge I.ul* Landing to refrain from entering any part of the university grounds or committing or inciting acts of violence that may cause damage to property, "! "David Curet Cuevas, attorney for the defendant, filed a motion of non suit before Judge Jose M. Calderon to dismiss the lawsuit for lack of evidence to justify the issuance of the preliminary injunction. The attorney for the University, Victor Gutiérrez Franqul, opposed the motion, alleging that during the course of the hearing there was more than enough evidence to justify the issuance of a preliminary injunction. Mr. Gutiérrez Franqul added that for the issuance of the preliminary injunction, according to the jurisprudence, it was only sufficient that "evidence tending to demonstrate that there was a probability that the acts alleged in the petition for a perpetual injunction would be committed. After hearing* the parties, Judge Calde-
rón declared the motion of Mr. Curet Cuevas inadmissible, stating that this did not mean that the case had been tried, but rather that the resolution referred only to the question of whether or not a non suit motion was admissible for lack of evidence to support the allegations of the petition. Curet Cuevas then requested permission from the Court to testify in connection with the case. Once permission was granted, said attorney began by stating that "this is the first time in Puerto Rico that the writ of interdict is used to prevent one of the parties, in a public dispute, from asserting its right against the other party. He then added that in this case it was a ' public dispute between the Rector of 1 the University, Lic. Jaime 1 Benitez, and young Jorge Luis Lan- ' ding. "In Puerto Rico- ' continued dl- ' riendo *1 Lic. Curet- we have the Organic Charter, which guarantees citizens a democratic serle of right* and to issue this order would be tantamount to violating that* right" guaranteed by the Organic Charter." Denies right to Landing Gutiérrez Franqul lawyer answered the manifestations of II- । cenclado Curet Cueva". He refuted the ! tándoie that at no time (Continued on psg. 24).
Failed the management of graduates to resolve the strike at UPR.
They call on the parties involved to resolve the problem. Non-university groups are asked not to intervene in the matter.
The Commission of the Association of Graduate Women of the University of Puerto Rico, which mediated between the Chancellor and the leaders of the student opposition movement, in its report on the efforts made, lists 1"" tentative bases for a truce to end the university conflict, which were discussed with Chancellor Benitez, La I-11. __ I i J . l í _ I 1 _ _ _ _ _
4 Puerto Rican case pointed out to congressmen It arose from a request for funds to bring foreigners to work in the North WASHINGTON, May 21 (PU)- The United States Employment Service today asked "1 Congress to allocate the sum of $270,000 to find foreign nationals to come and work on American farms. Robert C. Goodwin, director of the service, told a Senate Appropriations subcommittee that private contractors have been unable to negotiate successfully with the Mexican government to bring in experienced farm workers. He said that there is a shortage of about 24,000 workers in some 27 asados, and that this can be met by bringing in seasonal workers from Mexico, Canada, and the British West Indies*. With that $270,00(1), Goodwin said, the employment service can hire 50 to 60 persons to arrange for the transportation of the foreign workers, and establish a fund to defray the expenses of transporting the workers. These expenses would eventually be recouped through discounts to the workers themselves in the United States. Goodwin described the labor market as "the baddest I have ever seen.
* The commission does not pass judgment on the final decision of the interviewees, but emphasizes that "it is impossible to foresee the projection that such a conflict may have at a time of tremendous confusion as the present. The alluded Report follows: "On May 13, the Board of Directors of the Association of Graduates and a number of sodas met at the Puerto Rican Athenaeum for the purpose of determining the action to be taken by the Association with respect to the university problem. The result of the meeting was the appointment of a committee to mediate between the university administration and the striking students. Care was taken to choose only persons from outside the two countries, since by the nature of the Association, many women professors of the University are on its rolls. It was made up of the President, Mrs. Orilla Oliveras de Carreras, three members of the Board of Directors: Mrs. Carmen B. Hernández Usera, Miss Sofía Bienes and Miss Nllita Vientós Gastón and a soda, Mrs. Clara Lugo de Sendrat "The Committee considered that although the fundamental thing was to make an analysis of the university problem to propose adequate remedies, the main thing, for the moment, was, con "*gulr, as soon as possible, the normalization d* the university life; the most urgent thing, to achieve that s" celebrate, the exams without obstacles or interruptions and qu" the greater number of students could benefldarse. of them. He decided not to consider, at the present time, the preconditions which had caused the conflict, limiting himself to trying to harmonize the authority of the university administration with the de (Continued on page 18)
Navy withdraws objection to airport in Isla Verde
The Civil Aeronautics Board officially communicated yesterday to the Director of the Transportation Authority, Mr. Salvador V. Caro, the decision of the U.S. Navy to withdraw its opposition to the construction of the Isla Verde International Airport. The communication received by Mr. Caro is signed by Mr. W. M. Robertson, Regional Administrator of the Board, with an office in Atlanta, Georgia. T "his action confirms the exclusive information published by EL MUNDO several days ago* to the effect that the Navy has withdrawn its objection to the construction of the International Airport on the site originally selected by the Island Government. Mr. Robertson, in his communication to the Director of the Transport Authority, informs her that he has received notice that the Navy has received notice that the airport will be built on the site originally selected by the Island Government.
has received notice that the Department of the Navy has withdrawn its objection to the use of Isla Verde for the development of the projected international airport. He adds that as a result of such action, the Island Government's application to the Civil Aeronautics Board can now be processed for "u Therefore, he announces that "e will give cuno to this project in 1a regulatory manner.
S" expects that the CAB will soon announce the holding "n Puerto Rico of vlnta* related* to these works", in order to Alleger additional j information. Such information, "egún s* Informó, Includes the form *n qu* I the Government would have d* solved "1 *4 problem of the" family* affected* ¡ by the construction of the to,
i Minority accuses leaders of hysteria - Yesterday's extraordinary meeting ended - They are talking about convening another meeting By S. Gálvmi Meterán* I And José M. García Calderón ' Editor*" of EL MUNDO La* cámara" )*gl "latlvta termle naron "u" work" a 1a* five j medlA de 1a mAdrugAdA de 1a mAdrugAdA de Ayer luego de aprober, tra* exten "o" debate", tre" bill" d* law da "tln*do" to control any activity "to dMtruct or paralyze the Iniular Government, or any "political ubdlvlRlon of" it, by means of force and violence". This includes the action of "encouraging, advocating or advising, or preaching the necessity of overthrowing the Insular Government by force and violence". House session A heated debate s* developed in the early morning in the lower insular House, between the independentlsta representative, Baltazar Quiñones Ellas, and the representative* te Triarte, with representatives* Obdulio Bauzá, Benjamin Ortiz and José Portilla, around, the bill d' House number 24. This "s the one that declares it a felony to advise or preach the necessity of paralyzing or destroying the Insular Government,- or any political ttubdlvlvl*lón thereof,- by means of force or violence. Speaking against the bill, Mr. Quiñones Ellas said it was a product of hysteria and cowardice of the government, which he accused of being tyrannical and dictatorial. He said Quiñones Ellas* said that the bill also includes the portraits of the person whom the Government was going to imprison and punish, "using a law that represents a monstrosity". The Independence Party representative harshly criticized the government leader, who said that he had "an army of bodyguards, who cost the people of Puerto Rico more than $50,000 a year. "What is behind this project," said Quiñones Ellas, "is the fear, the hysteria that dominates the men of the government, whose conscience does not seem to let them live quietly. Increpando al señor Ramo* Antonlnl, quien prealdla la *""lón de 1* Cámara, a lo" ""nadore" Vicente Gélgel Polanco y Samuel R. Quiñón"", y " lo* demá* mlembroa (te j" mayoría, manitertó qu" no le extrañaba la actitud d" lo* tegl*- í labore* Popular"", "que todo lo han renunciado en obediencia a au amo". "You"", - shouted Quiñones Ellas with vlfttencía addressing * lo* legiiladore" Popular*", - that e "tán *n franca huida frente al problema d" 1a libertad de "u pueblo, votan este proyecto porque le lo lo manda el amo. The master is afraid and that is why u "tede" will vote for the bill". Representative José Portilla, in a violent and energetic attitude, interrupted Mr. Quiñones Elle* shouting at him: "You can put that fear stuff away. Nobody here is afraid. "I did not say that they are afraid. I said that your master is afraid," Quiñones Elle* also replied quickly, in a vicious tone. He went on to say "1 speaker that the members of the Popular majority n" did but fly what "e te# ordered, and that the men who were accused of violence, turned out to be more serene and pacific" than those who claimed to be orderly and men of peace. Quiñón** Ellas also said that the men of the Government were terrified*® of "Mr. Pedro Alblz.u Campo", whose return to the Island made him uneasy". Quiñone* She" added that the Government could arrest 500 student" of the University, but that such action would be nothing but a product of fear, and said that he was sorry to see how men who a few years ago had been a hope for Puerto Rico, ' were at present in frank flight. Reply Ledo. Obdulio Bauzá, who as acting chairman of the Criminal Law Committee defended the bill, answered *1 speech of Quiñones Ellas. Rauzá said, among other things, that the freedom of Puerto Rico "can only be achieved by order and equanimity, and not by aggression and violence. "That violence," he said, "is what rivets the colony". "I," Bauza said, "have to rectify the misconception I had of the United States," a nation which, after defeating the total powers on all the battlefields, granted Independence to the Philippine Tala*. I was in the jail of Lave*," he added, "for defending the Independence of my country, which I loved as much as *1 I ""ftor Quiñon "* EIIa*. Independence "Ó1O has to come by the carmine of the pa" and of the* realitye", but never as a fruit of 1" vteLtenda nor of the spilling of /blood of" brother* puertorrlquaJ <Contlnü> in 1" fál.">