. r - ; -- -- ; THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy to cloudy with scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 7*; low, 71. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:M o'clock, NAO inches of mercury.
40 pages 5/
' ( MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXIX
Enterad m second elaaa matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, APRIL 17, 194B
Automovillataa, demoatreinoa traditional courtesy of the pala
NUMBER 11277
Chambers recessed after approving a $58,607,461 spending budget.
Insurance "bill" passed, with discount for workers and employers Set working hours for police officers Approve gambling, allocation for island roads The legislative "chamber" ended its work at 9:00 a.m. yesterday morning, adjourning sine die, after a meeting that lasted 16 hours. One of the last bills approved was the general expense budget of the Insular Government, which amounts to $58,607,461.07. When the budget bill was being voted on in the House, Representative José Portilla, of the Popular majority, requested that it be read in its entirety, causing an incident that momentarily interrupted the work. Representative Obdulio Bauzá, who was presiding when Mr. Portilla made his request, declared it out of order. Visibly mortified, Mr. Portilla raised the question of quorum, which did not succeed, and the legislative process was then resumed. Later, when the budget bill was put to a vote, Mr. Portilla Je voted against it, leaving the Chamber shortly thereafter. The final session of the chambers was extremely laborious, especially in the House of Representatives, where at every moment the various members of this body requested explanations on the legislation to be voted on. Another incident was provoked by the Liberal representative, Mr. Ernesto Cádiz, when he made a harsh protest against the Commissioner of Health, Dr. Juan A. Cádiz. Juan A. Pons, accusing him of having been the person responsible for an affirmation contained in the report recently rendered by the group of the American Medical Association, which visited the Island, and in which the professional capacity of the minor surgeons of Puerto Rico is attacked. According to Mr. Cadiz, Dr. Pons is prejudiced against them. In response to the statements of Mr. Cádiz, Speaker Susonl made a motion, so that the House would express its confidence and appreciation to the Commissioner of Health. The motion, which was approved by a majority, was objected to by the independent representatives. Eugenio Font Suarez and Baltazar Quiñones Ellas, who argued that it was not appropriate for the House to make any expression, since there was no controversy involving a question of confidence against the Commissioner of Health. Before adjourning the House, at 9:00 a.m., Representative Ramos Antonlnl took the floor to praise the wisdom and skill with which Speaker Susonl had conducted the proceedings. The words of Mr. Ramos Antonlnl were joined by Representative Quiñones El tas, who delivered a brief speech, in the course of which he recalled the achievements of Mr. Susonl, together with the hero José de Diego, fighting for the ideal of independence. Referring to Speaker Susonl, Quiñones Ellas said that history has given him a place of prominence in the political life of Puerto Rico, and made the. Invitation to return to the struggle for the freedom "of Puerto Rl-, ■ 'co. Both Mr. Ramos Antonlnl, as well as Mr. Quiñones Ellas, received warm applause from their colleagues, and then the Popular representative, Obdulio Bauzá, took the floor. Mr. Bauzá paid tribute to the president of the Progressive Republican Union, Mr. Celestino Triarte (who was absent), saying among other things that he was proud to have been able to be in a parliament where the leader of the Republican Union was present. He also said that the presence of Mr. Irlarte as representative of the minority was a definitive proof of Puerto Rico's capacity for independence. - As the various speakers took the floor, emotional speeches were made, and several legislators were moved to tears. Finally, Dr. Susoni spoke, thanking the testimony of affection that his colleagues had offered him, and affirming that he had died as an independent, and that he had never stopped fighting for his ideals. The representatives applauded, standing, Mr. Susonl, with whom they merged in close embraces as he came down from his podium. Mr. Susonl, as well as his son, Representative Esteban Susonl, embraced each other tightly, letting tears flow down their faces. Before adjourning, the House read the report of the Legislative Committee on Unemployment, appointed to study the effects of the mechanization of the sugar industry, with its conclusions and recommendations, and to report to the House on the effects of the mechanization of the sugar industry.
Established a state of emergency. Trieste case resurfaces . By NORMAN MONTELUER ROME, April 16 (PU) - Premler Alcide de Gásperl today mobilized 330,000 soldiers, carabinieri and civilian police throughout Italy, to maintain peace and order in the parliamentary elections of Sunday, April 80. Gásperl established an emergency General Staff composed of Cabinet Ministers, military and police commanders. These will remain on continuous active duty 24 hours a day at the Vlmlnale Palace, in this Capital, will sleep?in the building, until* the final result of the election is known, which will probably be Wednesday night. F4 Government fears Communist-inspired disorders. All" Cabinet ministers" have been ordered to remain in Rome, in order to insure a quorum, should a national emergency arise, _ Liquors, wines and beer, were banned throughout the country for a term of 48 hours" from midnight Saturday, until the me-
The House will not meet next Monday. 4 The House passed statehood for Hawaii 'in June last. Hawaiian Delegate Joseph R. Farrington, Assistant Secretary of the Interior Oscar Chapman and others appeared before the Suhcohnlté of Territories to urge passage of the measure. Farrington called the moment "an hour of big decisions''. "We don't want to lose now,'' Farrington testified before the Subcommittee. "I can't believe that any of you" would refuse to give us an answer to our request." He said that for nearly dr 50 years as a territory, Hawaii's supreme ambi- i tion has been to be a state of the Union. He noted that President Truman, the Republican Party, the Governors' Conference in 1947, 24 national organizations, 90 percent of the nation's press and 100 percent of local groups have stood on record in favor of statehood. Seth W. Richardson, drowned out by Washington and former Assistant Attorney General during the Hoover administration, said the allegation that the Big Five dominated Hawaii's economy should be disregarded (Continued on page 16).
Shortly before recess, the House passed a budget of $58,607,461. Insurance passed in sugar industry, with discount to workers and employers - < - Paul Fxl wards resigned his position with the Agricultural Company. - New system will be used to avoid duplicity in the numbers of the license plates. - Puerto Rico was mentioned in the Senate hearings on statehood for Hawaii. Gaitan's family refuses to allow burial of body until Oaplna resigns. Piftero issued a large number of receao appointments. - There is optimism of obtaining 28 million loan for aqueducts. Senate defeated bill on pilots after long debate * * * Puerto Rico exports in 1*47 were $1*1,806,000. De Gásperl has moved 800,000 carabineros and police soldiers. - The 16 non-communist countries of Europe form economic union. - This morning at five o'clock expired the truce in the civil war in Costa Rica. - ♦ Elpidlo Quirino Jure is expected.
Gaspen has mobilized 300,000 soldiers, carabinieri and police.
1 Jl ALCIDE DE GASPERI day night of Monday, from "can" of closed" the school" at the end of do" day" of voting. The oratorical campaign practically ended tonight, at the ninth hour of midnight, when the last oratorical explosions will be launched in thousands of cities, towns and villages. (Continued eg page 16)
Puerto Rico Mentioned in Hawaii Statehood Hearings
A Senate pubrommittee ended it" and asked the full committee to approve the bill and send it to the floor.
WASHINGTON, April 16. (PU).i-- A Senate subcommittee yesterday began discussion and quickly ended hearings on legislation declaring Hawaii the fourth state of the Union. The referred subcommittee immediately asked the full committee to approve the measure and send it to the Senate floor. F1 committee in ni".
-There will be a meeting of parents of UPR students They will try to satisfactorily solve the university conflict Parents of students of the University gathered Thursday night at the Barbo School in Rio Piedra, and agreed to summon the parents of all the students, both from the Metropolitan Zone and from the other sections of the university, for a general meeting of parents of university students. A commission was appointed composed of Mrs. Ana Carrión, Mrs. Pepita Freire de Bosch and Mr. Victoriano Soler. S. Cruz Disdier, Juan Noriega Martinez, Cristóbal Ontrón. Marcelino Cabrero, Ermelindo Bauzá, Roque V. López, Pe tronío Canales and Ernesto González, to organize the next meeting and to summon the parents by the fastest possible means.
News Digest
The conÍL (Contlnued on page 7). - * * * * They practice rapture in the heist cano against Bloncourt The mlnlatrn Scelba aaassured the Roman people yesterday that the Communists will be crushed in tomorrow's elections. - * - Chaplain Aubrey O'Reilly replaces Monsignor Mariano Vassallo in the Army. - * . Professional Baseball League did not accept Córdova Días' resignation. - Baaora received offer to fight welterweight champion Ray Robinson. - Santurce. Class A. won a close game against the TaMeres Eagles. - a 5. - ♦ - The Consejo Superior de Enseñan* endorsed Rector Benites and extended the period of suspension of classes. Asks the Rector to recommend measures to ga" rantisar normality. - President of P. U. predicts* defeat of Communists on Sunday in Italy. * General Motors began to close its plants because of old iron cases. - - - There will be Sunday assembly of university students. - Arabs and Jews engaged in fierce battle at Armageddon. ;
The Superior Council of Education extends the university closure until the situation is well investigated.
A boulder falls on a bus killing three people and injuring another passenger. - The misfortune occurred on the road to Adjuntas Three people were killed and another injured when a boulder fell from a cliff and fell on the roof of a passenger bus. Mr. Miguel Rivera, correspondent of EL MUNDO in Ponce, reported last night that yesterday, at 4:35 P.M., and on the Ponce highway, a passenger bus fell from a cliff. and on the Ponce to Utuado highway via Adjuntas, kilometer 19, hectometer 6, while bus P-5874, driven by driver Julio Toro Aviles, 34 years old, was traveling towards Ponce at a moderate speed, a huge rock weighing 20 kilos fell on the roof of the vehicle, which broke, killing passengers Estrella Martinez Gonzalez, 17 years old, resident of Concordia Street in Adjuntas, on the spot; Juan Rivera Vera, 20 years old, resident of Agua Street, also in Adjuntas, and Agripina Pagán González, 32 years old, resident of Guaraguao neighborhood, in Tonca. This passenger, according to the Chief of Ilstrlto, Alberto Martinez, Corporal Piña and guard Torres, was traveling behind the other two passengers. All three died on the spot as a result of skull fractures and wounds and contusions in other parts of their bodies. There were 12 passengers on the bus P-5874. At the Trlcoche hospital in Ponce, according to correspondent Mr. Rivera, Isabel López, 50 years old, resident of Adjuntas, was assisted, who received in the same accident a contusion in the left forearm and another in the thigh of the same side with a probable fracture of the left ankle. The bus, according to police reports, continued its trip with the stone as cargo. The damages caused to the vehicle are estimated at $150. The Prosecutor of Ponce, Pedro Rodriguez Serra, investigated the accident, qualifying it as a disgrace and ordering the delivery of the deceased to his relatives.
At seven forty-five minutes past seven o'clock on Thursday night, the reading of the bill began. Immediately after the reading was finished, Senator Francisco L. Anselml asked to go to the floor to oppose the approval of the same in the Total Commission, stating that it was his opinion that it was better not to say another word, after knowing the attitude of the majority of the senators present in the hemicycle. From 7:45 p.m. until 8:15 p.m., Senator Anselm was arguing against the approval of the bill. During his argument, the aforesaid Senator explained that he was opposed to the Bill, considering it "the most tremendous and enormous privilege ever made by any Legislature, in all times in Puerto Rico." At the end of this sentence, a large number of pharmacy students of the University, and pharmacists who were in the galleries, burst into applause and vociferations, causing the President pro tempore of the Senate, Mr. Samuel Quiñones, to call attention to the fact that he would be largely benevolent with the spectators, but that he hoped he would not be forced to apply the Senate Rules, Senator Anselml continued his argument, stating that the people of Puerto Rico have been deceiving their university youth, making them spend large sums of money to the parents of the students, so that they would study a career, and then, by a law of privilege, a group of privileged gentlemen would become professionals. Senator Anselm asked in what way these practitioners can assure the people the guarantee of their health, when they do not know the least as to the "scientifically"! rised in these courses for pharmacists", and guaranteed "as a legislator and as a Puerto Rican citizen" (Continued on page 16)
Governor made a large number of recess appointments
The Governor issued the following recess appointments yesterday: Guillermo A. Gil, Special Prosecutor General; Zoilo Dueño González, Assistant Prosecutor, San Juan Judicial District Court; Joaquín Pérez Sosa, Justice of the Peace of Yabucoa; Nicolás Jiménez, Clerk, Orocovl" Municipal Court; José I. Ruiz, Clerk, Ponce District Court; Ricardo Rivera González, Justice of the Peace of Fajardo; Jacobo Algarln, Justice of the Peace of Juncos; Luis A. Ramírez, Judge, Municipal Court of Yauco; J. M, Almodóvar Acevedo, Assistant Prosecutor, San Juan Judicial District Court; Tomás Vera Medina, Marshal, Aguadilla Municipal Court; Ramón Marchán Robles, Justice of the Peace of Barceloneta; Francisco Rosarlo Pérez, Justice of the Peace of Guaynabo; Emilio Nieve", Justice of the Peace of Lolza; Celestino Benitez, Judge, Municipal Court of Adjuntas; Lorenzo Lagarde Garcés, Special Prosecutor General; Jesús A. González, General District Judge; Joaquín Correa Suárez, General District Judge; Raúl Ybarra, Justice of the Peace of Maricao; Modesto Meléndez González, Justice of the Peace of Villalba; José Julio Santiago, Judge, Cayey Municipal Court; Gerardo Carreira Más, Judge, Coamo Municipal Court; Carlos M. Dávlla, Judge, Balinas Municipal Court; Belford To-
rres. Judge, Crrolina Municipal Court; Diego Meléndez, Magistrate, Orocovis Municipal Court; Cruz Francisco Padilla, Clerk, Camuy Municipal Court; Manuel Correa. Justice of the Peace of Naguabo; Felipe Fontán Negrón, Justice of the Peace of Morovis; Luis Apellánlz Stórer, Prosecutor, San Juan Judicial District Court; Héctor Ruiz Somohano, Judge, Municipal Court of the Capital, Second Section; Efrain Ruiz, General Municipal Judge; Frank Vizcarronrio, General Municipal Judge; Aureo Sanchez Perez, Marshal, Aguadilla District Court; Rafael Padró Parés, Auxiliary Deputy Clerk, San Juan Judicial District Court; ChrlUlan Thlllet Seljo, Justice of the Peace of Vega Alta; José E. González, Judge, Caguas Municipal Court, Second Section; Manuel Reyes Serrano, Judge, Bayamón Municipal Court; Francisco Coll Moya, Judge, Rio Piedra" Municipal Court, Second Section; William Luyando Charneeo, Judge, Rio Piedra" Municipal Court, First Section; Alma Delgado, Judge, Municipal Court of the Capital, Sixth Section; Pedro Torre Rosas, Primitivo Cruz Báez, Miguel de J. Rivera González, and Ramón Teodomlro Rivera, for Members of the Board of Appeals of the Tahaco; Pablo Morslc" Otero, and Jorge Ber(Continued on page 16.'
Pur PAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, April 16, (PU)-The Puerto Rico Board of Trade said today that Ig Island shipped to the mainland market, sugar and other" product" in 1947, to the value of $191,306,000. This total, according to the Council, exceeded by 128.5 percent the value of the 1940 shipments. The Council further reported that port purchases of continental goods in 1947 amounted to $308,571,600, which exceeded by 196.8 percent the value of continental imports in 1940. The study of 'i"" island exports to the United States" will be published in the next issue of the Council's Mercantile Bulletin. The Council's analysis clearly showed "1 great decline in island imports, with mo-
fe# I MM £ * Klfel - 1 f i j mal v - fe V "4 ■ moH i i í i 1 mii i 11 iiiw f /1 i I / ' * í ■ 1 ai a I I I
The Consejo Superior de Enseñan* meeting yesterday afternoon to consider the university situation. From Isqulerda to right: Dr. Ismael Rodriguez Bou, permanent secretary of the Council; Lic. Manuel García Cabrera, member; Lic. Epifanio Fernándes Venga, member; Lic. Jaime Benítez, rector of the University; Mr. Francisco Collaso, Acting Commissioner of Instruction and president of the Council; Dr. José Gándara, member, and Jues Emilio 8. Belaval, member. (Photo by FI. MUNDO),
The project on the pilots did not have enough votes.
It was defeated after long debate in the Senate - Anselnii said it deceived "youth of the UPR. - Fonfrías proposed amendment. Figueroa against
By: S. GALVEZ MATURANA, RHlactor for EL MUNDO
The Senate voted nine votes in favor, two against and four abstentions to pass Senate Bill 447, classifying pharmacy practitioners with more than twenty years of experience as pharmacy regents. At least ten votes in favor were required for passage. 4'~ - - -
General Motors began shutting down several plants This is due r shortage of iron.- No work near workers By NORMAN E. NK HOIAON. DETROIT, April 16 (PU)- After the effects of the bituminous coal strike hit, its consequences were felt today in automobile production forcing the General Motors Corporation to begin closing its automobile manufacturing plants and throwing nearly 200,000 workers into idleness. The giant GM plant, the world's largest car and truck maker, announced today that because of a shortage of aging iron and steel supplies as a result of the recent miners' strike it would have to close its departments that build motor vehicles for the night of April 23. A steel spokesman in Pittsburgh, however, breathed a breath of confidence by reporting that there would probably be no further cutbacks in steel production. It was reported that well over half of the 400 MJO miners have returned to work in the mines. J.a GM said that "it is expected that if supplies of materials return then work could resume at the plants by May 1." The Chrysler Corporation and the Pac "kard Motor Car Company said their basic steel supplies were critically low, but indicated that both firms could continue operations, 1.a Ford Motor Company has not been as seriously affected as General Motors.because many of its plants were already closed, undergoing changes in their models when the coal strike broke out (Continued on page 12).
Puerto Rico's exports in 1947 were $191,306,000.
The reduction in the sale of rum also showed that of the "product" of the "coal strike. It also showed that of Puerto Rico's basic agricultural product, only sugar, in 1947, was the most important. Rico, only sugar, in company ne the" mletea preserves quantitatively its position in the continental market. However, there was an increase in secondary agricultural exports. The value of fruit exports, for example, increased from $1,816,000 in 1940 to $7,270,000 in 1946. / It was understood that, although part of the increase in dollars was undoubtedly due to the increase in prices, there was evidence that the quantity had also increased. The Council estimated that the" industrial exports rie la IsIa au(continued on page 16)
Asked Benftaa h to suggest measure . to guarantee normality He gave his full backing to Rector Fiscal Aponte continues his investigation. By Luis RrmándM Aqulne Editor of EL MUNDO The Superior Council of the University of Puerto Rico met for four hours to discuss the problem of the "university event" and the closing of the University of Puerto Rico. The Superior Council ra. tlficó the action of the Rector to suspend the teaching tasks" in the Colleges of Rio PJedra", am. pilando the suspension until all the factors reía, clonados with the "Ituaclón universi. taria evidenced by the events of the 14 of the current. The Superior Council also approved another resolution declaring itself in permanent session until the academic life is normalized, in "view of the seriousness of the situation". It also requested the Rector, after a careful study of the university structure and the functions and rules of its departments and faculties, to report to it on the necessary measures "to take to ensure the normal risk of the normal development of the" university tasks in an atmosphere of freedom and order. During yesterday morning there was no event" as in the" two previous raffles, by students, in the vicinity of the University. The Institution remained heavily guarded by 1" Polkla Insular. Speak yesterday on campus, guarding all entrances and the various buildings, about fifty policemen and detectives. In the morning was Colonel Salvador T. Rolg, conferring with the Adjutant, Guillermo Arroyo, as well as with the chief Véle" Ortlz, The prosecutor Aponte, during' the morning was questioning various" funcionlos of the University, some of them guards of !a Institution, Said prosecutor has already interrogated " about fifteen pertoñas, many of the same professors rie the University. He inspected the offices of the secretaries of the Rectory where the events of the 14th took place. He also inspected the office of Rector Benitez. When asked when he would order arrests, he indicated that the investigation was still in process and that he could not determine. In the morning, a group of members of the Senate met in the theater. Rector Benitez explained the university situation to them. The teachers gathered there were unaware that an order had been given to suspend the meeting but asked the Rector to speak to them, so an informal meeting was held. At that meeting, the following resolution was approved by the faculty, which was signed by 103 teachers: "We condemn the violent actions of a group of students and other persons alien to the University, who in open defiance of the regulations of this Center, and in violation of university order, and the most elementary rules of institutional coexistence, have disturbed the peace and tranquility of the University. We recognize the high spirit of responsibility and civility of those students who, in spite of the pressure they were victims of, knew how to comply with their university duties, and we support the actions of the Rector and the Administration of the University of Puerto Rico in the present circumstances". The representative of the Senate to the University Board, Mr. Reece B. Bothwell, addressed the meeting. Bothwell, addressed the teachers present. Later the Rector took the floor, who, focusing on the university events, among other things, stated the following: "It has become absolutely clear to all of us that it is not a question here, "e. flowers, of a problem of student action, although it is a question of that, too. It is about, among other things -- I say this with absolute honesty, with full conviction -- it is about the fact that, for the first time clearly and openly, the University is confronted with an open and open and clear robbery, an attempt to subvert and destroy the fundamental bases on which the University of Puerto Rico rests. I would like to say that I am deeply glad that the time has finally come when the Chancellor of the University can deal directly, openly and frankly, with full clarity, with the people inside and outside, with the people inside and outside and outside and inside the University of Puerto Rico who have dedicated themselves to prostitute the minds of our students and to try to convert this responsibility of ours and this university house into a center of agitation, intolerance, fascism and, in addition, terrorism© (Continued on page 12)
They hope to obtain a loan for the SAA
Cuevas made arrangements with the CRF. - It would be for $23,000,000 It would all be invested in making improvements He also explored the possibility of doing business with private investors Upon his return yesterday from the United States, the Director of the Aqueduct Service, Mr. Sergio Cuevas stated that there is a good probability that the program will obtain a loan of $23,000,000 from the Financial Reconstruction Corporation. He also stated that the possibility of obtaining said sum from private investors was also explored, and that there is also a good perspective in this sense. In statements made to EL MUNDO, Mr. Cuovss said that the main purpose of his trip to the United States was to establish the necessary contacts with the Financial Reconstruction Corporation and the "private investors in revenue bonds", for the purpose of "securing a loan to the Aqueduct Service" for the aforementioned amount. He was accompanied by Mr. Donald Bonnlwell, financial director of the Banco de Fomento, and economist Hail Hatley, consultant of the SAA, to plan the establishment of an efficient organization in the agency. He added that said fund would be invested exclusively in the construction, improvement and extension of aqueduct works in all the towns of the Island. | No part of these funds will be used for sewage works, nor for aqueduct works in the rural zone, and the sum will be used entirely for works in the urban zones of the entire Island. The loan will be of a self-liquidating nature, and therefore the funds must be invested in projects that provide normal income. The impressions we have had," said Mr. Cuevas, "demonstrate a great possibility of obtaining such funds. Our application to the Financial Reconstruction Corporation was accepted in principle, under very good auspices, and is now being studied. "As far as private investors are concerned, we are also taking the opportunity to explore the situation. In that field it seems to us that there may also be a possibility of obtaining the funds, in case we are unable to claim them" through the Financial Reconstruction Corporation. However, the latter opportunity is not as good as the Financial Reconstruction Corporation because the Water Utility does not have a very attractive financial history. This is due to the young agenda, and to the fact that it has operated in the years of its existence with losses, being able only to meet its operating expenses without surpluses". When asked about the possibility that, when the loan is arranged, the current water service tariffs will be revised and increased, Mr. Cuevas said that in the United States, both CRF officials and private investors asked him the same question. He said that in the consideration of any loan, especially for a public utility, the revision of rates as a means of increasing revenues and guaranteeing payment of the obligation must always be taken into account. "In this case," he said, "because of the magnitude of the program to be carried out, which will definitely solve all the local water supply problems, in all the countries of the world.