THE WORLD DAILY MARAÑA
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy to occasionally cloudy with scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 81; low, 76. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:89 p.m., 19.96 inches" of mercury.
52 Pages 5< t
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MAY 8, 1948.
AutonoviUetas. denoitrtmo" I" traditional courtesy of the country.
NUMBER 11298
ASO XXIX
Entered aa second class matter, Post Office, San Juan. P. R.
Classes at UPR ended yesterday with the endorsement of the University Board.
_ , ...? -r --iimmr V I 1 as alleged by the Office" of Administration (Photo by Casenave).
The judge, Jo "é M. Calderón, Jr., of the San Juan District Court, yesterday issued a permanent injunction against the students expelled from the university. Pelegrln Garcia and Jose Gil d" Ijsmadrld. to refrain *in any way to penetrate the university campus, or to promote disorder or incite university students to violence. F.1 act arose from the refusal of said youths to submit to the jurisdiction of the District Court. Young Lamadrld did not appear at the hearing held yesterday, for which he was summoned. Young P "l "grln Garcia appeared accompanied by his attorney, Francisco Hernandez Vargas, who merely challenged the jurisdiction of the Court to try the case. The young P "l "grln Garcia appeared accompanied by his attorney, Francisco Hernandez Vargas. As for young Joige Luis Landing, who appeared represented by attorney David Curet Cuevas, the court, at the request of the defense, suspended the case until May 14 of this year, when it will begin to hear the merits of the case. Mr. Curet Cuevas made a motion to the Court. *On behalf of the young Landing, for the court to allow him to litigate as a pauper, so that he would not have to pay the corresponding fees to the District Court Clerk's Office. Mr. Culet Cuevas argued that his defendant is a poor young man, without economic resources, who could not afford to pay for the expenses (Continued on page 18).
Final exam dates to be announced soon Chancellor's Agreement does not cover the work at the Mayagüez Gdegio. - Academic credits for Rio Piedras students are not affected The termination of the second semester of this academic year at the Rio Piedras colleges of the University of Puerto Rico, where part of the student body was on strike, was announced last night in EL MUNDO, by the Rector of our first educational center, Lic.
White House acts on railroad case Called meeting of union leaders- Cabinet to study matter By Laurence Gonder United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, May 7.-(PUF- The Government today delayed seizure of the railroads, awaiting the outcome of a new White House move to evl "ar the national railroad strike. The meeting took place in the early afternoon, and the labor leaders were summoned to attend another meeting at four o'clock, and the White House said that the White House was to hold a two-hour conference with the leaders of the three unions threatening to go on strike. The White House said that the first session was more of a "general exploratory conference. ; Union officials told the" reporter" that Steel- ' man had offered them no settlement plan, and*nt even read 'he had not asked them to postpone *1 naro of their 150,000 members. But their agreement *to return for a later conference suggests that there are some definite proposals in the air to settle the conflict. Ijis unione" are asking for a 30 percent increase *in their salaries and about 20 changes in work rules. The railroads are firm" in their proposal for a 15-1 2 cent feed for now, already accepted by more than 1,000,000 ¡ of (árox railroad workers. At the White House conference there were no representatives of the pationos. The speakers" were : Alvanley Johnston, head of the Her- ¡ mandad of Machinists; D. B. Robertson. president of the Herman- । dad of Stokers and Switchmen; । i and A. J. Glober. head of the Union of j Switchmen. The* three went into the meeting knowing the clear ad- । vert from part* of) the Government, that the railroads will be confis- i cated by federal order, if ** born- ¡ (Continued on p. 28)
Jaime Benitez. He informed the Rector that the laboi done so far will be completely valid to obtain the" corresponding" academic" credit" for the" second acme "tre, and that the" faith. cha" of the" final" exam, as well as the" place" and time," will be announced: The final exam, as well as the time and place, will be announced sufficiently in advance. At Mayagüez College the semester will end in regular form. In the following official statement, Rector Jaime Benlte, made known the last minute decisions taken by the university administration, terminating classes today: "The academic work at the Rio Piedras colleges has ended normally today. The persons interested in interrupting it! have again failed in their efforts to do so. Attendance has fluctuated between 60 and 70 percent of the total enrollment. "Notwithstanding the above, the tension and state of unrest caused by the insistent challenges and threats to the university order greatly hinder the educational work. I do not consider it pedagogically convenient to maintain this tension for another week. It would be more profitable for students to devote the remaining days to a period of study and review in their own homes. The work done so far will be fully valid for the academic credits for the second semester of the year.
í Purchase " from the Island within T Marshall Plan e - '* Transaction was made I- with tobacco firm.- n g They sell 129,000 pounds . The first " transaction to be made in Puerto Rico under the ' Marshall Plan, to aid the - countries of Europe, was carried out , aver between the tobacco cooperative. Puerto Rico Tohbaceo Mar- " ketting, and the. Austria Tohbaceo Moh nopoly. z According to the report of Mr. Ramon* >- Carmona secretary-treasurer of the ). Puerto Rico Tohbaceo Markrtting. IS 129,000 pounds of tobacco for manufacture, 1 car cigars were purchased in accordance with the Marshall Plan, to i. be shipped to Austria, as soon as the Commodity Credit satisfies its i- imposes. i- The tobacco sold is of a medium type, that is, it is not of the best that our vegas produce, i- but it is not of poor quality either. -- The price obtained is satisfactory, is according to Mr. Carmona reported. '■ I Those tobacco leaves came from 0 the 1946-47 crop and were pledged- to Commodity Credit. - They were harvested in the region of Caguas, Gurabo, Juncos. The negotiation, although rm os of great importance because of the amount of money involved, is very significant, as it may be the beginning of ■ a new market for í the Island's tobacco. Tobacco traders who know the commercial history of the aromatic leaf, stated that this purchase is the first one made by Austrian tobacco firms (Continued on page 27).
Compendium of News
The "second semester classes in the university schools" of Rín Piedra" are declared "finished". The date of the "exams" will be announced soon. - General Enteres clarifies that the National Guard owes obedience to its commander in chief, who is the Governor of the State. - Senator Taft opposes plan to give bonus" to Army volunteers. - Puerto Rico was awarded the first purchase under the Marshall Plan. - - - Piñero exalts "Civil Service" function* in Puerto Rico, - - - Chamber of Commerce asks Governor not to sign Senate Bill 25. - - - "Unified" wharf work. - a - - Bezudo Committee to consider Charter amendment. - - - "Red Ties" plan new offensive in the Manehurria. - The President's 'Iaje' is not politically motivated". - - - - Attempt to install a -'calda in the city of Jerusalem fails.
Alabama movement against Truman spreads. - Lady was twelve years asleep. Awakens much younger and fells. - e - General Kenney nplna Russia already has the atomic bomb. - Injunction granted against two of the expelled students. - The Liberal* still do not have a place for their assembly. - - - Seventh day law does not cover commerce" under closing law and J8M. - - - California Democratic leadership alleges Truman has "snubbed" it, - - - - President of the Chóferea Union called statements made by the CSP President threats. - Piñero signed change in forced expropriation. - The White House called for a meeting of railroad leaders, - -- White House says Truman's trip will not have a political objective.
Seventh day law does not cover businesses subject to JSM," said Jorge L. Córdova, Esq.
Jorge L. Córdova Díaz, legal counsel of the Federation of Commerce, has made a study of the recent opinion of the Supreme Court, related to the so-called "seventh day law". According to his study, commerce and industry, which are covered by the Closing Law and the decrees of the Island Minimum Wage Board, are not affected by the recent Supreme Court decision. The Executive Director of the Federation of Commerce, Mr. René Poitevln, authorized yesterday the following in relation to the legal study made by Mr. Cór- , dova Diaz : 1 "The commerce and Industry that are covered by the closing law in force, and the" decrees of the Island Minimum Wage Board are not affected by the recent decision of our Supreme Court, related to the seventh day. in the "emana de trahajo. This is revealed by a preliminary legal study, which has been made by the Puerto Rico Federation of Commerce through its legal counsel.
The study was conducted by the Federation of Commerce of Puerto Rico through its legal counsel, Mr. Jorge L. Córdova Díaz. "From the referred study it is clear that this decision affects rather certain isolated cases, and up to this moment not covered by iia closure law and decree" mandatorlo". Example, let us say" the" far-macia"-and certain" industrial activities. "The Federation of Commerce anticipates this information, attending numerous phone calls and letters received about this decision, proposing to make a more detailed study of this matter in the next few days. It is also warned that in the cases in which this decision is applicable, it is advisable to study each case individually, since very possibly doubts and points in controversy will arise. "In conclusion, the retail trade of the Island and the industries which have been observing the provisions of the closing law and which are covered by the decree of the Island Minimum Wage Board, have no reason to worry.
AUTHORITIES MEETING IN FORTALEZA LAST NIGHT THE Governor met at length last night in Fortaleza with the Commander of the Armed Forces of the Antilles, Gen. Ray E. Porter; the Commander of the National Guard, General Luis Raúl Esteves; the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín; the Attorney General, Mr. Luis Negrón Fernández; the Chief of the Uniformed Forces, Colonel Salvador T. Roig; and the Special Assistant of the Police, Mr. Alberto Guerrero. Also present were the Executive Assistant, Mr. Jorge Font Saldaña, as well as the Coordinator of Insular Affairs, Mr. Elmer Ellsworth. There was speculation that this meeting could be related to the university issue, but EL MUNDO submitted a question to the Governor on this matter and he refrained from informing.
Piñero Signs Expropriation Change
The governor signed a number of laws yesterday, including one that amends the Law of Forced Expropriation, by virtue of which the government may immediately acquire any property with a public purpose, upon filing the expropriation lawsuit and depositing the money in court. The section of the last law which provided that the Government, after having acquired a property, must return it to its previous owner, is eliminated from the last law. "If at the expiration of said period it has not been used. The Chief Executive also gave his approval to the legislation allocating an additional $40,000 for the athletic park in Mayagüez; allocating for the operation of the library in Humacao donated to the Government by Chief Agriplno Rolg; and authorizing the exchange, sale or lease of those public lands which cease to be of public utility. The laws" signed yesterday by the Governor were as follows"; P. of S. 962 (Act 104>. To authorize the Commissioner of the Interior of Puerto Rico, subject to the approval of the Executive Council, to exchange, sell or lease such public lands which cease to be of public utility, if in his judgment such transaction would be beneficial to the public interest; providing who shall have preference in such exchange, sale or lease, etc.", etc. P. 4 S. 519 (Act 105). Amending" section" 4 and 5 (h) of the law on compulsory expropriation of 1a private property, etc, P, of S. "15 <L*v 102>. To allocate the "urn of ($30,00(1,00) thirty mH dollars * the institution "Albergue de Niños de Ponce" to be Inverted" in farm" agricultural and other activities that serve for the sustenance of 1" same. P. of the C. 782 (Lev 95). Authorizing the contractor Zoilo Méndez Rios to sue the! Pueblo d" Puerto Rico claiming $25,775.02 paid in wages in exce "o d*1 contract by virtue of a decree of the Minimum Wage Board, P. del S. 220 (Law 97). Authorizing the Municipality of Humacao to pay the Catholic Church ($1,000), for a strip of land to widen Domingo Quijano Street. P. of 8. 155 (Act 98). To authorize the Commissioner of Instruction of Puerto Rico to establish training courses for domestic workers, prepare the programs and dictate the necessary regulations to provide the funds to be invested in their operation. etc. P. S. 260. (Act 99). Authorizing the Commissioner of the Interior to sell to Fernando García, a lot owned by El Pueblo dr Puerto Rico, located in the Mayagüez Arriba neighborhood, in the municipality of Mavagüez. P, of S. 553 (Act 100). To amend Articles 130, 134, 138, 139, 140 and 141 of the Civil Code of Puerto Rico, 1930 edition. P. S. 717 (Act 101). To amend the Act authorizing the granting of permits to inmates to visit their" homes. P. S. 603 (Act 103). To amend section 8 of Act 25 of April 14, 1938, and for other purposes. P. of S. 315 (Act 106). To amend subsection I of subsection (d) of Section 10 and sections 15, 20, 22 and 25 of Act 25 entitled "Puerto Rico Public Welfare Act", approved on May 12, 1943, as amended. P. S. 344 (Lev. 107), to add Article 72-B to the Puerto Rico Lands Act, approved on April 12, 1941. P. S. 418 (Act 109). To extend the "Undistributed" line item of the Senate of Puerto Rico, in the general budget of expenditures for the support of the Government of Puerto Rico, fiscal year ending June 30, 1948, in order to meet the expenses of the current Ordinary Legislature and to satisfy other unforeseen expenses. P. S. 621 (Act 110). To create a Second Section of the Municipal Court of Aguadilla, to determine its jurisdiction: to provide the necessary personnel, and the payment of the salary. P. deis. 768 (Act III). To authorize the Administrator of the State Insurance Fund to make available to the Commissioner of Traffic an "urn of not more than 825,000 from the" fund" collected" by way of premium", pursuant to the Traffic Accident" Compensation" Act (continued on page 18).
Senate Committee to Consider Charter Amendments
Would provide for increase in Coordinator's salary; would authorize Legislature to set salaries for officials paid with instilled funds
By William Dorvllller < orre "pon "al of The. WORLD in Wáshlngton WASHINGTON, May 7.-The Senate Insular Interior A "unlos Committee is likely to meet tomorrow in executive session to consider the drafting of a charter amendment bill. When the Committee meets, it will have to consider "a large number of bills," and if possible, it will study the advisability of drafting a bill authorizing an increase in the salary of the Governor of Federal Agencies, according to a source close to the Committee. If the Committee approves drafting such a measure, it will be introduced in the Senate early next week. In its present form, as prepared by the Committee, the bill provides for: (1) An increase from $7,500 to $10,000 in the salary of the Coordinator. (2) Authorizes the Island Legislature to fix the salaries of the officers paid with Island funds. (3) Permits the Island Legislature to fix the salary of the Auditor, provided that it shall not be less than what the Auditor receives.
"(4) Authorizes the Legislature to increase the pay of members of the legislative Houses, "providing that no increase may be made in the compensation of the legislators while they are serving the terms for which they were elected. In other words, "" it requires a special session, prior to the elections, if the legislators want to increase their pay for the next four years. (5) The salary and expenses of the Coordinator shall be borne" by the U.S. Bureau of the Budget, The same bill fixes a date for the effectiveness of all the provisions included" in it. The measure replaces one recently proposed by Senator Hugh Butler, R-Nebraska, which provides only for an increase in the Coordinator's salary. The Committee may amend the bill at its meeting tomorrow. The Charter provision authorizing Congress to fix the salaries of Supreme Court Justices will remain intact,
-*- - Pinero praised the functions of the Civil Service in Puerto Rico.
He pointed out the levels reached since the year 190/ at the opening of the Public Administration Conference. OP Chief Outlines Standards of Government Management
Governor Piñero stated in a message read by his Executive Assistant, Mr. Jorge Font Saldaña, before the attendees of the Inaugural session of the Conference on Personnel Administration, which was inaugurated"! Thursday night in the PRP's meeting rooms, which was opened on Thursday night in the PRP's meeting rooms, which was opened on Thursday night in the PRP's meeting rooms.
Since the first civil service law was passed in 1907, Puerto Rico has been gaining higher and higher standards day after day, regardless of the minor considerations raised by the ambition of factions or groups. He added that "Puerto Rico will not turn back on this high road, because for our prestige, the guarantee of justice to "our public servants, will be affirmed on the basis of their own spirit of improvement and the capable guidance, emancipated from petty motivations," offered by the Personnel Office. In his message, the Governor expressed his appreciation to the current Chief of the Personnel Office, Mr. Manuel A. Pérez, who said that "the Executive Council of the Government of Puerto Rico lost a first-rate collaborator, but the new Personnel Office gained a first-rate Director. For his part, the Director of the Personnel Office declared in his speech that "the current Personnel Act is an honest attempt to implement, in all its purity, the administrative procedure" involved in the so-called merit system. He described the law as "one of the great reforms that have been implemented in Puerto Rico during the last year. The Governor's message, read by Mr. Font Saldaña, states the following: "It is with deep satisfaction that I address the organizers of this second conference on public administration and the people of Puerto Rico in general, given the fundamental importance of these goals. In February, 1947, I gave a speech to the Sixteenth Legislative Assembly in its Third Ordinary Legislature, calling for a Civil Service Law which, together with a system of classification and equitable compensation, would serve as a basis for strengthening the spirit of responsibility of the public servant and for the creation of other activities of service to the community. The Legislative Assembly approved a Personnel Law, which went into effect on July 1 of said year.
A commission of the Liberal Party, made up of Rafael Rodríguez Pacheco and Antonio Quirós Méndez, both members of the Central Board, was yesterday negotiating the lease of a theater in San Juan or in a neighboring town, to hold the extraordinary assembly of said party, which is scheduled to be held on May 16. Until yesterday, all diligences carried out to obtain a theater in the city of Sun Juan, to celebrate the assembly, have been unsuccessful. In view of this, it was a question of contracting a theater in Cagua", and if obtained, it will be in this city where the Liberal Party will hold its assembly. Notwithstanding these Inconwnlóntos, it was informed in the offices of the Junta Cenital, that "everything was ready for the assembly" and that, as soon as the place where to hold it was found, the convocation would be publicized. On the other hand, in the* central offices of the Progressive Republican Union Party it was reported that the credentials"" had already been sent to the delegates to the assembly and that all the preliminary work for said act was finished. The* events* occurring* at the University, which have lately monopolized public attention, have made their influence felt on the movement for the formation of the new party, contributed (Continued on page 18).
Unified dock workers united
UTM is now part of the ILA Both are preparing to ask shipping companies to readjust wages By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA Editor of EL MUNDO The unification of all the workers' organizations* on the port front in Puerto Rico was achieved yesterday, when the Union of Dock Workers* and the local of the International Longshoremen's Association (TLA) approved a tentative agreement, by virtue of which the former becomes affiliated to the latter, while maintaining its personality as a union, and other prerogatives. The agreement between the UTM and the ILA, which put an end to a controversy that has existed for some time between the two organizations, does not affect the fact that they are affiliated with the American Federation of Labor, which groups under a single organization more than 8,000 dock workers in Puerto Rico. Until yesterday, the dock workers were divided into three different groups: the UTM, the ÍLA and the Unión de Empleados de Muelíca, the latter affiliated with the eegellist sector presided over by Mr. R. ""- rreto Pérez. A few days ago" the UDEM, headed by "Mr. J. A. Clntrón Rlvera, agreed to join with the UTM "in order to present a single brake!" to the shipping company. Under ""this do *e Informó, the UDEM m "nt*ó, would have some* prerogative* and right" as a union, but operate as part of the UTM. On the other hand, between the UTM and UILA there had existed for some time a jurisdictional controversy that kept the dockworkers divided into two distinct and hostile unions, despite the fact that these organizations were affiliates of the FAT. The case of 1" discrepancy "ntr* rilas was brought before the FAT by the General Secretary of the Free Federation, Mr. Njcolá" Nogueras Rivera, through a resolution presented at the last FAT convention, to send a delegation to Puerto Rico to try to smooth out the" differences between both organizations and to solve the problem of the division between the dock workers. At the same convention, a resolution was passed by another delegate, declaring the UTM illegal and "tacando a la UTM. The Free Federation, branch of the "ri"(1" /J* FAT, was ordered to merge the UTM within the 1T.A, or else it would expel the UTM from its bosom. The resolution was opposed by Mr. Noguera", and was not approved by the convention. Mr. Noguera also succeeded in getting the convention to agree to send a delegation to Puerto Ríen to intervene in the dispute. To this end, Mr. Harry P. Fenton and Mr. Morris Biall, international representative of the FAT and vice-president of the International Needle Industry International, arrived in Puerto Rico last Monday. "1 second. After several conferences between the leaders of the FLT, the UTM, the ILA and Mr. Fenton and Mr. Blalls, a tentative agreement was reached late last Thursday night which put an end to the feud between the two unions. The UTM was represented in the* negotiations by Messrs. Ramon Gordils, president of the Insular Council, Juan B. Garcia, president of the San Juan local, and all* members* of the Insular Council; the LIA was represented by Mr. Eusebio G. Moreno, president of the Insular Council. Moreno, president of the Insular Council, and the members of this body. Messrs. Nogueras Rivera, Francisco Paz Granóla, Acting President of the FLT, and Mr. Hipólito Marcano represented the FLT. The agreement is subject to ratification by the assemblies of the respective unions, and the UTM did the same yesterday morning at an extraordinary assembly held at the Eureka Theater in Puerta de Tierra. The meeting was attended by Mr. Fonton and Mr. Blalls, who addressed more than two thousand dock workers who attended the event. The agreement provides, among other things, to ratify the agreement approved in 1941 in New York, which established the relationship between the UTM and the ILA in Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico; it provides that both unions will be directed by two district councils; the UTM will be affiliated to the International Longshoremen's Association, and the latter will issue certificates of affiliation to those unions that do not have one; both organizations agree not to invade the jurisdiction of the other. Under this agreement, both organizations will continue to negotiate with" (Continued on page 18).