THE NftNDO
"WEATHER FORECASTS FOR IRLA, TODAY: - Patchy to occasionally cloudy, with some light, scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, SB; low, 76. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., inches of mercury.
44 Pages 5/ *
MARANESE JOURNAL
.YEAR XXIX
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 2, 194B
NUMBER 13445
Entered as second dam "a "w, Poet Office, San Juan, P. R.
Vishinsky says Russia possesses atomic bomb
Said U.S. Has No Bomb Monopoly Charged Truman and Dewey with Pursuing Aggressive Foreign Policy By Robert i. Manning PARIS, Oct. 1.-(PU)- Andrei T. Vishinsky, head of the route delegation to the United Nations General Assembly, today accused President Harry S. Truman and Governor Thomaa E. Dewey, Republican presidential candidate for the United States. Dewey, Republican presidential candidate, of H promoting a bellicose foreign policy in the mistaken belief that the United States retains a monopoly on the atomic bomb. With his face alight and waving his hands. Vishinsky stated that Russia will never accept the American plan for the control of atomic energy and demanded the immediate prohibition and destruction of all atomic weapons. Vishinsky repeatedly stated that the United States no longer has a monopoly in the production of atomic bombs. But he did not specifically say that the Soviet Union or any other country possesses the bomb or can produce it. He accused the President and Governor Dewey of pursuing a bellicose policy regarding the U.S. nuclear bomb. Vishinsky quoted statements he said were made by both candidates for the U.S. Presidency. Attacks Truman The Soviet delegate declared that, in giving a report on the latest atomic tests at Eniwetok in the Pacific, Truman had stated that three new models of the atomic bomb had been developed, which represented "progress". "That's what 41T calls it," Vishinsky shouted across the conference table at a meeting of the Political Committee. "Progress in the improvement of the atomic weapons." "We are told that in Hiroshima an atomic bomb killed about 150,000 people. Evidently, the President of the United States describes as progress the fact that perhaps the bomb can now kill half a million people." "That's what he calls progress; that's the mark of American progress! That's the progress that leading political figures in the United States of America boast of; that's what they call progress and that won the approval of the President of the United States. "Doesn't that speak eloquently of the direction that American policy with regard to the question of atomic energy is headed?" He then condemned Governor De. wey, whom he quoted as sponsoring, in a speech he delivered in Phoenix, Arizona, that "efforts in the line of atomic energy should be concentrated for use for warlike purposes." "That was what Mr. Dewey said, and now I ask, is this not a confirmation of the aggressive foreign policy now being agitated in all the major Republican Party circles in the United States?" continued Vishinsky. (The strategic bomb study reported in the United States on June 29, 1936, after a year of research, said that between 70,000 and 80,000 people were killed in the war.000 to 80,000 people were killed or disappeared as a result of the bomb dropped on Hiroshima, about half of the casualties cited by VIshlnskyh. (Governor Dewey said in his Phoenlx speech that atomic energy offered great "blessings" but that they could not be taken advantage of until peace had been won.) ("Because of that unfortunate fact," Mr. Dewey continued, "our mental effort in regard to atomic energy and the work of our scientists and technologists has been concentrated mainly on its military use. So long as the danger of war hangs over us, that need will continue. A different course would spell disaster for us and for mankind. Vishinsky's open insinuation in his remarks about the possibility of nations other than the United States having the atomic bomb was an advance on previous statements by Soviet leaders. "The United States continues to accumulate atomic weapons under the illusion that it still has a monopoly on atomic energy," Vishinsky said. "It is a mistake to believe that there is only one nation that has a monopoly on atomic energy and the atomic bomb. "It is useless to rely on that, because it is fraught with dangerous consequences and bad consequences and it is (Continued on page 18).
DIFFICULTY FAR A EQUIPPING FOLIC IAS 1 At Police Headquarters it was reported yesterday that there are in stock.'n 1,500 revolvers, sufficient quantity to,equip the 712 new guards, but that there are no uniforms for all. In addition to the problem of equipping these 712 guards, the Chief of Uniformed Services faces the problem of housing. This problem is even more acute, since many of the island's barracks do not have room for the number of guards assigned to them. Most of the cadets are single and if they are assigned to serve in other towns, far from their homes, it has been the Department's policy that they reside in the police barracks, or in places immediately adjacent to them. J.A.C. Sets Hearing to Discuss Reduction in Airfares Will Consider Petition for Reduction in Airfares Per PAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, Oct. 1. (PU)-Officials of the Department of the Interior and the Insular Government have been watching with keen interest recent developments in connection with airfares. Many reductions in fares have been effected which seem to reinforce the Island Government's fight for the establishment of cheap, second-class air service between the mainland and the island. The Civil Aeronautics Board has set a hearing for December for the purpose of considering the Island Government's petition in this connection. Donald J. O'Connor, director of the Island Government Office in this city, has noted a growing interest on the part of the air carriers in offering a "no frills service." For example, at the recent Annual Conference of the Air Transport Association, in Brussels, Belgium, the Director General, Sir William Hlldred, advocated "second-class international air transport." The Association official said that airlines have not touched "a virtually unlimited sector of the population, because people cannot afford the fares in force." Tapping the market On this side of the Ocean, too, the airlines have thought last (Continued on page 16)
There are difficulties with Puerto Rican voters in New York City because they don't know English. - Justice would give consideration to any police case in which benefits are claimed for having served in the Army. - The United Nations Day will be celebrated on October 24. - AG8 Intervenes in two complaints about the serving of milk to posts. - De Gaulle asked for his return to power. - - - - Increase on Jornal béaleo in sugar industry (agricota phase) of 80465. ' - - - - - Traman will be today in White House, after his campaign trip. Difficulties arise in equipping the new policemen. - Sunday Day" Amoemena was inaugurated as president of Panama Busoni addresses a message to Travieso about the attitude of both in defense of his candidacy" - - - a Two low flying planes intercepted an English plane, almost causing a collision. - Grau San Martin granted freedom to the dancer Satira. A radiographic study of the entire population of Vieques is carried out. They expect an aim of five percent in the sand canon.
Compendium of News
permanent room occupancy in U.S. hotels. - A jury is ordered to render a unanimous verdict. Tugwell attacks several aspects of the Roosevelt administration. - The CAB set December 4 to discuss a request from the Insular Government to reduce air fares. - On October 16 and 17, teachers will discuss their Association's problems. - J. Mari Bros. appeals contempt of court ruling. - The transfer of the Rio Piedraa prison is postponed until the 81st day of the coto mea. - A new rocket projectile is perfected, with a long range. - Twenty-one people lost their lives on the Island during the last seven days due to crimes, suicides and accidents. - - - The Island Government Employee's Association agreed not to approve more loans for home construction. - Transmission indicates that Russia will not leave the UN. - A young non-student was arrested in connection with a trichytrache explosion at the University. - A committee of the federal Lower House will come to investigate the license granted to WTPR. - Vishinsky insinuated that Russia has an atomic bomb.
Russian planes intercepted British ship
Incident occurred over Schoenfeld Russian Yak was close to cause collision. - Sit counter-blockade By Walter Rundle BERLIN, Oct. 1 (PU) -Two Soviet fighter planes," of the Yak type, made offensive passes against an English plane, today. do" days after the United States" demanded that the Russians stop harassing air service to blockaded Berlin. Michiel Davison, pilot of the well-loaded transport plane, said one of the Yaks flew to within 50 yards" of his plane, almost on the verge of a collision. The second Russian fighter, Davison said, "kept on the tail of his Wayfarer Bristol, but could not say how close. The incident occurred over Schoenfeld, about 10 minutes from the British-operated Gatow airfield. It was in the vicinity of Schoenfeld that nine Yaks disturbed do" American C-M", the mlércole", provoking a strong American note of protest, in which the Russians were warned that there would be "repercussions", should American lives be lost. Russian authorities have not yet responded to the American note. Rejects request Maj. Gen. Alexander Kotikov, Soviet commander in Berlin, flatly rejected a request by City Assembly Chairman. Otto Suhr, for the Russians to guarantee the security of the elected municipal administration, at City Hall. Suhr called last month for the establishment of a "neutral zone" where demonstrations would be prohibited. Kotikov told Suhr to contact Paul Markgraf, communist police chief in the Russian zone, if he wanted police protection. The municipal assembly dismissed Markgraf as head of the Berlin Police because he failed to stop a group of Communist rioters who broke into the town hall during assembly meetings. New evidence There was new evidence, meanwhile, that Western counter-blockade was already being felt in the Soviet zone. The official organ of the Communist Party in Saxony appealed to citizens to provide light bulbs for the post office. The newspaper said that there was a critical shortage of bulbs, which were previously supplied by the English firm Osram, and warned that "unless a remedy is found, the entire economic life of the area will be threatened with restrictions". The Der Kuner, with French Ucence. quoting well-informed sources in the state of Bradenburg, said that 2,000 former German prisoners of war from Russia would arrive on October 5 at a camp on the border oc(Contlnued on page 16)
The question of the application of a rxpost facto law, which is forbidden in Puerto Rico by both the American Constitution and the Organic Charter, has been resolved by the United States Supreme Court on the grounds that this would constitute the * application of a rxpost facto law. This same issue was resolved a few weeks ago by Judge Pablo Juan y Tqro, of the Ponce District Court. The question was raised by attorneys César Andréu Ri- 1 ba" and Carlos J. Borge" López in the case of first degree murder in the District Court of Caguas against Héctor Gabriel Moreno. Moreno was accused of stabbing to death Caguas musician Anibal González. The jury returned a unanimous verdict of second-degree murder. After studying the question raised, Judge Villares Rodriguez said: <*with place, instructing the jury that they could only render a verdict by unanimity, according to the old law on juries, and not by three quarters, as provided by the new law. Defense argument Andréu Ribas and Borges López argued that the crime for which Moreno was being tried had been committed before the new jury law went into effect; that according to that law, it was enough that only one juror voted against the conviction for the Court to be prevented from rendering a verdict, having in this case that Moreno had been convicted of a crime committed before the new jury law went into effect; that according to that law, it was enough that only one juror voted against the conviction for the Court to be prevented from rendering a verdict.That under the new law as many as three persons could vote for the acquittal of the defendant, and yet the Court could convict him of the crime as determined by nine jurors; and that this fact is prejudicial to the interests of the people of the United States and the United States of America, and that the Court could find the defendant guilty of the crime as determined by nine jurors.
Caguas Jury Ordered to Return Unanimous Verdict
Judge Declares Sustained Defense Defense Defense Contentions That Crime Had Been Committed Before Majority Decision Law Was Approved
For the second time in Puerto Rico, Judge José Villares Rodríguez, of the Caguas District Court, ruled that the new Jury Law, which provides for three-quarters verdicts, cannot spllcaite s crimes that were committed before the approval of said law.
Vil niiiva aaxr "n v % a ' ---- ---- ¡ - Committee to come to investigate Ucence WIBR Lower House group will arrive at a moment's notice. By WILLIAM J. DORVILLIER WASHINGTON, Oct. 1 (Espedal for EL MUNDO)- Republican Representative Forest A. Harness, of Indiana, reported exclusively to EL MUNDO today that the House Committee investigating the Federal Communications Commission will send a body of investigators to Puerto Rico later this month to examine the FCC's grant of a commercial radio license to the island government. The investigation will be conducted by members of the legal body of both House committees chaired by Representative Harness - the Select Committee Investigating the FCC and the Propaganda Advertising Committee. Serving as director of the investigators will be Frank Bow, counsel to the Committees chaired by Harness. Oscar Hume, staff director of the Advertising and Propaganda Committee, and another investigator, probably Edward Fine, will be part of the group. Harness decided today to order such an investigation, based on a preliminary report submitted to him by Bow, who recently completed a study of the granting of an II(Continued on page 16)
New York welcomes Warren
jL * vJF £ SO'
R'nJcuted by signs" reading "Warren- nuestio future vice president" and "Democrats pro Dewey and Warren," California Governor Earl Warren, candidate n the vlcepresideocla of State" United for the Republican Party, receives demonstrations of welcome as he arrives h New York's Pensilvanla station from New England. Mrs. Warren and her daughter Virginia (right), hold bouquets of yellow chrysanthemums presented by the reception committee. (Associated Press photo.)
Teachers Association discusses its problems October 16 and 17
The President of the Teachers Association, Mr. Luis Muñlz Souffront, informed yesterday that the celebration of the Professional Institute of Educational Leaders, which will consider and recommend a remedy for the "organizational, administrative and other problems of the Teachers Association", has been set for October 16 and 17. The Institute, which will be held at the Puerto Rico High School of Commerce in Rio Piedras, will be attended by the presidents and treasurers of the local teachers' boards, the Association's general directors, members of the Association's standing committees and other educational leaders. Purposes of the meeting The purposes of this Institute or meeting of the general and local leaders of the Teachers Association, as explained by the Association, are the following: To provide detailed information concerning the activities and projects of the Association; to submit for analysis, discussion and study the most important administrative and professional problems related to the Association; to consider new policies and procedures to improve the administrative functioning and professional activities of the Association; to discuss the policies and procedures in use in the Association; to discuss the administrative and professional activities of the Association; and to provide information on the activities and projects of the Association.
and procedures" in use in the pursuit of the greatest possible officiality in the operation of the Local Boards; and to achieve the greatest possible interchange of relationships" between the leaders of the Association and its Local Boards. Reasons The Teachers Association explains as follows the reasons that inspire the celebration of meetings of this nature: "The rapid development of the Puerto Rico Teachers Association makes its internal structure more complex and its organization and management more difficult every day. This progressive and constant development process, which is due to cultural, social, economic and professional circumstances, makes the organization and development of the agencies, organizations, dependencies and other regulatory tasks, which have undergone notable expansion due, among other things, to the growing enrollment of its members, more and more complicated and difficult. This situation demands a review of the functioning of our entity, for its greater efficiency. "In addition to the situation explained, it is recognized the need to make the information vehicles more efficient so that the members are better informed of the development of their Association, of (Contlnla on page 16).
AEGI will no longer lend for homes
Attitude of banks causes resolution New act of Congress limits acquisition of mortgages by F.H.A. By JUAN "MARTINEZ CHAPEL Editor of EL MUNDO Members" of the Insular Government Employees" Association who had plans to borrow" mortgages" for the construction of homes will have to desist from their" purpose" because of the resolution of the Board of Directors of the Association, approved last September 28, which suspends the approval of that kind of loans. The resolution does not cover applications made prior to the approval of the aforementioned resolution, but it destroys the "plans" of many employees who had taken steps to submit their applications in the near future. The" directors" of the Employees' Association" stated that the" circumstances" now prevailing have necessitated the resolution because the" banks have virtually stopped lending on homes under the new act of Congress, under which the F.H.A. is limited to acquiring no more than fifty percent of the mortgages on homes. . The banks, it was said, are not interested in making loans on mortgages which they cannot repay in full within a short period of time. The directors of the Employees' Association stated that the resolution of September 28 should in no way be interpreted to mean that the Association lacks funds or that it wishes to discontinue a service it has been providing to its members. The reason given is that the sum of $2,132,522.31 has already been invested in mortgage loans, an amount that should not be "obrépesarse in an association of the resources and purposes of the Employees Association, which should preferably attend to small loans and emergency cases and serve as many members as possible. During the fiscal year 1947-48, the Association granted 7,554 extraordinary loans, amounting to 84,417,106.79; mortgage loans numbered 384, amounting to 51,318,612.37; policy advance loans numbered 155, amounting to $91,418.36 and emergency personal loans numbered 1,944, amounting to $88,337. In that year the Association collected $399,724.78 in interest and after deducting the administration expenses, return of interest and reserves for building construction, doubtful debts, depreciation of furniture and automobiles, a net profit to be distributed of $157,844.61 was obtained. The dividend obtained by the associates amounted to three percent. The associates' savings account on June 30, 1948 was $5,261,486.91; the cash on hand on that date was $530,627.24; the amount of personal loans was $3,462,193.90; advances on policies amounted to $211,809.70 and mortgage loans to $2,132,522.31. The number of associates on June 30 was 8,666, representing an increase of 1,561 during the year. During the year, 2,548 members joined and 987 left. 98 insurance policies were approved, of which 64 were for physical disablement and 34 for deaths. At the beginning of the fiscal year, 219 policies were outstanding. In the course of the year 92 policies were paid out; but 98 were granted. which increased the number of policies outstanding to 215. The policies paid out during the year were: Island Police, 27; Auditor's Office, 4; Treasury Department, 10; Instruction, 9; Interior, 1; Justice, 12; Health, 7; Labor, 1; University. 3; Historical Archives, 1: Puerto Rico Co (continued on page 16)
Difficulties with Puerto Rican voters in urbe
- I I 1 < Susoni addresses a message to Travieso He exposes to him the attitude that both should follow in defense of candidacies.
Dr. Francisco M. Susoni, candidate of the Puerto Rican Independent Party for Governor of the Island, has sent a public message to Martin Travieso, candidate of the other parties of the Opposition for the same position, about the attitude that both should follow in the defense of their respective candidacies. The message in question reads as follows: "In view of the impossibility of locating you to exchange impressions on the current civic campaign, I am forced to send you this public message to express my hope that you will rectify the procedure lately adopted by you, in trying to acquire proselytes for your candidacy in the ranks of the party for which I am running for Governor. That is to say: in the ranks of a party whose ideal you do not profess, nor have you ever professed. I consider that this policy is not the "right one for our condition of friend" and gentleman". Let us defend our candidacies in our respective fields, with due respect for the friendship which has always united us and which we must preserve. This is the attitude I am adopting with regard to you. Do you think it is too much to ask you to do the same? AGS intervenes in two milk complaints Cites two distributors to explain why they do not serve stalls Two of the main milk distribution companies in the metropolitan area have been summoned by the General Supply Administration to appear next Monday to answer for alleged violations to Administrative Order 179, which controls the price of milk. Carlos A. Todd, legal advisor of the Supply Administration, informed yesterday that the agency had received several complaints from small merchants and stall owners that San Luis Dairy, owned by Mr. Julio Pérez Rosado, and Caribbean Dairy, owned by Ramón Rosado, had forced the merchants to buy milk at 22 cents per liter, withdrawing the supply of the product when they refused to pay that price. According to administrative order number 179, these firms are obliged to supply the milk to the stalls at a price of $0.21 so that these, in turn, supply it to the consumer at $0.22. The complainant merchants" and "stall owners" allege that since they pay the milk at $0.22 and have to sell it to the consumer at the same price of $0.22, in accordance with said order, they are unable to provide service to their customers, since there is no profit margin for them in the operation of the business. They also complain that, by refusing to pay San Luis Dairy and Caribbean Dairy the price of $0.22, contrary to Administrative Order 179, the IJs suppressed the delivery of the product, having to stop serving their customers. * The situation has created a problem for numerous poor families in the Melilla, Merhotf, Coal and a section of Barrio Obrero neighborhoods, whose" families, because they do not have their (Continued on 16)
Marcantonio says they are intimidated Recusation is based on the fact that they don't know English. Attorney General investigates * NEW YORK, October 1.-(PU)' -Representative Vito Marcantonio, of the American Workers Party® in this city, has filed a protest, it was reported today before the Office of the Attorney General of New York, for what he claims constitutes an improper interference in the activities of the electoral registry in his district. Marcantonio, left-wing leader of Henry Wallace's Progressive Party and chairman of the New York American Labor Party, is fighting a bitter battle to retain his seat in Congress against Republican-liberal Republican candidate John Ellls. The fiery little congressman from Manhattan claims that swarms of representatives of the Bureau of Election Fraud are being sent to his district "for the purpose of voter intimidation". The Attorney General's Office said that only four special helpers have been sent to that area, which is home to many Puerto Rican-born New Yorkers. The Office added that these four special assistants are part of the 100 required by the Board of Education for those areas where complaints have been registered and where there are large numbers of foreign-born voters. Marcantonio affirmed that the helpers of the Electoral Fraud Bureau of the Attorney General's Office are advising the regiatrariore" to reject diplomas issued" in Puerto Rico as evidence of their ability to read and write English. Marcantonio said he will move today for an order to show cause from the Supreme Court* prohibiting election boards from rejecting Puerto Rico's "diplomas" and "intimidating" Puerto Ricans and others who wish to register. The leftist congressman did not specify where the alleged intimidation occurred. A special assistant assigned to the school registration boards, mentioned in Marcantonio's protest, stated that 170 people had taken the spoken and written English proficiency test, with only eleven failing, as reported by Time" Regarding new voter registration activities in certain parts of New York, Will Lissner, editor of the New York Times, reports the following: Complaints that hundreds of new voters are being registered in East Harlem without being required to present elementary school diplomas or certificates of literacy prompted an investigation yesterday by the New York State Attorney General's Office. Complaints were filed by Republican, Democratic and Liberal party leaders and candidates. Eleanor Uris, special assistant to the Attorney General in charge of the Election Fraud Bureau, said that if the investigation produces corroborating evidence, the district's records will be subpoenaed?\ The affected area includes part of the Eighteenth Congressional District, where Vito Marcantonio, chairman of the American Labor Party, is running for re-election to Congress, against the opposition of John Ellis, the Jibe- ■ ral-Republican candidate, and Assemblyman John P. Morrissey, who has received the Democratic nomination. It is one of four neighborhoods in the city with a large concentration of the 160,000 Spanish-speaking Puerto Ricans who have immigrated to the United States in recent years. Many Ignor English Even though illiteracy is believed to be negligible among New York's Puerto Ricans up to 45 years of age - probably about 7 percent versus 32 percent in Puerto Rico in 1940 - many of these Puerto Ricans can read and write only in Spanish. Of the 13,914 Puerto Rican schoolchildren who recently arrived in this city, 4,767 were classified last February among those who do not speak English. The law requires that the new voters, who were not eligible to vote in this city before 1932, must be able to speak and write English. The Inspectors of the" election boards are required to make a note in the record book of the number of certificates of illiteracy presented. They are to send it to the Police to be delivered to the Board of Elections. It is assumed that the Inspectors will not accept diplomas from schools where they are not available.
Vieques population subjected en masse to radiographic study
In order to find out whether or not there is a tuberculosis problem on neighboring Vlequos Island, the Health Department is conducting a mass X-ray study of the entire population of the island over the age of twelve. The study began last Tues. September 22, with elementary, middle and high schools. About 500 X-rays are being taken daily. The success of the study," says an official release, "to date has been due in large part to the cooperation extended by the schools and community leaders, and to the educational program which has been taking place on Vieques. "Dr. Smith, head of the Tuberculosis Bureau, Dr. Ramón A. Rios, assistant director of the Division of Public Health, and Mrs. Dolores Garda, consultant in tuberculosis.
in tuberculosis; Ms. Beatriz Costa and Ms. Luz Divina Hernandez, public health educators; Ms. Maria Luisa Avila and Mr. Acuña, both X-ray technicians, enlisted the cooperation of the community, "who have responded one hundred percent in organizing the study and in mobilizing the community," according to the Department's note. Educational program "Up to date the educational program has been a success due to the dynamism of the Campaign Committee composed of loa seftore" Vincent, preaidente; José L. Rivera Sicardó. honorary preaidente; Mrs. Marta S. de Rivera, secretary; Manolo Pórtela, treasurer and Leoncio Davla, Raúl Brai. José Jusino. Antonio Avila, father Walter and Santo", voealea", said the Departamen(Continued on 1st page 16)