THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Clear to partly cloudy, with a few light showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 79 degrees; low, 74. Barometric pressure 80.00 inches of mercury,
44 Pages 5/
LA MARAÑA NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXIX
Entered as eacond class matter, Post Office. San Joan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO-SATURDAY, APRIL 10, 1948
demoetremo* I* corteeí" traditional court of the pala
NUMBER 11270
Lady Public for Income Tax Cut
Survey reveals unanimous opinion in favor of imitating federal congressional action They point out advantages in national law They allege discrimination in the case of partnerships and corporations By R. SANTIAGO SOSA Editor of EL MUNDO The recent action of the U.S. Congress, approving over the President's veto the law that reduces taxes for 4,700,000 low-wage employees, and grants the rest of the taxpayers their first significant tax reduction in almost 20 years, has moved Puerto Rican opinion groups to request from the Legislature, through a survey held by EL MUNDO, greater exemptions in the payment of the insular income tax. The Congressional action will produce savings* to mainland taxpayers (especially low-income taxpayers) estimated at $4,800,000,000,000: An extraordinary special exemption of $600 for each person who is blind or over 65 years* of age. Allows married couples, in all states, to segregate their income for tax purposes, dropping many of them to lower tax brackets. A further reduction in tax rates, ranging from 12.6 percent on a contribution of $400 or less; 7.4 percent on contributions between $400 and $100,000; and 5 percent on contributions in excess of $100,000. Taxation has been on the rise The island income tax has been on an ascending scale, in terms of income and tax rates, since the reformed law of 3942 was approved. All amendments introduced to the statute since that date have been to increase tax rates*. Since fiscal year 1942-1943, the income to the Treasury from this tax line item has reached the considerable sum of $109,833,423.26. The income tax has displaced the federal internal revenue tax from the first place in the annual revenue quantum, and it is very likely to remain this year as the principal item contributing to the Treasury. Since fiscal year 1942-1943, when the tax system began to be invigorated and the administration of the law and collections began to improve, this item began to reflect an upward trend. In recent years, Revenues* surpassed all estimates made for the planning of the Government's fiscal program. From $11,310,166 collected in fiscal year 1942-1943, it jumped to $16,243,028 in 1943-1944, remaining at $16,337,586 in 19441945, to continue its ascent - after new amendments to the law - in 1945-1946 when the sum of $18,744,874 was credited. In the year 19461947, $21,619,940 was collected; and three months before the end of the current fiscal year, $25,577,829.26 has already been paid into the Treasury. Advantages in federal law The federal law, which has served as a pattern for the leaders* of the Island Government's finances in the drafting of the current statute, varies in very fundamental cases, especially in that* which benefits* small* taxpayers*. In contrast to the* last! amendment* made by the Congress, which are quoted above, -1 Insular statute only grants a credit of $400 per dependent, provided the dependent depends exclusively on the taxpayer claiming. Our statute also grants a $2,000 exemption to spouses, or head of household, with $400 per dependent in the above manner. In the United States, the dependents must be relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity, while in Puerto Rico the dependency is an economic one, which must be proven. Also in the United States" it is allowed to deduct from the salary the contribution in monthly parolale* payments, being able to make at the end of the taxable year, a readjustment to claim for the* part" or the return of what was collected in excess, or the balance of what is owed, if this is the case. Situation on the Island In Puerto Rico "e used, until 1940, the system of filing separate tax returns. This benefited taxpayers in the payment of the additional tax on a progressive scale, when the income was substantial. This system was eliminated by the current one, with a view to increasing annual revenues to the Island Treasury. There is also another discriminatory situation regarding partnerships or corporations, which is being corrected by amendments to the law. In the United States, corporations do not have legal personality as such, and are therefore not subject to taxation. They are, however, subject to the payment of (Continued on page 12)
SOSA
Atomic energy to be used in the excavations of the Columbus Lighthouse
The UPR will supply the device that will generate it. Cobas and Bueso will help By LUÍS HERNANDEZ AQUINO Editor of EL MUNDO "For the first time atomic radiation will be used as an instrument for the erection of a monument to international peace. Mankind has associated the atom with thoughts of terror and destruction. A new atomic conception, based on its peaceful and beneficial uses*, will be inaugurated on April 14," declared eftor Harry Klempfui, Jr., emissary of Dr. John R. Dunning, of Columbia University. Dunning, of Columbia University, on the occasion of making arrangements at the University of Puerto Rico, to use physics instruments of said educational center, in the preliminary works for the erection of the Columbus Lighthouse, in Santo Domingo. Doctors Facundo Bueso and Amador Cobas, of the University of Puerto Rico, will collaborate with their labor and technical material, together with the scientists of the University of Columbia and Santo Domingo, in the production of nuclear radiation, in the excavations of the land for the construction of the Columbus Lighthouse. Mr. Harry Kiempfus, Jr., who arrived yesterday in Puerto Rico, coming from the United States and who is an emissary of Dr. John R. Dunning, of the University of Columbia, held conversations with Jos Doctors Bueso and Coba, about the project to be developed for the use of atomic energy in the atomic energy fields.
Commissioner Izquierdo will not leave his post Legislators were able to convince him not to resign According to several leaders of the Legislature, Agriculture and Commerce Commissioner Luis A. Izquierdo will return to his post at the end of this month. As is known, Commissioner Izquierdo has been on vacation for more than three months, and it was said that he intended to resign as Commissioner of Agriculture to devote himself to other* activities. Some prominent members of the Popular Party were pushing for the appointment of a different candidate to the likely vacancy: but a large group of representatives to the House and some other leaders of the Popular Party and some of the other leaders of the party were also in favor of the appointment of a different candidate to the vacancy. House and some other leaders of the majority party, exchanged Impresione" yesterday with "eftor Izquierdo, and convinced him that he should continue in cu post, whose appointment does not expire until me" April, 1949. The* vacation to which Commissioner Izquierdo is entitled expires in the second half of this month; but until it is fully exhausted Mr. Izquierdo will not return to his* duties, according to the* legislators who conferred with him, Mr. Izquierdo expressed that he did not wish to make any statement in this respect; but he confirmed that some legislators had visited him asking him to return to the Department of Agriculture and that he offered to consider and resolve the matter this week. (Continued on page 14)
News Digest
Anti-bullying bill to be considered again in the popular caucus, after amendment "discussed" yesterday in the Senate. - o - Picó explained vocqolonal plañen, before the annual Assembly of the Vocaclonal Association. - * * * * I* Federal Court ordered to file pleadings" in the Eastern Sugar case. - * - Doctors' Committee censures the condition of most municipal hospitals on the Island. Declares to Krug that the island's economic situation should be improved first. * * * * Bill in Congress provides for conscription ai failure of the voluntary a'lstment. ♦ - - Threatening to raise quorutn issue, Font Suárea forced to postpone bill on Rotisserie Games. ♦ * - Meo prosecutors' Escasee that Jues Polo agreed to the file of five cases. * * * Fomente endorses the artistic act that will present EL MUNDO in New York. - * - Legion starts campaign to erect a building in the Roosevelt neighborhood. * Prominent South American architects will soon be coming to the island. Hoffman was sworn in as Director of the Marshall Plan. " " - Final Wisconsin contendership gave MacArthur 8 delegates and Stassen 19.
HARRY KLF.MPFUS JR. digs" for the work. Yesterday the three visited the Chancellor of, the University, telling him of the project, Seftor Benitez having been satisfied with the co-operation which the Physics Department will offer for the purposes mentioned*. . According to what, communicated by the Columbus Lighthouse Committee, (Continued on page 14>.
They will begin the - North Avenue dentrb shortly Governor communicated it to committee owners. The Governor Plftero assured yesterday a commission of the Federation of Property Owners that visited him, that the North Avenue will be started in the course of the next few months, beginning with the first section that, starting from the Esteves Bridge in San Juan, will reach the Luchetti School at Parada 50, in the County. To begin the construction of this section, Governor Plftero informed that there was an allocation of funds available* and that it was only necessary to reach an agreement on the width of the avenue that will connect with the road that today exits at the site known as El Fanguito in Santurce. The second section of the Avenue, said the Governor, will begin next August. . As will be recalled, the commission of the Federation of Property Owners* went to expose to Governor Plftero the damages that were being caused to the property owners affected* by the construction project of the North Avenue, since, according to them, they could not carry out any transaction with their properties, which had been appraised a year ago by the Department of the Interior for purchase at prices they considered unfair, and were being subjected to an apparent confiscation of their properties. The committee also raised other issues with Governor Piftero, including" interest in (Continued on page 14)
They will use atomic energy to make the excavations in the construction of the Columbus Lighthouse, - * - Survey reveals that the representative citizen clamors for a reduction in Income Tax Insular. Consumers Association is going to establish cooperative stores in the Island. - Minimum Wage Board approves amendments to its decree on sugar industry. * ♦ - Lewis took le/jtl offensive against court order to force miners to return to work. * - ♦ Inauguration of the capital's flag today. -- * - Negron announces start of campaign against prostitution. - ♦ - l<o" university students postponed the assembly for next Monday. - ♦ - Mayor issues new proclamation on transit. - - - First delegates to the Municipal History Congress arrived. - u> ♦ Truman advisors urge "discipline" in the Nation; call for less Government spending, price controls. - - - Revolution broke out in Colombia; U.S. embassy in Bogota bombed. Mobs" go around the city looting.
The new enlistment bill is ready.
Encouragement will be given to volunteers in order to fill minimum quota Will be drafted if calculations fail Call will be for young men from nineteen to , twenty-five For FRANK "ELEAZER WASHINGTON, April 9. <PU)~ E1 Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, Walter G. Andrews, R-N.Y., today disclosed the existence of a "delayed action" bill to be passed only in the event that the growing* needs of the Armed Forces could not be met by volunteer Enrollments. The bill aims to increase the size of the Armed Forces by 550,000 men within the next two years and offers all the educational and homeownership benefits of the Veterans' Bill of Rights. But in support of the Voluntary Enlistment Incentive, it provides that men between the ages of 19 and 25 will be drafted only if the President formally notifies Congress that volunteer enrollment is less than the allotted quota. In either case, withoutabargo, no one will be drafted until 60 days after the bill becomes law. Andrews unveiled the measure as Senate Republicans approved prioritizing all defense-related legislation for consideration as soon as possible. The House bill, which will begin hearings on Monday, provides for the enrollment of all men between the ages of 18 and 30, including veterans. Men* between the ages of 19 and 25 could be drafted to serve 2-year terms. Veterans who have served more than one year would be exempt from the draft. Non-veterans are also given the opportunity to be exempt from the draft if they enroll in the National Guard or the Reserves. The bill provides for draft status testing of all men in the National Guard and the 120,000 men who enroll in the National Guard, regardless of prior service. Dlferimlenlos are authorized, at the discretion of the President for men who have dependents, those who, work in essential trades, and those engaged in "important studies." Conscientious objectors would be deferred according to a* procedure equal to that employed during World War II. The bill also provides for the recruitment of physicians, dentists and veterinarians on a proportional basis. The clause extending veterans' benefits to all those currently in service and to all those who enlist or are drafted will undoubtedly be a powerful recruiting incentive. Since July 25, 1947, persons who have enlisted in the Armed Services have not received wartime benefits. The bill would raise the Air Force contingents to 502,000 men or about 140,000 more than it now has. Andrews stated that the increase would be sufficient for the Air Force's wartime benefits.
PITSBURG, April 9 (INS)The nation is deeply affected by the coal strike, which has now lasted twenty-six days, The fetfocarrile" have received orders to reduce by fifty per cent, the movement of coal locomotive trains, if the strike is not settled by next Thursday. The railroad movement is already reduced by twenty-five percent, according to the order of the "emana pesad". The steel industry is threatened with total stoppage, for as the coal runs out, the blast furnaces are closing. Meanwhile, the anthracite miners' strike continues to spread, and in the Scranton region alone, two thousand hundred and fifty percent of them did not report for work. About half of the seventy-five thousand Penallvanla anthracite miners have left the mine in support of the strike of bituminous coal miners, who are demanding a pension of one hundred dollars a month.
Medical committee censures ■ ■ ■ . s condition of municipal hospitals on the Island.
Unknown Yankee soldier honored ÉGBl > BitH I I I I 11 I hurtant in which Prince Cario*, of Belgium, (Left) presented to President Truman the Belgian War Cross, to be offered to the United States' unknown soldier, of World War II. The medal was awarded on the condition that this honor be paid to an unknown U.S. soldier whose remains are transferred from a foreign cemetery for burial in his country. The medal was presented to the President in his White House office (P. A.).
The anti-bullying bill will be brought before the caucus again The Senate began to discuss it, introducing several amendments. - One would eliminate the felony classification of schools in Barrio Obrero.
House Bill 26, declaring as a public nuisance the games generally known as bolita, hollpu), clandestine combinations"" related to the racetracks of Puerto Rico, and clandestine lotteries, "h began to be discussed yesterday morning in the Senate.
Several amendments were introduced to the bill, before it was left in Full Committee for further consideration, most likely next Monday. The bill will be taken up again at the caulcu% d®! legislative leadership to be held on Monday, before returning to the Senate floor, according to the" manifestations of several of the ■ legislators present at yesterday's session. ' Among the most Impor- | (formerly introduced to the bill are the following: To classify as a public offense the qualification of Infractions to this law, instead of "felony" as it was in the original bill. According to this amendment, the crime could be downgraded* to the category of "less serious", with a penalty of imprisonment instead of imprisonment. The penalty to be imposed by the Courts of Justice is lowered so that the Offenders shall be punished with imprisonment, which shall not be less than six months nor more than two years, and for the second and subsequent offenses shall be punished with imprisonment of not less than one year nor more than 10 years. For such purposes, an amendment to the Bill has been introduced, which provides that "the special investigative force created by this Act shall be composed of a Director, such number of special agents, and such subordinate personnel as the Governor may deem necessary. All personnel for this purpose shall be Included in the served.
e, : Fomento praises 'El Mundo' event in New York Says it is an effective way to neutralize campaign against Island in the North According to Mr. Salvador Tió. one of the most effective ways to neutralize propaganda adverse to Puerto Rico in the United States is through events such as the one to be held by El. MUNDO at Carnegie Hall, New York. "We have seen with great satisfaction that EL MUNDO," says Mr. Tió, who is Public Relations Officer of the Foi mentó Company, "has contracted Carnegie Hall to present jointly the most outstanding Puerto Rican artists in the United States. And he adds further on the following; "Enough damage has been done to us by the 'bulky and biased' propaganda on the part of the American Press. Not only has it harmed the hundreds of thousands of Puerto Ricans forced by the scarcity of their land to earn their daily bread in the metropolis, but it has also damaged our credit by hindering economic operations which are essential for the industrial development of our country, and at the same time injuring our prestige as a people. "One of the effective ways to neutralize this type of propaganda is through events such as this one organized by EL MUNDO, to show other angles of life, and not only the sordid ones (Continued on page 14).
Rebellion broke out in Colombia
WASHINGTON, April 9 (PU) - Rioting mobs of leftist revolutionaries stopped the Inter-American Conference in Bogota today, throwing a bomb at the American embassy and partially occupying the city, according to an emergency dispatch sent to the U.S. State Department. The dispatch, transmitted over official U.S. government radio by 10 press correspondents covering the conference, said Secretary of State George C. Marshall and all "members" of the U.S. Embassy were safe. He reported that civil war had broken out in the Colombian capital after the assassination of a left-wing liberal leader". Guillermo Perez Sarmiento, United Press correspondent, reports that Dr. Jorge Ellecer Galtan, 43, head of Colombia's Liberal (opposition) Party, was seriously wounded today by an unidentified assailant. While" the attacker was being guarded by three policemen, an angry crowd of Galtan's supporters seized him and kicked him to death. They then dragged his corpse and left it in a "knot" at the door of the Presidential Palace, at the
The angry mob passed by the Presidential Palace, several blocks away from the scene of the attack. w Bmuí B Mariann Ospina Péres, president of Colombia, whose government was impotent to contain the revolution.
The angry mob broke through the police cordons surrounding the nearby National Capitol, where the Ninth International Conference is being held, and invaded the halls shouting "Down with Laureano Gomez" and clamoring for civil war. Gomez is head of the Colombian delegation to the Conference, and a prominent leader of the Conservative Party. The demonstrators were mostly workers and students, many of them adorned with ponchos. They shouted defiantly, ron Iracunda" expre "ione" and gesticulations, showing. lo" puftos to lo" who were in the building of the Conference and to lo" police. After touring the Capitol, they headed for the Presidential Palace, two" blocks away. Much" of it" carried brick" and stone". Galtán "high from his office, near the National Capitol, where the Ninth Pan American Conference is being held, when he was attacked by "his assailant, who fired three shots at him. The seriousness of his injuries was not immediately determined. Eyewitnesses said that Galtan fell to the sidewalk bleeding profusely from his injuries.
American Medical Association envoys report to Krug Praises work of Pons Says economy must be improved first - (.onlra import galenos By WIIJJJAM DORVnJJJER WASHINGTON, April 9. (Special to EL MUNDO)- A MSd¡cu Commission of the American Medical Association today reported to Secretary of the Interior J. A. Krug that Puerto Rico's economic conditions must be improved before it is possible to provide adequate medical care for all citizens. The Commission's Report strongly condemned the conditions and operation of most of Jos municipal hospitals on the Island. The Report, signed by Dr. Ernest E. Irons, Chairman of the Medical Commission which was conducting an investigation of the Island's medical conditions last January, highly praised the "excellent" work of Health Commissioner Dr. Juan A. Pon" for the "plausible improvement of Puerto Rico's sanitary conditions". At the same time, the Report praised the medical profession of Puerto Rico, in general, but censured the "introduction of ignorant and ill-prepared physicians, especially those whom the governments of neighboring countries, whose own medical needs are in need of improvement, are willing to export to Puerto Rico. Against importing medical* 1a Commission also looked unfavorably upon what it called "political" intervention in health matters in Puerto Rico. Among other doctors mentioned" in the Report for their "excellent work" are, in addition to Dr. Pops, Dr. Pablo Morale" Otero, director of the School of Tropical Medicine, and Dr. Fernán-, dez Marina, who has been in charge of the Insular Asylum for less than a year. The Report says of Dr. Fernandez Marina: "The hospital for the insane, located in Rio Piedras, can accommodate about 800 patients; at present there are 1400. Dr. Fernandez Marina is doing a good job in the midst of great difficulties." The Report devotes considerable space to the description of the E*vuela de Medicina Tropical and, in addition to the recognition of Dr. Pablo Morales Otero and "u administration of the School, says that "it is the single most important factor in the improvement of the standards of medical education in Puerto Rico." The School, the Report adds, "has been, therefore, an excellent Investment by the Insular Government and the University," ( aso de lo* practicante* The doctors Integrantes de I* Comisión criticize, in the most direct and pointed manner, the "practie cantos" of Puerto Rico, They also criticize the Legislature for having legalized these "minor surgeons," who, according to the report, "se a sí mismo* como una clase profesional con personalidad propia." "Many of their* cures cause harm to patients," the Report says, Referring to Puerto Rico Law number 288, 1" which legalized the practice of these "practitioners" and authorized the creation of an e*school to train them, the report says: "The unfortunate effect of a law of this nature is to impose on the poorest inhabitants," especially the indigent* of the urban and rural areas, the worst type of medical service, "The Commissioner of Health of Puerto Rico is authorized to establish a school of this kind, but has not done so because he believes that the quality of medical service that the people of Puerto Rico will receive will not be improved by this action. I fully share the position of the Commissioner of Health." Government cooperated Commission members told Krug in the report that they received "full cooperation'* from government officials and the medical profession. Other highlights of the Report included the following: Medicine, economics, nutrition: The health of any people ""is related von I* economics and nutrition. "This is especially true of Puerto Rico, since there exists there a chronic condition of malnutrition." "The entire population of the middle and low-income groups is malnourished, "The total food supply (locally produced - imported) is insufficiently adequate to feed the present population. Some improvement in the total diet is being achieved through educational methods." (Continued on page 14)
Action Against Prostitution Begun
Negrón reports work in San Juan, Humacao, Ponce and other towns Hold meeting of officials Appointed committee to coordinate the campaign - Legal study is underway By BENJAMIN SANTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer It has already begun in San Juan, Ponce, Humacao and in other towns. Ponce, Humacao and in other places of the Island, the campaign against prostitution, as reported yesterday by the Attorney General, Luis Neprón Fernández. During this week we proceeded, by legal means, to the removal of alleged houses of prostitution disguised as brothels and boarding houses; and to the filing of numerous complaints for alleged violations to the articles of the Penal Code of Puerto Rico, which refer to the practice of prostitution, v Among the persons involved in the judicial actions, according to information received by the Department of Justice, there are haXta professionals, In order to coordinate all government efforts in the campaign against prostitution, the Attorney General met in his office with more than 20 representatives of Justice, the Judiciary, the Police, the Detective Department, the Health Department and other institutions. The following, among others, attended the meeting: The Prosecutor; the First Prosecutor, Carlos Santana Becerra, Special Prosecutor General José C. Aponte. and Special Prosecutor Angel Vázquez Tébar, for the Department of Justice; the seven judges of the Municipal Court of San Juan; *1 District Attorney and his three assistants, for the Judiciary; Colonel Salvador T. Rolg and Chief Barredo, for the Insular Police; Chief Rafael Emmanuelll and Chief Benigno Soto, for 1a Detective: and Doctors Juan A, Pons and Ernesto Quintero, for the Health Department. During the meeting, which lasted from R;00 until 12:00 p.m., each of the por-, lavoce* of the different government agencies presented and explained the work that their respective agencies have been doing in their efforts to eradicate the evil of prostitution in San Juan and in other towns of the Island. Doctors Pons and Quintero made an analysis of the fight of the Department of Health against venereal diseases, expressing their agreement in the belief that although said disease is not transmitted to women of happy life, these are the main propagators of the same. They also expressed themselves in favor that the Government and the different civic and religious institutions undertake a crusade for the eradication of the causes of the evil that is being fought now. It was agreed to appoint a committee of 11 persons, who will be in charge of coordinating and harmonizing all the points of view expressed at last night's meeting, and to report at the next meeting, to be held on Tuesday next week, so that a crusade of enormous proportions may be launched with a single purpose: that of putting an end to nrostitution. The aforementioned committee, which will meet next Monday, is presided over by Special Attorney General José C. Aponte, and is made up as follows: attorneys José C. Aponte and Angel Vázquez Tébar, for Justice; Judges Héctor Rulz Somóhano, Alma Delgado and Victoriano Fernández, for Justice; Judges Héctor Rulz Somóhano, Alma Delgado and Victoriano Fernández, for Justice; Judges Héctor Rulz Somóhano, Alma Delgado and Victoriano Fernández, for Justice. Alma Delgado and Victoriano Fernández, for the Cor (Continued on page 28).