THE N>NDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, ROY, - Medium cloudy, with light*, scattered* showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: Maximum temperature, 77; minimum, 74. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4iM this afternoon, 29.94 inch* of mercury.
42 Págí nas 5/
DIARIO DE^Sesá^LA MARAÑA
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 4, 1948
áutanM>vül**M. damoatr*" 0 " "- traditional cut of! pal*
NUMERÓ 13417
YEAR XXK
Entered a* second cla*a matter, - Post Office, San Juan, P. R
Senate passed' bill on airport
Authorizes the TA! to use $2,000,000 Gives powers to Transportation to expropriate land. Senate acted favorably yesterday on a bill authorizing the Transportation Authority to use whatever part it deems necessary of the $2 billion appropriation for the construction of the International Airport. The agency is authorized to expropriate the land necessary to carry out said works. S. 10, approved on third reading, authorizes the Transportation Authority to use in the construction of the International Airport the necessary portion of the amount of two million dollars allocated for capital improvements by Act 120, approved on April 16, 1946, this authorization being limited by the provisions of said Act 329 regarding the port of Arecibo. S. 13, also approved on third reading, authorizes the Authority to acquire by purchase or compulsory expropriation, with charge to the amount allocated by Act No. S. approved on July 1, 1947, the necessary lands, with all its accessions, for the construction of the International Airport authorized by said Act; and further declares said lands and its accessions of public utility, also authorizing the Auditor and the Treasurer to place at the disposal of the Transportation Authority the part of said amount that may be necessary for such purposes. The Senate also approved on third reading bills 11 and 12, to amend Section 4 of the "Act providing for the organization,' regulation and government of the Insular Po- i licla of Puerto Rico" and to amend Section 12 (a) of Act 23 of July 16, 1935, establishing the retirement of officers and employees of the Government of Puerto Rico, respectively. The amendment introduced to P. S. 11 consists of adding a paragraph to said Act, so that "the credits to their credit in the Retirement Fund of the officials of the Insular Government shall be transferred to the Pension Fund of the Insular Police and credited to each of said officials and employees in accordance with the provisions of the aforementioned Act, number 70 of May 3, 1931. P. S. 12 was amended to the effect of preventing employees entitled to retire by special law from receiving the double benefit of a higher pension and the refund of their contributions to the Retirement Fund. Auditor's Clarification S. P. 12 was suggested by the Auditor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Rafael de J. Cordero, who, in making his request, included the following argumentation, taken to the Senate minutes at the request of Senator Vicente Gélgel Polanco: "Section 12a. of Act number 23 of 1935 was added by Act number 118 approved on May 12, 1943. This section provides that any officer or employee of the Insular Government who is availed of the retirement benefits of the permanent officers and employees of the People of Puerto Rico and who is granted a retirement or pension by special law equal to three-fourths of the salary he or she enjoyed, shall lose the right to retirement under the provisions of Act 23 of 1935 and any right to have his or her contributions to the Retirement Fund reinstated. As this section is drafted, any employee who receives less than 15 percent of his salary as pension under the provisions of a special law, is entitled to have his assets returned to the Retirement Fund and, possibly, to enjoy the benefits of retirement under the regular law in addition to the pension provided by special law, "It is clearly inequitable that employees who obtain a pension under a special law with benefits z greater than those they would receive under the present retirement system of the employees of the Government of Puerto Rico also receive their contributions to the Retirement Fund. "If Section 12a. is not amended, employees entitled to retire by special law will receive the double benefit of a higher pension and the return of their contributions to the Retirement Fund. The House of Representatives was in session for a brief period of time yesterday morning, deciding to meet at 4 p.m. to begin discussion of the legislation amending the current Puerto Rico Electoral Law. The postponement of the discussion of said legislation was requested by Representatives Celestino Triarte, Eugenio Font Suárez and José L. FelhL Pesquera, who alleged that they needed a few hours to study the amendments to the Electoral Law approved by the PDP majority in the Senate, on which there had been a prolonged debate. The question of the postponement of the session was decided in a conference held among the mlem (Continued on page 14).
President Truman receives I.O.C. endorsement,
V -mA I IMPS? - jwáí I . ■ ; O yrj 1 jB '''tp SMB . I ▼ B ? -dita 1hHMki9I£"9b
KI President Truman exchanges a handshake* with the president of the Congress of Industrial Organizations, Philip Murray, at the White House, where Murray will announce that the Co-
The CIO's Political Action Committee has agreed to endorse Truman in next November's election. Shown, from left to right: Truman, Emil Rleve, president of the United Tissue Workers Union, and Murray.
Behind Murray is Jack Kroll, director of the CIO's Political Action Committee. (Associated Press photo.)
O'Dwyer says there will be food shortages No prospect yet of settlement in truckers' strike. Milk shortage NEW YORK "Sept. 3 (P. N.)-The closing of several hundred grocery stores because of the truckers' strike was predicted today by Mayor William O'Dwyer. The supplies are in the warehouses, the mayor said, but the striking truckers refuse to transport them to the stores. Some of the stores were expected to begin closing after the Labor Day weekend. There is no prospect of a settlement of the strike before Tuesday at the earliest. The striking Teamsters Local Union 807, affiliated with the American Federation of Labor, is demanding a 25-cent-an-hour raise, a welfare fund backed by the bosses, and other contract improvements. It was reported that the employers were unwilling to go beyond their offer of a 15.cent per hour increase. Some Local 282 members joined the 10,000 drivers already on strike today. However, some 30,000 members of 10 other New York trucking unions. New Jersey and suburban areas were still working today. Milk Shortage Log run municipalities moved to avoid a shortage of milk. The striking union has agreed to transport certain essential items, including milk, but a critical situation arose when the*, dairies did not redeploy their container shipments (Continued on page 14).
Truckers' stoppage does not affect local stocks for now
Vicéns says island commerce was able to replenish merchandise after the strike at the docks. - There are enough to meet consumption needs for 6 weeks According to the General Supply Manager, Antonio Vicéns Ríos, the truck drivers' strike in New York City will not have an immediate adverse effect on Puerto Rico because the island grocers have been able to replenish their stocks after the strike.
stocks after the recent Puerto Rican port stoppage. Mr. Vicéns Río* spoke in general terms, making the caveat that it may be that it has not been possible to replenish the stocks of one or another article to the normal state they were in before the strike at the Puerto Rican docks. According to reports from New York, ships of the maritime companies serving the Puerto Rico route have had to leave for the Island partially loaded, announcing that if the strike of the New York truckers continues, these companies will have to suspend completely the "departure" of ships to the Island. In San Juan, the General Supply Manager said that the island, having recovered in general terms from the effects of the strike which occurred recently ort the Puerto Rican "mueHes", in Fuerte Rico the food stocks are sufficient to meet the consumption for a period of four to six weeks. So far, the strike which has originated in New York, called by the truck drivers, does not affect shipments received in Puerto Rico from the Gulf of Mexico and Pacific ports. Puerto Rico reel(Continued on page 14)
Milk price work underway The panel that directed the hearing met. The economists* who make up the panel appointed by the Supply Administrator, Mr. Antonio Vicéns Rio, to hear the matter of fixing maximum prices for the sale of fresh cow's milk, met yesterday morning at the Department of Agriculture and Commerce. "During this ' first meeting - says the official note - the work plan was organized, which will be put into practice immediately. "It will be recalled that the panel set a period of ten days, from September 1, the date on which the hearing was held in the assembly hall of that Department, to consider any allegations and* contributions that might be of interest to the various entities that attended the event." Cattlemen will meet On the other hand, next Tuesday the Cattlemen's Sector of the Farmers' Association will meet in San Juan, for the purpose of making a general examination of the situation of the milk producers, after the public hearing convened by the General Supply Administration regarding the price of this foodstuff. The Executive Director of the agricultural entity, Mr. Virgilio Ramos. He informed that last night the Board of Directors of the Sector was going to meet <Continued on page 14).
Compendium of News
Senate passed the bill authorizing TA to use fund" for the construction of the Airport. - - - - Rafael A. González will challenge the law that regulates employment agencies. - - - - - - - - Farmers to go to "hearing" on sugarcane "wages. - - - - UN to consider* Report* on territory*. Including Puerto Rico. - - - Railroad unions to test Taft-Hart-l*J act. - Pavia and Ochoteco deny favoring withdrawal of reformist* candidate*. "Five Boricua* were sentenced in New York. - Robert Schuman resigned as Premier of Flannel. - O'Dwyer predicts food shortages in New York, Interior regulates transfer of public land for airport. - - - Union challenges importation of Mexican* to United* States. * Several* promotions in National Guard authorized. - Robert Mitchum case to go before Grand Jury on Tuesday*.
Russia favors a meeting of loa minister" of the" four great power". - - ♦ Cunloner's stoppage* does not affect for now I*" existence" of insular consumption. United" State* will continue for one more year its aid " Core*. - " " Attorney General upheld the Law that Umita lo" expenditure" of the municipalities" of the Island. - - - Satire "eré" pardoned. The Treasury has sent to eight towns a receipt" for the collection of property taxes. - - - Planning approved a* new 22-room school in Fajardo and a 12-room school in Ve. ga Baja. - Heavy rain" yesterday and the day before yesterday caused serious damage" in several towns on the island. * * * * University Crinada leaders complained to the Police Assistant. ♦ ♦ M Communists reoccupied the Berlin City Hall. - - - Hurricane to hit Morgan City in Lulslana. Boston in first pueat as Dodgers lose 2 to Giants - - - - House debated amendment* to Election Law last night.
Reds occupy town hall in Berlin
They believe a separate government will emerge Military governors met again. - Optimism prevails By Walter Bundi* BERLIN, September 3-(PU).Fn the moments *when* Germany's* four allied* military governors*" were meeting for the fourth time, in an effort to solve the critical* problems of* the blockaded city, a crowd of communist* and their* sympathizers* occupied the City Hall today, trying "vidently* to usurp the* power" of the city council, which* does not participate *in its In mens* majority in this political "dologla. In a friendly ambl "nt*, the four commanders-in-chief met to discuss means* and resources to put an end to the ru*ous blockade, solving also the monetary* problems* of the city governed by the four occupying powers. The four military governors - General Lucius D. Clay, American; General Sir Brian Robertson, English; Lieutenant General Pierre Koenlg, French; and Marshal Vassily D. Sokolovsky, Russian - deliberated from five o'clock in the afternoon until half past nine in the evening, with a brief recess at seven o'clock. This was the longest of the four meetings held during the last four days in connection with the Berlin crisis. The meeting was preceded by growing indications that the blockade and related problems will soon be solved. American, Russian and German reports indicate that traffic between Berlin and the West will soon be resumed. * The Communist-dominated Socialist Unity Party and Communist factions of other parties proceeded to form a "democratic bloc" in the City Hall, holding their first meeting in "! City Hall after a Russian refusal to provide protection forced the legal city government to cancel the planned meeting. Communist riots" forced 1* cancellation of two city council meetings last week. Green to establish new government Political observers commented today on the possibility that the occupation of the City Hall probably means that the Communists intend to establish a separate municipal government in the Russian sector of the city, thereby widening the gap between the eastern and western parts of Berlin. The new "democratic bloc" announced that it will meet twice a week, as the elected assembly used to do, to consider matters which are within the legal competence of the city council. Presumably, this communist action will force the legal administration of the city to abandon the City Hall which is erected in the Russian sector of the city, seeking new shelter in the Berlin area occupied by the Western Allies. In this connection, the Reichstag (Parliament) has been mentioned as a possible substltu- ¡ tion of the City Hall. At the session which the Communists held were present representatives of the Social Democratic Party, the Christian Democratic Union, and *1 Liberal Democratic Party--iods from the Russian occupation zone. The pro-Communist elements" of these fresh parties have been "de-authorized by the majority of the members of the three organizations in West Germany but their presence at the meeting may possibly be interpreted as meaning that the new regime has received the endo(Continued on page 14)
Attorney General upholds statute limiting spending by municipalities
Municipal governments may not spend any amount of money in excess of 50 percent of the amount of each item in their budgets, in the period between July 1, 1948 and January 3, 1949, the date on which the municipal administrations, triumphant in the November elections, take office. Recently the Auditor of Puerto Rico informed * the mayors, presidents of municipal assemblies, auditors and municipal secretaries, in a circular letter, that 1* Law 305, of May 15, 1945, provides in its Article 6, that in the years in which general elections are held, they shall refrain from incurring in expenses* or obli* gations, or from recording or certifying any order, or from recording or certifying any order exceeding one-half of the amount of any item in the budget, during the period between the first day of July of the election year and the date on which the newly elected officials take office. Despite this circular, several municipal officials, according to
municipal officials, as reported by the Auditor of Puerto Rico, have been inquiring whether they could incur obligations or expenditures in excess of 50 percent of the budget allocation of each item, in case of urgent attentions or that, due to the nature of the work, require the total expenditure of the appropriation in the budget. Opinion of Justice The Auditor, having doubts as to whether expenditures in excess of the limit established by law could be authorized in specific cases, requested on August 16 from the Attorney General his legal opinion on the matter. The Attorney General in his opinion states that the letter of Law 305 of 1945 is "completely clear and free of any ambiguity, and it is evident that the legislator's intention is to strictly prohibit the municipalities from incurring in obligations or expenses that exceed 50 percent of the budgetary allocation of each municipality during the period between July and September of each year, and that it is not possible to incur in obligations or expenses that exceed 50 percent of the budgetary allocation of each municipality during the period between July and September of each year.
Heavy rains cause serious damage to several towns on the island
Czech people mourn the death of former President Eduard Benes
Communist coup believed to have contributed to deterioration.of my health By RICHARD CLARK SEZIMOVO U8TI, Ch*eo*"lov*qula, Sept. 3. (PU)- Dr. Eduard Benes, "president* of Czechoslovakia, who twice lost his lifelong battle to establish democracy in his country, died at the age of 64-a tired and defeated man. Benes died * at S:10 P. M. (12:10 P. M., New York time), a victim of hardening of the arteries, at his country house, sixty miles south of Prague, where he had been confined with his wife since the Communists staged their coup d'etat on Feb. 27 Inspector V. Vavrlk, who guards the huge wooden gate of the stone fence surrounding the country house, announced the death to a group of soldiers, guards and peasants waiting outside. "He died peacefully," Vavrlk said. Then, with tears in his eyes, he closed the door. Bowing his head, a peasant muttered, "Czechoslovakia is a much poorer nation tonight." Gottwald's message The news of Rene's death was announced by the government and immediately spread throughout the country. Prague radio made one of its" rare interruptions.
% / 'AS la'■ ú- w- i ' F \ EDUARD BENES clones to report Ja death. He then broadcast 1* piece "From the Hands of Fate," by a Czech composer. The radio reported that Element Gottwald, one of those who plotted the coup, spoke sent a telegram of condolence to the widow, Gottwald occupied the presidency ruando Bene" the resigned last June 7. "Our people will not forget ja(Continued "n page 14)
Dr. Pavia and Ochoteco denied favoring withdrawal of candidates
They declare that they have not managed that the* reformists give their votes to candidates for the accumulation of socialists and statehooders. - Clarification on PIP
The leaders of the Reformist Party, Mr. Felix Ochoteco and Dr. Manuel P'vl* Fernandez, made public that they have always acted in harmony with the leadership of their Party, in all the negotiations in which they have intervened with other parties with the purpose of offering the greatest
effective support to the candidacy ■ of Mr. Martin Travieso for Governor. The manifestations authorized by Messrs. Ochotecó and Pavía Fernández are the following: Agreement* unanimously "We emphatically deny qu* we belong to any group that has offered to gMtíonar. qu* the Reformist Party withdraw* aus candidates by accumulation and give its votes for* ""nadar by accumulation to the Socialist candidate, Lic. Bolívar Pagán and "ús votes for representative by accumulation to the candidate of the Statehood Party, Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa. "We have only intervened in some of the different conferences that have taken place between the Contact Commissions of the Reformist, Statehood and Socialist Parties. Our intervention at all times has been in close union with the remaining reformist members of our Commission, Mr. Santiago Iglesias Silva, Mr. Rafael Rodriguez Pacheco and Mr. Manuel Gonzalez Gonzalez. Rafael Rodríguez Pacheco and Manuel González Seijo, and our agreements have also at all times been unanimous and never definitive. "Our rule has always been to act jointly with the leadership of our Party and never independently. so it should be considered erroneous such information as far as our alleged and alleged management is concerned. We insist that with regard to the aforementioned conversations, we have not acted, nor will we act independently, and that we will not give our acceptance to any definitive agreement regarding candidacies, unless there is unanimity among our committee members, since the absolute harmony that prevails among all of us is of imperative necessity to be maintained until the end of this year, and that we will not give our acceptance to any definitive agreement regarding candidacies, unless there is unanimity among our committee members, since the absolute harmony that prevails among all of us is of imperative necessity to be maintained until the end of this year.
U.N. Considers Report on Territories Figure the U.S.* report on Ja Island. - Russia made censorship By Michael L. Hoffman GENEVA, "eptiemhre 3 (Special to the New York Time*) The Committee of the" United Nations which has "u charge of the territories qu* ! ! not "e governed by "I themselves, "e met today and immediately found itself deluged with report- ! ! n"". Corresponding to the dispos- । clon of a resolution dr the General Assembly of the United Nations, the eight countries which have territory" under "u domain have supplied a huge documentation. dealing with the economic", "ocíale" and educational conditions in their extensive possessions. Despite the choice made by the U.N. Secretary, this Reelins' module is still so impressive that, by general agreement, the committee decided to suspend meetings for forty-eight hours while the delegations attend to their work. The Russian delegate, A. G. Kula- । genkov, wasted no time in stating his country's position on the matter. He criticized the" Report," because in them "e omitted everything concerning the political, this e" Information showing "how the natives of those territories are oppressed." It was pointed out by several members (Continued on 1* page 14)
Farmers to go to hearings on cane wages.
Represented by a committee, the Farmers' Association and its Sugar Cane Settlers' Sector will attend public hearings to be held by the federal Department of Agriculture in Puerto Rico shortly, to receive evidence * to determine the wages to be paid during the 1949 harvest and the share to be given to the settler in the sugar production of his new crop of cane. For the purpose* of sustaining a change of impression* *on* the matter, the* board* of directors* of the Farmers' Association and of the Cane Growers' Sector* were called yesterday to a joint meeting to be held next Thursday, *1 at the domicile of the agricultural organization* in this Capital. I
i With *1 purpose indicated above, the aforementioned hearings sponsored by *1 United States Department of *1 Agriculture will take place in San Juan on September 22 and 23 of the current month. Said Department, in accordance with the evidence to be presented, will decree the wages to be paid in the agricultural phase of the Island sugar industry during the 1949 harvest, as well as the participation of the colonist in the sugar produced by his cane during the next milling season. Thursday's meeting will discuss matters in general connected with the holding of these hearings and is expected to be followed by a series of exchanges of views for the purpose of dealing with the issue. (Continued on page 14)
Telephone lost about $5,000 Railroad also ñu cold interruption at Buchanan Rector By BENJAMTÑ SANTANA Editorial Staff of EL MUNDO Heavy rains *across the Island, as it faded"" the storm qu* passed near d* Puerto Rico antenoeh*, de", all long distance telephone lines to the east of the island were totally interrupted by the heavy downpour, causing a loss of $5,000.00 to the Telephone Company.00 to the Telephone Company. Also interrupted were the communications authority's railroads between Caguas and San Juan, and to the ur. The railroad, on the other hand, had an interruption in its service when a certain sector near Camp Buchanan was flooded. The heavy rainfall in the island during the last 24 hours, described by the Weather Bureau as heavy, caused serious damage in Sabana Grand. Humacao, Patilla," Villalba, Bayamón, Ponce, San Juan and in another" municipality*", according to information received" by this Newsroom. Meanwhile, in the Gulf of Mexico another hurricane, of considerable intensity, but too far away from Puerto Rico to forecast danger for the island, as reported yesterday afternoon by the Weather Bureau, was forming in the Gulf of Mexico. Damage" * 1* Telefónica To locate and repair the damage caused" in the" telephone" line". to the *"te, thick" brigade" of the Telephone Company "alieron yesterday, well early, "egún no" Informó el señor José L, Domínguez, manager of the Company, In addition* d* those damage* in Ja" line" of long । distance, in 1a residential area of ! Miramar, in Santurce, a high tension wire fell on a cable, burning it in more than 20 different places, interrupting the service and causing alarm in the neighborhood. All these breakdowns and others of lesser importance in the southern 1o" rabies, caused the Telephone Company losses of more than $6,000. Report from the Department of the Interior The Department of the Interior did not have a complete report yesterday on the damage to the road and the road under the jurisdiction of said agency on the island. Mr. Ernesto Piftero, Chief of Conservation, said that there had probably been landslides in many sectors of the palisade, however, he said that until yesterday he had a report of major flooding in La Muda, between Cagues and Rio Piedras: in the road, re mlllter that leaves Santurre towards Aguadilla, cerra de Buchanan; in the* vicinity of the racetrack La* Monja*; in the* Muñoz Rivera, Pone* de J>ón and Fernández Juncos; and "n other places where there have been several" floods. To repair the breakdown in the telegraph service between Cague* and Rio Piedra, several brigades of the Communications Authority were dispatched early yesterday morning. The" major damage was caused by "hooks" on the "line", and by "lightning" that put them out of "service. The only abnormality reported by the Railway Company was 1" occurring near Camp Buchanan, at mile 15. The service was promptly restored, we were informed. In *1 rest of the Island no "e reported any breakdown, In Fuente" Fluvial*" reported no breakdown either. rain* in R*b*n* Grand* About 1* situation *in Saban* Grande, d" our correspondent *in that locality, ""ñor Samuel Irizarry, we received *1 following dispatch: "Heavy downpours and thunder *in this town, beginning at* 6:15 in the morning, as a result d*l storm that was passing through the southern part of the Island. "The Muñoz Rivera school was flooded due to the bad condition of the roof, interrupting classes. The telegraph service, with San Juan, was left Incommunicado'. The situation in Fono* Our correspondent *in Pone*, Mr. Miguel Rivera, reported "obre landslides * Floods in that sector. Mr. Justo Varela, Engineer of the District Office of the Highway Conservation Division, told him that several landslides occurred on the roads from Ponce to Adjuntas and Coamo to Orocovis, as well as in the Tibes and Maragüez neighborhoods. A flooding of the Velázquez River in Santa Isabel paralyzed traffic yesterday morning. The Portugués and Bucaná rivers, in Ponce, eogle,(Continued on 1* page 14)