THE
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Partly cloudy, becoming cloudy with showers" and thunder" in the afternoon and early evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: Maximum temperature, M: minimum, barometric TA Prsaidn at sea nlv "4, n." inches of mercury.
42 Pages 5/
DlAatO masana
ARO XXIX
ML. o luaa n u
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO- SATURDAY, OCTOBER U, IBM
nUmkbo isw
Rations to Berliners are to be increased
Lhm luÑriu "ti niÁ" ilt" un IS* Piintlriii Imjti mi iimntln tinlfle "tto finí""áre" ile n|irovlili)iiiiiiiiil'>iili> Nw ÍMN N, MenMHMim SMRMWi Ri "luhw M tPIH - Mi iiMrti imIImIiIh imi'iH'fiH Ims HUI III llflMH BllMMHlIvlll "H a| N "NI" hlMuiiHn rrpImh iwmiHh* 'Su "n mil Si un ih cishih ni d" nnvlambra tiara. "ayu "hr " MilMir i Ib pnhliHrtn""m Mr" 1 InIinHm raBHrt "In inhumAHA n llagal" pressure and A hñiiñfln nf iflMl "xpadidn par Ina Mnh0fHMrtni""i" mllltAre "R Miado* unlri "HR", hrlIAnlrn and French set % l" facha ant "rinrmmii" AnunrlMdR to supplant has aiIgnarlonM of allm "nfoi (ill'll the imI" da Berlin 1,730 to 2,000 calarlas diarlamenLa fqrmal confirmation do loa increases", made possible by the Angio-North American air transportation, "- occurred while" the "Allied" air force "announced plans to place the "umlnl "trn" air force under a unified command. Thus, the first real "combined operation" of the first real "combined operation" to be carried out since the end of the Second World War, the "KaeúchanM diaparo" of callon The roar of the d<:.paro" dr field and anti-aircraft artillery, clearly audible in the west of Berlin, reminded the people that the capital of the four powers" encircled by Soviet-held territory. An American Intelligence Service officer said that the artillery "practice" was part of the "ongoing" Russian "aerial "maneuver". There was no indication" that the fire constituted a threat to supply planes, but the intelligence official said the Russians were firing "as close as possible" to the "border" of the West Bank as a measure in their continuing war of nerves against the people of the isolated capital. Pilots saw Uamarr.da" British officials announced that supply pilots had seen artillery fire on the ground near the air corridor, but that no reports had been received of anti-aircraft fire on the vital air routes. The pro-Soviet newspapers accused the Western commanders of maintaining a "secret treaty" that would place the Rhur industrial area under international control for an indefinite period. The newspaper Neue" Deutschland said that the alleged agreement was intended to "compensate" the British and French for their earlier opposition to "American demands for the full restoration of German heavy industry." Provisional Control of the Rhur At Frankfort General Lucius D. Clay, American commander-in-chief, told a Press conference that he was considering a plan to establish "control in the provisional German administration" of the Rhur. The Germans, he said, would supervise, for the present, the responsibilities currently carried out by the owners and would continue in office until a future German government could settle the question of the ownership of Rhur Industries. He said he could not go into detail" because the question was still under consideration. Clay intends to confer tomorrow with the British commanders and the details of the merger of the three Western occupation zones. The Red Army newspaper Taegllche Rundschau accused the non-Communist majority of the City Council of supporting the "criminal acts" of the Western powers. Rundschau charged that a U.S. contact officer had "ordered" the City Council to "move from the City Hall in the Soviet sector on Wednesday to the Public Health building in the British sector. This allegation of the Red organ is groundless, since it was the German Communists, with the approval of the Soviet authorities, who provoked a series of riots in the Berlin City Hall, making the deliberations of that municipal body impossible and trying to impose a turbulent minority, biased to Russian purposes, on the democratic majority of the councilmen who sympathize with the policy of the potential Western occupation forces. The Acting Mayor of Berlin wrote, shortly after these mo ' tines, to the commander of the Russian garrison in the German capital requesting protection for the Municipal Council and, failing that, asking that the City Council be declared a neutral zone, to which the Communist agitators had no access. The Russian commander refused to do either.
Working in m cumideaáM
W r mk 4 Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, widow of U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt, is shown in action while taking part in a session of the United Nations committee in Paris, France, where she was representing her country on the second of this month, her 64th birthday. (Associated Press photo). France will acquire here t a ba c o under European aid program
The French will buy Jos surplus on the island through the Agricultural Credit Corporation (Oporarióñ Créditos Agrícolas). - There are 20,000 quintals ready for shipment.
The Puerto Rican tobacco industry will benefit on the occasion of the authorization granted by the United States to France for the purchase by the latter, under the European recovery program, of tobacco produced on the island.
A report" supplied yesterday to EL MUNDO revealed that the tobacco industry will be able, by virtue of the aforementioned authorization, to make additional sales" of the product to the Agricultural Credit Corporation, destined for France. On the matter, Mr. Ramón Carmona, manager of the Puerto Rico Tobacco Corporation, said yesterday that the tobacco industry has been selling its tobacco quota to the Agricultural Credit Corporation, part of which has been sent to Germany and Austria.n addition, Puerto Rican industrialists" have sold to American firms tobacco for other European countries", out of the CEC quota and the surplus of the past harvest, has a surplus Mr. Carmona also indicated that the firm he represents, currently has about 20,000 quintals of surplus tobacco, which can be sold under the Marshall Plan, to European countries. Yesterday, the Economic Cooperation Administration authorized the purchase by France, under the European recovery program, of 5357,000 quintals of tobacco from the United States. The Administration announced that Puerto Rico will participate in the sale of tobacco, but the amount to be allocated to the island's industry was not disclosed.
Police will be removed from UPR after elections They will then hold the vote to elect the Student Council An official site of 1" university administration reported yesterday to El. MUNDO, ni ser interrosnón when it would be withdrawn the Folíela Insular d" lo" ground" of the University, that e" d purpose of the administration maintain h PnHela in the institution until quo pass the elections, The Police was called for the first voice n pdestar services in núestrn primor teaching center in ocaalón of April 14, cunndn a group of students Invaded In Rocloría and requested the resignation of the rector Benitez, declaring later a state of strike in the University. On that occasion the services of Colonel Salvador T. Rolg were requested, who appeared at the institution with several uniformed officers, and later large police contingents arrived. Later, when other events took place in our first educational center, related to the student strike, for the month of October, the police arrived in the school and later the police arrived in force.
Compendium of News
Rector Benitos alludes to the UPR strike in his report to the Governor. VlahUisky refused to answer in UNO question" about the Berlin blockade. Small nations that made peace proposal meet today. ♦ * * - A committee brings data on the cost of living of federal employees in Puerto Rico. * * - There is a new method to discover the "case" of cancer. ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ Plans accept location of buildings for the Santa Maria. ♦ . - * - * Island's dental problem acute, says medical committee that was in Puerto Rico.  * Federal investigators investigate complaints made by veterans. In France, the death penalty will be imposed on black market speculators. ■ - According to Silverman, only Congress can exempt the Island from the Cabotage Act. * -- * Military engineers have an allocation of $800,000 to invest this year in the Island. - - - V * ' . j APA will request national quota 1 not to be too high. - Atomic force may be used in the construction of airplanes, they reveal.
Commander of I" American legion" is against Legion intervening in politics. - Rusta is accused of enslaving millions of its citizens. * e " Franela will acquire tobacco from Puerto Rico under the plan of aid to Europe. * There is a plan to delay the dismantling of the "factory" in Germany. Benites Rexach denies having spoken on behalf of the PIP, in his interview with Don Pedro Alhlzu (ampo". x - ♦ - Announced for Monday" vl "ta aohre lo" Huceaoa at the University. ¡ Hoffman estimates e| Marshall Plan will need less money for its second year. - The Commission of lawyers took deelaracionea to several", on complaint of Hernándea Vargas. - They allege the Communist Information Bureau is inspiring the "strikes in Italy. ♦ - - They reveal that the Police will be withdrawn from the University after the -lessons. - - - - The Allies will increase the "food radon" to Berliners. - Tomorrow there will be a demonstration of the Creole Party's forces. ..." JIE Instruct on right of entry to polling stations.
The problem of the immiliar denial is called acute.
CiHiiilló that vUlló lalu miMH duloA found great iIhwIuihi in Inn dltmlM of iiIAoMi liiínriiian Aalhi in labor nm'MHMTWn, Nuav" ñHUi lus ID iMMMi Filaría Riph filé nih dría il" |timm hIiim up ""im hhi HrH al tila h ppi iibih m tmpaiii mimu fin"|"HsiHirtuiAl "hH tMw'HHlrl""i hm tliariariH manatiaip HutuhlituiHH, wh wh mine ríiéiilarírtp ti" má" da linoi ill ¡liétai, puhliró mta Informa. rliiH a riña t'óhimnaa, anhea a", ititiln th the díala and dantatlura riH.h" piiai'loi'i'lquaño", aiiapiriarin pnr Hoa utiivaralriada" and by varis" n""nria" aubain'amatiial"", A fnlnaiafla a Ira" rqlumnaa ti" lo" ñ Mptu'iallsfa" that performed the caliirilo ptecertla to information. "For a hiten number of añn"" r -says the Roche "fer newspaper,- "lo" ri "nll "ia" have dahatldn the ciie "l|ónt "Do they march couple" a good diet and good teeth?" "The general opinion has sirio that al marchan juma". But the" records indicate that in New England, where diet" e" generally the best of all" loa Eatsrins Unldo". if not the whole world, people's teeth are not so good. For that reason, five Rochester dentists have delved deeper into the study of the subject in an effort to establish a definitive conclusion. They went to Puerto Rico where they spent K week" intensively examining more than 3,000 children. "Yesterday, in what appears to be a rambunctious laboratory - but which, by scientific standards, probably is not - the quintet studied the "accumulation of data acquired on that Caribbean island and admitted that the weeks they spent in Puerto Rico gathering information were nothing compared" to the program ahead of them. It will probably be about a year before we have studied all the statistics," said Dr. Kenwar L. Shouiie, the group's leader. The "avalanche" problem "Definitive results cannot yet be determined, but it was generally found that there is considerable tooth decay among children in Puerto Rico! and the number of dental fillings is so small that it is not worth considering," said Dr. Shouiie. That is why the need for restorative dentistry is acute on the island, and constitutes a major health problem. "One of the main reasons Puerto Rico was selected for the study, explained Dr. Norman S. Simmons, was because the Puerto Rican diet is notoriously poor. It consists mainly of boiled white rice, beans and bananas, and consumption of sugar (via sugar cane) is high. "The dental group acted as a committee. Four of them are attached to the Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry at the University of Rochester, and the other is director of research at the Eastman Dental Dispensary here. With Dr. Shourie, a native of Punjab, India, who received a scholarship from the Government of India to study in the United States, went to Puerto Rico, Dr. Simmons, Dr. Shourie and Dr. Shourie, who is the director of research at Eastman Dental Dispensary, here.
Silverman Says Only Congress Can Exempt From Cabotage Law
By ENRIQUE BAAIJKMZ DRAU EL MUNDO Staff Writer The President of the United States is not authorized to exempt Puerto Rico from any law made applicable to Puerto Rico by Congress, as reported in a letter from the President of the Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Irvin W. Silverman, adviser to the President's Advisory Committee on Federal Laws Applicable to Puerto Rico. In a letter received yesterday by Mr. Fillpb- de Ho "tos, Mr. Silverman reports "that it will be the task of the Commission to review the federal laws in the light of economic conditions and the nature of the governmental structure of Puerto Rico, in order to determine whether the President should exempt * the Island from the application of any of these laws", "The Commission will hold public hearings before making any recommendation to the President. Ample notice will be given as to the place, date and time of these hearings," and of those "laws to be considered so that interested parties may attend and present their views," Mr. Silverman said in his letter. The Commission," he adds, "will welcome any expression of opinion.
The Commission will be pleased to receive any expression of opinion that you or any organization may wish to submit regarding the federal laws that you believe should be declared inapplicable to Puerto Rico and which of these federal laws you would like to see exempted for Puerto Rico", says Silyerman, and adds: "In each of these cases a brief statement should be made, explaining the reasons you would like to make". Attention is called to the fact that a charter amendment such as the one mentioned above does not authorize the President to exempt Puerto Rico from any law which has been expressly made applicable to the Island by Congress." "This Committee," Mr. Silverman concludes, "cannot recommend to the President that Puerto Rico should be exempted from the application of any such law. As to this matter, the President of the Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Filipo de Hosto", informed EL MUNDO that no recommendation can be made to the President of the United States regarding the Cabotage Law because the application of this law to Puerto Rico obeyed an express provision of Congress. The Hosto" softer told EL MUNDO that by proceeding "1 Congre(Continued on page 14)
Vishinsky refused to answer questions at U.N. on Soviet blockade of Berlin
Health indicates h paralysis is endemic raperan "urja an epidemic in the hia, dehhlo to loa pncoa cam Yesterday "r Officially reported by -I Department d" Ralud that of lo" Míete rain" "n "pet<hn "na of paré* ll "l" Children's Informed from the city rie Fonre, one of them was confirmed, and there is ofro under ohiervsrlón, which is considered very anaperhosn, Loa olma clnrn rasos were eliminated" de "pué" riel opinion of the e "pecl "ll "t a. Dr. Abel de Juan, head of the Bureau of Epidemiology, commenting on the 17 cases of infantile paralysis recorded during the year, said that "we should not expect an epidemic of this disease during the next year, since, according to the characteristics of infantile paralysis and the way it attacks, it should take four years from the last epidemic. That being so, the next epidemic would be "urgent in 19ñ0," stated Dr. De Juan. Dr. León Shépland, a specialist in crippled children, was in the city of Ponce with Dr. José Hernández Matos, deputy chief of the Bureau of Epidemiology. After examining the cases, he was able to determine that of the five previously admitted to the District Hospital, there is only one positive case, corresponding to three-month-old Luis Jiménez, who was admitted on October 7. This" child is a native of Villalba, where in '1947 a" recorded 4 cases" d" parállsi" Infantile and eate aftn rins. Of the four cases reatante" there is another very ao "pechnao, according "e Informó, correapondlente to Ja nlfta Santla Rio", of 14 months", native of Patillas. The ntros three cases were descmladn". As for the last three cases that were admitted, it was determined that they did not suffer from poliomyelitis. Paralysis in Puerto Rico * The Chief of the Bureau of Epidemiology, Dr. De Juan, inmentandn Jos cases of infantile paralysis, said that on the island "e has not developed this disease in any sillo during this aftn, and that" there have only been sporadic cases", being greater in the" months" of winter, until December, time for which the incidence increases. He also said that the way in which the disease develops is in accordance with what experience would predict, and that the 1946 epidemic, which was more widespread than usual, included the first two months of 1947. He said that the year's cases have not exceeded the limit, and that "in spite of everything, the Health Department is on the lookout for any cases" outside the regular rie Jo. He explained that the Bureau of Crippled Children has two nurses on scholarship" in the United States" training in physiotherapy, and that the Department of Health has two mechanical lungs Paralysis in the United States" By way of comparison, Dr. De Juan explained that while in Spain (Continued on p. 14)
Hair miiAIInIn ih Inhor qur nf Iin rMlimifio Fn llINlhllulÓll (llIFMIIlF mAo By Lula Heenándee Aquino (Marírn* de Kl. Ml'NhD In the annual infflime rendered by "1 ftMnr of the University of Fuer", lo Ríen to the Gnhernedor rio the Island ae mentions the university strike romo one rie In" event" most" Important" of: year 1MJ-4R in our first center of teaching. In his report, the Rector considers eight events of great importance in the life of the Institution during the last reference year, and also makes an analysis of the activities carried out by the Institution during that date. The first important event mentioned in the Annual Report is the creation of the position of Dean of Administration, for which Dr. Ramon Mellado was appointed, and who has under his jurisdiction the following offices and divisions: Examinations and Statistics, Treasury, Accounting, Accounting, Prestípueslo, Auxiliary Agencies and General Ser- i vice, Registrar, Personnel, Libraries, Pl "nl" Physical and Es- i cuela of Industrial Arts. The Insular Board of Elections yesterday issued instructions on the entry of the members of the Board of Elections into the elected polling stations on the 2nd of January. "le", on November 2. Yesterday "l Popular Party filed with the Insular Board the appointments of Inspectors, secretaries and recussors of said party that will act in the colleges on election day, On entry into the colleges" In response to inquiries" made, the Board of Elections gave instructions to the" presidents of the Local Boards and " the" Local Committees on the entry of the members of said boards" " the colleges on the day of elections. Mr. Charles H. Terry, Superintendent of the Xeraf Superintendent's Office, retired. ! in replying to inquiries, to Section 69 of the Election Law, which states: "With the exception of the official representative, the Governor in the precinct; the Superintendent of Elections or'.With the exception of the official representative, the Governor in the precinct; the Superintendent of Elections or a member of the duly constituted Island Board of Elections; the duly constituted Local Board of Elections; the duly constituted Polling Place Board; and the duly authorized challengers of the political parties, no person shall be admitted to a polling place for the purpose of voting. The General Superintendent explains, that in "accordance with said statute no member of a Local Board of Elections may enter a polling place in such a manner, except as an elude- , harm for the purpose of voting. The only way in which a member of a Local Board of Elections, including the chairman of the Board, may enter a polling place is in conjunction with the other members of the duly constituted Board forming a quorum, that is, a majority of the Local Board of Elections. Mr. Terry recalls that when the proprietary member of the Local Board of Elections is present, the substitute member has the authority to act, FPD files appointment" The Popular Democratic Party filed yesterday morning in the (Continued on page .14)
I About 100 retail establishments have been visited for the purpose of conducting an investigation of the federal employee's cost of living in Puerto Rico, according to an announcement made yesterday by Mr. Merwin M. Peake, president of the Federal Employees Council in San Juan. Mr. Peake revealed that the study began on Monday and was successfully completed on Thursday. The purpose of the study is to provide the U.S. Civil Service Commission with preliminary data that may assist the commission in determining whether the cost of living of the federal employee in Puerto Rico is higher than that of the employee stationed in the District of Columbia. In accordance with the Presidential Order
0 1/17 Rector n refers to UPR strike in Report to Governor
til RECTOR JAIME BENITEZ supervl"" and coordinates le" sctivlri "rire and normes rie the Decens rie the di", tinto" colleges and rie lo" estudiAnle". The creation by the Board of Governors of another administrative post - Dean of Students - is one of the most significant events (Continued on page 14) Benitez Rexach denies speaking on behalf of PIP He expressed that his interview with Albizu Campos was a purely personal one. lix Benitez Rexach denied yesterday that Al ""atuviera " nomore of the Puerto Rican Independence Party, a conference rnn the lawyer Pedro Alhlzu ('ampos, president riel Partirlo Nacionalista rie Puerto Rico. Mr. BenUez Rexach made it clear that the conference he held yesterday with Mr. Alhlzu Campos was completely private. "It was a "migo" conference, without the Independent Party having anything to do with it. Circulating version As last night, yesterday a version circulated in San Juan to the effect that Mr. Benitez Rexach had asked Mr. Albizu Campos, on behalf of the PIP, to eliminate from his political speeches calls for electoral withdrawal, and that Mr. Albizu Campos had agreed to do so as long as the FIT would change its fight for Independence. In relation to the aforementioned version, Mr. Benitez Rexach told EL MUNDO: "No one would think that I would speak on behalf of the Independence Party. I am not a Landiriato at all within that Party. I am not even a member of it. I am an advocate of independence rio Puerto Ribo anywhere and in . any terrain. "The "mi "tari - that ,nts honors very much - with rion Podro AIWzu Campos, has many "ños. We are close friends. My house was always, is, and will always be, the house of Pedro Albizu Campos." . said Mr. Benitez. Rexach also said that the presence of the Director of the newspaper El Imparcial, Mr. Antonio Ayuso Valdivieso, at the conference, was an asset. To this effect, he assured that while he was talking to Dr. Alhlzu Campos, Mr. Ayuso Valdivieso arrived and participated in the conversation. (Continued on page 14)
Committee provides cost-of-living data for federal employee
The 10,000th anniversary of the 10,000th anniversary, which was recently issued, the additional 23 percent remuneration payment that has been given for five or six years to all Federal employees stationed outside of the  Influence of cost of living Under the order* s" will pay additional remu' neraclon, up to a maximum of 25 percent of the pay of ¡ each employee, to any Federal personnel stationed in a terrlJ > (Continued on p. 14) 1
Bi _ _ _- Denied uuloi'ldiut n dlscullr the cuso llmiHigllM ffuiiIfA today n pFf|lirAMN IIHFlmiFR hlrlFFtm ofFriH iIf pal Unr MDRERT 4, MANNING FÁRIN, mMuhrn jR, - (FU) - t MaiiimiU>tiitn his oiplnmállca huaica arnitary, Antlrel Y Vishinsky, d "legario rustí, "a n "gó Imy a re "pnnd "r, rtt c| Consajo ri" Rcgurirtari da la" Nai'imir" Unida" a" preguntaai|UF f "" le formulated "n around the qu "o d" Berlin. Vlihlnaky reaffirmed the Soviet Government's view that the United Nations has no authority to settle any problems relating to Germany. Announcing his refusal to answer the questions, breaking with clin his angry strike, Vi "hin "ky said: "It is useless to think that the Russian delegation will swallow the bait. No no" we will stick with the glue that has been poured "on a piece of paper, on which is written: "The Berlin river question". Vishinsky clashed with John A. Brachman, acting chairman of the Security Council, who, as leader of a group of small nations, drafted the questions. Rremugia against Vishinsky Br "muglia h "hla "hlerta the session ron an appeal to the four great powers, urging them to resolve the Berlin crisis. "Let us make an "upreme effort," ? declared Bramuglia. "Why not ; align our flag cakes" in a sota column, which fights for peace?" | Otrns spokesmen rie Ja" small nations Jo endorsed. Bramuglia censured Vishinsky for casting "n doubt on the motivations rie the" small" nations in their peacemaking attempt. "I categorically and formally deny," declared the Argentine delegate, "that" in our minds there was any question rie perfldie. We ground our* question" in an honorable manner. I must object to the implicit denial of our efforts," Vishinsky declared that he had nothing to withdraw from what he had said, since he had made no allegation against any delegation. Meeting of small nations Bramuglia ordered the meeting to recess until Tuesday at three o'clock in the afternoon, and summoned, to !"s delega- , ri mes rie the sel" small nations ron representation in the Council " a meeting p-UMe be held tomorrow ( nine-thirty rie I" martana. Those sel" nsclones are trqlantta/rle not to ab "nderize to one or the other, in e| case rie a definitive cKóqu" between the Órlente and the West. At a meeting of the Subcommittee on Disarmament, U.S. delegate Frederick C. Osborne rejected Russian disarmament prepositions, calling them "totally unacceptable" and designed to confuse the public. Demanding that the Soviet Union demonstrate its good faith, Osborne declared: "Would you demonstrate the end of the expansionist policy (which you are pursuing) by withdrawing your quintacolumns all over the world? Would you open your pats so that the other nations might know what is going on (in Russia), relieving them of the fear that compels them to arm themselves? "Is there not a certain impudence on the part of the Soviet Union, in bringing before this body a resolution of that nature, on behalf of a dictatorship which Premier Stalin himself has described as based on 1" violence and not on léy?" Despite Russian opposition, *! "ubrommittee pressed, for the consideration of the Political Committee d" M members, a resolution endorsing the American plan for the control of atomic energy and inviting the five great powers and Canada to seek a new basis for a settlement. In opening remarks at the Security Council meeting, Syrian delegate Farls El-KKoury. Farls El-KKoury. expressed the fears harbored by the "small" nation here when he said that the Berlin situation constituted a threat to the "...war will break out soon, or later," or an "outbreak of war will come very soon". Formulan do" I ask" Bramuglia. to the six small palse", he asked Russia and the Western allies $ to answer theseis questions : _ . We ask the representatives of the United States, Great Britain, France and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to explain circumstanclallmant" the initial imposition of restrictions on communications, transport or trade between Berlin > 1 (Continued on p. 14)