THE NON DO
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND. HOT: Partly cloudy. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 80; low, $9. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 99.96 inches of mercury.
42 Pages 5/
DAILY LA MARANA
ANoxxvm *M. -
Enterad aa second class matter, Poet Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO- SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 1948
NUMBER 11208
Gas rate hike to be permanent
Company proposes to be allowed to use fuel oil clause - ■ Would follow system adopted by AFF Petition was referred to Engineering and Accounting Division of CSP The Porto Rico Gas Co. has requested from the Public Service Commission that it be allowed a permanent increase in its rates, taking as a basis also a fuel oil clause, such as that used by the Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority. Since January 1, a provisional increase authorized by the Commission has been in effect, which is equivalent to an additional ten percent over the rates currently in effect. The Commission's inspectors have been making a study of the Company's conditions to determine the reasonable permanent increase to be authorized. The new fuel oil clause rates suggested by the Company, thus amending the previous application, are as follows: For the first 4,000 cubic feet of gas, $1.65 per thousand; up to 21,000 cubic feet, $1.55 per thousand; up to 25,000, $1.40 per thousand; in excess of 50,000, $1.05 per thousand. The minimum rate is fixed at $0.85, or ten cents more than the current rate. These rates, it is alleged, are the same as those in effect in 1943, prior to a reduction in the rates. To these charges is then added the increase corresponding to the fuel oil clause which reads as follows: To each monthly bill computed in accordance with the above rate, there shall be added or deducted one percent for each 2 percent increase or decrease in the cost of fuel oil per thousand cubic feet of fluid gas. The increase in the cost of oil per thousand cubic feet of gas is 79 percent over the cost per thousand cubic feet prevailing on December 31, 1943, when the current rate was in effect. According to the Company's report, the following is the comparative statement, between 1943 and 1948, of the cost of producing one thousand cubic feet of gas: In 1943: coal, 2.615 cents; coke, 7.61 cents; oil, 18.81 cents; which makes a total of 29.035 cents per thousand cubic feet. In January 1948: coal, 4.38 cents; coke, 10.18 cents; oil, 37.45 cents; which makes a total of 52.01 cents per thousand cubic feet of gas produced. The increase in production per thousand cubic feet of gas from December 1943 to January 1948, according to the Company's figures, was 79 percent. This report of the Company, amending its request for authorization of a permanent increase in its rates, has been referred to the Engineering and Accounting Division, which, as stated above, is making a study to determine what a reasonable increase in the Company's rates should be authorized. When the Company first approached the Commission requesting an interim rate increase while the permanent rates were being fixed, it requested a 20 percent rate increase. The Commission authorized only a provisional increase of 10 percent, fixing at 8 percent the reasonable margin of profit, on the invested capital, which the Company should receive. This increase was authorized taking into consideration, as explained by the Chairman of the Commission, Mr. Jorge V. Toledo, the increase in salaries and the increase in the capital invested. Toledo, the increase in salaries and the increase in fuel oil. If the increase is authorized with the fuel oil clause as proposed by the Company, and taking as a basis the 79 percent increase claimed by the Company, a consumer who pays at the rate of $1.65 per thousand cubic feet, if he consumes up to 4,000 cubic feet, will pay net $1.50 per thousand, or $6.00, and will have, in accordance with the provisions of the clause, an additional surcharge of $2.40. The total amount of his monthly bill will then be $8.40. Mr. Toledo said that due to the fluctuations in the price of fuel, such clauses are also adopted in the United States, and that it is probable that the Company will also be authorized to adopt one such as the one proposed as the basis for the increase in its rates. . J 4 .... When the Accounting or Engineering Division submits its report to the Commission, it will convene a public hearing to discuss its recommendations. On the other hand, Mr. Toledo informed that the Commission filed the complaint filed by the consumers of Rio Piedras against the Gas Company because it considered the excuses presented by the company to be reasonable. The company proved that it has taken all the necessary steps to improve service. It is currently installing a new six-inch pipeline and expects to have a low-pressure tank installed at its Hato Rey plant by May. The company has not been able to find a suitable site to install the tank (Continued on page w
Supreme Court Orders Mayagüez Mayor Barreto's Removal from office
It unanimously revoked the decision issued by the Municipal Assembly of that city, which had exonerated him.- Discusses letter from Muñoz to .
The Supreme Court of Puerto Rico yesterday ordered the dismissal of the Mayor of Mayagüez, Mr. Manuel A. Barreto, in a unanimous opinion, with Associate Justice Angel R. de Jesús presiding. The Court reversed the decision issued by the Municipal Assembly of that city, which, by a vote of 8 to 5, exonerated Mr. Barreto of the charges brought against him by the Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Jesús T. Pinero. This, through his attorneys, appealed to the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, which reversed the Assembly and ordered the dismissal of the defendant mayor. The Court discussed in the opinion a letter from the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, to Mr. Barreto, as President of the Mayors Association, in which Mr. Muñoz Marin talks about a conversation held with the Auditor of Puerto Rico regarding the funds collected during the patron saint festivities. The following is the full opinion of the Court: "On October 11, 1945, the Governor presented before the Municipal Assembly of Mayagüez a statement of charges against the Mayor. The Municipal Assembly acquitted him twice: the first time, through an improper application of the doctrine of res judicata; (1) the second time, the first time, through an improper application of the doctrine of res judicata.
The Municipal Assembly acquitted him twice: first, by means of an improper application of the doctrine of res judicata; (1) the second time, by declaring the preliminary objection filed against the first four charges and acquitting him of the fifth and last charge, after hearing the evidence relating to the first four charges, and (2) the third time, by means of the doctrine of res judicata; and (3) the third time, by means of the doctrine of res judicata.
There is a plan to send workers to New York agricultural centers Sierra revealed during forum that New Jersey farmers were grateful for Puerto Ricans. Commissioner Corsi Lists Existing Vacancies
By BENJAMIN ARNALDO MEYNEBK NEW YORK, February 6. - A forum conference was held last night at the board offices of the Benjamin Flanklin School, under the chairmanship of Dr. Leonard Covello, principal of that school, in the form of a forum, in which the principal speakers were the Industrial Commissioner of the State of O - New York, Edward Corsi, the Industrial Commissioner of the State of New York, Edward Corsi, and the Director of the Benjamin Flanklin School, Dr. Leonard Covello.
New York State Industrial Commissioner Edward Corsi and Puerto Rico Labor Commissioner Fernando Sierra Bendecía participated as keynote speakers. Both officials extensively developed the theme of the conference: "Employment of Puerto Ricans in the State and in New York City", providing complete data in rotation with the cooperation plan recently established by the entities they both represent. This practical cooperation, according to Sierra Berdocta, has materialized in the efforts of the state's Employment Service, thanks to which thirty young women workers from Puerto Rico will soon be arriving in Scarsdale, New York, to work in the homes of that population. They are all graduates of the Training Institute for Domestic Workers, sponsored by the Department of Labor of Puerto Rico, and will earn twenty-five dollars a week, plus room and board, with forty-eight hours of work a week, Sierra Bordela said he is very satisfied with the warm welcome given by the New York press to the plan, which he hopes will be the first of a long series of profitable results. The island Commissioner of Labor outlined in detail a plan to make Puerto Rican farm workers available to the agricultural communities of New York State, commenting on the way in which twelve hundred Puerto Rican workers were brought, experimentally, last year, to harvest the agricultural crops of New Jersey and Pennsylvania. He indicated that these workers were brought in to harvest New Jersey and Pennsylvania agricultural crops. (Continued on page 14)
The Board of Directors of the Consumers Association of Puerto Rico held a meeting in which they extensively discussed the legislation to be promoted in the next legislative session, aimed at benefiting consumers in one way or another. Present at the meeting was Mr. Sol Luis Descartes, member of the Planning Board, who was invited to the meeting to cooperate in the drafting of the bills to be presented. It was agreed to invite Mr. Cándido Oliveras, president of the Minimum Wage Board, together with Mr. Descartes and Mr. Antonio J. Colorado, president of the Association, to form part of the commission in charge of drafting the bills. Among those to be presented in the legislative session, there is one related to rents, and another related to the service of inspection of weights and measures. There is the purpose of improving as much as possible the agency in charge of watching over the (Continued on page 14)
News Compendium !■■<■! . I ■ --I. ■■■■-■ ■■■.I-. .I...-J
Sierra reveals plan to bring Boricuas to work in New York agrioolao centers. - - - Friendship Ship to play in Puerto Rico, on trip to Europe. "So alleged to have been the planes that according to the Venezuelan government tried to bomb Caracas. Fonfrias states that the AFH resolved to give 8800,000 for the Puerta de Tierra housing project. - Applications for studies received at the UPR up to April 80. - - - Outbreaks of whooping cough affect the entire island, especially Caguas and Coamo. - " - . The United States and Great Britain have granted a government letter to ana aosiaa do occupation. - Joint committee approved a budget cut of $1,600,000,000. - * - A drop in prices has already been recorded in Puerto Rico, in tes mgioaM, de luportaoMn. On* morolo of the Island cautious about the situation. - The FLT will review FLT's challenge to the agreement between the Union and the Astear Producers. - The Gas Company asks to be allowed to use the fuel oil clause to raise my rates.
Enacted regulation exempting veteran's housing from taxation for the first $4,000. * CSP prohibits the circulation of ten-passenger guagüitae. - PIP delegates review the registration of new voters. - - - Ford Smith vs. Eugene Smith this afternoon in Gaguea between Criollos and Santeras; Sloat vs. Indian Torree in Aguadilla in clash of Tiburones s Indios; Federico faces Wllfredo Balas at Escobar in Olmo batted 4-8 and clinched the batting lead in Cuba with .840. - On Sunday, the pistol championship will be discussed, "pound .45. - - - Maaatroe has a new Spanish-language teaching project ready. - The Supreme Court orders Mayor Manuel A. Barrate of Mayegües to testify. - - - UPR Board approved yesterday the eteudiantoe regiasnent. - Fear of collapse in the U.S. causes a sharp drop in London stock market values. - An aircraft carrier and a U.S. destroyer will go to the Galletee Inauguration. - Antonio Castro Pórte was exoareelated after the Juco adopted MR99A's flanea.
Committee made reduction in budget
Interpreted as a sure sign that they would cut taxes Cut rises to 12,500,000,000,000 But Republicans say final cut will be much larger By DAYTON MOORE WASHINGTON, Feb. 6 (PU)E1 Joint Budget Committee, Senate and House, today issued a mandate determining a reduction in contributions, by recommending a maximum figure of 37,200,000,000,000 for Federal outlays for the fiscal year 1949, । Ks JA ndn absent nearly 1* half of the 102 members of which the Republican-controlled committee is composed, it voted on the Subcommittee Report calling for a 2,500,000,000,000 cut in President Truman's budget for 1949, getting 44 votes to 16. The Report does not specify in its recommendations what amount is to be lowered in contributions, but says: "It is obvious that the taxpayers should be relieved somewhat of the wartime tax burden." The subcommittee lacks specific authority to make tax recommendations, and its resolution was more in the nature of an expression of opinion. Nevertheless, Republican leaders in both legislative bodies are committed to lowering taxes this year. The Senate has stopped all action on the House-passed tax cut bill, pending adoption of the budget ceiling and possibly also until it is known how much will be earmarked for European recovery. The 2,500,000,000,000 budget cut is an endorsement of Republican promises to reduce government spending as an anti-inflationary measure. Republican appropriations spokesmen have promised that the final cut will be "vastly larger" than osa. The maximum budget of $37,200,000,000,000 must, according to law, be submitted to both houses for approval by February 16. There is no doubt that Republican majorities will guarantee its passage. The Committee also approved a payment of not less than 2,600,000,000,0000 to the public debt, in the fiscal year 1949. Committee Chairman Styles Bridges, Republican of New Hampshire, said the figures set by the Committee would "surely" Sermltilate a tax rebate or $4,000,000,000,000 to $4,500,000,000,000. This is about the amount that has been cited to add up to enough Democratic support to override a Presidential veto. Bridges clarified that the figures provide sufficient margin for the full $6,500,000,000,000 House cut, but that resting on "more conservative figures" no one would deny that the budget can withstand the smaller tax cut. The Committee's estimates include a surplus of $10,100,000,000,000 for the fiscal year 1949. This is based on the President's estimated surplus of $4,800,000,000,000, plus the budget rebate of $2,500,000,000,000; plus an estimate of $2,800,000,000,000 over and above the President's estimate of Federal tax receipts. President Truman has laughed off the Republican threat to cut his budget. He said it was all just talk, that they had tried to cut his budget by $37,500.)
Teachers have Spanish-language teaching bill ready to go
The new bill on the Language issue, whose presentation before the next Legislature will be managed by the Teachers Association, was yesterday preliminarily finished and pending only the approval of the eomlté of the Association, which was entrusted with its preparation, । The Vice President and acting President of the Teachers Association, Mr. Virgilio Brunet, informed that the bill will be considered by said committee from one moment to the next. This group is integrated by' Señorea Brunet, Dr. Ramón Mellado and Lewis C. Richardson. As soon as it is approved by the committee, the Teachers Association will initiate the steps to have it presented before the Legislative Assembly. The drafting of the bill was entrusted to Mr. Virgilio Brunet. It is expected that the committee will approve it as drafted and that, in case it is amended, it will not suffer changes in its fundamental provisions. Brunet said that the bill, as he/he has just drafted it, differs in some ways from Senate Bill 5L, which was introduced by Sen.
Rafael Arjona Siaca and which has been the subject of legal suits before our courts of justice, as to whether or not it is a law. The bill prepared by Mr. Brunet excludes from its provisions the University of Puerto Rico, considering it apart from the public school system of the Island. In addition, it would not only decree the teaching on Spanish of the content subjects in the public schools of the country, but would also provide for the Intensification of the teaching of English, by means of the appropriate scientific procedures. On the other hand, it differs "1 new project, of the other whose validity is object of litigation, in its exposition of motives. In this regard, Mr. Brunet said that the two drafts have completely different explanatory memoranda. The introduction of the new bill refers to the constitutional guarantee that Puerto Rico has to teach its children in the vernacular language, among other things. The fact that the Teachers Association has decided to introduce a new bill to officially establish teaching in Spanish (Continued on page 14).
Prices continue to fall in U.S. markets; it is beginning to be reflected on the Island
Whooping Cough Outbreak Affects the Entire Island In Coamo and Caguas, the disease has become almost epidemic A wave of cases of whooping cough, which has reached 218 since December, has broken out throughout the island, with the towns of Coamo and Caguas being the most affected. In these towns, the outbreak is almost epidemic, since the number of cases in Coamo has already reached 70, and in the town of Caguas, 37. Whooping cough is an acute infection that affects the trachea and bronchi, and is characterized by a typical cough, which generally lasts from one to two months. The disease is especially transmissible in the early catarrhal period. The initial catarrh is manifested by an irritating cough which usually becomes paroxysmal within one to two weeks. The attacks are characterized by repeated series of violent coughing fits. Children under seven years of age are very susceptible to attacks and children under two years of age to attacks that lead to death. Susceptibility is greater in females * all ages, than in males. The disease is very common in children and it is recommended that children under three years of age be protected from contact with other children who have a "cough or fever" of any cause, and if pertussis is known or suspected to be present in the locality. According to public health authorities, quarantine in pertussis cases should be limited to exclusion of non-immune children from schools and public gatherings for 14 days after the last exposure to a recognized case. This applies to exposures in the residence or under similar conditions. The above precaution may be omitted if non-immune exposed children are carefully observed daily upon arrival at school by a physician or nurse for 14 days following the last exposure to a case. General measures recommended are instruction in personal hygiene habits and in the dangers of association with persons showing catarrhal symptoms accompanied by cough. According to the statistics collected by the Department of Health's Epidemiology Department, 72 cases of whooping cough were registered in different towns of the Island in December last year. The towns most affected during that month were Coamo, which registered 26 cases, and Manatí, which registered 14 cases. During the month of January, 116 cases of this disease were recorded, with an increase of 44 cases. The towns that registered the most cases were Caguas and Coamo, the former with 30 cases and the latter with 31. In the first days of February there are already 30 cases registered in the different towns of the island, distributed as follows: Monday, February 2, Aguada 2 cases, Jayuya 1, Manatí 5; Tuesday, February 2, Carolina 5 cases, Corozal 1, Rincón 2; Wednesday, February 4, Isabela 3, Aguas Buenas 1; Thursday, February 5, Caguas 3, Guaynabo 2, Jayuya 4 and San Juan 1. The figures for the following days have not yet been sent to the Bureau of Epidemiology.
Biscay is granted a charter of government Authorities stress that the new regime will have no political place By M. 8. HANDLER BERLIN, February 6.-(PU)-The United States and Great Britain today granted the Germans in their zones of occupation a limited charter of self-government. This was a historic move aimed at restoring Germany, the economic heart of Europe, to normality after three years of chaos. Russia was strongly opposed to this movement and an immediate reaction is expected from her by attacking it. An attempt to force the Western allies from Berlin, which happens to be an island dominated by the Four Powers but surrounded by Russian-occupied territory, may be the next step. According to the Charter, which comes into force on Monday, the Germans in the Anglo-North American zones will establish, by February 24, the following administrative regime: 1. An Economic Council composed of 104 members which will act as a House of Representatives. 2. An Upper House of Laenderrat- or Senate composed of two men from each of the two Western Zones. 3. An Executive Committee which shall perform the duties of a Cabinet. 4. A High Court with jurisdiction over economic and financial legislation. 5. Adequate government agencies to operate the machinery in the western zones through the alejnan plan. The present Economic Council, which has been functioning under the Western occupation authorities, will be the basis of the new regime. According to the Charter its membership will be doubled. The parliaments of the states will elect members to the enlarged Council on the basis of one member for every 750,000 inhabitants. Under the Charter, the Council and its affiliated agencies will have charge of all harnesses of a government, continued on page 14).
One of the ships of the Friendship Fleet, destined by the United States Government to transport food to the needy countries of Europe in the program of aid to the peoples devastated by the Second World War, will arrive in Puerto Rico during the course of next week, on a transit voyage to ports in France, Italy and Greece. The training ship "Golden Bear", of the California Maritime Academy, on board of which a cargo of nine thousand long tons of food for the European needy is bound for Europe, will arrive to the Island in the first days of next week, according to an announcement made yesterday by Mr. Emil G Laosus, Administrator of the Popo
He escaped from the Dachau camp.
\ W. P. B. ... Frite Kuhn, former leader of the German-American Guild in the United States, who, according to wire reports, escaped Wednesday from the Dachau internment camp in Germany. The photo was taken while Kuhn was in the Neudeck prison in Bavlera, near Munich, shortly after his arrest in July 1947, to be tried as a Nazi criminal. (Associated Press photo).
The National Labor Relations Board, through its representative in Puerto Rico, Mr. Salvatore Cosentino, will investigate the issue raised by the petition filed yesterday before the NLRB by the Free Federation, on behalf of the Independent Union of Workers of the Central Pasto Viejo, to be certified as the representative of the workers in that mill, for the purpose of collective bargaining. Yesterday, to questions from an editor of EL MUNDO, Mr. Cosentino declared that the petition of the above mentioned union had been filed at the office of the NLRB, through Mr. Hipólito Marcano, vice-president and legal advisor of the FLT. The official of the NLRB announced that he will proceed first to conduct an investigation of the petition filed, and then will convene a meeting of the* interested parties. He will invite to this meeting the representatives of the petitioning Union, those of the Free Federation, and those of the Sugar Union, "to know their position on this matter". Mr. Cosentino added that he will proceed later to file with the National Board in Washington a report on his investigation and the procedures carried out on the matter, so that the NLRB may issue a decision on the matter. As reported yesterday by EL MUNDO, the FLT, with the petition filed by the independent union of Pasto Viejo, has challenged the right that the Union has been exercising to bargain collectively on behalf of the sugar workers, and the Sugar Producers Association, to negotiate with the workers on behalf of the employers of said Industry. Meanwhile, Mr. Armando Rivero, General Secretary of the Sugar Union, yesterday authorized statements answering others from the General Secretary of the FLT, Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera, in which he invites the latter to visit the sugar mills of the sugar industry.)
Ship of friendship will touch in ■ ) Puerto Rico on voyage to Europe
and Talbot Lines, who will serve as agents for the ship during its stay in the port of San Juan. The exact date of said ship has not been announced, as stated by Mr. Lassus, due to the fact that the same -will need to reaprovlslonarte of fuel on the Island; and due to the present shortage of this commodity, the necessary confirmation for this has not yet been obtained. The cargo of foode. consisted of powdered milk, canned food and thirty tons of wheat flour, to be unloaded at Marseilles. Genoa, Ñipoles and Plraens. in Greece. This is the State of California's contribution to the aid program for the island's di (Continued on page 14)
However, the island situation is uncertain and the trade is cautious. cheap butter and meats affected AGS on the lookout for U.S. markets CHICAGO, Feb. 6 (INS) - Commodity prices continued their spectacular downward trend today for the third day in a row, although the grain market reacted briefly in erratic trading before the close, with the maximum authorized decline for a single day. The falling market prompted Richard F. Uhlamann, Chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade, to predict that retail food prices will decline "within a month to six weeks." Wheat contracts for July were the most active in fluctuations. They opened with a four-cent loss from yesterday's close, dropped to the allowable ten-cent limit shortly after the market opened, and then reacted the loss, but closed with the downside limit. December corn acted in parallel, opening and closing at the maximum allowable low of eight cents per day, but reacted at one time and reached yesterday's closing price. While wheat and corn kept grain traders nervous, oats rose the one-day limit of six cents authorized for December futures. The oats market closed Irregular. Despite all the midday buying activity, the only cries at the close were "Vendo, Vendo, Vendo". When wheat and melz reached today's lows, there was a dull lull in 1* stock market activity. The signal of an offer to buy gave way to a flurry of intense activity. Many traders eager to sell were jumping up and down to attract attention. Aside from the excitement when buyers indicated their intentions, traders seem to have taken the market's decline as commonplace. The stock market acted more balanced today after two days of weakness. The forex stocks reacted slightly, while industrials lost minor fractions. Uhlmann, who recently served as Chairman of the Board of Trade, predicted that the decline in retail prices will occur as soon as the distributors' stores run out of stock. According to Uhlmann, only sustained weakness in the market could lead to lower prices in the retail market. Wheat for May closed at two dollars fifty-six cents and three-eighths; corn for May at two dollars twenty-three cents and five-eighths; oats for May at one dollar one cent and five-eighths; oats for May at one dollar one cent and three-quarters. Soybeans for March at three sixty-two cents. All grain futures contracts, except oats for September and December, opened in today's market at prices lower than yesterday's close. On the same subject United Press reports from Chicago: Staple food prices continued to fall precipitously *in the national commodity markets on their third. consecutive day, and many permittees believed that the cost of living had begun to decline. Corn, wheat, oats, butter, and pork became considerably cheaper. The increasing reduction in the grain market drew wholesale flour prices in its course. Stock and cotton futures prices were erratic amid nervous trading. The decline in domestic grain prices and President Truman's warning of the possibility of economic disaster were reflected on the London Stock Exchange. The market there declined severely and closed without reestablishing itself, millions of dollars having been lost in British stocks. The daily Price Index of 30 commodities, computed by Dun and Bradstreet, fell today to 29L 51, a new 1948 low. A week ago the Index was 302.23. Morris Sayre, president of the National Association of Manufactu% rers. told reporters eh Moline, Illinois, that the decline in the market could mean the end of inflation. Richard F. Uhlmann, president of the Chicago Board of Trade, said prices have already gone up as much as they talk about going up. Several food industry leaders and grain dealers were of the opinion that the food inflationary spiral, at least, is over. Sayre said that "anyone could see this was going to happen. I don't know if inflation is over, but I suspect we are now on track to lighten the load on the east side of the economy (continued on page 14).