THE BOTTOM
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Increasingly cloudy with showers, becoming cloudy with rain. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M; low, 70. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:M this afternoon, 29.97 inches of mercury.
42 Pages 5/
THE MORNING
DAY OF
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO-SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 11, 1948 .
Motorist*, we demonstrate the traditional courtesy of the country.
NUMBER 13424
Island Commerce registers new trademark
Balance has been most unfavorable Expenditures on the mainland far exceed export income By Paul Hartón WASHINGTON, Sept. 10.-(PU).-The Puerto Rico Council of Commerce said today that the dollar value of Puerto Rico's sales with the mainland and of Puerto Rico's "purchases" on the mainland set a new all-time high for the fiscal year ended June 30. However, the Council added, Puerto Rico's spending on the mainland exceeded the Island's receipts from its sales on the mainland by a greater margin than in the previous two years. The Council derived these conclusions from an analysis of U.S. Department of Labor statistics. This analysis will be published in the next issue of the Puerto Rican Trade Bulletin. The analysis was released today to the U.S. Press. Imports exceed According to the study. Puerto Rico shipped products to the mainland valued at $186,592,000 in the year ended June 30. During the same period, the island purchased products on the mainland valued at $337,155,000. In the fiscal year ending June 30, 1947, the Council stated, the Island's exports were valued at $171,227,000 and imports at $279,322,000. The difference was $108,000,000. In the fiscal year ending June 30, 1946, the Council said, the difference was $102,000,000. In the past few months, the Puerto Rico Board of Trade analysis revealed, the Island's balance sheet had become very unfavorable. The Council is still studying the situation to determine if there is cause for alarm. To date, it said, all that can be said is that the large wartime savings, tremendous revenues from federal sources, construction loans and capital investment have contributed greatly to the unfavorable balance sheet without necessarily threatening the island economy. What can be said with certainty, however, the Council said, is that never has the dollar value of Island trade been so high and never has the balance been so unfavorable. The main points in the picture of the Island's export trade are as follows: (1) A substantial increase in the value and volume of sugar exports in the year ended June 30, as compared with the year ended June 30, 1947. Exports of all sugar products amounted to $124,297,000, in 1947-48, compared with $97,091,000 in 1946-47, Shipments of unrefined sugar rose from 683,285 tons to 836,129 tons. Shipments of refined sugar also rose and shipments of honeys almost doubled, from 23,785,000 gallons to 41,133,000 gallons. At the same time, shipments of rum fell from 2,082,000 gallons, valued at $7,020,000, to 416,000 gaIons, valued at $1,334,000. (2) Shipments of raw tobacco fell from 12,498,000 pounds, to 8,921,000, and e| dollar value from $12,614,000 to $7,323,000. (3) Textile exports fell in value, from $36,962,000 to $31,450,000. Lu Imports On the Import side, clearly reflecting the increase in mainland prices, and in some cases an increase in Island consumption, are the following items: (1) A substantial Jos Income in food expenditures. The total dollar value of all food imports rose from $81,187,000 to $112,017,000. Thus, for the year ending June 30, 1948, Puerto Rico's food imports came to approximately $50 per head. At the top of the list of the lion's share were: (A) An increase in imports of pork products from 25,740,000 pounds, valued at $8,788,000, to 34,980,000 pounds valued at $11,770,000. (B) Imports of lard rose from 31,910,000 pounds, valued at $11,209,000, to 44,757,000 pounds valued at $11,026,000 (reflecting a reduction in the price of lard). C) A decline in imports of dairy products from 41,540,000, valued at $11,356,000, s 36,119,000 valued at $12,186,000, (reflecting sharp increases in prices). (2) A decline in Imports of clothing, other products, ♦*". les, of shoes, from VI,750,000 to > (Continued on page 14) |
As they approach the Princess jail, three of loa students sentenced yesterday for . ' ■ II 'I ■ ■■■■-■ .1 I SI IW ■ I
No immediate danger of a storm Weather Bureau announced last night cyclone changed little "u course The Weather Bureau, in San Juan, assured last night that the tropical disturbance that has been located about 550 miles east, northeast (ENE) of the Island of Antigua, English West Indies," offered no immediate danger to Puerto Rico. Storm Warning No. 3, issued by the Bureau last night, reads as follows: "A reconnaissance plane located the small thunderstorm disturbance at 3:00 p.m., at latitude 18.5 North, longitude 53.5 West, or about 550 miles nor East Northeast (ENE) of the island of Antigua, English West Indies. "At 6:30 P. M. the disturbance was located at latitude 18.5 North, longitude 54.2 West, or about 500 miles East Northeast (ENE) of the Island of Antigua. "It is moving westward at a rate of 15 miles per hour, accompanied by winds of 35 to 40 miles per hour near the center and 25 to 30 miles per hour in an area within a 200-mile radius in the first quadrant. "Indications are at present that the disturbance will change its course very little during the next 12 hours, but the storm may increase in intensity. > (Continued on p. 11
contempt of court and who did not file appeals bid farewell to friends and family. From left to right: Harry Gardner
from left to right: Harry Garda Domlnlccl, Jose M. Tejada, and Juan Noriega Maldonado,
Judge imposed a $100 fine or one month's imprisonment Gil de Lamadrid and Landing appealed to the Supreme Court. Judge Correa Suarez reserved ruling in civil contempt case and announced he will write an opinion By ANGEL CRUZ~CRUZ t/os huelguiit"" university" Juan Noriega Maldonado. Jo "é Miguel Tejada Río" and Harry García Domlnlccl entered yesterday, at 1" one o'clock in the afternoon, in the La Princesa jail, in San Juan, singing the Hymn of the University of Puerto Rico, 4 - '
The" leaders" of the university strike were "sentenced to fine or jail by Judge Joaquín Correa Suárez. of the San Juan District Court, to pay a fine of one hundred dollars each or to serve a month in jail in default of payment, after finding them guilty of having violated a preliminary injunction issued by the same magistrate, which prohibited them from entering any part of the university grounds or inciting or committing any act of violence that would tend to "violate the order of the university. After the sentence was handed down by Judge Correa Suarez, the three accused, together with other students of the University, had lunch at a restaurant in Sen Juan before going to jail. The three told the press that they did not have the money to pay the fine, so they would go to jail. They walk to jail after they had lunch. Noriega Maldonado, García Domlnlccl and Tejada, accompanied by their defense attorney, César Andréu (Continued on page 14).
Vicéns announces he will give decision on milk He said it will be ready for the first days of next week At the beginning" of next week will be the decision of the General Administration of Supplies, regarding the increase in the price of milk. The Administrator of Supplies, Mr. Antonio Vlcén" Ríos, reported yesterday that, despite having received a communication from the members" of the panel that is studying the increase in the price of milk, at the beginning" of next "week there will be a decision. The" members of the panel appointed by Mr. Vlcén" Rio", in a meeting held last Wednesday, agreed to inform the Supply Manager that they will take no less than eight "weeks to finish the" studies they have been carrying out. Letter to Mr. Vlcén" To the" consequent" effect, the" members" of the panel addressed yesterday the following letter to the Administrator of Supply; "In view of the fact that, according to the work plan adopted by the Committee, the studies" that need to be carried out must take considerable (Continued on pg. 14)
Noriega, Tejada and Garcia serve jail time
A Selective Service Appeals Board will operate on the island. - * * Political leaders met with Judge Travieso. - Wallace's welcome is today, Saturday, in New York. * The Island's trade has registered new records, far surpassing expenditures on the Continent over export earnings. - The United States will suspend aid to countries inclined to communism or fascism. - Axis Sally will be prosecuted for treason. - Dewey to campaign for several state gubernatorial candidates. "Dewey to campaign for several state gubernatorial candidates. - - - Dominican Orchestra will offer audition today at La Fortaleza. - The Creole Party was not registered in Aguas Buenas. * Speer acknowledges reel- - - Speer acknowledges reel- - - Speer acknowledges reel- - - Speer acknowledges reel-
News Digest
bMa by New York teachers" in Puerto Rico, - - - - Nehru announced he will invade the rebel territory of Hyderabad . - . - - Senate Committee Investigates Alleged Fraud in Issuance of Export License". "- - Benites makes representations in New York about medical school. - - - No immediate cyclone weather said the Weather Bureau last night. - The weather bureau predicts a further reduction in the price of basic commodities. - - - Another Incident broke out on the college campus yesterday. - - - The Supply Manager will give his decision on the price of milk next week. - - - They indicate that Plñero will only approve two of the amendments to the Electoral Law. - - - University strikers sentenced for violation of the interdict. * During the first seven months of 1948, 3350 new automobiles arrived on the island.
Board of Appeals for Registrants to Operate in Puerto Rico
A Puerto Rico Board of Appeals will be the official authority to resolve appeals"" of Inacrlptoá, coming from the"" local board"" of the Selectlvo Service throughout the Island, as to classification and deferment"". This was reported yesterday by Colonel Rafael Gimenez de 1a Rosa, director of the Puerto Rico Selective Service. A reporter of this newspaper received the erroneous impression that Mr. D. Vázquez, a San Juan attorney, was the official before whom the appeals would be heard. The appointment extended to Mr. Vazquez by President Truman, and on the recommendation of Governor Pifteroi e" of Appeals Agent of the 63rd Local Board of Selective Service in San Juan, his duties being to advise said Board in all matters relating to the classification and determination of registrants, and to take appeals to the Board of Appeals for Puerto Rico. Recommend candidates
As reported by Coronal Glménez de la Roía, Governor Plftero has already recommended to the President the names of five persons to form the Board of Appeals for Puerto Rico. The" recommended are: Nicolás Noguera" Rlvera, labor representative: José R. Carrera", Industry representative: Dr. Juan A. Pona, doctor: Enrique Campoa del Toro, lawyer: and Antonio R. Mato", agricultural representative. According to Colonel Da la Rosa's report, the members of the Board of Appeals of Puerto Rico, which will be five, must be male citizens of the United States who are not members of the armed forces or of any of the armed forces; they must be residents of the area for which the Board of Appeals is appointed; and they must be not less than 30 years of age. "The Board of Appeals""- it says- "shall be a board ropreaentatlva of the" activities of the zone, and as such shall- * (Continued on page 14)
Denial of data requested by the Soviet
British Cabinet studies the crisis Russian planes continue to ply the air route of allies in Berlin By WALTER RUNDLE BERLIN, Sept. 10. (PU) - The United States today rejected as "Impossible" the Russian demands for information about the relief flight in Berlin - which is supplying the civilian population with food, fuel and medicine - while Russian warplanes continue to thunder ominously over Allied Berlin and the vital air corridors linking the city with the West. American* officials* flatly repudiated a Russian "aollei- , tud", "©"having that all the necessary information has "been supplied to the lntere "ado". An air force official said that the Russians are managing "an impossible coupling of useless information." In London, the British cabinet was considering the attitude it would adopt toward the Berlin crl "is. In this connection, a spokesman for the British Foreign Office said that it was possible that the riots, kidnappings and shootings in the German capital would prevent the Western Allies from reaching an agreement with the Russians on the problems of the blockaded city. Tree alternative* Presumably the English Chancellor. Erneit Bevln, presented three alternatives" to the Cabinet. The alternative is as follows: 1. A break in negotiations with the Soviet Union. 2. 2. A continuation of the" negotiations, as if nothing had happened in Berlin. 3. A postponement of the negotiations until Russia offers an explanation of what happened in the German capital. In a conference with the Perlodists, the above-mentioned English spokesman declared that *'-> Her Majesty's Government regrets very much the" incident" in which police officers" in the Ru "o sector fired on the British zone," adding that this shooting, in which one German was killed and fourteen wounded, was "the consequence of a chain of events which began with the (Communist) demonstrations inside and outside the Berlin City Hall." Ruaos prosecute fifteen The exchange between the Russian" and the" Allied" with regard to Air Information occurred at the time" when the" Red" announced the arrest and imminent military prosecution of fifteen Germans, accused of "espionage" for the benefit of the United States and Great Britain, in the Soviet occupation zone. Charges of "espionage and other criminal activity" in the East German state of Turlngla have been brought against the detainees. A small mail train, consisting of eight cars, passed through the Russian blockade, penetrating into the British sector, but G B. Thompson, Railway Director of that sector, was arrested. Thompson, railway director of that zone, stated that this does not constitute any indication that the blockade will be lifted in bravo. The "newspapers" which are published under the Ruhr license in Berlin are calling for a "monstrous" demonstration to be held tomorrow, Sunday, as "an answer to the fascist mob" which tore a Russian flag from the Brandenburg Gate last night. The Russian-controlled "newspaper" accuses the British authorities and officials of the Berlin city government of having "deliberately stirred up provocations by attacking the police in the Soviet sector. New record In spite of the Russian air maneuver, the Anglo-American air force set a new record today. In the space of twenty-four hours, 714 planes were flown! (Continued on page 11
Further price cuts are predicted
additional reduction in the price of basic goods
Indications are that Pinero will only approve two amendments to the Electoral Law Indications are that he will not sign the bill creating the proposed Board of Appeals. - The decision came after an interview with the Popular Leader.
August downward trend continues Reduction trend ;e due to giant crops in Nation w CHICAGO. "September 10.(PU)-Various" price" item" allmen-, retail tyrians have been falling during the past month, "e a survey has shown, but wholesale 1a meat prices remained high rie again. A 10-city survey revealed that butter, veal and sheep's milk, led the current downward trend in consumer prices. The decline followed a decline in wholesale prices, which induced grocery store owners to buy more liberally in the hope of inducing price-conscious housewives to buy more. But the Agriculture Department said today that the increased buying by retailers caused retail prices to rise again. Sheepmeat prices in Jos markets rose more than four cents a pound, while pork gained three cents and veal and beef, two cents. 1-those gains in part eontu- - saw the current followed by the" price* "1 pnr higher, "as shown by Dun <4 Bradstreet's essential item* rie index, which deicended for four "consecutive weeks." In addition, the Labor Department said average wholesale prices fell last week, with "pronounced" declines in fresh meat, beef and poultry. The survey showed that retail prices "remained in line with last month. Butter was uniformly down about five cents per pound in 10 cities, while beef steak was down an average of 5.5 cents. Sheep cutlet* prices* averaged a reduction of 15 cents per pound. The survey showed no change in the* prices of sugar, coffee and flour, although the* wholesale price* of staples fell in the past month. On the other hand, a United Press dispatch from Chicago says that "are, in carhino" lower prices for food, । according to the opinion rie tre" > of the Nation's largest । agricultural organizations. This good news for । consumers was announced । jointly by the National Grange, Federation rie Farm Businesses and National Council of Agricultural Cooperatives, They said the drop "perada "perada in food rie costs "e produce it as a result of this afto's record-setting agricultural production. But they warned that in meat and other animal products, lower prices would not occur immediately, because it takes time to replace depleted beef herds. Their forecast came at the same time the Labor Department reported a decline in wholesale prices for the second consecutive year. The average wholesale prices for 900 staples fell 0.6 percent in the week ending last Saturday, mostly due to a decline in food prices of a few cents on the week. Prices of essential items, other than agricultural products, rose 0.1 percent. Wholesale prices still remained 8.1 percent higher than in August of last year, however, and the Department's wholesale food index remained at 167.4, using 1926 as the base year with the index figure of 100. Brent Spence, D-Kentucky, announced that he will propose an immediate "wage and price freeze" if the Democrats regain control of Congress in November. The three groups defended the Government's price support program, which Harold E. Staisen, as spokesman for the Republican Party, called an instrument of the Administration to keep prices high in an election. The program aimed at securing vast supplies," they said, "has prevented food prices from reaching the high levels they would have reached, as they have in many other countries. The support provided ensures that agricultural commodity prices will not fall to collapse levels, plunging the Nation's entire economy into a depression, as occurred in 1920-20, and in 1930-31." Cheaper meat" The Department of Labor reported a total decline of 1.1% in the (Continued on pg. 14)
Pnr J. Martinet Chapel EL MUNDO Staff Writer Governor Piftero has not yet decided whether he will approve the bills submitted to him by the Legislature at its last special session, amending the Election Law. It is expected that one of them will be vetoed by the government. There are three bills approved for that purpose by the legislative majority, with the vote against of the representatives of the minority parties. One of them determines that the polling stations shall be located in urban areas, and the Local Boards of Elections or the Island Board of Elections may authorize the establishment of polling stations in those rural neighborhoods where they were established in the 1944 general elections. Another of the projects mandates that the "Junta" Locale" de Elecclone* or the Junta Insular de Elecclone*. put to dl "cu*16n and resolve, any motion presented by any of its members, even if such motion has not been seconded. These do" projects" shall be signed by the governor Plfte.
ro, in the opinion of the portavoce* riel llrieratn Popular and La Fortaleza. Board of Electoral Appeals* The third bill, before the Governor's con "irieration, creates a Board of Electoral Appeals, composed of the Governor himself on the recommendation of the chairman* of all" the political parties, to resolve the" ties which arise in the electoral boards, at present the exclusive mission of the Governor. This project was strongly opposed by the legislators of the minority, on the grounds that the Board of Appeals would be "a parapet behind which the Governor would hide it to resolve in a partisan manner the appeals submitted to him, since the Governor, being the one who appoints the Board, would always have to count on the best in it". The "minority political parties" expressed their preference that the Governor himself, with the responsibility of the public position he occupies before the people of Puerto Rico, would be the one to judge him, and (Continued on page 14)
Leaders met with Judge Travieso Discussed common candidates of the opposition parties Former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and candidate for Governor of the Socialist, Statehood and Reformist parties, attorney Martín Travieso, yesterday censured the leaders of the current Government of Puerto Rico, whom he accused of supplanting democracy with a totalitarian regime and of having perverted the principles on which Puerto Rican society has traditionally rested. Travieso said that he had abandoned the high office of Chief Justice of the Supreme Court to accept the candidacy for the governorship, which was his civic obligation, in view of the rampage that prevails in the Government of Puerto Rico and the disaster that threatens all the people of the Island. Mr. Travieso spoke at noon yesterday, before an audience that filled the assembly hall of the Ateneo. Mr. Travieso's* words were received with great applause, by the members of numerous local committees of the Opposition parties, who were summoned to finalize the agreements on common candidacies of different municipalities." In addition to Mr. Travieso, the President of the Socialist Party, Senator Bolívar Pagán, the President of the Statehood Party, Mr. Celestino Iriarte, and the President of the Reformist Party, Mr. Santiago Iglesias Silva, spoke to the public. In the discussion of the agreements of the committees of the three Opposition parties, the maximum leaders of said parties intervened. In eata meeting, for *being of private character, "e did not allow the presence of lo* journalists. It was noted, however, that all the discussions were conducted in a cordial manner, with a spirit of cooperation and personal disinterest reigning at all times. I
The Creole Party will not be registered in the municipality of Aguas Buena", because an examination of the registration petitions made by the Executive Secretary, as reported yesterday, revealed that many of them, estimated at about 200, were defective and therefore null. The Cryo, lio Party speaks of 505 petitions submitted for Aguas Buenas. Meanwhile, the Executive Secretary is awaiting today an opinion from the Attorney General, aimed at " determining whether or not the candidacy of Mr. R, Fortuito Alvarez, for representative to the House for Caguas and Aguas Buenas, can be registered, since said candidate has been credited with a number of petitions for Caguas that covers the total required 1 for the representative district. Another issue " to be resolved later, according to what was said yesterday, is whether in case the candidacy of Mr. Fortufto Alvarez can be registered, the voters of Aguas Buenas could vote for her, since the Criollo Party will not be registered in said municipality. As soon as he found out about the situation, Mr. Fortufto Alvarez went to the offices of the Executive Secretary yesterday morning. He informed that he was requesting that the Attorney General resolve the legal issue involved as soon as possible, since the Creole Party only had until tomorrow, Sunday, to register the candidacy. He said that in case the opinion of the Attorney General was adverse to the Creole Party, said Party would immediately resort to the Court with a writ of mandamus, so that the candidacy be registered, considering that it had sufficient petitions from the municipality of Caguas. Revlun petitions The Executive Secretary, Mrs. Haydée F. San Miguel, personally examined yesterday morning; 1 the petitions of Ins- 1 crlpclón riel Partido Criollo en Ca- ! guns, and found that they could ac- 1 ditAmele, as valid, numerous ' I (Continued on page 14)
Imported 3,350 automobiles in the seven-month period.
During the first seven months* of the present year, 3,350 new passenger automobiles have been received on the island. Chevrolet was the firm that imported the most automobiles during this seven-month period, with a total of 387. In second place in imports were Plymouth automobiles, of which 353 arrived, and in third place were Ford automobiles, with 348. Detail* by make* The" automobiles received in the above-mentioned period are
The following are detailed below by make and quantity: Chevrolet, 387; Plymouth, 353; Ford, 346; De Soto, 259; Dodge, 298; Hudson, 245; Buick, 242; Pontiac, 219; Mercury, 142; Oldsmobile, 204; Oldsmobile, 204. 142; Oldsmobile, 204; Chrysler, 188; 139; Studebaker, 115: Lincoln, 81; Nash, 62; Cadillac, $4; Crosley, 8 and Kaiser, 8. The above figures show an increase of 868 more cars in the present affto, than in the previous affto. In the first seven months of last fiscal year, a total of 2,482 automobiles were imported to the Island (Continued on page 14).