THE MBNDO
- - - - - V WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: Cloudy with scattered light showers* during the morning. Partly cloudy in the afternoon.
40 pages 5/
MORNING JOURNAL ,
YEAR XXIX
Entered te second cíese matter. Poet Office, San guan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY MARCH 27, 1948
NUMBER 11256
■ Forrestal urges a law for the conscription of -young men from 19 to 25 years of age.
* J - Asked Congress for immediate action - Assured that Russia could not now manufacture atomic bombs By RAYMOND LAHR WASHINGTON, March 28 (PU)- - Defense Secretary James Forrestal asked Congress for a conscription law for young men aged 13 to 25, and an extra $3,000,000,000 for the armed forces. to convince Russia- before it is too late- that the United States will fight to deter aggression. Surrounded by the largest array of military leaders assembled before Congress since World War II, Forrestal presented his "cold war" program to the Senate Armed Services Committee, with an urgent appeal for immediate action, He asked that the military budget for fiscal 1949 of $11,025,000,000.. 000,000,000. suggested by President Truman just two months ago, be increased to $14,000,000,000,000 to cover the cost of increasing the size and combat strength of the Army, Navy and Air Force. His program to expand the nation's combat strength by 349,500 men, including officers and soldiers, would provide for 3,000 new combat airplanes during the next 12 months, beginning July 1, and an additional $4 million for research and development of new military weapons. Military instruction Forrestal reiterated the Administration's plea for mandatory military instruction. But that compulsory military instruction is a long-term measure, which alone cannot meet the present emergency. If the conscription law is passed, he said, the armed services will ■ propose to recruit an estimated 220,000 men who are not veterans. but d*l group between the ages of 19 c 25 arto. during the 12 months beginning the first tie plus 500,000 volunteers to fill the gaps left by the liconciamlen. tos and retirement*. He bluntly assured the senators - the first statement of this nature to come from a high-ranking government official - that Russia lacks the knowledge and capability to manufacture atomic weapons at the present time. He warned, however, that the atomic bomb alone would not decide the course of the war, if it were to break out. But the fact of possessing it would undoubtedly have the power to deter "any nation which has the intention of aggression, believing that we have sufficient military power to make effective use of that soul," he said. - Forrestal's account of the world crisis and the steps proposed to deal with it was couched in the most extreme language yet employed by an Administration official in public. He drew a "deadly parallel" between the aggressions perpetrated by Soviet Premier Joseph Stalin - since World War II. And he reminded the senators in the most tenebrous terms that the last war could have been avoided . if Nazi Germany had been shown in time that the United States would fight. "It is clear to me that if we state . 0 plainly and clearly that the United States will not tolerate the destruction of Western civilization in Europe, we shall have peace."- said Forrestal. "Faz. because it will be the first time in history that an aggressor has been warned of our determination to back it up with our might." "It is equally clear to me," he added grimly, "that if we do not do so, we will run the risk of another war, under circumstances which could be disastrous for us and our friends in other parts of the world." Truman to send program On the other hand, President Truman stated at his Press conference that he expects to send formally, au national defense program to Congress at any moment. Secretary of the Army. Kenneth C. Royall said that the armed services will soon send a draft of the draft. He noted that only conscripts would be required to "serve for not less than - - two years." He did not specify whether to ask for the registration of all men from 18 to 45 years, as previously reported. Forrestal repeatedly warned the Committee that the aegu- ♦ - - rldad program is not aimed at realizing a geatof first intention in an effort to provoke a war with * Russia. But. he said, "it seems clarq that the Soviet Union so far qule. re not realizing what I en- . tend by determination of the United States." "We want now to state that determination quite clearly. The Government" (Continued on page 16).
* Muñoz does not want to be considered for the governorship of the island, he told a New York Times correspondent. - Reveals the acquisition of the newspaper El Universal, of which he will act as Director.
Journalist Lee E, Cooper, in a special report sent from San Juan, dated March 24, to the New York Times, and published in the March 25 edition of the same mea, says that "the inhabitants of the congested Island of Puerto Rico are cheerful and satisfied, as they prepare to go to the polls next autumn, to elect their own Governor for the first time." "Perhaps," says Cooper in the Times, "never in history has a Puerto Rican election aroused so much Interest. Speculation as to the possible candidate for the new head of Government is the main topic among the men of the people from San Juan to Ponce, as well as among the jibaros of the sugar cane fields of Fajardo and Aguirre.
'r
LUIS MUÑOZ MARIN
Caucus approved bill (foot raises salaries of department heads)
Benefits all those whose salaries are fixed by the Charter - Includes Supreme Court justices. 84,000 increase to be made.
The congressional majority caucus held Wednesday night agreed to approve with amendments F.C. 949. Rep. Benjamin Ortiz (by petition, "to authorize reimbursement, up to the annual amount of $4,000 for expenses incurred by the heads of the Executive Departments and the] Au
Executive Departments and the] Au-i dithr of Puerto Rico, in the performance of the official duties of their offices". The purpose of this bill is to increase the salary fixed in the Organic Charter for these officers by $4,000, or so that the heads of departments who currently receive a salary of $6,000 would receive a salary of $10,000 per year. The amendment to the bill in the caucus, which was the subject of extensive discussion, extends the benefits of the law to all officers whose salaries are fixed in the Charter. This means that the salaries of the associate justices of the Supreme Court, who currently earn $10,000 per year, would be increased to $14,000; and the salary of the Chief Justice, which is currently $10,500 per year, would be increased to $14,500 per year. The Chairman of the Public Service Commission, whose salary was set at $5,000 per year by the Charter, would receive a salary of $9,000 per year. The Senate held a short session yesterday afternoon, recessing after a half hour of deliberations, until 4:00 o'clock Monday afternoon. Upon being brought up for discussion cl. P. S. 2 to which the House introduced (Continued on page 16 )
House approved bill of women in the Jury Bill does not determine number of those who will be part of the panel On Thursday was approved by the House of Representatives bill number 23. The bill does not determine *1 number <lc women who may be part rie urt panel, but empowers to select women on equal terms with male jurors. Another bill passed by the House on third reading was P, C. 370, which amends subsection (n) of the Transportation Authority Act to read as follows: (n> To borrow money, make and issue bonds rie the Autoririari for any rie of its corporate purposes, and to guarantee the payment rie its hay and rie any and all rie of its other obligations (Continued on page 16).
Compendium of News
Muñoz does not wish to be considered for the Governorship of the lain. declared to the New York Time". Reveals purchase of El' Universal, of which he was Director. - Forrestal urges Congress to take immediate action for the recruitment of young people from 19 to 25 years of age. - X * * * The Island would get $4,000,000.000 if a bill on improvements to educational facilities is passed in Congress. * * * . - Congress approved a bill extending rent control for another term. * * * * FBI rectifies figures given by Coll Cuchi before House committee. * * * w Truman denied U.S. opposition to partition of Holy Land. ♦ * * Ortix Toro and Blanco Lugo allege Legislature did not improperly delegate powers by empowering the Supreme Court to write rules of criminal prosecution. ♦ * ♦ Island government prepares to request a $200 million loan from the CRF. to promote Puerto Rico's economy. se* House Committee* of the United* States* held a meeting* regarding the payment of bonuses to three island power plants. * * * They* consider introducing bill to give aid to antlcommunist* groups* in Russian* satellite*. ♦. ♦ * * Italian* want British* and American* troops* to remain in Trieste, even if Russia acc*-.
gives that it should pass into Italian possession. - * * Lo* Russians willing" to resume sessions of the Allied Control Council of Germany. * * * * Police corporal graduated from the FBI National Academy.  5 * * * ♦ The tahonero* oppose the reduction in the price of bread. ♦ * * * Caucus approved the bill that increases the salaries* fixed* by the Charter. * * * The House of Re p reten tan te* approved the bill that gives participation to women in the Jury. * * * . The U.S. State Department has taken action* to protect the life of ex-king Michael of Romania. * * * Marshall declares that United Eatadna* will not withdraw from Germany. Fighting in the Holy Land made it difficult to hold lo* rellghmo* act* of the day. Roosevelt's son* would endorse a campaign for El "enhower for the Presidency. - Marthall declares that the United* States* will not leave *their zone in Germany. - Tito makes Yugoslav friendship with Italy conditional. * About 15,000 people participated in the Via Crude "Beto".
New control of vehicles to be established
With the purpose of establishing a more rigid control over the vehicles of the Insular Government assigned to the new Office of Transportation, which is directed by Mr. Agustín Mercado Reverón, and that by dispositions of the current regulations render services permanently in various Government agencies, a new monthly report form will be implemented on the use of each vehicle, starting on April 1st of next year. This system is due to the fact that the new office did not have the means to supervise the use of these vehicles, since they are under the direct responsibility of several heads of government departments and institutions. These vehicles are not returned daily to the central garages of the Transportation Office because the nature of the services, it was explained, requires that they remain in the garages of the agencies and departments to which they have been permanently assigned. As of April 1, the head of the department or his authorized representative must render a detailed monthly report, specifying, row by row, the speedometer reading of the car, truck or bus, both at the beginning and at the end of each row. The total traveled per day, or] fuel used in gallons of gasoline and oil, as well as the value of fuel and lubrication costs, should also be detailed. With these data in hand, the Inspectors of the Bureau of Transportation hope to ascertain whether the vehicle has been spending more than it should for the services it provides, or whether the vehicle's daily mileage is inconsistent with the nature of the services for which it is being used. Both the driver of the vehicle and the Head of Department must sign the corresponding monthly report. Section 13 of the regulations of the Office of Transportation, specifically excludes from the general provisions of the same, a number of department heads, who will now have to comply with the new rule on the monthly report. Said action states the following: "The provisions of these Regulations, as to the use of vehicles, shall not apply to the automobiles assigned to the Governor of Puerto Rico, the automobile assigned for use by the Attorney General, the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, the Commissioner of Instruction, the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, the Commissioner of Health, the Commissioner of the Interior, the Commissioner of Labor, and the Chief of the Insular Police. These officers shall, however, render a monthly report to the Chief of Transportation of the mileage traveled and fuel consumed". Section 14 further provides that in addition to said vehicles, it may assign, with the approval of the Governor, "motor vehicles to Departments and officers for constant official use, when the nature of the service so requires, subject to such conditions and requirements as may be imposed by the Chief of Transportation. The Heads of the Government's hospital institutions that are assigned to a particular department shall also be obliged to render the corresponding monthly report. Government that have assigned for constant use trucks, ambulances and delivery buses; the chief of the Insular Fire Service, who is in charge of all the rolling equipment of San Juan and the Island; and the colonel of the Insular Police, who also has for constant use a number of jeeps, cars, motorcycles, buses and trucks. ,
Island Government prepares to borrow 200 million from CRF to boost economy
Measure equalizes the right of children They hope to motivate debates. By JUAN "MARTINEZ CHAPEL Editor of EL MUNDO One of the bills presented# in the Legislative Assembly. This bill tends to equate the rights of children born out of wedlock with those of children born in wedlock, without giving importance to the circumstances that existed between the parents at the time of the birth of the child out of wedlock. The entire bill is limited to amending Article 125 of the Civil Code of Puerto Rico, which defines "natural children" and the circumstances under which they may be recognized. According to Article 125 of the Civil Code, which has been in effect since 1911: "Natural children are those born out of wedlock to a parent" who, at the time of conception, "could have married, with or without a dispensation. The bill declares as natural children those born out of wedlock, eliminating* the condition that the parents, at the time of I" conception of that", had been able to marry or not. Proposed" change* According to the governing law: "The natural child may be "recognized by the father or the mother jointly, or by only one of them", in the birth certificate, or in another public document". According to the bill, "the natural child may be recognized by -! pariré or mother jointly, or by one rie them alone, in e] "Ha ri* marriage, in affidavit, in public document, or by any act of admission rie paternity or maternity, as the case may be." "In case rie death rie father or rie Ja mother. 1"" persons entitled to their inheritance may acknowledge the natural child of the father or mother, born before or after the effective date of this Law, by voluntary action, for all" legal purposes. Said recognition shall be valid in any form in which paternity is admitted, accredited or recognized, as the case may be". According to the current law, the father is obliged to acknowledge "1 natural child: "1-When there is an undoubted writing in which he expressly acknowledges his paternity." This condition is not altered in the draft. 2-"When the child is in continuous possession of the status of natural child of the defendant father, justified by act# of the father himself or of his family". This condition is not changed in the draft. 3 - "When the woman was known living in concubinage with the father during pregnancy or at the time of the birth of the child". The project adds this other condition: "Or when the child was born while the parents were having amorous or sexual relations". 4-"When the child presents any authentic proof of his paternity." The bill eliminates the word "paternity" (Continued on page 16).
Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, and "orne-1 ty to the Legislature, to teatlflcar in favor ri* that said" Rule" be approved. Jos rúalo". according to him", will represent a great advance in o] criminal procedure in, Puerto Rico. However, only Mr. Blanco Lugo testified, since the Joint Committee agreed to postpone the hearings for the near future, so that some of the persons who were part of the committee appointed by the Supreme Court to draft the Rule could appear at the hearings. These persons were Francisco Ponsa Fdiú, Philip Herrick, Reñido Sánchez, Francisco Ponsa Fdiú. Philip Herrick, Reñido Sánchez Castaño. Jorge Luis Córriova Díaz, Santo" P. Amadeo'y Luí" Negrón Fernández. At the beginning of the hearing on Thursday night, Mr. Lula A. Negrón López, who chairs the Joint Committee, announced that he had received several letters from different attorneys who helped draft the Rules, letting him know that they wished to appear to testify at the public hearing, for which they requested their respective turns. Next, Mr. Negrón López added that *1 Committee had thought it convenient to "keep" the presence of "one" person so that they could explain the changes introduced by the Rules and the basis that inspired them, so that afterwards the different issues surrounding these presentations could be discussed. Mr. Orllz Toro then intervened to say that the Rules are "substantially good, being of the opinion that they should be approved. Senator Rollsar Fegán intervened to say that, according to the words of Mr. Orllz Toro, he understood that the latter had meant that *1 Committee and the Legislature should approve the Rules as drafted, and that the Legislature should permanently delegate to the Supreme Court its power to legislate in matters of criminal procedure. Ortlz Toro replied that the Legislature would not be permanently delegating its power rio leglilar because it always "*reserves the porier ri* to repeal the." Rules or amend them at any time. Senator Bolivar Fagan spoke again to argue that this was so, but that until the Legislature passed such a law on 1 (Continued on page 7).
Governor Piñero is of the opinion <iu* "this is not the opportune moment, to make representation before Congress, for the organization of the Department of Commerce". In a communication addressed to the President of the Federation of Commerce, the Governor expresses through his executive assistant, Mr. J. Font Saldarte, that "for the moment it seems to us that the facilities of the Department of Industrial Development and the Department of Agriculture and Commerce should be used in connection with the problems of commerce and industry in Puerto Rico". However, the Federation of Commerce has informed the Governor, in a communication from its Acting President, Mr. Santiago Jimenez Solii, that it does not agree with the Governor's proposal.
Irene Curie visits Einstein
I' o i .1h ® i^í : ' e ■ - .
Mrs. Irene Jollot-Ciirlc, PNpeclallzHda in 1n nuclear physics, and Albert Einstein converse on the back porch of Einstein's residence in Princeton, Nuesa Jersey, on the occasion of Mrs. Curie's visit to the famous man of reins the past week. Mrs. Curie's stay in the United States" is embroiled in controversy after an effort was made to prevent her from entering the country. (P. A.)
Ortiz Toro and Blanco Lugo make statement to the Legal Committee
They affirmed there was no undue delegation of powers by the Legislature in empowering the Supreme Court to enact the rules of criminal procedure.
For Angel CRUZ CRUZ EL MUNDO Staff Writer
Arturo Ortiz Toro and Luis Illanco Lugo appeared Monday night before the Joint Committee of the Legislature, which is holding a public hearing on the new Rules of Criminal Procedure promulgated by the Supreme Court.
Island would get $4,000,000,000 if bill passes Provides $300,000,000,000 annual appropriation for educational improvements WASHINGTON, March 26 --(Special to Teletype) -- The Senate began *1 Wednesday its debate on a bill providing for the appropriation of $300,000,000,000 annually for the states and territory to increase and improve educational facilities. In its present form, the bill provides for the allocation of between $5 and $25 for children between the ages of 5 and 17 in each state. The allocation for Puerto Rico, based on population and need, has been estimated at approximately $4,000,000 annually. The bill, S. 472, has bipartisan support. A similar House bill, C.R. 2953, has been favorably considered by the House Education and Labor Committee. The measure, currently being discussed in the Senate, would allocate 2 percent annually, or the full $300,000,000.000, to Jos territories and possessions. Senator Robert A. Tnft, Republican of Ohio, who has led the battle against federal aid to education, urged this time with the same energy that the bill be passed to raise the level of education in the country. Taft spoke at the Senate debate, saying that the new bill has a safeguard that the previous legislation did not have. He added that it would not allow the Federal Government to interfere with the autonomy of the states in the operation of school systems. As the debate began, the Senate seemed to be engaged in a polka-pole over an old constitutional question - the separation of the state and the church. Senate sources said that amendments would be offered to 1 (Continued on page 16)
Commerce brought in 60% of Treasury revenues during 1946-47.
part of this criterion. Le expresses that commerce "has very well earned its place in the Executive Council of Puerto Rico," and that a study conducted reveals that it contributed "more than 60 percent of the. 60 percent of the "Income# received# by the public treasury during the tax year 1946-1947, or $41,460,644.46 of a total collected of $60,438,127.93. The communication from "eftor Font Saldarte, on behalf of Governor Plfiero. addressed to the President of the Federation of Commerce, states the following: "Your letter of February 26th addressed to Governor Je#ús T. Plfiero. suggesting that the Governor suggest to him that the taxable year 1946-1947 be extended to include the taxable year 1946-1947. Plfiero. suggesting that he "e petition the United States Congress" to amend our - (Continued on page 16).
Agency expects the plan to be submitted to it.
Paul HARRISON WASHINGTON, March 26 (PU)- Government officials in this city cautiously welcomed reports received today that the Island Government is prepared to apply for a loan of $200,000,009 from the Island Corporation for the purpose of raising the sum of $1,000,000,009,000,009 from 1" Financial Reconstruction Corporation, for *1 purpose of boosting its economy. It is clear that the program will have to be considered in light of the implications of the foreign situation: plan# pa" ra invest $17,000,000,000,000 in *! rio European recovery program, to invest many" million# ri* dollars in the programs" rie economic and military aid to Greece. Tur* qula and China, and for additional National Defense expenditures, which will amount, according to estimates, to $10,000,000,000,000 in the next fiscal year. The Island Government's intention to seek assistance from the Financial Reconstruction Corporation to accelerate its industrialization program is by no means unexpected. Officials in this capital, however, said they could not discuss whether or not such a program would be approved. They pointed out that they had not yet seen in detail the plans of the island government, and that no "as yet" has been made as to their feasibility. Dispatches received from San Juan indicate that Teodoro Moscoso, president and general manager of the Puerto Rico Industrial Development Company, has presented the Island Government with plans for an ambitious economic and public improvement program, to be financed with a loan of $000,000,000 from the Financial Reconstruction Corporation. Davts, director of the Interior Department's Territories Division, told the United Press that he could not comment" on Puerto Rico's decision to request a $200,000,000 loan. He said the Department has not yet received details of the plan. He indicated. "He indicated, however, that the Department will encourage any industry expansion program in 1" as long as it is based on sound business principles" and is feasible from a financial and raw material standpoint. Dnvl# is a strong advocate of island industrialization, especially in the textile field. However, he told Prensa Unida. recent" events" have highlighted the possibility ri* that it will be very difficult to inaugurate new economic programs" on the island. "We are studying the implications of the increasingly critical foreign situation," Davi said, adding that "there is no clear picture yet". Morton Macartney, director ri* lending" of the Financial Reconstruction Corporation, told the United Press that his office also does not have details" of the Puerto Rico government's industrial expansion and public improvement plans. "We have talked informally with the advisers of the Government of Puerto Rico," Macartney said, "but no pacific sum has been suggested. We have been waiting for a delegation from the island to discuss the matter in detail. Macartney stressed the fact that there are other considerations to be taken, in addition to the changes that may take place in the international situation. First, he said, there is the problem of whether the authority of the Financial Reconstruction Corporation to extend loans will be extended. Second, he added, assuming the Corporation continues to have authority to extend loans, there is the possibility that limitations will be imposed on the amount of loans. Third, the type of loan requested by the Government of Puerto Rico, said MacartneyrActually, loans from the Corporation to any public agency are limited to $125,000.00. However, it is possible that projects involving loans to private companies may fall within the agency's general loan extension guidelines," Macartney said. Davi# stated that aside from the issue of the new economic and public jobs programs, there are other possible effects on Puerto Rico and the nation, most of which are inherent to the administration's recent foreign policy statements. Military aid to foreign "palse" and an increase in "spending" to meet the "need" (Continued on page 16).
Fernos introduces bill for unemployment and old-age assistance
By JAMES F. CUNNINGHAM WASHINGTON, March 26. (PU) £ Resident Commissioner Dr. A. Fernós Isérn today introduced a bill aimed at providing Puerto Ricans with federal unemployment compensation and old age and dependency insurance. The new bill would complete Fernós' pending bill introduced in the last session of Congress, which is awaiting action by the Ways and Means Committee. The proposal was to extend to Puerto Rico, old age assistance (not insurance); aid to dependent children; and aid to the blind. If enacted into law, both bills would have the effect of giving Puerto Rico complete equality in comparison with the mainland in the protection of social legislation. Puerto Rico is already entitled to the benefits in the sections of the law relating to public health and welfare. Observers here are aware of the difficulties encountered in trying to pass such legislation in Congress. Fernós first bill has been stalled in the Ways and Means Committee since July. That bill did not include as much money or as much gent as the current one.
i This" sources nevertheless consi- / gilded the delayed action as . "due in part to pressure rie - more urgent national legislation and ■ in part to Indifference." They ' believe that Insistence rie the sos- ' holders of soeial legislation. can penetrate even committee ■ meetings. It has been estimated that more than 200,000 Puerto Ricans would benefit from the extension of old-age and dependency insurance to the island as proposed in the bill. This provision of the Social Security Law would provide a minimum of $10 per month to employed persons 65 years of age or older, plus $10 for each dependent child. The cost of the program to the Island is insignificant. The#employee# and employer# covered# by this Act, however, would be taxed at 1 percent of the employee's salary up to a total not to exceed $30 per employee per year. It has been assured that in the beginning, the program would bring more money into the ' Insular treasury than would be taken from the employees and employers. This, it is ' said, is explained by the fact that ' the ' tax rates' on the Island are lower than on the Mainland and the ' tax rate' on this account would be lower, but the benefits of the program would not be as high as on the Island, and the ' tax rate' would be lower than on the Mainland.