THE DAILY N@NDO MARAÑA
I Meditated Your Vote; The Government To Be Elected Cannot Be Changed Until 1952
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy to occasionally cloudy with occasional showers, day and night. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M; low, 76. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.86 inches of mercury.
44 Pages 5/
YEAR XXK
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 30, 1948
NUMBER 13473
Government Acquired Guánica Lands for $4,537,208.33
90% of Sum Goes to Non-Residents Pinero and Muñoz Marín Were Witnesses During Signing of Deed The People of Puerto Rico acquired yesterday the lands of the Quánlca plant at a price of $4,537,208.33. At 10:30 a.m., the ceremony for the signing of the pertinent documents, legalizing the transfer of said lands to the Island Government, through its Land Authority, took place at the Library Room of the Land Authority. Shortly after 10:30 a.m., Mr. José Acosta Velarde, for the Land Authority, and Mr. Llover Godwin, for Central Guanica, began the signing of the 65 pages of the deed. Half an hour later, the two gentlemen finished signing the two copies of the document, which makes the Land Authority the owner of 20,000 cuerdas d.f tie- - rra, extending from Güín'ca to San Germán and Cabo Rojo. PIAero and Muñoz testify Immediately after Messrs. Acosta Velarde and Hover Godwin finished signing the document, they proceeded to testify the same by means of the signature of the witnesses of both parties. Governor Piftero was the first witness to sign, followed by the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín; the Judges of the Supreme Court, Mr. Angel R. de Jesús and Mr. Borlnquen Marrero; Mr. Francisco A. Arrlllaga, legal advisor of the Land Authority; and Mr. Jorge Font Saldaña. Other attendees In addition to numerous employees of the Land Authority, present at the signing ceremony were the Commissioner of Labor, Mr. Fe. 1 ' nando Sierra Bcrdecla; Mr. Enrique Campos del Toro, former Attorney General; and the members of the Board of Directors of the Land Authority, Mr. LTpiano Colom, Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, Dr. Pablo Morales Otero, Mr. Francisco A. Arrlllaga, and the Secretary of the Board, Mr. Rafael M. Camacho. According to information provided by sources related to the transaction, 90% of the money paid will go to Ruscll & Co. shareholders who do not reside in Puerto Rico, and 10% will go to residents of Puerto Rico. . Chinese in Ftifia From Manchuria - Government - Sends Ships For New Dunkirk Tor GERALD NOZ1CK PEIPING, Oct. 29. (PU) - , Reports from the battle front inform that the Manchu Army of Generalissimo Chiang Kal-shek is in full retreat from the Communist troops, who have pushed it into a "Dunkirk" in the port of Ylngkow, on the Yellow Sea. Nationalist forces have begun evacuating the town of Mukden, for a retreat along a narrow corridor of one hundred miles in the direction of Ylngkow. Responsible circuits say the Government has dispatched transports quickly to the port to rescue the troops across the Yellow Sea. Chinese officials and foreign diplomats who have arrived by air, in large numbers, at this Government stronghold in North China report that General Wei LI Huang apparently has no intention of leaving defenders for a rearguard action or of holding out to the last man at Mukden. But five Nationalist divisions have been thrown into the battle, to hold open the escape corridor against attacks by superior Communist forces along a 130-mile front. Ultimatum Against Mukden It is reported that the communists have already mobilized advance units in an effort to encircle Ylngkow. These units are moving against Chinsl, about 80 miles from Ylngkow, across the Gulf of -Liaotung. Communist General Lln Piso has -sent an ultimatum to Mukden, threatening "annihilation" of government defenders who have not left the city by November 15. Mukden's call would give the Communists a clean conquest with the campaign that began on the day of the victory over Japan with the occupation of strategic areas in Manchuria. From these bases, the Communists spread throughout the vast region.
The engraving shows an aspect of the signing of the deed concerning the acquisition of the lands of the Guanica power plant by the Insular Government, in a ceremony held yesterday in the Library of the Land Authority. The photo shows the moment in which the Governor signed the document. Sen-
President Strolled on Foot in New York On Downtown Tour, Greeted Pedestrians NEW YORK, Oct. 29-(P Vh- This morning President Truman took a stroll through downtown Manhattan. It was a beautiful morning, and the President was giving a half-hour tour of the downtown streets. Many of the early risers were surprised to see Mr. Truman walking the streets." Many greeted him, and some spread the news to other pedestrians, "There goes Harry!" The President "left the Bilimore Hotel shortly after seven o'clock in the morning. He was followed by his Secret Service bodyguards and a police car. The President wore a dark blue suit and a gray hat. He began his walk on Madison Avenue, stopped for a photographer at 46th Street and walked up to 51st Street, turning onto Fifth Avenue by St. Patrick's Cathedral, where he stopped for the first time to greet passing pedestrians. The President then descended by (Continued on page 16)
The Government acquired the lands of the Guánica plant at a cost of 64,537,208. - - - PIAero granted noon on Monday to island employees: there will be no classes on Monday and Tuesday; the University will open on Thursday. - - - 1st FAA reports it will not reduce its air transportation service with Puerto Rico. - ♦ - Political parties will continue campaigning until moments before voting begins next Tuesday, - - - - Congressional investigation on island communications ended. - - - Caro said he did not obey the Governor's orders on the rental of the buses. - ♦ Several Republican congressmen endorse statehood for the island. " - - - There is a tentative agreement which will permit the recording of dlacoe in the United States, - " " " Great Britain will exercise control of Im steel mills. Tobey will ask for investigation of trust funds. - Gun licenses suspended; trade to be closed from Monday noon to Wednesday noon. I
■millr i wr* V A * I * I "MbH ■ ' ■ ■ ■ r" "*"** UK il w i H r>W AjbiI; yf X hJMf4 a rtwMIVO J JB MBmBbI
ff the left are Lula Muñoz Marín, President of the Senate and of the Popular Democratic Party; and Mr. Ulpiano Colom, Acting Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rican Railroad Authority. Enter loa who are observing,
standing, on the extreme left, are Mr. Jorge Font. Saldaña. Administrative Assistant to the Governor; Mr. José Acosta Velarde, (center), Director of the Land Authority; and Mr. Hover Godwin, representing the Guánica plant. (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Courts Cancel for 3 Days Licenses to Carry Weapons Attorney General Instructs for Closing of Commerce from Monday at Noon to Wednesday at the Same Time - Police to Monitor Liquor Traffic The Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Ircncindo Luis Nrgrón Fernández, communicated yesterday with all the judges and prosecutors of the Island, to remind them that the Electoral Law precludes the carrying of weapons inside the polling stations?* or in the rows in front of them.
Since the Governor is not empowered to cancel the licenses that authorize the carrying of weapons, all the district courts of Puerto Rico had already done so yesterday afternoon, by means of the corresponding resolution. This was reported to EL MUNDO by the Administrator of the Courts, Mr. Anqcl M. Umpierre, who communicated yesterday with all the courts, to insinuate that they would take said action, in conformity with the recommendation made by Governor Piftero. Cannot Carry Arms The communication on the carrying of arms, within the ele-jtoralcN schools or in the ranks in front of them, reads as follows: "Next Tuesday, November 2, General Elections will be held in this Island. It is the purpose of the Government that such elections shall be peaceful and fair. Therefore, it is your duty to see to the maintenance of public order, so that said purpose may be fulfilled. "One of the most effective means of (Continued on page 16)
News Digest
The Island Board of Elections unanimously approved a resolution presented by Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones, regarding the adjudication of the vote on the ballot of a voter who marks a cross in the columns of the three allied parties. The resolution, which was approved yesterday by the Governor, is as follows: That the following additional rules shall be observed in the scrutiny to be practiced by the College Boards and by the Insular Board of Elections: For Three Parties" 1- When on a ballot a voter places a cross or mark in the columns of the Puerto Rican Statehood, Socialist and Puerto Rican Reform parties, and in said three columns the candidates are the same, three votes shall not be counted for each candidate, but rather one vote shall be counted for each candidate. Regarding the first ballot as follows (Continued on page 16)
Plans announced a public hearing for November 9 on the zoning map, * - * Fernandez Marina says four alleged madmen are sane and can be put on trial. . " Kxambassador Bulllt will study the civil war situation in China. - " - The Democratic Party has a deficit of 647,981.00 in its political campaign. - United States withdraws endorsement of resolution imposing penalties on Israel. - Hoffman believes French miners' strike is the last communist resistance. - The Insular Board of Elections resolved on the votes cast in favor of one or more Opposition parties. - Greece is under martial law. Auditor said no frauds have been committed against the Treasury. - Stalln's last speech was repudiated by the demoeracies. - The leaders of non-communist militias will ask their followers to return to work.
Congressional Inquiry Ended Yesterday
Bow To Report To Harness Last Night He Was To Present Final Status Of WIPR Station To Muñoz By Luí* Sánchez Cappa EL MUNDO Staff Writer Yesterday concluded the preliminary investigation of all aspects of communications in Puerto Rico by the committee of Congressional Investigators, composed of Thomas F. Simpson, Frank T. Bow and Oscar L. Hume. At a press conference held yesterday, Mr. Row, chairman of the group, announced the completion of the inquiry, revealing the aspects it covered and the position of the groups interviewed. An interview with Senate President Luís Muñoz Marín was scheduled to be held last night by the committee. Earlier, Messrs. Row. Hume and Simpson, spoke with Mr. Martin Travieso, gubernatorial candidate for the opposition parties, and Mr. Luís Ferré, candidate for Resident Commissioner for the three political parties. Dr. Francisco Susonl, candidate for Governor for the Independent Party, was also given the opportunity to appear before the committee, but this was not possible. Conference with Muñoz The conference announced by Mr. Row to be held with Mr. Muñoz Marin last night, was to refer to the final status of the license issued to the Insular Government to operate a radio station, according to what was reported to this newspaper. Nothing on the matter was disclosed by Mr. Row. To reporters," Mr. Bow began by saying that the Preliminary Inquiry had been concluded, and that the group intended to leave for Wáshlngton at 6:30 a.m. today. He indicated that the committee would report on the outcome of the Inquiry within the next week to the Congressional Harness Committee, which has jurisdiction over communications. The report will contain specific recommendations, and based on these, the Harness Committee will decide whether or not to hold public hearings on communications in Puerto Rico. Antagonistic* Group* Mr. Bow stated that as part of Ja Investigación" several groups of people have testified before the committee members. One of these groups stated that they were opposed to the Island Government operating the WIPR radio station on a commercial basis, alleging that it was "unfair competition. for private stations." Another group expressed disapproval and dissatisfaction with the radio stations' broadcasts, and a third group, composed of representatives of the armed forces, informed the committee of plans for the establishment of low-power radio stations for purely military purposes. They investigated the FCC Mr. Bow revealed that following complaints made by the San Juan office of the Federal Communications Commission, the committee extended its investigative work to that office. He said that several local radio stations have complained against the Commission's office. He said, however, that "we found that the staff of the Commission's office is doing very well, under the circumstances." political line The people who expressed their '...continued on page 16)
Auditor Says No Fraud Has Been Committed Against the Public Treasury
The Auditor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Rafael de J. Cordero, informed yesterday that he has no knowledge of frauds against the Treasury or violations to the law committed in the last few days. Mr. Cordero said that inspectors of his Department are routinely investigating different institutions of the island and municipal governments. Currently under investigation are: the Isabela Irrigation Service; the municipalities of Rio Piedras, Barcelbaeta and Barranquitas; the municipal courts of Arecibo, Lares, Salinas, Manati and Toa Alta; the Internal Revenue offices of Santa Isabel, Sabana Grande, Vieques and Culebra; the District Court of Guayama, and the School Lunchroom Division. In the past week, investigations were completed in the municipalities of Guaynabo, Santa Isabel, Salina, Rincon, Pefluala*; the municipal courts of Aguadilla, Camuy, Salinas and the second section of Ponce; the Tropical Medicine Hospital and the Tropical Medicine Association.
dicing Hospital and the Government Employees Association. Complaints are Investigated "In some cases," said the Auditor, "investigations are made due to complaints filed against officials who handle public funds, but the Audit Office is constantly investigating, without any accusation or suspicion of violations of the law. "In cases where any legal infraction is found," added the Auditor, "the investigation file is transmitted to the Attorney General, pointing out the deficiencies found; and the Attorney General is the official who proceeds against the delinquent official if he thinks it justified." "The fact that a municipality or any other Government institution is investigated, does not mean that there is or is suspected of Irregularities" - concluded Mr. Cordero.
Political Parties Will Continue Campaigning Until the Elections
The united parties of the Opposition, as well as the Popular Party and the Independent Party will have to continue their organizational and propaganda activities until a few hours before the beginning of the elections on November 2. In the offices of the different parties yesterday they were working feverishly in the attention of the political commissions of the Island and in the answering and sending of communications to the local committees. All the parties continued yesterday to transmit instructions on the duties of the school officials, who are being instructed on all the
all the towns are being instructed on how to conduct their work on election day. The Popular Party, the Opposition parties and the Independent Party are planning to hold large events between today and tomorrow in the cities of San Juan, Mayagüez and Ponce. Other less important events will continue to be held in the different municipalities of the island. Opposition United Parties Refused to End (Continued on page 16).
PAA Reports No Reduction in Service
Flight To Trinidad Will Not Affect Island They Only Want To Eliminate Intermediate Points On Flights To Brazil By PAÚTThÁRRISON WASHINGTON, Oct. 29 (PU) - A spokesman for Pan American Airways told Prensa Unida today that the airline does not intend to reduce its service to San Juan. The spokesman said that rumors have been circulating to the effect that a planned nonstop flight between New York and Trinidad would take effect at the expense of Pan American's service to Puerto Rico. Spokesman. Michael J. Flynn, the company's public relations officer, stated that this report appears to be the result of a mistake in connection with a Pan American route case that has been pending for more than a year before the Civil Aeronautics Board. Flynn indicated that this case involves the consolidation and expansion of several Pan American routes between the continental United States and points in South America and the Caribbean. The only route in which San Juan is involved, according to the spokesman, is the route between New York and intermediate points in the Caribbean, including San Juan and Port of Spain, Trinidad. This route has its southern terminals in Brazil. San Juan Will Not Be Harmed Fljnn said that, under Pan American's certificate as currently drafted, the company can only fly Jo along that route by stopping at intermediate points. What is desired, according to the spokesman, is the elimination of intermediate points on the new flights to speed up service between New York and distant southern points on the South American continent. That is why, according to Flynn, on the present flights or on the new ones being made to him for the benefit of passengers going to or coming from Brazil, there is an intention to establish a non-stop service between New York and Puerta de España. In Flynn's opinion, that does not involve a reduction in service to San Juan. Pan American is operating five daily flights from San Juan to New York and return, and two daily flights from San Juan to Miami and return. The decision on this issue is up to the Civil Aeronautics Board. The final arguments, which constitute the final part of the proceedings in the matter, were presented last Monday. Last July, an In JAC examiner recommended that the Board approve Pan American's application for nonstop service between New York and Trinidad. That examiner, Ralph L. Wiser, stated that this would improve service to Latin America, without interfering with the quality of service to San Juan and other points in between. Wiser also stated that, with the elimination of San Juan as a stopover point on the New York to Port of Spain route, congestion at the already heavily congested Isla Grande airport would be relieved. The case aroused the interest of several other airlines and various federal, state and municipal governments and organizations. However, even though the Department of the Interior was invited to intervene in the case, the Department did not do so, on the grounds that the proposed addition to Pan American's service to Latin America would not adversely affect service to San Juan, It was also recalled in this city that the Island Government currently has pending before the CAB an application for additional air service to the Island. This request is for additional "second class" service and for the certification of another airline, in addition to Pan American, to fly directly from Puerto Rico to Washington and New York and vice versa. This case is scheduled to be discussed before the CAB in prime (Continued on page 16).
Caro Would Not Follow Pinero's Order On Buses
Wallace Gives Viva Puerto Rico Libre Ends Speech In Latino Neighborhood NEW YORK, Oct. 29 (PU) - Henry A. Wallace, Progressive Party presidential candidate, gave a shout of "Viva Puerto Rico Libre!" at the end of a speech he delivered in the heart of New York's Puerto Rican neighborhood. A crowd of more than twelve thousand people gathered at the corner of Madison and 108th Street to hear Wallace, who throughout the rally went from neighborhood to neighborhood in a last-ditch effort to get out the vote. More than half of his listeners were Hispanic or Puerto Rican. Wallace devoted most of his spontaneous speech to attacking President Truman, speaking sometimes in Spanish and sometimes in English. He severely criticized the President for his handling of the Palestine issue, and said that this has cost him a lot of votes that have been added to the Progressive Party. "We are going to surprise Truman the Maltese," he said. - Wallace ended his speech by shouting, "Viva Marcantonio! Viva Puerto Rico Libre!" Pinero Grants Half Day Next Monday Classes Suspended Monday and Tuesday. - UPR To Open Friday The Governor declared a half-day holiday on Monday, November 1, starting at 12:00 noon, so that public employees who are electors in precincts outside their place of work may duly exercise their electoral franchise. The proclamation issued by the Governor to that effect and promulgated by the Executive Secretary ajer, reads: "For the purpose of facilitating the voters to travel in good time to their respective election precincts, in those cases where such precincts are located in other towns and so that such voters may duly prepare to exercise their franchise on election day, Tuesday, November 2. "I, Jesus T, PIAero. Governor of Puerto Rico, by virtue of the authority vested in me by law, do hereby declare a holiday on Monday, November 1, 194R, at noon on Monday, November 1, 194R, beginning at 12 o'clock noon. At that hour, work will cease in all public offices, including all agencies, authorized and works of the Insular Government and the municipalities. Ektará en au Oficina The Governor, as reported in Fortaleza, will be constantly in his office from now until the elections are over, attending to any matters that may arise for the time being. Mr. Piftero is registered to vote at Colegio 17, located at the Hostos School, in the municipality of Loiza, and will leave La Fortaleza at 1:30 p.m. on election day to cast his vote. No Ciases Classes will have to be moved on Wednesday morning. This was informed yesterday by the Deputy Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Julio Sellés Solá. Neither the Governor's proclamation nor the Department's circular specifically includes private schools. Mr. Sellés Solá believes that these schools are not covered by the proclamation or the circular, since the suspension of schools on Monday is due to the fact that the work of the polling stations in the public schools begins today. On Wednesday, however, all (Continued on page 16)
Said TA Would Hire Committed He pointed out that the parties did not have the opportunity to request them By Luí* Hernández Aqulno EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Director of the Transportation Authority, Mr. Salvador V. Caro, when he appeared before the Island Board of Elections yesterday, when questioned by PIP representative Eugenio Font Suarez, as to whether he received an order from the Governor prohibiting him from renting buses from the Authority on Election Day, said that he would comply with the previous commitments he has with two political parties that have requested vehicles in that sense. The matter was the subject of a lengthy discussion in which Dr. Figueroa, Boll" var Pagán, Font Suárez and Senator Samuel R. Quiñones participated prominently. The Insular Board heard in its session yesterday the complaints of the members of the Opposition in the Local Board of Rio Grande against the Municipal Judge and president of that board, attorney Angel Rodríguez Escobar. It also heard the complaints formulated by Mr. Domingo Vivaldi Pacheco, president of the Reformist Party in Yauco, and Mr. Pedro J. Rodríguez Lugo, president of the Socialist Party there, against the Yauco Mu- । ncipal Judge Luis A, Ramírez, | of whom it was said "that he commits serious irregularities," | The case of the Autarldadad De Transporta When the Director of the Transportation Authority, Mr. Salvador V. Caro, appeared to intercede on behalf of the employees of the Authority, in the sense that he be given preferential votes, he was the object of an Intense Interrogation. It will be noted that *1 representative of the PIP said that as long as the Authority did not specify that no buses would be rented to transport voters on election day, he would not favor preferential votes for members of said company. Mr. Caro said that the Governor had asked him for more buses for better service on election day. Dr. Figueroa asked him if Mr. Piftero had not spoken to him about the convenience of not hiring buses to transport voters on election day and that the buses were intended for public service on that day, for the general benefit of all citizens. To which Mr. Caro replied that on that day there would be more buses for the public. Petition to Piftero Dr. Figueroa pointed out that he had made a motion at the Thursday night meeting in Fortaleza and that the Opposition and PIP parties had submitted a petition to the Governor that the Authority's buses not be rented to any political party on election day, due to the danger implied by the danger of the buses being rented to any political party on election day. because of the danger of having Popular Party drivers transporting voters of other parties and of the possible damage to Government property in the event that tempers were aroused on that day. Mr. Bolivar and Dr. Figueroa raised the issue that on October 12 the Authority had rented buses to the Popular Party for a rally, while the public was crowded in the streets waiting for said public service, which was not provided, creating the consequent uneasiness. (Continued on page 16) No Political Events in the Sports Centers "The sports facilities, property of the Insular Government, will not be used for the celebration of political events", declared yesterday the Comíalonado de Recreo y Deporte", Mr. Julio Enrique Monagai. And he added: "In this sense, I have addressed the mayors of the towns where the Commission of Parks and Recreation of the Island Government owns sports properties, and I hope that they will clearly understand that the action taken by me aims at keeping the practice of sports out of any partisan controversy. "I wish to inform you, furthermore, that in response to a request from the Commander of the San Juan Police Force, Captain Rios, I have authorized that 600 special police officers to be used by the Government on November 1 and 2 be located in the bleachers of Sixto Park."