THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy to cloudy with showers*, in the morning. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 7"; low, 70. Barometric pressure at sea level at* ltSO.in the afternoon, 28.96 inches of mercury. -
40 pages 5/
MORNING JOURNAL
. "o xxvm
Entered a* second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 31, 1948
Motorist", let's show the country's traditional courtesy.
NUMBER 11201
Farmers back Marshall Plan
But ask for greater participation in his administration's work New Republican Criticism Condemns Truman's "all or nothing" phrases on aid By JOHN L. STEELE
WASHINGTON, Jan. 30 (FU)- Spokesmen for don of the Nation's largest agricultural organization endorsed the Mar "hall Plan for European recovery today, but called for greater participation by American farmers in administering the aid. Allan B. Kllne, president of the American Farm Business Federation, and J, T. Sanders, legislative counsel for National Farm, told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the two million farm families comprising their organizations strongly supported the program. But they insisted that the Scoretario of Agriculture participate as the farmers' representative on whatever body was ultimately chosen to run the relief project. Their endorsement coincided with a new outbreak of censure by several Republican congressmen against President Truman's last demand that the plan be approved in its entirety or ■ repudiated in all its aspects.
The Republicans told us that both President Truman and Secretary of State George C. Marshall were trying to force the Congress to accept something it did not like. A group of about thirty Republican sonadora", who believe they can reduce to about $4,500,000,000,000 the $56,800,000,000,000 appropriation requested by Mr. Truman for the first fifteen mews of the program, arranged a secret strategy conference for tonight. They propose to discuss, among other things, a proposal to divorce foreign aid from recovery aid which might be extended to Western Europe by American private capital, rather than by the U.S. Treasury. Agricultural spokesmen were confident that shipments of agricultural machinery and fertilizer could be sent to the sixteen nations of Western Europe, despite the shortages the country had been suffering. Kllne food shipments would further strain the American economy, but that such" exports required by the Manhall Plan would actually be less than in recent years. He added that permanent markets in Europe must be secured for American farmers," who increased their production during the war years. -- Sanders cautioned against viewing the program primarily as a means of combating communism. He added that such a program might eventually remove the wall between the industrial countries of Western Europe and the food-producing areas of Eastern Europe. The Committee also heard a new idea, expressed by an industrialist, on how to obtain from Latin American sources a greater participation in the aid plan for Europe. C. Al Barrett, president of the Tate-Jones Co. of Pittsburgh, was warmly applauded by the Senators for his recommendation that Latin America supply food for Europe in exchange for industrial credits granted by the United States. He estimated that Latin American countries could supply about $1,000,000,000,000 worth of food to Europe through such an agreement. He added that his own conversations with Latin American businessmen had convinced him that they would sell their food products at prevailing prices in the United States if they could obtain credits of two to four years here for the purchase of the equipment they needed to develop their own industries. On the other hand, the Maritime Commission today strongly opposed the transfer of five hundred American ships to Europe as part of the Marshall Plan on the grounds that such a step would be "contrary to the best interests of the American Merchant Marine. President Truman included the ship* proposal in the European recovery program on the grounds that the transfer of such ships would help reduce shipping costs and the use of scarce materials for shipbuilding abroad. But W. W. Smith, chairman of the Maritime Commission, said in a letter transmitting his annual report to Congress, given to the publicity today, that "while in sympathy with the general objectives of the European recovery program, the Commission believes that the sale, lease. loan or gift to the European Union's naval vessels would help to reduce shipping costs and the use of scarce materials in the construction of foreign vessels.
Judge laments that law proves useless against boliteros
Polo said in open court that he often had to acquit because of the terms in which the statute is currently written.
Judge Luis R. Polo, of the District Court of San Juan, said yesterday in open court, while a case for violation of the Bolita Law was being heard, that "the efforts" made by the members of the Insular Police are fruitless, with the current law that punishes the clandestine game, since, according to the interpretation of the same law by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, it is very difficult to prove the crime against the accused. The Judge said that, according to the wording of the statute, a law enforcement officer obtains a search warrant to search a certain house where the law is being violated with the game of bolita, searches said house, obtains the material used in said game, denounces the alleged offenders, and then they have to be acquitted in court because the law, as it is written, does not allow the punishment of the offender. This is so, according to the said magistrate, because it has been resolved that the delinquent possession of bolita material does not constitute a crime. He believes that in order for the law to be more effective, it should provide for the punishment of possession of pellet material. The present law only punishes tampering with such material, and tampering. according to our mA* high Court of justice, is not possessing, Moreover, in order that a
I J I. JUDGE POLO
conviction for violation of the Bolita Act, it must be proved that the person charged was acting in the capacity of owner, manager or agent of the business, which is difficult to prove, but it is difficult to prove that the person charged was acting in the capacity of owner, manager or agent of the business.
Dr. Irons says tuberculosis is a problem of nutrition and economics
Youmans says Puerto Rico is a great field to experiment with Calmette-Guerin vaccine and said the island would benefit from application of treatment
Pnr LUIS HERNANDEZ AQUINO EL MUNDO Staff Writer Dr. Ernest E. Irons, president of the visiting committee of American doctors, said at a press conference held yesterday at the Condado Condado Hotel in Puerto Rico, that Puerto Rico is a great place to experiment with the Calmette-Guerin vaccine and said the island would benefit from the application of the treatment.
Juan A. Pona, Commissioner of Health, is doing a good job in the rehabilitation of the hospitals in Puerto Rico. He also stated that the Insular Asylum presents the difficulty of not having enough beds, but that the conditions now are better than they were seven years ago, he said. The problem of tuberculosis, he said, is one of nutrition and economics. Dr. J. H. Youmans, tuberculosis specialist and dean of the Illinois College of Medicine, stated that there is a good plan for "1 control of this disease; but it is necessary to give more care to the sick. Likewise, he expressed that Puerto Rico is a great country to experiment with the Cxlmette Guerin vaccine against tuberculosis, and that if the Government of the Island approves a plan to use it, it could benefit by obtaining it from the University of Illinois, where there is an institute that manufactures it. He also believes it is feasible from the professional point of view, the establishment of a School of Medicine in Puerto Rico. Dr. Irons explained the objectives of the visit of the medical commission, indicating that the Secretary of the Interior, Julius A. Krug, consulted the American Medical Association on measures for the improvement of the medical conditions of indigent patients in various states and territories, after which the American Medical Association was consulted by the Secretary of the Interior, Julius A. Krug.
"Aníbal García was reinstated by Pinero Ordered to file the charges filed against him as Auditor of Ponce Governor Riñere ordered the filing of the administrative charges filed on June 13, 1947 against Mr. Aníbal García, in his capacity as Municipal Auditor of Ronce, and reinstated him in said position, with retroactive effect to the date on which he was suspended from employment and salary. This being the Governor's resolution, Mr. García will be entitled to receive the "salaries he has not received since he was suspended to date. This decision was communicated to Mr. Garcia the day before yesterday morning, in a letter sent by the Governor through the special delivery postal service, enclosing a copy of the resolution taken in the case. The Governor's letter to Mr. Garcia reads: "You are hereby notified that on this date (January 27) I have issued a resolution ordering the filing of the administrative charges which in "your capacity as Auditor of the Municipality of Ronca, I made to you on January 13, 1947, a copy of which is attached to a copy of the resolution.
Compendium of News
India on brink of civil war after Gandhi's assassination by fanatic. The first* riots broke out in Bombay. Nehru assumes Mahatma's task. SAA to suspend water service in San Juan Sunday, due to repairs and cleaning to be done on pipe. - - - J Air Force Marshal was in deaapareddo plane off Bermuda. Instruction is gradually putting into execution loa plans pare enaeftense in Spanish, Jue* be lómente in court ablerte that le ley contre lo bolita proves Insufficient. y - * * Fortale*" B-17 crashed in Low Alps after localiiar the transport missing since Tuesday. * Nasis succeeded in manufacturing a gas which transformed their victims into homicidal before* causing* their death. ' - - - - They will resume *u* converaaclonea e| marte*, the Association of Producers of Asúcar and the Union Asucarero. - - - The fire that destroyed three houses* in Santuree is attributed to arson. - - - - Personnel Director sets procedure for determining which obventions are necessary for public service.
8n have recorded 14 case" of diphtheria in the week ending January 28. - - - The A AC suspended the trip of a plane carrying ten Boricua" from New York. * * - Gerardo Ferrao was reelected president of the Puerto Rico Drivers Association. t Q - Rector will not go to the United States in February. - 4 - The Governor reinstated Mr. Aníbal García as Auditor of Ponce. * * * Representative Heracllo Rivera Colón believes that the Legislature should make savings in the Government's expenses. * * "Pifien" has not yet received the Electoral Board's agreement on the transfer of registrations. * - # Communications Authority finished installing the automatic telephone in the area that airve. - Chess championship continues today and tomorrow. Herb Pennock, general manager of the Philadelphia Phillies, died of cerebral congestion. - - - Rodrigues Olmo milestone single round in Rabana's win, 1-0. * * ♦ _ Gupoa agricultural* give backing to Marshall Plan.
Perez fixes rule on subsidies
The procedure to determine which obventions are necessary* for the public service and which are not, in order to proceed to the elimination of the latter, has been instituted and was notified yesterday to the different Government agencies by the Director of Personnel, Mr. Manuel A. Perez. To the public employees who have been deducted from their salaries the amount of allowances received (lodging, uniforms, meals and other) and which are determined to have been and are necessary to render an adequate service in the Government, the amount of such deductions shall be returned to them by the Public Treasurer, Until recently, employees such as members of the Island Police, nurses of Government Institutions, prison guards and others, were being charged and deducted from their salaries the amount of uniform, meals*, lodging or other* allowances received from the Government. When the protest of the Insular Police arose, due to the salaries that were fixed with the new classifications, the Uniform Remuneration Law was amended in an extraordinary session of the Legislative Assembly, held in December, through Law 27 of 1947, to establish that "the types of pay stated in the remuneration plan represent the total remuneration and include all types of payment; but if meals, lodging, uniforms" or any other necessities necessary for service are provided, by administrative disposition, with the approval of the Governor, the cost of such meals, lodging, uniforms or any other necessities shall not be deducted from the pay or remuneration of the employee". In addition, the Office of Personnel tlaslficaWM, aúmenUudola" in the case of the Police, to increase the salaries of the police force. In accordance with the Act, the amount of any allowance furnished and determined to be necessary for the service, will be returned to the employee retroactive to July 1, 1947, in fulfillment of the responsibility imposed on him by the Act, says the Director of Personnel, he established the procedure for the purpose of implementing the above provisions regarding deductions for allowances. According to said procedure, the appointing authorities shall make a study of all the positions in their agencies that entail the provision of allowances, such as housing, lodging, meals, uniforms, laundry and others, in order to be able to determine in which of those positions the provision of such items is necessary for the service. The results of the study shall be communicated to the Director of Personnel, i.e., in which cases no deduction shall be made from the pay for expenses, since they are necessary for the service, and in which cases the deduction shall be made, since the expenses are not necessary for the service. The Director of Personnel shall review all such cases and make recommendations to the Governor for action in accordance with the law. The 'iwílrúcclones of the Director of Personnel, add: "Once the Governor of Puerto Rico has acted, the Director of Personnel shall notify the appointing authorities of the final disposition of each case. Likewise, the Director shall forward to the Auditor and the Treasurer of Puerto Rico the list of the cases" approved" by the Governor so that the aforementioned officials" may prescribe the procedure to be followed by the Governor.
No water in San Juan Sunday
The cleaning and repair work on the San Juan aqueduct main, which extends from stop 29 in Hato Rey to the Colón square in San Juan, will begin at three in the morning on Sunday and will be suspended at six in the morning on Monday. For this reason, the Director of the Aqueduct and Sewer Service, Mr. Sergio Cueva* Bustamante, informed yesterday that there will be no water service for the entire population served by this pipeline during the period of cleaning and repair of the same. Mr. Cueva added that in all probability, the water service in some upper sections of Santurce, and in the upper part of old San Juan, will be completely irregular. - This pipe," said Mr. Cueva, "has been installed for about 60 years, and there is an imperative need to clean it and correct some defects that cannot be postponed any longer. We will also take advantage of this work to install new regulating valves at some points, to improve water service to the population". (Continued on page 16)
India on brink of civil war after Gandhi's assassination; Nehru succeeds the Mahatma
Opposition on San Fernando Avenue
The first armed clashes have already broken out in Bombay.
i BKW - 11 RywZjá'.... This is one of the most recent photos of Mahatma Gandhi. It was taken during his last fast, when he offered to stop eating until he died of hunger if the violence between Hindus and Muslims continued. The Mahatma succeeded ps* and began to take food. The photo captures the moment when he began to ingest a Juice, (Photo P. A) Hindu Apostle died forgiving the killer, who was beaten by the crowd. The world condemns the brutal aggression. - Truman's message
The Navy consigned, its objection on the grounds that it crosses naval zone No speeding up of its construction Appears in distant future plans. - A note from EL MUNDO The President of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, sent us a communication yesterday informing us that "there is no present intention to advance the priority of the construction of San Fernando Avenue". He adds that "until we are officially informed that the Tenth Naval District has changed its mind, we understand that its definitive opposition to the construction of 1" San Fernando Avenue still exists, for which reason the rapid construction of this work cannot be considered feasible at the present time". Dr. Picó's communication states the following: "Yesterday I wrote to you to clarify certain particulars regarding the construction of Avenida Norte by the Island Government which appeared on the front page of the January 25, 1948 edition of EL MUNDO. Allow me to refer once again to the above-mentioned article, in the part of the same that refers to San Fernando Avenue. "It says that "the funds" that have been earmarked for the construction of the Avenida del Norte, if they were to be used for the construction of the Avenida del Norte, could be used for the construction of the Avenida San Fernando" and that the Avenida San Fernando "would give direct access to the projected International Airport at Taln Seco". In addition, it is considered feasible the rapid construction of the Avenida San Fernando since it crosses land that is not densely populated," etc. Having clarified in my communication of yesterday the position of this Planning Board with respect to Avenida del Norte, it is the purpose of this letter to make some comments with respect to the other work mentioned (Avenida San Fernando). "San Fernando Avenue appears in the official plans of this Board to be constructed in the distant future. There is no present intention to advance the priority of such construction. It could not be built immediately, even if it were desired, because there are serious obstacles" that prevent the work from being done at the present time. "San Fernando Avenue crosses United States Navy land" and the management of the Tenth Naval District is decidedly opposed to its construction. In a letter addressed to this Board by Vice Admiral D. E. Barbey, Commander of the Tenth Naval District, dated June 2, 1947, he states this in a final and definitive manner, and also reaffirms it in another communication, under his signature, which is in our possession and which is dated November 13, 1947. "In these communications the Commander of the Tenth Naval District objects to the construction of the proposed San Fernando Avenue and indicates that he warns of such opposition from his Department in time to the Insular Government to avoid the erection of plans for the said work* which may cause expenses (Continued on page 15).
By J. B. SAHNI NEW DELHI, Jan. 30. (INS)- Mohandas Karamrhad Gandhi, the great man of peace, died today by being shot at by an assassin, whose act has horrified the world and brought India, with its four hundred million inhabitants, to the brink of war . . - - - A It-
Board to discuss entry of buses Mayor to report to it on Interior Commissioner's plan The Administrator of the Capital, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier. She informed that the Board of Commissioners of the Capital will discuss in its next session the plan for the entrance of the buses to the city, a problem that has been entrusted to a commission of said organization for its study and report. Mrs. Rincón de Gautier explained that she will inform the Board about the plan of the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Jorge J. Jiménez, for the entrance of the buses into the city, which, according to her, is not final, and is open to "suggestions from other government agencies" as well as from other entities. Mrs. Rincón de Gautier, from the first moment that the question of the entrance of the buses to the Capital arose, favored their entrance to the center of the city, indicating that this was the way to benefit the working classes and the public.
'vcivíl. A Hindu, like Gandhi, fired four shots into the body of India's spiritual and political leader, who was 78 years old and who spoke of his life as a prayer against violence. Gandhi, who was on his way to a prayer meeting, died with forgiveness on his lips. Soon after, riots broke out in Bombay. Many fell, dead and wounded, when indignation, overpowering tears, brought out guns and knives, and Hindus and Muslims clashed to the death. The whole of India is today a great cathedral of mourning. Premier Pandit Nehru, speaking on radio, told the nation: "The light has disappeared from our lives. Everywhere" there is darkness. However, the light that was Gandhi will continue to shine for a thousand years." Nehru, realizing that India is threatened by one of the bloodiest civil wars in its history, warns: "There will be anger as well as grief in the heart of the nation, but let none of us dare to violate the peace". The assassin, identified as Nathuram Vinayak Gode, a 36-year-old Maratha Hindu, was beaten almost unconscious by Gandhi's disciples, who pounced on him moments after he fired the murderous shots. He was saved by the police, ■ who held him incommunicado. Gandhi, in the moments of sor ase(Continued on page 13)
Nazi gas turned victims into murderers It was developed in the last days of the war, but even the Germans did not dare to use it. - It caused death. Americans managed to manufacture it
N. of the R.- Ladislas Farago, author of the book, The Great Strategy of the Axis describes in the following, articulated the terrible effect of a new weapon of war that has not yet been used - a toxic gais that transforms its victim into a homicidal maniac before killing him. According to *1 author, the ga" is no longer a secret, knowing it "all" Jo" military centers" of the world'. The Nazis perfected it in the last war, baptizing it with the name of Tabun. The United States also came to produce it under the anagram of DFP. Pnr Lidíalas FARA GO (Excerpt from information appearing in the magazine "United Nations World". Distributed by the International News Service). NEW YORK, Jan. 30 (SIN)If it is true that insanity is far worse than death itself, then the most terrible weapon perfected during World War II was not the atomic bomb, but a German mlsterlo "o ga" developed in the final stages of the war and known as a code name by the Germans.
But it was never used in combat. For the first time, man refrained from taking advantage of one of his most diabolical "inventions" - a chemical agent that attacks the brain and nervous system, turning normal people into "rabid lunatics" before causing a "rage.
rabid lunatics" before causing their death. All the toxic gases" perfected for military use up to the advent of World War II, such as mustard, phosgene, lewlsite and others, had been conceived" with the idea of attacking the "respiratory system, the skin or both. They could neither be tasted," smelled, nor felt. But Tabun and Sarln have no such characteristics; attacking only the nerves," i.e., they are invisible, tasteless and odorless. Their presence in fresh air cannot be discovered by the senses until it is too late. One" breath of polluted air containing fractions of a milligram of Tabun is enough to cause death. And the old "mask" offers no protection whatsoever. Tabun enters the organism through the pores of the skin. The clean air of entire cities could be polluted in a single gas attack by means of "aircraft" disguised as a transport device. A secret agent (Continued on p. 15)
Instruction is already preparing plans for Spanish
The Department of Instruction is gradually implementing plans to establish Spanish language instruction in public schools and to intensify the teaching of English, Selles said yesterday, according to a statement made by the Supreme Court, as revealed yesterday by the Acting Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Julio Sellés Solé, in official statements he authorized for EL MUNDO, in response to a request to comment on the recent ruling of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, in which it was determined that the Idio- ! ma is not law. - The decision of our highest court does not fix in any way what should be the school language policy in Puerto Rico, which, in our judgment, is a pedagogical responsibility," said Seftor Sellé" So14. in other words, through his" official statement, which said in its full text: "Our Supreme Court has issued a decision in connection with Senate Bill 51, approved by the Legislative Assembly during the regular session of the ■ 1948. The decision of our highest court does not fix *in any way , what should be the llngülati- ' co-"*school policy in Puerto Rieo which, in 1 uueatro judgment, is a pedagogical responsabilidsd. The Court simply- , mind expresses itself on the validity of ! the bill passed by our Legislature, about . a year ago. "In December 1946, the "Department of Instruction of । Puerto Rico, through the voice of the then Commissioner, Mr. Mariano Villaronga, presented to the teaching profession and to the country in general, what the linguistic policy of the Puerto Rican school should be. The stated policy was warmly welcomed by the teaching profession and the country in general, and received a strong endorsement. Our school is moving towards this direction as the most advisable. "The Department has formulated a series of plans to attend to the technical aspects of the problem. These plans are put into effect according to the state of readiness and commitment to those situations which, psychologically and pedagogically, can lead us to the best achievements. 4 The" ■->preliminary steps leading the Department of Instruction to establish the new procedure for the use of Spanish" as a teaching vehicle and the intensification of the teaching of English as a subject of major importance in the school curriculum, were taken by the appointed, but not confirmed, Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano Villaronga. Under his administration was created in the Department the new Division of Cu-} rrlculus, which is now directed by Miss Carmen Gómez Tejera, by designation of the Acting Commissioner, Mr. Francisco Collazo. Part of this new Division is the English Program, which will be directed by Dr. Paulina M. Rojas, who will be in charge of the plans for the intensification of the teaching of English in Puerto Rico. Dr. Rojas was also appointed to this position by Mr. Collazo, months after the departure from the Department of Mr. Ma-" riano Villaronga, who resigned before Congress could consider her appointment.
The Acting Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Julio Sellé" Solá, who is in the United States, Commissioner Francisco Collazo, who is also Acting, the Rector of the University, Mr. Jaime Benitez, and the President of the Teachers' Association, Mr. Luis Muftlz Souffront, are in agreement that the question of which language should be used as a vehicle of instruction, is a matter of responsibility. is a pedagogical responsibility, which lies with the Department of Instruction itself. The three aforementioned officials have pointed out to this effect, the fact that what the Supreme Court has resolved is a legal question, as to *1 a measure - J the Language Law project, without going into the consideration of our highest court of justice as to what should be the means to be used to conduct public education in Puerto Rico, * * * *.