THE DAILY M©NDO OF^^-5^1LA MARAÑA
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY: Mostly cloudy, with intermittent moderate to occasionally heavy rain. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temp. My minimum. 75, Barometric pressure at sea level, at <:M this afternoon, MJ1 inches of mercury.
38 Pages 5/
NUMBER 13452
year xxk
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan. P.' E
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 9, 194B
AutomortUstaa, let's show the traditional politeness of the pala
Berlin Negotiations Prolonged
- Bramugia seeks agreement with Russians Marshall left for Washington. Believe he carries some hope By ROBERT T MANNING PARTS, Oct. 8. (PU)- The American Secretary of State, General George C. Marshall, left tonight for Washington by air to confer with President Harry S. Truman, after asserting that "a black cloud of menace" would have hung over all Europe if the Western Allies had not brought the Berlin crisis to the attention of the United Nations. General Marshall left Orly airport, near Paris, at ten past nine in the evening (ten past three in the afternoon, New York time) aboard the private presidential plane Independence. Before leaving, the Secretary of State informed 1ns labor leaders of the countries benefiting from the Marshall Plan that Russia had committed "a long series of provocative acts, culminating in the blockade of Berlin." "Almost any one of these acts would have been thirty years ago," the General stated, "grounds for a serious break-up." Blockade is threat "IF ever there was in peacetime. a threat against peace. it is precisely that blockade " Marshall declared that there had been some censure against the" Western powers for *- Berlin case before the United Nations. but He indicated that. to date, no one had offered any other Solution to the 'impasse.' "We are fighting," the General declared, "not only for peace. but for a kind of peace in which an, Individual or a labor guild has freedom to meet whenever he pleases and to say what he wishes That is as far from a police state as possible." Marshall stated that. when he began to operate his recovery plan. the (hundo did not understand why the United States was re. building a Western Europe. Now, the General commented, that form of action may become "a tiny ray of light in the Berlin cloud." The Secretary of State expressed that production is the key to European economic recovery and "uño cannot achieve , production without well-organized labor unions." Believe that Marshall will communicate to Mr. Truman, who called him for a report on the situation in Paris, that there is at least a glimmer of hope that an agreement will be reached, which would put an end to the Berlin blockade. The leaders of the United Nations, meanwhile, were desperately trying to find some means of resolving the crisis, which is casting a shadow over the entire Assembly. Juan Bramugia of Argentina, acting president of the Security Council, spoke for more than an hour and a half with the Russian Andrel Y. Vlshlnsky, and the Russian President of the United Nations. Vlshlnsky, and tonight he spoke with Ukrainian Dmitri Manulski. Bramugia also spoke with delegates to the Security Council from Canada, Belgium, China, Colombia and Syria, who have been helping him. Colombia and Syria, who have been assisting him in his efforts to find a compromise. In United Nations circles in general, the opinion was growing that both Russia and the Western allies would welcome a compromise which they could accept without confessing defeat. The following are the three possibilities of solution envisaged: 1. Russia would lift her blockade, in exchange for a promise of an immediate conference of the Four Great Foreign Ministers on all German problems. 2. 2. If this should prove unacceptable to Ruala, the Western Allies could get the Security Council to pass a relatively benign resolution inviting both sides to agree. If these two means failed, the Western allies would pursue their complaint to the Security Council that the Russian blockade is a threat to world peace. Russia would veto any attempt by the Council to consider it a violator of the peace, and would then be able to leave the United Nations. It is likely that the Council will not meet again until Monday at the earliest, so the peacemakers may have time to negotiate and Vlshlnsky may have time to consult his Government. Marshall is expected to return to this city by midweek after his conferences with President Truman.
This photograph shows members of the Advisory Commission on the Relationship of Federal Leagues to Puerto Rico, established by executive order of President Truman. From left to right: Martin G. White of the Department of the Interior; Jorge Luis Córdova Díaz, former Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico; George T. Washington of the Department of Justice; Governor PIAero; the President of the United States; the President of the United States; the President of the United States; the President of the United States; and the President of the United States.
The Disciplinary Committee of the University of Puerto Rico will soon submit to the Dean of Administration, Dr. Ramón Mellado, the corresponding recommendations on the 70 preventive suspensions of university students who have participated in the different events that have taken place at the University since April 14 to date. Dr. Mellado informed that the Disciplinary Committee has been compiling the information corresponding to Jos different cases. The Disciplinary Committee is composed of the Interim Dean of Students, Mr. José Gueits, the Assistant Dean, Mr. Enrique Vllella, and Mrs. Juana Rodríguez Mundo, from the Office of Student Social Services. After the events of April 14, when the Rectory was invaded by university students who demanded the resignation of Rector Benitez, about 25 students who participated in said events were suspended, their suspension being of a preventive nature. The aforementioned students were charged by the Dean of Students in property, Mr. Felix Luis Alegria. Some of them answered the charges, and a number of them were readmitted. After that date, other students were suspended for their participation (Continued on page 14).
French strikers fought a 12-hour battle with police.
I One Ile Ion worker was killed and eighty were wounded in the violent scuffle. - 500,000 workers are in the movement
By Joseph W. GR1GG PARIS, October R (PU)- The first violence recorded in the five-day strike" in the French coal industry resulted in one death today.
At least eighty persons i gulsta* had encounters with the security guards of the republic, at do* point* of the northeastern Industrial area of the I-ore-na. The* strikers* and the police fought a twelve-hour battle in the village of Merlabach in Lorraine. One striker perished, and forty strikers* and twenty-eight guards were wounded. The strikers of Merlabach, who had been rigidly accused of being Communists, were trying to prevent the non-Communist miners from entering the mines. The* police intervened and about five hundred strikers attacked them, throwing stones at their trucks. Later the strikers* launched a large-scale attack, overturning the trucks and trying to set them on fire. During the ensuing battle, a Yugoslav miner was killed, and forty strikers and twenty-eight guards were wounded, four of them seriously. At least twelve people were wounded earlier today, when two hundred security guards charged at the strikers who had seized the Michevllle metalworks near Nancy. (Continued on page 14).
Bishop Ponce will visit the Governor today Monday's ceremonies in honor of Cardinal Spellman are speeding up At 1" Fortaleza yesterday preparations continued for 1o" official ceremonies in honor of His Eminence, Cardinal Spellman. The Governor's aide, Mr. Jorge Font Saldaña, personally attended to the sending of the invitations. It was definitely agreed to limit the number of people attending the banquet on Monday night to thirty-two. Seats at the table were assigned according to the hierarchy of the diners, who represent high positions in the Government, in the Catholic Church and in the Armed Forces of the United States. United. For the reception to be held the same evening in the gardens of Fortaleza, a concu- ■ rence of a thousand people is expected. To the banquet no lady has been invited: but for the reception -* invites gentlemen" with his" wife". Visit of the Bishop of Ponca According to what was said yesterday in Fortaleza, this afternoon the Bishop of Ponce will visit the Acting Governor to finalize details" rie all" the" events to be held during Monday and Tuesday. "(Continued on page 14)
Compendium of News
Army recruits. 8,900 galen* for the military medical sen-Icio. - - - There is a plan to grant more clerical comlalonea in the National Guard. - Provisional insurance for veterans expires this month. Clay requested the shipment of M,000 parcels* of food* to Berlin, during the* Christmas season. - - - New Mexico court ruled against the employment of nuns in the* public* school*. Governor and Dr. Rafael Picó discussed in Washington lo* arrangement* for the coming census. - Dewey begins a tour of the border states. - The opposition against the communists in Berlin is disintegrating. - One thousand sailors arrive tomorrow aboard three de "tructore*. - - - ; ■> New York investigates complaint* about Puerto Rican voter registration. - - - Pro-communist workers to be distanced from atomic* project. - - - IJeencl*do Ochoteco calls Hernandez Varga* complaint a serious charge. - Pacheco Padró advocates Insular action to eliminate the* cabotage* law.
He had an incident with detective* Andréu. - The report containing the recommendations on the 70 students suspended from the university will be filed soon. - Dewey promised to solve the housing problem. - The tobacco industry is warned against the application of the* exemption* of production area. - Army patrols the capital of Peru. Clement Atlee admitted the* allegations of agiotlwno in the market in England. - - - San Juan Municipal Judge acquitted " do* person* accused* of uaing a loudspeaker in Barrio Obrero. - In February a new brewery will operate in Mayagues. - A loan* will be granted for the purchase and improvement of a farm". There is available* 53,218,079 p "ra eae fin. a - - - Strikers* franceae* fought a twelve hour battle* with the Police.< - - - - - The Insular Board of Elections transmitted Instructions to the local Boards* on preferential voting. - - - Director of Transportation will replace driver Reyes Ortiz. - - - Negotiations with the ruao*. are prolonged in search of a solution to the Berlin crisis.
The Acting President of the Bar Association of Puerto Rico, Felix Ochoteco, Jr., said yesterday that the complaint filed by Mr. F. Hernandez Varga" before the College "involves an accusation of having hindered one" citizens, arrested" for the alleged commission of a public crime, of their right to "be advised by lawyers. while" they were deprived of "their liberty". The Acting Presidents of the Bar Association is of the opinion that the facts consigned in the complaint "must be immediately and carefully purged", since at all times the lawyer must be fully protected in the exercise of his profession...". Mr. Ochoteco's statements read as follows: "The complaint filed before the Board of Governors of our Bar Association by fellow lawyer F. Hernandez Vargas. involves a serious accusation of having hindered some citizens, arrested for the alleged commission of a public crime, of "their right to be advised by lawyers, while they were deprived of their liberty. The College agreed "Pursuant to Article V of the Constitution of the United States, and
Consider the operation of federal law in Puerto Rico I --V- ¿ ' k ' ' 1r ' -
Judge Charle* K. Clark, of the Court of Appeals for" the Second Circuit; Solicitor General Luí* Negrón Fernández; Justice A. Cecil Snyder, of the Insular Supreme Court; Benicio Sánchez Castaño, president of the Puerto Rico Bar Association; Jame* P. Davl", director <le I* Division of Insular Territory" and Posesione". From plc, Irwin W. Silverman, to Mr. of the Commission.
Arrangements made for Puerto Rico census Picó and Pinero had interview with Bell. - Federal personnel to come By JAMES V "cÜÑNINGHAM WASHINGTON, Oct. 8. (PU)-Governor Jesús T. Piftero and Plan Commission Chairman Rafael Pico flew to' New York last night, after spending the day ccktjrando contepncia" eon funrfnnaMos He! Deifaftamento de E* tarto and rtel Census Bureau. Piftero said in New York that he expected to confer with Cardinal Francis Spellman on the details of the visit of the prince of the Catholic Church to Puerto Rico next week. Up to the time of his departure, the Governor had not received notice confirming his appointment with Spellman. It may have been mistakenly directed to La Fortaleza, Piftero said by way of conjecture. Picó, who arrived in Wáshingtnn yesterday, will spend several weeks in New York. Piftero said Picó intended to attend a conference of metropolitan, municipal and rural planners. Picó was also expected to oversee the presentation of an exhibition of Puerto Rican planning to be held at the P.ussell Sage Foundation in New York next Monday. Detail* of the exhibition The exhibition, which will be offered to New Yorkers from October 11 to 15, is the same one that received such favorable comments from Latin American government officials during the meeting of the Caribbean Commission in San Juan at the beginning of the summer. It is a collection of drawings, photographs and printed material that was made to describe to North and U.S. audiences how Puerto Ricans are tackling problems such as landfill disposal, housing, port development, transit, roads, industrial construction and zoning. Yesterday Piftero and Picó discussed (Continued on pg. 14)
Lie. Ochoteco calls Hernandez's complaint a serious charge
In accordance with the Bill of Rights contained in Article 2 of our Charter, the citizen cannot be denied the prerogative of requesting and receiving the advice of counsel when called to answer for his conduct in the criminal arena. A refusal of this nature would imply an attack against citizen security, which is not tolerated in the governments of law. "Our Bar Association, at its next past annual meeting, unanimously adopted a resolution imposing upon its Board of Governors the duty to watch over the faithful maintenance of the civil rights of all citizens; in so doing, our Institution only responded. *In doing so, our Institution only responded to its high mission to our community. In addition, the law that created our association expressly imposes as a duty to our Association to defend the rights and immunities of lawyers in the exercise of their profession. Since one of those rights is the right of the lawyer to meet privately with any arrestee who claims his services, and in order that the latter may receive the benefits of the advice of the former, there can be no doubt that any complaint may be filed against him in a court of law.
Loans will be granted for the improvement and purchase of farms.
JIE instructs on preferential votes Hny discrepancies in relation to location fie local colleges By T.UIS SANCHEZ CAPPA Editor of EL MUNDO The Insular Board of Elections agreed yesterday to request from the Juntas Incales rie Elections, that re "uelvan favorably requests for preferential voting, which reside doctors, nurses, and practitioners rie Institutions of public charity or privad". Among the persons recommended by the IEB to the Board for preferential voting are those who are sick and unable to stand for long periods of time; pregnant women; firemen; drivers engaged in public service transportation; telephone operators; movie theater operators; the editor of a daily or weekly newspaper; not more than five editors from each daily newspaper; not more than two graphic editors from each daily newspaper; not more than two operators, and one announcer from each radio station; members of the Armed Forces, State Guard, and civilian employees of the Army and Navy who are required to work on election day. The Board's resolution further provides that "any person who would be covered by this provision and who has been denied the right he/she is entitled to, may apply to the Island Board of Elections stating his/her case, for due consideration by this body". In an elrcular sent by the IBE to its local bodies informing them of the aforementioned agreement, it states that "Section 74 of the Electoral Law specifically expresses who has preference to enter the polling place in which his registration is registered with the exclusive right to vote at any time during voting hours without the need to line up and take turns. "Section M-d of the Act. in its first paragraph further expresses that any other person who by reason of being engaged in indispensable functions rie public character, has also preference to vote at the Judgment rie of the Local Board rie Elections." Require credential Elsewhere, the circular reads as follows: "Persons who are qualified to vote under Section 74 of the Act are not required to apply to the Local Board of Elections for the right to vote, since by law they are so qualified, but they must carry an authorized credential justifying their entitlement. Other persons performing indispensable functions of a public nature, plus those specified in this Circular, must submit their request in writing to the Chairman of the Local Board of Elections, who shall issue to those who justify their entitlement, a certificate to vote on a preferential basis. The vote of these is automatically challenged. On the other hand, yesterday, it was reported at the offices of the JIE in San Juan that the selection of locations for the location of polling places has not yet been completed. The Local Boards of Elections rie a number of towns did not speak informed the IBE on the matter yesterday. These towns are the following: Adjuntas, Aibonito, Arecibo, Carolina, Carolina, Guayanilla, Isabela, La" María", Manatí, Mayagüez. Moca. Morovl", Naranjito, Rincón, Salina", San Sebastián and Vieques. The Electoral Law gives until October 15 to the local boards to agree on the locations where the polling places will be installed (Continued on page 14).
Candidate Doubts Marcantonio for Independence He toured Harlem district contesting congressman's bid NEW YORK, Oct. 8. (PU)- John Ellis, Republican-li-beral candidate for the 18th congressional district seat held by Vito Marcantonio, of the American Labor Party, last night denied that Marcantonio could help the Puerto Rican Independence movement. Ellls said that Puerto Rican Independence has been one of the American Workers Party leader's main issues in his campaign for the November elections. The 18th Congressional District is home to a large number of Puerto Rican-born citizens. "Neither Marcantonio nor any other congressman can give you independence," Kills declared. "All he contributes is to put you on the direct aid lists." Ellls alleged that Marcantonio's pro-Communist activities had discredited him with his fellow congressmen, adding that, despite his twelve years in that office, he had been unable to improve the con(Contlnued on p. 14) Truman made a surprise departure for Washington © Canceled ru announced campaign tour of coal country By John Ü CUTTER BUFFALO. New York, Oct. 8 (PU)- President Truman declared tonight that, although the present world situation was a matter of deep concern, "I believe we will have peace," The President made that statement in a political campaign speech in this city after a campaign rally through upstate New York. Mr. Truman said that there were two basic issues that were hindering the American people in these rilas. He listed them as: 1. War or peace. 2. Bad times" or prosperity His speech was primarily aimed at the second question - bad times or prosperity - in tune with his theme that the Democratic Party stands for economic progress and the Republican Party leads to depression. Pa" and war Before delving into the economic question, however, he dealt lightly with that of peace or war. "I know that every Judicious American desires peace," he said. "I believe our prayers will be heard and we will have peace. "Of course, the present conditions are of deep concern to all of us. Because of these conditions," he added, "I have canceled my political campaign scheduled to take place tomorrow in eastern Pennsylvania in the coal region, and will return quickly to Washington to attend an important meeting with Secretary of State George C. Marshall. A member of the rie! Cabinet member returns to Washington by air from the United Nations meeting in Paris to brief the President. As the President's e "peclal train* approached * Buffalo, his (Continued on page 14).
Army recruits 3,900 doctors for military medical service
According to statements by Secretary of the Army Kenneth C. Royall, the average sickness and casualty rate in the Army is now at the lowest level since peacetime. "This fact is remarkable in view of the large deployment of U.S. troops around the world, with thousands of them stationed in areas where the dangers of disease are enormous," said Mr. Royell. - Mr. Royell stated. "Many factors have contributed to this high level of health in American troops. For example, 1" incidence of venereal disease has been reduced to half of what it was in 1948. Common diseases of the respiratory system, such as colds and sore throats, are at a higher rate than in 1948.
tion of the respiratory system, such as colds and sore throats, are at the lowest prevailing level. Other diseases have also become less frequent, such as mosquito bites, and dia-enteritis. "These splendid achievements are largely due to the practice of preventive medicine, which has been developed and integrated into the military medical program. They include certain useful measures in the control of diseases caused by insects and rodents, immunization and the maintenance of an excellent diet. "The advances made in military medicine benefit not only soldiers but civilians as well," said Mr. Roosevelt. - said Mr. Ro(Continued on par 14),
Agency has S3,213,079.00 available to be granted at low interest rate and to be paid in long terms By Benjamin Santana EL MUNDO Staff Writer There is $3,213,079 available to be borrowed, at long" and comfortable terms. and at lower" interest" rates" than those currently required, for the purchase and improvement of property". The Farmers Home Administration, a federal agency formerly known as Farm Security, reports that borrowers are finding it difficult to obtain suitable farms. The agency currently has some 653 active borrowers who owe more than $3,000,000 taken out to purchase farms in different parts of the island. These loans are financed in a unique manner in any lending system, as the applicant is loaned 100 percent of the amount borrowed, plus an additional loan for production expenses. Objective of the Program The objective of the program is to provide loans, as reported, at a lower interest rate than that of any other lending agency, and at long and convenient terms, to purchase or improve any farm, provided that the borrower undertakes to raise the general standard of the farm and the standard of his or her home. In order to accomplish the purpose stated in the preceding paragraph, two types of loans may be made, separately or simultaneously - one for the purchase of the farm and one for the improvement of the farm. The first can be made up to a maximum of $8,000 for a term of 40 years, and at 4 percent interest on the balances owed annually, and the second has a maximum of $3,500 for no more than five years, and at 5 percent interest. The second loan has a maximum of $3,500 for no more than five years, and at 5 percent interest. The former includes four points: subsistence, health, money management and housing. Regarding subsistence, the farmer is encouraged and helped to have vegetable gardens, fruit trees, raise animals that produce meat, milk and eggs, and so on. As for housing, the agenda provides the services of three engineers to assist in the drawing of plans and in the direction of construction. There are currently 190 projects of this nature. The farm improvement plan covers more and better production through the best fertilizers, seeds and techniques, as well as guidance on records, money management, livestock and other matters. Eligibility* Any person of limited means, with agricultural knowledge, who loves rural life and who is interested in buying a farm where he and his family can develop a work plan that will enable him to live decently, in addition to paying ordinary operating expenses, qualifies for the first of the two types of loans*. The same person, or any farmer who owns a farm or who holds one under a lease for a period of not less than one year, qualifies for the farm improvement loan. In both cases, of course, it is necessary to prove the need for the loan and the impossibility of obtaining it from another private agency. How to obtain a loan The borrower of a loan should contact a local committee in each of the 33 Agenda "di "trltos". This committee shall be composed of two farmers and a prominent citizen of the locality, with the Executive Secretary being an agronomist who holds the title of Dl "trlto Supervisor. The aforesaid committee evaluates the application and certifies, finally, to the Federal Secretary of Agriculture, that the applicant meets all the necessary requirements. 4 With the advice and assistance of the Supervisor, the borrower purchases 1* - farm and carries out all the necessary work, such as purchase of equipment and equipment, construction of housing, repairs, harvesting, etc. In addition to the 33 supervisors, the Agency has the services of a specialist, Ms. Sara Rodriguez Chacon, who is in charge of training the first ones in matters related to the administration of agricultural homes and in the use of the resources (Continued ¥n 1" page 14).