the World
WEATHER FORECASTS PABA LA ISLA, ROY i Partly cloudy to occasionally cloudy with a few scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, AYEB: High, Uj low, 71. Barometric pressure at sea level, 4:80 p.m.. MM inches of mercury.
46 Pages 5/
DAILY MORNING
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San - Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JUNE 19, 1948
AutomovIUatai, demoitremoi traditional pals courtesy
NUMBER 13340
Formula for new party has been achieved
By BENJAMIN SANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO From very reliable sources, we have learned that yesterday, at the last minute, Unlorrepubllcan and Liberal leaders, who have been meeting without recess for two consecutive days, have reached an agreement as far as the constitution of the new Party is concerned. An authorized spokesman of the Opposition informed us that the aforementioned leaders have been deliberating for the last two days, dealing in principle with the bases that will serve as pillars for the organization of the new political collectivity. These matters were not disclosed yesterday. * The mentioned spokesman added, then, the following: "The foundation of the new collectivity only depends now on the convocation of an extraordinary assembly that, at the request of more than 30 local committees, will be verified in its next meeting on Monday by the Territorial Committee of the Progressive Republican Union, hoping that the same agreement will be adopted by the Central Board of the Liberal Party, in order to deliberate on the bases agreed upon in the meeting of the opposition leaders". There are 80 petitions As is known, the following day of the assembly of Unlorrepubllcanos leaders, held at the residence of former Senator Juan Ramon Ramos, in Vega Baja, one of the 300 delegates who attended the meeting extraoflclally called by the President of the Progressive Republican Union, Celestino Irlarte Miró, filed 30 letters with the Secretary of said party, from the same number of local committees, requesting the celebration of an extraordinary assembly. It has been reported that during the last few days work has been done to verify the aforementioned letters, to determine if they are totally authentic, and then proceed, in accordance with the Party's Regulations, to convene the extraordinary assembly. At the meeting of the united republican and liberal leaders, which was held in a certain hotel in the Capital, the results of the elections in Cuba were discussed as an example. In said elections, the Authentic Revolutionary Party, which nominated Prló Socarrás for the Presidency, triumphed with 788,994 votes cast in its favor. The defeated parties, in order of electoral strength, were the following: Liberal Democratic, nominating Núñez Portuondo, with 561,688 votes: the People's Party, nominating Eduardo Chlbás, with 289, 579 votes: and the Communist Party, propelling the candidacy of Juan Marlnello, with 129,488 votes. The votes in Cuba At the meeting it was said that, had the pact between the Liberal Democratic Party and the People's Party, which were in coalition for a week, not been broken, said political coalition would have triumphed by 62,273 majority votes over the triumphant party, the Authentic Revolutionary Party. Adding the votes of the Communist Party, the votes of the Opposition in Cuba are 980,755, that is, 191,761 more than those of the triumphant party. At the meeting of the opposition leaders, it was hinted that a similar thing could happen in Puerto Rico, if a fusion or understanding between the forces that oppose the Popular-Democratic Party is achieved, and that to such effects they will use the case of Cuba, to convince all the leaders of all the dispersed collectivities, so that they can reach an agreement before the next comidos of November 2. It was also reported yesterday that in the rally that the Opposition will hold tomorrow, Sunday, in Mayagüez, for the Liberal Party, Mr. Félix Ochoteco, Mr. Rafael Rodriguez Pacheco, and Mr. Santiago Iglesias Si iva will participate; for the .Celestino Irlarte and Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa; and for the Popular Disgruntled, Mr. Eudaldo Baez Garda, who recently resigned his seat in the House of Representatives. When the latter was asked by EL MUNDO about his participation in tomorrow's event, the former PDP legislator answered that his attitude "should not be interpreted as if I had joined any of the Opposition parties. What I am trying to do is that the components of the opposition political parties of Puerto Rico forget the old party lines, to create a new collectivity". Dqego added that he did not lose the aspe rito zas of the new Party being organized, and in that acttttnriublrla to lg tribune of the Opposition tomorrow. In this act tomorrow there will be no flags or political insignia. The tribune will be adorned with a white canvas. (Continued on page 30).
The Mayor of New York will arrive in San Juan on Monday.
He has already left on board the steamer Agwidawn on a rest trip. He has professed friendship to the Puerto Ricans in the New York city. Golden Jubilee Party
The Mayor of New York City, Mr. William O'Dwyer, will be in Puerto Rico next Monday. He left yesterday afternoon on the steamer Agwldawn, on a rest trip. Mayor O'Dwyer's visit to the Island is of great importance to Puerto Rico, in view of the demonstrations of friendship toward the Puerto Ricans residing in New York City which the Executive of that great city has shown during the last few months. When a sector of the New York Press had just carried out a strong campaign of discredit against the Puerto Rican colony in that city, Mayor O'. Dwyer addressed a letter to the leaders of that colony, inviting them to participate in the acts of the celebration of the Golden Jubilee of the great New York city. The Golden Jubilee celebration is a municipal celebration that is taking place in the city of New York, with the purpose of remembering the formation of the referí, da úrbe, by means of the consolidation of its five counties -Manhattan, Brooklyn, Bronx, Queens and Staten Island. The origin of the city of New Yogit according to U.S. History, dates back to 1609 when Henry Hudson, an Englishman working for the Dutch, first saw, for the first time, a trl. bu of kidlos, from whom the Dutch bought for $24.00 the girdle of
i ■ A ■ v Bm -í' 'BBbpBBBNBI KL MAYOR O'DWYER land known as Manhattan, establishing the colony of New Amsterdam, which in 1664 was recognized by the British as New York. The population grew rapidly and moved eastward, later establishing the counties mentioned. (Continued on Page 27)
Finalize plans for Ponce de Leon and Muñoz Rivera Jimenez to review the (Je the improvements to be made in the vicinity of the San Juan post office, to be submitted to JP. -The Department of the Interior is working on the final plans for Ponce de León and Luis Muñoz Rivera Avenues, and has already submitted to the Planning Board the preliminary plans for the work to be done at the 26 and a half stop, and will also submit to the Planning Board next week the final plans for the work to be done at the McLearney Street connection.
the connection of McLearyj Street with Doctor Ashford Avenue. The Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Jorge J. Jimenez, stated yesterday that he also has on his desk the construction plans for the improvements to be made in the entire section around the San Juan Post Office building, which he is studying and reviewing in order to submit them to the Planning Board for consideration early next week. "This whole program of urban public improvements," Mr. Jiménez said, "will be carried out during the course of the fiscal year that begins next July 1. We are accelerating all procedures in order to achieve this objective". Five important projects, which involve an investment of several million dollars, are practically finished in their studies and designs. These are the following: Reconstruction of Ponce de León Avenue from the Tropical Medicine building to the Guillermo Esteves Bridge; reconstruction of Muñoz Rivera Avenue; intersection project for the 26'4 drSanturce stop; connection of McLeary Street with Doctor Ashford Avenue; project called Lazo del Correo in San Juan. Commissioner Jiménez said that two important roadway projects in the metropolitan area have continued to develop without setbacks. These are the section of the Rio Piedras-La Muda highway and the Hato Rey-Catafto highway. He added that they are being (Continued on page 18)
Cordero Visited Officials in Washington Discussed Details of Pension Plan for Government Employees WASHINGTON, D.C. (PU)Rafael de J. Cordero, atidltor of Puerto Rico, conferred today with Resident Commissioner A. Fernós Isern, officials of the Department of the Interior and representatives of agencies of the U.S. Department of the Interior. Department of the Interior and representatives of federal agencies interested in island affairs. Cordero arrived in this Capital on his return trip to San Juan after attending a conference in Denver last week of government budget and finance experts from all the states and Hawaii. The system of intervention in accounts and control in Puerto Rico is as modern as that of any state, Cordero told Prensa Unida. He said the mechanical facilities for regulating and compiling tabular information compare very favorably with those used in the metropolis. In discussing important activities of the Audit Department, (Continued on page 18)
News Digest
The plans for the reconstruction of Ponce de Leon and Muños Rivera Avenues are being finalized. - " 4 Allied governments will change the mountain in the west of Germany. ♦ - - Buscaglia says insurance companies are not forced to make the investment as they allege. " " * " < Staff activates paperwork to grant raises, - - - - - They survey plant finances. - - - - Police officers to take exams. Truman's 18-state tour of the Union ends. Suspension of shipment of steel for cane ríes, in Saudl-Are-bla. Senate approves loan to U.N. - Truman reveals that the Greek Army is ahead of Communist rebels. Radio stations oppose Government competition. - - - Island delegates to GOP convention, no candidate yet. - - - Doctor denounces abuse in the application of streptomycin. - - - Cordero discussed in Wáahin*- - - - - - - - - Cordero discussed at Wáahin*-
v - Puerto Rican to lead Hispanic newsletter of the Caribbean Commission. - The island's electors' counter-declarations sent by mail on the day the deadline expired were accepted. - The young Russian women in England are invited to return to the Soviet Union. - - ♦ From Tuesday they will begin a study on traffic in the entire metropolitan area. - * - The Air Force will send a squadron of 78 modern airplanes to Germany. Muños Marín finds the Island's Instruction system inadequate. - * - Columbia will cooperate in consultations to set standards, to solve problems outlined in its Report. - ♦ - More than 8,000 employees are expected to receive government grants. - - - Catastrophe in which 48 died remains a mystery. * - * Jury Trial period ended in San Juan district court. - - - Two divisions in Justice to be reorganized.
Perez activates process for raises
It is believed that it will not be until next August that the increase in salary provided by Law 282 of June 1948 and by the Regulations promulgated the day before yesterday by the Personnel Director, Mr. Manuel A. Pérez, will be paid to the public employees who are favored. The increase, however, will be retroactive to July 1, 1948, for which reason it is probable that the benefited employees will receive, in their paycheck, the increase corresponding to the latter month and to July. Thereafter, the increase will be made on an uninterrupted basis, as part of the total salary earned. According to instructions issued yesterday to the heads of departments and agencies, by the Director of Personnel, Mr. Manuel A. Pérez, these officers must submit to the Personnel Office, on or before July 15, the necessary recommendations in favor of the authorization of a salary increase to the employees they consider to be entitled to such benefit. This is what indicates that it will not be until at least the month of August that the benefited employees will effectively begin to receive the salary increase, since the Personnel Office will have to take a few weeks to determine that the employee meets all the requirements. Meanwhile, the Personnel Director has summoned all appointing officials to a meeting to be held next Wednesday, June 23, at 9:00 a.m., at the Department of Agriculture and Commerce, stop 19, in Santurce. At this meeting, the details of the Regulation for the Granting of Salary Increases will be extensively discussed. Mr. Perez has indicated that if they so desire, the appointing officers may attend the meeting accompanied by their respective personnel officers, but he urges the presence of all agency heads, "in view of the personal participation they will have in the formulation of the recommendations for the increases. This event will seek to clarify doubts as to the interpretation of the various provisions of the above-mentioned Regulations. As previously indicated, there are two fundamental conditions that must be met in order for an employee to be entitled to the increase decreed in the rules recently approved by the Director of Personnel: the employee must have completed at least twelve months of service and, in addition, his or her manager must issue the corresponding recommendation, considering the various factors set forth in the Rules and Regulations. The Personnel Office has prepared a new form, OP-34 (Certificate of Merit), on which the payroll officers will record their favorable recommendation for the employee's salary increase. Copies of this form will be made available to the agencies and departments within the next few days, so they have been asked to immediately make the necessary requisition from stock, forwarding it to the Service Office, for the amount deemed convenient. An example of this is as follows: an employee, according to the uniform pay scale, has (Continued on page 14) Another Puerto Rican at Caribbean Commission A Puerto Rican, Ms. Josefina de Román, has been appointed Puerto Rico Director of the Hispanic edition of the Caribbean Commission's Monthly Bulletin. Since last October, she has held the position of Information Officer of the Caribbean Commission in Port of Spain. As such editor, she will be responsible for gathering informative data on the social, educational and economic movements of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, to be published in the aforementioned bulletin and broadcast on the Revista del Caribe program, which is transmitted weekly through all stations in the territories related to the Commission. Ms. Román was born in Puerto Rico, having graduated from George Washington University and Columbia University, and having also studied at the University of Madrid. Before joining the Caribbean Commission, she traveled extensively in France, Switzerland, Italy, Germany, England, Argentina, Chile, Mexico and all the countries of the Caribbean.
Obstructionist tactics may prevent Congress from adjourning today; recruitment tentative
French strikers throw acid on police 1 1 1 i M - iK I WwitiflHBBBMBe 4 ' ; ■ Y. ' ' Members of the French police are shown in a hospital in the industrial city of Clermont-Fer-rand, known as the rubber capital, after receiving eye injuries during a fight with strikers in that city Wednesday when acid was thrown at them. At least 600 people were injured between authorities and strikers. The photo was received in New York the same day, broadcast from Paris (Associated Press photo).
GOP presentation in favor of Statehood was presented by the Island delegation. - Dorvillier covers FILAMLFTA?lünÍo~ 18.-(PU)The Puerto Rican delegation to the National Convention of the Republican Party today submitted a paper requesting the admission of Puerto Rico to the Union as a state. Acting on behalf of the Puerto Rico Progressive Republican Union Party, the delegation offered several alternatives to the proposed petition. The first simply states: "Statehood is the only solution to Puerto Rico's political status, since Congress made Puerto Ricans American citizens in 1917 and in 1940, through the Nationality Act, made Puerto Ricans American citizens by birth, with the same rights, privileges and immunities enjoyed by American citizens". In addition, says the paper, the Nationality Act of 1940 specifically states that "Puerto Rico is a part of the continental United States", therefore, "entitled to receive full support for the realization of the aforementioned aspiration". Also presented today to the GOP Platform Committee was a proposal for "Immediate Statehood" for Hawaii. The proposal is submitted by O. P. Soares, chairman of the Hawaii delegation. The proposal reads: "We favor the immediate admission of the territory of Hawaii as a state of the Union". It follows the model that the GOP platforms employed before the admission of Arizona and New Mexico. A bill granting statehood to Hawaii has already passed the House of Representatives. It has been held up by the Senate in the Public Lands Committee, until one of its members can visit the Islands. (Continued on page 11)
Buscaglia says insurers are not obligated as they allege He affirms that they can make the investment required, in bonds of El Pueblo, and not of the agencies. He says the withdrawal has been due to consolidation By JUAÑ "MARTÍN' eFcHAPEL EL MUNDO Reducer After an absence of three days, yesterday the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Rafael Busóaglla, was in his office, where he stated
8- ; Survey is made on finances of the plants Also on labor and life of the workers. - A comprehensive study of the financial conditions in which the sugar mills of Puerto Rico currently find themselves, and of the living and working conditions of the workers who are employed in them, is being carried out by the Puerto Rico Minimum Wage Board. Mr. Cándido Oliveras, president of said organization, revealed yesterday the study that has been carried out by the JSM's Research and Statistics Division. Mr. Oliveras announced that the study is being carried out in the form of a survey, both in the manufacturing and agricultural phases of the industry, to establish the economic situation of the sugar mills and the sugar cane growers. For the purposes of the study, a sample was chosen from all the sugar mills operating on the Island, in which the economic situation of the sugar cane growers is verified. The report resulting from the study, announced the president of the JSM, will be used by the Board in connection with the revision of Mandatory Decree number 3, which sets wages, working hours and working conditions of the workers, and which is being withdrawn from its scope.
The Board has been retired to his country residence at Comerlo, in order that he may better attend to and devote more time to various important matters of his Department which must be completed before the last day of this month, when the fiscal year 194748 closes. At his residence in the field, the Treasurer was receiving frequent reports on the progress of the Treasury Department, and resolving matters that needed his personal attention. Lic. Buscaglia has plans to leave for the United States next week. When asked by this editor about how Puerto Rico is affected by the withdrawal of ten major foreign insurance companies, in protest against Act 30 of December 1947, the Treasurer stated that "neither Puerto Rico, nor any person or business that is insured at present or wishes to be insured in the future, will suffer any damage or be exposed to any risk, by the approval of Act 30 or by the withdrawal of that group of companies from their business. Mr. Buscaglia stated that "the argument that insurance companies are obliged to purchase a higher percentage of bonds and obligations of Puerto Rican origin than what was previously required is false. The new law does not alter this aspect at all," he said. "What has been done is to expand the list of eligible collateral. Before, bonds of the People of Puerto Rico or of the municipal governments, which were backed by the good faith of the People of Puerto Rico, had to be used as collateral. Today, other bonds that, by virtue of the collateral rules, the Governor declares acceptable as guarantees of funds I (Continued on page 1).
On behalf of the many
We reproduce below our editorial of yesterday, in response to repeated suggestions from our readers, to give renewed emphasis to the presentation in this editorial of one of the serious aspects of the island situation. We have been insisting that, in keeping with the prevailing situation on the Island, the Government should submit itself to a rigorous examination of conscience, seeking a readjustment in its budget that will give the people a better service at a lower cost. We have been suggesting, at the same time, a relief for the island taxpayer and have censured the imposition of new taxes at this time. We address ourselves to the President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, as the person who is in a position to do much to achieve that economy in government expenditures and that relief for the taxpayer. Mr. Muñoz Marín has answered us, but he has not made any reference to these main issues we raised. Instead, he formulates and explains a few premises, such as, for example, that THE MULTITERRANEAN
for example: that EL MUNDO has not interpreted the statistics provided by him correctly. We pass for now the ''errors of interpretation'', since these are ''from the point of view'' of Mr. Muñoz Marin. We hope to convince him that we have interpreted the island reality correctly and that he should help to achieve the things we have requested. Let us go to the so-called factual errors. We said that in the Island at present there is no appreciable greater economic welfare and that there is inflation. That is the reality. Mr. Muñoz Marín denies that reality by citing comparative statistics between 1940 and 1946, which in summary state that in 1946 the average worker earned $343 compared to $246 in 1940 (both figures expressed in 1940 dollars). This is not a fortune, and it is even less so when divided among the three or four persons who depend on the worker. Muñoz Marín himself acknowledges this. But we are not going to dwell on this (Continued on page 18)
Senator Taylor Delays Jobs Delegates from Both Houses Seek Settlement in Discrepancies .By FRANK ELEAZER WASHINGTON, June 18 (PU) - An informal bicameral committee agreed tonight on a twenty-one 'month Selective Service program. whose first conscriptions would begin within ninety days. But a filibuster initiated by Senator Glen Taylor, Democrat of Idaho, threatened to delay final Congressional action on the measure. The agreement was reported by a member of the committee. It must still receive approval from a formal bicameral committee and then go to both Houses for final approval. The other details of the compromise program derived from the two competing congressional bills were not immediately disclosed, but most of the other differences were considered minor. The agreement, reached by a bicameral committee that did not actually receive formal status, came as a blow to Selective Service opponents in the House, who had succeeded in burdening the peacetime enlistment bill with restrictive amendments. House members voted for a one-year enlistment term, and decreed that conscriptions be delayed until at least January 31. The Senate approved an Immediate Selective Service, and decreed two years for the period served. The conferees removed the so-called Shafer amendment, under which enlistment could not begin until next year. That amendment they changed it to a clause providing for enlistment to begin within ninety days, under which President Truman, as in the Shafer amendment, would give the signal for the movement of Selective Service machinery to begin. Taylor, a third party candidate for the presidency, began his obstructionist action while the conference group was in session. Officially, the conference committee had reached no conclusions. Chan Gurney, R-South Dakota, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, told reporters that the committee would reconvene and make its decisions only after the senatorial conferees were formally appointed. Their designation - agreed to earlier today - was delayed overnight when Taylor began his one-man stalling action at 4:37 p.m. The "singing cowboy" was still in the Senate. The "singing cowboy" was still speaking vigorously at seven o'clock tonight. But Senate leaders were sure they could wait longer than he could talk unless he was unit ran reinforcements. At that hour, there were none in sight. The House also had to approve the conference report, but, unlike the Senate, it did not allow unlimited debate and the rules facilitated quick votes. Still in session overnight, the House reached the point of a final vote, when action was blocked by Rep. Vito Marcantonio, R-N.Y. Labor, who invoked a little-ignored rule that provides that a measure must be printed in final form before it can be put to a vote. In today's final vote in the House, 145 Democrats and 138 Republicans favored the bill, and 30 Democrats, 98 Republicans and two Labor members opposed it. Taylor's action in the Senate jeopardized congressional plans to recess on Saturday. But Robert A. Taft, head of Senate Republican politics, was still optimistic that the Congress would recess tomorrow at six o'clock or seven o'clock tomorrow night. Taft said that Taylor would be allowed to die speaking and that all the work would be accelerated tomorrow so that it would pass at 1 o'clock in the evening. Taft pointed to an evening meeting with his Senate Republican Po. litica Committee to consider the housing bill passed by the Candara. With that h House made more progress than the Senate in clearing its schedule in its last-minute legislative backlog. But bills on overseas spending, displaced persons, postal employee pay increases, appropriations for the armed services, the United Nations, and agricultural legislation still remained in various stages of legislative work. * The following are some of the highlights of the House draft bill, as compared to the medldt (Continued on p. 30).