W W T T r j I , U VJ
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Fair to partly cloudy. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High 78: miniaba, 88. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 89.87 inches of mercury.
40 pages 5/
DAILY JOURNAL
MARAÑA
AÑoxxvm
Entered as second clase matter, Poet Office, San Juan, P. R
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RI€O - SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 21, 1948
Motorists, let's show the traditional courtesy of the country
NUMBER 11222
The South gives Democrats an ultimatum *
If within 27 days you are not dropped on race question, there will be a schism 50 congressmen made decision come President's program interferes with states' right Pnr JOHN L~CTJTTER WASHINGTON, Feb. 20. (PU). -Loe Southern Democrats, who have revolted against President Truman's civil rights program, gave the Democratic high command 27 days today to aban*nish the race question or face a schism in the Party. Some 50 congressmen from 11 Southern states met privately and endorsed the attitude taken on February 7 by the Southern Governors' Conference. On that date, the governors agreed to suspend all action in connection with a split in the Party for a period of 40 days, and elected a 5-man delegation to ask satisfaction of the Chairman of the Democratic National Committee, J. Howard McGrath, at a conference to be *held* Monday in this city. Pledging to send a committee of legislators to the conference at which the governors will make their case to McGrath, the Southern members of the House of Representatives, adopted a resolution asserting, that the civil rights question must be silenced or "most assuredly there will be a stranglehold" on party support in the South. They "respectfully, but forcefully, warned" the Party bosses not to try to include the program in the platform to be adopted at the 1948 National Convention, a maneuver which they have successfully carried out in the past. Mr. Truman, who called for party harmony in his speech last night in commemoration of the birthdays of Jefferson and Jackson, was not in town to hear the latest repercussions of the "'ompact South" dissension. Early this morning, he left on his private plane for a two-week trip to Key West, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. Although the President made no reference to the civil rights dispute in his speech, Southerners today openly stated that his silence had not helped to restore party harmony. Represented in the legislators' caucus were several ( members of the House of Repre- ; sentants from Alabama, í Mlalslpl, Georgia, Texas, Florida. North Carolina, South Carolina, Arkansas,-' Louisiana, Tenness?e and Virginia. 5 No senators attended, but many of them, as well as many ; members of the House boycotted e| fund-raising banquet last night. In addition gives this action many states which held , banquets last night for the same purpose, may rotengsh their funds, which would normally have entered the Party coffers. Pledging to "fight to the bitter end" Mr. Truman's calls for federal laws condemning lynching, poll taxes and racial discrimination, the Southerners charged that such proposals would constitute an interference with states' rights and hinder local efforts to relieve the tension of the racial problem. Their resolution stated that approval of the above recommendations "would represent an invasion of state sovereignty and an enhancement of federal power far beyond its clear limitation by the Constitution. The resolution also argued that federal action to protect the rights of Negroes "would most regrettably interrupt the progress which has been made in several states in the solution of the difficult and painful problems which naturally arise from interracial differences. Cautioning "all who are interested in the success of the Democratic Party" to keep racial issues out of the Democratic platform, the rebels pointed out that the party "has been nurtured and sustained throughout its existence" by the Southern compact. Rep. J. Bayard Clark, D-N.C., told reporters he drafted much of the resolution. He added W "I language "was not as forceful" as several of the representatives would have wished, but "my chief interest was to prevent the conference from degenerating into confusion and 'oca .toning damage to the Party." Although today's session was strictly a matter for Representatives, Southern Senators had previously stated that they were strongly opposed to Mr. Truman's program, and several had cautioned the Democratic leaders against a. laughable split in the Party. Sen. Harry F. By-d. Demo(Continued on p. 16)
Gen. Willis Crittenberger in Puerto Rico.
■r A mu, . wJa vIlMl / I I b 4 ® ■ I '5. 5 * ' RS lT ( Á
Lt. Gen. Willi* D. Crittenberger, Isqulerda, chief of the Caribbean Defense Command, arrived at lela Grande airport the day before yesterday afternoon, for the purpose of ocnferencecl with the chiefs of the Army, Marins and Air Force and to observe maneuvers on Vieques. With him in the photo, from left to right: Maj. Gen. Harry H. Vaughn, military aide to the President; Maj. Gen. Ray E. Porter, Chief of the Army IsaFuenes in Tas Antilles; Vice Admiral Daniel E. Barbey, Chief of the Tenth Naval District.
There was a new drop in the price of grains and other foodstuffs. - Steel Prices Rise By JOHN~BARROW CHICAGO, February 20. -(FU). grain and stock prices fell further today and many other grocery prices were lowered, but retailers complained that there was still consumer resistance in spite of the markdowns. Housewives are apparently fearful that a large buying spree could lead to higher prices, retailers said. The American Meat Institute, a spokesman for the meatpackers, said a check i at various points showed that retail meat prices had : wadoff sharply in ( many sections, reflecting declines in wholesale prices. A study by the United Press in New York showed that the price cald there in the last week wiped out nearly half of the increased costs in food for an average family during the ■last year. Upward pressure on the cost of living developed in the Metal Industry. Major producers announced a series of price increases which the trade estimated would cost steel consumers $68,000,000 a year. Prices ranged from $3.50 to $25 per ton for pipe, structural steel and semi-finished steel. Joseph M. Dodge, president of the American Bankers Association, said the increase in steel prices "has inflationary characteristics. He declared at a Press conference in Wáshlng* ton that the increase was "an indication that the dangers of inflation have not vanished." The large manufacturers of (Continued on page 14)
The Attorney General suggested using the island of La Mona as a prison It would be used for cases considered incorrigible - Negróh is against Ja death penalty. He favors peace courts to be substituted by municipal courts.
Lui" Negrón Fer to Rico, suggested to Governor Pifl tahlecer in Ja Isla de Ls Mona ui those inmates who are consldo: penal form, and which could be Inaugurated Immediately with 200 or 300 inmates. During a one-hour talk before the Rotary Club of Santurce, the Attorney General made an analysis of the administration of justice in Puerto Rico, pointing out all the failures of the criminal prosecution system on the Island, and recommending the corresponding remedies. He expressed his opposition to the elimination of the jury and the reestablishment of the death penalty, and expressed his opinion that the peace courts should be abolished and replaced by municipal courts. Mr. Negrón Fernández also suggested that the Government pay greater attention to the problem of juvenile delinquency, "practically abandoned until now," as an effective effort to eradicate crime in Puerto Rico. The Prosecutor began his speech by stating that he recommended a redistribution of the judicial "zones" from )a Island to Island, so that in each town there would be a municipal court, whose jurisdiction would extend even to civil cases. He then referred to the new rules of criminal prosecution submitted by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico to the Island Legislature, pointing out some of the most important, such as the following; the one that provides that 9 jurors, out of the 12 that intervene in a criminal case, shall constitute a legal majority to decide the same, instead of the unanimity required at present; to leave to the discretion of the Judge the fixing of bail in those cases already decided by a district court and appealed before the Supreme Court; to leave to the discretion of the Judge the fixing of bail in those cases already decided by a district court and appealed before the Court of Appeals; and the new rules of criminal prosecution submitted by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico to the Island Legislature.
nández. The Puerto Rico Health Department notified the Puerto Rico Department of Health of the need and possibility of this maximum custody prison, for ran "lost" in the cemetery program, to submit cemetery plans until the Municipality complies with the requirement, it cannot put it into use. "The Department of Health of Puerto Rico has notified the Health Department that it must submit the plans of the cemetery being built by the Municipality in Isla Verde, so that the Health Commissioner may issue the corresponding permit for the opening and use of the cemetery. The Isla Verde cemetery, which was planned to solve the problem of congestion in the San Juan cemetery located in Barrio Obrero, "e began to be built some time ago, and for its construction the Puerto Rico Board of Plañe" issued a provisional permit, but the Department of Health was not consulted on the matter, from which no permit was requested for the construction nor were the corresponding plans submitted. According to the Municipal authorities, the Isla Verde cemetery will be used for a period of time only, after which it will be moved to another place, probably the property acquired in the Monacillos neighborhood of Rio Piedras, where it was originally planned to be installed and which was later abandoned. Mr. Juan G. Figueroa, head of the Sanitation Bureau of the Health Department. He informed yesterday afternoon that the Government of the Capital has been notified to present plans of the new cemetery, so that the opening and use permit can be issued by the Commissioner of Health, Dr. Juan A. Pons. Mr. Figueroa also informed that the Government of the Capital has been notified to correct certain deficiencies that may be present in the new cemetery, so that a permit may be issued to open and use the cemetery.
Compendium of News
The Procurador suggested not to use the Isla de La Mona as a prison for incorrigible fallers. Colón Gondiany condemns that workers can participate in pi- , quete against Truman *-* They advise that tomorrow they stock up on water in Puerta de Tierra and the hull of San Juan. ♦-a Collazo signs convent in New York that extends to the island an education plan for veterans. [S; *-* Five English naive* women were in Ponce. x Three judges and a prosecutor demonstrated against the death penalty in Ponce. a *** PIP asks independentistas to ask the President by telegram or letter to intercede before Congress in favor of the island's independence. Health asked the Municipality to submit the plan for the new cemetery in order to authorize its opening. The basic period for the payment of wages to the workers of the sugar industry has been altered. Vlcéns estimates that the drop in prices will soon have repercussions on the Island. *-* During the hearing on the incident at the Escobar they gave names of the private persons who occupied the box of the Legislature,
Southern "Democrats" warned the party that if Traman's civil liberties program is not abandoned within 27 days, there will be a schism. Murray denies that he violated the Taft-Hartley Act's ban on union political activity. ♦"* The cegetista sector of Barrete receives certification from the NLRB. Puerto Ricans in New York are advised to participate in recreational activities* as a means of learning English more quickly. They begin to discuss the contract for the economic study of the Aguadilla port works. They propose that MacArthur be invited to testify regarding the aid program to China. - Traman and Marshall show concern over some countries' challenge to UN. ♦ * ♦ Truman is expected to make a speech of world importance on the island. Yesterday m finalized all the* details** connected with his arrival. Gemsále* * Vldela believes it possible that there may be uranium in Antarctica. The* price* of* grain and other* food* was further* lowered. - í ' - . Secretary Krug arrived last night. ' *-* In Czechoslovakia a serious political crisis arose yesterday as the goTilerno de ce" I '" cion. The parties* modered"" rebelled against the oosiuniitn predominance.
Vicéns believes the decline will soon be felt A
He is attentive to the decrease in flour to order lower prices for bread He will resolve on the price of milk Consumers are preparing a project aimed at reorganizing the AGS By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA Editor of EL MUNDO Mr. Antonio Vicéns Ríos, general administrator of Supplies, expressed yesterday his opinion that in the near future, the decrease in prices for several articles of domestic consumption, registered in the continental markets, will have repercussions in the local market. Mr. Vicéns Ríos told EL MUNDO that "given that our market is very sensitive, it is most likely that the drop registered in the United States will be reflected on the island". However, Mr. Vicéns Ríos pointed out that most of the items whose prices have decreased in the United States are not subject to price regulation in Puerto Rico, and therefore, the decrease in Puerto Rico will occur without any intervention by the General Supply Administration. On the other hand, he pointed out the exception of rice, and stated that the price of rice has not yet dropped in the United States. Referring to bread, he said that "he was watching for any drop in the price of flour, in order to proceed, if necessary, to decree a reduction in the price. On the other hand, the Puerto Rican Consumers Association authorized ay*r a note in which it informs that "Mr. Antonio Vicéns Rloa has informed a commission of directors of the APC that visited him, that he remains in constant vigilance as to the movement of the market, and is likewise in the best disposition to lower the price of bread" if necessary. The commission that visited the General Supply Manager, it is reported, was composed of Epitanlo Fiz Jimenez, Alberto Sanchez, Dorothy Ruiz, Berta Cabanllla", Moises Ledesma, Evangelista Calderon and Maria L. Guerra. The committee discussed at length with Mr. Vicén" Ríos the recent drop in prices in the United States, as well as the manner and date in which said drop will begin to be reflected in Puerto Rico. The note adds that Mr. Vicéns Ríos informed the committee about the present stocks in Puerto Rico of rice, butter, flour, grains, bacon, evaporated milk, etc. Another matter that was considered in the consumers' interview with Mr. Vicéns Ríos was related to the price and distribution of raw milk YES As is known, the milk producers have demanded that the AGS grant an increase in the price of milk, a petition that has not been definitively resolved by the agency. On this matter, APC reports that "Mr. Vicéns Ríos left saner to 1* commission that visijara him that within the next rilas will have resolved ri "sunto on raw milk." On the other hand, the APC reported yesterday that said entity already has the information and the" document" necessary for the drafting of the project aimed at reorganizing the AGS, and that it plans to submit to the Legislature for its approval. It was added that the committee appointed to draw up the preliminary draft will soon meet, a committee made up of Messrs. Cándido Oliveras, Antonio J. Colorado and Epifanlo Fiz Jiménez. It was also informed that once the draft bill has been prepared, the APC Board of Directors will meet with the legislators who will sponsor and promote the measure in the Legislature.
Water supply advised in Puerta de Tierra and San Juan
The Director of the Aqueduct Service, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, informed yesterday that he believes it is prudent that the inhabitants of the islet of San Juan, which includes the population of Old San Juan and Puerta de Tierra, provide water for their use during Sunday, in case any mishap may arise, such as the one that occurred last Sunday, when the cleaning of the aqueduct main was being carried out. Tomorrow night, the Aqueduct Service will proceed with the cleaning of the last section of the 22-inch pipe, which extends along Ponce de León Avenue. This section is between the Guillermo Esteves Bridge and the pump station at stop two. Mr. Cuevas said that as this work is planned, it is expected to be completed in time for the public in the area to have enough water in the early hours of Monday. However, in anticipation that any unexpected situation could arise, such as the one last Sunday, when the machine used in this work got stuck when it encountered a blockage in the pipe, he considers it advisable that the residents of San Juan and Puerta de Tierra provide water for the water supply.
This warning does not apply to the residents of Santurce and the rest of the area supplied by the San Juan aqueduct, according to Mr. Cuevas. The rest of the area will have water at all times after the installation of a regulating valve in the vicinity of stop eight is completed. With the work to be carried out on Sunday, the total cleaning of the metropolitan aqueduct's main pipeline along Ponce de León Avenue will be completed. It has been many years since this cleaning work was performed, causing obstructions in the water service, and in some cases, the contamination of the liquid, since large amounts of sediment and decomposed matter allowed it. The work of cleaning the aqueduct piping also caused the need to make changes in many sections of pipes, which were in very bad condition due to constant use. In other cases, the company took advantage of this circumstance to remove deteriorated valves, replacing them with new ones that allow a better distribution of the liquid through the pipeline.
Revenue estimate set by Pinero is higher than that of the PB This is due to the fact that the Governor used the revised figures of the Treasurer of Puerto Rico as the basis for his expenditure budget report
Governor Piñero's revenue estimate for the next fiscal year, at $878,4W.338, is $4,149,338 higher than the estimate submitted to him by the Planning Board in its Fifth Economic Program of the Government. It is due to the fact that the Governor reportedly took
In order to publicly protest the salaries they earn, as well as the classifications they have been given under the Personnel Law, a commission of weights and measures inspectors of the Weights and Measures Bureau of the Public Service Commission visited the editorial office of EL MUNDO yesterday to protest the salaries they earn. . The commission was composed of Inspectors Restitute Velez, Jesus M. Castro, Fausto Arroyo, Jo "é D. Rosa, Tullo D. Rivera. Jorge J. Ramirez and Roberto Daly. They explained to an editor of EL MUNDO the economic limitations they allege they are suffering because of the" low salaries they earn, while they are forced "to perform a copious amount of work." The members" of the commission maintain that under the old Civil Service law their positions" were classified as "weighing and measuring inspectors," with a salary of $125 a month. They added that when the new personnel law was passed, their classification was altered, and they were called "field investigators," with the salary for beginners being lowered to $105, while $125 was maintained for the experienced ones. They said that "the $125 salary is (Continued on p. 16)
Notwithstanding such an increase in the Revenue estimates for the main tax items, the Government expects a deficit of $4,223,173.39 for June 30, 1949, amounting to $4,223,173.39. Said deficit is also expected at the end of the present fiscal year, since according to the fiscal study conducted by the Bureau of the Budget, the excess of appropriations over resources, as of July 1, 1948, will be $4,195,820.73. For the fiscal year 1948-1949, the Bureau of the Budget increased the Planning Board's estimate for the income tax from $20,000,000 to $23,500.00; that corresponding to excise taxes from $21,000,000 to $22,500,000; that of the island tax on alcoholic beverages from $5,000,000 to $6,900,000; and the income from the lottery from $3,000,000 to $3,764,338. As to Federal Internal Revenue, the Board had indicated a probable income for the coming fiscal year of $5,000,000,000. The same was fixed by the Governor at $12,000,000, and $2,350,000 was added to the general estimate to be paid into the general fund of the Treasury if a fixed, self-renewing appropriation for the maintenance of the University was approved, eliminating the one? percent tax on the Federal and insular tax on alcoholic beverages. To cover the cost of the proposed expenditure program, the Governor has recommended a $5,000,000 bond issue next fiscal year, an action which was reported in advance by EL MUNDO.
Veterans' Agricultural Education Plan Extended to the Island
By Benjamín Arnaldo Meyner" NEW YORK, February 20. (By teletype)-A contract was signed yesterday afternoon at the offices of the Veterans Administration in this city, between the Commissioner of Instruction of Puerto Rico, Mr. Francisco Collazo, on behalf of the island department which he directs, and the Veterans Administration, by means of which the veterans' education plan is extended to our island. According to statements of Commissioner Collazo, made to an editor of EL MUNDO in his rooms at the Dixie Hotel, in this city, the referred contract implies that more than a thousand veterans in Puerto Rico will benefit from this agreement, which will also provide the opportunity to employ agronomist instructors to take charge of the teaching of our veterans.
the teaching of our "veteran".
This contract is the result of the combined efforts of two members of the Cabinet, the Commissioner of Labor, Fernando Sierra Berdecta, and the Commissioner of Instruction, Francisco Collazo, who held several conferences in Washington on this matter, clearing up all doubts for the approval of the plan. As is well known. Yesterday the Commissioner of Instruction sent a cablegram, informing about the signed contract, to "u Department in San Juan; and the New York veterans office did the same, notifying the San Juan office, directed by "1 Dr. Jaime Serra Cha""rry. about the approval of the agreement.
Truman is expected to make a worldwide statement on the island.
Secretary Krug will continue with the President to the Virgin Islands.
He was pleased to return to San Juan upon landing last night. Last night the United States Secretary of the Interior, Mr. Julius A. Krug, who is part of the entourage of President Truman, whose visit to the island is expected today, arrived in Puerto Rico. The plane that brought Mr. Krug to the pals from New York, where he arrived from Washington to board it, landed at the Isla Grande airport in San Juan at 8:30 this evening. He is accompanied by the Director of Information of the Department of the Interior, Mr. Carl Skinner. Responding to a question from an editor of EL MUNDO as to what was now his Department's position on the disputed matter of the location of the San Juan International Airport, Mr. Krug said he was reserving for today any statement he might wish to make on the subject. "I am "very pleased to be back in Puerto Rico" - were his first words" and added: "I am pleased to be back on the island, particularly because of the visit of President Truman, who arrives tomorrow (today)." Secretary Krug said he would leave tomorrow, Sunday, for the Virgin Islands to accompany the President on a two-day visit to the island," remaining Sunday in Santoma" and
M ' ~ ' A ■ /and Ji ■B "rae JULIUS A. KRUG ri Monday on St. Croix, on which day, at" two o'clock in the afternoon, the President and his entourage will leave for ia naval base at Ir Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. From the latter site, Secretary Krug will return to Washington, as reported to EL MUNDO, the Director of the Division of Territories and Insular Possessions, Mr. James P. Davis; the Governor, Mr. Jesus T. Piñero; Senate President, Mr. Luis Muñoz (Continued on page 16).
Yesterday final details were worked out concerning events in his honor 11 " * V Trade expected to close all day Police organize protection work - Picket will be from eight to twelve By Wllílnm DORVILUKR WASHINGTON, February 20 (Special to THE WORLD) - President Truman told the press that he was "as happy as he could be" shortly before boarding his plane at 10:32 A. M. today. M. (Eastern time), to begin a trip to Puerto Rico, postponed twice, and become the fourth President to visit the island since it became a U.S. possession. The President will spend the night at a submarine base in Key West, Florida, from where he will fly to San Juan at 4:00 A.M. (US time). He will arrive in the Puerto Rican capital at 9:30 a.m. (10:30 a.m. in Puerto Rico). (From Key West, it was reported at the afternoon that Truman had already happily arrived at the base). Truman is expected to make three speeches on his trip: in San Juan, Santomas and Santa Cruz. A senior official who knows the island very well and who is expected to act as the President's chief adviser and guide is part of the Presidential party. He is Admiral William D. Leahy, the President's Chief of Staff, who was a very popular governor on the Island from August 1939 to November 1940. He will visit the Island for the first time since leaving the governorship to assume the post of ambassador to Vlchy. Truman's visit will tie the score for the Democrats". Truman was preceded by Theodore Roosevelt in 1906, by Herbert. Hoover in 1930" and by Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1934. Waiting for Truman in San Juan will be Julius A. Krug, Secretary of the Interior, and the military aide to the President, General Harry H. Wughan, who arrived in Puerto Rico after having attended the Inauguration of the President of Venezuela. In addition to Leahy, the presidential entourage includes: Robert L. Dennison (Captain Naval Aide: aa Colonel Robert B. Lnndry. air aide: Secretaries William D. Hasset and Mathew J. Connelly; Assistant Press Secretary Eben Ayers; Clark Clifford, special adviser; John Steelman, aide to the President; Brigadier General Wallace Graham, physician to the President; and Stanley Woodward, Director of Protocol, State Department. Steelman has been a longtime friend of Munoz Marin and Governor Piñero. On Saturday evening, after participating in the entertainment, which includes a luncheon, a meal and a reception at the Fortaleza, the President will board his yacht, WHllnmsburgh, which will sail for San Francisco at four o'clock in the morning. The Press will be represented by a group of 28 journalists, representatives of radio and film news. For the first time two journalists of color will cover a presidential trip of this kind. The group of journalists covering the President's trip will be quartered on the aircraft carrier Greenwich Bay. It will serve as Truman's escort ship on his trip to the Caribbean. The journalists" will make all" their trips by commercial aircraft. The President's two host governors, Piñero and William H. Hastie, were appointed by Truman, and White House insiders welcomed press reports from San Juan of plans to picket the President as unimportant. A source close to the President reported that he was the last person to worry about such things and pointed out that Truman had been picketed several times at the White House by different organizations. The same happened with Rooievrit. Meanwhile, a Government sito funcionarlo asked qu* 1* to translate an editorial of THE MllNDO of February 17 in progress and said it "was excellent." This funcionarlo would not give *1 name, fearful of "the" Political implications" "i made a statement endorsing the deseripetón of Truman's editorial as 'a nmlgo of Puerto Rico." He said it could be interpreted that he was trying to "stifle criticism of the President." t Another government source, however, pointed out that although in official circles there was complete confidence that no untoward incident would spoil the President's visit, the most experienced observers in the United States would analyze all news from the island for its importance. "For one day," the source said. "Puerto Rico will be the news center of the Nation and possibly the world." He implied that the di*cur(Continued "n p. 16)