THE
WEATHER FORECASTS TABA LA ISLA, TODAY: Partly to occasionally cloudy with one* light* to scattered* showers* in the morning, becoming cloudy to partly cloudy and rainy from time to time, with possible thundershowers* with thunder* in the afternoon and early evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY! High, 88; low, 78. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 P. M" 39.88 inches of mercury.
42 Pages 5/
TOMORROW'S NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXIX
Entered a* second cíese matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO-SATURDAY, JULY 31, 1948
NUMBER 13382
It is likely
Allied commissioners do not find Mololov East is on vacation. - Dissension in two proceedings By Donald J. Gómale* WASHINGTON, July 30. -A dispatch was received in this city from the American Embassy in Moscow stating that the Russian Foreign Minister, Vlascheslav M. Molotov, is "on vacation" and therefore "unavailable" for critical verbal negotiations in the official circuits. No denial has been authorized of the possibility, reported today, of the United States, Great Britain and France trying to discuss the Berlin blockade directly with the Soviet Premier. Josef Stalin. On the other hand, R. H. Shackford, ' United Press correspondent in London, reports that official circuits in that capital revealed today that, even though neither side wants to admit it, a controversy has arisen, behind the scenes, between the United States and Great Britain, regarding the manner of making the allied case to Moscow. Americans on alert in Berlin In Berlin, PU correspondent Walter Rundle reports, American defenses in Germany have been kept on alert for the past few days, prepared for any contingency, senior officials in Munich reported today. Thirty bombers, 75 ordinary combat aircraft and 18 jet-propelled combat aircraft remain on alert. Radar crews report that they have picked up the flight of unidentified aircraft over the U.S. occupation zone. The prevailing view in Washington is that if Stalin is also unavailable, the Russian Government must assume full responsibility for what may happen as a result of the Berlin blockade. The representatives of the Western powers arranged a personal conversation with Molotov to put to him the new Allied point of view and to determine the price which the Russians would charge for the lifting of the blockade. It was reported that these representatives were prepared to offer discussions on the Berlin problem, the German problem or any other problems, if the Russians first lifted the blockade. They favor direct approach It is understood that the United States favors a direct approach to the question *to Stalin, since the explosive possibilities of the situation were too alarming to entrust negotiations to the subordinates of the chancelleries. The State Department did not indicate whether or not it regarded Molotov's absence as a "slight." Michael J. McDermott, the Department's press officer, told reporters that he preferred "not to touch that issue." McDermott stated that, according to a dispatch received from the American Ambassador in Moscow, General Walter Bedell Smith, "Mr. Molotov is on vacation," acting as Acting Chancellor Valerian Zorln. The dispatch did not indicate whether steps were being taken to determine Stalln's whereabouts, nor when Molotov would return from his vacation. McDermott declined to say whether the Allied envoys would try to see Stalln. but said he doubted that any new instructions would be transmitted to the envoys. It was precisely these words, which were taken as'an Insinuation that the Allied ambassadors would try to arrange a conference with the Russian Premier. Republican* Alarmed* In conjunction with the news that Republicans are becoming increasingly alarmed at certain aspects of the Administration's approach to the Berlin problem, it was reported that John Foster Dulles, Thomas E. Dewey's chief adviser on foreign policy matters, conferred today with the most prominent leaders* of Congress, and with Under Secretary of State Robert A. Lovett. There have been suggestions that some Republican leaders believe that, rather than the State Department, it is the Defense Department which is exerting greater influence on American policy in Berlin. As an example of the internal division, the unexpected American decision to halt overland transportation through the Russian zone of occupation in Germany is cited. This decision was seen as a step taken by the Army without consulting the State Department, thus upsetting the delicate balance of negotiations between the West and the West. In London, the informed circuios say that the controversy arisen between the United States and Great Britain, involves the procedure of the approach and the publicity of the diplomatic management (Continued on page 14),
People's Assembly to be held on August 15
..'BBBBBflRhflBBBBBBBBBBBBBHBB. . a- T MUI 9 ■ i Jejo. b 19 i , ]■ HUr- JP K * ■r Wl / "Wi I 41 BF MHBí - 9 H |1|<' W T JgMk I rafiA *B > JE Eb Chief- Al H a Ir > -o--;?': O ir wWo*
An aspect of the meeting held yesterday by leaders of the People's Party on Capitol Hill. Seated, from left to right: the Administrator of the Capital, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier; Senator Vicente Gélgel Polanco; the Speaker of the House, Mr. Ernesto Rumos Antoninl; the President of the Senate and of the Popular Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, and Mr. Raúl Gándara, Chief of the Island Fire Service. Standing are Mr. Lula Lahoy, secretary to Mr. Muñoz Marín (in the background), and Mr. Luis Montalvo, of the Auto, rldad de Transporte, (to the left). (Photo* EL MUNDO).
English teaching will be improved Even though thousands of students will again be left out of the classroom this year on the island due to the lack of school facilities, in San Juan the authorities of the Department of Instruction expect to accommodate the total number of students requesting enrollment, with the exception of about 700 first-grade students for whom they cannot provide accommodation. Acting Commissioner of Instruction Francisco Collazo said that as far as San Juan is concerned, the figure of 700 children who will not be able to gain access to the public schools represents a considerable reduction from the number that was left out of the classroom last year, which stood at 1,000. Collazo informed that according to reports given to him by the Superintendent of Schools of the Capital, Mr. Verner Taylor, 400 children will not be able to enter the first grade in Barrio Obrero and 300 in the Lolza Street sector between stop 20 and Martin Peña. He said *1 Commissioner of Instruction that, taking a commendable step that he is the first to recognize, the Municipality of San Juan built from its own resources seven school buildings with a total of fourteen classrooms, to help reduce the number of children in the capital who are out of the classrooms, and who are in the first grade. Collazo also informed that as for the middle and high school grades in San Juan there will be no problem, since it is expected to accommodate all those who apply for enrollment in these grades. In the rest of the island, however, the situation remains more or less the same: due to a lack of classrooms and teachers, thousands of children will have to continue to take turns in order to enter primary school or continue their secondary studies. Experiment in Morovi* Commissioner Collazo stated that he attended a meeting held in Morovis to make known a new plan that the Department of Instruction plans to establish on the island to facilitate the continuation of their studies in higher education for children who, due to lack of facilities, are forced to interrupt their school work. Morovis is one of the towns that has requested the establishment of the tenth grade, for ninety students, and the policy of the Department is not to encourage the creation of Incomplete high schools". AHI an experiment will be made which, if it has favorable results, will be extended to all lo* towns where there is no high school. An (Continued on page 18.)
It will take place in Escobar Park; Muñoz appointed organizers The party president had my exchange of impressions yesterday, with the island leadership and a local group.
It was authoritatively reported yesterday that the general convention of the] Popular Party will be held at the Sixto Escobar Park, in San Juan, on August 15, next month. To take charge of everything related to the organization of the Popular Party assembly, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin proceeded to - - - - a commission composed of.
- ■ - - , v Government employees will meet hov. * Expect them to clarify their attitude on raises, obven Today, Saturday, beginning at nine o'clock in the morning, the annual assembly of the Federation of Island Government Employees, presided over by Mr. Justo Pastor Lozada, will be held in San Juan. It is expected that this assembly of the public employees will approve a resolution fixing its attitude regarding the implementation of the laws for the increase of salaries and the granting of subsidies to government employees, laws which the President of the Federation of Employees, Mr. Justo Pastor Lozada, recently said have not been implemented, in accordance with the spirit in which the legislators approved them. Mr. Pastor Lozada denounced that many employees who, according to him, have sufficient merit to be deserving of better treatment have been left out of the benefit of the subsidies and the salary increase. On the occasion of today's meeting, the FEGI President made the following statements: "The FEGI favors all measures aimed at improving public services. Our attitude in this respect is frank and sincere, because we are convinced that in order to implement such measures, it is not necessary to sacrifice or depress the employee, neither economically nor morally. The improvement of services must be in harmony with the progress and welfare of the employees, who are the ones who provide the services to be improved. It is not necessary, nor does it produce constructive psychological reactions to the purpose pursued, e) Implanting rules and procedures that are detrimental to the employees. "We public employees wish to assure the people that we wish to serve them, and serve them well; that we consider it an honor to be able to cooperate effectively in the implementation of the standards of progress and improvement that inspire the Government. The whole philosophy of the merit system which we advocate rests upon the honesty with which those standards are implemented. He employs(Continued on page 6).
■vnPsiKnar a witubiuji inicKiaua i by speaker Ernesto Ramos Anlloninl, Lic. Víctor Gutiéirrez Franqul and Mr. Raúl Gán- ; dara. Chief of the Sen-Icio Insular de Bomberos. Discussing matters concerning the convention, Mr. Muñoz Marín held yesterday a broad exchange of views with members of the Insular leadership and local leaders in a meeting held in the Capitol caucus room and presided over by the President of the Senate and Speaker Ramos Antoninl. According to what was anticipated yesterday by an official spokesman of the Popular Party, 1" convention of said collectivity will constitute an "extraordinary demonstration of forces" that will surpass all those made in the previous assemblies. It was also revealed yesterday that the leadership of the Partido Popular has already summoned the insular leadership for another meeting to be held today, presided over by Mr. Muñoz Marín. The issues to be discussed in this new meeting were not disclosed, but it was said that it will deal with programmatic problems and candidates at large of the Partido Popular. It was not possible to obtain preliminary information regarding the candidacies, but it was said that "this matter is being resolved in the greatest harmony" among all the supporters of one or the other. It was also ■ reported that Mr. Muñoz Marin will attend today a ban1 quete. to be held in the town of Fajardo.
Selective Service Will Still Take Time to Enact Deferments
WASHINGTON, July 30 (PU) - Selective Service officials* said today that it will be "some time" before a deferment system for new peacetime conscripts can be established. SpecUlciments law exempts certain men* from compulsory service. Poro the Selective Service will decide on the* bate* for lo* deferlmientoa of other such* conscripts* as man* catado* and aque11o"" who have penonat dependent on them. All young men, aged 18 to 25, must register for the military service, but only those between 19 and 25 will be called to service for 21 months. The vast majority of lot conacriptoi will come from the ranks.
will come from the ranks of men between the ages of 19 and 21. Married men* will not have to serve now. But the Selective Service will have to decide what will be done with young men* subject to the conicrlption. who marry or become fathers*. During World War II, dependency deferments were not authorized* unless $1 marriage or birth took place on a specific date*. The* officials* said that they* did not know if the same procedure would be followed under the new peacetime* conscription, since the deferment alaterna* on this occasion will be more liberal. There is 1" certainty, moreover, that (Continued on page 6)
Strike talks break down again; food shortage begins
About 10,000 tons, on the docks Price hikes have been reported for some items in San Juan Pnr S. GALVEZ MATURANA Editor of EL MUNDO The effects of the current strike decreed by the dock workers have already begun to be felt in the metropolitan area, reflected in the shortage of many staple products* in almost all commercial establishments in this area. Due to the fact that when the strike began, small quantities of products such as potatoes, lard, butter, codfish, pork products, and others were left in the establishments of the metropolitan area, which have practically sold out, the price of some items has begun to rise, and the effects are also being felt in the depletion of the stocks of cereals. Many stores have very low stocks of beans, corn, chickpeas, peas, and other grains, but the situation is more serious in terms of items that are easily damaged. A considerable quantity of sacks of potatoes, consigned to a well known commercial house in San .luan, have been damaged at pier number R, because they had been on the dock for more than a week. While this shortage of food products is being registered, which already threatens a crisis that has begun to manifest itself, about ten thousand tons of food, essential for our daily diet, are stored in the different docks of the Capital. In a tour of the San Juan docks, in spite of the inconvenience and impossibility of obtaining official numbers regarding the cargo on the docks from the shipping companies, who claimed they did not have the specific data at hand, this editor was able to verify that large quantities of these foodstuffs, which are already beginning to be stored on the docks of the Capital. An inspection of the foodstuffs stored on the docks*, and cnn*tataclon of the approximate figures given by Jos employed "n each of the Capital docks, show that the total gross tons" of foodstuffs stored reaches an apioxlmada figure of ten thousand, At dock number three there are stored 700 sacks of feed" for cattle, 400 cartons of chickpeas. 300 cartons of sausages and 300 cartons of "petit pols. Alongside this wharf is berthed the steamer Dorothy, with a large quantity of food on board, and the Monróe, in whose holds are stored a large quantity of cans of lard, barrels of bacon, pig's feet and pork products, and a large cargo of hams. It was not possible to obtain specific data as to the specific quantities of these "products" from the company that owned these ships. At dock number 5, according to data supplied by officers of (Continued on page 22.)
He called for vigorous measures to stop inflation.
Tor Merriman SMITH WASHINGTON, July 30 (PU)E1 President Truman and his* economic advisers warned Congress today that a depression is brewing,'if nothing is done to stop Inflation. Prices, wages, production and profits have reached all-time highs. But, said the President, this may be the calm before the storm if Congress does not adopt "vigorous measures" to bridge the transition from post-war uncertainty to a stable economy. President Truman expressed his views in his Semester Economic Report to Congress. The Report, which includes an analysis by the Joint Economic Advisers, has been submitted to comply with the provisions of the Continuing Jobs Levy of 1946. ' "The facts," said the President, "do* not present a clear and puzzling conclusion. Although there are some favorable factors, we are in the midst of the convergence point of inflationary forces, which day by day are imposing additional burdens on families and which day by day are undermining the foundations of the relatively high level of postwar prosperity which he-.
Clark will step up the fight against speculation by allocating additional staff. WASHINGTON, July 30 (Special to the New York Time*) - As part of the campaign against conspiracies to maintain or raise the prices of food, clothing and housing, the inspection staff of the Justice Department's Anti-Trust Division will be materially expanded, Attorney General Tom C. Clark announced today. New offices will be opened in Philadelphia, Jacksonville and Kansas City, while" inspection staffs in New York, Boston. Cleveland. Chicago, Denver, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Seattle, is being increased. While the expansion is primarily aimed at addressing cost-of-living conspiracies, it will also enable the Division to deal with what Mr. Clark calls "the growing concentration" of economic power in other areas. Under the new program, the entire country will be covered, each zone office attacking monopolies within the states it covers, (Continued on page 15.)
As EL MUNDO anticipated, most of the employees of the Island Government were unable to collect their July paychecks yesterday, the last working day of the month. At the end of the month, the only departments that paid all their employees were the Audit, Executive Secretary and the offices of Personnel and Police, teachers and employees of the Insular Government. The employees of the Treasury Department were paid with the exception of those belonging to the Income Tax* and Beverage and Narcotics Bureaus. Part of the "employees" of the* Department* of Labor, Agriculture and the Unlver "ersity were also paid. Agriculture and the Unlver "ity. In Instruction, the central office employees were paid; but
Truman warned Congress that a depression was brewing.
Bib -41 w i-i-HARRY S. TRUMAN mns maintained to date." Mr. Truman said that "it will be very dangerous for us to assume that depression will not come, even though.'we have no measures to control Inflation." The President's economic advisers, led" by Dr. Edwin G. Nourse, said that "impossible to trace relationships in the price structure" may cause a breakdown in the economic system, which will lead us into "a general recession of serlas proportions." The President seized the opportunity (Continued on p. 18)
Two spinsters accused of swindling Puerto Rican families in New York
Prosecutor alleges Dorothy and Pearl Bloom demanded $4,882 in illegal "tips" for renting apartments described as "mice caves" New York, July 30 (Special to the New York Times) - Two spinster sisters, who were accused of defrauding Puerto Rican families in New York City, were charged with defrauding the families of Puerto Rican families.ada* spinster sisters, whose mild-mannered and inoffensive parl- ¡ cies stand in marked contrast to the charges against them that they are "greedy, despicable and inhuman" rent cheats, were charged with having demanded a total of $4,882 in illegal "tips" for rent from tenants of an abal- । lodgings - all of them Puerto Rican families.
The pair of spinsters - Miss Dorothy and Miss Pearl Bloom - reside with their father, Simon Bloom, in an elegant apartment at 210 Riverside Drive. Prosecutor A-ank S. Hogan called the defendants the perpetrators of an "evil" scheme that allowed them to exploit families desperately in need of low-cost housing. As real estate entrepreneurs, the spinsters, the prosecutor testified, leased apartments lacking hot water service in twenty-five buildings in Brooklyn, the central West Side and sections of East Harlem. Fourteen of those buildings have been charged with more than 1,000 violations by the Department of Housing and Building Inspectors who have described them as "mouse caves. A three-month investigation by Assistant U.S. Attorney Andrew W. ¿eider revealed that eleven tenants were able to obtain apartments only after agreeing to purchase a motley collection of broken and dilapidated furniture at exorbitant prices. In addition, three others had to openly hand over "tips" totaling $8,450. When arraigned before a special session of Judge Frederick L. Hackenburg's court, the defendants "pleaded not guilty to the charged offense of conspiracy and Violation of Section 065 of the Penal Code, which governs the issue of excessive rents. They were released on the posting of a bond of (Continued on page 18)
A large number of government employees were unable to get paid.
no teacher was paid. In Ja Police the "oficíale", "argentos" and corporals who were recommended for promotions have not been paid. No employees of the Health Department were paid. Justice. Interior and State Insurance Fund. Neither did the officials and employees belonging to the Governor's Office receive their pay. Among those who have not received their salaries are the Governor Plftero and the Administrative Assistant, Mr. Jorge Font Saldaña. In the Budget Bureau, everyone was paid. Since today is a governmental holiday, it will not be until Monday or Tuesday that the departments that sent their payrolls * Auditoria, in the last days of this week, will be able to receive their salaries.
The parties will meet again next Monday. Workers go to Speaker By LUI8~SAÑCH¿Z CAPPA Editor of EL MUNDO The efforts being made by the conciliators to find a solution to the strike conflict prevailing in the port area suffered another setback yesterday afternoon. A few hours after the representatives of the shipping companies and the representatives of the two District Councils of the International Longshoremen's Association met to resume talks on the demand for a 25 percent increase in wages, the meeting was suspended without any agreement having emerged from the meeting to put an end to the strike. At ten o'clock in the morning negotiations began in the offices of Jose L. Novas, legal counsel for the maritime companies, with Federal Conciliators Charles A. Goldsmith and William McAlister, and the Island Conciliator, Adolfo Collazo, present. The workers proposed to the employers that they withdraw their request that the controversy be submitted to an arbitrator, and then they would make a proposal on wages. It was authoritatively reported that the companies refused to withdraw their arbitration proposal. The workers* proceeded on their part to request an increase of 15 cents per hour over the present wages, proposing further that the difference between this 15 cents per hour increase and Ja demanded 25 per cent, be submitted to arbitration, so that *the amount of the increase over the difference could be decided by the arbitrator. After negotiating on this pro| position, the meeting was adjourned at twelve o'clock, and resumed at half-past three o'clock in the afternoon, at which time the parties again sat down to discuss, and the shippers reported their rejection of the pro| position. The deliberations were again broken off, but the .stevedores and the shippers" agreeing, at the iniel*'tiva of the conciliators, to meet again next Monday at । three o'clock in the afternoon. On the other hand, it was reported yesterday by a spokesman for the companies that "it is possible that the National Labor Relations Board in Washington will be asked to reconsider the decision issued by that Board on the charge brought before it by the companies that the union had violated the Taft-Hartley Act by declaring an illegal strike. According to our informant, if there is no solution to the conflict in the negotiations next Monday, they will then proceed to request a reconsideration of the NLRB. As is known, the Board determined that the charge of "illegal labor practice" that the employers swore against the workers was not valid, since there was insufficient evidence to prove it. The same ruling was rendered by the Board as to the charge filed by the Union against the companies for alleged "bad faith bargaining" and refusal to bargain. The latter ruling was rendered on the same grounds as were adduced for the former. Meanwhile, as of yesterday, four steamers had left the port of San Juan for different points, carrying on board all or part of the cargo destined for Puerta Rico. It was reported by the Porto Rico Line that the steamer Borlnquen "e had been forced to sail from! port of San Juan, bound for New York, with more than 375 tons of dry goods consigned to Puerto Rican firms. The final disposition of this cargo was not reported. The Belgium Victory, of the San Juan Mercantile Corporation, left last night on an unknown course, carrying in her holds over 3,000 tons of foodstuffs shipped by Pacific port firms to merchants in Puerto Rico. It was reported by the steamship line that this vessel has been in San Juan since July 23, unable to unload because of the strike. The Spanish steamship Magallanes also left the port, but was unable to unload the cargo it had consigned and signed in San Juan. It was reported that the ship brought from Spain, a cargo of approximately 100 tons of product* of that pal". For its part. the navteu firm Pope & Talbot reported that its va by P. T. Navigator, which was caught by the strike .surto in - port of San Juan, spoke islldt for Puerto Cabello, carrying on board about 300 tons* di (Continued on page 18.) <
There was incident between Villamil v chief Soto in Rio Piedras cut off.
w .¿uV bet v .Or ir fok W.. i A B i - 4BBBb ■ ■ eMB -
LCDO. ANGEL M. VILLAMIL CHIEF BENIGNO SOTO It happened during recess, while they were airing charges against University students. - They decided to appeal cases to the District
By ANGEL CRUZ CRUZ EL MUNDO Staff Writer Jet* Benigno Soto of the Insular Police, who currently holds the position of Chief of the Metropolitan Area Detective Post, yesterday assaulted Angel M. Villamil with his* fist* in the session room of the Rio Piedras Municipal Court, second lesson, presided over by Judge Francisco Coll Moya. Mr. Villamil received a scratch on the left side of his face. Moments before being assaulted,
Mr. Villamil acted as a lawyer defending Lula A. Kortrlght Valladar*", one of the youths denounced in connection with the events" of the last university strike, and severely insulted Chief Soto, whom he accused of being the accomplice* of a policeman who allegedly acted improperly on the day in question. Lui* Kortrlght Valladares was charged with the crime of disturbing the public peace because, according to the complaint, on May 4 of the year (Continued on page 7)