THE KffiNDO
rSONOSTIOUS WEATHER FOR TAHA ISLAND, TODAY - Partly cloudy, occasional showers. IN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temp. 90; minimum, 77. Barometric preaion at sea level, at afternoon laa, 39.94 in." of mercury.
42 Pages 5/
LA MARANA NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXIX
Entered na aecond daaa matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JUNE 12, 1948
AntomoHllitaa, dunMtrMnn* the traditional cut of the pala
NUMBER 13833
Pinero moves for approval of the bill of homes
Will seek action on measure* related* to Din By William Dnrvllller WASHINGTON, Junin II. (Esperial for EL MUNDO). FU Governor Jema T. PLfiern lined WáShingtnn. rie passage today for the rl* Governor* Conference to begin in Portsmouth. New J Hampshire, on] next Monday, ron j the determination to get con-J peraclon .of the state governors in an effort to obtain approval d*l the Taft-Eliendar-Wagner home profernce before the current session ' congresslonnl recesses on June 19, according i the Governor's own remarks. Píñern said: "He will call upon the governors of the states to lobby for federal legislation in favor of better housing for both veterans and civilians. > He added that if e| Congress recuses and fails to act sofiriv the Taft-Flllender-lVagner bill, he expects it to reconvene during a hr "ve period between the national conventions "*, when he expects to be back in Washington "to, ha-1 per all he can fnvor the ; bill." ! Said bill is presently on the floor of the House Rules Committee in the same form in which it was passed in the Senate. The measure into law would provide Puerto Rico with financial assistance for the public housing program sufficient to eliminate, in the opinion of the housing officials of San Juan, all of ElFangulto, and La Perla, the city's main suburbs. Favorable action on the prnyec-i to in Ja House would be tantamount to its passage, since qut" the President has stifled by the measure and.the sign it Immediately. Pifiare will leave Sunday rum-¡ ho toFilari "lfl" to visit his children. andhiegoconHnu will travel ha-j cia Boston, from where he will continue "n automobile h<$ja Portsmouth. New Hampshire, to attend the Governors' Con-J ferenda. Píñern , said he iiabout participating in / a roundtable conference with Gov. Thnmas E. De- '■ way. of New York. Femó* moves for action on lalq billa The Resident* Commissioner, Dr. A. Rernós fsern. conferred with Tmey** 'Republicans ri* the House of' Representatives, today, in an effort to obtain the suspensfon of the rule to permit acHon on dn" projects related<M>qp Fuprtn Rico, Monday of the week \ien>. The bills, already passed by! the Senate, are *1 of Burlar to authorize -the Legislature to filar certain salaries to functionaries of| . Government that of Cordon, to protect the American citizenship of Puerto Ricans born before April 11, 1899. Both of these bills were on the House calendar last Monday, but because of a parliamentary rule requiring them to be on the calendar for two legislative days, they were not then considered, As last Monday was *|the last day of the special calendar, *|in ' the House before recess, 1 would require *1 unanimous consent for suspension of the rules for action to be taken on the bills. Fernos said he was confident that the House leadership would accede to his request to suspend the rules. If the bills are brought up for consideration, there is no doubt that they would be passed without objection. Strike by unions prohibited WASHINGTON. June 11 (PU). - Federal Judge Alan Goldsborough today issued a preliminary injunction prohibiting railroad labor unions from striking until he makes a final decision on whether or not to grant a full injunction. The judge announced that he would not make that decision until at least *1 22nd of the month. On that day, Golris- . borough .will grant a hearing g| hear his application for a full interdict. It is pcsible that a few more days may elapse before *1 Judge renders his ruling. The ord "npr?!lminar signed by the Judge, today replaces a temporary injunction prohibiting a work stoppage which averted a railroad strike at torinel straw a month ago, The injunction expires tonight.... "Neither the Army nor the Army is currently operating the railroads. ,
WASHINGTON. June II. tPlD The House Committee on Agricultural Affairs agreed today to give its approval tomorrow, Saturday, (today) to a bill allowing agricultural laborers to be brought to the United States from Puerto Ríen and the British West Indies. Representatives of industry and agricultural organizations told the committee that such authorization is necessary because Mexico has refused to allow its citizens to work in certain American states because of possible discrimination. Robert C. Xloodwin, director of the U.S. Employment Service, which is in charge of the program, said that all such cases have been investigated and it has been determined that there is no basis for them. Goodwin said that up to sixty thousand foreign laborers will probably be brought to the United States during the harvest season if the project is approved, about ninety percent of them from Mexico. The employers will pay the transportation expenses incurred by the Government. The Government of Puerto Rico, through the Commissioner of Labor, Fernando Sierra Rendarla, and the director of the Bureau of Employment and Migration, are to confer on (Continued on page 18) Ochoteco sijjue supporting new party idea He makes rrfcrrnria to the* inlrre*p* romiinM of minority* party* Félix 'Orbofem, son, 'interim president of the Ll■Itera Party! Puertorriqueño, stated yesterday that he continues to be a supporter of the organization of a new political coalition, and that he was sure that his attitude would be shared by the great majority of the country's electorate, which was making evident in all the towns its desire to defeat in the next elections the current government party. *I understand, added Mr. Ochoteco, that all* opposition* parties* have common and related interests, and as parties of the same kind, it would be a disastrous tactic to attack each other, forgetting the common enemy, which is the Government party, "Wherever there is a minority group," said the Interim President of the Liberal Party. No matter their political and social aspirations, they are a group of free citizens who are concerned about the destruction of the prevailing public interest in Puerto Rico, "The Popular Party is the only one that can (Continued on page 1R)
Aponte Initiates Intensified । campaign against rape, f - Piflero will request help from governndore" to achieve approval of the bill *ohre hogn' ' re". 1 ♦ - - - Insurance agent" explains fmr why insurance companies have withdrawn from the Island. - - - Ochoteco "Igue supporting Idea of new party, - - - - Will resolve before" July Iro. the issue of differential payment to por "onnl po "tal. - - - - triarte accepts new party v porn not Vega Raja's plan. And - - - - Q Allocate $11,000 for preliminary work tie restoration at the Tapia Theater. - - * 127 people disappeared*, when they hit a mine and the Dutch barge sank. Roljr works on the renovation" of the Uniformed. "- - - - - Arrangements made" for aviation and storm relief. - United States insists on international control over atomic energy. Health Instructs on the plan of classifications. 1 - - - - Vandenberg's presidential candidacy faces obstacles. Vandenberg faces obstacles. UPR's Cornejo To Ask For Improvements In EatuI diantea Regulations.
News Digest
-HE prnrrnga until the end of the year the desire to contradecljaracinne". Marahail and Hoffman criticized Ir House's downgrade of the aid plan to Europe. - - - . Truman flew over the "Flooded" area in Oregon. - - - - Tenancy clarified on 1ft percent increase contracts. Hidiiult defended before the National Assembly e1 labor sohre ar. German cldent. - - - In Weatinghoiise offers alrA Á its workers." J * ♦ - Dr. Guillermo Arhona appointed Head of- Health Póbllcu. President gives FEGI aRpara sa further improvement to Police. Garcia Mendez proposes to agree candidacy" romanea on the ballot, Including the , P1P. - ♦ - E "tiidian(e" Cuban" "e "e bataron a tiro" in Havana. Committee of the ('Amara to approve today hill snbre shipment of hortruR" workers to U.S.. - - - The supersonic copibate plane has not passed Ir et*pa d*l design. ♦ ♦ ♦ - Will raise Port Ríen" issue at Albany metpritsts" conference. - - - Merger of the two nr "anlaacionM da detaUiatM studied.
Tenancy clarifies 15% contract
In order to clarify some confusion which he said has arisen among landlords and tenants regarding the requirements to enter into contracts for rent increases under the new national tenancy law, Jorge Benitez Gautier, Territorial Director of the Office of Housing Accelerator, issued an official note yesterday, in which he explains the provisions of the law to that effect. It is reported by the aforementioned office that during the year 1947 about 700 contracts were signed in Puerto Rico between tenants* and landlords to increase rents. Mr. Renltez Gautier points out that upon the expiration of the contracts signed to be in effect until December 31, 1948, the dwellings covered by them will again be subject to the rent law. The note is as follows: "Since the Federal Rent Act of 1947 was amended on April 1, 1948, the Office of the Housing Accelerator has been receiving hundreds of telephone calls and letters inquiring about the new requirements for entering into leases which have the effect of increasing the maximum rental rates for dwellings by up to 15 per cent. In order* to clarify doubts and answer the questions most commonly asked by both landlords and tenants, the Federal Office has decided to expand on the information published in the newspaper EL MUNDO on March 31, 1918, on "15 percent leases. During the past year about 700 contracts were signed in Puerto Rico, of which an equal number of tenants agreed to increase the rents of their respective dwellings by hundreds which fluctuated between .V per cent and 1 per cent of the amount of the rental rates fixed by the Federal Tenancy Regulations. In almost all cases . dlch'bs leases, approved under the provisions of the 19471 regulations, will expire on December 31, 1948. We are now asked whether the dwellings which were the subject of these leases will be reinstated on January 1, 1949. "Those dwellings will NOT be twoconliolnds. Federal law provides that any unit covered by such a contract will again be subject to the Federal Rule. | The Federal Act provides that any unit covered by such a contract will again be subject to Federal Rule. 1949. i Therefore, Tenants* who sign such a lease* will continue to be protected by the Act until । March 31, 1949, the expiration date of this Federal law, "IF, for any reason, the lease is terminated, or terminated, after March 1, 1948, it shall revert to Federal control, at a maximum rental rate equal to that provided for in the terminated lease, but such maximum rental rate may be increased to a maximum rate equal to that provided for in the terminated lease; but such maximum fee may be reduced by the Office of Housing Acceleration, as provided in Section 5-c of the Federal Regulations. that is, in the event of the elimination or reduction of leased space, services, equipment, furniture, etc., (Continued on page 1R>
a boricua's triumph
Miss Gloria Fragoso, a blind native of Puerto Rico, won the valedictory of her class upon graduating from Neton Hall College with a bachelor of science" degree from Archbishop Thomas J. Walsh, Archbishop of Newark, New Jersey, after four years of study in the Braille system. (Photo by Associated Press). Insurance agent" explains why they have withdrawn as punishments aldemar Lee alleges "security deposits involve locking up assets (foot may be needed to meet emergency cases Mr. Waldemar F. Lee, insurance agent* of San Juan, addressed a letter to the Superintendent of Insurance*, Mr. Lorenzo J. Noa, expressing the reasons that have induced some of the* insurance companies he represents to withdraw from business in Puerto Rico. He informs
Mr. Lee that such action nn t e-i presents' a protest in relation ron the new Law' which obliges the / vonfpaftlas de seguro* e Invertir fondo* en bona* del Gobierno o sus inxtrumentallrindes, and adds In si-J guíenl"; ("La* razone* por las cuales la Phoenix Assuiance Company, In ■ Guardian Assurance Company Ltd. ! . y In LColtimbia Cnxunlt.v Company sc sc withdrawn, are the following: "First, they have maintained the principle that the security they pro- ¡ vide to their policyholders in । all over the world is not limited by í the amount of deposit required j according to local laws, but <|ite all, rl their total free capital is dls- ¡ ponlble to meet ; their* obligations. It is, therefore, a fundamental principle of insurance that liquid funds should be centralized as far as possible in order that the companies may always be in a position to meet promptly the needs which may arise in the event of local disasters, "The imposition of deposits of I gatanlla is contrary to the aforementioned principle, since it becomes the locking up of assets in the event of a disaster. The funds thus placed are inadequate to meet the risks resulting from a Whormal conflagration or other disaster, such as an earthquake or hurricane, to which Puerto Rico is particularly vulnerable, and the system is inadequate to meet the risks resulting from such a disaster, and the funds thus placed are inadequate to meet the risks resulting from a Whormal conflagration or other disaster, such as an earthquake or hurricane, to which Puerto Rico is particularly vulnerable. If the system to which the 4? funds were universally adopted, the best offered at present by the central fund would be greatly disproportionate. Difference in law lngle "ii "If such a system of deposits of i i i collateral* were followed to its logical ¡ conclusion, it would mean that the collateral for payment of losses in a particular area would be the ¡ j funds currently deposited in that area, a situation which could ¡ (Continued on page 18)
- ' * * > j Will settle case 25 % before July I/-' A*this was assured by Vincent Burke, assistant chief of Deparlauiento < .orreos By PAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, June 11. (PU) - Assistant Postmaster General Vincent Burke told the United Press today that the Department expects to decide before July 1 whether to extend to Puerto Rico postal employees a twenty-five percent differential in pay; increasing pressure was exerted on the Department last week to include the island's postal employees in an order extending the overseas differential to Hawaii, The order will be effective on July 1. Burke said today that the Deparln-, ment is sending a Jnveslign-I dor to Puerto Rico to determine whether the cost of living there ex- so high as to justify the payment of the (lifet curial of twenty-five per cerjto. He added that the Department would receive the report of the Ini vextigator within fifteen days. He added that the Department expected to receive the investigator's report within fifteen days, so that a decision on the matter could be made before July 1. Meanwhile, William Langer, a North Dakota Republican and chairman of the Senate Civil Service Committee, told the United Press that he intended to do "everything possible" to make the differential payment effective in Puerto Rico: Puerto Rico, (Continued on page 18)
5,000 allocated for preliminary work on Tapia Theater
A supplemental budget ordinance, allocating $5,000 for the preliminary work on the restoration of the Tapia Theater, was approved by the Board of Commissioners of the Capital at its regular session held this week. This amount of money is in addition to that provided for in the law approved by the Legislature authorizing the use of a surplus of $131,000 of a special contribution, which the Government of the Capital will not be able to dispose of until President Truman gives his consent. Governor Pinero said, moments before leaving for the United States, that a week ago he had already sent to the President the aforementioned law together with a favorable report in *1 which requests his approval. The Resident* Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, Dr. Antonio Fernós Ixern, according to what the Administrator of the Capital said, is diligently seeking, through the U.S. Department of the Interior, the prompt presidential approval of the statute authorizing the payment of $131,non. Mrs. Felisa Rincon de Gautier, administrator of the Capital,
yesterday, that early next week she will summon the members of the Capital Theater Board to consider various matters related to the early restoration of the Tapia. - In the opinion of Mrs. Rincón de Gautier, it will only take a week or two to begin this work. On the right wing of the Tapia theater there is a café restaurant which is said to be an obstacle to the beginning of the restoration of the building; but according to Mrs. Administrator of the Capital, *1 contract authorizing the lease of such cafe is expired and the owners have been asked to move to another site and if they do not do so within a reasonable period of time, the eviction procedure will be established in the manner determined by law. As previously reported by EL MUNDO, the plans for the restoration work of the old coliseum were entrusted to the architect sefinr Jorge Jullá, who )n" finished hare má" 4e "the" i" i months and torio is Hato to emI prender |a work, as soon "* cuani (Continued "n the patina 18)
Roig works on the reorganization of the Uniformed
The Financial Reconstruction Corporation announced yesterday that ¡ the "actlvhjade" of the "e- । cumiarlo mortgage" market, of the Federal and National Mortgage Aao1 elation, - subsidize it from the | CRF, - s? With effect from June 1, the "x purchases made by the Federal and National Mortgage Association will be limited to cases in which the application is filed, and the commitment is issued, prior to the commencement of construction of the improvements on the mortgaged property. The application for the purchase commitment must be accompanied by demonstrative proof that no other market is available. Up to this time, such limitations have been in effect with respect to the* commitment* of a mortgage on mortgaged property under sections" 2U7 and (>(>(>8, "l"' the National Debt ('on "l t uc" ión de \'iv leudas, which ruin e multiple* dwelling units. Anlei iormenle. the Axndarlon has emllldo commitment" of purchase on hipolera" ' gai "ni under the "eccb'úi 2o3 and In arcelon 603, ante" ite or during the period (le i'mw liucrbni, and has purchased such" mortgage" xubslgule-ntemente to the Iei mintóii". "ie the construction, provided that the mortgage did not bubie in force for more rie 1 one year, Dr. A bnew chief of Public Health i I . - He has twelve negotiated" under his jurisdiction Acaiia long inlerinalo | Yesterday was appointed director <1* the Public Health Division of the Depart ámenlo d? Health,-rl Dr. ¡ I Guillermo Arbona. The appointment was extended by the Acting Health Commissioner, Dr. José Alum, Dr. Arbona will become director of the Public Health Division next Monday. With this appointment ends another of the Interim Health Depar-| J lamento de Salud. In the Public Health Division Public Health was directed for a long period of time by Dr. Ramon A. Rio, who was to become the head of the Public Health Division. Rio", ' i who became the director of this department, which is considered as one of the most important in the Department of Health. Department dr । Health, since it fills under xu juiixdic ! rion twelve negotiated; Statistics*. | j Epideotniolog¡a. Sanitation, '1 uI bei "ulosis, Miliaria Control, Enfei mellad''" Venerei cus, Infant and Maternal Hygiene. Crippled Children, Lnlxx alorlos of Public Health. I.aboraloilox Quimbos, Servirlos Mó* * "heos and Sol íales; and Ením met as, 1 I 1 , 'I doctor Albinia, ton who no" lomiinii'Hniox in nyer's tíñale, 1 did not want iiai er any < omeiitnrio ( ' on his nojnliraiiiicnto. SolaniKnlr s"< limited himself to lúíoimar that, aileináx 1 of the Direction of the Division of ' 1 Health Píibliea riel DeparlaiTiento rie Sniuil, he manienritá in the Direeclon of the Drpat lamento de Higiene d? la FAciicIa de Medicina Trnpbal. qu*' ' he has been serving for rxpn- : ' cío of long time. He also said that he intends to take up his new position next Monday, and that he will make public declarations after he takes office. - Dr. Guilhwmo Arbona was born in the town of Maricao in the year 1911. He studied medicine at the University of San Luis, graduating in 1934. He did xú in- ¡ temado má* larri? ?n ?l Ho "pltal\ Municipal of San Juan. Then he studied Public Health at John's Hopkins University, joining the Department of Health in 1936, as Chief of the Public Health Unit of the Diaz Lua na Diaz Hospital. He then became assistant to the Director of the Health Unit (Continued on page 1R).
IEB extends until the 16th sending of the counter-declarations
T.a Insular Board dr Election"!", | i j meeting under the "e- , | | ñor Charle* H. Terry. The Board of Directors, meeting under the chairmanship of Mr. Charle* H. Terry, agreed to extend until June 16, 2001, the deadline for the nl "clorn" con-j ■ Ira who have filed a request for exclusion to submit their counter-declarations. J Likewise, in accordance with the de- , ' termination of the Insular Board of Elections, those voters who at - 12 o'clock noon on June 16, ' have not poriirfo obtain "inrcerti-i 1 finado" positive" of birth pa- ¡ nor answer the* r*cuxarlone", po- , , . will send on said date the con-, 1 trarieclaracjón, being granted!*" h "ji , Ja the din lá of June - to send the ( certifleadoi.
■■■■■- । The agreement of reference, extending the term to answer the challenges, was adopted by a unanimous vote by the members of the 1* Island Board of Elections, and is aimed at extending, for the benefit of the electors of all the parties, the opportunities for their legal capacity to vote in the next election. In response to the agreement of the 1" Board, Mr. Terry has forwarded! to all" the" Local" Boards" of" Elec-¡ ¡clones" and to" the" presidents" of" the" co* I 'rntté" lócale" of" the" different" political" parties," the" following" communication: "I" hereby" have" *1 gu"- j Jo d* Inform" you" that" *1 deadline to" ¡rnt" the" new" "l "ctor*< r "cu "adn* h" "trio" (Continued on page 18)
The budget is five million From July V radiotelephone service begins. The examination of sergeants By Enrique Remíre" Rran Reitactor of EL MUNDO The Colonel of the Police, Salvador T. Roig, informed EL MUNDO yesterday that he was working on the breakdown of the police budget for the next fiscal year, 1948-49. To this editor, who covers Police Information, the Chief of the Uniformed Forces told him that, with very rare exceptions, the budget for the coming year will be as follows: One Colonel = one Auxiliary Chief and Ayuriant". one Ayijdante Esper-ial, one Inspector Gep*. ral, twenty captains. Among" "this" figure as a new addition of] In Police Department a legal abejar; 42 first lieutenants, RA second" lieutenant", 66 sergeant", 164 corporals, 1,840 guards and 177 detectlve" Before* the passage cj" 1" law qm" rrotgahiza to the Uniform, the personnel d" the Detective was ri* N), _= This "will eljpcrxonal tota! 4* the i Uniformed. As for the technical pcrjnnal and expertise] of the Departemen. tu, they have not undergone any change and will continue to function as they have up to- । the present. The legal senior, who will hold the rank of Captain, is Antonio José Amadeo, the Colonel's secretary, Mr. Celedonio R""osa, will hold the rank of tenlent" according to iio. / When asked how the Colonel of the Moth would have rie ¡r "r the uniform, and the insignia Y "Htlían with the new law, he replied that he did not wish to anticipate to riar opinion "on this matter, specifying to dedr that "su* lri*"" were i modernist"", PrMUpUMtó of JA,(HMI,000 The budget, harting a tentative ráb : tentative ass, amounts to clnrr, million dollar*", I With the approval of the* miavaa laye", "*p "clalm*nt" I" number 32, ¡ reorganizing the competition of the ■ Corps ri" the Police, which ri "t "r;min" the number ri" square" and fixes nu "vq" ! rank* and category", *e restituy" the old law to pay lo" ches and compensation adirlñn"! to lo" man* <;u* work in 1" metropolitan area, and lo* ri* latíala" of Culebra and Viequ**; and also increases the bonlfacición to lo* "g'ent*" who serve m motnclclclcl" the Dice *1 Corone] d" la Pnllria, ! qu* not only recognizes" said law Jodo* lo,* derecho* a qu* son । acreedore" lo* homhr "* ri" la Fuerza, but s* cnnsW*'ralilemente increases the total number "I" agonies, and it also provides for a uniform salary scale, which also represents an increase of $91 per year in 1945, and will now earn a base salary of $J32. The Uy establishes ademé', jíIic" *1 Jete "le the Uniformed, an "i*t "ma "le "atcgoilax and rank" uniform", a 1oii (1 with lo" modern advances and slnipllli''nción *n administra'Ión ' publii :i, " Seiminit of 48 hours Al icferir"? e| Colonel of the Pn- ¡ lu ía, to IH Law numeio 7. rile" that this one establishes the "emana of 4R hn ras. and the Jornada d" 8 hours daily* for In Police, Increasing considerably the number of guards, pata to be able to carry out the purposes (le said law. The Chief of Police, Salvador T. Roig. He also informed El. I)(), that at the beginning of the next fiscal year, on the ptim*ro ri* July, the police radiotelephone system will be fully operational. At his office, and in order for the editor of EL Mt'NDO to give an account of how the radiotelephony system works, the Colonel met with the Chief of the Ponre district, Captain Alberto MaéHnez, who immediately answered questions about the system.He immediately answered the questions posed by "l "efipr Roig i Nieves in agreement with the President of the Police Association, Mr. Eran' cisco A. Nieves. He reported that the Aso| dation qu" he presides over participates ri" loa ptfn'o" ri" view expr"""rto" by a| erfltoriallata ri" EL MUNDO, in the wdlcFón of the paaado mlárool"". The "efior Nieva" said that 1a Association does not participate in the selection ri "l personnel, but expects qu" the mlima "a take effect, selecting "1 personnel more Suitable, for prestida of the Uniformada As for the examinations qua "1 Chief d" the Uniformada said qú" 1?"As for the examinations that would be given to the Argentines, the President, Mr. Nieves, said that the law authorizing these examinations had been passed last year and was not applicable now, since the new law does not mention the old ranks. Ultimately, added Mr. Nieves, the examination of "ar. ! people for" tenlent" aegunrio' should "er oral, so that the Gomlilén I d" 1" Pollo!" know the rapacity i d" the candidates".
CriticizeQn the reduction to the avuda plan.
JB. V It was termed dangerous Secretary of E*state and Hoffrnan appeared before Senate committee By JOHN L MIE ELE WASHINGTON, June 11, (PU)Secretarylo rie of State, General George C. Marshall, and Foreign Aid Administrator, Taul G. Hoffman, today called Ins teducclones made by the ('Amata Bala in the exlranjeror spending program rumo a "dangerous economy" <(U" It will impede the recovery of Europe and weaken the confidence of the world in the" United States, Both General Marshall and Hoffman appeared before the Senate Appropriations Committee in a last ditch effort by the Admlnlsiinclon to restore "the $2.160,OCX),(MM) which the House cut last week in the European recovery program and in appropriations to finance six other major foreign aid projects. Marshall stated that if the reductions are not restored, the European countries which are resisting Soviet pressure and have joined the recovery program will lose confidence in the leadership of the United States. Hoffman stated that the economics practiced by the ('Amata Baja will make impossible the delivery of jáx herramlenlax and machinery nedesltada" by the sixteen nm ionex qu* have : adhered to the Maixhall Plan for j benefit of xu economic recovery in Western Euroua. In Huffman's opinion, the aid program is stripped of its "most pioduvlivq" btnzo, being reduced to "little more than a relief task. The testimony given jior Marshall and by Huffman constituted the climax in the Kltriiemlax which for three days has been held by the S-nate Appropriations Committee (luíante the rúale" a formidable batel la rie the Adminlxlia .clon and rie lo" diligent" Republicans have held the aei litation of the House of Representatives under fire." UandldatsM lo have combatid'" Finite lo" who have fought the" reduction"" include the chairman d "l Senate, Arthur II. Vandenberg, Republican of Michigan; and virtually every major Republican presidential cnndldato" Governor Thomas E. Dew "y, of New York; Governor Flail Wat t en, of California, and Harold E. Stassen, of Minnesota. Robert A. Taft, of Ohio, the Republican leader in the Senate and another prominent Republican presidential candidate, said he, too, would support restoration of the funds. The *1 Committee is expected to finish its deliberations tomorrow, Saturday, [ ronsagrAndo"? then" to a foreign aid money bill that is likely to come to the floor next Monday. Marshall and Iboffman, however, spoke in strong terms of confidence in any reduction in foreign funds, and particularly in those earmarked for Europe's emergency aid program. i eJim-Isi íislóglco of rebuja Expressing that it is "very dilliil" I justify the redu< clones drcreladiix । by the Hala House, the Secretary ' of Esíndu manlfesló that "no xe nor" I has nioxlrado just iliciu ion of lax reductions that x<'a convincing". <■ Mnrsluill emphasized the "psychological effect" that. xi'gun said the act nation of the ('Amara Bala '-n lo" pRlxe* of Western Europe that novson communists would have. That* palse*, stated r| Secintailo I'd? State, d?xafied the "abieita, formidable and threatening" opposition ' d* Russia to engage in "l combined program d" recovery in cooperation with the. F'.sfarios United States. IndicHBrio that few people understood "how much courage" such an action d* natuiai Dzr, Marshall warned that the na- * clones who have subscribed to the prograj ira rie recupera" lon has been left "in a dangerous state of mind" by the action of the ('Amaia d? Re l pre "*ntante". The Secretary of Exlado agiego ' that Communist propaganda has been working against ej progia1. ma of European recovery and v la is uxsnrio now "up to ?! Ilmi1 (Continued "n page I81