THE WORLD
PRO WEATHER FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Clear to* partly cloudy. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temp. My minimum, 70. Barometric prealon at sea level, at 4iM this afternoon, 29.98 inches of mercury.
36 Pages 5 X
LA MAÑANA NEWSPAPER
year xxvin
Entered as second class natter, Poet Office, San Juan, P. R. >
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 10, 1948
AutomovUlstaa, demoetrenoe I" oortoata traditional of the pala.
Senate may act in Savannah case.
Expect it to order review of air safety rules Coastal Airways charges were made on previous occasions, by CAA agents By WILLIAM DORVIUJES WASHINGTON, Jan. 9. (Bipedal for EL MUNDO, by teletypewriter)-The Civil Aeronautics Administration yesterday unveiled a long list of safety violation charges by CAA inspectors against Coastal Airways, operators of the ill-fated plane that crashed yesterday near Savannah, killing 18 people and injuring 10, some of them seriously. A CAA spokesman said that the allegations were, "accumulated" by CAA Inspectors, who charged Costal Airways with the alleged violations, but made it clear that such allegations must be processed through the CAA's regional office, and then may be reported to the Civil Aeronautics Board for final action. The referred violations refer to the fact that on August 21, and in Miami, Florida, the following allegedly occurred: 1-£1 co-pilot flew in excess of the legal number of hours allowed by the regulations. 3- There was no flight log on board the aircraft. 3-The manifest was not properly completed, 4-11 the airplane had not been inspected for 100 hours of previous flight time, as required by regulations. On August 27, 1947, at Miami National Airport, a CAA inspector made the following findings against a Coastal Airways airplane: I-Left wheel in poor condition. 9-The left engine box was inoperative. 3-The right engine fuel supply line was leaking. 4-The rudder surface was cracked. 5-The surface of the right aileron was in very bad condition. 6-The whole body structure was in very bad condition. 7-The manifest was not properly labeled. 8-There was no checklist in the pilot's compartment. 9--The baggage was not properly secured. 10--The aircraft was overloaded. The CAA spokesman could not say whether the "aircraft affected" by these crashes were headed to or coming from Puerto Rico, but said they were "undoubtedly plying that route." It will not be known what action the CAA or CAB will take until the regional offices involved in the case have proceeded in the first instance. It was explained that the CAA may accept a civil default whereby the offending carrier pays a fine, by way of penalty, to the U.S. Treasury. In case of a flagrant violation, the CAA reports the case to the CAB for decision. In the meantime. Carl Dolan, aviation advisor to the Senate Aviation Subcommittee, told EL MUNDO that he will attend the hearings into the causes of the Savannah air disaster and conduct a thorough investigation to report to the Senate Committee. Dolan said his investigation would be aimed at determining "the benefit for each victim" of the Savannah tragedy derived by the Travel Agenda that chartered the plane. The date and location of the hearings have not yet been determined, but it is likely to be in Philadelphia, headquarters of Coastal Airways. From a different source it was learned that (e) December 21, 1947, a Coastal Airways plane was forced to land in Miami, stripped of gasoline, There were no mishaps, however. The CAB said today that its investigators had already reported that the weather was clear and that there were no radio indications that anything abnormal was noticed on the plane prior to the fatal crash in the marshes near Savannah the day before yesterday. Dolan called attention to his briefing given to the Senate Committee, which is now before the Senate, in connection with the fatal crash in Melbourne, Florida, on July 13, last, in which 14 lives were lost in a Burke Air Transport Company plane. He noted that the aforesaid Report offers a series of recommendations "calculated to prevent similar violations of 1"" rules and regulations, with their corollary of misfortunes." In reporting on the Melbourne crash investigation, Dolan made certain observations indicating that the Coastal Airways opereclonea, in view of the CAA's allegations (Continued on p. 12)
Negron has another measure on bolita
Will Berlin be Russian? BERLIN, Jan. 9 (PU). - The German News Agency, which operates by virtue of British authorization, today quotes a Russian official as having stated that there will soon be only one occupying power in Berlin. The agency dispatch, published by several German newspapers, says that the Soviet official warned several German "political leaders" to refrain from campaigning against the Soviet, dictating in passing that three of the occupying powers will soon be unrepresented in Berlin. The official was identified by the agency as Lieutenant Colonel Nazarov, assistant to Colonel Sergel Tuleanov, Head of the propaganda department of the Soviet military administration.
There is opposition to the regulation of cars (JI Limits the privilege of use by officials.- 'Mercado submitted it va o' After making a complete study of the number of cars owned by the Island Government, of the needs of ln" officials and employees in relation to the use of motor vehicles, and other a#yeitos Indispensable" to have an exact knowledge of the proble. ma, "rftor Agustín Mercado, director of the Government Transportation Bureau, has drawn up the regulation for the use of Government motor vehicles. These regulations have been submitted to the Governor, who must give his approval for them to have the force of law. According to the report, the regulation before the Governor's consideration is designed to prevent the abuses that some Government employees have been committing on a daily basis, using Government vehicles for personal purposes, and at the same time facilitate the proper use of their vehicles for official purposes. The regulation clearly establishes that the employees of all government departments may use the vehicles assigned to them without any limitation whatsoever. The Governor, the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, are also at liberty to use the vehicles of the Government which are at their command, in the manner they deem convenient. Apart from these officials, the only heads of agencies and offices who will be left with automobiles to use them at their best convenience, will be the Chief of the Insular Police, the President of Parks and Public Recreation, and the Chief of the Insular Fire Service. The other Heads of offices and schedules, as well as the other Government employees, when they need to use an automobile for official purposes, must request it from the Transportation Office 24 hours in advance, stating the approximate time the vehicle will be used and the reasons for the trip, and each driver must, upon returning from the trip, make a report of the time of departure and arrival and the places traveled. Government officials, knowledgeable in the matter, state that the regulation prepared by Mr. Mercado is clear and definitive, and does not lend itself to discretionary interpretations that would allow office heads to misuse the automobiles. Governor Plfiero, who has on several occasions expressed his (Continued on page 12)
Gonzalez and Correa appointed nt-iarge Judges. * * * To investigate traffic in San Juan area, During hearing yesterday discussed improvements for various" streets. - Expert to recommend ex. industrial plant for the I "ls in Report to the Caribbean Commission. "The work on the weaving factory" in Ponce will begin at the end" of the month of June. "The mechanisaclóu could be used in 150,000 cord" of letter. - Negrón prepares a project even stronger than last year's against the "holiteros. " * " Congress hrasilefto repudiates di. putado" communist", denying him" seat. * o * Opposition has arisen to the draft regulations limiting the use of Government cars. " " ♦ Compartía Agricola sets procedure for liquidating livestock it half-kept, - 9 - England to nationalize me. dloina under plan to take effect in July, ♦ * * * * Plans to issue its point" of view in connection with proposed" location of International airport at Palo deco. - " - Believe Savannah case proel-.
Punishes infractions more severely than 1947 bill To be submitted to the Legislature Creates a nhevo corps of special agents. - Luis Negrón Fernández, Attorney General of Puerto Rico, intends to reintroduce, among other bills, the one related to the bolita and the holipul, which was not approved during the last legislative term. The new bill punishes with imprisonment the possession of tickets for illegal gambling, in addition to other heavy penalties, and creates, for the prosecution of gambling, specific agents of the Department of Justice. During last year's legislative session, upon the recommendation of the Department of Justice and the Chief of the Insular Police, Senator Cfttz Ortiz Stella, after consulting with the competent authorities and aware of the flaws in the current law on gambling and holipul, drafted and presented in the Senate bill number 7, "as an effective weapon to combat those games". That bill, which was not approved and will be presented again during the next legislative session next month, provided for drastic measures against lawbreakers. Sections one and two of the bill read as follows: Section 1 - "Any person who carries, conducts or is in possession of any slip, ticket, ticket, booklet, number list, artifact or any implement of what is used for the game generally known as "bolita", "holipul", clandestine combinations, etc., related to the "pool", "bolita", "holipul", "holipul", or "holipul", related to the pool of the racetracks of Puerto Rico, legal or clartdestlna lottery, or otherwise, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of not less than three nor more than one month; and in case of recidivism shall be punished to imprisonment for a term of not less than six months" and not more than two months". Section 2 - "Any owner of a printing or photoengraving shop who allows or consents to the printing or engraving in his establishment of tickets, tickets, ballots, booklets, or any other material used for illegal "games" generally known as "bolita", "holipul", "holipul", clandestine combinations related to the "pools" of the Puerto Rico racetrack, legal or clandestine lotteries or in any other form, shall be immediately arrested, and the corresponding complaint shall be filed before the competent Municipal Court, and if convicted, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term of not less than 3 nor more than five years; and in case of recidivism, he shall be punished to imprisonment for a term of not less than one month and not more than 2 articles: apare. Such sentence shall include the closure of the printing or photoengraving shop for a period of not less than 30 days nor more than fi months". The Attorney General informs that due to the fact that said prohibited games have spread throughout the Island, becoming, according to some authorities, a situation of public immorality similar to the one that existed in the United States when the island was in a situation of public immorality (Continued on page 12).
Compendium of News
Senate will take action, ordering a review of the "rule" on air safety. " " " 229 cases of measles have been reported in San Juan and Rio Piedra*. * Governor Alftero received yesterday the Se. lectivo Service Medal. * Leaders want to make Marshall Plan conditional on European nations' efforts to re-hawaken. ♦ * * The program, rules and agenda for the municipal history congress were approved. "* * * AC attorney to object to Master's Report recommending permanent injunction, prohi. hiendo expropriating Telefonica. ♦ * * "They seek to include the Island in some "benefit" of social security. ♦ " ♦ Coastal Airways will be in charge of bringing the bodies and the" wounded from Savannah. - " * Stassen charged eleven government officials with enriching themselves in the grain market. ♦ " * Bureau of Production and Marketing announces "day labor" for sugar workers. - Tari alleges that Truman is trying to turn the Government into a Sente Cteua. t -- a "**.""" -M t"
Coastal Airway s will be in charge of bringing in dead and wounded bodies.
- Se Wbr _ J* --A -A -Tí®®®
Several unidentified victims of the plane crash near Savannah, Georgia, in which 1S Puerto Ricans lost their lives, are brought ashore to receive urgent medical attention. (Photo P. A.)
Coastal Airways, owner of the plane that crashed in Savannah, Georgia, last Tuesday, will be in charge of the transfer to Puerto Rico of the injured Puerto Ricans, as well as the bodies of the victims who perished in the catastrophe. Yesterday the date on which the victims will be brought here had not been decided, but plans are to do so as soon as possible. Mr. Carlos M. Paíteme, representative of the Governor at the scene of the tragedy, cabled Mr. Piftero, at about six o'clock in the afternoon, informing him, moreover, that
the total number of dead reached 18 and that 15 of them were Puerto Ricans. The bodies of seven have been positively identified. Mr. Patterne further informed the Governor that there are nine survivors, who remain hospitalized in Savannah, with no serious cases. According to the cable, the Coastal and the company with which the plane is insured have agreed that either will pay the hospital expenses of the injured. He concluded by reporting (Continued on p. 12)
England to nationalize medicine The hoRpitalefi aeran of the Eatado and loa doctorR will be public employeeR For HOMER JENKR LONDON, eneco'9. (PU)-The Government will nationalize medicine, within a plan that will take effect next July, despite the unanimous opposition expressed by delegates n the conference of the British Medical Association, according to sources close" to the Ministry of Health reported today. The conference, attended by 370 delegates from the various branches across the country, decided today to circulate copies of its resolution recommending rejection of the plan to all 72,000 British doctors, among whom the RMA will hold a poll on the issue on January 31. Under the plan, the Government takes over ownership and operation of all hospitals and clinics or includes doctors, dentists and nurses on the state payroll. The AMR resolution clearly states: "The elected representatives of the medical profession in Great Britain and Northern Ireland solemnly declare that in their considered opinion the National Health Service Act of 1946, in its present form, is so grossly at variance with the essential principles of our profession that it should be rejected by all who practice medicine. The AMR board understands that if rejection of the law is enacted by 63 percent of the Association's 56,000 members and 16,000 unaffiliated physicians, the law would be impracticable. The law provides for free hosptial, specialty medical and dental care, as well as such child welfare and domestic help as may be necessary (continued on page 12).
Praises freedom of religion in Puerto Rico , w* Dr. Frank Mead points out intolerance. - DÍRcrime in Harlem RUCK HILL~FALLS. Pennsylvania, 9. (PU)-There is more religious freedom in Puerto Rico than in New Mexico, and more racial tolerance in Hawaii than in Harlem, according to Dr. Frank S. Mead, former editor of the Christian Herald. Dr. Mead spoke last night before the 40th annual conference of the North American Home Mission Board. He blamed 1" Catholic Church for the lack of religious freedom in New Mexico. and the "repugnance the Church feels for facing up to its responsibilities," regarding racial intolerance in Harlom. Referring to racial intolerance here, compared to that in Hawaii, Dr. Mead said that "the fault lies, in grnn extreme, in the failure of the Church to take a firm stand on the racial question." He said that in Hawaii the Church has always pursued a vigorous policy on racial matters, ,vains refuse to emigrate to the United States "because they take to racial discrimination." "Harlom constitutes a precious example of our policy of discrimination." -"HERE we find that "-they pay exorbitant rents in a virtually slum area - rents that are usually higher than in many of Manhattan's finest and most exclusive residential districts." Earlier, Dr. Mark A. Dawber, Executive Secretary of the North American Home Mission Council, said that the vast influx of Puerto Rican" and other Guipo" of different nationality and speaking a different language, and the development of new homes in New York City combine "to present a re(Continued on page 12)
Farming Company sets way (to liquidate livestock it cared for)
The Board of Directors of the Puerto Rico Agricultural Company decided yesterday on the procedure to be followed in the liquidation of the livestock that it had been taking care of in Vieques and which belong to "private ranchers of that island. This liquidation will be carried out because the Navy has given until January 15 of this month to deliver to it the lands it owns in Vieques where the livestock was being cared for. The Agricultural Company estimates that the 179 ranchers who owned the cattle in question owe it approximately $70,000 for the care, which "extended over a period of more than two years. The Compartía took over the care of the cattle through an agreement entered into with the ranchers. This agreement - as reported - provides that in exchange for the care, the Company is entitled to a S0% of the increase in passage of each animal, as well as 50% of the entire breeding. PRACO's Acting General Manager, Mr. Paul Edward, stated his agreement with the decision of PRACO's Board of Directors.
(1) In the presence of the cattlemen or their representatives, as well as other witnesses, the representatives of the Compartía will weigh each animal and compare the current weight with the previous weight, in order to determine the increase and the portion thereof which corresponds to the Compartía; all offspring will be weighed; the Compartía will calculate in dollars and cents the value of the gain in weight per animal, in accordance with the current market: the amounts due "e will be taken into the books# of the Compartía as collectible accounts" to the" 179 Interested ranchers; the amount due will be collected Individually from each rancher. Mr. Edwards said yesterday that, "we have good" reason" to believe that this" account" "will be paid"; and we will make every ""effort to collect"". He added: "I'm sure that all the ranchers realize that the money we invest in the best (Continued on page 12).
San Juan area traffic to be investigated
Yesterday, a meeting was held on Tapia and Joró de Diego streets and improvements are proposed for several roads in the Loíza area The Department of the Interior will conduct traffic investigations on the main arteries of the San Juan metropolitan area. This purpose was announced yesterday at a public hearing on the reconstruction of the José de Diego and Tapia avenues, by the head of the Department's Division of Highways, aeftor Héctor Dellz. In relation to both projects, the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Jorge J. Jiménez, presented to the Board, through his representatives, Mrs. Dellz and Jorge A. Rodríguez, points of view aimed at improving the Tapia Street project and extending the work on De Diego Avenue to cover the stretch between Loiza Street and Ashford Avenue. The views of the Committee of the Interior are contained in the following communication filed during the course of this hearing: "We have studied, in the short time available, the plans submitted and will make brief comments which we will expand on later when our Highway Research Division is in normal operation. Tapia Main Street: "1.41 proposed alignment is bound to the current urbanization of the area, there being no need for any change, "The 13 meter section" to be used■e, with Bolamente 9.50 bearing, not e" adequate in our Judgment, based on eatudlo" stopped" on the current tránaito, dlmenaione" maxlmaa of vehlculoa, etc. We call attention to the fact that the minimum taxiway for this type of roadway should have two 7.30 meter wide taxiways and two 2.50 meter wide parking lanes, for a total of 12.30 meters," according to the modern standards adapted by most of the State Highway Departments in the United States. "The current bus parking system at the intersection of Murtoz Rivera Street indicates the need to provide a substitute system to avoid the bottleneck that forms today at that location. We propose to acquire an additional strip east of Tapia Street for a reasonable length, to be used as a parking lot, or to add a circulation system for bus traffic on the side streets, prohibiting the current parking lot on 1" Tapia. "The intersection of this project with Eduardo Conde Avenue should be considered immediately to avoid additional construction that would prohibit the proper design of this intersection in the future," De Diego: "We make the same comment regarding the proposed section. "The 18-meter section should be continued to Ashford Avenue. While it is true that the proposed North Avenue would detract traffic from this section of De Diego Avenue, the future development of the former park land and all the lots on the west side between Loiza Street and Ashford Avenue, which undoubtedly will be multi-story apartment houses, will compensate for the traffic thus diverted by increasing the parking problem on this section which already exists today, this should be done when the cost of land and property is less than when the section is developed. "As I put to you rn the case of Tapia Street as soon as our Highway Research Division is functioning normally. will proceed to expound our" views more fully on these and future cases submitted by that Board." The event was presided over by Dr. Picó, with the Board members, Dr. Santiago Iglesias and Dr. Sol Luí" Descarte" also in attendance. The" projects were endorsed by, among others, the Mayor of San Juan, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier, and the" engineers Héctor Dellz, Jorge (Continued on page 12). 12) Sugar Cane Daily Rate Announced for December Fortnight The Caribbean Area Office of the Production and Marketing Administration announced yesterday in San Juan, the average price of raw sugar delivered duty free in New York, for the fortnightly period December 16, 1947 to December 31, 1947, inclusive. This average price will serve as the basis for determining the wages to be paid to workers employed in the production, cultivation and harvesting of sugar cane during the second fortnight of December 1947. "It will be recalled that until October 31, 1947," says the official notice, "the price of sugar was fixed by the Department of Arrlcul(Continued on page 13).
NUMBER 11180
Stassen alleges 11 officials have earned millions
Mondial! plans to go to Bogota conference WASHINGTON Jan. 9. (INS) - Secretary of State George Marshall announced today that he plans to attend the Pan American conference to be held in Bogota, Colombia, next March. In a conference with reporters, the Secretary of State said that the postponement of the conference, which was originally scheduled for January 17, has made it possible for him to attend the sessions. The wave of measles cases that began to be registered in the island since last September has not ceased. As of last November, 285 cases had been registered," according to the Department of Health. At present, new male cases are being registered in the towns of Rio Piedra# and San Juan, whose number has reached 229 in December and January. Now that the school year has begun again, it is most indicated that those children suffering from this disease should not be sent to school, in accordance with the general instructions given by the Department of Health in these cases* According to the Department's Epidemiology Bureau, an immense majority, probably more than 90 percent of the people who are twenty years of age, have acquired active immunity against measles, because they have experienced an attack of the disease. The measures indicated by the Department of Health in cases of measles are as follows: avoid contact with children with a case of measles or suspected measles; if a child has catarrhal symptoms and especially if he/she may have been exposed to the infection because of cases in the neighborhood or at school, he/she should be placed immediately in isolation for observation until it is proved not to be measles; a physician should be called as soon as the disease is suspected, which, although benign, is prone to complications, especially measles and otitis media, which are life-threatening to the child: if measles is proved, visits to the paclen should be avoided. Children should not be sent to school until ten days after* the onset of the rash; teachers should send home any child in the classroom who has had no previous measles illness and who is not immune to measles; any measles case occurring in any household that comes to the public's attention should also be reported to the Public Health Unit. Measles is most common in children five to fourteen years of age, although in many cases it occurs in children under five years of age. The characteristics are fever, catarrhal symptoms in the eyes, nose and throat, rash in the mouth and spots on the body, which are known as Koplik's spots. The 229 new cases# recorded in Rio Piedras and San Juan break down as follows: case# in Rio Piedras for the week ending December 12, 30; cases in the same population. for the week ending December 26. 65 Total: 95 In the week ending December 19, there were no cases in the same town. Cases in San Juan. for the week ending "1 rila 12 December. 69; case# for the week ending the 19th of said month. 6; case# for the week ending Dec. 26. 41; case# for the week ending Jan. 26. 41; case# for the week ending Jan. 18. Total: 134. Cases for the remaining days have not yet been reported. WASHINGTON, Jan. (PU)-The Department of Labor today saw no possibility of an end to the constant increase in the cost of living. To that effect, it released a report saying that the retail prices of the main staple items were higher in November than at any time in the nation's history. In a separate report, the Department said that the average wholesale price of core commodities rose to a new postwar level in the week ending January 3. This was the ninth consecutive weekly increase.
He named General Graham and Pauley in speculator's group He refused to reveal names of others He said the President's doctor was not truthful in his statement For FREDTñnTLLLEN WASHINGTON, Jan. 9.-(PU)- Harold E. Sta""en, Republican preai* denclal candidate, today charged that "about eleven" Government official# had earned more than $4,000,000 in speculation in the" food" commodity" markets. He also said in the course of the enatorial investigation into speculation that President Truman's personal physician, Brigadier General Wallace H. Gra. ham, had not been truthful in his statement that he had lost money in grain speculation. Bowing to pressure from the Senate to name names, Sfassen again named Graham, Edwin W. Pauley and Ralph K. Davies, all listed pro" viously as speculators. But declining to publicly mention other government employees, although he was willing to identify them in a secret hearing, Stassen added that he has "information, not judicial proof," concerning those whose names he was withholding, but that he did not want to openly accuse them until he had material evidence, He said there were no congressional names in the group. The former Governor of Minnesota appeared to ant" the committee as a "star witness". Stassen, who led the investigation last month when he charged in a speech in Royalstown, Pennsylvania, that government officials, including Pauley, were taking advantage of official information about government purchases to make millions in market speculation. It was reported today that Pauley, once the Democratic National Treasurer, had earned more than $1,000,000* in postwar speculation, but he offered the committee no direct evidence to back up his allegations. Most of the fire was dlri. gited against Pauley and Graham, meen" after Stassen himself was pressed by Jos Senators Theodore Francis Green, Democrat of Rhoda Island, and Joseph C. O'Mahoney, Democrat of Wyoming, Stassen also gave a mentis to Graham's statement in the seo, tldo that he liquidated his grain purchases immediately after President Truman's speech de* ' nuncíng ia speculation. "Our information," said Stae" j w "n, "is to the effect d" that he did not leave the market until" I specifically denounced that Government em" pirates were lu" ering in operations in basic articulo!". Graham's statement to the committee, which was to take effect today, was postponed until tomorrow, Stassen claimed that an analysis of Pauley's accounts showed a "syniLilarity with the Government purchases "that could not be the result of mere coincidence". He recommended that the committee investigate Pauley's business activities while he was in Europe as Commissioner of Repair" : clones in 1945 and 1946. It added that Pauley profited by purchasing 50,000 bushels of oats and other business while "traveling abroad in the rank of ambassador. On one accusation, Senator O'Mahoney had Stassen backtrack a bit. Stassen had said that the then Postmaster General, Ra. liert E. Hannegsn, and Secretary of Agriculture, Clinton P. Anderson, were Pauley's guests in Hawaii last summer, when he made a $30,000 profit on hides and a $4,100 profit on wheat. O'Mahoney forced him to admit that Pauley did the business before Anderson arrived at the Hawaii. At another point, Green asked Stassen how Pauley could have. "e taken advantage of a sharp rise in the price of wheat in February and March, 1947, by not buying any wheat during that period. Stassen countered that he profited because he did business in other grains, which rose in price with wheat. Stassen disclosed that his report of speculation by Government employees came from certain Federal employees "who were displeased with the reprehensible conduct of those who were viewing official information to profit from price increases. Pera declined to reveal the names of these informants for fear that they would cease to supply information. Ferguson agreed that such a safeguard was necessary. Stassen recommended that the Congr". so pass legislation prohibiting Go blerno employees from buying future burUU* les. stating that if President, Truman had put Roosevelt's rule prohiblend" such speculations into effect. "Pauley huH "* (Continued on pitia."