THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: Partly cloudy to occasionally cloudy with scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: High, $8: low, 78. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:00 p.m., $9.97 degrees mercury.
42 Pages 5/
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. ■>
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY JULY 3, 1948
auto-morilistas, let's show the traditional corteóla of the pals
NUMBER 13354
Allies Prepare Strong Note to Soviet; Succeed in Making Berlin Blockade Ineffective
Budget for U.P.R. is $3,775,000 Board creates several new offices Recommends that contracts of four professors not be renewed For LUIS HERNANDEZ AQUINO Editor of EL MUNDO After a week of discussion, the University Board approved, '° that "Ao to the sum of $,>,1(5,000, alendo higher than in the amount of S| (5,000, Said budget commented to take effect yesterday. Several new offices were created, which will be under the direction of the Dean of Administration, Dr. Ramón Mellado, and the position of Comptroller was eliminated, creating in substitution the position of Auditor of the University, The University Board recommended to the Rector not to renew the contracts for the next academic semester to four university professors who are considered to be opposed to the present university administration. The position of Social Worker at the Model School was also eliminated. The budget, which was completed on Thursday afternoon, will soon be submitted to the Superior Council of the Faculty, which will take cognizance of it. The Board's budgets are generally approved by the Board of Governors as recommended. Creation of new offices: A number of new offices were created in the new budget, all under the jurisdiction of the Dean of Administration, Dr. Ramón Mellado, as well as the elimination of the Office of the Comptroller, creating in its place the Office of the Auditor of the University, Mr. Rafael Miró. The Office of Examinations and Statistics was created. Previously, there was an Examinations Office at the Colegio de Pedagogía, which was in charge of the admission exams to our first teaching center. The new office will have broader powers and will be responsible for the preparation of interpretation exams and other types of exams. As for statistics, this office will compile all the statistics of our first school, make recommendations to formulate new plans, and predict the enrollment of the UPR. This office will be headed by Mr. Harry Bunker. The Faculty Office, to be headed by Mr. Eleuterio Vega, will function jointly with the Personnel Office, currently headed by Mr. Vega. The Accounting Office, the Budget Office, the Registrar's Office and the Supply Division will remain as they are currently functioning, with Mr. Miró as the director of the Accounting Office. Medical Services: In the new budget, an item of $10,600 was approved for the purpose of providing medical services to the employees and workers of the University. A new item was also created for the acquisition of a laboratory for the statistics classes, which lacked the corresponding machines. The reference allocation is $3,000. The appropriation for extramural courses was increased by $11,000. A study is being made to open new extramural centers in different parts of the Island, which will offer greater advantages to public instruction teachers who live in distant towns, and who for various reasons cannot study in the present centers. The appropriation approved for the extramural courses amounts to $61,000. The sum of $80,000 was appropriated for the payment of visiting teachers at the University of Puerto Rico. The amount will cover the salaries and expenses of visiting professors from all faculties. Cases of opposition teachers: According to what has been reported, the University Board discussed at length the case of some opposition teachers, having recommended to the Rector not to extend new appointments for the regular course of the next semester to four of the aforementioned teachers, who* are José Ferrer, José Emilio González, Roberto Beascochea Lota and Eladio Rodríguez Otero. The first three also did not receive a contract to work <'urente the summer. Professor Eladio Rodríguez Otero has served the UPR for a year and a half, during which time he has taught five 100-credit courses (Continued on page 18).
I Dr. F. Gonzalez collected the jackpot prize ¡ A M - I v V 11 * r I X| 71 Moment in which Dr. José Felipe González (left), resident of Mayagüez, received from the hands of the Director of the Lottery, Mr. Jesús Benitos, the check for the amount of $815,000 corresponding to the 90 centesimos he owned of the number that won the jackpot prize in the drawing the day before yesterday. (Photograph by EL MUNDO). He had acquired 90 fractions, for a total of $315,000.00 Galeno, a native of Lares, currently resides in Mayagüez. - I was entitled to a break' 9 said upon learning of his fortune in the lottery By LUIS HERNANDEZ - AQUINO Editor of EL MUNDO Doctor José Felipe González, a native of the town of Laret, and currently residing in Mayagüez, cashed yesterday from the hands of Mr. Jesús Benitez, direct: Negociado de la Lotería, a check -a turn of $315,000.00, corresponding to 90 fractions of the jackpot prize of the extraordinary drawing ve-.
The holder of the other ten pieces of the jackpot of the extraordinary drawing held on July 1st, which amounted to $350,000.00, the largest of all times. The holder of the other ten pieces, amounting to $35,000.00, did not yet collect it yesterday afternoon. I Dr. Gonzalez appeared at four o'clock in the afternoon in the Lottery Negó-1 ciado, accompanied by his brother, Mr. Juan Manuel Gonzalez, and Don Ramon Maria Ramirez, mayor of the town of Lares. Senator Luis Alfredo Colón, married to a daughter of Dr. González, who accompanied him to San Juan, was not present when the check was handed over. For a long time the fortunate doctor talked with Mr. Jesus Benitez and Oscar Monagas, from the Lottery Office, and this writer, about the details of how he acquired the 90 fracclones of the jackpot. Dr. Gonzalez was serene, without any emotional affectation. How the release came to him. Dr. Gonzalez said that a few days before the drawing, he had gone to the branch of the Royal Bank in the town of Mayaguez to make a $22,500 operation, related to a check for that amount, from a minor's business. As he was leaving the bank, he was approached by an itinerant billfold and offered him ninety pieces that he had left. Dr. Gonzalez told the billfold: "I'll buy it on one condition, that you go to my clinic to cash it later". The billfold, who knew that his money was safe in good hands, left his bill with the doctor and went later to collect it. Dr. Gonzalez, who does not believe in fables or superstitions, kept his ticket until yesterday, Friday, while he was still in bed and before breakfast, the newspaper EL MUNDO was brought to him, where, checking the Lottery list, he realized that the wheel of fortune had been (Continued on page 18).
Prices for refined sugar increase Vicéns issued an order that will take effect on July 6 The Supply Administrator, Mr. Antonio Vlcéns Ríos, issued yesterday a new administrative order, setting maximum prices for refined sugar, prices that will take effect on July 6. Mr. Vicéns states that when maximum prices were fixed for this product last May 13, the action was taken "on the basis of the regulatory market of the mainland, on which the Puerto Rico market depends". Mr. Vicéns adds that "from that date until today, there have been variations in the * market in decline and rise, which have culminated in a rise in the price of refined sugar in the regulatory market, which determines the need to alter the maximum prices in effect. to fix them and adjust them in tune with the current prices of the 1 regulatory market." ... The prices fixed by the Supply Administration are as follows: Refined sugar, in paper sacks, per 100 pounds, to wholesalers, $f.2O, to retailers, $7.45, to consumers, 9 cents per pound, and two pounds for 17 cents. In plain and white cotton sacks, $7.35 to wholesalers, $7.60 to retailers, and the same prices as above to consumers. In flowered or brightly colored sacks. $7.45 to wholesaler. S "70 to the retailer and the same as above to the consumer. In 25 lb. paper sacks: $".40 per quintal to wholesaler. $7.65 to (Continued on page 18)
Official predicts prices will continue to rise.
WASHINGTON, July 2. (PU)A leading government official predicted today that commodity prices will rise to new records within the next few months. He said the latest Bureau of Labor Statistics report clearly shows that the rise in prices continues uninterrupted. The Bureau reported that its wholesale price index for 900 commodities rose 0.8 percent last week, to 166.7 percent above the 1926 average. No official ventured to predict whether that figure, for this week, would surpass the all-time record high set in May 1920. But they privately believe it will. The rise in the prices of basic necessities broke all records for the year.
records for the year 1920. The wholesale index was 167.2 in May. 1920, but it dropped to 120.7 in December. By January 1930 it had fallen to 92.5 percent of the level recorded in 1926, reaching a low of 59.8 percent in February 1933. At the outbreak of World War II in 1939, the index had risen again by 77.1 percent above the 1926 level and last week reached 166.7. The Administration's expert economists do not believe that the pals are willing to repeat the experience of 1920 at this time. They are of the opinion that the banking system is now stronger, that there is much less speculation, that many industries have considerable unfulfilled orders, and that the economy generally rests on sounder foundations.
Appointment agents encounter difficulties I ~ . There is no equipment for the 700 new officers Neither could they be given instruction at the same time at the Academy for enrichment" Ramirez brau Editor of EL MUNDO The 700 guards authorized by the new police law, which came into force on July 1, were still not appointed yesterday. The Police Department faces several urgent problems that it will have to solve. One of these is that of having to send all these guards to serve, without being able to receive adequate academic instruction and the necessary training, as had been the custom at the Police Academy. The other problem is the lack of equipment to provide the 700 new guards with revolvers, handguns and uniforms. The investment for this equipment is considerable, since in the case of a firearm, it must be a regulation one. The maximum capacity of the Academy is to release 100 guards. As the number of guards increasing the Force is 700, it is possible that 100 of them could enter the Police Aeadethiá'de la Policía, where they would be subjected to two months of eutr "namiprtfo; and the remaining 600 guards could be sent to confinement. Instruction, to the heads of Zones: Bayamón. Arscibo. Aguadilla, Mayagüee, Ponce, Guayama, Humacao and Caguas. The captains of these zones, with the help of their officers, could subject these guards to rapid training in such essential subjects as regulations, circular letters, the Pruning Code, the Criminal Procedure Code, the Electoral Law, courtroom procedure, weapons handling, fingerprinting and public relations. Instruction in villages A number of the guards who were sent to the district headquarters could be distributed among other villages in each of the zones, where they would also receive instruction. After these guardsmen have received two months of training, they could be properly uniformed and redeployed for permanent service. It has also been suggested that those 600 guards sent to the head of the zones for training could be sent in groups of one hundred to the Police Academy to undergo a one month course, so that they could cover the last phase of the curriculum with a complete course in target shooting. Yesterday, in conversation with the Assistant of the Police, Mr. Alberto Guerrero, he showed interest in opening a camp to train the new guards, who could carry out the exercises of the academic and shooting course, wearing fatigues. Investment of 175,000 According to EL MUNDO, the investment to equip the new guards, who would be able to carry out academic and shooting exercises, wearing fatigues.
Iriarte advocates maintaining statehood He gives reasons why he believes that the assembly should support this ideal On the eve of the extraordinary assembly of the Republican Union, the President of said group, Celestino Iriarte, declared yesterday that according to his observations, "there is no current of opinion in the Republican Union in favor of the truce". He also said that in his opinion "the assembly will maintain the ideal of pure and untainted statehood. "The Republican Union will hold an extraordinary assembly on July 4," said Mr. Iriarte. "In Sixto Escobar Park. There is great interest throughout the Island to have as many delegates as possible attend the event. The supporters of the truce in defense of the ideal of statehood have moved to try to get as many delegates as possible, and those opposed to the truce have done the same. The problem to be considered by the assembly is well known everywhere. "The Republican Union will have to decide whether to keep its lifelong ideal unchanged or to hesitate to maintain it as it is now. (continued on page 18)
1 tion to Berlin during the war, are bringing life, in the form of 1 food for the occlden8 tal sectors isolated by the Soviet blockade. ' An American spokesman said 1 that before July fifteenth, the ' Anglo-American air fleets . will have transported su1 ficlent food to sustain the Berlin ha- ' hitants for the entire ' month of July. Having already on hand . a month's food supplies, the Western sectors will be able to keep the ration satisfied, i until the first of September. _ Now Western officials ' are thinking of transporting by ' air , coal and oil . ' The transportation of food , by the Anglo-Americans exceeded . raba today the present needs, while it was reported that the Soviet overland bloL queo of Berlin j is beginning to hurt the j Russians themselves. The Soviets are reported to need flour, drugs, and coal, to operate the giant Klingenberg electric power plant. With the food situation under control, the Western Allies turned their attention to supplying fuel for their Berlin sectors. By mid-July, the airlift service could be supplying such items as coal and oil. An experimental flight has already been made (continued on :page 18).
A full battalion of the 65th Infantry Regiment. plus units of the 18th Cavalry Squadron and the Army SI Band, will reportedly lead a long column of Army, Navy, veteran and civilian organizations in a parade down Ponce de Leon Avenue tomorrow in celebration of the Fourth of July. This parade, which promises to be the largest ever held in Puerto Rico, marks the 172nd anniversary of Independence from the United States. An Army note states that the troops of the Army Forces in the West Indies to participate in the parade will number approximately 1,800, - they will be preceded by the well-uniformed 81st Band and directly behind the Grand Marshal and his aides. A number of armored cars of the 18th Cavalry Squadron will go in front of the Second Battalion of the Puerto Rico Regiment. Leading the second dlvi-
fe ' A ■ L fe: M LA* * ' '
Ix "s engravings* above** capture two aspects* of the si tuaclon created in Berlin, on the occasion of the Russian blockade. Above, the first C-54 transport plane to take off in Texas for Germany, carrying supplies. Fleets of Anglo-American aircraft are rendering the ground blockade ineffective, maintaining the flow of supplies to the Germans. Below Frans Neumann, leader of the Social Democratic Party in Berlin, addresses some 70,000 people who took part in an anti-Russian demonstration in the sector occupied by the French. cease*. (Associated Press photo*).
i British and American planes - carry large quantities of supplies Air fleets transport more than the German people consume. - The blockade seems to be at once injuring supplies from the Russians i By WALTER RUNDLE BERLIN, July 2. -(PU)- Hundreds of American and British planes broke the Russian blockade of Berlin today, transporting" - more food to the western sectors of the city, than the - people consume. Day and night, without ceasing, the gigantic airplanes that brought death to the city.
The liberals will (I issued its convocation Leaders held a meeting in San Juan. Assembly to be held tomorrow The main leaders of the Liberal Party were meeting in San Juan, discussing the final plans for the extraordinary assembly of said party to be held tomorrow at the Tres Palmas Club, located on the road leading from Bayamón to Vega Alté. In the circuits of the L1' beral Party, the idea of the formation of a new party, which is the main issue to be discussed in tomorrow's meeting, has unanimous approval. However, some leaders were reserved when asked for their predictions about the liberal and unio1 republican assemblies. The call for the Liberal Party assembly was issued yesterday, and it includes the following matters: (1) To decide whether or not the party opts for the Liberal or Republican party.
A battalion of the 65th Regiment will lead tomorrow's parade.
The National Guard Infantry and its band will lead tomorrow's parade, followed by the Organized Reserve Officers Corps, the Navy Reserve Officers and the University of Puerto Rico ROTC cadets, who will leave their summer camp at Henry Barracks for a short period to take part in the Independence Day parade. The Army and Navy bands will be positioned at the foot of the Capitol steps where they will play martial airs while the rest of the troops parade in front of the Capitol. At the bandstand will be Governor Jesús T. Piftero and high-ranking dignitaries from the island government, the Army, the Navy and civic organizers. Commanding General Ray E. Porter, Chief of Army Forces in the West Indies, and Brigadier General Luis Raul Esteves, Adjutant General of the Port (Continued on page 18).
Diplomats meet in London Marshall reiterates that the situation will be dealt with promptly WASHINGTON, July J. (PU).E1 Secretary of State, General George C. Marshall, disclosed today that Republican leaders in Congress have been given a voice. Including 1 Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg, Speaker of the Upper House, in an effort to break the blockade of Berlin by the Russians. In London. the American Ambassador Lewis W. Douglas, cancelled all non-essential engagements to attend conferences to be held - day or night - on 1* Berlin crisis which, according to a spokesman for the British Foreign Office, has worsened since yesterday, when the Russians left the Allied "Kommandatura" in the German capital. "In well-informed circles it was indicated today that a vigorous protest by the three great Western powers against the "cold" blockade of Berlin by the Russians is inevitable. In London, all indications are that the Berlin situation is approaching its climax and that this weekend will see dramatic developments. General Marshall stated that the State Department is in close contact with Vandenberg and Charlea A. Eaton. Eaton. Republican, of New Jersey, and chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, regarding the strategy being developed by the three Western Allies. In a conference with the perioi distas. Marshall stated that, to ■ date, he has not been in eomu- ; nicaclon with John Foster Dulles, Republican adviser on foreign politic* and intimate associate of Republican presidential candidate. Thomas E. Dewey. He added, however, that no Implications should be inferred, since he had to be admitted to a hospital for a general examination, and Dulles had been busy. Marshall gave no indication of the tactics being developed by the three powers against the blockade, saying only that this would be revealed in due course. But some U.S. officials say that a firm protest is being drafted and will be sent to Moscow. In response to other questions, Marshall merely said that he was reaffirming his statement of Wednesday. He said on that occasion that the United States "intends to remain" in Berlin and expects to "deal promptly" with the clone situation. The Secretary stated that consultations with England and France are constantly taking place, and that at least four or five messages are exchanged between the State Department and the American Ambassador in London. Marshall had at least one telephone conversation with Douglas. Dlcutlng other European matters, Marshall said that a formal Turkish-American alliance, such as has been recommended by Turkish officials, would envelop the whole question of American relations with virtually every nation in the world. But he added that this country is deeply interested in the maintenance of a free Turkish government. Backing *1 Benelux: He also said that efforts are under way to set a date for discussion of possible U.S. military backing for the five nations that signed the Brussels mutual aid pact: Britain, France, Belgium. Luxembourg and the Netherlands. Marshall refrained from commenting on any reports that negotiations between the Big Four might be revived in view of the situation in Berlin. Homer Jenks, United Press correspondent in London. He reports that, according to well-informed English circles, the only thing that has stopped the sending of the protest is the discussion of the form in which it should be drawn up. The diplomatic representatives of the United States, Great Britain and France, meeting in this city, are trying to draft a protest which. although not an ultimatum, will leave no doubt in the minds of the Russians that the Allies are prepared to carry the struggle to the end. It was revealed that the call made by (Continued on page 18)
News Digest
Allies prepare strong note of protest to the Soviet. Tito asked Stalin to revoke accusations launched by the Communist Information Bureau. m - Jackpot went to Dr. Felipe Gonsales, of Mayagües. - ... - The liberals have already issued a call for tomorrow's assembly. - A - - A battalion of the 65th Infantry Regiment will take part in the Fourth of July parade. e t f Fleets of Anglo-American planes have succeeded in rendering the land blockade of Berlin ineffective. - * - Italian workers* went on a twelve-hour strike throughout the nsclen. - - - O'Dwyer to establish rival organls*clone of Tammanny Hall. - - - Lewis charged with attempting to coerce signing of illegal contract* - - - - - Officers appointed in charge of National Guard camp.
Russia does not have note on return of 81 ships to U.S.*. di Q - Bernadotte has cited Arab* and Jew* to Rhodes. - Price* increase* for refined sugar. They will hold viataa on the *1tuaclón of lo* chófere*. - Several riots have broken out in Panama. They predict that prices will continue to rise. Appointment of 709 police* finds dlflcu'tade*. - - - Truman unlikely to call Congress into special session. - Iriarte believes URP assembly should declare itself against the truce. - Jiménes to discuss Muño* Rivera Ave. in the north - - Iriarte believes URP assembly should declare against truce. Budget set for UPR reaches - $3,775,000. - - - Ponas Feiiú promoted to the post of Flaca'. Interim Federal. - - - - / Maximum price of refined ■aiúear fixed by ¡x* AGS.