THE NONDOOR
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy in Puerto Rico. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 90 degrees: low, 'll. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 39.90 inches of mercury.
42 Pages 5/
DIARIO DE^SáÉ*'LA MARAÑA
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 25, 1948 "
NUMBER 13438
Russia alleged to have violated secrecy agreement
Reaction is violent in Western countries to clear up lies By WALTER KOLARZ LONDON, Sept. 24. (PU)- Britain is seriously considering, it was learned today, giving to the public the secret talks held in Moscow in connection with the Berlin crisis, because of the false versions, evidently inspired by the Kremlin, which have appeared in newspapers in Czechoslovakia and Soviet-occupied Germany. It is indicated that it is possible that the British Foreign Office has begun consultations with the United States and France on the advisability of publicizing the exact version of these conversations. A British Foreign Office spokesman said that these reports, which are said to have been made from Moscow, have grossly distorted the facts, giving an inaccurate picture of all the negotiations. One such report says that the three Allied commanders-in-chief in Germany, especially General Lucius D. Clay of the United States, caused the "interruption" of the talks in Berlin as a result of the Moscow negotiations. British official circuits indicate that it will be impossible to adequately refute the false versions without quoting extensively from the minutes of the talks in Berlin and Moscow. In this connection it is added that the publication of the full minutes will have to follow after careful consideration by the three Western powers. Violation of agreement Informed circuios say that the leaks to the "iron curtain" newspapers constitute a violation of the agreement of the four powers to keep the talks secret. These circuios emphasize the fact that, in this case, Russian propaganda has been operating, just as Nazi propaganda used to do, using the newspapers of the satellite and occupied countries. The British Parliament recessed today until next October 15, after a debate on foreign affairs, and especially on the crisis between the West and the West - a debate which took place in both Houses. In the House of Commons, the Conservatives objected strenuously to recess at this critical time, but Government leader Herbert Morrison promised that the House would be called to meet in the event of an emergency. In the House of Lords, the Marquess of Salisbury, the Conservative leader, urged the Western Allies to suspend negotiations with Russia over the Russian Federation.
Students agree to strike Monday at University
MM _ rl X Al. *r\ V ■* "* jsm ll - M -1. , t- '■'S' ■ B K JlUJBÍ ■) M- ¿8 K i. ■ B V ' I" HL "w x"
Lr photograph captures the moment when a crowd of university students marched on foot from Rio Fie-
dra" to San Juan, singing the University Hymn. The young woman with the handbag on the left is Miss Irla Martines. In the center, next to her, José Gil de Lamadrtd and Jnan
Noriega Maldonado, the latter president of Cruzada Universitaria. The young woman on the right, carrying a black mixer, is La Pasionaria, Miss Ana Cecilia Canales (Photo by Case na ve).
Textron reached agreement on its factories It will leave one more year that of. Jackson.- Will replace the other Nashua plant NASHUA, New Hampshire, Sept. 24, - (PU) - A Senate investigator and a millionaire industrialist wept today as they shook hands with a CIO official to formalize a commitment among the three to save the textile plants that are so vital to Nashua. Tears rolled down the cheeks of Senator Charles W. Tobey, Republican of New Hampshire, and filled the eyes of Royall Little, president of Textron, Incorporated, whose operations the Senator came to Nashua to investigate, The audience of 250. - The audience of 250, mostly plant workers whose jobs were in jeopardy. - The audience of 250, mostly workers from the plants whose jobs were in jeopardy, stood cheering in the high school auditorium as Tobey and Little were embraced by J. Harold Daoust, the new director for Vermont and New Hampshire. of the CIO's Textile Laborers Union. The dramatic conclusion of the two-day hearing before the senatorial subcommittee chaired by Tohey contrasted with the first acrimonious exchange of sentences, when the union and the employer blamed each other for the possible closing of the Textron plants in Jackson and Nashua. Tide cooperated "If the people of Nashua can forget their bitterness against me and the company, we will cooperate together on a plan to create more jobs (Continued on p. 14).
They met in assembly at the recreation plaza in Rio Piedras From there they left in a demonstration to San Juan, passing in front of Fortaleza. - Mellado warns that classes will be held normally. - Tejada and Mattei well By Luis Hornández Aqulno Editor of EL MUNDO From one thousand to two thousand university students, gathered yesterday at ten o'clock in the morning in the recreation plaza of Rio Piedras, in an open assembly called by the members of Cruzada Universitaria, agreed to go on strike in their classes on Monday. They also agreed to manage an assembly of parents of university students for "the creation of an authentic committee, which will help in the solution of the#-- --■
***" *- V" v, ... m l university problem." - Another agreement that was immediately put into effect was to hold a march to the Fortress, on foot, from the recreation plaza, which took place from a quarter to twelve noon until 3:20 in the afternoon, when they arrived in front of the Governor's official residence, after two hours on the road. The demonstration was with black flags and with banners alluding to the University. In an official communiqué issued yesterday by Dr. Ramon Mellado, Dean of Administration, it is stated that "the attendance to classes today, Friday, was perfect", and students are warned that "next Monday classes will be held as usual" and that "students with the purpose of taking advantage of their time, should attend classes punctually". As called, the student assembly was held at ten o'clock yesterday morning. From eight o'clock, students began parading to the recreation plaza. Meanwhile, at the University, a quarter of an hour before classes began, there was great expectation. The police were reinforced and almost all of them were in front of the Tower, the Janer Building and the Fedrelra Building. (Continued on page 14)
Permits Bureau will give free plans Will provide these as of Monday to persons of moderate income - As of next Monday the Permits Bureau will begin to execute Law number 173, of May 12, 1948, by virtue of which persons of moderate economic resources will be provided with free plans for the construction of houses whose cost does not exceed 54,000. According to the new Director of the Bureau, Mr. Héctor A. Deliz, there will be 24 different models of houses for the applicants. In order to be eligible for the benefits of the law, applicants must have an income of no more than $3,500 and must not own property worth more than $1,000. 1 Applicants will also be required to submit a copy of their plans to the Bureau.
Vote in favor of not going to school on Monday the 27th.
The engraving shows a general meeting of the assembly of university students, held at the Rio Piedras public silver yesterday, Friday, in which the students agreed to go on strike in their classes next Monday. Other agreements were to initiate a march to the Governor's Palace, which will take place on Monday.
The march took place yesterday at a quarter to twelve and ended at half past three in the afternoon, when they stood in front of Fortaleza and demanded the resignation of Rector Benites, the photograph captures the moment when the students raised their hands and called for the rector's resignation.
Prospects are for AFH case to be settled
Chicago Firm Sends Delegates To Study Purchase of Mortgages on Home Loans By Luis Sánchez Cappa EL MUNDO Staff Writer Representatives of mortgage brokerage firms are expected to arrive in Puerto Rico tomorrow to study the possibility of purchasing mortgages on home loans granted by local banks. It was revealed that it is possible that during the visit of the loan brokers, the problem created for San Juan banks by the recent drastic reduction in the mortgage sales market, which has adversely affected the home purchase program, will be definitively solved, It will be recalled that a few weeks ago most of the banked firms suspended the granting of mortgage loans guaranteed by the AFH, alleging that they had no outlet for the sale of the mortgages, being forced to maintain a considerable amount invested in such loans. The National Mortgage Association, a subsidiary of the Financial Reconstruction Corporation, was recently subjected to considerable limitations on the purchase of mortgages. This limited the outflow of mortgages held by the banks, and the banks then halted loan negotiations. Steps were then taken to see how the banks could sell the notes* mortgaged, and thus be in a position to continue" lending under the AFH. Interest has been obtained from a firm of mortgage loan brokers, headquartered in Chicago, whose representatives will be on the Island on Sunday to consider the matter - Roe otrn side, 1n" Reports given to this newspaper yesterday reveal that at present the local banks have invested about $8,000,000 in loans under the AFH, and that these bonds have not been sold by the firms. They will be able to resume lending* It was assured that if the banks were able to place five to six million dollars in loan brokerage firms, these entities would be in a position to resume lending. This would make it possible for people interested in acquiring or building homes under the AFH to do so more easily. Island government officials have reportedly been making efforts to get U.S. loan brokerage firms to take over a portion of the loan obligations and relieve the firms from the effects of the loan.
Russian response on Berlin crisis expected today
Two wells to be drilled on the island to determine if there is oil - - A
Pinero received an offer from an oil magnate. - WASHINGTON By James 'F. Cunningham WASHINGTON, Sept. 24.(PU)- L* $300,000 investment in oil exploration pót the Industrial Development Company, may soon have its first chance to bear fruit, Governor Jesus T, Piftero told the United Press today, as he arrived "1 national airport in the early hours" of today. Piftero said he will remain in the metropolis until Oct. 10, when he must return to participate in the inauguration ceremony of the Catholic University of Santa Maria in Ponce. Most of "his time, he said, will be spent in Washington. But he will at least make a short trip to Philadelphia to visit his son and daughter, who attend a school in that city. Shortly before his departure from San Juan, the Governor revealed, an oil tanker from the metropolis proposed to him to make two test drillings in the southern part of the island. (Continued on page 14) Jews against plan proposed by Bernadotte Abdullah would accept it but there is opposition from Egypt, Syria and Iraq By EL1AV 8IMON TEL AVIV, Israel, Sept. 24. --(PU)--Arab attacks on vital roads between Trl Aviv and Jerusalem presented a new stumbling block today to the shaky truce in the Holy Land. Israeli spokesmen reported that the Arab Legion attacked the main road to Jerusalem and that the route provided by Jews to leave Jerusalem when the city was under siege was also attacked. Traffic through the main road continued uninterrupted, but Israeli officials said the attacks may mark "the beginning of a new Arab campaign to isolate Jerusalem. This could end the Palestinian truce. News of the attacks was received just as observers in this eludid were saying that the Jews were most likely to make the modified plan to isolate Jerusalem, but the Israeli authorities said the attacks could mark the beginning of a new Arab campaign to isolate Jerusalem, which could end the Palestinian truce.
K" " BÍt 1 MW W Rh I ', >Wk ■ " \ ' W r l \ _ WBh %WBi í&w: x JERUS T. PIÑERO Ty dings opines veterans would be protected Says he is sure independence bill would guarantee benefits < By William Dondlller WASHINGTON, Sept. 24.-(Sp. by teletype)-Senator Millard F. Tydings, D-Maryland, said today that he feels "confident that any law" granting independence to Puerto Rico "will contain a clause" providing that Puerto Rican veterans will continue to receive full veterans' benefits. Admitting that Congress would have to act to protect these rights for Puerto Rican veterans, Tydings declared that, if he is in the Senate when the pro-independence bill is introduced, "I will certainly see to it that such a provision is offered and I will fight for its adoption. Read the full text of Mr. Tydings' remarks, "Many of us in Washington are surprised at the arguments that have been made in Washington," he said.
Marshall and Bevin prepare action Discussed steps to be taken in unfavorable case. - PARIS, Sept. 24.-(PU)-The United Nations Assembly today defeated vigorous Russian efforts to keep out of its program seven perplexing items. All but one of the items had to do directly or indirectly with Russia's conduct of foreign affairs, and most of them are intimately related to the war of nerves between East and West. While the Assembly was in session, the American Secretary of State, George C. Marshall, conferred with the British Foreign Secretary, Ernest Bevin, on the Berlin crisis. The two discussed the next step to be taken in case Russia replies unfavorably to the latest note from the Western allies. A hint of a Russian reply will appear tomorrow, when the Russian Assistant Foreign Minister, Andrei Y. Vishinsky, will reply in a letter to the Russian Foreign Ministry. Vishinsky, will reply in *1" Assembly debate to the speech in quit Marshall warned that American patience should not be interpreted as weakness. Today it became evident, however, that Russia has not accepted Marshall's invitation to end " its self-imposed isolation, and join with other" nations in the task of peace-building. The Assembly approved the inclusion -in its agenda, gives 68 item" which its Helm Committee adopted yesterday. Soviet delegate Jacob MiJik "insisted" that "seven points" be deleted. He and the Russian satellite delegates were overwhelmingly defeated seven times. The vote was as much as 47 to six. Yugoslavia, whose communist regime has been kicked out of the Comlnform for deviating from the Party line, backed Russia. Point" objected to" by Russia Here are the points to which Malik objected, and the vote which favored their Inclusion in the program: The question of admitting seven countries to the United Nations over the Russian veto -29 against 18. The Greek situation -44 against 8. The case of Korea -47 against 6. - The question of the modification of the right of veto by the Big Five -47 against 6. The extension of the "Little Assembly," which meets for discussion of "big" problems between sessions of the annual General Assembly -47 against 6. Treatment of Russians" who marry foreign diplomats -30 1 against 7.
The "registration card", during the vote. These matriculation cards identified the attendees* as current students of the University of Puerto Rico. The assembly was presided over by Juan Nortera Maldonado, president of Crumda Universitaria, who called the assembly to order.
The assembly was presided over by Juan Nortera Maldonado, president of Crumda Universitaria, who summoned the assembly after the event that took place on Thursday in Río Piedras. No incident was recorded with the police during the assembly that was recorded, nor later during the march to Fortaleaa. (Photo by Caeenavo, EL MUNDO),