THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY: Partly cloudy with scattered showers. IN RAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temp. 7"; low. 71. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 80.00 inches of mercury.
40 pages 5/
LA MAÑANA NEWSPAPER t
Motorist," let's demonstrate the traditional courtesy of the shovel.
NUMBER 11173
year xxvin
Entered 4" second close matter, Post Office, San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 3, 1948
. Trade officials among ■ speculators.
List was sent to Senate conüté Among them are several economists, analysts, engineers, inspectors By WARREnY)UFEE WASHINGTON, Jan. 2. (PU)Seventeen of the Commerce Department's "highest paid" employees today joined the growing list of names of people on the Federal Government's "payroll" who have been speculating in essential "commodities" over the past 18 months. Their "names" were referred to the Senate Appropriations Committee by Acting Commerce Secretary William C. Fuslor, who said he was pleased to hear the names of those on the payroll. Fuslor, who said that their trading operations were in direct violation of departmental regulations, The" operations of this" sefioie", and that" of 125 other Government employees who were previously revealed as commodity speculators. will be investigated" by the Committee to determine whether Harold E. Sisasen was "correct" when he made the charge last month that Federal employees were making use of "secret" """cretas"" to profit in the commodities" market. Today's list has included several government economists and a Commerce Department analyst, but all have placed themselves well below the level of sound policy. The most prominent men" produced" since Congress began its" inquiry are Edwin W. Paulley. the milolnlar assistant assistant to the Secretary of the Army, and Brigadier General Watlace H. Graham, the President's physician í turn at the White House. Paulley, who testified before the committee that he possessed more than SI,000,000 in commodity contracts before taking his Army post last fall, has been asked to submit Monday all "his personal documentation surrounding his speculations. If it is not ready by that date, the Committee said it will then proceed to subpoena him. Graham is also expected to be subpoenaed by the Committee to explain how he was able to acquire contracts for 50,000 (anegas of grain at the" precise moment" when President Truman was decrying the speculation ron commodities as ''simply a play for money." The White House doctor indicated to " reporters that he did not know that his broker n*b was invested his money in grain v that he ordered his" contracts to be sold "at a big loss" as soon as he learned of it last me". Broker Bache and & Company, said, however, that Graham had knowledge of the entire transaction, and promised to submit to the Committee the full record of the brokerage account of the faculty-
10 UUFUin SW" """-,- VO. ' . The list, compiled by a questionnaire supplied to all employees of the Department of Commerce, was headed with the name of Forest G. Warren, an economist and businessman working in the Office of International Trade. It also included Leroy H. Mantell and Thomas J. Murphy, "economic analyst" of the Domestic Trade Bureau; Robert S. Lehman, an economist in the Census Bureau; Walter Sahin, a patent examiner in the Patent Office; George A. Hermanson, a statistical officer in the Census Bureau; Gordon B. Maawrgale, a ceramics engineer in the Measurement Bureau, and J "m" Bolling, a materials engineer in the same Bureau. The Aeronautics Negpclado Ci1 there bus representatives with the names" v of the" inspectors John R. Carh*y. Raymond Rver, William E- Carpenter and John p. Rowan; the Airport Engineers". V. L. Perrotta and Harold A. Wllde and attorney Phillip Tocker Also listed in the usia were Warren B. Nelson, an agricultural survey officer with the Census Bureau, and Earl L. William, whose occupation was described as 'latitude observer' for coastal and geodetic surveying. The Federal Bureau of Investigation, it was disclosed today, has taken charge of the records. - has taken over the brokerage records of Brigadier General Wallace H. Graham, President Truman's personal physician, as part of the general investigation into grain speculation. The news came from the sena, dor wniiam F. Knowland, Republican of California. At the same time it was disclosed qu< tree employees of' State Dept. have been speculating These are. Paul F. McGuire, deputy head of the Department's Office of Finance and Development Policy, whose name was changed to "The man of the year".
Marshall voted man of the year LONDON, Jan. 2. - (PU) - Secretary of State George C. Marshall was today named "man of the year" in a public opinion poll held by the Daily Express. The poll, which claims to represent the average of British public opinion, places Winston Churchill in second place and President Truman in third. < Marshall was also selected as "man of the year" by Time magazine). Warren against importation of Puerto Ricans Governor (California hopes to make harvests with Puerto Rican workers Fnr WILLIAM J. DORVII.1.1ER WASHINGTON, Jan. 2. (Special to THE WORLD)-Governor Earl Warren, of California, definitely opposed "the importation of farm laborers" from Puerto Rico. Warren stated his opposition to the plan to import Puerto Ricans in a statement given to the Star-Free Press, Ventura, Calif. California. The newspaper said the Governor had learned of the plan from Mr. Fernando Siena Berdecia. Commissioner of Labor of Puerto Rico, that an organization known as Citrus Emergency Harvest, Inc. of Los Angeles, was in Puerto Rico recruiting workers for the citrus plantations. Warren said, according to the article, that 'I am definitely not in favor of importing workers from Puerto Rico.' The article quoted Warren as saying that he was confident "that we can make our crops with workers from California." California congressional sources in Washington, meanwhile, expressed the opinion that Warren's opposition to Puerto Rican workers is based on the same reason that most farmers are reluctant to encourage the importation of workers from the island, fearing that as U.S. citizens, they are free to go anywhere they please and might abandon the job before the harvest is finished. It was indicated that 4o" farmers have already become accustomed to employing Mexican nationals and wish to continue the practice if the U.S. and Mexican governments" conduct negotiations to continue the program of importing Mexican workers. The Mexicans, it was explained. The Mexicans, it was explained, "are single and may live in barracks. In addition, the employer exercises control over the Mexicans, who are bound by a contract and cannot leave their jobs without an extensive dossier and the possibility that they may be returned to Mexico.
The NLRB resolves that the workers cannot refuse to work with unionized workers. # The sugar law has been in effect since January 1. Fixes production of 810,000 short tons* of crude oil to Puerto Rico. * * * New AFA president to be elected next Monday. * * * Truman is expected to request a budget of approximately $140,000,000,000,000. The Governor has not yet considered Caro's resignation as a member of the TA Board of Directors. "Marshall elected man of the year in poll in England. - The Insular Board of Elections completed the designation of the registration "colleges" in all the municipalities. - ♦ - Doctor Cebollero will participate in institutes for teachers who teach borlcuaa children in New York. The administration of the Caguas aqueduct has "Ido transferred to 8AA. - Loan" from the HFA reached 87,321,000 in logging. - The Department of Commerce's "II function it", among the eapeculadorea. * Another snowstorm, similar in violence to that of several days ago, yesterday swept over several states from Inwa to the Atlantic coast, depositing on New York, New Jersey and New York City.
News Digest
York another "25 inch" of snow. Flights to Puerto Rico were grounded. The Governor of California is opposed to the importation of hnrlcua" laborers to work in agricultural labor" from that state. * - * * Hhj strike in four United States "'"biographical" companies". * * * Coronal Roig submitted to the Governor the projects "on the Pnllcía. - "- They discuss merger of iras of the occupation tona" in Germany. Disappearance of 4,300 halas from the Punta Borinquen deposit. ♦ - - Sharks, Indians and Criollo", begin weekend series today. in pursuit of retaining the lead in professional baseball. * Bob Thurman, from Santurca, took the lead in the individual batting in the Professional League. The Gallístlcn Classic of the Button and the Golilla will begin today. "Attorney General settled the case related to the police per diem claim. * * * Conciliator submits stipulation to the parties to end the strike at the" launches. Anderson fixed the national sugar consumption quota for IMS. at 7,800,000 tons. He did not distribute the same in detail but a decrease in Cuba's share is estimated.
THE PUERTO RICAN QUESTION)
By Gerald Blank Interview with Leonard Sussman shows the reverse side of the medal in New York City.
(Translated from PM. of New York) We have been watching, with alarm, the alarming treatment that the newspapers have been giving to the emigration, in recent years, of large numbers of Puerto Ricans to New York City. In an editorial written by S. Burton Heath, of the Newspaper Enterprise" Association (NEA), widely distributed and published throughout the country, Puerto Rico is described as a "poverty-stricken, poverty-stricken, overcrowded island," whose people are "tubercular, dysentery-ridden, illiterate, immoral, without the slightest conception of sanitation." Heath paints these" people as arriving in New York with between $10 and $40 in their pockets, stopping at a welfare station to enroll for public assistance, and flocking to the" most congested area" of New York Writing in the Daily Mirror, New York, on August 10, 1947, about a Columbia University project to study the problem, dive Jack Lait: "With all due respect to Columbia as an institution of learning, we cannot grant it as a mud-slinging agency. The figures are simply easy to obtain. There are angles" of communism, the most rotten tremedal of thug territory in I" Nation, heroic drugs, prostitution and an incredible proportion of criminality. Two police reporters, experienced and astute.
A headline in the Bronx Home News on August 20 read: "Slums are paradise after tasting the swamps" of starving Puerto Rico." On October 12, the Daily News, of New York, "referred to Governor Jesus F. Plftero, of Puerto Rico, as saying: "When the leaves begin to fall in September, a good proportion of Puerto Ricans will return to their native land. "As the leaves are falling by the bushel," the New" riposted, "and the" Puerto Ricans are standing as firm" as the trees. that assertion has proved to be false in its entirety, "if we can make this observation without being engaged" in a duel for piracy. We could not help feeling that this picture had a reverse side. To find it, we visited Mr. Leonard Sussman, the suave and quiet director of the New York office of the Puerto Rican Industrial Development Company at 2 Park Avenue. Although we had not forgotten that Sussman is paid to promote the" Puerto Rican interests, he was not" impressed by much of what he told us. "Most of the nisi oriel as appearing in the" newspaper" about the influx of Puerto Ricans," Sussman began, "te fundan en on two premises fal(Continued on p. 19) , r - .... ■ "I
Conciliator submits stipulation to end the boat strike It was accepted in principle by the union's low leader. - SANCHEZ CAPPA Editor of EL MUNDO F1 passenger transportation service between San Juan and Cataño, and Cataño and Bayamón, operated by the Company continued to be paralyzed due to the strike decreed by the Company.
CQHlinuiina pwo wo.-w- - - - - fated by the Unión da Empleado "* del Transporte d* Cataño. As has been reported, the Union and the Compaftia broke off negotiations on Wednesday, about eleven o'clock at night, when an impasse arose, the strike beginning at twelve o'clock at night. The impasse arose when the Union, after having accepted that the agreement expiring December 31, 1947, would continue in force, demanded on the other hand that a clause be inserted in it obliging the company to maintain the shifts as they are presently established. The company rejected this demand, and this is where the impasse arose. As the shifts are established in the company's boat and bus service, the operators of these work seven days a week, and are paid eight, since the seventh day is paid at double wages, the workers have demanded that the company be obliged, by the agreement, to maintain the shifts in this form. On the other hand, yesterday a commission of Union leaders, accompanied by the Conciliator, Francisco Verdiales, visited the Labor Commissioner to present the existing situation. The union leaders, presided over by Mr. José (Continued on page 16)
Board assigned the registration colleges There will be 2 more in Cataño, 7 more in Rio Piedras - Santurce colleges The Insular Board of Elections, in its last meeting, agreed to establish two new additional colleges in the Rio Piedras precinct. The additional polling places in the Cataño precinct will be installed in the Ray View neighborhood; and those in Rio Piedras in different points of the 1" eludid. According to the information provided, the Insular Board of Elections has already completed the assignment of registration polling places for all the municipalities of the Island. The colleges will be installed both in the pohla- ! cfbnes as well as in the different neighborhoods of Puerto Rico, as long as there are the necessary facilities in this", in terms of accessibility and adequate premises where to carry out the work of registration of the new voters. The various existing political parties have already begun the work of filling out the registration petitions for the voters who will vote for the first time in the general elections. None of the parties has so far made any estimates as to the number of voters they expect to register, but all of them are presently engaged in the work of locating voters, to whom their corresponding petitions are being prepared in quadruplicate, to be sworn in on the 17th and IR, when the general registrations will take place.
The situation of the registration colleges The situation of the registration colleges, in the second precinct, of San Juan, in the second precinct, for voters of the Quinto ward, is as follows: College 1. Room 7. Luchetti School, County; College 3, Room 13. j Luchetti School. Luchetti School, County; Collegie 4, Room 14. County; (Continued on page 16> Enrollment for Extramurals on 8 In *1 course of the R day of January will take place 1" enrollment for the se. i gundo semester of the extramural courses of the University of Puerto Rico, in the towns" of Areciho, Barranquitas. Guayama. Humacao. MaI yagüez and Ponce. For this purpose, the Acting Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Francisco Collazo, has addressed the school superintendents," ordering them to provide the teachers interested in enrolling with the necessary time. Except in cases in which the circumstances so warrant, a half day shall be given to urban teachers and one day to rural teachers. In Ponce, the enrollment will be from 8 to 12 in the morning and from 1:30 to 4:30 in the afternoon; in Arecibo, at the same time; in Barranquitas, from 10 to 12 in the morning; in Guayama and Hqma. i cao, from 9 to 12 and from 2 to 4; and in Mayagüez, from 9 to 12 and from 1:30 to 4:30.
Another snowstorm paralyzes flights from New York to the island.
Congressmen Arrive In Puerto Rico Today
HHMH ¿mi 1
Hugh Butler (left), chairman of the Senate Public Lands Committee, and Representative Arthur Lewis Miller, who conducted an economic study in the territory, will arrive in Puerto Rico from the Virgin Islands at 10:30 a.m. today. Ae "imj>afta to both leglslndore" Mr. Muson Bnrr, bine onary of the federal Department of the Interior. Both Butler and Miller will be Guests of Honor today at a luncheon hosted by Admiral Daniel K. Barhey. Governor Plftero has also been invited to the luncheon. During their stay here, they will inspect in Pah> Seco, certain lands that are being strongly considered for the establishment of the international airport. Governor has not considered Caro's resignation in TA Board As soon as he is accepted, entity will meet to officially appoint him to the position of general administrator of the Authority ~F~nr j7m71 FRET , Editor of EL MUNDO
The Governor of Puerto Rico has not yet considered the resignation submitted by *) engineer Salvador V. Caro, as a member of the Board of Directors of the Transportation Authority. As soon as his resignation is
The resignation will be accepted, the Board will meet to make the official nomination of Mr. Caro as General Manager of the Authority. Mr. Caro said yesterday that "e proposes to hold an interview, d* momentarily, with Miss Estella Draper, acting general adminl "tt "dor" of the Authority. In the meantime, despite being on leave, Mr. Cam ronti-¡ nú" attending to business" n" his position as Director of Works" Publi'-as of the Capital, in order <ie leave well on track the projects" in the pipeline to his successor. ¡ The position is inteiina- ' mind occupied by Mr. Luis Paralítici. The Administrator of the Capital, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier, has declared that she will not consider any candidate to replace Caro after January 12, when he takes office in his new position in the Transportation Authority. When Mr. Caro was asked about his plans as administrator of the Authority, he said that he is still busy in the affairs of his position in the Government of the Capital and does not wish to make any statements to that effect until he is officially appointed to the position and takes office. The new general administrator of the Transportation Authority will have numerous problems, among which the most important are the problems of the international airport and urban transportation ■ As will be recalled, the Navy opposed the construction of the international airport in Isla Verde, alleging that it would cause the Intorferen (Continued on page 16).
Grilíasca has vacation for 30 more days He has conferred with Lanauze several times PONCE, -'By Miguel Rivera)- Under the presidency of Senator Samuel R. Quiñones, the leaders of the Popular Party committees of some 2 towns in the Ponte, Guayama and Mayagüez districts met at the Coamo City Hall. According to our reports, in said meeting they discussed the organization of the general registrations, which will begin this month throughout the island. It is reported that 5 members of the local committee of the Popular Party of Ponce attended the meeting, but it is also reported that Mayor An dros Grilíasca, president of the committee, was not present. On the other hand, the political circles of this city have been commenting on the statements authorized by Dr. José Lanauze Rolon in "his name and in the name of] ah aide Grillase", in which he suggests a plan of action for the Popular Party. Several members of the ('omite Lo cal of the Popular Party lian spied their disagreement with the suggestion. stating that at the last meeting of the committee it was riiscui (Continued on 'page 24'
Wallace is required to run for office
In Pennsylvania must file signatures; Ohio requires convention HARRISBURG, Pennsylvania, Jan. 2. (PU)-Before Henry A. Wallace's name can appear on the 1948 preferential primary ballot as a third party candidate for the national presidency, 7,975 voter signatures are required. State election law requires an unrecognized party to file a petition with the" signature" equivalent" to at least one-half of one percent of the highest vote in the previous state election, before" The petition must be signed by at least one-half of one percent of the highest vote cast in the previous state election before its candidate's name is allowed to appear on the ballot. John S. Fine garnered 1,594,817 votes" on Nov. 4, winning the election for superior court judge; hence a third party pandidate needed 7,975 signatures on his petition for president. " f'.n to qualify to "appear on the ballot in the" primary to be held April 27. While tarin Aubrey William" editor of the Southern Farmer, and head of the NY A uajr the late President Roqsevelt's adminlat ration, said today that he would not endorse Wallace. although he believes "in all that Henry Wallace has been preaching." "I believe that leaving the Party he (Continued on page 16),
-nW I
Former Vice President of the United States." Henry A. Wallace, (right), independent candidate for president, "alludes to Fatil Robeaon, singer and actor, before addressing a rally held in Milwaukee under the auspices" of the Wisconsin Citizens Pro Club Wallace. son preceded Wallace with some" ranclones and a brief speech. (Associated Press photo) ,
Covered hundreds of . cities from Iowa to the Atlantic coast' Affects 60,000,000 citizens Center exhausted New York, with snow up to 25-inch mark. Fnr UNITED PRESS CHICAGO, Jan. 2.-(PU)-One* ' of the worst storms of the century, nearly paralyzed traffic, communications and business, today, in hundreds of cities from Iowa to the Atlantic coast; greatly restricted activities in the great metropolitan areas of New York and Chicago, and caused damage estimated at many millions of dollars. The storm has affected some 60 million people in the densely populated 16-state area, and a cold snap 1" followed close on its heels. Temperatures have already dropped below zero, and to a few degrees below zero in the Great Plains states, with temperatures expected to reach 10 to 15 degrees in the Midwest tonight. The storm affected communities in Iowa, southern Wisconsin, Missouri, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohm. Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohm, Pennsylvania, New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Rhode ¡ Island, Massachusetts, Mama, Ver- ■ mont and New Hampshire, The disturbance dumped freezing water, frost, snow and moisture, over the entire area, disrupting communications and essential services in many towns", Train, water and airplane routes were disrupted, some factories and businesses had to close their" door" and many "s communities were cut off. The center of the storm hit New York City, dropping snow in a proportion equal to the 25.8 inches of the great snowfall of 1888 and nearly paralyzing the city for several miles. The storm paraI lized transportation rio service I for one" two million workers, left thousands without electricity ; rn their homes .and many without heat. and paralyzed the . fire alarm system in the boroughs of. Queens. Richmond and the Bronx. The stock, re. real and cotton markets of New York, 1 and the Boston and Chicago exchanges decided not to open tomorrow for the Saturday noon session because of bad weather. But the Chicago grain market, the largest in the world, decided to open tomorrow. Broken power lines and frozen fire extinguishers created new risks today. New York City battled the worst bout of winter in 60 years as freezing rain fell on top of last week's snow, which set a new record high, surpassing the great snowfall of 1888, caused broken power lines, created new traffic hazards and delayed the operation of passenger trains throughout the metropolitan area. Mayor William O'Dwyer announced that 3,318 fire extinguishers were out of service in the boroughs of Queens, Richmond and the Bronx. Richmond and the Bronx. The power companies reported thousands of homes without electricity, and those with automatic furnaces, electrically controlled, without heat. The Sanitation Department reported that most of the streets were clear of snow, although with a sheet of ice. Garbage trucks were recalled from emergency work, while snow shovelers and drivers were working overtime to make the first snow pickup in a week. Private automobiles were still barred from frequenting city streets unless their drivers could prove that their use was essential. A spokesman for the New York Central Railroad said there would be some delay in passenger transportation services, but that all scheduled trains would run. Other passenger transportation lines predicted some delays. Two large stores, the Kresge'", tn New York, and the L. Bamberger and Co. in Newark, N.J., did not open today. The persistent rain which fell all day yesterday froze last night. The Weather Bureau said that the rain would turn to snow this afternoon, and that the temperature would drop vertically tomorrow. The states of New York and New Jersey and much of New England were isolated by snow or ice. Maaachusets. southern New Hampshire and Vermont were expecting 10 to 12 inches of snow today. There were no air arrivals. And traffic at Newark Airport was also virtually paralyzed. "Consolidated Edl "on reported at mid-morning that 10,000 (Continued on page 10)
Quota । for sugar consumption set for 1948
Andersun yesterday allotted the Nation 7,800,000 tons of product / Does not distribute the i quota in detail However estimate Cuba's will be less than it had 1947 By GRANT TOLLMAN United Press Correaponaal. WASHINGTON, Jan. 2. (PU) Secretary of Agriculture Clinton P. Anderson. Clinton P. Anderson today set a sugar quota of 7,800,000 tons for the United States for the current year, 1948. Under the formula provided by the Sugar Act, for the distribution of shares in the domestic market to United States and foreign producers, it appears that Cuba's quota share for 1948 will be about 3,200,000 tons, which is a very marked decrease in its share from 1946, and previous years preceding the war. Anderson said, in explaining the announcement made, that he had estimated that T.RW.DOC) tonnage would provide consumers with 105 pounds per person in 194H The record per capita consumption was 114 pounds in 1929. This fell in the prewar ahn" 1, and continued to fall until ' it reached 70 pounds per person du| rente the war, rising again this year, "I end the shortage. Attentive " to estimates by va-। Has source" Industrialists, that । new consumption records are in prospect dehldo to high incomes, Andérson said the ¡quota might be raised if later conditions warranted ; lal action. He noted that it could also be reduced, Anderson explained, in announcing the setting of the quotas, that they should prevent any increase in the price of sugar to the consumer, unless an unexpected rise in the cost of living occurs.
The Sugar Law of 1" 1. The 1D48 Sugar Act, passed by Congress last year, provides that the quota shall be fixed on the basis of assuring a fair return to producers and processors and, at the same time, an ample supply for consumer needs at reasonable prices. The consumer estimate prepared by Anderson was based on a compromise between estimates that fluctuated as high as 8,500 tons presented by labor and industry representatives who use sugar during the recent hearings and Puerto Rican sugar producers who filed an estimate of consumption of 7,250,000 7,500 tons. The text of the "nuncio" reads: "The United States Department of Agriculture today announced that, in accordance with the provisions of the Sugar Act of 1944, the Secretary of Agriculture has determined that the sugar consumption requirements for the continental United States for the calendar year 1348 will amount to " 7,800, (M>0 short ton), gross value. ' This resolution is based on sugar consumption amounting to " 7, 431,000 short tons, gross value, for the 12 months ending October 31, 1947. basic period. In addition, distributions have been made in the amounts of 50,000 short tons for inventory deficiencies and 319,000 short tons for changes in population and demand conditions. It has been determined that no additional distributions are necessary for this time, with respect to the relationship between the "ratio" between the "inventory" and the "inventory".