THE WNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy in the morning, becoming cloudy with showers in the afternoon and evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 84; low, 77. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.98 inches of mercury.
40 Pages 5/
DAILY MORNING
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 1948
Motorists, let's show traditional paw courtesy.
NUMBER 13389
Island left out of housing bill
Senate only accepted substitute version F o n f r i a s explains that relying on promise, Legislature did not allocate By Lee ÑÍCHOLS WASHINGTON, Aug. 6 (PU)- The Republican high command today forced au amended national homes bill through the Senate, and then directed "u attention to its limited antl-lnflaclo-narla measure, to carry it to the last redoubt. By this action it is shown flavly that Congress will adjourn and tomorrow night the Congressmen will go to their flushes, having granted President Truman little or nothing gives what he asked of the special session, with the exception of a $65,000,000 loan to erect United Nations headquarters in New York . The Senate passed the House bill by a vote of 48 to 36, after the Republican leader, Senator Robert A. Taft, said it was all or nothing. The House, which rebelled against the original Senate bill, Taft-Ellender-Wag-ner, was expected to accept the amended version. Speaker Joseph W. Martin said the House would accept the bill as is. Meanwhile, the Senate Banking Committee gave its approval to the House-passed anti-inflation bill, with minor amendments. Nowhere do the powers requested by the President to control wages, prices and establish the ragimentaelon appear. A motion made by the Chairman of the Committee. Charles W. Tobey, R-N.H., to substitute the White House program was defeated, 6 to 4, as was a proposal by Senator Homer Capehart, R-Indiana, to freeze Jos. wages and prices at present levels. - Final vote today The Senate Initiated debate on the measure, but a । final vote is not expected until tomorrow, Saturday. ' The House recessed 't ties tomorrow, ' when Charles A. Halleck will ask members of that leglslatlvo body to accept the Senate-passed version on homes. He also expects final action on the anti-inflation bill, so that Congress can adjourn. The Senate antl-lnfladonarlo bill provides for the return of controls on installment purchases. and increases the reserves of" the ■ banks, in accordance with the Federal Reserve's system nara Prevent ''easy" lending. But it omits a House clause to increase the gold requirement certificates, of the Federal Reserve banks. The vote on the homes bill in the Senate upset the decision of its own Banking Committee, which agreed yesterday by a vote of 7 to 5, to push through the Taft-Ellender-Wagner bill introduced by the President and containing the disputed provisions on public homes and the elimination of slums. Eleven Democrats, in their Southern mavorla. joined 37 Renubllcans in approving the measure. Twelve Republicans defected their party's mandate to join 24 Democrats in a futile effort to defeat the bill. The T-E-W bill was never put to a vote, even though the Senate had passed it twice before. F.l Substitute bill Here are the main provisions of the Republican homes bill: 1, Title Sixth of the Homes Act would be reinstated. Under its provisions, the Government could guarantee private loans up to 90 percent of the cost of those "large-scale housing projects which produce large single-unit rents at a cost of $8,100 or less. A total of $800,000,000 could be used for this purpose, 2 The Government could guarantee loans up to 95 percent on homes costing from $54,500 to $6,000. 3. An additional $35,000,000 would be available to guarantee loans up to 90 percent on low-priced homes with a maximum price of $4,500. 4. The Financial Reconstruction Corporation would be authorized to extend its secondary market for home loans, and to purchase up to half of all loans made by veterans since July 30. The Government would guarantee loans for up to 95 percent on veterans' home cooperative projects. 7. The Government would guarantee a 2-3.4 percent return on equity invested in low-rent home projects. (Continued on page 16)
There is enrollment of 165,735 in the dining halls Instruction began its program with an increase in funds of $806J 29 The Puerto Rico school dining halls program began a new year of activities last August 2, with more than half a million dollars. According to Acting Commissioner of Instruction Francisco Collazo, last year's Insular allocation for the program, which was $3,400,000, has been increased to $3,887,052 for this year. In addition, the federal allocation has been increased by $152,000 for this year. The School Lunchroom Program will operate this year with total funds amounting to $6,805,225, which includes the sum of $806,129 expected to be received again this year for food donated by the federal Department of Agriculture to the Program. This grand total is distributed as follows: In- 1 sular allocation, $3,887,052; federal allocation, $2,112,044; and food to be donated by the federal Department of Agriculture, $806,129. 1 As reported by the Acting Commissioner of Instru- 1 ction, the Program began the new year's activities with an enrollment of 165,735 children, which was the average attendance at lunchrooms recorded last year. However, the Commissioner said, new applications are being considered in order to accept those from the most needy children. The new year also began (Continued on page 16)
Pastor Lozada advocates for salary increase
Says compensation of 25,000 employees is not in line with cost of living
The President of the Federation of Employees .of the Insular Government, Mr. Justo Pastor Lozada, declared yesterday that "while the Government is demanding that private industry pay decent salaries, it maintains in its own organization 25,000 employees who do not earn to attend to their most peremptory needs". "One of FEGI's most serious concerns is the inadequate salaries received by some 25,000 public employees who every last day of the month have to try the 'miracle of the loaves and fishes to live dying,'" declared Pastor Lozada, adding: "Although we got the elimination of the $55 minimum wage, this does not fulfill the justice that is owed to these employees. The $60 minimum is still a starvation wage, which today no one will accept. "The problem of the paltry compensation of these employees remains and demands the most careful consideration. The government has before it the tragic situation of the father of a family in its service, orphaned of the justice that has been given to the worker in every other branch of labor, by every other employer than the Government, in many cases by decrees and ordinances of that same Government; the humble employee who gives to the people (Continued on page 16)
Increases recommended in 3,768 cases
A total of 3,768 recommendations for salary increases have been received so far by the Personnel Office from forty-five agencies, offices and departments. The Acting Director of Personnel, Mr. Ramón Torreg Braschi, informed that the only recommendations yet to be received are those from the Departments of Health, Instruction and perhaps some other agency, in addition to the total number of recommendations that these agencies have sent to Personnel so far. The Personnel Office has already studied and considered the recommendations submitted by 35 of the 48 agencies whose certificates of merit are in the possession of Personnel, but has yet to receive the necessary approval and send them to the departments and agencies for their approval or rejection. The recommendations for salary increases under the recently approved $1,000,000 appropriation, which correspond to the aforementioned 35 agencies, represent the amount of $129,697. This amount does not include the amount of the recommended increases corresponding to agencies such as the State Insurance Fund, the Coffee Insurance Corporation, the Industrial Commission, the Housing Authority and the Isabela Irrigation Service, which have industrial or other capital funds, from which the salary increases recommended by said agencies for their employees are to be paid. The recommendations now received are for salary increases beginning July 1, 1948, exclusively. It is reported that there are a number of agencies, such as the Insular Waterworks Service, which entered competitive service or unopposed service after July 1, 1947, or which were organized after that date, such as the Bureau of Transportation, their employees being in one of those two services. The employees of these agencies have therefore not yet completed one year of work in one of those two services and consequently cannot qualify for increase until now, since they do not meet the requirement of having at least one year as regular employees in the service. However, such employees may qualify for a salary increase upon completing one year of service as a regular employee and, if they meet the other requirements, they would be entitled to the benefit of the salary increase. In the total of the recommendations studied and considered so far, from 35 agencies, and in which the increase to be authorized amounts to the annual sum of $130,000, the recommendations of the Departments of Health, Justice, Treasury and Interior are not included. The recommendations of the Departments of Health, Justice, Treasury and the Interior, whose recommendations have been studied and considered in part, are not included. Staff studies recommendations The work necessary to review and approve the recommendations of the departments of Health, Justice, and the Treasury, whose recommendations have been studied and considered in part, are not included.
News Digest
Plftern returns to island today; likely meeting between shipowners and strikers in Fortaleaa tonight. - * * Iji AT will study the problem of rail transit in San Juan with a view to increasing the number of buses. - F.l Congress adjourned public hearings on the Communist eapia* network." 1 - " School canteens began with an enrollment of 165,735 children, and an increase in funding of $806,139. - M " They accuse Oscar Figueroa Bocanegra, of giving it dead to Agustin Dueño. - Unidentified fleets of unidentified combat avlone" flew through the Berlin air corridor. - Company of the 2M won the prize among all the companies of the Nation. The Governor was honored in Tortuguero. Ford increased the price of its cars by $75, * * - It is believed that the liberals will invite the opposition parties to make an understanding. The closing of the Metropolitan this year is definite. JAC will deny permits to uncertified lines in advance. - MacKensle King announced that he is retiring from political life in Canada because of his advanced age.
The Health Department appointed a permanent doctor to attend the population of Patillas. - " " FEGI President advocates higher pay" for public employees. - - Congressional Republicans rejected Dewey's petition on behalf of displaced persons. ♦ * - Iji Union Panamericana is finalizing its" reorganization plans. - * "Solá Morales' nomination for senator is believed to be decided. - Agency has recommended raises so far, for 3,768 employees. - * - Granted another 1878 safe-housing exemptions. Ambassador* allies confer with Molotov for three hours. - Cattle continue to fall in price. * French Finance Minister asked for dictatorial powers. - Dewey will ask for the active participation of all "prominent" members of the GOP in his campaign. - "Influenza cases increase. The trial against university students continued yesterday. Puerto Rican teachers will be used to teach Puerto Rican in the city.
Police officer testifies against his son
. y ■ y r 1 . ■ í S' I Policeman Harold Jones (right) testifies against his son, Harold O, Jones, 19, (left) in the Flladelfla Justice of the Peace Court in a disturbing the peace case. The Young Man was sentenced to serve three months confinement in a house of correction. His father stated that the Young Man had been dismissed from the Navy for misconduct, that he had spent 18 months in a reform school, and that he had had to bail him out of trouble on many occasions. The son made no comment other than to call his father a "liar" who arrested him after a spectacular car race. (Associated Press photo). New conference with Molotov lasted three hours in the Kremlin Smirnov, Russian adviser on German affairs, was present. Smith, Chataigneau and Roberts have not disclosed details of discussions By HENRY SHAPIRO MOSCOW, August 6. <PU)-American Ambassador, General Walter Bedell Smith; French Ambassador, Yves Chataigneau; and Frank Roberts, English special envoy, conferred tonight cori MI-.
-" ' - , , ■ ■ _ . Metropolis is going to use Puerto Rican teachers They will teach Puerto Rican children during the day. NEW YORK, Aug. 6 (PU) - New York public schools with large Puerto Rican enrollments will implement a program of school and home activities next fall to help Puerto Rican children adapt to the American way of life, it was announced today. The teachers to be selected for this program will be Puerto Rican graduates of the University of Puerto Rico who have come to New York City to take graduate courses at Columbia University and other local institutions of higher learning. These specially selected teachers are assigned to teach Puerto Rican children in school for part of the day and to visit the homes of students and establish relationships with parents the rest of the day. It was announced at the Board of Education that these student teachers, to qualify as members of the public teaching staff, will be granted special "assistant substitute elementary mathematics teachers" licenses to be established for this program. The licenses will make their holders eligible to the Puerto Rican project only and will be renewed each year. but never beyond June 30, 1951. The Board believes that this is a further step in facilitating the adjustment of Puerto Rican students who either do not speak English and are strangers to American customs and traditions or are illiterate in English or Spanish or both. (Continued on page 16)
*The Russian Foreign Minister, Vlaceslav M. Molotov, considered this meeting as a vital stage in the negotiations aimed at resolving the dangerous crisis that had arisen between the West and the West as a result of the blockade of Berlin, decreed by the Reds. Despite the strict secrecy surrounding the prolonged meeting held in the gloomy walled fortress of the Kremlin - seat of the Aovletic Government - I am confident that the diplomatic representatives of the great world powers have agreed - at least in principle - to a conference of the foreign ministers of the United States, Great Britain, France and Russia, which is likely to be held next month in Paris. The Western envoys arrived at the Kremlin at five o'clock in the afternoon. The conference lasted until eight o'clock, - one of the longest of its kind. When General Walter Bedell Smith arrived at Spasso House, where the U.S. Embassy is installed, the journalists jumped out at him, but Smith, hurrying.e to reach the door, only shouted at them, "Molotov and । Smirnov were present. Stalin was not there. It lasted three hours. No comment." Andrei Smirnov is Molotov's chief adviser on German affairs. Chataigneau and Roberts accompanied Smith to Spasso House, where they conferred with Foy Kohler, Smith's chief aide, coordinating their views on the conversation they had just had with Molotov. Then the three envoys began to dictate their reports destined respectively for Washington, London and Paris. The experts watered down to translate these reports in code and transmit them for study in the three Western capitals. Those involved in the negotiations are committed to keeping all the details of the meeting secret. A month ago today, the Berlin situation reached its critical point, with the presentation to the Soviet Union of the results of the negotiations.
Non-certified airlines to be denied permission from now on
WASHINGTON, Aug. 6 (PU) - The Civil Aeronautics Board announced that, from today onwards, no new permits will be granted to non-certificated airlines, except those dedicated [ exclusively to cargo transportation ! The JAC Board also announced that it will conduct a complete investigation of the current irregular airlines to determine "if they are useful to the public and economically feasible". The island circuits in this city immediately took note of this announcement, since the Irregular airlines provide a large part of the cheap passenger transportation between Puerto Rico and the mainland United States. Those circuios also suggested that the CAB's announcement could have an indirect effect on the Island Government's proposals for the establishment of a "second class" certified air service. The CAB intends to consider those proposals next December. Non-routing airlines, which now hold CAB certificates, will be able to continue to operate. The CAB reported that "ua sue tavM*
gachons will cover the question of whether or not to proceed civilly or criminally against carriers proven to be in violation of federal air regulations, Assume that the Board has reason to believe that some i of the non-certificated carriers are in violation of their certificates. Non-routing carriers of the class referred to by the Board are exempt from certain sections of the Civil Aeronautics Act. / The Board indicated that there are currently 109 "large" irregular carriers employing DC-3 or larger aircraft in their air operations. The Board reported that its investigations will include an inquiry into indications that a number of irregular companies with large aircraft are "acting in concert, often with the help of ticketing agencies, to provide scheduled air service". Some time ago, charges were filed with the CAB alleging that the ticket agencies in New York were acting as representatives of the airlines, stimulating the movement of passengers between Puerto Rico and the KataóM Ualdoe o "nUn "ntatea."
Pinero to hold * strike meeting today; management failed in Norte
296 Company wins award among all the companies in the nation
The National Guard honored the Governor. By S. GALVEZ MATURANA Editor of EL MUNDO The Acting Governor, Luis Negrón Fernández, visited yesterday the National Guard camp in Tortuguero, Vega Baja, on the occasion of Governor's Day. At ten o'clock in the morning the Acting Governor arrived at the camp and was received by Brigadier General Luis Raul Esteves. Company A. of San Germán, commanded by Captain Luis A. Torres, presented arms to the Commander in Chief, who in company of Brigadier General Esteves reviewed, while Battery B of Regiment 482, commanded by Major Luis A. de la Vega, fired a salute of seventeen cannon shots, as a greeting of welcome to the Island's First Executive. Preceded by Company A. the Governor:' went to the central office of the Camp where he saluted the officers under whose command and direction the activities of the camp have been carried out for fifteen years. Immediately the Governor toured the various facilities, stopping at the dining room of Company I. riel Regiment 296, where he inspected the food that was being prepared, as well as the menu for yesterday's day. Later he went to the various firing ranges, where several of the men were being trained.
a ni ' a tí i WM' " The Acting Governor, Mr. Lula Negrón Fernández. companies were practicing with the different weapons. After this inspection, after which the Governor praised the officers of the National Guard, as well as its members for the magnificent order observed during his visit, and the perfect military discipline which prevailed, he proceeded to the officers' dining room, where lunch was served. In the afternoon the Acting Governor reviewed all the units encamped in Tortuguero, parading before him the 7,000 men who on today's Saturday afternoon parade in Tortuguero, where a lunch was served.
Patillas now has a permanent physician Dr. Armando Gutiérrez will attend to him Dr. Armando Gutiérrez has been appointed Medical Director of the Patillas Public Health Unit. He resides there and will work in combination with the municipal charity of that town. Commenting on a cartoon by our colleague Carmelo Fllardl, in relation to the lack of doctors in Patillas, Dr. José R. Alum, I deputy commissioner of Health, informs { the following: "I am pleased to inform you that, since August 2, Patillas has had the services of a physician as Director of the Public Health Unit of that town, and to attend to the municipal welfare, in accordance with the provisions of the contracts made with the municipalities under the plan of this Department, which combines the services of environmental sanitation with those of municipal welfare". Not long ago this newspaper published extensive information on the situation of the municipal welfare in Natillas, and subsequently published an editorial urging the appointment of a permanent resident doctor for that municipality, where in less than a year there have been two outbreaks of epidemics that "cut short" the lives of more than 60 children. During the past month, a doctor "loaned" by Mayor Grlllasca, from Ponco, attended the Municipal Hospital. The Public Health Unit was attended, four times a week, by another one on loan from Arroyo. Dr. Alum informs that the appointment of Dr. Gutiérrez is permanent, that he will reside in Patillas and that he will serve "24 hours a day".
Caro will study traffic problems If necessary, the number of buses in service will have to be increased The Transportation Authority intends to increase the number of buses that serve the San Juan and Santurce routes, in order to meet the needs of passengers, which have increased due to the opening of classes in public schools. Yesterday, Mr. Salvador V. Caro, administrator of the TA, informed that said agency has been conducting a study on passenger congestion in certain points. He added that the agency is conducting a study on passenger congestion at certain points to determine if it is necessary to put into service a greater number of vehicles during rush hours than the number of vehicles currently in circulation during those periods. He added that the TA currently has 22 buses available for use during rush hours. Mr. Caro pointed out that during the summer almost all educational institutions remained open, so that the difference between the summer and the beginning of the school year in terms of increased ridership will not be considerable. An editor of EL MUNDO has observed that in the late afternoon, especially, the transportation of passengers is congested in different points of the metropolitan area due to the large influx of students leaving public schools. This causes inconveniences to passengers, who have to wait longer (Continued on page 16).
"1 - Governor expects prompt solution He said the situation would not become serious until the end of the current month By Luis Sanchez Carpa Editor of EJ, MUNDO It was authoritatively reported yesterday afternoon, by sources intimately linked to the shipping companies in Puerto Rico, that the efforts made by Governor Piftero in Washington with the national officials of the shipping companies operating in the island to reach a solution to the strike conflict culminated in another failure. As revealed by our "fnformarrte", the directors of the companies made it clear to s "ftor Plñem oue the problem was a matter to be resolved in Puerto Rico, between their" representative" on the Island and the stevedores. It was reported that the" company officials" in Washington communicated at the end of the" talks yesterday with their representatives on the Island, informing him" of the outcome of the negotiations. Meanwhile, at 4:00 p.m., it was announced by the Executive Assistant to Governor Piñero, Mr. Jorge Font Satriafta, that he will be back in Puerto Rico today, Saturday, at 1:00 p.m., and that in all probability the Chief Executive will call on the shipowners and longshoremen to resume the talks tonight at La Fortaleza. Mr. Piñero communicated twice with his Executive Assistant yesterday, from Washington, by international telephone, informing him of the result of his negotiations. According to Mr. Font Saldaña, the Governor "is satisfied with the spirit which prevailed in the course of the negotiations in the Federal Capital, and expressed his hope that a satisfactory settlement will be reached in the dispute between the shipping companies and the longshoremen. Federal Conciliators Charles A. Goldsmith and William H. McAlister and Island Conciliator Adolfo Collazo held a conference with Mr. Font Saldaña, who stated that the conciliators informed him of the status of the situation. On the other hand, the shipping companies appealed yesterday to the Public Service Commission with a petition for reconsideration of the order issued by the PSC requesting that said companies proceed to deliver the cargo that is on the move to their consignees. For its part, the Commission yesterday issued an order directing Waterman Dock Co. to appear before the PSC to show cause why it should cancel the franchise under which it operates the dock business. In their petition for reconsideration to the PSC, the shipping companies, represented by their attorney, Jose L. Novas, deny that the Commission lacks jurisdiction to issue the order; that the order was issued without holding a public hearing, and without hearing any of the parties and that the appearing companies do not hold any franchise issued by the Commission authorizing them to engage in the dock business in Puerto Rico. The petition states, in part, that: - Even assuming that this Public Service Commission had jurisdiction over the petitioners, which they expressly deny, the order of August 5, 1948, providing for the delivery of dock cargo would constitute discrimination and favoritism in favor of certain and specific consignees, since according to the information and belief of the petitioners, the striking unions require that a permit be issued by them to cross the picket lines; The appellants continue to allege, upon information and belief, that such permits are issued upon payment of money or other consideration and that this practice constitutes discrimination in favor of consignees who accept this condition and against other consignees who accept it, In the event that this Commission should have jurisdiction over the appellants, which they expressly deny, it would be impossible to comply with the terms of the above order of August 5, 1948, because of the state of strike prevailing on the docks, as a result of which the appellants do not have employees to deliver the cargo deposited on the docks. The action of the Unions in huciga in demanding permits issued by paca, as a condition for crossing the '.inca" of picket lines is illegal v constitutes a crime in violation of I" section 420 of title 18 riel United States Court, and that rte be possible to the appearciente" deliver cargo by virtue of the referred permits", it (Continued on page 16)
Liberals Believed To Invite Opposition To Conduct Connoisseurship
By J. M. García Calderón Rerinetor <te EL MUNDO Tomorrow Sunday, at 10 a.m., the extraordinary assembly of the Puerto Rican Liberal Party will begin in Mayagüez. The asAmbleA has been called to, among other things, discuss the change of name, flag and insignia of said Party. The question of changing the name of the Liberal Party is not expected to meet with any objection from the assembly, since, in the last convention of the party, held about two months ago in Bayamón, the majority of the local boards, through their delegates, were in favor of this step. On the other hand, the members of the Executive Committee of the Liberal Party, without exception, are in agreement with the transformation of the party.
Tomorrow's assembly in Mayagüez is the third one held by the Liberal Party this year. The" last two assemblies were held with the purpose of organizing a new collectivity through the fusion of Liberals and Unlorrepuhlicans, which failed because the respective groups could not reach an agreement. In the assembly of the Liberal Party, it was announced yesterday that a resolution will be adopted inviting the other opposition parties to make an understanding, by means of which it will be possible to unite all the forces that fight the present Government Party. . Until late yesterday the Secretary of the Liberal Party was dispatching the credentials corresponding to the delegates of 50 local boards and it was expected to send the rest in the course of today. (Continued on page 15).