THE DAILY N®NDO MARANA
NEW YOBK, Nov. 28. (FU)- Temperatures in the afternoon were: Nine York. 54; WAshlngton, M; Miami, M| Chicago, 41, At ol La Guardia airport, dolo clear to an Unlimited height; high, wispy, broken clouds; visibility I miles. Forecast for tonight and maflana: less clear sky tonight | visibility dlamlnulrd a little maflana; weather will not be entirely good.
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY. - Partly cloudy, with some fairly scattered light showers. IN SAN JUAN, AYEB. - Maximum temperature, Ml minimum, 15. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., N.M. inches of mercury.
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 1948
NUMBER 13501
FIVE CENTS
YEAR XXIX
Negotiations With Cargill Have Failed
- The parties withdrew from the plan to build factories and mills The negotiations of the Compartía de Fomento with the firm Cargill, Ine, of Minnesota, to erect several factories in the vicinity of Cataño, have been broken off. In relation to the breakup of the negotiations, the Compartía de Fomento reported yesterday that Cargill had withdrawn some months ago from the business it proposed to establish on the island, because it understood that the construction costs, and above all those of the machinery, had exceeded its estimates. Fomento said that Car.gilí has resumed negotiations on the basis of a smaller project than the one originally planned, with the above-mentioned reauthorizations. According to the initial plans, the Compartía de Fomento was to provide $2,000,1)00 for buildings, in which would be factories to manufacture wheat flour, soap, cattle feed, and fertilizer. First" Negotiations The first negotiations - as reported yesterday - were held on the understanding that Cargill would buy the factory in a number of months, after construction, giving prompt payment and leaving the building and machinery as security until full payment of the debt. A business of this nature - said an official of the Compartment of Development - is easily negotiable, with which the Compartment was in a position to negotiate "its value" and continue its work. He added that when the negotiations were resumed, the parties tried to make a new contract on the basis of a lease. However, the Compartía de Fomento found that in this form it would not be possible for it to discount its role, so it made a counterproposal to Cargill to return to the original terms of the first contract. Cargill rejected the new proposal, thus breaking off the new negotiations. (Representative) Cargill was represented in the negotiations by Mr. H. Duncan Watson. As reported yesterday, that company, pursuant to a stipulation agreed to at the time of the negotiations with the Compartía de Fomento, has agreed to pay the latter an amount of about $50,000 for the expenses incurred in the various arrangements made in connection with the withdrawn business. Among the steps to be taken by Ja Compartía de Fomento is the preparation by its officers of studies and plans for the project. The stipulation under which Cargill will have to indemnify the Compartía de Fomento was said to be part of the contract that the Compartía is required to sign prior to initiating negotiations to establish a new industry. The negotiations between the Compartía de Fomento and the Cargilí firm appeared frequently in the Puerto Rican press as one of the main steps in the development of the Industrialization program in the island. When these negotiations are definitively closed, the money that the Company intended to invest in the different Cargill factories will be free to stimulate another "enterprise". Crop Report From Minneapolis. we received yesterday the following dispatch from the United Press: The Cargill Company's newsletter reported today that nearly the entire corn crop was spared from the snowstorm which hit the Midwest last week. The authoritative Grain Industry publication said that, of the current year's crop, estimated at 3,649,000,000 bushels, 15 to 20 percent was unharvested when the storm hit, the bowl added that the days leading up to the storm had been very good and that farmers had had a very good chance to harvest the crop. The mechanical harvesters were helped by light rains during the harvest. This was particularly true in Nebraska and Kansas, the bulletin said, where stalks and cobs had dried out too much. The bulletin said the outlook for the 1949 wheat crop was "very favorable," with winter plantings benefiting from the moisture. "Even late wheat will be able to start growing well before winter sets in." He added that my 58,000,000 acres are expected to be planted.
They brought a Parranda to the Governor-Elect.
"d&E I S * IBM "fw i L Ji I \ I | lili®.
Governor-elect aeflor Lula Muño" Marín, became an impromptu musical director last night, as you can see in the photograph. A group of artist"", singer"" and journalist""
of San Juan visited Mr. Muño" Marín to pay tribute to his election. Li parranda offered the aeftor Muño* Marín and his eapnan laa Musical interpretations of the" singer and artist" that the
te" and artist" who visited her. In the photo appear, among others, Mrs. Inés Mendoxn de Muño" Marín; Mr. Muño" Me. rln, their daughters. Guillermo Venegas; Adalberto da Córdova,
Je "úa M. Rnntnlls, Rafael Umplene, Luis Emilio Herrío", Alicia R. do Córdova, Gilberto Cru" Ignrtúa and Manuel Rivera Mato", (Photo by EL MUNDO),
Fernós Unveils 5-Point Program One on Constitution, Others on Economic Measures For Paul HARRISON WASHINGTON, Nov. 26 (PU) - Puerto Rico's resident commissioner in Washington, Dr. Antonio Fernós Isérn, said today that the island government will seek the approval by the Eighty-first Congress of five specific pieces of legislation. During a press conference at his office on Capitol Hill. Fernós Iscrn said the legislative program outlined by the newly elected administration has two objectives: to increase self-government for the island and to improve Puerto Rico's economic conditions. In the political sphere, Fernós Isern said, the objective will be the approval of a Constitution drafted by Puerto Ricans" to replace the current supreme law of the Island - the Organic Charter - drafted by Congress. F.l Economic Objective On the economic side, he said, the Island Administration will: 1. Renew and redouble the campaign it began during the last Eightieth Congress to extend to Puerto Rico the Old Age and Unemployment Pension benefits, and other benefits of the Federal Social Security Act: 2. Renew its campaign to have the Charter amended, or a provision in the new Constitution, preventing the imposition of quantitative restrictions on trade between Puerto Rico and the U.S. mainland; 3.
Muñoz Marín Awarded "Toscanini of Island Policy" Baton at Treasure Island Event
Admiral Daniel E. Rarbey announced Friday that while in Washington, he was able to get the Navy to loosen its restrictions on commercial radio stations in Puerto Rico so that no station in the San Juan area would be adversely affected by the construction of the Navy's Sabana Seca station. "We have always tried to cooperate to the fullest with the Puerto Rican people," Admiral Rarbyr said, "and we will continue to do so. The change that has been made represents an additional burden on the Navy, but I have complete confidence that our Corps of Engineers will be able to get around that obstacle." ( amblan Limits The tentative limit of ten millivolts per meter has been changed to 30 millivolts per meter. The WEMB, WIBS, and WIPR stations, located in Sabana Seca, will be relocated as previously agreed, at the expense of the U.S. government. All other stations in or near San Juan are operating satisfactorily in accordance with naval requirements. Existing stations will not be required to reduce power or change equipment, it was reported. It will be noted that with the loosening (Continued on page 14)
Pnr Luí" F. Sánches Cappa Editor of EL MUNDO A group of radio artists and journalists" of San Juan paid a sympathetic tribute last night to Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, on the occasion of his election for Governor of Puerto Rico. The artists and journalists went on a parade to Treasure la-
land, in Cidra, where Mr. Muñoz Marin is spending a temporary stay. The parranda arrived at the place where the honoree is staying, singing aguinaldos, and was received by Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín and his wife Inés Mari" Mendoza de Muñoz, and several of their guests. Later an acT" was organized, in which several of the artists took part. As part of the event, a resolution approved by the Cofradía de Artistas Nómada", sponsor" of the tribute, in which Mr. Muñoz Marín is praised and designated "cl Toscanini of the politics" of Puerto Rico, was read and delivered by artist Fernando Roca. Acting as master of ceromorúas, guitarist Jesús M. Santaliz presented Mr. Muñoz Marín with a baton. He also introduced the members of the organization that sponsored the event and approved the solution. Mr. Muñoz Marin thanked the "rtl "tas for the resolution, the gift of the baton and the tribute paid to him. For several hours the singers, guitarists and composers present regaled the Muñoz Marin husband and wife with songs, imitations and anecdotes. For their part, the Muñoz Marin couple regaled the visitors with refreshments and hors d'oeuvres. The party went on until the wee hours of the morning. Before leaving, Mr. Muñoz Marin said a few words, inviting the artists to visit him when he is residing at La Fortaleza, after assuming the duties of the governorship. The following, among others, took part in the tribute: Jesus M. Santallz, Fernando Roca, El Trio Vegabajefto, El Trio Perln Vaz.(Continued on page 14.)
Veterans' Teachers To Be Paid Promptly Starting January 1 - VA To Make Advances Teachers in aspacíal groups of veterans will be paid promptly starting next January 1. The Department of Instruction was able to solve the problem related to the delay in the payment of their salaries, as raised recently by EL MUNDO in one of its recent editorials. In response to a request from the Department of . Instruction, the Veterans Administration decided to make advances of $750,000 every four months. The first of these will arrive next December, it reported, ■ Previously the payments were made after the Dopartainento rendered services, as a result of which the teachers' pay was delayed. - Continued on page 14)
Mrs. Chiang Kai-shek Would Now Be Received Coldly, Rumor Says
Rumor Has It She Is Coming To Ask For More Aid For China. Denied Invitation For Donald J. Gonzalez" WASHINGTON, Nov. 26 (PU)~ President Truman today dropped a proposal to invite Chiang Kai-shek to come to Washington to deal with the Chinese crisis, even though the Generalissimo's wife already plans to make a visit and appeal to the United States for "immediate" aid to China. A State Department spokesman confirmed Nankin's report that Madame Chiang, educated in the United States, was scheduled to make a trip to the United States, but refused to answer any direct questions as to whether or not the Government had invited her. On the basis of statements made by Secretary of State George C. Marshall to a press conference on Wednesday, Madame Chiang is in danger of being received coldly by the official authorities. Marshall made it clear that the "guiding principle" of U.S. policy is carefully weighing the question of how much more "more" this pal "can do" to help the "blockaded" nationalist "army" against the "advancing communist "army". He also made it clear that the U.S. is willing to proceed cautiously by
T7 >BI Bl Bra. Chlang Kal-shek fear of getting too involved in China. True Information The "ugeition that "e Invite! Generalissimo to visit Washington to give "true information" "on the needs" of Chl. na, was made by Representative Sol Bloom, Democrat rie New York, during a conversation at the White House with leftor Truman. But Bloom said the President had stated that he did not believe that Chlang could abandon the Chlang (Continued on p. 14).
Price of Dairy Products Decline Recorded
NEW YORK, Nov. 26 (P. U.)-The prices of all dairy products have fallen in the market during the last few months, according to a survey of more than 20 dairy firms today. The survey showed that from September 26 to November 24, the average price of milk has dropped three-tenths of a cent a quart, butter 6.8 cents a pound, margarine 3.3 cents a pound, and American cheese 3.1 cents a pound. The average price of eggs in the cities where the survey was conducted increased 4.3 cents a dozen during the same period, "ln however. Following is a cojn* paratlva relation: On Sept. 26: milk, 19.8; butter, 75.8: eggs, 70; margarine, 70.5; and cheese, 55 9. On Nov. 24: lecre, 19.5; manto keel, 69.5: eggs. 74.3; margarine, 37.2; and cheese, 52.8. Lowest Tidal Wave I The Department of Agriculture
reported this week that the decline in dairy commodity prices from September to October was the steepest on record for this time of the year, when food prices regularly increase. Dr. Cliff D. Carpenter, of the American Poultry Industry Institute in Corral, said egg prices rose because they were the only ones to follow the usual trend at that time. Dr. Carpenter explained that egg production is at its peak in April, May and early June. Production and supply will be at its lowest point from September 15 to December 15, with a consequent increase in prices. Denies Drop" in Other" Produce" Product" Dairy "Portavoce" for the indmtria through the Nation denied that the cause of the drop in the prices of other" dairy "products" was due to the growing retinence to tCuntinú* on p. 14),
Preparing Ship Departure From U.S.
The Presidency In The New Government '.b "
Colonel Carlos Delgado Chalhaud, President of the Military .lunfa that will govern Venezuela provhlonnlmente. The news was given a few hours after the Army had overthrown the government of President Romulo Gallegos in Caracas, the colonel was unseated as Minister of Defense in the Gallegos Cabinet, (Photo by Associated Press), Weapons Commissioned To Opposition In Venezuela 4 Gallegos Ministers Held In Prison In Miraflores Palace By Anthony Luí" CARACAS, Venezuela, November 26. (FU)- The Proviiinnal Government "" dedicated today "" to wipe out the" last" remnant" of 1" opposition. The Provisional Government was organized yesterday. Six stations" cl "nde "tlna" that had been transmitting what the." military authorities cnllflearon ri" "rumor." false"", were loentizadas with detectors militare". Four of clin." were trnnsmltlenrio from Caraca", and do" in e| nearby Lo" Tcques. Todn" were cenada". arresting to loi that In" they operated. It was reported that weapons and rudimentary bombs were confiscated in the barracks of the deposed Democratic Action Party, and in several homes. About 200 rifles and a shipment of ammunition and bombs were seized. Four of the ministers of the overthrown regime of Romulo Gallegos: Juan Perez. Alfonso, former Minister of Development, who is well known in the United States; Luis Beltrán Prieto, former Minister of Education; Leonardo Rulz Pineda, former Minister of Communications and Alberto López Gallegos, former Governor of the Federal District, who had a seat in the Cabinet, are imprisoned in the Miraflores Palace. The Provisional Government, under special powers assumed by the Euanrio, suspended the constant Ituclonal guarantees of freedom of speech, travel, assembly, individual security and of the home and correspondence. This means a proclamation of martial law throughout Venezuela. On the surface, normality has been restored in Caima" and in the interior. Torio." lo" rilarlos were circulating again, ron the usual number rie page". However, In" úulcos that brought editorial comments were El Heraldo and El Gráfico. Both spoke out against the overthrown Gallegos government. El Heraldo praised "the" eight civilians named provisional "minister" (Continued on page 34).
First Call to the Colors To Be Held on the Island in January
At the Selective Service Headquarters the first call has been received from the National Headquarters for the entrance of men into the Military Service during the month of January 1049. Following the procedure established by law, instructions will soon be sent to the "Junta" Lócale". "on the" election and "appointment of the" Inscripto" in order for this" "ufran lo" physical and mental examinations that determine their condition of acceptability for the" Armed" Forces. The Selective Service Act of 1948 - says official note - contains no provision specifically permitting voluntary entry of the Enlisted" in advance of the date on which they are normally selected for service in the order of their birth date; the oldest" first, "Any ln "cripto who is between the" 19 and 25 arth", "will be free to make application in advance of the date on which they are normally" selected for service in the order of their" birth date; the oldest" first, "Any ln "cripto who is between the" 19 and 25 arth", "will be free to make application in advance of the date on which they are normally" selected for service in the order of their" birth date.
shall be free to make application at any recruiting station to enlist voluntarily for the same period as he is under obligation to serve under the Selective Service Act of 1948, provided, however, that no such enlistment may be made after the registrant has been ordered to appear for an Armed Forces physical examination. "Only 200 men will be selected for military service during the month of January." In the states of the Union, the call-up for service began this November and another call-up will be made in December. As will be recalled, "1 initiate the draft in 1" d> New York City, among Tos first" "late men admitted "1 Army, do will be Puerto Rican."
Borinqucn] Will Sail on Day 2/ NavieroR Approved to Give Vacation and Raise. Other Strikes Remain NEW YORKT'ññvIembre 26 (PU)- As the strikes of the Parifico Coast and Atlantic Coast stevedores, which cost $824,ooo.ooo, are nearing their end, the shipping lines have begun to prepare to resume domestic maritime operations. Hopes for an end to the strike on Monday were dimmed* somewhat when 2,000 Brooklyn longshoremen voted down the settlement today. The vote was not official; the official secret ballot will be held tomorrow. On the other hand, the F'ilndrlfln "e.tlbndorea" decided by official "'otaclon" to "rept the terms. no" of the settlement and return to work. Joseph P. Rynn, president of In Union, said the vote of the" Brooklyn workers ca-x recíu of importance. I.ns part" in dl "putn said today that tndo Indicates that the giant merchant fleet rie United States comcnzwrá n pircar lo" seas as soon as the ships berthed at lo" port" of both costal are unloaded and loaded." Ne Damage (Cargoes Much." perishable cargoes "" hnn damaged during 1a" strikes; and in the East Coala 200,000 sacks of outside rail mail and $3,ooo.ooo in goods" for the." recipient countries" of] Marshall Plan were stowed" on the nearly deserted docks. Representatives of the longshoremen of the FAT "n 1" CostaJJste and of the" CIO longshoremen on the Pacific Coast reached agreements with the employers yesterday. However, the official end of the 17-day strike in the East and 81 days in the West depended on the ratification of new wage agreements by union members. The strikers, who laid up 265 ships in the 10 Pacific Coast bays, will vote tomorrow on a fifteen-cent-an-hour increase to $1.82 per hour. The International Longshoremen's Association (FAT) strikers, who have stopped ships on the Atlantic coast, will vote tomorrow on a fifteen cent per hour increase, which will raise the hourly rate to $1.88. On the West Coast, strikes by seamen, cooks and ship's stewards are still going on. Also on strike are the stokers and radio operators. All, except the stokers, are affiliated with the Congress of Industrial Organizations. It is necessary to settle all these strikes before ships can sail, but it is believed that the settlement of the stevedore strike will facilitate the settlement of the other strikes. The agreement cancel (arlo in the Atlantic coala was produced m a re" i union chaired by Cyrus S. Ching, director of the Federal Conciliation and Mediation Service. The contract, approved by the shipping porfenriare" at their meeting da hnv, in addition to the increase provides va" | endones and a d* welfare plan. It will be valid for one year. Workers' Guarantee The West Coast contract would provide vncncioncs. retain the contracting snla rie, and would provide for a national guarantee that the ClO would be bound by the terms of the agreement. The contract would be in effect for a fresh year," with an anti-strike clause. The shipowners" estimated that the west coast strike cost $4,000,000,000 a) rila, and the east coast strike $30,000,000 a) rila. The strikes stranded many ships overseas, as well as in U.S. ports. The Queen Elizabeth, the world's largest ocean liner, was laid up at Southampton, England, for a week, with 1,500 passengers on board. 1.a Cunard White Star Lina said that the ship will sail Sunday for New York, "if the port workers" on the east coast decide to return to work. The Borlnquen, the New York and Porto Rico Steamship Line's "printer passenger ship," has "tentatively been scheduled to sail for Puerto Rico on Thursday, Dec. 2," according to line officials. The Borlnquen, which normally carries 350 passengers on a "San Juan" voyage, has been docked at this port, awaiting the end of the Atlantic Coast Longshoremen's strike. Officials said that the trip depends on what the workers decide with respect to the company's offer. The "workers" expect to sell two-thirds of the "tickets" if the ship "sails 01," (Continued on page 14),
BCG Immunization Will Be Massive
Plan Will Cover All Children, Including Those Who Do Not Study By Lula Hernández Aqulno Editor of EL MUNDO Health Commissioner Dr. Juan A. Pons said yesterday " EL MUNDO that the use of the BCG vaccine "will be applied en masse in torta la lila, tncluyénrtos" children "rte the" urban and rural area. Speaking about the adult tuberculosis program, Dr. Pon referred to the former Chief of the Tuberculosis Department, Dr. Jose Rodriguez Pastor, who has given a day of free services to the Department. How the Vaccine will be used, Commissioner Saluri explained that the application of the vaccine will be a kind of mass study, first taking 20,000 children, who will be vaccinated in the first year, and later the program will continue to be developed until the entire child population of the Island has been vaccinated. Dr. Pons revealed that the plans drawn up to date, and which may be subject to change, include sending four or five vaccination teams to different districts of the island. Both school children and children who are not in the classroom will be vaccinated. Vaccination will be done only among children between 6 and 10 years of age, provided that these children have a negative reaction to the application of tuberculosis. Vaccination of Newborns Dr. Pons explained that for those children who do not attend the schools, a health education plan will be developed first, and then the tuberculin test will be applied. Dr. Pon" said that all" the" newborns" will be vaccinated" fifteen days after their birth, being this work in charge exeluilvo of the personnel of the Public Health Units of" his department. The Commissioner of Health made a warm praise of Dr. Jo "é Rodriguez Pastor, former Chief of the Department. Dr. Pona explained that "1 Dr. Rodriguez Pastor is giving a row d" caris semsns si Depsrtsmento, "ln pecuniary interest rio any kind and for the benefit of the program against tubercles!", The cooperation d" l Dr. Rodriguez Pastor consists of going with Dr. Robert L. Smith, current Chief of the Tuberculosis Bureau, to different towns of the Island, in which conferences are held among the directors of the Tuberculosis Hospitals, chiefs of the Anti-Tuberculosis Centers and medical personnel related to the problem. At the meetings, the head of the Tuberculosis Centers, the director of the area's Tuberculosis Hospital, Dr. Smith and Dr. Rodriguez Pastor, study the files of each tuberculosis case, observe the radiographic herds, and discuss the cases one by one.  Dr. Pona said that the value of this trust is that the agreements reached increase the effectiveness of the Anti-Tuberculosis Centers, increase the number of tuberculosis cases to be treated and make much better use of the surgical facilities of the hospitals. On the Cooperation of Doctors" The Commissioner of Health stated that he appreciates the cooperation that (Continued on page 14)