THE NWNDO
42 Pages 5/ , *
WEATHER FORECAST FOR. THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy, partly cloudy, mm "neo little* showers in the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: Tempo, maximum break, 84: minimum, 11. Barometric prealon at silver of the sea, at 4:M do afternoon, NM inches of mereu- . rio.
DAILY TOMORROW
ávtomovtltetaa, demoetremoa M corteóla traditional pala
NUMBER 11319
XXIX
Unemployment insurance would be extended
Sierra discloses that a study is being made It would cover the island industries. - The Labor Commissioner, "eftor Fernando Sierra Berdecla, yesterday expressed his support "for the study and extension of unemployment insurance to all industries," Commissioner Sierra Ordecla praised the legislation that provides unemployment insurance for workers in the sugar industry, and reported on the study he has been conducting for "the implementation of such law" through the creation of the corresponding Wvlslón in his department. On this matter, Mr. Sierra Berdecla stated the following: "The unemployment problem in Puerto Rico is one of the most serious, and the program to deal with this problem has to be one of the most necessary and important of the Government and the People of Puerto Rico. "The problem of unemployment has been tackled by the present Government, through diverse legislation, especially that which provides for Industrialization, and that which provided for the creation of the Bureau of Employment and Immigration. All that was left to do was to begin to tackle it, through social security. "With the legislation that creates this insurance in the sugar industry, we began to face this problem, also by ose Angulo. This legislation will benefit greatly, not only the workers who will receive the benefit payments and the unemployment benefits, but the entire community, especially the merchants and businesses in the Puerto Rico sugar area, which are so affected every year during the months of October, November and December, when almost all the workers in the sugarcane industry are unemployed. As to whether he would advocate the extension of unemployment insurance to other industries, Commissioner Sierra Bardada said, "I am in favor of studying and extending the unemployment insurance systems to all industries, coordinating them with the federal social security system as these systems are established". Mr. Sierra Bordéela further informed that the Department has already initiated the work to implement this legislation. On this point, he indicated that "the Director of the Bureau of Statistics, Mr. Francisco Rodriguez, is working with me on the initial program for the implementation of this law. Our Bureau of Statistics has been conducting studies and gathering information on the unemployment problem on the island. He further announced that the new division will work in coordination with the Statistics and Immigration and Employment bureaus. The new agency will be duly installed by next January, when the law will be in force, regarding the discount of 5 percent of the workers' wages, and the contribution of another 5 percent by the employers, to constitute the insurance fund. Commissioner Sierra further explained the law that provided for the eight-hour workday and expressed his views on the effects of said statute. He said that "the law does not change the existing situation in the sugar industry, nor in any other industry where decrees issued by the Minimum Wage Board are in force." He added that "by virtue of the decree fixing wages in the sugar industry, and since it was approved and sustained by the Supreme Court, all labor in excess of eight hours must be paid double time. In the rest of agriculture under the old law, as interpreted by the Supreme Court, double time must be paid for the ninth hour only. Now all overtime will have to be paid double time, "I must call attention to the fact that rarely in agriculture are more than A hours worked. As a matter of fact, and due to the fact that in the cutting of canes barely 4 hours a day were worked, even at the height of the harvest, the Junta de Salarlo Minimo its decree guaranteeing a minimum period of 4 hours a day for those workers who were employed. "As for the local industries, including agriculture, Astas continue to enjoy the opportunities to work 48 hours a week, with simple pay. It is only in excess of 48 hours a week that they must be paid double time. This was also the case under the old law. "Industrialists who are in interstate commerce have to pay time and a half in excess of 40 hours. Myth was that way before under federal law. Now they must pay time and a half in excess of 8 hours a day. If one of these industries should need to work 5 hours in excess of 40 hours, it can do so either by working them after 40 hours, or by working 1 hour overtime per day for 5 days. "The situation now in that case would in fact be identical to the antenor." ¡ I
Entered as second close matter, Post Office, Ban Juan, P. R. '
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MAY 29, 1948
Susoni retired from the House yesterday after surrendering his office.
■ r W®. , : .y - Im Hi * I H Fj® ® . B I I H ■ ®®B ■ ® I ®MB J PwFJl ' aHxZ? ,/®l i A. IK ■S x ® JhsnSH® .
The moment when Dr. Francisco M. Busoni handed over the presidency of the Chamber of RanraMutantM yesterday to the vice-president of said legislative body, Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonin! (Fotograprrwrnr.n £ MUNDO),
An explosion was heard at the University I know erre was near the residence of the Rector,- No damage was recorded By Luis Hernándas Aqulnn Editor of EL MUNDO Final exams gave yesterday at the University of Puerto Rico in a normal and orderly manner, without any incidents being recorded. The striking students plquetearon to our first teaching center, poetando posters on the university situation and the Rector of the University of Puerto Rico. At 2:00 a.m. two loud explosions sounded in the vicinity of the Rector's residence, which could be heard in a radius of more than a kilometer. Police are investigating the origin of the explosions. Mr. Benitez, commenting on the matter, quoted a poem by Garel laso de la Vega, a 16th century Spanish poet. At eight o'clock in the morning, as usual, the unlveraitarloa students of Cien (Continued on page 12)
Ramo* Antoni also resigned and became president of the legislative body. In Muñox's residence there were conferences to deal with the situation created By JOSE CALDERON Editor of El, MUNDO In an atmosphere of tension, and with many of the people present reflecting their anonadamiento, Dr. Francisco M. Susoni handed over his post as president of the legislative body yesterday afternoon.
-yesterday afternoon, of his position as President of the Chamber of Deputies of the Chamber of Deputies. ♦ te of the Chamber of Representatives to the Vice-President of said body, Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonlnl. Upon handing over the mallete, symbol of the Speaker's authority, -Mr. Susoni stated the following, addressing Mr. Ramos AntoV nlni: "Ramos, dear fellow member of । Chamber, I want to express my sorrow at leaving this place, to which I came full of hopes in pursuit of an Ideal that I believed was going to be consecrated during my Incumbency here. I want to tell you that I leave disappointed and sad for not having been able to see my hopes realized. "In my letter to Muñoz. Marin are the reasons that determined my final decision. I place this briefcase in your hands, certain that you will honor it, as you have already been able to honor it from the Vice-Presidency of this House. I hope that you may be happier in the consecration of the Ideal (Continued on page 18).
h ■ wi i, .i - i । ten ¡i mi House Subcommittee approved return Bill ps - on land ceded by the Armed Forces on the Island WASHINGTON, mpyó 28, - (PU) - The House Armed Services Subcommittee today approved legislation to authorize the Armed Forces to return to Puerto Rico certain land that was ceded during the war. The bill has already been approved by the Senate. Rear Admiral John J. Manning, head of the Navy Department's Bureau of Piers and Shipyards, told the subcommittee that the legislation was deemed necessary to avoid any doubt as to the future validity of title to the land once it was returned by the Armed Forces. It was indicated that the original terms of purchase of the land is (Continued on page 18).
Compendio de Noticias =1
Muñoz Marín tells Ruaonl that within the same party there cannot be two ways of dealing with the status problem. - . - * ('omission of civic entities delivered to the Governor memorial and resolution against bills affecting freedom of pnlahm. * By unanimous vote of the members present*, the Board of Directors of the Ateneo Puertorriqueño agreed to join the protest against bills 28, 84, and 88. - - - - GOP leaders agree to close Congress on June 18. - - - - - - - International Airport case to be discussed on June 1. - - - Formalized agreement on payment for aqueduct improvements. - MacArthur to go to U.S. before Republican Party meeting. - The agreement was reached at the London meeting of the National Security Council. - The "muU" resigned as Premier of South Africa. - - - - Rusonl handed over yesterday to Ramos Antonlnll presidency of the House; his son, Rep. Estaban Busoni, also rsaunI aló.
The Cordon bill, gives eludadanta, |x "ó to the Nenado. - Judge grants injunction ordering landing not to enter UPR. Railroad union leaders agree to extend anti-strike order. - Rnrlcuaa result in high schools in Maryland. * Rlerre supports extending unemployment insurance to all industries. - - - - < Gumita* Dorado* teams from Pittsburgh and Buffalo will arrive Tuesday afternoon, at the airport at lata Grande, for their aerie with Puerto Rico, q Inaugurarte Tuesday night at the Escobar. - The American League lead was restored by virtue of their victory over the Washington Senators, 7-4. - In the early hours of yesterday morning -- an explosion was recorded near the residence of the Rector of the UPR. There were no casualties. - - - House Subcomlte approved the return of island land* held by the Armed Forces. - Schuman alleges right to dismissal of civil service employees.
Muñoz tells Susoni that within a party, two ways of dealing with status cannot be sustained.
Commission of entities saw Governor Ix" made formal delivery of memorial against Ion projects 23, 24 and 25 Yesterday afternoon, at four o'clock, was fulfilled the agreement adopted by the recent assembly of entity clvlcaa, in the sense of submitting to] Governor Jeaús T, Plflero, with a memorial, the agreements approved" against the project" 23, 24 and 25 of the House. A delegation of the assembly, composed of the Director of El Día, Mr. Rafael Rivera Santiago; the president of the Puerto Rico Press Circle, Mr. G. Miranda Archilla; and the Director of El Mundo, Mr. Pahlo Vargas Badillo, visited the Governor at the Palace, formally handing him the documents. Mr. Vargas Badillo told the Governor, on behalf of the assembly, that the documents were presented in the best hope that the Executive would see clearly the way to deny his signature to the projects in question. The Governor then expressed his gratitude for the cooperation provided and offered to give his most careful consideration to the point of view of the elviva entities". The documents delivered yesterday afternoon "I Governor the main Resolution, approved by 43 civic entities of the pals, whose relation ae detailed: an alegaioj'Ubrlendo the légale" aspects of the proposed legislation, and a memorial in which numerous" razt ie" are maintained by which they should not become law the already aforementioned projects. The memorial reads as follows: Excellency: On behalf of the forty-three political, cultural, labor, professional, civic, economic and religious entities listed in the appendix to this memorandum, the undersigned" enearecly request Your Honor to deny approval and signature to House Bills 23, 24 and 25, passed by the recent Extraordinary Legislature. We make this request, protected by our right of petition, convinced that the first Puerto Rican to occupy the island governorship, by personal commission of the President of the United States, since the change of sovereignty, some fifty years ago, should not write the somber page that the enactment of this repressive legislature would constitute. Backing up ezle request is a peaceful and good people, reapetuo "o of the law, abider of authority, trained in two genera- , clones of democratic living and ce-1 loso of "V" prerogatives civile", ( who aientesgrave" fears that this legislation which he rejects may I mark the beginning of an odious ara ' of diminution or abrogation of civil a- - lliberties, or of the intimidation of the Individual or of 1n" groups of individuals by ofl- I clal action. The reasons supporting this petition, synthetically expressed, are as follows: । 1- The projects are. clearly, a possible instrument of, repression of the freedoms of speech, ( assembly and Press. They are also, potentially, a specter of Intl- i, midaclon. Even without official diligence ( to that effect, the citizen does not au(Continued on page 18)
Boric lias are unharmed in a forced watering in Maryland.
BALTIMORE, May 28. (PU)-A Boeing four-engine plane from Puerto Rico, bound for New York, made a forced ditching today, but none of the passengers were injured. The plane, belonging to World-Alrways Incorporated, was piloted by Captain William Odom, world circumnavigator aviator. Odom was flying the plane near the mouth of the Susquehana River when he was unable to land in New York or Baltimore due to fog. The plane hit a mud bank after landing. In a message to the Baltimore airfield, Odom reported that there were no injuries on board as a result of his emergency landing. Maryland police rushed to the crash site and reported that Odom said all 82 passengers and 12 crew were aboard the plane. Officials at the Baltimore airfield said, however, that they understood that between 55 and 60 people were on board the plane. Police reported-
Police reported that the plane was not damaged when it hit "the mud flats in the bay. The passengers were removed from the seaplane and transferred to a bus" to be flown" to Baltimore. "A World Airway official said the plane was directed to Baltimore instead of New York because of heavy fog over the latter city. But upon arrival in Baltimore, the landing area was also obscured by fog. Qdom flew north and landed in a fog-free area near the upper Chesapeake Bay. Odom reported that the plane was able to float freely and lift off from the mud bank. He added that he intended to fly to Baltimore and pick up passengers* and continue on to New York. Passengers were expected to arrive in Baltimore at 3:00 p.m. on the buses. No Unta*: In San Juan an editor of EL MUNDO met with Mr. James Falzarano. representative of the (Continued on page 12)
- I""lilili III I lili .IW.IWIIIIIWIIIH- - "!""l I 1 - IMIII.I HIWIIIII-y- III II MacArthur would not go to the United States before the GOP meets.
__ I He does not want to capitalize on his war record to win nomination By JOHN I~CUTTER ' United Press Correspondent WASHINGTON, May 28, (Pü)E1 General Douglas MacArthur declined an invitation to come to Washington today because his return, ahead of the Republican national convention, could be construed as "politically inspired." But he promised the Senate Appropriations Committee, which issued the invitation, that he would gladly return after the convention next month. It was a bitter disappointment to those pushing MacArthur's candidacy for the presidency. They are confident that MacArthur will accept it, and that his first visit to the United States since the war will unleash a wave of public acclaim that will carry him to the White House. MacArthur has given a stern warning that he has no intention of turning his heroic war record to political advantage of that nature. He said that it would be a reproach to him. and a betrayal of the American accountants, living and dead, who contributed to the victory in the battle of the Pacific. Dispatches from Tokyo reveal that the Supreme Allied Commander is still willing to fly immediately to his palace if "ordered" to do so, rather than invlt. sele. And some of his political supporters have been quick to advocate such a course of action, on the grounds that it would cut off all political involvement to which he has aspired. Among its" proponents is Irvlng Hohenaee, executive secretary of the national headquarters.
-, -■-- K . - ■ ■ ■ General Douglas MacArthur drt pro MacArthur movement, f who urged "e to send a deluge of correspondence and telegrams addressed to President Truman for him to "order" MacArthur's return before Congress recessed. Rep. A. L. Miller, Republican of Nebraska, the most insistent of MacArthur's supporters in Congress, suggested that the Senate committee consider changing its Invitation to an order, and ,that it be delivered to the Department of the Army. Miller said he has reserved a four-bedroom apartment for MacArthur while the Republican national convention convenes in Florida next month. He spoke of no indication, however, that an order for MacArthur's immediate return would be issued by any congressional committee.(Contlnija on page 18) ft ' i-ta ।
*"-II ¡■mili ' llllW- * 'I*"te"?'* 11111 . II GOP Eideres agree to adjourn Congress for June 19 Taft indicated they would prewR still approve 15 measurea before adjourning.-. They have not ruled out the possibility of another meeting after that date May~28, (PU)-Senate Republican leaders today agreed to close the second session of the Eightieth Congress on June 19, provided it is "humanly possible," but did not rule out Ja holding a session after that fec.h" L i - - - - - - - ---- --- <9 Senator Robert A. Taft, repu-
Formalized agreement on sale to SAA East will pay 81,500,000 to federal agency for improvements in aqueduct The commitment by virtue of which the Aqueduct and Sewer Service will pay to the Federal Public Works Administration the amount of 31,500,000 as a condition to receive in transfer all the improvements made by said federal agency some years ago, to the metropolitan aqueduct system, has been formalized. The Federal Works Administration, through the Army Engineer Division, invested more than five million dollars in the construction of the Cidra dam, in the artificial lake Las Curias, and in the installation of reinforced concrete pipelines of ammonium nitrate, which were used in the construction of the Cidra reservoir.
The schedule of projects to be approved will be prepared next Tuesday during a meeting of the Republican leadership of both houses. Taft said the meeting will discuss those projects that will be approved by both bodies. Everything else will be dropped, at least for the time being. Congressional leaders have set June 19 as the closing date because the GOP National Convention meets in Philadelphia on June 21. The Democratic National Convention will be held in the same city on June 12, Taft said. Taft reported that 15 bills need to be approved before the closing date. Although he did not mention them, they are presumed to be the appropriations bill, the draft, a resolution to strengthen the United Nations, a bill on the admission of expatriates, repeal of the federal oil tax, extension of the maintenance of the U.S. Navy, and a bill on the protection of the United Nations.
THE ATHENAEUM JOINS PROTEST AGAINST BILLS 23, 24 AND 25
At the invitation of the organizers of the civic, political and cultural assembly held at the Ateneo Puertorrlqueo on Tuesday night, Tuesday 25, to protest the passage of House Bills 23, 24 and 25, the President of the Institution, Mrs. Nllita Vientos Gaston, attended. Ms. Vientos informed the attendees that she would not vote as representative of the Institution because there was no agreement from the Board of Directors on the matter and that she would call the Board of Directors to an extraordinary meeting to consider the matter. Meeting on the night of Thursday 27th, the Governing Board of the Ateneo Puertorriqueño agreed unanimously of the members of the board present* to approve the following resolution: "After having been submitted to careful study and discussion by the members of the Board of Governors present, House Bills 23, 24 and 25, approved in the last legislative session, considering that they constitute a serious danger to the development of Puerto Rican life in all its aspects, free from all coercion, the Board of Governors of the Ateneo Puertorriqueño agrees to join the request of protest of other associations of the country so that said legislation does not receive the approval of the Governor of Puerto Rico. The Ateneo Puertorriqueño, faithful to its tradition of respect for freedom of expression, cannot but protest any attempt to restrict the fundamental rights that constitute the essence of a democratic community," Vicente Gélgel Polanco, president of the Puerto Rican History Department of the institution, sent the following telegram:"I believe that the Ateneo should abstain from participating in the question raised regarding public safety laws because it is a problem of a political nature, of mere opposition to the current government. Matters of this nature are alien to the cultural purposes of our institution; intervention would violate the traditional norms of the Ateneo and would contribute to break the existing solidarity in the Board of Directors. Please sign mf vnto the terms of this telegram".
1 ' _ I answer letter of resignation Speaker Indicates party rule may be changed but only to be improved Indicating to him that "the attitude expressed in his letter is similar to that of the Puerto Rican Independence Party - an attitude that I believe is wrong, obsolete and tragic in its consequences for our people, if our people were to authorize it," the president of the Popular Democratic Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin, answered last night in the following manner the letter addressed to him by Dr. Francisco M. Susoni, withdrawing from the Popular Party: Dear Doctor: '/I received your letter. In the personal field I am very sorry to see myself deprived in this arduous struggle of your good and noble company that for so many years I had the privilege of having. From the point of view of the problems of Puerto Rico, I realize, especially from reading your letter, that your decision has for a very long time been inevi" table. What is personally painful for me may be extremely enlightening for the people. It is evident that in the same party two ton opposite ways of wrestling with the problem of political status cannot be sustained as have been sustained by the People's Democratic Party throughout its growth process and what uWed expresses in your letter. "You say that you have long been deeply concerned with the "political standard to which I have been holding the party" in relation to the status of the island. I see from these words that your concern dates back to 1940, the date when, not I, but the expression of the great electoral masses, bound our Party to the standard it has been practicing, a standard that has been endorsed by two great victories at the polls. This rule may be changed someday, submitting it to the will of the people; but it must be to improve it, to modernize it, to make it more effective in the grouping of wills and in the authorization to face the problem in the terms of the most careful and scrupulous intellectual responsibility. It certainly should not be modified to go back to the erroneous simplifications of the past before the Popular Democratic Party. "You conceive of freedom only in terms of the thrill of political freedom. The People's Party conceives of it as an integral substance of spirit which is composed of human freedom, freedom from fear of hunger, freedom from fear of insecurity in old age, freedom in respect for the individual, and also,' political freedom. We conceive the duty to enlarge the whole freedom in all its components. In conceiving it thus, we understand that if a certain method of enlarging political freedom can produce a tragic destruction in the freedom from fear of hunger, in the freedom from fear of insecurity, in the consequent freedom of man in the book of his life, then to attempt that method is to put at serious risk the other substances of the freedom of the shoulder, which deserve as much respect and concern as the political instance of that freedom. "If we aspire to be liberators, we must discipline our spirit to be so in the full extent of its meaning. And we must beware of being mere exchangers, on behalf of a whole people, of the most humane and profound forms of freedom for the most dramatic forms of freedom. I believe in political freedom as a worthy part of the concept of integral freedom. I believe it must be established. But I do not believe in methods of obtaining it which risk trading a people's vital freedom for a political freedom which, in such a case, would be merely nominal.