THE
NEW YORK, Dec. H. (FU) - This afternoon "e recorded the following temperatures: New York, 44; Washington, 50; Miami, 84; Chicago, 29. Flying conditions at La Guardia Airport: maximum altitude, unlimited; high clouds, light and scattered: visibility, eight miles, wind, coming from sixteen miles per hour. For this ► che: same conditions; high clouds for tomorrow.
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY: Clear to partly cloudy, with some showers late in the evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 81; low. 70. Barometric pressure at sea level at 4:80 p.m.. 28.98 inches of mercury.
MORNING DAILY^"3Í^THE MORNING
NUMBER 13521
FIVE CENT
SAN JUAN PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, DECEMBER 18, 1948.
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan. P. B.
De Jesús, Negrón Sworn In Before the Supreme Court
In a simple but eloquent ceremony, the new Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, Mr. Angel R. de Jesús, and Associate Justice, Mr. Luis Negrón Fernández, took office yesterday. The Court was filled to capacity, with many people standing to witness the ceremony. Among the audience were district judges, prosecutors, municipal judges, officials of the Department of Justice, and hundreds of lawyers. Justice, and hundreds of lawyers from all the towns of the Island. At half past two o'clock in the afternoon, the Governor-elect of Puerto Rico, Mr. Lids Muñoz Marín; the next General Vicente Gátgel Polanco; and the President of the House of Representatives, Mr. Ernesto Gágel Polanco, took their seats on the proscenium destined for Jos. judges, and the President of the House of Representatives, Mr. Hcenclado'Ernesto Muñoz Marín. Hcenclado'Ernesto Ramos-Antonlhl. Moments later, the group was joined by the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, Dr. Antonio Fernó" Isern; and the Vice President of the Senate, Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones. My" Guests Also taking places on the proscenium were the President of the Bar Association, Benlció Sánchez Castaño; the Administrator of the Capital, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier; the Judge of the Federal Court, David Chávez; Commander P. E. Cherry, and Lieutenant Commander B. H. Berry, of the Navy, and Lieutenant Commander B. H. Berry, of the Navy. H. Berry, United States Navy*. Two former presiding judges, Emilio del Toro Cuevas and Martin Travieso, Jr., as well as former Judge Jorge Luis Cordoba Diaz, were seated at the podium. When former President Judge Emilio del Toro Cuevas and Martin Travieso, Jr. President, Mr. Emilio del Toro, the audience, standing, gave him a jungle of applause. At about three o'clock in the afternoon, Judges Roberto H. Todd, Jr. A. Cecll Sny. right and Borinquen Marrero Rios. Judge Todd then announced that the President of the United States had appointed Judge President of the Court, Mr. Angel R. da Jesús and that he intended to be sworn in. Judge Todd then ordered ": marshal. Mr. William Látimer to go in search of Judge De Jesus, who went up to the bench amidst the applause of the standing audience. Judge Da Jesus was sworn in by Judge Todd. Meanwhile, the standing audience listened religiously to the reading of the document containing the oath taken. After Judge De Jesus finished taking the oath, the first to congratulate him was Judge Todd. Then the other judges gave him their congratulations. Judge De Jesus, acting as Presiding Judge, announced the appointment of Luis Negron Fernandez. Accompanied by the Rector of the University, Mr. Jaime Benitez, Judge Negron passed to the podium, amidst the applause of the audience. The oath was taken before Judge De Jesús. The public gathered in the session room of the Supreme Court to greet the new judge, Mr. Negrón Fernández. It is (Continued on page 18)
! A.P.A. Dice Jornal . The sugar industry will be able to maintain next year the wages and salaries it paid last year, said yesterday the Executive Vice President of the Sugar Producers Association, Juan Bautista Garcia Men- >. dez. Among other reasons that he alleges have made the situation of the sugar industry difficult, Mr. García Men1 dez referred to the high production costs on the island, "which turn out to be the highest in all the sugar factories competing in the U.S. market. He also said yesterday Mr. Garcia ' . Méndez said yesterday that at any time ■ that he was advised by the labor side, he would be ready to initiate negotiations for the co- labor agreement for the coming harvest. Delay in Negotiations 1 Negotiations have been delayed by discussions between the Sugar Union and some unions of the Free Federation, which are trying to reach an agreement to sign a common agreement with the sugar producers. 1 The APA is presently discussing with the ex- - officio sugar growers the agreement of the 1949 harvest. These negotiations are well advanced and it is expected that *1 contract will be signed in the course of next week. As reported yesterday, the Aso- ' elation of Sugar Producers : "e proposes to hold its annual ; ordinary meeting on Tuesday, December 28, 1. The assembly will elect the new board of directors, which will be composed of a president, a vice-president, new members and seven alternates. Food Prices 1 - Prices Down 1 - I- ' - Decrease in September and October 2% Has Been Largest Since February h , - i - ...- -1 WASHINGTON, Dec. IT. - h (PU) - The average family's food bill continued to decline during October for the third consecutive month, the Agriculture Department reports in its monthly market survey. n The decline in the months of September and October - by two percent - was the largest since February, the largest since February. has been the largest since- '■ last February. '* The Department's studies are- '-based on allmentl- " clos lines equal to the average annual purchases '- for a family of three during the period 1935 to f 39. r * The "shopping basket" '- consumed an average of $340 *- annually by that time. It rose to a record-setting $708 last July. In August dess, it fell to $704; in September to $701, e, and in October to $689. i- Price" at Detel z. In spite of the decline. 1the retail prices in October were still 1- 49 percent above those of "- 1935 and nearly a quarter percent higher than a year ago. The cost of farm products for the grocery basket declined from $372 in September to $357 in October, a $15 s- bullet compared with a $12 s- in retail prices. The "you are likely to (Continued on page 18)
Conference Approved) Bill of Rights Also Reconsidered Caribbean Bank Idea. Will Stimulate Migration By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA Editor of EL MUNDO The Third Caribbean Conference adopted and endorsed the declaration on human rights," approved by the United Nations. After a lengthy debate in favor of the Caribbean Conference adopting a position in favor of human rights, Ernesto Ramos Antonlnl, Puerto Rico's delegate to the assembly, succeeded in getting the assembly to take action on the matter. The delegates agreed to postpone any action on the proposal, pending consideration by the U.N. of the draft declaration of rights approved by the committee. Fourteen Caribbean peoples, through their respective delegates, endorsed the above-mentioned draft, agreeing further to request the UN to approve it and to ensure its implementation in all countries of the world. The draft contains an exposition of principles on the rights of man, similar to those contained in the Bill of Rights, and the first amendments to the Constitution of the United States. Ernesto Ramo" Anteninl and the Comiiionado del Trabajo, Mr. Fernando Sierra Berdecía, who attended as delegates to the conference, reported yesterday on the agreements reached. The conference was attended as advisors by Cándido Oliveras, Teodoro Moscojo, Jr. Simón Hembrrg. Francisco de Jesús and Stanton Robin*. According to Messrs. Ramos Antonlhl and Sierra Berdecla. the most fundamental and transcendental agreement of the meeting was the one related to human rights, as the Conference took a definite position on the matter. The entire population of the country, the entire population of the country and the entire population of the world, is the only one who has the right to know, to know and to be able to know.
The entire population - teachers, civil servants, municipalities, doctors, students, workers, peasants - are on the warpath against what seems to be taking on the characteristics of an epidemic. The" campaign" *riucatiiva", directed" by the Superintendent of Schools, Mrs. Mariana Suárez rie Longo, as" of sanitation, directed" by Dr. Franclíco Berlo Suárez, doctor rie charity, are being taken house by house, and person by person. In fact, Mrs. Suarez de Longo said that in the schools, both high and elementary, during this week nothing else has been done but to instruct the students about typhoid fever. The teachers focus in their lectures on the ways in which the terrible disease is caused as well as on the preventive formulas devised by medical science to avoid its consequences.) In one of the classrooms of the elementary school, our colleague Luis rie Casenave and this Editor met the Assistant School Superintendent, Mr. Manuel Cruz, together with a group of children painting posters illustrating to the public how to protect themselves from the disease. These posters are posted in different places in town. The students also hand out daily thousands of handouts prepared at the school, instructing the public to boil water, keep yards clean, avoid contact, etc. The teachers" of the Comerlo schools were trained by Dr. José Hernández Matos, deputy chief of the Department of Health's Bureau of Epidemiology, pn(Continued on page IR)
Yesterday's Act at the Supreme Court - ; jfl V II E E E I b x E - " h L W Jr H I iwi B l\1 B J B IíbI K \ 1 1 BBB
Yesterday the new Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, Mr. Angel R. de Jesús, and the new Associate Justice, Mr. Lula Negrón Fernández, were sworn in. For this purpose, the Court held a brief session, which was witnessed by hundreds of people from different towns of the island. In the first photograph, the President Judge, Mr. Lula Negron Fernandez, was
techa, the President Judge, Mr. de Jesus (first on the right) takes the oath of office to the aaociado judge, Mr. Nmon Fernandez, (with the paper in his hand). Next to Judge Negrón p frnánda" appears the Rector of the University, Mr. Jaime Benlte". who was the godfather of the new magistrate, In the same photograph appears the associated Judge Mr. A. C "clnánda".
In the same photograph appears the associate judge Mr. A. C "cll Snyder (next to him is Mr. M Jum do Joaúj). *1 H" rendered Samuel R. Quiñones, Mr. Reñido sánche" Castaño 3 Mr. Luis Muño" Marín. In the -*F "nó" photograph, Mr. Muílm Marín greets the new President of the Tribunal Sun";""""' 1°" de Jesús. In the third, Mr. Muflo" Marín shakes hands with Judge Negrón Fernández, in the presence of the new President of the Tribunal Sun";""' 1°" de Jesús.
- Negrón Fernández, in the presence of Judge nonclMA VWUBU h ' - v Kios. In the last photograph, Associate Judge Roberto IL T - 1 WM W W l takes the oath of office to the presiding judge" M I MÍW. . t (Photograph" by EL MUNDO)" , |
I Isabel's Son on the Occasion of his Baptism.
■ ErWSIEl bb Ma JqFb ' ;, W J' , -1 i 1 *- WBot Kl J HBSr 1 d ■■ Ip&v j % jH keb KwF iTibJKáK 2a Bl v / í InRaBk fS&B WB lz t * Hkj '■ BU' -Ak ' # *.
Prince Philip Arthur George of Edinburgh, Prince King of England, the second heir in direct line to the British throne, rests in complete indifferentism.
The Prince of England, the second direct heir to the British throne, rests completely indifferent to the pride shown by his father, the Duke of Edinburgh, and Princess Elizabeth, who holds her in her arms. Lb fofo was taken at oca-
The photo was taken at the height of her hautlso, in Buckingham Palace. On the right, the Royal Prince sleeps in his mother's arms during the ceremony (Radlnfnto Frenan Associate).
Typhoid Fever Cases Rise to 43 in Comerlo Village
All Available Personnel Working to Prevent Spread of Epidemic. - SAA Serves Drinking Water, Using Mobile Equipment
By Angel CRUZ CRUZ Editor of EL MUNDO COMERIO. December 17-* Notwithstanding the extraordinary efforts by both the Instilare and municipal authorities, the typhoid outbreak in this town continues, with new cases suspected every year.
The Executive Committee of the Governor-elect's "inaugural acts*" is facing a difficult situation, due to the fact that there are no lodging facilities, in the form that the Committee wishes, to accommodate the "various personnel" who, as guests of the Government of Puerto Rico, will attend the inauguration of the Governor, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín. There is a desire among the members of the Cqmlté. that the "visitors" receive careful attention, and that they may enjoy the comforts of life while they are in Puerto Rico, for which reason they have agreed to request, for the good of the Island, the cooperation of the inhabitants of the town, to help provide lodging for the "Guest". To this end, the Executive Committee authorizes the following communiqué: "The number of persons from abroad who are to attend the inauguration of the Governor-elect, Don Marin, is so great that the Executive Committee in charge of the" event is finding it difficult to obtain lodging for many" of the porsonallda (Continued on page 18).
BuscagliaCalled Legislature To Amend Employment Insurance Law Monday
Laborers' Tax likely to be eliminated. Governor Requests Hearings The Acting Governor of Puerto Rico, Rafael A. Buscaglia, resolved yesterday morning to convene the Legislative Assembly for an extraordinary session to begin on Monday. The "business" to be discussed are those anticipated by EL MUNDO, that is, amendments to the laws related to the Employment Insurance Fund. The laws to be amended are numbers 355 and 356, passed on May 15, 1948. Number 355 provides for the manner of levying and collecting by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, contributions to create the Employment Insurance Fund. Act No. 356 provides for the manner in which the Department of Labor shall grant unemployment benefits. No Limitation According to the proclamation issued by the Acting Governor, the Legislature has no limitation as to the amendments to be made to such laws; but it is known that the primary purpose is to exempt workers from contributing to the Employment Insurance Fund. According to the law which rlg?. they are obliged to do so with 5 percent of their wages". The Acting Governor, Rafael Buscagua, said yesterday that to all the legislators with whom he has exchanged impressions about this extraordinary session, he has suggested that before the legislative work begins, or as soon as possible, the workers and employers of the sugar industry should be summoned to hear their opinion on the bills already prepared, or to suggest amendments that might be acceptable to both parties. "In making these suggestions," - said Mr. Buicaglla, - "it is not with the intention of interfering in the legislative procedure," but with the purpose that the bills, when printed for discussion, should contain the general ideas to be discussed after the views of the various sectors involved in the legislation have been heard. "In this way," added Mr. Buscaglia. - added Mr. Buscaglia, "the extraordinary session will not last more than one or two days". The Proclamation The proclamation issued yesterday by the Acting Governor, calling for the extraordinary session of the Legislative Assembly reads: "Whereas, the public interests demand action by the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico on certain matters of importance now pending. "Therefore, I, Rafael Buscaglia, Acting Governor of Puerto Rico, hereby convene the members of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico for a special session of the Legislative Assembly, which shall commence on Monday, September 30, 1948, at 10:00 A.M., at the Capitol Building, Capitol Hill, Puerto Rico, at 10:00 A.M., in the Capitol Building, Puerto Rico, at 10:00 A.M., on Monday, September 30, 1948, at 10:00 A.M., at 10:00 A.M., in the Capitol Building, Puerto Rico, at 10:00 A.M., at 10:00 A.M., in the Capitol Building, Puerto Rico. M. in the Capitol Building, for the purpose of considering the following matters of public interest and adopting appropriate measures for the solution thereof: "1. entitled "An Act to impose certain contributions to employers and workers of the Puerto Rico sugar industry for the operation of an employment insurance in the sugar industry and the payment of unemployment benefits to the workers thereof in the periods following the cutting and milling of each cane harvest, and for other purposes. { "2. - Amendment" to Act No. 356, approved on May 15, 19(Conllnúi. on page 18."
Muñoz Says Island Will Not Be a Cheap Labor Workshop* 1 ; I
More Witnesses Appear On Espionage McDowell Holds Private Hearing At Hotel Pennsylvania NEW YORK, Dec. 17-(P U)-Representative John McDowell, Republican, Pennsylvania Republican and member of the House Committee on Un-American Activities, said today that he had come across some "important" new information which he immediately followed up. Mr. McDowell did not disclose what the "important" new information is, - limiting himself to saying that it involves "espionage in the affairs" of the Government." McDowell came here on behalf of the entire House Subcommittee investigating Communist espionage in the spheres of the Federal Government and was expected to hold hearings in the Federal Court Building, where the Federal Grand Jury also investigating Communist espionage is in session. Used Cars Abundant For Rurlcn River" A survey of local car dealers reveals that the price of cars will not go down for the time being". All indications are, however, that car buyers have at the "ctualldarf numerous facilities for acquiring them." "The situation at present," declared one of those interviewed, "is almost in favor of the buyer. The latter can demand colors, conditions and equipment, and the distributor has to accommodate that, and must do so in order to keep up with the volume of business." "There is now a used car market," reported another dealer, "that is moving toward what it was in pre-war days." Installment" sales Another thing the survey revealed was the "installment" sales angle. Every buyer today can easily take a car with him by means of a convenient installment sales contract. Another angle is the great abundance of automobiles on the market today. Puerto Rico is arguably the leading automobile market in the United States. Some distributors stated that this is due to the fact that the Latin American and European markets, either for lack of import permits or dollars, do not have a large market for automobiles. That situation does not occur in Puerto Rico, which has import permits and dollars, and is an American territory. Arbitration. Onerous The taxpayers consider that the duty that must be paid for each unit is excessively onerous. "Here you have to pay 26.4 percent of the cost of the unit 7 . This tax is explained by one (Continued ?n page 18"
So Wouldn't Want' Industrialization ' World Telegram Publishes Interview. Alternatives For The United States NEW YORK, April 17 (P U.)- Puerto Rico will not become a "sweatshop" for cheaply paid workers in North American industry, Governor elect Luis Muñoz Mrin told a New York newspaper in an interview published today. The New York World-Telegratr publishes an article sent rie "d* San Juan by Victor Lasky, in which he quotes Muñoz Marin as saying that "we are not committed" to carrying out a total Industrialization program, which will turn Puerto Rico into a place of economic exploitation", "We are providing mtl>. We are providing many incentives for private capital to make investments here," he said, "such as our two-year tax exemption program, but exploitation through cheap labor does not figure in it. । Will End Emergency Program The first popularly elected Puerto Rican governor said that his party's program to industrialize the island, ending the island's >1 status of a vast war emergency project, financed by the U.S. taxpayer. "The United States can do one of three things for Puerto Rico: it can allow Puerto Rico to use its legislative powers, such as our tax program, to help ourselves by our own efforts; it can continue to pour millions of dollars into Puerto Rico, in the form of a project that will help the island's economy. Puerto Rico, in the form of emergency war ■ project; or it can - let us not" die of hunger," - said Muñoz Marin. - "Fortunately. Ja (believe" al 1 ternat.lv" is misplaced, tra ■ tándos? of the human caracterlst! ca riel American people. 5 ■ I am sure that most Americans would be pleased if we were able to stand up for ourselves. The writer reminded Muñoz Ma 1 rín of the time when he lived in the village of Greenwich in New York, a neighborhood traditionally known for its coexistence of artists" 1 intellectuals and radicals. It also reminded him that 25 years ago Muñoz Marín was a proponent of socialist solutions to Puerto Rican and world problems. The newspaper quoted him as saying: "I am not a socialist! I am not trying to theoretically turn Puerto Rico into a paradise of workers. I am not trying to turn Puerto Rico into a workers' paradise. I favor any economic program that increases production over and above our growing population." i Tugiyell-Mufln" Marín The interview also makes reference to the Tugwell-Mufto" Marín case, and adds that "according to Mr. Muñoz, Mr. Tug was opposed to the tax exemption, "on the grounds that it constituted a virtual subsidy by 1. '4 virtual subsidy on the part of 1 Government, for" private ' interests." Muñoz Marín pointed to the fact that 42 new industries are coming under private control as proof of the wisdom of the Government's program to encourage private industry. "We are American citizens who want to survive," Muñoz Marín told the writer, "By offering the North 1/ (Continued on page 18)