THE NANDO
í 44 Pages 5/
WEATHER FORECASTS ON THE ISLAND, BOY: - Partly cloudy to occasionally cloudy. IN SAN JUAN. r- Maximum temperature, 80 degrees; minimum, 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level at 4:80 p.m., 80.01 inches mercury.
DAILY
LA MAÑANA
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO- SATURDAY, APRIL 3, 1948
AutemovlUataa, demMtramoa Ib traditional courtesy of the country.
NUMBER 11263
YEAR XXIX
Senate acted to prevent the raising of rents
Approved restriction for landlords If an increase is made, it may not be more than 15% and shall be fixed by the Administrator So that landlords may not increase their rents by themselves in the future, and determined that no more rent may be charged on the Island than was paid on October 1, 1942, the Senate approved yesterday afternoon P. S. No. 677, amending Sections 12 and 12-A of Act 464, approved on April 25, 1947. To that effect, the Senate approved the inclusion of a new article to Act 464, which would read as follows: "Article 6.-Except as hereinafter provided, as of the effective date of this Law, no more rent may be charged than that which was paid on October 1, 1942. "Until altered by the Administrator in accordance with the powers hereinafter conferred upon him, for the purposes of this Act, 'base rent' shall mean the rent paid on such date, unless any written agreement fixing a higher or lower rent for any period after such date has been entered into prior thereto. In this case, the basic rent shall be the agreed rent, whether in the case of a written or oral agreement. "The Manager shall have the power to fix the reasonable rent, decreeing increases or reductions in the prevailing rent, in those cases in which, in his judgment, this is justified by reason of improvements of capital importance, increase or reduction of furniture, equipment or accessories, increase or reduction in services and supplies, deterioration of the dwelling or of the leased building, or increase in contributions. "If the Manager shall have decreed an increase in the rental charge of any business, and the tenant shall be entitled to a rent increase:) "(a) If the tenant alleges and proves that such increase is not justified by reason of a decrease in the volume of his business, losses or imbalance resulting from the post-war situation or any other factor of a similar nature which contributes to a substantial decrease in his income from such business, the Manager may reinstate the original rent or fix a reasonable rent, which in no case shall exceed the original rent by more than fifteen (15) percent thereof; the original rent being understood to be that which prevailed at the time of the Manager's determination. "If the dwelling or building had not been leased on October 1, 1942, the Administrator shall fix the reasonable rent on the basis of the rents prevailing in Puerto Rico for similar dwellings and buildings during the year ending October 1, 1942. "If the dwelling or building was built after October 1, 1942, the Administrator shall fix the reasonable rent on the basis of the cost of construction of said dwelling or building; it being understood that in no case shall the reasonable rent, computed on an annual basis, exceed twelve (12) percent of the cost of the work. "In those cases in which the Administrator adjusts the rent that was being paid prior to the effective date of this Act or issues a final order on any rent, fixing in lieu thereof' the reasonable rent as herein determined, the tenant shall only be obligated to pay the base rent or the reasonable rent, to that effect fixed, but shall not be entitled to any refund or claim for any amount paid in excess of the reasonable rent prior to the date on which the reasonable rent is fixed, except in those cases in which by express provision of this Act the rent is automatically adjusted to the amount prevailing on October 1, 1942, and except in those cases in which the Administrator issues an interim order increasing or fixing the maximum rent until the case is finally disposed of; Provided, that the rent so increased or fixed shall be subject to reimbursement to the tenant in respect of such amount as may be in excess of the maximum rent as may be fixed by the final order. "If by reason of kinship or other personal or special relationships between landlord and tenant, or due to peculiar circumstances, the rent accrued on October 1, 1942, was substantially lower than the rent accrued in Puerto Rico for similar dwellings or buildings on the same date, the Administrator shall fix, at the request of the landlord, the reasonable rent in accordance with the standards established in this Act. "In the event that the dwelling has been or is furnished after October 1, 1942, the Administrator may authorize an increase in the amount of the rent, according to the number of rooms furnished and the quality of the furnishings. "The landlord may also (Continued on p. 10)
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R,
A feast for don Romualdo Real will be held today in this Capital.
■ - I jar al BMMHL '^C.-; ■ 7 mt ■ /I H ■ ® / / > : ' :HBBBBBBH DON ROMUATJDO REAL Founder of "Puerto Rico Ilustrado" and EL MUNDO.
Tonight, at eight o'clock, on the terrace of La Mallorquína, there will be an act of camaraderie and affection with which a group of writers and journalists will honor Don Romualdo Real, founder of "Puerto Rico Ilustrado" and EL MUNDO. The organizers of this tribute, Messrs. José S. Alegría, Luis Antonio Miranda, Enrique Ramírez Brau, Juan Martínez Chapel, Joaquín Montezuelan, Joaquín Montezuelan, Joaquín Montezuelan, Joaquín Montezuelan, Joaquín Montezuelan, Joaquín Montezuelan and Joaquín Montezuelan.
Chapel, Joaquín Monteagudo and Ramón Umplarre, have received a number of endorsements from people not included among the literary men and women who gave luster to Puerto Rico at the time when Don Romualdo Real began his memorable journalistic work. Before founding the magazine "Puerto Rico Ilustrado" and the newspaper EL MUNDO -the latter (Continued on page 14)
Herrick and Ponsa Feliú went to ■defend the Supreme Court rules
Prosecutor Aponte, for his part, objected to some of them, including the preliminary hearing. -F. Rodriguez Higgins suggested amendments to the body of law
The prosecutors of the Federal Court, Philip Herrick and Francisco Ponsa Feliú, appeared before the Joint Committee of the legislative Chambers that are holding public hearings on the Rules of Criminal Procedure, to defend, together with other attorneys, said body of law, promulgated by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico and recently sent to the Chambers for its approval. Mr. Félix Rodriguez Higgins, attorney at law, made some amendments. The Special Attorney General, Mr. José C. Aponte, opposed some of the rules and agreed with others. The hearing was presided over by Senator Luis A. Negrón López, and Senator Bolívar Pagán, Senator Lumen Méndez, and Representative Jo sé Portilla were also present. The first lecture of the evening was by Mr. Félix Rodriguez Higgins, Puerto Rican crlmlnologist, who presented to the Committee a series of papers he had written on his ideas.
tillas that he had written about his ideas. Mr. Rodriguez Higgins began by saying: "MY first observation is that the new Rules are based on a Penal Code declared ineffective because of its anachronism. I partly agree with that opinion. For example, the Rules deal with district, municipal and justice of the peace courts, corresponding closely to the Penal Code's classification of felony, misdemeanor and municipal ordinance violations. That classification has its res. pective consequences in the types of prisons we have: presidio, district jails and munlcipalc depots".... "This classification is the first obstacle to simplify judicial procedures. The situation is more complicated when it comes to certain crimes. For example, it is a felony, punishable by imprisonment, by the district court, to commit grand larceny, or (Continued on page 14)
News Digest
Two hundred pharmacy students picket Capitol. * * * Senate acted to prevent them from raising a'qulleree. Declared felony the abandonment of minors. - * - Judge Bela val was appointed arbitrator to hear the "charge" against Dr. Vincenty. - Federal law authorizes tenants to sue landlords for triple damages. - The increase in demand for oil, sobeepaM all precedents. - The Government is unable to pay Russell and Company the sum of 84,600,000 to acquire the property of said company. Incident between agent Pagan and Secretary of the Police Commission investigated. _ - - - - Communist general strike demands increase in Italy. - Plan to improve the conditions of the Island's children is submitted to a conference in Washington. - se - Global aid project to Europe and China sent to White Caaa sent to White Caaa. Chile submitted an anti-communist resolution at the Bogota conference.
Today will be verified the feast to don Romualdo Rea!, * * * * Truman signed the project protítulo sexto de la Ley Nacional de Viviendas. * The FEG1 insists that the Government fix a minimum wage of 875 per month for employees. - Marshall holds meetings with the heads of the delegations to the Bogota conference. - Shareholders say "cigarette producers" should raise current prices. Will sell steamer Odenwald as war surplus. * ♦ Caucus discussed amendment to bill against hoUta but took no final action. * - Judges intend to be severe" in excusing jurors" in the Ponce District Court. * * - The House agreed to leave pending the resignation" of Cabrer and Bies García. - Ge" ti on an insular organization for protection against atomic bombings. - - - American "military policemen" surround railroad building administered by the Ruaos, in Berlin, - - t - e Plftero alleges sabotage against medical school; says Dr. Aster opposes on grounds of unwarranted chauvinism.
"The truth is, and Dr. Astor knows this, that many hospitalization facilities and low-cost services, in the process of improvement and improvement, which the people of Puerto Rico have, cannot be fully utilized because they are so low-cost. The truth is that the Government is attacking the root of the problem with all its energy and without hesitation, in spite of those who, while pointing out the root of the problem, ridicule the efforts made to attack it at its root, and, at the same time, oppose the attack on one of its aspects, such as the need to establish a medical school on our Island. "Dr. Astor's chauvinism is inappropriate when he threatens Dr. Juraaz with fighting him "in truce, if "e establishes a medical school in Puerto Rico with a faculty that is not "ea Puerto Rican. Dr. Astor aspires to a class A medical school! Sure, there are doctors in Puerto Rico who could teach at any class A university in the world, but could Puerto Rico fully operate a class A school with our staff? The Puerto Rican doctor-teachers that there are and those that there are, with the quotas that we have, are not enough.
Pinero alleges sabotage against the medical school He says that Dr. Astor opposes it out of unwarranted chauvinism. He assures that Horicua doctors will be invited to join the faculty of the institution.
A "tor can rest assured that they will be vehemently invited to share with the doctors of afueW ; 'Wa / GOVERNADOR PINERO
ra the high responsibility of medical education in Puerto Rieo. Joctor Astor's chauvinistic scruple is lacking in the class A universities of the United States. Would that we could have here medical eminences of all nationalities to direct our school and that it would be so in all fields of our activities that an Einstein, a Fer* mi. a Mann, a Pitaluga, would project their wisdom, together with our eminences, in our milieu yearning for light and truth. Mrs. Schelling speaks Puerto Rico has a good chance of being chosen as the new headquarters of the Paderwskl. Hospital currently located in Edinburgh, Scotland, hospital that "arla the origin of the School of Medicine gives the Island, but the Paderewski Foundation wishes that in the new site of location of the same, the interested sectors offer him all cooperation for the development of its activities. This was expressed yesterday by Mrs. Peggy Schelling, member of the Board of Directors of the aforementioned Polish-American Foundation, who, together with Dr. Anthony L. Jurasz, a Polish physician of fame (Continued on page 7).
Europe aid plan sent to White House
The first" ships with supplies are expected to sail this afternoon By JOHnTHrTEELE WASHINGTON, April 2. (PU).E1 Congress today approved and sent for President Truman's signature the $6,098,000,000,000 comprehensive aid bill aimed at preventing the spread of communism through China and other European "Ubre" nations. This is the most far-reaching project of its kind ever undertaken by the United States in peacetime, and Congress acted with such festination and near unanimity that it clearly reflected its fear of Russian intentions. The House passed the measure--an arrangement of the separate Senate and House versions--by a roll call vote of 317 to 75. 167 Republicans" and 150 Democrats voted in favor. Against were 62 Republicans, 11 Democrats and the two PTA members, Representatives Vito Marcantonio and Leo Isacson. The Senate then considered the bill and passed it by voice vote without debate. President Truman will sign the bill into law upon "his return from Williamsburg. Virginia, tomorrow. His aides meanwhile are already drafting tentative orders for the State Department to begin drawing money from the $1,100,000,000 fund which the legislation provides for the Financial Reconstruction Corporation to advance. In its final form the bill authorizes: 1. A one-year expenditure program in the sum of $5,300,000,000 to assist in the economic recovery of the 16 Marshall Plan nations of Western Europe, plus Trieste and West Germany. Franco's Spain was included in the plan by the House but was later dropped at a conference after a stormy wave of protest from European capitals, London, Paris, Rome and the White House. The bill proposes to continue the work of the European Reconstruction Plan for 51 months, but leaves it up to successive Congresses to reauthorize the program and allocate funds as necessary. President Truman is expected to nominate an ERP administrator soon, subject to Senate confirmation. Government sources said that Paul G. Hoffman, president of the Studebaker Corporation, appears to be in mind for appointment. 2. A one-year plan to assist China to the tune of $463,000,000,000, including $125,000,000 which the Nationalist government of Generalissimo Chiang Kal-shek may use to purchase military supplies for its civil war against the Chinese Communists. 3. A sum of $275,000,000 for arms and ammunition for Greece and Turkey to back these two countries in order to help them cope with Communist pressure. A contribution of $60,000,000 to the United Nations Children's Relief Fund to care for and feed the children of the countries of Europe which were devastated by the past war. - Since it will take another month for Congress to complete the congressional procedures to approve appropriations to fund these projects, the measure provides for the Financial Reconstruction Corporation to contribute $1,000,000,000 for the PRE and $50,000,000,000 for each of the projects.
Island's Children's Plan Submitted
Provides for expansion of school facilities and language solution By PÁÜL~HÁRRISON WASHINGTON, April 2 (PU). - At one of the preliminary meetings of the 1950 White House Conference on the Welfare of Children and Youth, four island organizations, representing government and private entities, submitted an ambitious program to improve the educational, physical, economic and social standards of Puerto Rican children over the next two years. The Puerto Rican delegation was composed of Mrs. Celestina Zalriuondo de Goodsaid, Director of the Division of Public Welfare of the Department of Health; Mrs. Maria Elisa Gomez Tolosa, of the Association for Mentally Abnormal Children; Mrs. Angelita Richardson, of the Puerto Rican Teachers' Association; and Mrs. Angelita Richardson, of the Puerto Rican Teachers' Association. The Puerto Rican delegation gave a copy of the program to each of the 40 delegates. They also stressed Puerto Rico's need for additional funds and said that these funds can be met by extending the provisions of the Social Security Act to Puerto Rico; by liberally appropriating funds for the school lunch program; and by passing legislation extending federal aid to education, health care and low-cost housing programs. The delegation's report consists of a nine-point program to improve the status of Puerto Rican youth. The most salient points of the report are as follows: 1. To do this, L509 new classrooms need to be built. Island" funds do not allow for the construction of more than 300 or 500 classrooms" in the" next" two" years. It needs $R00,000 to purchase equipment. The Government has $300,000 to $400,000 available. The expansion of educational facilities also involves the hiring of three to five hundred new teachers. Every student must be provided with medical and clinical nurses. It is necessary to improve existing school facilities, improve the school lunchroom program through staff training, encourage better nutrition habits, and arouse community interest in the program. 2. Civic contribution to the construction of athletic parks. The Recreation and Sports Commission will provide the equipment. 3. Granting of scholarships for the improvement of teacher preparation, improvement of teaching conditions, organization of projects and conferences, participation of teachers in the formulation of the curriculum. 4, Encourage the community to use the classroom after work hours. The community can organize recreational programs, adult classes, veteran's clAses, etc. 5. Reorganization of the Island curriculum to "add dynamism to all activities in and out of school supervision. The main objective of this is to focus attention on the physical, mental, and emotional needs of the children. (Continued on page 14)
Truman Signs Housing Law Extension
The construction of 10,000 housing units may continue on the island President Truman yesterday signed a bill approved by Congress to extend for an additional 30 days the sixth title of the National Housing Act, under which the Government will initiate a program for the construction of 10,000 low-cost housing units for veterans. Yesterday Mr. F. D. A. Carpenter, Island representative of the Federal Housing Administration, reported that he had received official notification from the agency's headquarters in Washington that the President had signed legislation extending the provisions of the Act, which under Title Sixth allows mortgage loans to veterans for the acquisition of low-cost housing. According to information provided to Mr. Carpenter, the legislation extending Title VI of the Act appropriated an amount totaling $400 million for the veterans' housing program. Puerto Rico, as it has been doing so far, will be able to benefit from this legislation by being able to proceed with Governor Piñero's plans for the construction of housing for Puerto Rican veterans. The program is halfway through, with more than 4,000 homes already built. Title Six of the Federal Housing Act, which provided a "facíllriade" for veterans interested in acquiring low-cost homes, ceased to be in effect on March 31, and on that date Congress passed a law extending that section of the Act, submitting the bill for the President's signature. Although, Mr. Carpenter said yesterday, Governor Plftero's program for the construction of 10,000 homes will not be completed in the next 30 years (continued on page 14). Tobacco Manufacturers Association, made it known at the annual meeting of that organization that in the opinion of the stockholders, cigarette prices should be raised in such a way as to permit a reduction in current debts. He was of the opinion that even if lower costs could produce such an objective, this is hampered by the government's pre. . "ent rules. Mr. Wotten cited that cigarette manufacturers incurred their large debts during the war period and added that manufacturers of the major brands have no alternative but to continue to increase their debt if the demands of civilian smokers and the armed forces are to be met. He added that the prices of cigarettes were frozen, their consumption continued to rise dramatically and the demand "in procodentes by tobacco, caused the shortage that raised the" price" rie some" types riel tobacco in rama. While this situation created a good business for the manufacturers, a relatively unprofitable prosperity ensued. The industry was confronted, when the price controls were lifted, with a rieuria to comply and compromise" (Continued on p. 19).
Congress Passes Tax Cut Over Veto
Medical Association offers its cooperation, would revive civil defense By Lula Hernández Aoulno F.L MUNDO Staff Writer The American Medical Association, as well as other entities of the Federal Government, have addressed the Governor of Puerto Rico, urging him to take the necessary measures for the organization of a civil defense service, so that in case of need such service would be in operation. The interest of the American Medical Association is focused on certain aspects related to possible attacks with atomic energy, should a new world war develop, so that there will be a training organization - composed of doctors, nurses, etc. - as there was in the last world war, when this new war element was not used in a general way. The President of the Medical Association of Puerto Rico, accompanied by Dr. Manuel Guzman, visited the Governor yesterday to offer the cooperation of the Association in organizing the civil defense. The Governor of Puerto Rico has not been able to give attention to the matter at the moment, due to his intense work in connection with the current legislative session. The first news on the organization of civil defense on the Island was received by the Commissioner of Health, Dr. Juan A. (Continued on page 14) "El Universal" continues under new owners As of Monday it will be managed and administered by Mr. E. Campos del Toro The newspaper "El Universal", which has been published in the Capital, will be published as of next Monday under new administration and management. From the edition of said newspaper circulated last night we reproduce the following note: "Yesterday afternoon the details of the operation by virtue of which the company Prensa Democrática, Inc. acquired the newspaper El Universal, by purchase from Puerto Rico Publishers Inc., which has been publishing it since its foundation under the presidency of our Director Don José Coll Vidal, were finalized. The president of Prensa Democrática Inc. is our colleague Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, director of our colleague "La Democracia". Our next Monday edition, then, will be published under the auspices of "Prensa Democrática Inc." On the same date, the General Administration of El Universal will be assumed by the exPiocurarior General, Mr. Enrique Campos del Toro, who replaces the co-founder and administrator until today of this company, Mr. Periro Miranda González. The editorial and administrative staff of El Universal, who have shared with its directors the successes and difficult moments of this new company, send their friends and colleagues, Mr. José Coll Vidal and Mr. Pedro Miranda González, a warm and sincere farewell greeting. (They know that they leave here the full affection of their collaborators. Our friend Don Enrique Campo" del Toro, General Administrator of the new publishing company, will assume the interim management of El Universal, while the necessary internal readjustments are being carried out".
Crushing defeat handed Traman This one claimed that the Nation ne would weaken in a Xnoment of danger By JOHnTTcUTTER WASHINGTON, April 2. (PU)- Congress today signed into law "u rie contribu* tlva reduction bill, medianle a crushing rejection of President Truman's veto riel. Mr. Truman sought to override the measure with a 1,700-word message in which he denounced the bill as an ill-timed "evil in disguise" that would weaken the Nation at a time of peril. Congress defeated his veto promptly and decisively, thus signing the proposed reduction into law. Sq" needed a two-thirds majority of the votes in both houses to override the veto. The override was accomplished in less than three hours with votes to spare. The House passed the bill by a vote of 311 to 88 over the President's objections. The Senate vote was 77 to 10, or 19 in excess of the number needed to override the veto. Only Republican House Representatives H. Cari Anderson, Minnesota, and Thruiton Ballard Morton, Kentucky, defected to the leadership to cast their votes in support of the veto. On the other hand, 82 Democrats deserted the President to cooperate with the GOP in overriding the veto. In the Senate, 27 Democrats voted with 50 Republicans to defeat the President's opposition. No Republican voted against the veto. All 10 Senate votes to back the President were cast." torio" by Democrats. Only one Democrat, J. William Fulbright of Arkansas, abandoned "his original position of endorsing the bill to sustain the President's view. The Administration had hoped that Ir "eftor Truman "s recent warning about the world crisis, in addition to his demand for a $14,000,000,000,000 cjefen "a rie budget, would attract sufl" cent" Democratic votes to sustain the veto. The tax cut became law at 3:18 p.m., when the Senate vote was officially announced by Senator Harry P. Cain, R-Washlngton, who presided over the session. The reduction will be effective retroactive to the first of January. The first effects will be felt on May 1, when payroll deductions will be reduced. Immediately after the Senate vote, the Government presses began printing new tax forms, which will be quickly sent to six million employees. During the next few rounds, other blanks covering the new exemptions and technical changes in the old law will be mailed. Final congressional action began at 12:33 p.m., when a House clerk began reading the President's veto message. The vote was taken immediately upon completion of the reading, without debate. The House Republican leadership issued statements in rebuttal to the President's arguments. Speaker Joseph W. Martin, R-Massachusetts, said the bill would offer the nation tax relief while providing for the strengthening of national defense. Martin said: "It is long overdue that relief should have come ep 1®*pressing wartime contributions. We can give the (Continued on page 28)
U.S. military policemen surround Russian office in Berlin
By JOHN B. MCDERMOTT BERLIN, April 2. (PU)- United States Army military policemen today suddenly surrounded the building of the Russian-run railroad office in the North American sector of Berlin, and about thirty armed military policemen surrounded the building at midnight. The German night-shift employees in the building looked excitedly out of their windows as the American troops surrounded them. Reliable sources said that the American troops received the following instructions: (1) to guard the railroad office until further orders, (2) to allow any Russian citizens who wished to leave the building without interference, (3) to prevent any Russians from entering the building, and (4) to prevent any Russians from entering the building without interference. (3) to prevent any Russians from entering the building, and (4) to allow any German employee to enter or leave freely, The building, called the Reichsbahn,
The building, called the Reichsbahn, has long been under Russian administration in accordance with an Allied agreement, although it is in the American sector of the city. It was reported from the western border of the occupation zone in Germany that an American-protected food train, which left Berlin to test the Russian "blockade" of Berlin, passed through the Marienborn control station, ninety miles westward from Berlin, at 10:40 p.m. It is due to arrive in Berlin tomorrow night, before the end of the night. It should arrive in Berlin tomorrow, before noon. Reliable sources said tonight that the Russians withdrew from sel" rie allied commissions overlooking the city of Berlin, in what constitutes an intensification of the "boycott" eontra the quadripartite administration rie Germany. The" informants said that the Russian action was adopted at a ten-hour meeting of the deputies in Berlin, in what constitutes an intensification of the "boycott" of the quadripartite administration in Germany.