THE MYNDO
WEATHER PBOKOBTTCOS FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY Partly cloudy. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temp. Mt minimum. 14. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:88 a.m., 9M8 inches moreurio.
40 Pages 5/ - ■ . . ' . . . . . ; ' l
DAILY MARA - ' ■ .- ~ ■ - . :
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan. P. R
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO-SATURDAY, MAY 15, 1948
AtrtamoriliatM, damoatramoa traditional pala cortaaía
NUMBER 11305
Russia withdraws Gromyko from UN-argo.
He will be replaced by Jacob Malik They consider that change may indicate step in Russian offensive LAKE SUCCESS. New York, May 14 (PU)-Russia has recalled Assistant Foreign Minister Andre! A. Gromyko, from the post of chief aovletic delegate to the United Nations, in a reshuffle of his diplomatic person! The 38-year-old Soviet diplomat will be succeeded in a few days by Jacob A. Mallk, another foreign assistant diplomat and a longtime associate of the Foreign Ministry, V. M. Molotov. Gromyko revealed yesterday that he will soon return to Moscow to take a long-delayed vacation," and admitted that he did not know where he would be raided when a vacation is scheduled for next fall. He considered it certain that Gromyko, the spokesman for the Russian Federation in the United Nations since the founding of the organization almost three years ago, had been appointed to a more important position in the Soviet diplomatic service. Gromyko's auceaor is already on his way to this city from London to become the chief Soviet delegate to the United Nations. He is the man who, as Soviet ambassador to Tokyo, delivered the Ruala war declaration to the Japanese government in 1945. Officially, the Soviet delegation said that Gromyko was leaving the U.S. to take a two-week or longer vacation, and that during that time he was the main delegate to the U.S. Navy. The diplomats of the United Nadonoa were, however, certain that the Kremlin would have assigned one of the trained diplomats here to handle the Palestine debate in succession to Gromyko if he were to return to his post. They added that when Moscow goes to the trouble of sending an assistant foreign minister from the Soviet Union to Lake Sue-esa, one can be sure that the man will remain at the United Nations for a considerable time. There was speculation that Gromyko's transfer might signify a change in Russian tactics or, even more so, in its policy in the United Nations Security Council and in other agencies in which the East and West have long been at an impasse. It was pointed out that Gromyko has become almost synonymous with the veto, and that his withdrawal could constitute another step in Russia's "peaceful offensive". In his long career at the United Nations, filled with bitter verbal battles between the Soviet bloc and the West, and particularly between Russia and the United States, Gromyko made himself the center of world attention by withdrawing from the Security Council. Such a spectacular event "" occurred when the Council insisted on continuing its deliberations on Iran, which concerned the threats made by the Kremlin against the Tehran government. Gromyko waited until the Council had reached a decision adverse to Rusta before dramatically leaving the meeting room. Overall, Gromyko earned a reputation for exercising veto power on twenty-four major decisions adopted by a majority vote in the Security Council. During the past few months, Gromyko's wife - a familiar figure in the United Nations circuits - has noted that her husband planned to return to Russia so that their son could be educated in Soviet schools. During last year's sessions of the United Nations General Assembly, it was noted that Mallk seemed to have relations with Molotov and that he recognized him as having almost the same rank as Andrei Gromyko, then head of the Soviet delegation to the United Nations. Since 1943, when he was only 34 years old and became Russian ambassador to Washington, Gromyko has been in control of Russian-Russian relations. He has spoken on behalf of Russia at the United Nations since he organized the Instrument four years ago at the Dumbarton Oaks conference, stepping aside at the main UN meetings to make way for Toytov and the first Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, Androl Vi.hinsky. Almost all of the 24 votes Russia applied for on the Security Council were cast by Gromyko - in the case of Franco, Eapafta; >on the Balkan dispute, on the Indonesian problem, and on the case of dozens of applications for registration in the United Nations. His name, "uo" meaning "thunder" in Russian, fit the vulgar American vocabulary after the spring of 1948 when he stormed out of the Security Council chamber protesting against the move by foreign powers to send Russian troops out of Iran. Since I have seen the term "walk out" as a common expression. Meanwhile, a dispatch from Washington reports that Ambassador W. Bedell Smith intends to (Continued in Ml'na 18)
Marshall comments on Russian attitude l - . _ i _ 0 ' |i -'
MF KI U.S. Secretary of State, George C. Marshall, srnta-
U.S. Secretary of State George C. Marshall, seated at the table before the Washington Press corps at the State Department, declares that if Russia is seriously interested in improving world conditions, there is "urgent need for action by the United Nations". (Associated Press photo).
Truman gave a program to Congress on agriculture
He criticized Republican congressmen for failing to take action on postwar agriculture. Called for more funds for conservation
By Vincent BURKE
WASHINGTON, May 14-(PUJ- President Truman today blasted the Republican-dominated Congress for delaying action on a postwar farm program, and offered his own twelve-point plan for "a healthy and prosperous agriculture."
His message to both Houses co-( menced with a call for । a "permanent fie- ' xlble price support system for agricultural loq ' ' item"" to replace the wartime system which expires Dec. 31. But Senate Republicans have dealt a severe blow to Seftor Truman on that request. A bill providing for such a program was approved by the Agriculture Committee on Monday, shortly before it became known on Capitol Hill that the President was drafting an agricultural message designed to put Congress in this election year in a difficult political position. The President's message, however, indicated that he had been advocating a far-reaching agricultural program for two years. "Congress has not yet acted," the President said, "and today farmers do not know what price support levels ... will be applied to large portions of many products already planted." Seftor Truman put his finger on another sore point when he insisted that Congress "fully provide the necessary funds...,, for the continuation and increase of our soil conservation program." The "House recently cut about $75,000,000 from its $1*00,000,000 request for soil conservation during the next (Continued on page 16"
Da vis plans trip to island Wednesday Ahead of Caribbean Commission meeting. Conference with Pinero WASHINGTON, May 14. (PU)James P. Davl". director of the Territories Division of the Department of the Interior, informed the United Press today that he will probably leave for San Juan next Wednesday night. Davls, who has been appointed special adviser to the Caribbean Commission, intends to go to Puerto Rico a few days before the Commission meeting, for the purpose of conferring on "routine business" with Governor Jesus T. Plftero. Plftero. The Commission is scheduled to meet in San Juan from the 24th to the 29th of this month. Even though he has not previously acted on d* Commission business. Davls stated that he is familiar with most of I his new duties. The Commission is credited by the Director of the Dlvl1 (Continued on page 16)
News Digest
Caucus approves alea for Island Police. - - - UPR exam schedule to be revealed Tuesday. - - - FAT leaders who were in the can returned to the United States. - The Governor signed the bill to reorganize the Ponce District Attorney's Office. - President Traman offered Congress a twelve-point agricultural program. - VA appraisers to advise veterans thinking of buying homes. - Russia to remove Gromyko from its delegation to the United Nations. - U.S. Attorney Herrick to resign "in hreve. - James P. Davis plans to leave for the island next Wednesday. - New law defines policy on exemption for new industries. - Minnesota moved National Guard to deal with strikers' violence. - RUssen and Dewey to debate Monday. - - - Perennial board resolves no dismissal without prior charges. - - - - Women's Workers' Union agreed to exclude Communists and their sympathizers from positions in the organization.
Doctor ftllplnn says bllharsi* is more plentiful in his pala than in Puerto Rico, - - - - Caro alleges "phantom" buses are circulating in the metropolitan area. - - - - Róscase where to house families residing on land where airport will be built. - - - Auction of a large number of vehicles discarded by the government. - - - The House of Representatives yesterday approved a new contribution to pay the bond issue* for "4,000,000 for works and other expenses. Republican Union has already appointed several committees. - Jews proclaim new State of Israel and U. S. recognizes it. Jews proclaim new State of Israel and U. S. recognizes it. - JRT refuses to consider cases which may fall under the jurisdiction of the Taft-Hartley Act. At yesterday's hearing on injunction against landing, Patterns and Agralt testified. The case continues to be heard on Monday. - Muflo believes the call for a special session of the House should be extended. DeI.and Puerto Rican players were reinstated. - - - Yankees blanked the Athletics. * Bayamon team, Class Do- । bleJL made triple majors.
Republican Union appoints members to various committees
Tomorrow will be held in Pone" and Bayamón, respectively. the general assemblies of the Progressive Republican Union and Puerto Rican Liberal parties. It was reported yesterday that Mr. Luis Ferré, president of the publishing company El Día, will be promoted to a high position in the leadership of the new party. The General Secretary of the Progressive Republican Union has already designated the committees of Platform, Regulation and General Affairs, subject to ratification by the Assembly, as soon as it begins its work. The different committees, which will begin to work today in Ponce, are integrated as follows: Platform Committee - Dr. Juan B. Soto, Pedro J. Barbosa. Francisco López Domínguez. Juan Ramón Ramos, Lumen Méndez. F. Fernández Cuyar, Dr. Enrique Lassisse. Jorge Lucas Valdivieso, J. Tormo" Diego, Eugenio Lecompe, Rafael Rivera Santiago, Pablo Noguera", doctor Jorge Zequelra and Juan R, Garzot: Regulation Committee - Ramón Llovet, Justo Rivera Cabrera, doctor Antonia Marchan!, Luis Ramo", Francl "co J. Jullá, Mario Oronoz, Tomé" Ram!rez Cuerda, licenciado Luiz B. Blaaco, Julio Viera Morale", Pedro A. Ocaalo. Fldenclo Muflir. Rivera. Jnaé S. Poto. Miguel J. Noya and Nicolás Quiftonas Matta; and the Committee of Aauntoa Ganarala"- Joaquín A. Be-
cerril, Adolfo Done" Padró, doctor Pedro Badillo, son, Antonin Ramo" Rodríguez, Fernando J. Géigel, Juan González Mercado, Rafael Antonmarchl, Lula Bolta Colón, Cándido Fernández, Vidal Moreno, Rafael Gallart, Cornelio Alvarado, Antonio Hernández and José Pagán Mundo, Eato" committees were appointed" in advance of the Assembly, as explained yesterday, in order to hasten the study of the amendments to the Platform and the Party Regulations, as well as the resolutions that may be proposed by the delegates. In the central offices of both parties, it was reported yesterday that everything was ready to begin the work of the conventions, at the time indicated in the convocation". Among unlorrepubllcanoa and Liberal leaders, the purpose of creating a new political organization, in which the Progressive Republican Union and Puerto Rican Liberal parties would be merged, continued to be discussed. It is expected that one of the first things to be considered by both conventions is the designation of representative commissions of both collectivities, so that they meet at some intermediate point, between Bayamón and Ponce - probably in Loa Baños de Coamo - and structure a plan that allows the organization of the new party.
Recognition of the Israeli State
U.S. President gave official announcement
Ben Gurion proclaims new Jewish state, announces it will be defended WASHINGTON, May 14.-(PU)-President Harry S. Traman announced tonight that the United States has recognized the new Jewish state in Palestine. Within minutes of the proclamation of the Jewish State - pro elamaclon which took effect at one minute past six o'clock this evening, President Truman made the following statement: "This Government has received information that a Jewish State has been proclaimed in Palestine and that recognition has been requested by the Provisional Government. - The United States recognizes the Provisional Government as the de facto authority of the new state of Israel." American recognition was extended at the time the British Mandate in Palestine formally ceased. Charles G. Ross, White House Secretary. The creation of the new Jewish state and the recognition of the United States will in no way weaken the effort of the American Government to bring about a truce between the Arabs and the Jews, he said. (A dispatch from Cairo says that Egyptian troops were ordered to penetrate into Palestinian territory, according to a note authorized by the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs). Unexpectedly, the General Assembly of the United Nations <lló death to the American plan for the establishment of a special regime in Jerusalem. In Tel Avlv, the Haganah, acting on orders from its commander-in-chief, Israel Galileo, mobilized its sixty thousand men and women to defend the approximately five thousand five hundred square mile territory of the new Jewish state - roughly the area granted to the Hebrews under the provisions of the United Nations partition plan, announced to the world in November. Officially, the British mandate does not expire until midnight tonight ("eia late New York time), but the British High Commissioner, Sir Alan Cunningham, formally signaled its termination about fourteen hours earlier. Cunningham returns At eighteen minutes past ten in the morning, Cunningham boarded a launch at one of the Haffa docks, transferring to an English cruiser in that port. About six hours* later, David Ben Gurlon, a stocky, gray-haired man, proclaimed to the world the advent of the new State of Israel, announcing that it would be defended to the last drop of Jewish blood. Ben Purlon is sixty-six years old. During the last forty years he has ardently advocated the establishment of a Zionist state in Palestine. He holds the offices of Prime Minister and Minister of War in the Hebrew Government and will be the first President of the Republic of Israel. T" proclamation of the new state - a dream cherished by the wandering people for nearly two thousand years - took place at four o'clock this Friday afternoon (ten o'clock in the morning, New York time) Official Proclamation The proclamation - broadcast to the world by radio -* summarizes the history of the Hebrew people and declares that "the establishment of the Jewish State in Palestine, to be called Israel, took place "by virtue of the natural historical right of the Hebrew people and of the resolution of the Jewish people to establish a Jewish State in Palestine, to be called Israel, by virtue of the natural historical right of the Hebrew people and the resolution of the Jewish people to establish a Jewish State in Palestine.
House approves tax to pay for $8 million bond issue
Announced Tuesday exams plan Seems to last until after 31. - Research on Monday By Lula Hernándes Aquino Editor of EL MUNDO The program of final exams of the University "will be announced next Tuesday" by the university administration, although it is already prepared by the Committee that was commissioned for it, under the direction of the Dean of Administration, Dr. Ramón Mellado. It is known, however, that it will be offered to the student all the comfort put lúe, and that due to the alaterna that "e" has devised, "e" will not "e" surcharge the number of exams to take in a day. Because of the plan designed, it is most certain that the exams will be extended until after May 31, for which reason some arrangements will have to be made in the enrollment of the Summer School, which is announced to begin on June 1, extending until June 5. It could also be, according to reports picked up" by El. MUNDO, that the "class" of the Summer School will not begin on June 7, but a few days later. As for the exams of the night cures, it has been reported that there is no problem for the development of the same". These exams will be held during the night, on the date to be announced in the program to be published next week. * The matter of the final exams was the subject of a long discussion by the deans of the University, who met yesterday morning with Rector Benitez. Neither the Rector nor the deans wanted to inform about the agreements reached at the meeting, nor did they indicate the points under discussion. Meanwhile, the campaign of the University Crusade, aimed at the students not to take the final exams offered by the university administration, is still going on. The campaign is being developed in Rio Piedras and in the different towns of the Island, where the University Crusade leaders are working. To this effect, the leaders of the movement have received telegrams from different towns of the Island, informing that the students of these towns, in their majority, will not take the final exams. In the town of Naguabo, as reported yesterday by Mr. Juan Noriega Maldonado, president of the Student Council, a strike committee was organized, chaired by university student William Ortiz. According to a telegram received, the university students of Naguabo will not attend their final exams. Another" Report* Mr. Noriega Maldonado also reported that the" efforts made by the University Crusade to obtain permission from the local authorities of Cíale" for the use of the public square, where "they planned to hold a rally, failed, since "1 Mr. José pez Vega, mayor of said town (Contlntia on page 16:
They expect action on Monday including amendments to the law Banco de Fomento Pur J, M. García Calderón Editor of K1. MUNDO In a press conference held yesterday, Senate President Luis Muñoz Marín said he believed that the call for an extraordinary session would be extended next Monday to include new matters, among which will be amendments to the law creating the Puerto Rico Development Bank to make it a government bank. Mr. Muflo" Marín said that this law had the approval of the bankers of Puerto Rico. When asked if any amendments to the University Law would be considered in this extraordinary session, he answered in the negative and argued that the Governor has not expressed his intention to include this matter in the additional call. Responding to another question regarding the date on which the Popular Party will hold its assembly, the President of the Senate stated that "1)0 plañe" has not yet been made about that", To another question on whether he was in favor of the next assembly of the Popular Party making an "allegorical statement on the problem of the political alatlis dr. Prosecutor "Herrick will resign his post soon He announces he will devote himself to the private practice of law in Washington F.l Phillip Herrick, who has been holding the post of federal prosecutor in Puerto Rico, will resign shortly to devote himself to the private practice of his profession. The purpose of leaving the post was announced yesterday by Attorney Herrick himself. He revealed that he has requested from the Attorney General of the United States, Mr. Torn C. Clark, the granting of a vacation period, to begin on June 7, next. Herrick, who for five years has been heading the U.S. Attorney's Office in Puerto Rico, announced that on the aforementioned date he will travel to Washington to meet with U.S. Attorney Clark regarding his decision to resign. Subsequent to that date, U.S. Attorney Herrick will tender his resignation. - Yesterday, Attorney Herrick addressed Attorney Clark requesting a vacation, and took the opportunity to recommend Assistant U.S. Attorney Francisco Ponsa Fellú for the position of U.S. Attorney in Puerto Rico. Mr. Herrick stated on this last point that Mr. Ponsa Fellú fill all sinjéspaldo for "ustHuirle, and ahogaiA "fervently" close to the Attorney General, so that the prosecutor Ponsa sen selected for the position." Plans cl prosecutor Herilck to establish his firm in Washington, or to associate with some law firm in the national capital. Mr. Herrick has been serving the Federal Government in Puerto Rico since November 27, 1929, when he was appointed regional attorney of the San Juan office of the Division of Labor and Wages of the United States Department of Labor." On November 30, 1942, he was appointed United States Attorney. In various social and civic activities, Mr. Herrick has taken an active part in the Island, having been vice-president of the Council of Nlftos Escucha"; (Continued on page 16)
The Director of the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority, "eftor Salvador V. Caro, has asked the Public Service Commission to intervene to eliminate from the San Juan metropolitan area those buses that are circulating without authorization from said agency. Mr. Caro said yesterday that his staff has verified that "ghost" buses are circulating without any authorization from the Commission to transport passengers within the metropolitan area. This situation, according to Mr. Caro, causes economic damages to the Authority, an agency that has reinforced in the last few days the different routes with a number of reaeondlcionados vehicles, of the type" Reo and White. "We have offered the Public Service Commission the cooperation of new personnel in locating and locating asta.
Muñoz believes that the call for a special session will have to be extended.
i Ft'™ ; U' '"í, '"n, J r "w.o IihIiIIIIhihíhíhhu LUIS MUÑOZ MARIN Puerto Rico, Mr. Muñoz Marín replied laconically, saying that "we will see about that when the time comes". Mr. Muflo" Marín also informed that he would soon send a communication to President Truman and other officials of the Federal Administration, requesting them to adopt the new law, which defines the exempt industry. 45 of them are mentioned in the new statute. Act 184, signed by Governor Plftero last Thursday, defines the policy of the People of Puerto Rico with respect to the temporary exemption of new industries from taxation. This Act, which corresponds to S. P. number one, as amended in the last "day" of the legislative session, repeals the provisions that were previously in effect, and establishes new provisions on the matter. For the purpose of determining the "Subsidized Industries" with possibilities of greater development in the Island, which shall enjoy the benefits of the exemption, the following are mentioned in the Act: Articles produced by companies dr assembling. Assembly companies shall be understood to be those engaged in the production of articles of commerce, other than articles of furniture, by joining some parts with others, provided that the cost of labor to assemble such article represents such a substantial part of the total cost of the article that in the judgment of the Executive Council it merits the exemption provided by this Law. Articles of straw, cos' and other fibers. Artificial flowers. Baseball and other sports balls. Bed springs and wire mattresses. Cartefas and other articles made of leather or imitation leather. Construction of "box" or "bodywork" for motor "vahlculq". Candles. Candles. Ceramics, including brick, tile, sanitary ware, tiles of all kinds and other earthenware products. Cheese. Cigars. Cigarettes, Cinematography work on motion pictures produced and exhibited for commercial purposes. Cosmetics. Cotton, silk or rayon stockings. Cookies. Edible oils and fats. Coconut and other fibrous plant fibers and articles and products derived therefrom. Fighting" apparatus, including "netting" and "coffee" of "peacar". Furniture, except what is "e (Continued on page 16)
Alleged 'ghost' buses on metropolitan area routes
The "clandeatlnaa guagua"," said Mr. Caro, "and- eatamoa aeguroa that the Comlalon will have to act quickly." The Authority's staff has been devoting the last "-- mana" to locating and identifying the buses that run on the "metropolitan" route "ln the Commission's correapondlente Ucencia. Mr. Caro did not give a spectral number of these identified buses, but said the situation warrants prompt action by the PSC. Reports held by the Authority on these vehicles will also be submitted to the PSC. Although the Transportation Authority has placed, and will continue to place, new units in service, it has not yet officially determined the date on which the PSC will request the suspension of provisional permits to portea* (Continued on page 16).
Legislature passed several bills AmuiIo vacation of employees prompted strong i taque from Mr. Figueroa At its meeting yesterday, the House of Representatives approved bill number 8, of the Administration, imposing a new tax of 14 hundredths of one percent - equal to the same on all movable and immovable property of the Island, to pay the principal and interest of a bond issue in the amount of eight million dollars to be invested in works and miscellaneous expenses authorized by the ordinary Legislature of this afft. At noon yesterday, at 12:15 p.m., the Sixth Extraordinary Legislature began its work, convened by Governor Plftero to deal with seventeen bills whose approval is necessary, according to the Governor, for the development of the plans drawn up by the Government of Puerto Rico for the next fiscal year 1H4M9. At the beginning of the work, a roll call of the legislators present was taken, only Senator Manuel Barreto Pérez being absent. <* Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa requested the Senate to ask the Treasurer of Puerto Rico and the AuK dltor for a list of the revenues produced" by Act 32, which creates the Emergency Fund, as well as another list of the earmarked funds", since, since, since in this "extraordinary meeting they are going to deal with matters related to specific allocations", "I believe it is necessary that the" legislators duly know the status of said funds". Once this motion was approved, "Governor Gélgel Polanco "ollcluded that "the rules of the Senate be suspended, for the purpose of expediting the work of the special session* ' - He then presented a motion to write a communication to the Governor, to the effect that among the matters to be included in his extension of the call of this special session, be included the revision of the Law approved in relation to public employees' leaves of absence. Géigel Polanco indicated that, after said law was approved and signed by the Governor, the majority of the legislators have found that it suffers from several defects, which they wish to correct in this extraordinary session. Figueroa's attack While making the above statements, Senator Géigel Polanco, asked for the floor Senator Leopoldo Figueroa, to blame the majority for having to consider again, in extraordinary sessions, "In relation to the project on the leave of absence of public employees, he mentioned that Dr. Figueroa said that he had been a member of the Senate and that he was not even aware of the fact that the majority of the legislators had not even seen it. Dr. Figueroa mentioned that he opposed its approval, because he found it defective and discriminatory, but that his minority voice was overruled, and the bill was approved. Now," added Dr. Figueroa- added Dr. Figueroa,- this Government which obeys nothing but coercive force and organized protest, which it fears, pressured by 1M own public employees affected, tries to fix what hlso bad, with the opposition of the minarla," "To avoid a repetition of ti1# case,- continued Sen* dor Figueroa,- "it is necessary to stop working in caucuses and clandestine meetings, in which only the man who carries on his shoulder the "reinstatement" of the Government of the Island orders, and in which the "outflore" of the "leglsladore" acts as a "rubber stamp", exposing him to public ridicule for his "lack of integrity and ability to assess his own "criteria". Censure * Biflora Condemned what 41 U*m4 a* "os*-| di* of Governor Plftero, *1 con-] vocar * a legislature axtreordlJ narla antea da transcurrir lo" quin-J ce di*" qua 1* law la confiare p*r"| sign loa bill" "proven", p*| r* try to fix everything that has happened in 1* legislature, in 1* which 5 days were lost, during which nothing or very little happened. Senator Géigel Polanco, at the end of Dr. Figueroa, badly nlfestó that he did not answer the dls] course of his colleague in the Signal do, and that the only thing he regretted was that they had had to waste twenty minutes listening to him. To these manifestations, the din" tor Figueroa replied that he should have been equally zealous #■ to prevent them from losing 55 days of the ordinary session, "to then be forced to work in the festal way in which they had to work, which was the cause of the many bad things they did and which they are now trying to fix in estl (Continued on 1* page 15).