THE MLJNDO
cloudy from time to time, with a few scattered light showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 711 low, 70. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.98 inches of mercury. /■ -
40 pages 5/
MARANA NEWSPAPER
ANNUAL XXIX
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. B>
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 20, 1948
NUMBER 11250
Pedagogy courses to be offered to graduates
UPR to begin these courses in conjunction with Columbia University faculty This accredits the value of studies They will begin this summer under the direction of Drs. Craig and Hartmann By Lufa Hernández Aqulno EL MUNDO Staff Writer A plan approved at the last meeting of the University Board, to begin graduate pedagogy studies in the summer session of this year at the University, will allow Puerto Rico's public education teachers who hold a bachelor's degree to begin courses for a master's or doctorate degree without having to leave the Island. Teachers taking the above courses shall be admitted as students of the faculty of pedagogy of Columbia University and shall pay the tuition fees charged by that educational institution, which are computed at the rate of $15.00 per unit of credit. Dr. Pedro A. Cebollero, who submitted the plan in the last session of the University Board, for the initiation of said courses, declared in this regard, that during the next Varano Session, two professors from the faculty of education of Columbia University will be on the Island - Professor Gerald S. Craig, known worldwide for his work in the field of pedagogy. Craig, known worldwide for his contribution to the pedagogy of natural sciences and author of one of the best series of textbooks for the teaching of science in elementary schools, and Professor George W. Hartmann, a well-known American philosopher, who is considered the best exponent of Gestalt psychology in the United States. The Dean of the College of Education, Dr. Cebollero, said that Professor Craig explained a laboratory-type course, known in English as a "workshop", entitled "Scientific Study of the Environment". According to Dr. Cebollero, the course will offer the study of the Puerto Rican scientific environment in its zoological, hotin.co, geogr*fical, industrial, etc. aspects. Industrial, etc. The course will include* numerous field trips to representative regions of the aforementioned scientific phenomena. Professor Hartmann will teach two advanced courses, one on educational psychology and the other on the most important schools of general psychology. In the latter course, according to Dr. Cebollero, preferential attention will be given to the exposition of the theory of the Gestalt school. The Dean of the College of Education of the UPR went on to declare that the plan agreed upon between the two institutions, Columbia University and the University of Puerto Rico, will be extended for a period of five years, during which time a group of the most distinguished professors of the University of Puerto Rico will come to the University of Columbia. These professors, said Dr. Cebollero, will be selected with a view to enabling Puerto Rican students to enter specialties in those fields of pedagogy that are popular among Puerto Rican teachers, such as educational psychology, rural sociology, school organization and administration, educational philosophy, comparative education, and others. It was reported that preliminary thought was given to professors Brunner, Davis. Butte, M*c Kenzle Hall and Miel, to participate in the postgraduate courses to be offered in Puerto Rico after the next Summer Session. According to Dr. Cebollero, Columbia University will accept Jos credits taken at the University of Puerto Rico as if they had been taken at its own campus in New York City, but will require that a considerable part of the total credits necessary for the master's degree be taken at Teachers College of that institution. Dr. Cebollero went on to indicate that persons taking these courses will have to obtain admission as students of the Teachers College of Columbia University and pay the tuition fees charged by that university, which are computed at the rate of $15.00 per unit of tuition, and that they should apply to his office at the Teachers College as soon as possible for the appropriate forms. Together with the form, the applicants were given instructions on the registration procedure and other organizational details. The admission to this "curao" should be processed, stated Dr. Cebollero, before the end of next April. Finally, the Dean of the College of Pedagogy declared: "For several years now, a large number of teachers of public instruction who have already completed their baccalaureate* have been anxious for the University of Puerto Rico to organize postgraduate courses in pedagogy. In the summers as well as in the regular artof the year, numerous teachers move to (Continued on page 16)
Marshall Said 'No Aid To Italy If Communists Win
Senate praised for approving appropriations for aid program BERKELEY. California, March 19 (INS) - Secretary of State George C Marshall today issued a stern warning to Italy that if the Communists win in next month's elections, that nation will no longer receive the benefits of the European recovery program. The Secretary of State, speaking at the University of California, said the Italian political crisis was part of the world situation "most threatening to our Ideals and Interests" that has ever existed in history. He attacked Russia and communism, "which are duplicating in Europe the despotic and calculated procedures of the Nazi regime." He emphasized, however, that the United States leaves "the door wide open for any general conciliatory steps." The Secretary of State defended the Administration for giving special attention to the European phase of the International situation, arguing that the needs of "general strategy" compelled that efforts should not be dispersed. He further proclaimed his faith in the eventual victory of democracy in "this worldwide struggle between freedom and tyranny." After reviewing the advance of communism in Europe, which has given "the initial advantage" to the "dictators," Marshall turned his attention to the case of Italy. He said that the" Italian Communists have alleged that "American aid to Italy will continue* without
tOHIwOBW'S 1 E/L. II A 1 GEORGE C. MARSHALL," even in the event that the Reds" triumph in the" April elections. Then, referring to the Italian people, he said: "If the" voters* install in power a government in which the dominant political force is a party whose hostility to this program (of European restoration) has been frequently, publicly and emphatically proclaimed, that could only be regarded as evidence of that nation's desire to break away from that program." The Secretary of State praised the Senate for approving signatures to put the program into operation, and called on the House (Continued on page 16)
Island's advantages pointed out to Hollywood They point out variety of scenery, climate and proximity to markets By Jean Van Vranken WASHINGTON, March 19 (SIN) -The island government today invited Hollywood to consider the "advantages offered by Puerto Rico as a possible scenario for the film industry. The invitation was made in the form of a memorandum sent by Donald O'Connor, economist of the Office of Puerto Rico, to nine major "shared" film "producers. Copies of the memo were also sent to several actors, including William Powell, Humphrey Bogart, Betty Grable, Frank Sinatra. Frank Sinatra. Bing Crosby, Heddy Lamarr and Lana Turner. The main advantage for filming movies in Puerto Rico is the "island law that exempts new" industries from taxes. O'Connor also pointed to the fact that the island is a "natural setting" for the filming of various types of Hollywood productions. Only eight hours by air from New York, a company with film equipment in Puerto Rico would soon have access to the "center of comedy creation and representation" in the United States. On the island, a company would be able to choose sets ranging from modern buildings to the "structures of the Spartan world"; from the "green" tropical forests to the "placid seascapes". O'Connor also said that the permanently benign climate of (Continued on page 16)
The agreement adopted by the Ponce attorney to create a third courtroom in the Municipal Court of Ponce would be the result of the approval of a bill already filed in the Legislature to give Peñuelas and Guayanilla the jurisdiction of said court, according to the Attorney General. According to the bill, the municipalities of Guayanilla and Piñuela, currently under the judicial jurisdiction of the Ponce Municipal Court, would form an independent court. This action, according to the Attorney General's criteria, would in fact serve the purpose of creating a third wing in the Ponce Municipal Court, since the segregation of the aforementioned towns would decongest the two courtrooms that currently sit in said court. The Attorney General and prosecutors José C. Aponte and Luis ApeHániz Storer spent all night Tuesday, until 5:00 a.m. the following morning, discussing with the Governor numerous projects favorably recommended by the Department of Justice. Some of these bills are the following: to create two additional positions for assistant prosecutors in the San Juan District Court, and another position for a special aerretarlo; to allow those confined in the prison farm to reasonably participate in the benefits of their work; to reinstate the old penalty of six years in the prison; to reinstate the old penalty of six years in the prison; to create a special prosecutor's office in the San Juan District Court, and another position for a special aerretarlo; to allow those confined in the prison farm to reasonably participate in the benefits of their work; and to reinstate the old penalty of six years in the San Juan District Court.
News Digest
Bill presented for $10,000,000 bond issue. * * * Introduce bill giving representation to minority parties in municipal assemblies. "* * * The University will offer this summer postgraduate courses in pedagogy. * Puerto Rico will not be able to use all the funds of the hospital plan. * * * * tordon renders to Senate Committee, a Report in favor of the Hawaii statehood, preparing action for the 49th state. that the United States has increased the manufacture of atomic bombs. "* * * Marshall warns Italy that if Communists win election there will be no U.S. aid. a * * ♦ GO P leaders refrain from comment on recruitment. * * * University suspends a law student. ♦ ♦ ♦ - They point out to Hollywood producers the advantages of the island for filming movies", "The administrative reorganization program at the ASA is already in operation. * Rafael Arjona has decided to take the language lawsuit to the Court of Appeals in Boston.
The Governor and the Attorney General discussed legislation favoring the Department of Justice. APA will revise its estimate for the current crop. Drought has affected production in the South. se" American embassy bulletin containing Truman's speech confiscated in Prague. - Norwegian Army will not lisend Jos conscripts" who finish their military training. * * * Bill is introduced that would take jurisdiction over criminal prosecution rules away from the Supreme Court. * * * Accounting for the collection of federal Internal Revenue has been standardized. - A - The United States asked the United Nations to abandon the plan for the partition of Palestine. - A - The U.S. Senate approved to set the reduction in the income fax at "4,900,000,000. * The W*ahIngton House Committee on Commodities agreed to investigate the butter market in New York to determine if price gouging is taking place. - The United States has withdrawn its support for the Palestine partition bill. - Henry Wallace ignored an invitation to a White House event.
Bill would strip Supreme Court of jurisdiction over criminal prosecution rules.
10,000,000 bond bill introduced would provide funds for 1948-49 expenditures. In the House of Representatives was introduced the day before yesterday, and reported on first reading, a bill (Administration) to authorize the Treasurer <1* huerto Rico to issue, with the approval of the Governor, a bond of the People of Puerto Rico in an amount not to exceed $10,000,000,000 for the purpose of providing funds for expenditures authorized by the Legislature of Puerto Rico, and for the payment of which appropriations have been made in the 1946-49 fiscal year. The bill, the title of which has been disclosed, shall provide the manner in which such bonds may be issued and sold, and the manner of payment thereof and interest thereon. The proceeds from the sale of Jos bonds" as stated in the bond certificate, (numbered *" R15. and authored by Representative Benjamin Ortiz, Chairman of the House Finance Committee) shall be paid into the general funds*" of the Insular Government. 4 The obligations referred to in the bill and for which it is proposed to issue a $10,000,000 bond were appropriated for the fiscal year 1948-49. As is known, it is expected that the Island Government will close its operations for this fiscal year with a deficit estimated at about $5,000,000. With the proposed new bond issue, according to official data obtained, the Island Government's borrowing margin will be reduced to only $13,113,000, and the public debt will increase to $19,562,000.
It is expected that the expansion of the Sanatorium, the extension of the Insular Insular Insane Asylum, the Ponce District Hospital and the Industrial Hospital will be given preference in the plan. Dr. Picó added that Puerto Rico will not be able to take advantage of all the available fairground facilities, due to the high maintenance costs of a program that involves a considerable investment of public funds, and that the plan to be developed with the funds for the first two years will at least help to balance the hospital and health services provided on the island. When asked to comment yesterday on this program, Dr. Tór Picó stated the following: "The Planning Board collaborated in the formulation of the hospital fair plan. Both personally, as a member of the Island Advisory Board, and through Mr. Brandon Howell, who is an officer of our Division of Industries and Services, we cooperated with the Department of Health in the formulation of this program. We have been able to use the District's hospital regulatory plan based on our hospital regulatory plan, were used by the Advisory Board in the study of the island's needs, and maintained close and cordial cooperation with the Department of Health at all times. I can say that the Hospital Census Bureau of the SaInri Department, headed by Mr. Julio A. Pé. rez. did a magnificent job. "It is a great step forward that has been taken with 1a Approval of the plan by the Public Health Service ri* State" United. This makes it possible to begin quickly the construction of a number of long overdue projects. Among those considered of importance, and especially of great preference, are the extensions to the Rio Piedra Anti-Tuberculosis Sanatorium," the expansion of the Insular Insular Asylum, *1 Ponce District Hospital and *1 Industrial Hospital. A "considerable" study" has been made on the construction ri* these (Continued on page 16).
Bill Gives Minority Representation in Municipal Assembly
Obdulio Bauzá and María Libertad Gómez have filed the following bill: Section Ira, That Section 17-L of the Municipal Law of 1928, as subsequently amended, is hereby amended to read as follows: Section 17-L: In all general elections, the voters of each municipality shall elect a municipal assembly, which shall be composed of thirteen members in the first class, eleven in the second class and nine in the third class. Provided, that the political party obtaining the majority of voters in the elections of 1948 and successive elections, may only elect eleven assembly members in the first class municipalities, nine in the second class and seven in the third class; provided further that the remaining members in each of said classes of municipalities shall be appointed by the corresponding Municipal Assembly in its inaugural session, at the opening session, at the end of the first session, at the end of the first session, at the end of the second session, and at the end of the second session, at the end of the second session, at the end of the second session.
at its inaugural session, upon the recommendation of the governing body of the party or party merger which has obtained the largest number of votes in the preceding elections, subsequent to the political party which obtained the majority. The" members" of the municipal assembly so elected" shall hold office for a term of 4 years and until their "elected" or "appointed" members" are duly elected" or appointed" and take office; Provided, that in order to complete the number of members of the assembly in the municipality created by this Act, the Governor of Puerto Rico, with the concurrence of the Insular Senate, and upon the proposal of the local director of the political body that obtained the highest number of votes in the municipality in the 1928 elections, shall proceed to appoint them. The" member" of the municipal assembly before" taking office" shall take an oath, in accordance with the Political Code, which shall be taken by *1 president or a member of the outgoing assembly, judge or notary public. (Continued on page 16)
In the future, it is expected that there will be no discrepancy in the reports concerning federal "internal revenue collections" provided by *1 Treasurer of Puerto Rico and the Chief of Federal Internal Revenue for Puerto Rico. A uniform accounting system will be used in both the Puerto Rico Treasury and the Federal Bureau, so that federal tax revenues will be deposited in the banks on the same date as they are recorded in the Internal Government's books. Until now, every time the Treasurer of Puerto Rico reported that a certain "urn of money had been deposited in a certain period of time in the island funds, for a certain period of time, the Treasurer of Puerto Rico reported that a certain "urn of money had been deposited in the island funds, for a certain period of time, for a certain period of time.
Truman shakes hands with Dewey in New York.
1 Mk -i - Bu ' & x z " ■ '-■i.--' ■. 'Al. * <. -íT 7 ■' IL. ■ \ 'i, > ra ; £3.
President Truman (Left), 'allude to New York Governor Thoma* E. Dewey, aspirant* for the Republican nomination for prealdencla, upon arrival at the pavilion he a* erected on "trlle 84 for T "reaencter the annual parade of the din da San Patríelo in that city. Center. John J. Sheahan, chairman of the Parade Committee. President Truman arrived by plane from Washington after delivering his message to the joint congressional caucus. (Associated Press photo).
Puerto Rico will not be able to use all the funds for hospitals The great difficulty, according to Picó, is not the maintenance content of the extensive program. - They will be able to balance the current nervicionen The president of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, declared yesterday that it is a great step forward that *1 United States Public Health Service" has approved the island and federal plan with* hospital* trucrlón ri*". He said the start of the program is assured.
f U.S. raised number of atomic bombs Rise in production preceded President Truman's speech WASHINGTON, March 19 (PU) - An authorized UnAjucnt* reported hov the United States is making atomic bombs in quantity*" ri*"tlnaria" to cope with any em*rgencl". This source said that the production of atomic bombs had been increased before President Truman's address to Congress on military preparedness. He pointed out that the 1948 Atomic Energy Act states that the primary responsibility of the Atomic Energy Commission is to "insure the common defense and security. He added that "bombs have never been produced on a 'peacetime' basis. Puerie riecirs* that* continues on a 'peacetime' basis." For that reason, he continued, it is unlikely that the Atomic Energy Commission will have to turn to Congress for additional money to keep the program in step with the preparation efforts on the other fronts. He said that the Commission has received enough money not only to manufacture the required number of bombs but also to improve the production methods and the bomb's "riiiefio" of the bomb.
They have standardized federal internal revenue accounting
In order to improve the accounting of federal internal revenue, the head of the Federal Internal Revenue Service for P.R., almost immediately sent to the newspaper where the information had been published, a note rectifying the data given by the Treasurer and stating that the amount collected had always been the same, a situation that was repeated every month, causing a certain amount of confusion. Neither the Puerto Rico Treasury Department nor the Federal Bureau of Treasury explained the reason for the discrepancies, although experts in this area accepted that "it was a matter of different accounting systems and the use of different dates. This issue, along with the (Continued on page 16)
> ■ I " I. They allege that previous law improperly delegated power to the Legislature They file bill to reorganize the Police Force They would increase the force by 500 members. Proposes amendment to retirement law A bill was filed yesterday amending the law that authorized "1 Supreme Court to put into effect fas rules of criminal prosecution for the purpose of providing that such rules must be approved" by the Legislative Assembly. It is alleged that the prior law improperly delegated powers that the Legislature should have. Five separate bills have been filed with the Secretary of the Senate on these rules. As explained by one of the authors of these bills, the rules enacted by the Supreme Court so amend criminal procedure, It is claimed that if a committee of distinguished professionals took more than a year to review these rules, the Legislature should have at least an equal term to study them properly. It is further argued that the Court should have the right to prepare the draft, but that promulgation of such rules should be a legislative action. Senator Fonfrlas filed a number of bills relating to the Insular Foliola. The most important of these reorganizes the police force, increasing the number of the force by an additional 800 members; another bill creates the position of Assistant Chief of the Insular Police; another establishes the 48-hour week and the 8-hour workday for the Police, provides for the increase of the force and allocates funds for such purposes. Finally, a bill was filed amending Section 8 of Act 70 of 1931, which establishes *1 the retirement of the members of the Insular Police, provides that if a member is retired from the force before the term established by law to be entitled to his pension, 1* all the money that has been withheld for such purposes "- shall be returned to him, and in case of <1* death" the money shall be returned to "his heir". A bill was also filed to facilitate *1 the supply of uniforms to the members" of 1" force. Other important projects" filed" by *1 Senator Fonfrla" are the" following. So that the municipalities and other" insttrumentaliriades <tel government can make aútollquidables works such as markets, aqueduct", stores", ports, etc, without recording e, margin borrower of the same": using as vehicle rie tiansaceiór to the Raneo da Fomento. The only pro. piety that will be responsible for the deurf" will be the work itself performed, in accordance with the rules and guidelines laid down by the federal law" in this sense; another provides for the expro. The other provides for the expropriation of the Compartía Popular d" Transporte qu* op*ra *1 alaterna da lanchas entre San Juan y Catafio j traspasa ese servicio * la Autoridad d* Transporte: another orders the D*partAmento d* lo Interior traspaw to the Authority rie Hng "r*" lo" terreno" riel arrabal known by "Li Coal", altuado en la zona de lot muelle", disposing that eso" "ola" res be sold" for the establishment ri* industrias y que el dinero que por tal concepto se obten, ga será utilizado en la construcción de viviendas para pobres. Samuel R. Quiñones filed several bills yesterday afternoon, among them: to transfer the Port Captaincy to the Transportation Authority; allocating $50,000 for the Preterian Hospital; allocating $50,000 to cover hospital deficits; adding $1,000,000 to the Department of the Interior for roads and another million dollars to the Food Supply Administration for the Food Fund. A project "imitating the one for the Lajaa Canal was presented by "l sanator Francisco Anselmí for the development of a river system for the Coamo Canal. at a cost of $8,000,000, of which the River Source Authority will provide $3,000,000 and the Island Government the rest through allocations to be made every year by the Legislative Assembly, until 1977. The project would consist of an electric power plant that will provide II million kilowatt hours annually and the irrigation system that will serve some 4,000 acres of land. A bill creating the Court of Forced Expropriation was filed by Senator Cruz Ortís Stella. The court will consist of three judges who could be transferred indistinctly to the different districts of Ida to resolve expropriation cases. This senator also filed a bill to facilitate the issuance of bonds by the Servieid Insular d* Acueductos and its operations.
Cordon would provide statehood * for Hawaii
Rendered report in favor after investigation conducted in the Islands Subject now goes to Senate committee. Cordon's opinion By WILLIAM DORVnj.IER From THE WORLD'S Washington Bureau WASHINGTON. (Espednl pera THE WORLD- Hawaii took a big step toward achieving *"- statehood, when *1 Senator Guy Cordon. Republican of Oregon. chairman of the *"-"statehood"! Sühcomlté of Territory" and Insular Affairs of the Senate, recommended to the píen© of the Committee the immediate passage of legislation admitting Hawaii's Entry into the Union, as a state. Cordon's report simulated the most extensive investigation ever made of Hawaii in connection with the Territory's readiness to become a state of the Union. Last year the House approved Hawaii's statehood and the Senate's action in favor of House Bill 49, the statehood bill, will cause Hawaii to become the 49th state. Senate, Cordon said: "Hawaii has met all the requirements for statehood. It is the opinion of the Chairman of the Sühcomlté. that the territory has conducted itself satisfactorily within the limited self-government permitted by the Organic Act. "It can and is prepared to" accept 1as responsibility"" "ocíale". political" and economic" ou" enterte the state government, as well as the" advantages. "As a state rie could more' effectively manage sirs own affairs," and contribute to the welfare of the Nation. As a Nation. The United States, by granting statehood to Hawaii at a hysterical time like the present, could prove to the world that it is sincere in what it does and practices, which is urgently needed when it stands for true democracy for the people. Cordon was assisted in the Hawaii Inquiry by Judge Cari E. Wimberley, of the Oregon Circuit Court, who was retained by the Senate Committee. (Editor's Note-EL MUNDO, in an exclusive news item from its Washington Bureau, published on March 3 that the Cordon Report recommended admission of Hawaii to the Union). The Report, long awaited, provoked considerable speculation in Washington. in view of the importance attached to Cordon's recommendation, the political circles in Washington consider that the President's Report will be a decisive factor in obtaining senatorial action in the course of this congressional session. Interest was also concentrated *in Puerto Rico, whose people have long been anxious that *1 Congress should decide to determine a permanent form of government. With Alaska earmarked for eventual statehood, both the members of the House Committee and the Senate, with the right to vote. The Senate, with jurisdiction over Puerto Rico, has asserted that the most important of the U.S. Insular possessions must be considered after the Hawaii case is finalized through the granting of the charter, Cordon indicated his determination to obtain prompt action by the Senate on Hawaii's statehood. When he strongly expressed his belief that "as a principle of legislative procedure, whenever one house passes a bill in the first session of the congressional term, the other house will take up the bill in the first session of the congressional term. 1" another house has the duty to act on it in the course of the next session, and the other house has the duty to act on it in the course of the next session," he said.