The MtNDO
WEATHER FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY - Partly cloudy. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 77; low, 89. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 89.08 inches of mercury.
40 pages 5/
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXVIII
Enterad a" second cías" matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 1948
Automovllltta", let's show the traditional pal" corteáis.
NUMBER 11229
Vicéns alleges AGS had no loss 1947
Believes it can only operate on a large scale in normal commercial times Points out reversion of customs funds Claims that if these were reintegrated to the agency, a surplus would have been achieved The Administrator of Supplies, Mr. Antonio Vicéns Rio", in a report delivered to Representative Pedro Vega Berrios, states that the law that creates this agency does not determine that the agenda of the agency must be changed, He adds that it can do so only in abnormal situations of supply or distribution of some item, "as it has been doing every time that due to market or special contingencies, a lack of some basic food item has occurred or has been foreseen". Mr. Vicéns adds that at this time "a decrease has begun in the market of origin of basic food articles, and its extent and stability cannot be determined". "There is reason to believe," he comments, "that prices will not return to the levels they have reached, which will surely be reflected immediately in the local market, making the situation of our working classes more bearable. When referring to the idea of achieving a local lowering of prices through the Import and direct distribution by the Administration of Supplies of basic necessities, Mr. Vicéns expresses that "something could be done", but "It implies "a wide organization that responds to these ends in case these were determined". It is his opinion, furthermore, that*a determination of this kind should be decided by the Government or by the Legislature "since the Administration does not have sufficient means to address the problem in this respect". Mr. Vicéns also states that "apparently, the powers given to the Administrator by the law do not determine that the AGS has to enter into the commercial function on a large scale in normal situations, and only in abnormal situations of supply and distribution of some article". In another part of his report, the Administrator of Supply states that "price control is contingent upon home market prices, and holding prices at a low and fixed level can only be done on the basis of subsidies, which, although provided by law, it is for the Legislature to determine how and to what extent the Government can economically do so", He further comments that "since the AGS has not had the necessary means at its disposal, the agency has not been able to consider lowering prices under any aspect". Mr. Vicéns summarizes the legislative appropriations received and their investment as follows: "The total appropriations received by the Legislature and transferred to the General Supply Administration, from their origin on August 12, 1942, to December 31, 1947, amounted to $4,907,231.58 The assets of the Administration on December 31, 1947, represented by inventories, furniture and accounts of the departments and municipalities was approximately 51,700,000, If we deduct this amount from the total allocated, we have a difference of $3,207,231.58 which represents; "The allowances and losses which the Administration may have had in the supplies of necessaries during its existence (August 12, 1942 to December 31, 19471. Customs duties paid by the Administration not recovered in the sale of basic necessities imported from abroad for the same period, and administrative expenses also for the same period". It is also added that the Customs duties from August 12, 1942 to December 31, 1947, totaled $3,518,388.09, which have gone to swell the funds of the Government of Puerto Rico. "So that the Government of Puerto Rico," comments Mr. Vicéns, "has not incurred losses with the General Supply Administration, since if all these duties had been returned to the Administration's fund, it would have a surplus, or in other words, it would have an asset of $55,218,388.09 against appropriations of only $4,907,231.58. Thus, the Administration has not only covered its expenses, but also the intrinsic losses derived from its business operations and has carried out an infinite number of activities and functions determined by Act 228, such as price control, rationing, subsidies, emergency "auminístro", etc., during its existence of approximately six years, without this having cost the Government of Puerto Rico anything.
The Attorney General appears to defend himself.
JIE. Jr WFr4 I 5Bh¿al " 'W 1 j ■ & ■ ■ ■ i * il ' i s ' 4 iw "Más® ■RR** * ' ' . | The engraving shows an aspect of the hearing held the day before yesterday before the District Court of San Juan in relation to the case of alleged contempt against the Attorney General, Mr. Luis Negrón Femándes, and the Mayor of Rio Piedras, Mr. Augusto P. Alvares, from left to right, the following are pictured: Harrv B. Lienza, Rubén Gastambide Arrlllaga and Attorney Negrón Fernández With his back to the camera, Mr. Carmelo Pérez, stenographer of the Court. Judge Bolavnl removed the Prosecutor from the case and gave the Mayor a final deadline of two months to remove the Río Piedras municipal jail from the Santa Rltn. neighborhood. (Photo by EL MUNDO".
The JP accelerates preparation of economic plan This will be submitted to the Legislature early next week Early next week the Fifth Economic Program of the Planning Board will be submitted to the Puerto Rico Legislature for its consideration. The Board's Finance Division has been speeding up the preparation of the document, introducing those changes made to it by Governor Plftero. The Board states in the document to be submitted to the legislators that its purpose is to provide information and guidance to the executive and legislative branches for the action to be taken on the Government's revenues and income. It adds, also, that the recommendations for the first year receive greater attention because they are the subject of legislative action and that "an outstanding merit! of the program is, however, that of anticipating the effect on the financial framework of the Government in future years of the action taken in the present year. It is added, tambiéh. that the proposed allocations jen each year are based on the '-resources available for that? year which are distributed among the different public services in accordance with । . the social need of each. "The program." ¡ Continues the Board, "p'-esenta an organized set d*- ccommendations intimately related to each other. Failure to follow the recommended proposals for increasing revenues would affect the ability to meet the expenditure program. The same would be true if the recommendation for savings in the overall expenditure budget is not followed.
Airport dispute to be discussed in Washington Meeting of Navy, Interior and AAC representatives to be held - Davis expects a decision to emerge before Congress intervenes It is expected that the conflict between the Government of Puerto Rico and the authorities of the Tenth Naval District, regarding the location of the San Juan International Airport, will have a satisfactory solution before the U.S. Congress can intervene in the problem, resolving it.
I intervene in the problem, resolving it in the end, according to statements made yesterday by the Director of the U.S. Department of the Interior's Territories and Possessions Division, Mr. Jamos P.J. Davis, in a conversation with reporters at the Fort Lauderdale. The question of whether the airport should be built at Isla Verde, which is the site chosen by the Island Government, or at Palo Seco, the other site suggested by the Tenth Naval District, will be the subject of discussions in Washington between representatives of the Navy and Interior departments, as well as the Civil Aeronautics Administration. Mr. Da. vis also reported that, if no agreement was reached, the matter would go to a committee of the Navy, the Army, the Department of Commerce and the State legislature. Asked whether in his opinion Congress would have to pass legislation to solve the problem, he said he did not think it would, since he hoped that a decision satisfactory to the parties could be reached sooner. The Chief of the Territorial Division stated that the position of the U.S. Department of the Interior is that no determination was made in this matter without first hearing and considering the views of the Government of Puerto Rico. It added that, in addition, the Department considers that the issue should be resolved taking into account the views of the Government of Puerto Rico. He added that, in addition, the Department considers that the problem should be resolved primarily in the public interest involved in the case, for Puerto Rico and the United States, without, however, losing sight of the interests of the armed forces and the defense of the Hemisphere. Yesterday morning, Mr. Da- | | vis and Governor Piñero held a conference at the latter's office in the Palace. And even , I when nothing has been said officially. it is understood that one of: i (Continued on page 16" ।
The executive vice-president of the Association of Sugar Producers, Mr. Fernando A. Villamil, declared yesterday that the action of the Parliament of Agriculture, in reha- 1 1 1 jarring the national quota for sugar consumption to 7,300,000 tons, "will at least stop the drop in the price, which has been so accentuated in recent months". Mr. Villamil ' ¡ received quite pleased the ae- ¡ ¡ ¡ clon riel Department rie Agrlcul- I i turn lowering the quota narion il of I consumption, information published 1 yesterday exclusively EL MUNDO. He expressed, moreover, that e" very pro- । maturo to make a prediction on j the result rie the action taken. ! since it is necessary to wait for a long time in order to know how the market will react. However, Mr. Villamil did not fail to admit that the reduction of the national quota will be reflected in the price fluctuations of the last few months, at least in order to maintain the market's competitiveness. ' at least to maintain the ha- ¡ ¡ | ja in the market '. "For some time now," -- he commented, | -- "we have been protesting rio the fi-1 Jación rio a national quota rie j । consumption of 7,800,000 tons. We were told by the authorities in ¡ ¡ ¡ Washington that this quota was ¡ [ too high to maintain ¡ i the price of sugar at the level provided by the Sugar Law". It will be noted that the views of the Puerto Rican producers were conveyed to the Sugar Department of the Federal Department of Agriculture at public meetings held several months ago in Washington. An excessively high quota was objected to, in view of the tendency । to lower sugar prices and to produce high national ' 1 consumption rates when there is a surplus of sugar, and thus to produce a strong market" The action for the time being, Mr. Villamil said, will be limited to stabilizing the price only. I
News Digest
Fonllledu dm-hm qu- l" Ir* che da saca will continue to be sold for the time being at Ins same price." * * * Russia proposes to Finland a mutual defense pact. *** * * Congress reaffirms reduction rtnl federal spending budget. Anderson declares that the government will emphasize support for the price" product" "aricola". - ♦ - Commodore Bayli" thinks that a nautical school should be established on the island. More than 200 people" are evicted by order of the Federal Court. - Suspected ex-convict gang" is the author of the robbery" "ometido" last night in San Juan. - Myer believes there is a greater chance of finding oil off the coast of the island. - The Senate considered on first reading several bills and will wait until Monday for the CSF to oppose the repeal of Law 221 on sugar mills. Conflict "over the airport M*rá dl "cutldo soon in Wáahlnrton. - Villamil believes that Agriculture's action on the national consumption quota will halt the decline of the sugar industry.
The Planning Board will continue to study the project for the construction of the airport in Isla Verde. ♦ * * At the beginning* of next week, the Fifth Economic Program will be submitted to the Legislature. * ' * $1,000,000 recommended for repair and maintenance of public buildings, ♦ - Taft's" chances are in aiia to win the presidential nomination. Shipping companies* operating on the island declare that they are not empowered" to lower freight rates on sugar. Czech* Communlata* reject note of protest from U.S., Britain and France. - Vicéns states that the AGS did not make a loss* in 1947. - The United States decides to close the door to Russia and its "satellite" at the conference on Germany. * Communist deputy will admonish the French government with the same fate that has befallen the Czechoslovakian regime. . . . . They hold hearing in Aguadiha i>' ¡ on the" improvement* to the port of that city.
Russia seeks a pact with the Finns.
Stalin himself makes the offer in a letter to President Paasikivi Parties in the country oppose alliance However, delegation will go to the Russian capital to negotiate By MATTI HAKKARAINEN HELSINKI. Finland, February 27. (PUL- Premier Joseph Stahn personally offered President Juho K. Paasikivl a Russian-Russian treaty. Paasikivl a Russian-Finnish treaty of mutual defense and friendship, it was announced this non ; che. Stalin's letter, s, irioning that Finland initiate negotiations with Russia, was received here ol Monday. The Cabinet discussed the matter on Tuesday, but the Russian proposal was kept secret until this afternoon, when the Speaker of Parliament went to the Presidential Palace to hear Paasikivl explain the matter. It was hinted in the political circles that all parties, with the exception of the Communists, are opposed to Finland's entering into military alliances with any country whatsoever. It was predicted, however, that the Cabinet would approve the idea of entering into negotiations with Russia, as requested by Russia, and that a delegation would be sent to Moscow next Thursday. i It is expected that the Russian proposal i : will be discussed in Parliament next Tuesday. i Some officials said that) Stalin in his letter points out the fact ' rio that Finland is the only one of Russia's ¡ eight neighbors with which the Soviet Union has not concluded ¡ a mutual aid treaty. Informants" said that Slalin's letter was couched in friendly terms and did not specify any demands. It was interpreted in political circles as leaving Finland to choose an opportunity to negotiate and suggest amendments. Russia has since completed a series of mutual defense treaties with other Eastern countries, which, as Moscow puts it, offers it a wall of friendly countries from the Baltic to the Black Sea. If a pact is concluded with Finland, it would extend that line to the Arctic Ocean. In reliable centers it was said that ¡ in the form in which it has been suggested, ¡ the Russian-Finnish treaty would involve mutual defense only against future aggression by Germany, not by any of the Western Allied countries. (In the other pacts which Russia has concluded, emphasis is also laid on possible aggression by Germany. However, these ¡ treaties cover also aggression by any country allied to Germany in any form) ¡ Paasikivl conferred with the Gaj bínete for half an hour this morning at the Presidential Palace. This afternoon the presidents of all the political party groups were invited to participate in the meeting. It is understood that at both meetings Paasikivi outlined the details of the proposed Russian fruit. Before going to the meeting with ¡ Paasikivl the leaders of the various parties held separate conferences with their groups in Parliament, which had already been informed in advance of the situation. It is understood that Paasikivl ¡delineated the proposed pact to the members of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Parliament who visited him, as well as to the members of the Cabinet individually. Paasikivl is ill i ' enn catarrh so his meetings- ¡ j ne* have taken place in his palace. Rumors rie that a treaty I with Russia would be negotiated have ¡ infensiflBed during Jos last । rilas, and today the official admission । having been received ruI 'a proposition comes to confirm them.
CSP will oppose the repeal of Law 221 on power plants.
In legislative circles it was in- ■ formed yesterday that the Public Service Commission will oppose the legislation proposed by the Lands Authority to repeal Law 221 of May 12, 1942. ! which declares the power plants to be public utilities and confers on the Commission powers to regulate their operation. The legislation proposed by the Land Authority which, although it has been drafted for several weeks, has not yet been filed. This legislation proposes the creation of a Sugar Board which would have powers to regulate relations between the sugar mills and the settlers. Opposition to this moflirla- as reported yesterday- will be sustained by the allegation that since the Land Authority is the principal enterprise engaged in the exploitation of the sugar industry in Puerto Rico, it would be illegal for it to have powers to dictate policy and regulations regarding relations between settlers and sugar mills, and that it would be the first of a series of cold-!
i clones expected to arise between the Public Service Commission and the Land Authority appeared a few days ago when, without holding public hearings or conferences between the interested parties, the Land Authority published a table containing the settlement rates to be applied to the settlers of the Plazuela and Cambalache plants, both of which are properties of the Land Authority. Probably during the course of the next week, the legislation which propels the Land Authority will be introduced and it is also likely that a conference will be held between the President of the Senate and the officials of the Authority and of the Public Service Commission. In the House of Representatives, as has already been reported, there has been opposition to the measure sponsored by the Land Authority to repeal Law 221. This opposition is headed by Representative Rivera Cnlon, who is supported in his attitude by other representatives.
The United States will close the door to the Soviets in the session on Germany.
There is a greater possibility of finding oil on the south coast of the island.
This is the opinion of W. H. Mryrrs, supervisor of works carried out by United Geophysical Inc.- Herbert Hoover, son, head of the company, visited the area.
By Luis Hernández Aquino EL MUNDO Staff Writer The possibilities of finding oil on the south coast of Puerto Rico, with preference to the northwest coast, areas where the Puerto Rico Development Company has been conducting studies, were expressed by W. H. Myers, supervisor of the exploratory work being carried out by United Geophysical Inc. in search of oil. Mr. Herbert Hoover, son of the former president of the United States, head of the company, was last week at the work being done in Juana Diaz and Aguirre, and came away very impressed with the possibilities offered by those localities, according to the studies, for the discovery of oil. The United Geophysi. cal Ins. has been conducting exploratory studies since the end of last December, on the south coast of the Island, in an area that covers the towns of Juana Diaz, Salinas, Santa Isabel and Aguirre. The studies will soon be carried out at various points along the Poncc river. As Mr. Mjers explained to this editor in the afternoon, it has already been determined that the geological structures studied on the southern coast offer better possibilities than those on the northern part of the island, having some of these structures that are being studied.
The three structures, as explained by Mr. M. M. M., are very important, and therefore in his final report to the Development Company, he will recommend that the wells be sunk in these locations. The three structures, as explained by Mr. Myers, are located as follows: One three-quarters of a mile west of Salinas; another two miles west of Santa Isabel and the other west of Aguirre. United Geophysical is mapping these areas. As we reported earlier, exploratory work to determine if there is oil in Puerto Rico began to be carried out in March 1947 by the aforementioned company, contracted by the Puerto Rico Development Company. The work began in Cataño, and extended along the north coast as far as Aguadillo. Four areas were located with possibilities of having oil in them, according to the characteristics of the sedimentary tocas of these, that locate in the nearer Manati river. Vega Alta. Toa Baja and Arecibo. It is the case that the new study areas in the south present more opportunities than those in the north, although Mr. Myers said that the latter do not (Continued on page 16).
The fresh cow's milk will continue to be sold, for the time being, at the same prices at which it has been sold to the consumer, as announced by the President of the Livestock Sector, Mr. Fonalledaa. The President of the Livestock Sector and the Farmers' Association, Mr.
The President of the Livestock Sector of the Farmers Association, Mr. Jeró-* nimo Fonallerias, made the announcement after an exchange of views held yesterday morning with important producers in the metropolitan area and on the island. The Board of Directors of the Sector rio Ganaderos ¡ will meet next Monday. [In San Juan, to consider the function, once decreed by the General Administration rie Supplies the decontrol rie the prices rie the prices rie the fresh milk ric cow. It will be decided at this meeting whether or not to convene a general meeting to decide what will be the definitive attitude to increase and in what proportion the prices of fresh cow's milk should be raised. As of yesterday, said Mr. Fona- ¡ lledas. he had received no official notification from the Supply Administration regarding the price of feed "We are awaiting developments," he added, "confident that the country's dairy industry will now develop better. After his exchange of views with leaders of the Puerto Rican livestock industry, Mr. Jerónimo Fonallerian made the following statements: "The Livestock Sector of the Farmers' Association of Puerto Rico, which I am honored to preside, has received with pleasure the order of the General Administration of the Government of Puerto Rico releasing the dairy industry. Although belatedly and without responding to the real situation of this industry, the General Administration of Supplies washes its hands of the matter like Pondo Pilate. It had before it for more than six months a request from this Sector of Cattlemen for an increase in the maximum price of loche. We attended public hearings: offered (Continued on page 18").
(By Rafael A. Gunfín López) In the auditorium of the Mayor's Office, a public hearing was held on the n] cslarto riel port, being presided over by the engineer William C. Cros- ¡ ley to whom the Department of the Interior entrusted the mission of carrying out an economic study related to said port. Senator Reinaldo Méndez accompanied Mr. Crosley. ! The hearing was attended by several representatives of Commerce, Industry, Industry, Agriculture and workers of the aguariillánn district. Also present were Mayor Fernando Milan, Jr.; engineer Arturo Riollann, director of the Isabela Experimental Station; Arturo Hernandez, administrator of the Coloso Power Station in Aguadilla, and Juan Elias Capella, manager of Banco Popular. When testifying at the hearing, Mr. Juan Elias Capella, manager of Banco Popular. Mr. Juan Elias Capella stated that the investment to be made in the port of Aguadilla is justified when considering its monthly revenues, estimated at $.300,000, The greater part of this sum - Mr. Capella indicated - is credited to the importation of food products. To those who want to have a gln idea (Continued on page 16)
Shipowners declare that they are not entitled to lower freight rates.
The shipping companies operating on the island are not empowered to decree a reduction in the current freight rates they charge for the transportation of sugar, according to spokesmen for the shipping interests in San Juan. In relation to the petition that the sugar producers have submitted to the shipping companies, so that the representatives of the shipping companies on the island transmit this request for a reduction in the freight rates to their offices in New York City, it was informed yesterday that the power to decree this reduction is held solely by the Gulf-Atlantic Conference, which is the entity that supervises and regulates the freight rates between the mainland and the island.
It was also reported that the shipping companies have endorsed the petition to the Gulf and Atlantic Conference so that the Conference may decide on the matter at the next joint meeting of shipping and sugar interests to be held in New York City in the near future. The reasoning of the island sugar producers is that these rates have been increasing in recent years and their reduction is now considered a very necessary step for the protection of the industry, especially at a time when the sugar market is very uncertain and prices continue to fluctuate almost daily.
The agreement includes the Russian satellites. - The United States Government will repudiate all protests. Poland, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia were also asking for participation. Tor R H. RHACKFORD ■ WASHINGTON, February 27. (PID - It was announced today that the United States Government will close the door to all efforts by the Soviet Union and its satellites to gain a voice at the United States Conference. The United States, France and Germany, which is being held in London. The conference of the three great powers began last Monday. I.a same os a consequence of the collapse of the Council of the Four Glandes Glandes Ministers riel Foreign ce" icbrario in December paciary in London, and the first formal step taken by the Western powers to settle the West German case without Russian Intervention. A spokesman for the State Dept. A spokesman for the State Department said that the United States Government would reject any protests which might arise on the occasion of the Conference, and would cancel the efforts of any Eastern European countries to be consulted. The occasion for these demonstrations was the receipt of a second Soviet protest against consultation with Poland. The Americans have already rejected a formal Soviet protest, insinuating that no decision on any part of Germany would be legal if it were not made without the participation of the Soviet Union, and that there would be no chance of any concession in American policy. The Western powers decided in London last December to discount the participation of Russia in their efforts to seek a solution to the problems posed by the western part of Germany. The attitude then, and now, was that every effort had been made to seek a solution to the moratorium problem with the participation of all four powers. On February 18, the foreign ministers of Czechoslovakia. Poland and Yugoslavia issued a declaration in Prague protesting against the Western conference and accusing the West of trying to raise the military potential of West Germany. They insisted on a new conference of the four powers, and demanded that their governments be consulted as well. Almost simultaneously, the Soviet Union protested strongly against the London Tripartite Conference, calling it illegal and warning that it would not abide by any of the decisions taken there. On Monday, the representatives of Poland. Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia presented the Prague declaration to the State Department and were told orally that it was based on "false premises." This morning. e| Soviet Ambassador, Alexander Panyushkin, in" tinged ¡the second Soviet note, demanding that the request rie Poland Czechoslovakia and Yu"~ goeslavíA be acceded to, in r] feeling it rie that ¡es be consulted in London. "It must be reenqoeered," - the note said, - "that Poland. Yugoslavia and ("hecneslovaqula belong to a group ri* éslarlos partlcularmamentmente interested in the solution of the German problem, *1 which concerns n the Interests rie peace and security rie of the peoples." Earlier in the week, the London Tripartite Conference granted audience to the" small western neighbors" of Germany; Belgium; Holland and Luxembourg. The only formal American reply to this series of protests and petitions has been that given to the first Soviet note, rejecting the Soviet allegations. Similar notes will soon be sent to Poland, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia, and to Russia in reply to its second note. The Secretary of State, Geor "a C. Marshall, has made the position of this country quite clear: that there is no basis for further conferences with Russia or the Eastern countries about Germany at the present time. The Western powers will therefore proceed to negotiate agreement" on their zones in Germany. This was stated categorically during the hearings "on the Marshall Plan for European recovery when the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee". Arthur H. Vandenberg, R-Michigan, asked Mar" shnll; "To state the matter clearly, is it correct to say that, (Continued on p. 16)