THE WNDO
i WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: Partly cloudy to cloudy with scattered showers. -oa. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 84; low, 77. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.98 inches of mercury.
44 Pages 5/
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P, R,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JUNE 5, 1948
Awtomovillataa, danoatranna la corteáis mdleional del pala
NUMBER 13326
amendments to the 4th Organic Act
Action on Island Has Accelerated Hope Congress Has Passed Bills Before Recess June 9 By WILLIAM DORVFLLLTFR WA8HINGTONLjuWh)-4. (Eapocia! for EL MUNDOThe House Committee on Public Lands today unanimously approved two bills to the Puerto Rico Charter, and sent a report to the House recommending their passage. The bills, which have already been approved by the Senate, are the Insular prlmerb to fix the >*<ioa officials amend the Nationality Act of 1940, so that a group of Puerto Ricans do not lose their American citizenship. . Yesterday, the House Insular Affairs Subcommittee approved both bills. The House Committee on Public Lands' action will lead to approval of the bills by the House before recess, set for June 10. The approval of these two measures was interpreted by island circles as an example of the speed with which the committees* of the two chambers having jurisdiction over Puerto Rico have acted on the small bills introduced this year. I-oa had approved the bills that were introduced in the Senate just over three weeks ago, had been approved by the Senate Insular Affairs Committee, the Senate Interior and Insular Affairs Committee, the House Subcommittee, and now the House Public Lands Committee. If the House acts on these bills within the next week, a Charter amendment record will have been set. The Butler bill authorizes the Legislature to ■''fix the salaries of insular officers, except Supreme Court justices. - The same bill sets a salary of 510,000 per year for the Coordinator of Federal Agencies, an increase of $2,500 over the previously set salary. The legislature will have the authority to fix the amount of the salary, which may not be the same as that received by the executives n> the departments. Also the ~T>®®¡4jalura shall be authorized to increase salaries of aus members, provided that dlchnairment is not effective for the term-for arcual they have been elected to approve the increase. If the bill is approved by the House, the Legislature will have to meet in special session in order to approve an applicable to the members who will be after the November elections, The nationality bill of Senator Cordon: left out of the purview of the Nationality Act of 1940 Puerto Ricans who were born before April 11, 1899. According to the provisions of the Nationality Act of 1949, these persons lost their U.S. citizenship when they were absent from U.S. territory for more than five years. The Cordon ion bill in a retroactive clause to October 13, 1M7¿ date that marked the expiration of the first five-year term of the Nationality Act of 1940, thus restoring the citizenship of all those who had lost it. Fred Crawford, R-Michigan, chairman of the Subcommittee, today explained the details of both bills to the full committee. In both cases the approval was unanimous. Rep. Arthur Miller, R-Nebraska, questioned the Resident Commissioner, telling him that "somewhere in Puerto Rico there seems to be a leak in connection with the Immigration laws." Femó" replied that the federal immigration authorities are the ones who control the entry of persons to the Island and that the Government of Puerto Rico has no jurisdiction whatsoever over these matters. On the other hand, the House Committee on Ways and Means approved and sent to the Senate floor the bill that authorizes the Commodity Credit Corporation to make readjustment payments to Hawaii and Puerto Rico. On April 20, the House approved this authorization for payments of $150,000 to the Boca Chica, Caribe and Plazuela plants to compensate them for the higher prices paid to Cuban producers for their sugar during 191W. With passage of these bills almost assured, Resident Commissioner Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern told Prepsa Unida that "I do not recall a time since 1917 when so much legislation directly or indirectly related to Puerto Rico has been passed during a single eongreiloptglna 20) injury.
Picó advocates no tax increases
The President of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, stated yesterday that "clearly, all measures adopted or to be adopted by the Government to improve tax revenues should be given a chance before resorting to tax increases". He added that the Board "is not considering any recommendation for tax increases," and that the most important recommendations made by the Board to improve, without resorting to tax increases, the Government's fiscal resources have been crystallized in legislation. Regarding such recommendations of the Board, in order to achieve a relief to the current fiscal situation, Dr. Picó stated the following: "Since last year, legislation was passed । to achieve a scientific reassessment of the property, a task that is in the hands of the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, and on which work is being done. I consider this recommendation of the Board one of the most important to improve the existing conditions. "Legislation has also been passed to prosecute the clandestine lottery game, known as "boll-pul", the organization of which is in the process of being implemented. The Board's recommendations, which have crystallized into laws passed or to be accomplished through administrative channels, include the scientific reassessment of property, the prosecution of clandestine lotteries, the intensification of the prosecution of Jos. clandestine rum-runners, the limitation of the emergency fund to $10,000,000,000 so that its surplus will go into the general fund of the Treasury, and the cancellation of appropriation items and balances which are no longer in use. In connection with the prospects for various items of the Government Revenue, Dr. Ph'ó stated, among other things: "The reorganization of the property tax, authorized by law passed last year, is being organized by the Treasury Department. The reorganization of the property tax, which implies a uniform and scientific reassessment, has in itself the goodness that it will eliminate the differences which now exist and which are completely unjustified. Since 1917, property valuation has not been revised in Puerto Rico, and therefore, there are still great inequalities that must be corrected. "For example, in the urban area, the appraisal of the property represents a lower value than its true price, which is why we believe that greater income can be obtained, This work, which is being carried out by the Island Treasurer, is estimated to take about two years. Lottery, source of Itígreaoa: "Another important source of income will be the Island Lottery, which has been very effectively channeled by Treasurer Ruacaglla. (Continued on p. 20) 1 '-n
Compendium of News
Will make change in way of paying doctor" partially serving Health. ,* * * - Susonl lawsuit to act outside ! political parties. ♦ ♦ " Uiihersldad CateMca will accept applications for Admission from ; i". i - ♦ - i Chinese Government officials accuse U.S. of abandoning country to communism. The U.S. government officials accuse the U.S. of abandoning the country to communism. i - ♦ " i Picó states that measures taken to improve revenue should be given a chance rather than resorting to new jobs. i ♦ -. - ' 1A lela would lose $800,000 pnr 1 aflo ai they altered the program da ' roads. i - - - - Rúala grant a loan of W,000,000 to Finland. I lawls complied with Coria's order da resume talks with mine operators. - - - । De Mostos believes yesm in freight does not give hese to raise wages. > - - ♦ - Today will end Ins final exams at the University. - - - í Try to consolidate civil rights and conscription. . - ... - - New York population set at 8,008,000. - - - Accelerate irrigation nhra in r .southwest area. ♦ - - í Four Army units will have
will hold aerle of competitions June 7 and 8 at Camp O'Reilly. -_ * - House Committee |m*ed Charter amendments* - * - Alleged misuse of direct aid by Puerto Ricans in New York studied. Britain orders amnesty for German officers. - Suggested to England to initiate peace negotiations in Greece. - Roman plane tried to collide with an American plane over Berlin. - Denied, there is understanding between candidates Vandenberg and Dewey. * * - Athenaeum summons women writers for a literary contest. - - - All Indica have shelved the Mundt project against communism. f' House approved foreign aid in raducclon M88,000,000, CAJMFENDIO - - - - - Catholics organize crusade for protection of holy places in Palestine. Federal Government opposes granting citizenship to Dr. Fidel Alonso. - Plumber signs bill amending the Banking Law. 'I - - - - Truman asked for endorsement of Alocteres "last year. during design in Gary, Indiana.
Southwest irrigation work accelerated.
Commission will move to Eslá families in the process of accelerating the project for the construction of irrigation works in the southwest of Puerto Rico. In order to carry out studies on the land to determine which public services and families will be affected by the construction works of the hydroelectric project mentioned above, officials of the Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority and the Planning Board will travel to the area next Thursday. The Water Resources Authority submitted the project for the development of the Lajas Valley, also known as the Southwest Puerto Rico project, to the Planning Board for approval. Said Board has been studying the plans and proposals submitted, which involve an investment of approximately $23,000,000 over several years. However, there are problems that must be faced before authorizing the start of said works. These problems are the relocation of schools, public health units, government services and businesses, and families. These will have to be relocated once construction of the system begins. (Continued on page 20) Suso does not plan to act outside of parties He will only work for a prompt definition of the island's political status Dr. Francisco M. Susonl. who a few days ago resigned as president of the Island Chamber of Deputies, clarified in authorized statements yesterday that he will not join any party, but will work - outside of party lines - for "the most prompt and effective definition of Puerto Rico's political status". Says Dr. Susonl. Susonl: "Among the information in today's El Tmparclal, there is the verse that all the political parties of the opposition are trying to use my name to be considered for a high position in the Government. I want to emphatically state for the record that such a version is unfounded, "I disassociated myself from the Popular Democratic Party for no other purpose than to work unceasingly for the most prompt and effective definition of the political status of our people, as I clearly expressed in my open letter to the President of the Popular Democratic Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz. Marín. "My position has not changed. I did not leave the Popular Democratic Party to join any other party. Nor did I leave the Popular Democratic Party to accept any position of the Government. "As has already been reported by the Press, I intend to leave Puerto Rico for the time necessary to obtain my physical recovery by means of a rest. Upon my return I intend to organize my political activities, in the sense that I have already expressed, free of any partisan commitment."
Gandhi assassination trial to begin on 14th.
F A 1 W, " ... X"...
These men, accused of assassinating Mohandas K. Gandhi, the Hindu leader, will be tried on the 14th. Gandhi, the Hindu leader, hear testimony presented against them in a New Delhi courtroom during the indictment filed in late May. The trial is scheduled to begin on June 14. From left to right, they appear: Nathuran Vinayak Godse, leader of the accused group; Narayan Dattraya Apte and VUhnu Kamkrlshna Karkare. In the center, in the second row, is Madan IaI, also accused of throwing a homba outside Birla House while Gandhi was holding a meeting, ten days before he was assassinated on January 10 (Associated Press photo).
Pinero signs I amendment to the Bank Act Obliges <|whoever (kwen to found Bank, to ask permission of the Treasurer Making it Act 6, do June 3, 194R, Governor Plñero yesterday signed House Bill number 22, amending the Bank Act#. The new law obligates those who intend to: establish a bank to request in writing a permit from the Treasurer of Puerto Rico. The application must state and demonstrate the need for a banking service in the locality where the bank is intended to be established. The Treasurer must investigate the banking ability and experience of the petitioners; the necessity for the establishment of the new bank; the character and general qualifications and banking and commercial experience of the prospective officers who are to manage the bank; whether such bank is to be of public benefit; and the funds available for the operation of such bank. The Treasurer may or may not issue the permit applied for, according to the result of the ¡ . investigation in his judgment. The Treasurer's decision will be final. Up to the present time, five or more persons of legal The Treasurer could inspect the bank's operations, and the Treasurer's decision would be final. The new law authorized the Treasurer to increase, at his discretion, the legal reserve established by law. The order to increase the minimum legal reserve will not take effect until 30 days after its issuance. The Treasurer is hereby authorized to impose, administratively, on each bank a fine of not less than five (5) dollars nor more than one hundred (100) dollars for each day that such bank fails to meet the minimum legal reserve requirement. No bank hereafter organized shall invest during the first three years" of its operation, in loans and discounts, a sum exceeding its available capital plus fifty percent of the depositors' money, except for deposits of public funds secured by collateral. Under the new law, no officer or agent of a baney may borrow or discount as debtor, drawer, acceptor, endorser, drawer or guarantor. No director, stockholder, or employee of a bank, nor any firm, partnership, or corporation of which such director, stockholder, or employee is a director, stockholder, or employee, or any firm, partnership, or corporation of which such director, stockholder, or employee is a director, stockholder, or employee, shall accept applications for admission from it.
Catholic University will accept applications for admission as of 15 Will offer "a" first" course" for ladies only, consisting of the basic and Normal. - Arrangements are being made for lodging in Ponce.
WE BELIEVE IT IS PART OF CULEBRA Having been informed locally that it is likely that the Navy wishes to acquire part of the island of Culebra and not the entire island, we asked the United Press to do additional research on this matter. The United Press informs us that the information on this matter is somewhat confusing, because although it appears that the intention is to purchase only a portion of the island, it appears that Ja ley is written in such a way as to give the impression that it is the entire island. The United Press instructed us to try to confirm the information locally. - 1 The following was reported at Tenth Naval District Headquarters: "The United Press dispatch is wrong, according to Captain Godwin, Public Works Officer" for the Tenth Naval District. Apparently it should read "a project to authorize the Mari, na to purchase land on Culebra Island for d* $110,000." Captain Godwin adds that this sum "is in payment for land the Navy is buying on Culebra, which is not more than a thousand acres, which is a small portion of the Island." Mayor entertains Berta Singerman By Rolando E. Sote Ramo" Numerous people gathered yesterday afternoon at the Casa Municipal Dr San Juan, to entertain the applauded reciter Berta Singerman, who was accompanied by her husband, Mr. Rubén Stolck. Mrs. Felisa Hincón, de Gautier, Administrator of In Capital, led Slngerman and the audience to the chapter house, where the former presented the latter with the symbolic key to the city, The judge, EmHIo Mr. Belava|pronuncló the" words of welcome, praising the actress and saying, among other things, that her arrival for the first time to the Island, had awakened the major art of declamation, and that now, in her second visit, allowed the administrators of the Capital to show her the great appreciation of the people towards her. blo towards her. Berta Slngerman then spoke, expressing her deep gratitude for the unexpected entertainment. She said she called herself the "Indefatigable Pilgrim" because of her great pa(Continued on p. 20)
The Catholic University of Santa Maria will begin to receive applications for admission on June 15 for its first courses for young women, according to statements authorized yesterday by the Bishop of Ponce, Monsignor Jaime I E. MacManus. Regarding the upcoming inauguration of said University, Bishop MacMgnu authorized the" "l- ! With immense joy, to become a reality, thank God, I the golden dream of tollos, and with no less "<ntensa concern at the magnitude of the enterprise, we announce our decision to start the Catholic University of Sapta Maria with the College of Pedagqglft and Science" Social, óon the" section" of Bachelor of Education and Normal, in our diocesan capital, the city of Ponce. "After having published our proposal, the events and enthusiasm of all are of such a nature, that they have obliged us to begin as soon as possible, but we are in the duty to walk with a firm step, and to lay a solid foundation; and for this reason the number of students will be quite reduced, and for now only to young ladies. Our desire is to establish also the College of Science and Pre-Medicine, and the College of Business Administration" for men and women, which will depend largely on the cooperation of all our diocesans and especially of the pony-boys, who so much desire and deserve a university institution. "For the time being we will organize the curso in accordance with the requirements of the University of Puerto Rico, whose administration has offered its determined cooperation, which we will use, and we reciprocate our gratitude in advance. At the University of Puerto Rico, the so-called basic course is compulsory for all students who wish to obtain a baccalaureate degree, except for those who wish to study pre-medical or pre-legal studies. We offer the basic course, in the next September and in addition to the Normal course. "The alumnax who wish to enter either of the two courses I our University, will be directed ¡ from June 15 onwards " . Sister Placida, post office box" ¡ 4(13, Ponce, acting registrar, to ask for application blanks". "Another problem that interests us is that of housing for the young ladies who come to study in Ponce, and our plans for land and buildings include that of solving the problem in the best possible and practical way, but in the meantime we hope that some Catholic families will be willing to admit young ladies in their residences, but we hope that they will be willing to do so. but as conduct and welfare is one of the ideals of the University, we expect good Catholic families who are interested or wish to cooperate, to communicate with Sister Placida so that in case the parents or guardians of the students ask, we can make the appropriate recommendations.
Russian plane tried to collide with an American plane in Berlin.
BERLIN, June 4. - (PU) - F.he Soviet pilot of a transport plane today premeditatedly tried to crash his craft into an American fighter plane while flying off course over the North American zone of Germany, April 28, according to In. formed tonight by American authorities, The American Army rejected a Soviet allegation that the American plane had tried to intercept the Soviet transport over the Soviet zone. The American pilot stated that he narrowly avoided a mid-air collision when the Russian pilot, obviously with premeditation, tried to perform violent maneuvers in an apparent attempt to collide with the American plane, American officials said. U.S. officials publicized the official account of the incident and a series of letters exchanged between the Russians and Americans. They added that they already considered the case closed. The statement explained that the "ru. so" spoke of permission for one of their "transport planes to make a flight on April 23 from Berlin directly to Bar-
na, Switzerland. The plane, however, did not take off until April 2, and shortly before departure, the American authorities were told that the plane's destination had been changed to Zurich, Switzerland, "Rather than create any delay and inconvenience in the plane's departure, the United States immediately granted approval for the flight," the U.S. Army said. On its return flight, on April 2R, American groups from a radar station in the North American zone observed the Russian plane "excessively off course to the south, and flying by compass in a direction that did not suit the flight of any aircraft allowed to fly over that area for a long period of time", - the statement added. A U.S. Thunderbolt aircraft, on routine patrol in the area, was ordered to determine the identity of the suspect aircraft. When intercepted 10 miles southwest of Bayreuth, the aircraft was headed for Broma, not Berlin, the statement said. It was about 30 miles off the route from Berlin to Zurich, it added.
Truman asked voters for their endorsement this year
Puerto Rican aid misuse studied NEW YORK, June 4 (PU)Willlam O'Dwyer, Mayor of New York, is studying a report submitted by the Committee on Relief, John M. Murtagh, in which he finds that Puerto Rican relief recipients have a widespread practice of flying to the island. The report, delivered last night, presents several cases of misuse of direct aid. The Invest 1I garlon revealed that, in a period of one week, from December 17 to December 24, 1947, twenty-three 1 Individuals who were receiving direct aid traveled by plane from New York to Puerto Rico. Murtagh also claims several visits" to a Manhattan post office" during the day" IB. December 17 and 18, 1947, showed that the direct aid "recipients" purchased 128 money orders, amounting to $1,406. It was also found that 118 of these money orders were sent to friends and relatives residing outside the continental United States. The Commissioner states that the investigation shows that the misuse and maldistribution of public assistance is due to a lack of proper and efficient oversight. He also reported that the Public Works Workers Union, affiliated with the Congress of Industrial Organizations, exerts undue influence on the policy of the Direct Aid Administration. The Commissioner suggested that "the practice of allowing the supervisors to be represented by the Union be discontinued. The recommendation is not worded in the sense of prohibiting the per(Continued on page 20) University Examinations end today Rio Piedras colleges graduate 663 students* enrolled. 663 of students* enrolled* Today will end the final exams at the University of Puerto Rico. They were prolonged for two weeks, thus altering *1 the Summer School program. ! míe is "uponla hsbria de inlclsrse e] din first of June, with the enrollment of the summer session. Summer School registration will run from the seventh day of the current school year, or next June, until the eleventh. The classes will begin on the fourteenth, and are expected to end on July 30. The number of students who did not attend the final exams is not yet known, because it has not been determined by the university administration, until the number of people who will attend to take the last exam, which will be held this afternoon, from half past one to half past three. The University Board will be *1 body that will finally decide on the attitude to be followed with regard to those students who did not take their final examinations because of the university strike. Several students sent their excuses in time to the respective deans, but many of those who participated in the strike did not present any excu4a. Six hundred and seventy-three "studianter will graduate from our first teaching center this month, following the careers of" pharmacists, teachers, accountants, stenographers; and a large group will go on at the end of the academic year, to study" medicine in universities abroad. More than 4,000 teachers of public instruction and about a thousand students are continuing their studies in the summer school courses (Continued on page 20).
All indications are that the Mundt v. Communism bill has been shelved.
By LOUIS CASSELS WASHINGTON, June 4. (PU)- Apparently the Mundt and Nixon <7* communism control bill was shelved by this congressional session, when the Judiciary Committee of Congress decided to consult on the constitutionality of the measure. The Committee wishes to hear the views of the Attorney General of the United States, Tom C. Clark, and three prominent Constitutionalists, Seth Richardson, Charles EvamHughes, Jr. and John W. Davl," The Committee met today and decided to suspend hearings on the House-passed measure until it has heard 1" expert" opinion. The adjournment of the hearings 1" gave new life to the prophecy" that the Senate would not act on the measure before" its recess.
j measure before" its recess on June 19. The Senate leadership has not included the Mundt-Nixon bill in the list of "unprecedented" bills, and even if it is discharged from the Committee, it is impossible that it could pass, given the last minute confusion. The bill also faces the threat of a presidential veto. President Truman said at a recent press conference that he does not agree with outlawing a political party, and in fact, the Mundt-Nixon bill is aimed at outlawing the Communist Party. As passed by the House, the measure requires the Communist Party and its fronts to register annually with the Juitlela De ¡ parliament. Also (Continued on p. 20)
d Was during a discussion in Gary In Chicago attacked the Congre*o and communism. Incident* on the trip By Merriman Smith CHICAGO June 4.-(PU) -President Truman drowned tonight by legislation free of "restrictive enmlendas," permitting entry into this pala of substantial numbers of displaced person". Beginning his Western speaking tour, the President also attacked Communism, outlined a comprehensive program of social reform and advocated the rights of the common man in the United States and abroad. The President opposed the "displaced persons" legislation now before Congress, which sets limits and quotas according to rus "pal-, se* and occupations," He declared that "these" amendments are restrictive. They unfairly discriminate against groups" who are already represented in this pal" and have helped us to enlarge it". Rather than a defense of new propositions, Truman's speech, at the celebration of] the Swedish-born cente. in Chicago Stadium, was a reiteration of the program he has insisted upon before the Republican Congress, without substantial success/' In the first of five capital speeches during "his nine thousand mile trip, Mr. Truman specifically re "rized the following: 1. He combated Communism in many different respects, but opposed the theory of trying to outlaw the Communist Party in this country by legal means. 2. He repeated his demand that the Congress permit the substantial immigration of displaced persons from Europe to the outside world. He stated that the United States must do its part in the obligation to give entry to people at home in the world. Mr. Trumtfh stated; "I hope that Congress will soon pass legislation sohre !m displaced persons*, and pass it without quallflcaclone* deviating from our established nortoamerieano.s principles."""I would* remind lo* members of| Congress, that it is not e|]o" who await, nor I e| who - guard, but young people and young children, whose hope for a life of freedom and Equality "-shadows more with each passing day."" In an outspoken appeal for public support of his program, which has been going badly in Congress, Mr. Truman argued that "the rights of the common man are as important as the rights of the prominent man. And we must strive to make sure that the United States continues to exist 'on those same principles.'* The occasion of the President's speech was the commemoration of the Hegada< of the first Swedish immigrants to the Midwest, one hundred years ago. Prince Rert11, son of the Crown Prince of Rueda. shared the* honors of the rentenarlo crin the President this evening. After repeating his defense of the influx of "ustanelly maximum numbers of European displaced persons," the President turned to the subject of Communism, which he said "is of direct interest" to the American people. He scorned, however, attempts to stop communist activity by federal legislation. He said that "such.* propositions are misguided. The spread of a ¡dea. cannot be stopped by passing a law against it. Communism cannot be eradicated by making it an illegal movement. Communism can be evl. eradicated by better and greater demarcracy.'' His reference to ln* Legislative attempts to stop o] communism was obviously directed at the Mundt-NIxon bill, which provides for the Registration of Communists. In drowning for "better and greater (■antity of democracy," as e1 antidote to e| communism abroad, as well as in this pal*, the President said that the threat here did not reside in a handful of foreign agents.' "The amen." - ■ he declared. - "It resides prlmordially in that* area" of American life where the promise of 'democracy remains without I then linked his basic program of social reform, to the battle against Communism. Said the President: "If any* of our people are living in slums, and nothing is done about it, that is an Invitation to Communism. "If some of our citizens are forced to work for wages below I* normal, and nothing is done about it, that constitutes an" invitation to communism, "IF some of our people are denied the right to vote or "- 1*" prU of our people's right* to live in slums, and nothing is done about it, and nothing is done about it, and (Continued on p. 20)