THE MONDO
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND TODAY. - Clear to partly cloudy with occasional light showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, low, $7. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:89 p.m., 39.81 inches of mercury. '
38 Pages 5/
LA MARANA NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class unatter, Post Office, San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 18, 194B
AutomovlUatas, demootremoo traditional stick courtesy
NUMBER 13431
Milk Price Ordered to be Lowered to Previous Level
AGS Resolution is effective on Monday It will be in force while the Panel of Economists ends the study started by S. Gálve" Maturana Editor of EL MUNDO As from next Monday, cow's milk will have to be sold to consumers at the previous price of $0.22 per quart pasteurized, and $0.20 per quart, raw. The General Supply Administrator, Mr. Antonio Vlcén* Ríos, issued yesterday an administrative order to reestablish the maximum prices that prevailed for the sale of fresh cow's milk on February 26th when the control on the price of milk was eliminated. Mr. Vlcén Ríos stated that the order issued is provisional, because the Panel of Economists that he appointed to study the milk problem has officially informed him that according to the work plan drawn up, the studies that need to be carried out will take considerable time, possibly not less than eight weeks. The Supply Manager added that, as the Panel has correctly stated, this is a matter of utmost importance for all economic classes, and that the price increase recently fixed by some pasteurizers in the metropolitan area, has been followed by other increases, created by middlemen and agiotists, with fresh cow milk being sold at 26, 38 and 29 cents per quart. Mr. Vlcéns Ríos informed that in order to correct this situation for the time being, he decided to reestablish the maximum prices that prevailed on February 26. Basis for the action Mr. Vlcéns Ríos also informed that in order to make said decision, he based his decision on the study and decision he made on December 1, 1947 on the same matter, denying the request for a price increase, which was then formulated by the Cattlemen's Sector; and he has examined the concurrent economic factors that may have affected the result of that study since then, finding that: The changes that have occurred of some importance, could better determine a reduction than an increase, since concentrated feed, which is one of the basic factors" for the production of fresh milk, has dropped in price, having a much lower cost now than it had at that date; that there have been no major droughts which could have caused the lack of abundant pasture; that it does not find that there have been any other substantial changes in the analysis it has made of the visible economic factors which contribute to the cost of production and distribution and that the Administrator is not aware of any other facts or economic factors which would justify the increase decreed by the pasteurizers. Prices fixed The prices fixed for fresh milk, in accordance with the Administrative Order issued yesterday, are as follows, as far as consumers are concerned: raw milk, bulk $0.19 quart; bottled, $0.20 quart; $0.10 half a quart and $0.5 a quarter of a quart. Pasteurized milk: in stalls, delivered bottled. $0.21 quart. To the consumer $0.22 quart; $0.11 half a quart and $0.5-112 a quarter of a quart. The Administrator of Supplies also added that for the purposes of the application of said order, the Metro-Politan Zone shall be deemed to include the municipalities of San Juan, Rio Piedras, Guaynabo, Cataño and Bayamón. He indicated that it is not considered necessary in this transitory measure to fix prices or additional zones for the other municipalities of Puerto Rico, where milk has not increased in price nor has there been any disruption in distribution. Mr. Vi&na Rios also stated that this administrative order includes a provision prohibiting milk produced in any municipality outside the metropolitan area from being sold at prices higher than the maximum prices fixed on the day before. Penal penalty In accordance with the provisions of section 13. lndg0 ® 238, of May 12, 1942, any person who shall violate any provision of the order issued and any person who shall file or make any false statement or report in any material respect in any document or report required of *Ha by the Administrator shall be fined, upon conviction thereof, a fine not exceeding five thousand (Continued on page 14)
New work paints the cato of the Island -- 1 ' z Gives it as an example of overpopulation. - By Wn-LIAM J. DORVILLIER Washington Correspondent of EL MUNDO WASHINGTON, Sept. 17 (Special to EL MUNDO)-Puerto Rico's overpopulation, a subject of great interest in the United States, is receiving wide prominence in a new book distributed this month by the Book of the Month Club, with a circulation estimated at 400,000 copies. The llhgo Road to Survival by William Vogt, noted scientist and author, was published by William Sloane Associates. Discussing world population and the declining productivity of land and other food sources for the world's billions of people, Vogt offers the case of Puerto Rico as his most salient example of the dangers of continuing to neglect the overpopulated regions of the earth. "Puerto Rico walks straight along the route of the Chlnos and Hindus, to (Continued "on page 14) No increase in Eastern rates The company will maintain present rates of 5 l /i cents mile -The Eatteen Ak Lines has indefinitely postponed all action to increase its rates. This was announced yesterday by the air carrier, citing statements by its President and General Manager, Capt. Eddie V. Rickenbacker. Eastern reports that "the decision to maintain current fares will make them 10 percent lower than the increased fares put into effect by some of the major airlines in early September." As stated in the note, "Captain Rickenbacker pointed out, by way of contrast, that while Eastern's day rates have increased about 133 percent and retail prices in the Nation have increased 65 percent since 1941, the rate gives 5 112 st. per mile that will be maintained remains >10 percent lower than the level prevailing before the war." Eastern originally had plans to increase its fares by 10 percent, and set a 5 percent reduction on round-trip flights, as did other airlines.
News Digest 9* News Digest 9* News Digest 9* News Digest 9* News Digest 9* News Digest 9
Ordered to lower the price of locho to the previous level, starting Monday. Eastern Air Lines will not raise its fares. - Truman to appoint commission to assist in moral and religious orientation of the conscripts. - PAWA's OonlellaHon will make inspection flight to the island today. Czech communist government arrests hundreds of people in Prague and other cities. - The Czech communist government arrests hundreds of people in Prague and other cities. - Russia is feared to be ordering a campaign of terror in Germany. - New book by the Meo Book Club is based on an example of overpopulation on the island. Congolese demand Truman deliver report on what slogan he suppressed. oes Another threat of a railroad strike in the United States arises. " O . Rains in recent days have caused flooding on the island. - o - - A Senate Committee ordered an Inquiry into the Toatron. - - - Bl Mayor of Paris visits New York on court trip - M - CPS submitted the regulation defining the agenda* ds pssajos.
AT provided airport facilities to the PAA. A Folíela was assaulted in the middle of the municipal court by the person he had accused. - Travieso clarifies frw" about the lawsuit. - The Nisam of Hayderebad surrendered to Hindustani forces. '- - - - Buscaglia estimates that next year's revenues will be the same as this year's. * - - Ambassadors were empowered to insist on a meeting with Molotov. - - - The UN Security Council will consider this afternoon the assassination of Bernadotte, by Jewish irregulars. - - ♦ French Premier submitted his program to! Parliament last night. * - - - Hitchcock and his wife. Stephana Saja, had to make aterrlsgje fonoeo while flying to Miami, on honeymoon trip to Rio. * Joe Louie will return to defend his title. - Governor to attend ceremony at the former Baes Borinquen. " " " " " "Guante" Dorados ce Iniciacion in Arecibo tonight. Eric Johnston* celebrated confe" round with MolotoV. - United States returned 04 masterpieces to Germany.
Ceased fire! in Hyderabad principality.
Nizam's troops laid down arms Indian forces to occupy capital today. Demands accepted By Jumes MICHAELS NEW DELHI. India, Sept. 17 (FU)- After five days of fighting with India, Halderabad troops today laid down their arms. The Muslim Nizam of Haldetahad, reputed to be the richest man in the world, ordered his troops to cease fire at 5:00 P.M. (7:30 A.M. Eastern time). At that time the Hindustani troops were six miles from the Halderabad cault. Today, five days after the beginning of the war, we have realized that we are lost," the Nizam told his 17,000,000 subjects in a message over the radio. "We have fought as far as possible." The Nlzam said that In(tastan troops will be allowed to occupy their old base at Secunderabad, on the outskirts of the capital and that Haldetabad will not raise charges against India at the United Nations Security Council, which meets in Paris next week. He resigned from the (. "bínete Premier Mir Lalk All announced that the entire Cabinet d* Haldetahad has resigned. He said that the Nlzam, who is 62 years old, had taken over the Government and that a new Cabinet would be appointed to negotiate peace terms. The Government of India officially announced that its armies are outside Secunderabad, but that they will not enter the city until tomorrow, when the triumph will be formally celebrated. (Dispatches from Halderabad indicated that the troops will begin to occupy the capital city tomorrow). Restoration of order Hindustani troops invaded the principality of Halderabad on Monday morning with the purpose of restoring order. The Nlzam ■e spoke out against the entry of his state into the Dominion of India, despite the fact that it is completely surrounded by Hindu territory and that 80 percent of its population is Hindustani. India's Premier Nehru said that fanatical Muslims in Halderabad were provoking a "rising tide of violence". In his radio address shortly after the surrender, the Nlzam accepted all the Hindustani demands that preceded the Invasion. When the Government of India was compelled to order the invasion of Halderabad, foreign observers feared that the incident would provoke a bloody communal war in the princely state, which would have serious repercussions throughout the Asian subcontinent. The Nkám has offered to disband and outlaw the Razakars, troops composed of Muslim fanatics who have stubbornly opposed the demands of the Pakistani army.
Constellation will make a flight to the island today.
¿¡>S|n3M
Starting next October, Pan American World Airways will use Constellation" Constellation-type "Constellation" transport, such as the "Constellation" aircraft. Constellation type, like the one illustrated in the engraving, on the New York-San Juan and Mlami-San Juan routes, Katoa cuatrimo- . ■■ ' -...... ,
torea have room for 44 passengers, and will enhance the flight to New York in five hours. The Han Juan " Miami flight will be reduced to four hours and twenty minutes (PAWA photo).
Heavy rain has caused flooding Affected Ponce, Yauco, Caguas, Sabana Grande. Letter from the Bureau During the last two days, heavy rains and windstorms were recorded in several sectors of the island, as a result of a barometric pressure wave that passed to the south, near Puerta Rico. In Sabana Grande and Yauco, the flooding of rivers and streams reportedly caused losses ■ in crops and livestock, and paralyzed traffic for a long period of time. El Negociado del Tiempo" reports on the rains and winds, but warns that these were not as strong as those of two weeks ago and that there is no storm danger for the island. Damages in Sabana Grande From our correspondent in Sabana Grande, Mr. Samuel Irizarry, we received the following dispatch: "There were heavy downpours and thunder yesterday in this town, since 2:00 a.m., the rain gauges of Vicente Quilinchinl marked 7 and a half inches. The town was Incommunicado on all roads. "Going towards San Germán, kilometer 211, hectometer 6 was flooded, and before reaching the bridge of the Grande river, towards Yauco, the river overflowed through the farm of Delfín Rodríguez. Cario, destroying his cane and flooding the road, before reaching the Castillo bridge. "The current was so strong that the waters uprooted the trees in the center of the riverbed. The road to the Machuchal neighborhood turned into a river from the entrance to the bridge. "On the road to the Aqueduct there have been large landslides. A creek overflowed over a bridge, bringing several tree trunks. "It was necessary to suspend classes in the urban area due to flooding. The Los Muertos creek rose so high that it swept away numerous "pigs, chickens and goats. "The telegraph service was also suspended, being necessary to send messages by telephone," Damage" in Yauco, our correspondent in Yauco. (Continued on page 14)
PAWA plane to inspect route of new direct service to begin Oct. 15. - Covers New York-San Juan distance in 5 hours.
Travieso Says His Sentence Was Misinterpreted Recalls Legislation Approved After Romany's Decision" l "a Costa Clarifying the "Iconce and 1" motivations of the statements he made a few rilas ago at a meeting of leaders of the Opposition parties, regarding the island's Judiciary, *Judge Martin Travieso said yesterday that the President of the Bar Association, Mr. Benicío Sánchez Castaño, had "presumed him guilty of having deliberately and viciously attacked the Puerto Rican magistrates, many of whom were his dearest friends, accusing them of having surrendered to the dictatorship that does not govern". Mr. Travieso had to leave yesterday morning for the city of Mayagüez on political errands, for which reason the meeting he was to have held with the top party leaders of the Opposition to discuss campaign plans had to be called off. Mr. Travieso was accompanied on his trip to Mayagüez by Mr. Celestino Iriarte, president of the Partido Estadista. Mr. Travieso's textual declarations, in relation to his statements on the judiciary, were the following: nl-as manifestations of the President of the Bar Association, published in the Imparcial on the 13th of this month, were for me an unpleasant surprise. I am not complaining that the distinguished colleague has repudiated with frankness and courage the statements attributed to me in El Imparcial del rila 11. It is his duty, as a lawyer and as President of the Bar Association, to defend our Judiciary against any unjustified attack that may affect its dignity and prestige. I congratulate myself on seeing that we have at the head of our Bar a colleague so zealous in the performance of that duty. Now, in fulfilling one duty we must be careful not to neglect others, no less important, and not to ignore the rights of others," said Sánchez Castaño. Driven surely by his spirited youth, without taking the slightest trouble to ask me whether or not what I was accused of was true or not. Without giving me a chance to defend myself, he presumed me guilty of having deliberated and viciously attacked "the Puerto Rican magistrates, many of whom are dear personal friends, accusing him" of having surrendered to the dictatorship that governs us, He explains participation "Even though in the same issue of the newspaper that published his statements appeared mine clarifying what I said at the Ateneo meeting, I am going to explain in brief words what I said before the representatives of the three Opposition parties, in 38 towns of the Island.
Pan American World Airways informs that a Constellation type Clipper, precursor of the fast service that will inaugurate this line in Puerto Rico in mid-October, will land in San Juan today, Saturday at 2 P. M.
"The Great Republic dipper, which has just undergone an inspection process in the large repair shops of Miami, is at present making an inspection flight for the company over the San Juan-Miami and San Juan-New York routes. "With these fast transports, which constitute one more step in the program that Pan American has set itself with the object of offering Puerto Rico the most modern air service, the time of flight between the Island and New York will be considerably reduced, and the new Clippers will cut by four hours the itineraries of the DC-4 type planes that at present serve on this route. The Itlnornrta "According to the schedules that have been tentatively set, the new Clippers will depart daily from New York " at midnight, arriving in San Juan at 6 o'clock, Puerto Rican time. From Puerto Rico they will depart for " Miami at 9:40 a.m., arriving in Miami at 9:40 a.m., arriving at 9:40 a.m., Puerto Rico time. M., arriving in that city " at 11:00 P.M. (Miami time). The apparent time differences are due to the time change between Puerto Rico and the mainland. On the return trip, the Constellation Clippers will depart Miami at 4 p.m., arriving in San Juan at 8:00 p.m. At 12:00 p.m., the Constellation will arrive in San Juan. M. At 12 p.m., they will continue their journey to New York, where they will land at 5:00 A.M. "This fast, luxury service is a great way to travel between Puerto Rico and the U.S. mainland. M. "This fast luxury service will be offered without any increase in the current fares. The Constellation seats 45 passengers and "its airtight cabin allows you to fly at 20,000 feet or more without the slightest discomfort. "In addition to these daily flights, three other round flights will be operated between San Juan and New York, using the regular DC-4 Clippers. A daily flight will also be offered on this route with the 63-passenger Clippers, which will be used in the Tourist Service, at a rate of $75 for a single trip. M. (Miami time), arriving in San Juan at 2 P. M. (San Juan time). Two hours" later "e(Continued on p. 14)
New threat of a railroad strike
Employers break off negotiations with 16 unions in Chicago CHICAGO, Sept. 17.-(PUL (FU).-The National railroads today broke off negotiations with 16 unions, charging that their demands would bankrupt the railroads. The unions immediately called a vote to go on strike. The carriers said the dispute would have to be settled in accordance with the National Railway Labor Act. The unions, which represent about one million shop, maintenance, office and other workers, demanded a reduction of the workweek from 48 to 40 hours, with no reduction in pay, and a 25 percent per hour wage increase. They are also asking for time and a half pay on Saturdays and double time for Sundays and holidays. during negotiations that have been going on since September 8. Extravagant demands Danie! P. Loomis, spokesman for the carriers, said the demands would total 48 cents an hour. and were "too extravagant and illusory to offer any prospect of settlement through collective bargaining." G. E. Lelghty. Chief Union negotiator, said the brotherhoods would initiate a strike vote immediately, but would take about 30 days to finish the ballot. He accused the porters of failing to offer any counter-offer during negotiations. Government intervention No strike will be possible until the National Railway Mediation Board's efforts to settle the differences are exhausted. In Washington, the Board said that three members would go to Chicago next week to try to reach a settlement. In recent railroad strike threats, the Government has paralyzed the movement by seizing the railroads. Under the law, the National Railroad Mediation Board will be called upon to try to reach a settlement. The Board could ask both parties to submit to arbitration. If they refused, the Board could certify the dispute to President Truman, who would then appoint a fact-finding panel. During the 30-day investigation (Continued on page 14)
NVA Board to Consider Bernadotte Murder This Afternoon
Jewish irregulars were officially reported to have killed him JERUSALEM, Sept. 17 - Count Folke Bernadotte af Wisborg, fifty-three, United Nations mediator and nephew of King Gustav V of Sweden, was assassinated today by an unidentified gunman in uniform in the Jewish-controlled Katamon sector. "With the Count died his main observer of the Palestinian truce, the French air colonel An" dré Serot. The assassin opened fire on Bernadotte's jeep as the mediator was walking the front line between Arab and Jewish troops in Katamon, southwest of Jerusalem. Bernadotte was taken to Hadassah hospital, where he died. The news of the tragedy was immediately transmitted to the United Nations headquarters in Paris, to Washington and to other world capitals through consular radio facilities. The news was also conveyed to the American widow of the
O* jí / ! ■ i V ' '■R - B \conde Folke de Bernadotte Conde, the former Eztelle R. Man" villv of New York, who ze en" cutfntra in Eztocolmo. with her two teenage sons Ockie and Bertil. Bernadótte, who chaired the Swedish Red Cross, paid with his life for his devotion to peace in the world and to (Continued on p. 14)
BuscagÜa estimates revenues of 4849 will equal 4748
The Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Rafael Buscaglla, is of the opinion that the general fund revenues of the Government of Puerto Rico for the 1948-49 fiscal year will be about equal to the estimated revenues prepared by the Treasury Department in April of this year. This revenue estimate prepared by the Treasurer is lower than the previous year's estimate and in many of the items is lower than what was collected in 1947-48. For 1948-49 it is estimated that the revenue assessment will yield for the general fund the sum of $23,500,000.
23,500,000. when that source produced revenues of $30,978,810.72 during 1947-48. Mr. Buscaglla stated that some items will produce less than estimated but others will produce more and overall the total revenue will be very slightly lower than estimated. Federal Internal Revenue is estimated for 1948-49 at $12,000,000, which is not likely to be reached if we take into account the fact that the Federal budget will be much lower than estimated.
Ambassadors to insist on seeing Molotov
Envoys Have Full Powers Must Tell Him That Berlin Talks Cannot Be Delayed LONDON, Sept. 1? (PU)' - It was learned from a reliable source today that the Western envoys in Moscow have been given full powers to remind the Russian Foreign Minister, V. M. Molotov, that they wish another meeting with him on the Berlin situation. The same Western envoys may choose an opportune moment to remind Molotov that the termination of the Berlin talks is too serious a matter to delay. This moment may come soon, perhaps within a few hours, but the circles of the Whlt" Hall riurinhan that the step would be taken today, It was understood that England's position in the talks on Berlin has improved since the negotiations began weeks ago, in that the British public is becoming aware of the serious implications of the Berlin situation. rie the Berlin situation. Puehta warns gravity Almost every riia that passes without diplomatic progress, due to Russian delaying tactics, will ira" to the British people a new warning "n as to the gravity of the situation, ' Today there were indications of a meeting of the Foreign Secretary, Ernest Bevin, with the armed services jets" and other ministers at the Foreign Office. This meeting was believed to be for the dual purpose of considering, first, the British defense position in the light of the Berlin crisis and the possibility of a breakdown in the talks, and, second, questions relating to the defense of the Western Union. Bevin's conference with *1 Marshal Bernard Montgomery and others is probably intended to serve as preparation for his meeting with U.S. Secretary of State George C. Marshall at Parts next week. Talks with Washington Before the meeting between Bevin and Marshall materializes, there may be further talks between London and Washington through diplomatic channels on a possible approach to the serious crisis prevailing in Berlin before the United Nations. The latest speculation in this capital is to the effect that the United States will take the initiative if the crisis should be brought before the United Nations, while England will back the American step and France will adopt a somewhat hesitant attitude. The crisis in the German capital has been rapidly worsening in recent days, to the point where there was talk in London that if the Western powers did not soon veto the possibility that the negotiations being carried on between West and West in London would show definite signs of success, they would have to appeal to the United Nations for a solution of the problem. Yesterday's seriousness Yesterday the Berlin problem took on new gravity, when Russian soldiers penetrated American territory in Germany at three different points, the incident almost culminating in bloody action on the part of both Russian soldiers and the American Military Police. Fortunately, the Russian soldiers withdrew without an exchange of fire. It will also be recalled that on Tuesday night, September 14, emissaries of the three Western powers - the United States, England and France - visited Minister Molotov in the hope of securing an interview with Premier Joseph Stalin, receiving from Molotov information to the effect that the Marshal was "out of town". This last contingency proved a new setback for the efforts of the Western powers in favor of a peaceful resolution of the Berlin conflict, although it is not believed that "1 Soviet leader had deliberately absented himself in order not to receive the Western envoys. It is believed that as a last resort for the solution of the Berlin problem, the three great Western powers will appeal to the United Nations, an appeal which is expected to produce immediate results, at least as long as the Soviet Union retains the power of veto. This appeal, however, has an indisputable moral significance, since it will put the United States, Great Britain and France on record as nations which have exhausted all diplomatic means to reach a decent solution of their difficulties with the Kremlin. In Washington, the State Department is maintaining absolute secrecy about the Berlin situation.