THE MONDO
WEATHER FORECASTS. WEATHER FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy, with scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, AYEE: High, W; low, 76. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.94 inches of mercury.
42 Pages 5/
DAILY JOURNAL
MORNING
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO- SATURDAY, AUGUST 28, 1948
NUMBER 13410
900 teachers to participate in registration
For this purpose, some 275 locations will be set up Jurisdiction of San Juan boards. -Any young person who needs to leave for the United States after Monday, August 30, and before the day on which he is to register, has two remedies at his disposal. They can either Register in the North, giving the exact address of their residence in Puerto Rico, so that their card can be sent to the Island, or they can go to their local board, so that they can proceed immediately to their Registration. When questioned by EL MUNDO in relation to the contingency mentioned above, Colonel Glménet de la Rosa informed that this privilege is guaranteed by Section VT, I (e) of the General Instt actions. Some 900 teachers and 275 enrollment sites, in as many schools, will be used to carry out the enrollment process of the students between the ages of 18 and 2, beginning next Monday and ending on September 1st, although the enrollment will continue, after this date, for all the boys who will be turning 18 years of age. The Local Board number 62 will have jurisdiction over all the residents of San Juan and Puerta de Tierra, up to the Guillermo Esteves, Dos Hermanos and San Antonio bridges, which connect Puerta de Tierra with Santurce. Local Board number 63 shall have jurisdiction over the residents of Santurce, from the center of Ponce de Leon Avenue towards the North, covering the proper north of Ponce de Leon Avenue, all the streets, neighborhoods or districts to the north of the avenue in all its extension, from the Guillermo Esteves Bridge to the Martin Pella Bridge and limits of the municipal term of San Juan. Local Board number M will have jurisdiction over the residents of Santurce, from the center of Ponce de Leon Avenue to the South, covering all the streets, boroughs or neighborhoods south of the avenue, in all its extension, from the Guillermo Esteves Bridge to the Martin Peña Bridge, and the limits of the municipality of San Juan. Schools for Registration In addition to the local boards established in San Juan, the following registration boards will operate in this municipality in the corresponding schools: Lincoln, Salle General Contreras, San Juan; Acosta, Ponce de Leon Avenue number 1, San Juan; Braumbaugh, Ponce de Leon, stop 7. Puerta de Tierra: Luchettl, Condado (Loira y Dos Hermanos annex) Vega, Miramar, stop 12; Cordero, Cerra St., stop 15: Rulz Belvls, Fernándes Juncos; stop 16%; Doctor Hernández, La Zona, Tras Talleres: Tadre Rufo, Calle del Parque, stop 42^: Blanco, Mlnillas neighborhood, stop 22; Goyco, Lotzi Street, stop 44; Castelar, Las Flores Street, Santurce: Mufloz Rivera, Fernándes Juncos Avenue, stop 25: Carrlón Maduro, Melilla, stop 22; Asenlo, Barrio Obrero; Boada, 17th Street, Bairlo Obrero: Tapia, Las Palmas housing development; Henna, Villa Palmeras, and Bacener, Montefiores. In a meeting held recently, in the auditorium of the Central High School, the 900 principals and teachers of public schools were sworn in and duly authenticated to work in the inscriptions, free of charge, receiving for this purpose the title of registrars. All the registrars of San Juan must register all those who appear to be registered, no matter which local board has jurisdiction over the registration cards, and must proceed to sign the registration cards and certificates, according to the residence of the registrant, if he/she resides in San Juan. For example, if a young person enrolls in a school that is not located within the jurisdiction of your board in San Juan, he/she must give all the exact generals of his/her name, date and place of birth, exact place of residence, etc., so that the registrar may note those details and send his/her card to the corresponding board. Although preferable, it is not necessary for a person to register with the local board having jurisdiction over his or her place of residence. Any person who is required to register, may do so, before any registrar, in the area where he is located on the date fixed for his Registration, always taking care to give all the details requested on the card, particularly those of his residence. On Monday, August 30, next, all men born in the year 1922, after August 30, must register; and on Tuesday and Wednesday next, all those born during the year 1923. Those born in the year 1924 will register on September 2 and 3; those born in 1925, on September 4 and 7; those born in 1926, on September 8 and 9; those born in 1927, on September 10 and 11; those born in 1928, on September 13 and 14; those born in 1929, on September 15 and 16; and those born in 1929, on September 14.
Russian currency agreement is believed to be already in place in Berlin
The conference of Allied envoys yesterday was with Vishinsky and Molotov. - It was not reported whether it was the last one to be held, but there is that impression
- e By Henry SHAPIRO MOSCOW, Aug. 27 (FU)-Russian Minlstro ds Rslaclonts Extranjsras, Vlachoslsv M. Molotov, and his lugartsnlonte, Andrei Y. Vishinsky, conferred with the" three Western clplomatlc representatives-Walter Bedell Smith, American ambassador; Yves Chatalgneau, French ambassador; and Frank Roberts, British special envoy-for about three hours in what is probably the last meeting aimed at resolving the Berlin crisis. The three Western envoys arrived at the Kremlin at 5 p.m. (10 a.m. New York time) and left at 7:55 p.m. None of them said whether they would hold another conference. In the rain, Smith and his companions moved immediately to the British Embassy. Crossing through the reporters, without (Continued on page 22*
i * VIACHESLAV MOLOTOV
Proposed student assembly convened by the Administration
Lidere* of the University Crusade would abide by its ruling and promise not to attend. - University asked to imprison the protagonists of artos By LUÍS" HERNANDEZ~AQUINO EL MUNDO editor
The situation at the University was uninterrupted. The riot was reinforced. Eight more students were suspended for Thursday's events. The University Crusade, in statements authorized by its president, demands the holding of a "democratic assembly which will be a faithful expression of the student will in the present university conflict," and submits, among other conditions, that the administration sponsor the assembly in which the expelled and suspended students will not participate, and whose decision the student opposition leadership will abide by. The University requested the District Court to incarcerate the leaders of the university strike Juan Marl Bras, Jorgs Luis Landing José Gil de Lamadrld, José M. Tejada, Juan Noriega Maldonado and Harry García Dominico, "until such time as the circumstances under which said defendants carry out acts of violence in the Institution cease to exist". It also requests that the entrance to Ir Institution be prohibited to another fifteen students. Police "reinforcement" In view of the situation that developed on the University campus last Thursday, when the leaders of Campus Crusade broke into the campus, the UPR Police was reinforced. In each building of the institution there are detachments of five or six police officers, as well as at the gates that give access to the institution. There are also a number of detectives and police officers guarding the offices of the Rector's Office and in the corridors of the editors' offices. At all the entrances to the university campus, the policemen on duty searched the cars entering the institution. The car of our colleague Luis de Casenave was (Continued on page 14)
was normal yesterday. Classes are on duty at the Institution. A drop in the price of rice is expected Vicéns Ríos believes it will be effective in September when new purchases are made A substantial drop in the price of rice is expected during the next month, according to the Administrator of Supplies, Mr. Antonio Vicéns Ríos, who reported yesterday. In the supply market, according to Mr. Vicéns Ríos, a decrease in prices has already begun, due to the new harvest: and the effects of the same are expected to be felt on the Island, probably during the next month. The Supply Manager added that the decline could not be effective in the Island immediately, or at the same rate as the supplying market, because there are large stocks of rice on the market purchased at the prices of the Ritos; and there are also several shipments pending delivery, which were also purchased by importers at the prices prior to the decline. However, concluded Mr. Vicéns Ríos, by the middle of next month all this rice should have disappeared from the local market, and the new shipments at lower prices will have resulted in a drop in prices in the local trade.
News Digest
Rice prices are expected to fall. * PIAero's attitude of not accepting nomination is definitive. - . * The call to the Legislature suffers delay. * It was forbidden to record designs in England by American singers. Hllton Caribbean Hotel to be completed in September 1949, ... French Cabinet is divided over Reynaud's economic program, a a a s Number of automobile accidents dropped in New York State. ... - The ... - The ... - The ... - The ... - The ... - The number of people who have died this year in Eetadoe Unldoe 429 people affected by poliomyelitis. - - - National entity believes Island Government radio station creates bad precedent. There are plans for the evacuation of Germany in case of emergency. * Employees' back pay is being facilitated. - American citizenship is being arranged for teacher Kasenklna, * * * . Several countries will discuss the Federation of European States.
They will divide the enrollees into 5 classes. - Five airline companies plan to increase their fares. Produced a lower variety of corn plants. - Franco had a conference with Prince John. E" prnhlable a reduction in tariff rates for 1849. - - - Six charged in Isabela case. - - - 90 teachers to participate in 1st Enrollment. - It is believed that hurricane may have changed its direction, deviating somewhat from the Floridian coast. - The re-election of J. Pastor Losada by the FEGI Board of Directors to the presidency is assured. - Crusade leaders propose university assembly to rule on strike. University asked for imprisonment of the leaders of Thursday's sucaans. - Congressmen send investigator to check new allegation by Chambers about Hlss. - * - - - Island tenancy starts housing registration on September 1, - - - * Heat wave has already caused 59 deaths. - - - Supreme Court demands from Auditor to allow inspection of books on Concrete Industries transactions.
National entity believes government station creates nial precedent
WASHINGTON, Aug. 27. (PU) - A spokesman for the National Association of Radio Station Owners told the United Press today that the Association sees Puerto Rico's government radio station, WIPR, as the tip of a potential wedge by which the government could drive a wedge into competition with private radio and even newspaper companies. A thorough examination of Tos records, the spokesman said, could reveal no other government excursion into U.S. radio or journalism. "No government agency, nor any state or municipal government has ever owned a commercial type of newspaper or radio in this country before," he said. A. Willard, Jr. D. Willard, Jr., executive vice president of the National Association of Radio Station Owners, said his organization has been watching the situation for some time. Yesterday, Counsel to a House Special Investigative Committee, which is examining the operations of the Federal Communications Commission, told the United Press that the director of the Federal Communications Commission's operations has been under investigation for some time.
Informed sources said that the Committee has not yet decided whether to investigate, but it is public knowledge that Committee members have discussed the matter informally with radio industry officials. Commenting on the situation, Willard explained that "the National Association of Radio Station Owners is concerned that the WIPR license sets a precedent by authorizing government operation of a commercial station on an insular possession of the United States. "The National Association of Radio Station Owners," Willard continued, "will conduct a study of the facts involved in the case to determine what effect this license may have on the U.S. radio industry. -These facts," he said, "will be presented to the committee and all governmental bodies involved in the matter,
Number of auto accidents down in New York State
ALBANY, Aug. 27 - (Special to The New York Times)- Motor Vehicle Commissioner Clifford J. Fletcher reported today that automobile accidents** and the resulting deaths" from them have experienced a marked decrease in New York during the first half of this year compared with the same period in 1947. Mr. Fletcher also said that 95 per cent of the drivers who reported accidents had their vehicles insured. This, he said, represents "a marked improvement" over last year when a similar investigation showed that more than 12 percent of the vehicles were uninsured. The" statistic" The number of accidents during the first half of 1948 was
the first half of 1948 was 38,843 compared with 40,048 during the corresponding period last year. The number of persons killed dropped from 807 last year to 781 and the number injured from 53,031 to 51,426. The amount of property damaged in these accidents in 1948 had a value of $23,846,689 which exceeds by more than 5 million the amount of $18,751,598 reported last year. Mr. Fletcher pointed out, however, that the figures did not show an absolute comparison because of the change in the law which increases from $825 to $50 the minimum computation of property damage required for reporting accidents. Although in June of this "ño automobile travel increased by (Continued on page 6)
Call for Legislature delayed
- PEP is against electoral change Iriarte and Dr. Figueroa visited Governor.Ig1e*ia* Silva in favor E! Private Secretary of the Governor, Mr. Emilio López Ramírez, said yesterday that the extraordinary legislative session will be called today Saturday or tomorrow Sunday. fiara to begin on any day of the next "emana, a pacilr of Monday. On the other hand, it is known that since Thursday night the matters to be included in the convocation have been ready, and that two or three others have been considered, to be added to the original three, yesterday, however, no work has begun on the drafting of the convocation. The Governor has not decided either the date for the joint meeting of political leaders, electoral, judicial and police officials, in which the rules that will govern the polltlcaa activities during the present electoral campaign are to be agreed upon. It is said that the Governor is considering matters, such as the special legislative session, which have not allowed him to determine the day on which this meeting will be held. However, he is expected to do so shortly. The President of the State Party, Mr. Celestino Iriarte, and Senator Leopoldo Figueroa, are opposed to the Electoral Law being amended in any way. The triarte and Figueroa held a conference with Governor Piñero regarding the topics to be included in the call for the extraordinary session of the Legislature. They spoke to the Chief Executive regarding the published reports "to the effect that the Electoral Law was going to be amended, and expressed to the Governor that they were opposed to changes being made in said Law. It is recalled that Governor Pifiero, when it was first said that the Electoral Law might be amended, told reporters that he would not recommend changes to the Law unless all political parties were in agreement as to the amendments to be considered and approved, this was expressed by the Chief Executive Officer, more than a month ago in a press conference, answering questions from reporters. Santiago Iglesias Silva, president of the Reformist Party, said yesterday that he was in sympathy with the proposal to amend the Electoral Law to establish all the electoral colleges in the urban areas of the island. In expressing his support to the proposed amendment, which was reported by EL MUNDO, Mr. Iglesias Silva stated that "the best guarantee that the elections would be peaceful and honest, would be to establish all the polling stations in the towns, so that the electoral process would take place as in the previous elections near the Local Election Boards". Practical denunciation*.: The President । of the Reformist Party also referred that, "the machinations of the Government party, the electoral bribery through the concession of work opportunities''" to corrupt the conscience of the electorate, and the coercion of the public officials, would be weapons that the Popular Party could use with impunity, if the elections were held in the countryside", and that "such means would pervert and vitiate the elections with corruption". "The Opposition parties," added the President of the Reform Party, "represent today the majority of the Puerto Rican electorate, (Continued on page 14*)".
Heat wave 1 . I causes death to 67 people Several hundred thousand had to abandon factory jobs (PU) - On the sixth day of the tremendous heat wave that is affecting most of the world, millions of American "udoro "os" "cuchaban lo" bulletins that passed the "ejtaciones" radio, in Ir hope that brought the news that Ja heat wave was about to disappear, but there is still no indication d" that it will give way. At least "7 people have died as a result of the heat wave and hundreds of thousands of workers have been forced to leave the factories and seek refuge on the beaches. The mercury approached 100 degrees in many sections" of the Midwest and East. In New j York and Washington, the thermometers rose this afternoon " 97; 98 in Boston and 95 rn Chicago, Lansing, Buffalo and Pittsburgh . The end cannot be assured The Weather Bureau said in this city that the wave will subside next week, but that as yet "we cannot assure it." Forecasting Division officials said the temperature will drop below 100 degrees in many areas, but will remain so humid that many people will not notice it. The heat zone stretched from east of the Rockies to the Atlantic coast, but there were many local variations. Showers temporarily eased the situation in Texas. Arkansas, Oklahoma, Mlsislpl, lowa. eastern Illinois and Wisconsin. A breeze off the lakes dropped the temperature to 84 in Milwaukee. Cold air from Canada brought relief to residents in North Dakota and northern Minnesota. Deaths reported A study of the deaths causes (Contlnún on page 14), ,
Agent sent to check new Chambers allegation.
Chambers claims that in 1936 he was involved in farm business with former State Department official. - Committee held another secret session
WASHINGTON, Aug. 27. - (PU* - The" Ir House spy hunters turned their searchlights on an agricultural area of Maryland today, looking for new evidence to substantiate the Imputations of communism oue have been hurled against Alger Hiss, former employee . nanart adish fn di"
<i "i uppN r i ti ni f f n t o n* oniRon, The House Anti-North American Activities Committee promptly sent an investigator to Westminster. Maryland, 45 miles c| north of Wáshinj'tnn, to check a statement to *1 the effect that Hiss and his accuser, excommunist Whittaker Chambers, were united in an agricultural business there, in 1936. "That clue was offered by Chambers, who told Committee members that he had bought a farm near Westminster twelve years ago, after Hiss had shown him the property. He stated that Hlss originally gave an initial payment for the estate, but then lost interest and abandoned the idea. Chambers said that he did not believe that Hlss had ever known that he (Chamber*) bought the farm, as soon as his defendant abandoned it. Important Point The question of the estate is closely related to one of the main points in controversy in the contradictory statements which Hlss and Chambers have made before the Committee under oath. His" stated that he had known ¡ Chambers about 1930 as "Geori ge Crosley," editor of a magazine, and that he ceased to see "Crosley" ¡ since 1935. i Chambers denied that he had used aliases ' on any occasion; that he and Hlss were Intimate friends and comrades 1 in Communist Ideology; and that he last saw Hlss in 1938, a year after dr Chambers had left the Party. The House Committee indicated that its investigator was trying to locate someone in Westminster, who might remember seeing Chambers and Hiss together, in 1936, a affin after they had both separated, d* according to Hiss's statement. Meanwhile, the Committee held a lengthy secret session today, during which it questioned five additional witnesses about a 1929 Ford automobile belonging to Hiss. Chambers testified that Hlss gave his car to the Communist Party for use by a Party organizer. Hlss denied the allegation, but admitted that he was not sure how he disposed of the car. Three of the witnesses were members of a local used car firm, through which Hlss was said to have transferred his car in 1936 to one "William Rosen." Said witnesses were Leon Cherner, Henry Cherner and Floyd [ brewer. I The others were Samuel M. Bialek and his brother. Robert Bialck, son" of a man who lived in the house consigned in the deed of conveyance given to Rosen. John McDowell, R-Pennsylvania, a member of the committee, said the House panel obtained "virtually no evidence" on the case.
Evidence sought in Hiss case
® v wi i * i d9 Lü £ ■Kr ¥iB&< PwT vBKB sr ' mMp ■ I ' Alger HIm (at In left) listens with a grave face to the" done* made" by Whittaker Chamber" (at right), before the Ja House Un-American Activities Committee. Chambers repeated his charge that Hlss was a Communist leader, and added that Juntns participated in an agricultural business in 19M. This aspect is under investigation, -Associated Press photo).
Registration of housing starts on the day lo.
The Treasurer and the Auditor of Pucr- 1 to Rico have agreed that all public employees be given the opportunity to pay their delinquent contributions, taking advantage of the provisions of Law number 19 of April 20, 1931, which authorizes partial payments. The action concerted to this effect between the Auditor, Dr. Rafael de J. Cordero, and the Treasurer, Rafael A. Ruscaglla, is due to the fact that, according to what has been determined, many public employees are unable to pay their" contributions in arrears, because their economic situation prevents them from doing so; and the" withholding of their salaries", in order to respond to the" confrlbuctone", 1"" should they be disrupted. It was reported that in April 1947, the Island Auditor's Office, in agreement with the Treasury, established a collection procedure for public employees who were in arrears with their contributions. Said procedure put into vi- i gor the provisions of Article 124 of the Political Code and according to the same, any collecting officer in whose possession a receipt for contributions or a bill for any other concept was pending collection, the debtor being a ' (Continued on page 14)
Iriarte to visit Ponce today to seek settlement He will listen to the parties to the conflict. - Celestino Triarte, president of the Puerto Rican Statehood Party, is expected today in the city of Ponce, where he will intervene in the conflict created by the resignation of the Municipal Committee of said party in that locality. | Julio Viera Morales, candidate for representative to the Chamber of Deputies, and one of the resigning members, informed yesterday that the deadline originally given to the party's leadership, set until the 23rd, had been extended, due to the impossibility of Mr. Iriarte to travel to the city of Ponce before that date. Situation is the same Mr. Viera Morales also stated that the situation is currently the same, regarding the resignation of the Committee and the candidates. He informed that currently this organism of the Statehood Party in Ponce, does not have any legal personality whatsoever, because even though the party's management has not taken action on the resignations, they are still standing and in fact the Committee does not exist. He added that the resigning members sustain in all their parts the arguments submitted in the challenge to the nomination of Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa as candidate for Representative at-large. Opportunity for all" When Mr. Iriarte was located yesterday afternoon, he stated that he intends to visit the city of Ponce today, and that he will meet with all those interested in talking to him about the matter. i However, Mr. Iriarte stated that he would make said trip in his "private" capacity, refraining from making any other comments on the matter.
Island entity to control rents Géigel clarifies law covers all housing or premises excluded* from federal law
The Island Administration of Tenancy decreed yesterday the control of Jo" housing rentals that are not regulated" by the national law. The registration of such housing" will begin on the first day of September, according to ; "and reported yesterday in a note authorized by 1" said agency, signed by Mr. Tullo L. Diaz. Acting Administrator of the same, The cream reads as follows: "The Insular Tenancy Administration is ready to initiate the program t'e rent control for all" those" dwellings that are not regulated by the Office of Federal Contra. "Beginning "1 day first of September 1948, "it will initiate the 1 f'Rmnwfi' registration of all those dwellings" which at present ¡ are not h"|n any regulation, and which have not been "registered with said Office of Federal Control" To facilitate the registration of I o c a 1 n ", 1" Administration will dlstr hulr the forms "* n"- : In order to facilitate the registration of the forms through the municipalities, the municipalities will be the center for the distribution of the forms. The" District Inspectors of the Administration will make periodic visits to the" villages included in their district to instruct and facilitate registration. Said" agents will visit the corresponding "municipalities" at least twice during the registration period, which will extend from the first day of September 1948 to the 30th of the same month. "The landlords who have filed a registration form with the Federal Bureau of Revenue Control will only fill out and submit a form, which will be furnished to them, in which they will indicate their name and address as well as the name and address of the tenant and the exact address of the premises. These landlords will not need to fill out the Registration forms and with the information contained in the above-mentioned form, this Administration will be able to obtain the necessary data from the Federal Revenue Control Office. "The Administration is in the best disposition to provide the landlord with any pertinent information or instructions regarding the form to fill out the registration form, as well as to attend to any landlord or tenant inquiry related to the new rent control program for premises dedicated to housing. In conjunction with the announcement, the island's tenant agency issued an administrative order, which will be published soon, related to rent regulation, which stabilizes rents for all housing that is not subject to existing federal rent control, or that will be established in the future. Lh order states that "as of the effective date of this order, and until the Administrator determines otherwise, in accordance with Paragraph TI, post..., the maximum rent for a dwelling, shall, in the case of housing" completed on or before October 1, 1942. (1) the last rent set under the Federal rent control program, if the dwelling was subject to such control; or (2) the rent charged on October 1, 1942, if the dwelling was leased on such date; or (3) in the absence of the provisions of subsections (1) and (2), the first rent charged after October 1, 1942, shall be the rent charged after October 1, 1942. if it was leased after that date; (4) if the housing has undergone a fundamental change or improvement after the dates referred to in subsections (1) through (3) above, the first rent charged after such fundamental change or improvement" shall apply if the housing was leased after October 1, 1942. As to housing completed after October 1, 1942, the rent to be charged shall be "(1) the last rent charged under the Federal rent control program, if the housing was subject to such control: ''(2) the rent charged when first leased; or ''(3) if the housing has undergone a fundamental change or improvement subsequent to the date referred to in subsections (1) and (j) above, the first rent charged after such change or improvement shall govern.''. In this case, "the rent resulting from the provisions of subsections (1) (2) and (3) above, which shall in no case exceed 12 percent of the actual cost of the work, it being understood that the furnishings shall be considered as part of the cost of the work, if the dwelling has been "rented furnished; and when j (Continued on page 14)