THE NANDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND" TODAY, - Considerable haziness, with occasional showers, IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 84; low, 75. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 28.94 inches* of mercury.
38 Pages 5/
DAILY MORNING
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 1948
NUMBER 13487
JP Proposes Program Of $81,457,705
Announces Resources Of "109,135,000 Would Increase Expenditures General Budget - For Next Year By S. GALVEZ* MATURAN To Editor of EL MUNDO According to the estimate of the resources of the Insular Government, prepared by the Planning Board in its Preliminary Economic Program ita. Six Year.", dlsJ ponlble" funds are estimated for the current fiscal arto, amounting to $109,135,000. Included in this figure are $72,741,245," which is the revised revenue estimate of the Treasurer of Puerto Rico; a cash surplus on July 1, 1948, of $10,596,000, 1948 of $10,596,000; transfers from other funds to the General Fund, $3,17R,0(X); repayment of the Land Authority loan, $4,600,000; repayment of advances to municipalities, the Lottery and the Gasoline Fund, $5,536,000; surplus of 1947-48 appropriations, $4,484,000; and bonds authorized for permanent improvements, $8,000,000. Revenues for the first year of the program, i.e., the coming fiscal year, according to the estimates of the Plan Board, are estimated at $76,500,000.
In its Draft Sixth Economic Program, the Planning Board recommends the acceleration of the scientific study for the appraisal of property.
It also recommends the strengthening and modernization of the Treasury Department's collection machinery. The collection bureaus of this Department, according to the program, should send well-trained personnel to the U.S. Treasury Department or to the local Treasuries to improve their technique of investigation and prosecution of violators of the tax laws.
It is also recommended a rapid implementation of machinery to combat illegal gambling, and vigorous legislation against clandestine rum products and traffickers. Finally, greater government cooperation* with the rum industry is recommended. Although a specific grant project for an institutional-type campaign for four-rum in the United States is not recommended in the draft VIth Economic Program, in the absence, it is claimed, of relevant information, the Plan Board's endorsement of such an allocation is expressed. Bonn* r For the first installment of the program, a bond issue is recommended at SS.OOO.OOO. It is proposed that Act 120 of May 5, 1939, be amended so that the contribution of one-tenth of one percent, which is levied on property, be devoted to the payment of principal and interest on the proposed issue. At present this assessment is being used for the payment of the Isabela Irrigation Service conversion bonds which will be fully paid on January 1, 1949. The $5,000,000,000 issue proposed for fiscal year 1949-50 is recommended to be used for the following projects: International Airport, $2,600,000; first, second class roads and turnouts. $1,200,000; Hospital Building Fund, $1,100,000; building oflclñas, Extension Service, $100,000. As to the bonds authorized by the last Legislature but not issued, to carry out part of the permanent improvement program of the current fiscal year, 1948-49, it is recommended that they be used to meet the cost of the following projects already authorized by acts of the regular session held in 1948:
First and second class roads and detours, $3,000,000; Municipal roads, $1,200,000; Aqueducts and sewers, $1,950,000; Hospital building fund $1< 600,000; Athletic parks, $250,000. In total, the Government of Puerto Rico will issue bonds in the amount of $13,000,000 in fiscal years 1948-1949 and 1949-50, as recommended by the Board. Expenditure Budget The General Expenditure Budget recommended for FY 1949-50 amounts to $62,584,100, or $4,447,820 more than the current $58,136,280. The increase, according to the bill, is due largely to growth in the cost of certain services due to the effect of special laws such as additions to the Insular Police, ($1,715,000), and the increase in the public employees' grade ($1,000,000), as well as to the operation of permanent improvements expected to be completed during the current fiscal year, such as schools, vocational schools, prison camps, rural health centers, and parks. Special Appropriations The recommended special operating appropriations amount to $6,452,268 for 1949-50. A portion of this appropriation is already appropriated by law, such as the University of Puerto Rico's self-renewable appropriation ($2,500,000); the appropriation for the reimbursement of improperly assessed contributions (continued on page 14); the appropriation for the reimbursement of improperly assessed contributions (continued on page 14); and the appropriation for the reimbursement of improperly assessed contributions (continued on page 14).
The Brightest Comet in this Hemisphere
SS i SB '7 ■ I g|jÍj i H ■ 8 , i
This photograph of the new comet in the eastern skies" was taken Wednesday morning by astronomers at the California Institute of Technology at the Mount Palomar Observatory.
the Monte Palomar Observatory. Scientists describe it as the brightest comet seen in this hemisphere since 1927. The stars
look like short streaks in this five-minute exposure made with an 18-inch slow motion camera*. (Photo by P. A.)
Senators Leader Sued
Marshall Denied Consideration of Sending Peace Mission to Moscow
Said that "Report" of Truman-Stalin Interview Arose from Russian Peace Propaganda. Reaffirmed Current U.S. Policy Tor Robert J. Manning FARIS, Nov. 12 (FU)-Secretary of State Gen. Gen. C. Marshall said today that reports of a personal interview between President Truman and Premier Khare Stalin of Russia arose from a very dangerous Soviet peace propaganda offensive.
Alleged Before Authorities That He Was Going to Be Assaulted By Gambling Group
The leader of the Senadores team of San Juan, Mr. José Seda, complained yesterday afternoon before Judge Luis R. Polo, and prosecutor Martin Almodóvar Acevedo, of the San Juan District Court, that last Wednesday, after finishing a baseball challenge between his team and the Ca-guas-Guayama, he was chased by a group of people who were about to attack him. According to Mr. José Seda's complaint, on Wednesday, a group of gamblers spoke at the Eseamhrón ballpark who spoke to the Senadores team against Caguas-Guayama. The San Juan-Senators were defeated that day, so the gamblers lost their money. Believing that director Seda was responsible for the defeat, they stood at the exit door, waiting for him to come out.
He emphatically denied that the United States was considering any peace mission to Moscow. On the contrary, he said, the United States would continue its air supply of Berlin, press its European Recovery Program, press ahead with the North Atlantic defense pact and develop its aid program for Greece. Marshall said that he had not spoken ron President Truman *in any way about his withdrawal <1*1 Cabinet*. He said he had already hnhh said he wished to withdraw "* iu life /rivada when he could. No Further Statements He would make no further statements, he said, until he returned to Washington and had had a chance to sit down and talk with the President.
There Were Disputes About Votes At The Board Proposed To Investigate Who Wrote Injury On Ballot Luis Hernández Aqulnn Editor of EL MUNDO The Island Board of Elections finished yesterday canvassing the second and third zones of the San Juan electoral precinct, entering the fourth zone later today. Today the canvass will continue with the Rio Piedras precinct. The Board approved a motion to investigate which voter was the author of a message defaming the governor-elect, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín. The motion was presented by Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones, representative of the Popular Party in the Insular Elections Board. Results of the canvass in Zone 2. The result of the canvass in the second zone of the electoral precinct of Santurco is *1 as follows: total voters 7,516; popular votes 3,318; statehood votes 2,0005; socialist votes 241; reformist votes 944 and lndcpondentlstas 958.
A friend of leader Seda 1e informed him what rgie was going on, so he armed himself with a bat when he went out, in order to protect himself from any aggression, The agostadores. realizing ri* Mr. Soda's attitude, dispersed. (Continued on p. 12)
Marshall made his speech at a somewhat bizarre press conference. He spoke very frankly to American correspondents and gave an almost glonal analysis of the American strategy against Russia in the cold war. (Continued on page 14)
News Digest
There is a belief that further price increases can be avoided. ♦ M They are showing in New York a newsreel about Muflo" Marin. "u Ijs PRACO will establish a canning plant in Vieques. * Marshall denied that he was considering sending a mission to Moscow. He brings success tota! in first operation of 1 oboto mis, they decide not to make any more in Manicomio. in Vega Alta a rayon plant. Specialist in Education VI* sual was on the Island. * * * - Two aviators failed Attempt to break continuous flight record. Ixm Puerto Rico municipalities closed with surplus at the end of the last fiscal year. *Congressman Huber favors elimination of the Anti-American Activities Committee, - " China alleges 30,000 Red soldiers perished east of Suchow. - Dr. Cordero leaves today for the mainland. *Four of the University students are accused.
(University students. The Planning Board proposes a program of expenditures of $81,407,705. *"♦ Yesterday a bloody riot was recorded in Paris, promoted by the Communists. They estimate at eight million the number of workers on strike in the German Bisona. "♦" PIP ratifies agreement to undertake at once its campaign for 1952. - "* 'i Senator Bridges proposed session of Congress to grant aid to China. * * * * Gypsy Rose 1#* refused to perform in a Broadway Chih. French government controls situation in French mines. There was discussion about voting at the Insular Board of Elections; they will investigate the person who wrote Injuria on the ballot. The leader of the San Juan team filed a complaint before the Judicial authorities. Tourism Board asked the Police to intensify the persecution of clandestine games. - The longshoremen's strike "extended to the entire east coast; the Borinquen will not load until the 24th.
Longshoremen's Strike Now Extends to Entire Eastern Seaboard; Ryan Urges Truman to Take Action
No More Medical Lobotomy Operations" They Say "Lacks" Suitable Environment. First E" Total Success By Lula Hernandez Aqulnn Editor of EL MUNDO The first lobotomy operation performed in Puerto Rico has been a complete success. The patient operated on at the Insular Asylum by Doctors Nathen Rlfklnson and R, Fernandez Merina, is currently occupying a position as a stenographer, performing her work very efficiently. For now, no more lobotomy operations will be performed at the Insular Asylum. The reports are to the effect that when the necessary improvements are made at the Insular Asylum, which is listed as one of the Health Department facilities to be rebuilt and re-equipped, several of these operations will be performed on patients who are on duty, and whose families have given permission for them to be performed.
Representative Walter R. Huber, Democrat of Ohio, said yesterday that he favors elimination of the House Anti-American Activities Committee. "This congressional group," Huber declared in an interview, "has become known for its anti-democratic tactics and it would do a great deed for the prestige of Congress if it were eliminated." Congressman Huher arrived last Thursday in Puerto Rico for a short vacation as a break from the political campaign that brought him back to the House. Asked for an opinion on the work of the Un-American Activities Committee, he said, "I believe that the tactics of this body should not be used to protect our hard-earned political philosophy and way of life. Huber announced that he would introduce a bill as soon as the next Congress begins to create a joint committee on civil rights. This body, he said, would be a permanent body composed of five senators and five representatives.
English and Spanish Stenographer Interested EL MUNDO in the course of the operation of the patient who was operated on September 28 by Dr. Rlfkinson and Dr. Fernán dez Marina, a detailed inquiry was made. According to reports gathered by this editor, the young woman - whose name is discreetly kept by the authorities of the Insular Asylum - is in a perfect state of health, having become a cordial and peaceful woman, who has shown great capacity and disposition to carry out her work. The authorities of the Insular Asylum hope to discharge this patient soon, since the results of the operation have been satisfactory. However, the readjustment of the patient's personality is awaited before the patient can be discharged. I The reports obtained from the au1 torldades of the aforementioned hospital, "on | in the sense that the patient needs a special environment that is not available in the institution, where it cannot be offered as desired, due to the precarious conditions in which the Insular Asylum is located, How the patient is expected to live As expressed previously by Dr. Rifkinson and Dr. Fer- ! nándei Marina, a person surgically intervened with the lobotomy procedure will live a completely normal life: he will continue to react to all the emotions produced by the different situations of life, but these will be temporary, they will not torment him relentlessly. Faced with a painful situation or a tragic problem, which apparently has no solution, the operated patient will react normally for the moment, but will forget it very soon, being an absolutely happy person. It has been reported that no more lobotomy operations will be performed for the time being at the JnsuI lar Asylum. This is due to the bad situation this institution has been in for some time, (Continued on Page 12).
Confident of Being Able to Avoid Price Rises Demand Level Has Declined" Due to Further" Increase in Labor Day
WASHINGTON, Nov. 12 (PU)-Sources connected with the Administration predicted today that labor's offensive for a fourth wage increase will produce the smallest-and probably the last-general increase of the postwar period. These sources said the reason will be the leveling off in the cost of living, and the desire of both labor and industry to raise prices again. Economic experts .and government workers said there is little doubt that another series of wage increases will be granted in 1949. The fourth offensive has already begun. and many increases have been denied, averaging nine cents an hour, compared with IR 12 cents an hour in 1946; 15 1 2 cents in 1947, and 11 cents in 1948. Said one official that he is confident that wage increases can be made without causing corresponding increases in prices. That [ would mean a greater emphasis in the 1948-49 negotiations on wage increases resulting from higher productivity, he said. The American Federation of Labor has already urged that wage increases for 1949 come from increased productivity rather than from other price increases. Increase in Productivity "We are going back to the time when a three to five cents an hour increase will be a substantial and satisfactory improvement," said a White House adviser. "I expect that the cost of living will level off, and that future increases in wages will be based on an increase in productivity as a result of technological improvements." He said that mechanical progress, coupled with the great improvements achieved during the war, should result in a 50 percent improvement in national living standards by 1955. Level Maintained Government cost-of-living index has maintained the same level for the past two years" (Continued on page 14"
Pnr Juan Martine" Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO Police, it was learned yesterday, were actively pursuing all hotels, night clubs" and establishments operating gambling tables whether "**n d" roulette, dice or any other game prohibited by law. The Advisory Board of Turis- 1 mo. at a meeting held yesterday | in a hall of the Banco Credito y । Ahorro Poncefto, agreed to request from । the authorities to put special efforts in the .persecution and ¡ denunciation of Infractions to the law of gambling" prohibited". Haita now the Police *"had to- , ¡erante with certain" eitabledmlen-1
Huber in Favor of Eliminating Un-American Activities Committee
Hr ■ H WALTER HUBER "I suggest that it would be advisable for <"1 Congress to support this bill and that the committee on civil rights tnme e| place ri*l the Un-American Activities Committee." The body he will propose, Huber said, should investigate not only Communists but such organizations as the Klu Klux Klan, the Klan, the U.S. Congress, the U.S. Congress, and the U.S. Congress on Civil Rights.
I To Install A Rayon Plant In Vega Alta Promoting Suma.American Firm Pays For Building In Ten Years" (Continued on page 14)
Pnr Jos* M. (¿arria Calderón Editor of EL MUNDO The Development Company yesterday signed a contract with the Puerto Rico Rayon Mill, a subsidiary of Plaza Mili, New York, to build an industrial plant for the production of rayon. The plant will have 30,000 square feet of space and will be built in Vega Alte, on the outskirts of Vega Alte, near the main highway. The estimated cost *is $.330,000, of which the Development Company will contribute $200,000, and the remainder, in addition to the industrial equipment, Ja Plaza Mili. The said firm will purchase the building, paying 10 years, together with interest, at normal market rates, on the money borrowed for the transaction. The factory will employ over 100 people and should be in operation by the middle of next year, i.e. in 7 months. The contract was signed at the offices of the Development Company by Abraham Rosen, representative of Plaza Mili, and Teodoro Moscoso. At the last exhibition mounted a few weeks ago by the Development Company in San Juan were exhibited the tolas produced by Plaza Mili. Tolas of rayon like those that the new industry will manufacture in Puerto Rico. At the present time several representatives of American firms are in Puerto Rico negotiating contracts with the Development Company to establish themselves on the island. The names of the persons involved have not been disclosed, as they themselves wished to do so. The new industrial plant to be established will partly alleviate the situation of Vega Alta, whose main source of livelihood - the Central Carmen - was eliminated since 1945, leaving several hundred workers unemployed, which reportedly produced a general state of prostration in the community.
Police Asked to Prosecute Clandestine Gaming Halls
The Police were asked to pursue clandestine gambling halls that operated "gambling wings", as unofficially reported, while awaiting the resolution of the Treasurer of Puerto Rico granting or denying those establishments the license they had obtained to operate gambling halls in accordance with Law 221 of May 15, 1948, 1 The establishments, Escambrón I Beach Club, Jack's lnc" Hotel Normandie, Hotel New Yorker, Hotel ■ Condado, Casino de Puerto Rico and Elka Club Association, requested ' riel Tesorero d* Puertpp Rico franchise to operate gambling halls in accordance Jos terms rie i the aforementioned law and medianI (Continued on p. 11)
Borinquen Won't Sail Until Day 24
In San Juan they do not accept cargo can damage. Operations Continue For JACK V. F0X NEW YORK, Nov. 12. - (PU)- A strike of 45,000 workers at all ports along the Atlantic seaboard, effective at midnight tonight, was proclaimed by Joseph P. Ryan, president of the International Longshoremen's Association, affiliated with the American Federation of Labor. The general strike in the East was ordered minutes after the Association of American Railroads imposed an embargo on export cargo shipments to New York and Boston, as shipping at its ports is paralyzed Wednesday by a strike at the docks. Afpctadaa i cities Philadelphia, Wilmington and D*lawalie are also suffering the consequences rie the strike and the anuncie rie Ryan ■ means it "-will become rn a formal strike and will extend from Maine to Virginia, encompassing the other major ports" co1 mo Baltimore, Norfolk, Virginia, and Portland. Ryan said the union had voted overwhelmingly not to accept a contract which provided for a ten-cent hourly wage increase approved by the bargaining committee set up by A1E and the shipping company representatives. | The general strike will stop shipments to Europe under the Marshall Plan. It is expected that strikers will load the barges carrying supplies, correspondence and Christmas gifts to the American troopships in the overseas occupation zones. Change of Route i The strike has already caused them to change their route on three large ocean liners, the Mauretania, the Britanlc and the Veenrfan, now heading for Halifax, instead of New York. Passengers had to carry their own baggage when they boarded the French liner De Grasse and disembarked on the American rail yesterday. J.a extension ri* the strike parall* zará foinlmcnte *the movement mii rllimo rie the eastern rosta. The maritime industry in the occl- ■ dental rpsla is rietmiria rie "d* on September 2 to ronseruencia rie another strike. Sf" r "veiled today that the" 28,Ó(Y) "". tibariores of the Gulf coast ports ri* Mexico are likely to continue to work although in . other strikes they have made cause ro. mun with the eastern ro"(a) strikers. Union officials in New Orleans said they expect to sign an agreement with the Gulf shippers soon and did not anticipate a strike despite the action, hinting that President Truman might intervene, He said that Jos federal mediation officials would present a program today at a meeting between the JLA Negotiating Committee and the shippers' representatives. Poro, after ordering the hue'-xa, had nothing more to say about federal mediation. In Philadelphia, Cyrus Ching, head of the Federal Mediation Service, said that no formula for termination of the dispute had been prepared. He added that "we will do what we can, but we can't say what it will be, since all" matters are being handled in New York. It was reported that Mayor William O'Dwyer had abbreviated his vacation in California to return to New York to take charge of the situation in this enormous port, where some 300 ships remained paralyzed. It is feared that the stoppage of cargoes may be extended to another port on the same track, now that the strike has been ordered along the entire coast. The csiiacio on the docks" was becoming scarce in the Canadian port of Halifax. The Mauretaftla arrived in port yesterday, and the passengers boarded trains for New York. The Veendam, with six hundred passengers on board, arrived today, and the Aquitama was expected to arrive *1 Monday with 1,700 passengers. The Queen Elizabeth and Queeq Mary are expected to arrive on November 22 and 23 respectively. Two special trains with approximately six hundred passengers will leave Halifax for New York on Sunday evening to enable the Mautetanla to start (Continued on page 11).
Auditor Reports $2,613,231 Surplus in Municipalities
Data compiled by the Auditor's Office reveal that during the fiscal year 1947-48, the sum of $16,059,672.18 was collected in the municipalities of the Island. This figure, the Auditor of Puerto Rico reported, exceeds by $4,559,025.30 that of the previous fiscal year, which only amounted to $11,500,646.88. The economic conditions of the municipalities of the Island, and the work of the Audit Office during the aforementioned fiscal year, are explained as follows, according to information furnished by Auditor Cordero; - "The municipal budgets were the object of careful intervention by the Auditor's Office to determine whether the legal and regulatory provisions applicable to these official documents had been observed. "During the fiscal year 1947-48, 76 regular budgets with appropriations totaling $9,970,382.00 and 115 supplementary budgets containing appropriations totaling $1,542,501.74 were examined. "The sources of the estimated resources used to formulate the municipal budgets. were as follows: Property Tax:
Fund" Ordinary, $3,544,902.03; Redemption Funds, $1,555,616.89; Local Purposes, $1,143,742.71, total: $6,246,261.63,
Island Government Offsets and Contributions: Island Lottery, $576,483.79; Additional Cigarette Tax, $788.61808; River Source Authority Offset, $556,700.00; Aqueduct and Sewer Service Compensation, $295,919.96; Others, $323,752.26; total: $2,541,474.09. Local Taxes (Patentes espectáculos públicos, licencias y permiso", etc.), $1,184,646.28; total: $9,970,382.00,
Budget Allocations Of the aforementioned amount, $2,239,648.45 was allocated for salaries; $5,538,477.29 for materials and services; $303,194.65 for non-expendable property; and the remainder, amounting to $1,889,061.61, for the payment of principal and interest on the municipal public debt. The municipal assemblies adopted during the aforementioned year 130 ordinances readjusting the ordinary budgets, being included in this figure the "5 readjustments that were (Continued on páftna 14)