THE NINDER
' / ./.J
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy with occasional showers*. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 84; low, 14, Barometric pressure at maty level at 4:80 p.m., M.M. inches moreprio.
40 Pages 5/
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 17, 1948
Motorists, we show the traditional courtesy of the pal*.
NUMBER 13368
Threat of strike affects commerce
Many cancel food purchases Situation remains tense between workers and shipping companies By Lula Sanchez Cappa ' Editor of EL MUNDO The strike threat made on Thursday by the leaders" of the dock workers" prevailed yesterday, while yesterday the tension in lea Madonna between the shipping company" and the dock workers" organization" was becoming more and more tense. *The tension between the two sides continued yesterday, while the lilac import trade began to experience the anticipated effect of the strike threat. The strike is scheduled for next Wednesday, if the employers do not present themselves for negotiations on that day. History of the case As will be recalled, the talks were originally scheduled to resume on July 14. At the request of the International Longshoremen's Association, they were postponed to July 21, on the grounds that the national representative of the 1LA, who was to participate in the negotiations, was unable to travel to the lela for the 14th. Subsequently, the shipping companies approached the ILA proposing a postponement of the converaaclonea until August 3. The reason given was that before the negotiation was set for the 21st, several members of the shipping committee had made arrangements and commitments that would make it impossible for them to be in Puerto Rico on the 21st. This proposal of the shipowners was rejected by the ILA, which notified the company that if it did not agree to negotiate on the 21st, on that same date they would stop work on the dock, and would continue negotiating with the company willing to do so. Yesterday it was not known whether or not the shipping company would negotiate with the company. ' On the attitude taken by the ILA to the shipping company's proposal, E. WL fhy- । vaert, Manager of the Waterman Line, and chairman of the shipping committee, stated that it was "arbitrary and unjustified". - They did not report whether shippers Iran Questioned as to whether the companies were willing to resume negotiations on Wednesday, 21, Mr. Thyavert said he could not anticipate anything on the matter. As to whether it was proposed to summon the shipping committee to discuss the issue and decide whether or not to negotiate on Wednesday, Mr. Thyavert could not report either. Mr. Thyavert emphatically denied that the shipping companies were trying to delay talks with the workers, and that they had refused to negotiate. He also denied the assertion made by Mr. Eusebio G. Moreno, president of the District Council Number One. Moreno, president of District Council Number 1 of the ILA, that the shipowners are trying to delay the talks so that the sugar shipments can be finished before resuming them, and also to be able to make large imports and exports, before a general strike occurs on the docks. On this last point he declared that "the trips are being made within the usual itinerary, and we have no intention of accumulating cargo on the docks" of Puerto Rico nor of bringing in shipments at an accelerated rate" to affect a possible strike movement. He finally adduced that the" companies what they want is to quote properly prepared" for the negotiations." Workers maintain amenas* On the other hand, the leaders" of the ILA and the UDEM maintained yesterday their position of decreeing a strike on the docks next mlércole", "if they do not appear in the negociaclone" the shippers." Representatives of both organizations reiterated their decision to "go on strike without having to wait any longer for justice for the workers." As is known, the negotiations are to revolve around a demand for an increase in the Jornale" made by the unions. These" talks have been suspended for some weeks now, when an impasse arose, as the parties were unable to reach an agreement. In the meantime, the threat of a strike looming over maritime transportation has been having its anticipated effects on the island's import trade. Sources related to the importing companies in San Juan and the island revealed yesterday that they have been reluctant in recent days to place orders in the United States for shipments of perishable food products. One of the items that have not been purchased, or of which the importers have not wanted to order shipments, are potatoes, according to what was indicated. A spokesman for the trade stated that "when the longshoremen announced the strike for July 14, some importers suspended or cancelled shipments and orders of perishable products," as it is now being announced for July 21.
Southerners expand rebel movement
I ■ iouisiamB&Il - * ■mrnr-■ vM K * TBBBBBBBBfclf WB* iBBI9BNHc£sBr Members of the Alabama delegation line up under their state flag in the hallway as they angrily leave the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia after the party's platform based on strong "civil rights" was adopted and with which they disagree. Southern rebel Democrats meet today in Birmingham to" select a candidate to stand up to Trmnan. (Associated Press photo). *
Delegates to today's convention held unofficial session Plan to "invade" Missouri and Kentucky - the home states of Truman and Barkley - with two opposition candidates. The fight for rights I By Roland DOBSON~ BIRMINGHAM. Alabama, July 16 (PU) - I.o" dream" in rebollon move tonight to Invade Misurl and Kentucky, with presidential election tickets, in opposition to President Truman and -enator Alben Barkley, the candidates already nominated".
The delegates to tomorrow's "state" right" convention, held an unofficial caucus, and resolved to carry their whirlwind to the home states" of the leaders. Horace Wilkinson, of Birmingham. said that if the resolution is approved by the full convention, a committee will be instructed to prepare a southern Democratic ticket, which will be carried on the general ticket in the state. "I am wholeheartedly in favor of continuing the great fight we are engaged in," Thurmond announced in Columbus, There was doubt, however, as to whether Thurmond and other Southern leaders would participate in a "convention" to select an "Independent" nominee for President and Vice President, and in effect create a new party. 'To date, only two states have decided to go all the way on the issue-Misslslpl and Alabama-and even Alabama's two Senators. John Sparkman and Lister Hill, remained on top. Misisipl's "cnators, John Stennis and James O. Eastland, were in the vanguard of southern Democrats" who "e embraced the movement. Gov. Ben Laney of Arkansas said the main task for Southern Democrats is to work against civil rights legislation in Congress. "We must appeal to Congress, both Republican" and Democrat" not to pass it,"- Laney said. "Imposing this legislation amounts to a new kind of government. It could not adopt(Contlnued on page 16).
*-~WASHINGTON, July 16. (PU)- Gov. Jesus T. Piñero arrived here late today, and was in Washington, July 16. Piñero arrived here late today, returning from the Democratic national convention in Philadelphia. Piñero told the United Press that he expected to be busy here until Wednesday or Thursday of next week, conferring with lawyers and government officials. Invited to express his opinion regarding the Democratic Party platform, Piñero repeated that in his opinion, it was "very vague". It mentions a self-determined status, and the possibilities of enjoying a constitution drafted on the island, he explained, but does not commit the party to a firm commitment to such a policy. The Governor admitted that the proposal was an advance on the one previously considered, which did not mention the eventuality of a constitutional territorial status. He should have imposed on the Democratic Party to enact both a plebiscite and a constitution if the people so desired, he said. (Continued on page 16)
News Digest
On the 20th of this month, enrollment will begin at the UPR Industrial School w * * * The island's largest investments were in food and vehicles. * * * Law approved validates the collection of patents" paid under protest. * * " ' South Carolina Democratic Party ordered to admit blacks to its ranks. * * * Greek troops will protect the passage of the Olympic torch. - . * * An outbreak of influenza breaks out in the Insane Asylum. ♦ * * A subway train is inaugurated in New York. * * * Gromyko returns definitively to the Soviet. * * * Abdullah orders cease-fire in Palestine; Jews offer truce. Police law" is likely to be amended. * ♦ - Four UPR strike leaders fined in MO in connection with Central High Incidents. * * * Steel company loses fight against Inflation. - * * * Durocher replaced Me! Ott as leader of the Giants; Burt Shotton returned to the helm of Brooklyn.
They will study the construction of a new municipal hospital. <- # * Threat of strike on docks has already affected commerce. * " * Arecibo port works discussed in Fortaleza. Communist strike fails in Italy; Togliatti is in serious condition. - Southern Democrats expand their whirlwind movement. - 0 0 0 Satchel Paige won his first Game in the Majors and Doby Jonroneó. 0 0 0 - The Court of Expropriation noted the first" six cases. - - - Carnival of Class A baseball champions begins today. - - - San Germán field reopens; Segunda Vuelta begins today as Arecibo vlsltár to Ponce. A - - University Board to discuss on Monday about pensions for low paid employees. - Piñero arrived in Washington from Philadelphia. - - - United States sends another sixty superfortresses to Europe, in view of Russian announcement threatening Allies. 0 * 0 Hibbins finished the study on the industrialization of the Island.
U.S. sends another sixty superfortresses to Europe, after Russian announcement threatening allies.
Steel Company Likely to agree to change law to raise Police pay -w-."■ . "II- - .
At the same time it raises prices for its products, stops fight against inflation
Would correct difficulties that have arisen* in the case of promotions, appointments Yesterday it was suggested that the Insular Police Act should be amended, with the purpose of correcting certain difficulties that have arisen after the Police Commission formulated its" appointment" and promotion" recommendation" to be approved by the Governor and sent to the Senate for confirmation. Fortaleza, through the Executive Assistant, Mr. Jorge Font Saldaña and after a conference between you, Senator Ernesto Juan Fonfrla, Chairman of the Senate Police Commission, Mr. Antonio Miró Sojo, of the Insular Police and Mr. Alberto Guerrero, Special Assistant of the Uniformed, tried to establish communication with Governor Piñero, by international telephone. It was reported that Messrs. Fonfrla", Miró Sojo and Guerrero, have been negotiating that the Police Law be amended in the current special session of the Legislature, in order to overcome certain legal obstacles. It is reported that the Acting Governor, Luí" Negrón Fernández, has objected to the appointment as Police Officer of a person who has been performing strictly civilian functions within the organization of the Uniformed Forces. The objection is of a legal nature, the Acting Governor considering that the Police Act, as currently in force, does not provide legal authority for this appointment. It is understood that "efflor Negrón Fernández does not believe that it is legally possible to appoint a police sergeant to a guard, or any other person who has not previously held the rank of corporal in the organization of the Uniformed Forces. As it is known, as previously reported, the Insular Police Commission recommended to the Governor the appointment of civilian officers of the Police Department as police officers. In addition, the colonel of the Police, Salvador T. Roig, has extended appointments as sergeants to two civilian employees and two guards. Snow* fixes *his attitude. On the other hand, the President of the Association of Members of t? Insular Police, chief Francisco A. Nieve", yesterday authorized statements in which he defines "u attitude in this whole matter. They say in part his statements: The undersigned wishes to clarify the position assumed now and assumed long" months ago with respect to the" squares in controversy. As the Prenda has not expressed clearly to what places the Information of Palace has referred, we must presume that reference has been made to certain places" of sergeants for the" which have been appointed to guard" and to 1a" places of captains for the" which "e has recommended to function it" civilians. "As for the guardsmen appointed" "argento", I must say that a serious error has been made on the part of the Department. This position I made clear to geftor Rodolfo Torre" when he made the inquiry to me. Any recommendations that ¡ have been made to the Colonel of the I (Continued on page 16)
PITTSBURGH, July 16.-ÍPU)-1" U. S. Steel Corp, announced today the granting of an average increase of thirteen cents" an hour in the wages of its" employee." The company's president, Benjamin A. Falrlcss, said the action will be accompanied by an increase in the price of the company's products. The wage increase," effective today, amounts to approximately nine percent. Today's announcement signifies the formal abandonment of efforts by the major steel companies to combat inflation by maintaining wages at the 1947 level and reducing the price of products. The union's Wage and Standards Committee ratified the agreement this morning and hailed it as "a great victory for the United Steelworkers, as the union's 'just' demand has been recognized." The new contract covers 170,000 hourly paid" employees at U. S. Steel and "u" subsidiaries. Fairies" said that U. S. Steel voluntarily resumed wage negotiations with the United Steelworkers, an affiliate" of the CIO, when its experiment in fighting inflation appeared doomed by the" increase" in wages" and prices made" in other" industries. In a desire to treat employees fairly," said Fairlea, "the United State Steel mills have granted their workers an increase of approximately nine percent in their wages, or an average increase of about 13 cents an hour, effective July 16, 1948. Fhirless stated that the increase in the cost of materials and labor made it necessary to raise the price of the company's products. "The steel-producing subsidiaries of U. S. Steel," Fairless stated, "will soon announce increases in their prices for various steel products at their mills or shipping points when the cost study being made is completed. This upcoming price increase is solely due to the fact that steel prices have not kept pace with rising costs. We are obliged to recognize the necessities imposed by these undesirable financial facts if we are to keep United gtate" *Steel in a healthy condition." Negotiations on a new contract had been held for several weeks after U. S. Steel had abandoned its experiment against Inflation, adopted in April. At that time, the company refused to grant wage increases and, instead, reduced its prices by a total of $25,000,000 in the hope that other "Industry" would follow suit in the battle against Inflation. But, following the wage increases granted in the "Indus- ■ (Continued on page 16)
Abdullah orders cessation of fighting in Palestine; Jews offer truce.
For EL1AV SIMON TEL AVIV, Israel, July 16.(PU)-The Arab and Jewish governments acted Unexpectedly tonight to obey the United Nations demand for a cease-fire in Palestine. Transjordanla, one of the seven Arab nations, issued an order to "uspend fire in Jerusalem at" 8:00 P. M. Friday (Eastern time). The Government of Israel offered a truce for the whole of Palestine if all the "Arab armies" are willing to accept it. It is hoped that by the end of the week all the guns in the Holy Land will be silent and that Count Folke Bernadotte, mediator of the United Nations, will have a hand in proposing a permanent solution to the Palestine problem. By a resolution passed on Thursday night, the United Nations Organization ordered the "uspenilon of the fire in Jeru "*len before midnight on Friday and the "uipenslon of the fire on all other fronts" of Paleatina before midnight on Sunday. King Abdullah of Tran "jordanla, taking immediate action in response
The ultimatum, went ahead of the appointed time. His troops control the walled part of the city of Jerusalem, and it is hoped that his example will induce the other army to suspend fire. It was said today that the Arab countries would reluctantly comply with the United Nations' demand for a cease-fire at midnight on Sunday. The Political Committee of the Arab League met today at Ins mountain" near" Beirut, Lebanon, to take a decision. Shortly before King Abdullah's order, the Jewish authorities in Haifa announced the capture of the city of Nazareth, a town associated in the Christian world with the name of Jesus Christ. It was also announced that "Israeli troops captured Tira, located four miles" to the south of Haifa, on the main road to Tel Avlv. The city was captured after a bombardment by Jewish aircraft and naval units. The Jews claimed to have captured many Arabs in both towns. It was reported that the Arabs and Jews were fighting a fierce battle in the Latrun area (continued on page 16).
Communist strike fails in Italy; Togliatti gravely ill.
"- - - Kk. j has / Antonio Pallante, 25, SIcíHm law student, assailant of Italian Communist leader Palmiro Togliatti. (Photo Associated Press*) announces that Togliatti has "Ido placed in an oxygen tent v that attempts are being made to contain pneumonia. American penicillin continues to be supplied. . Meanwhile, INS continues to report, Communist deputy Pietro Secchi* announced tonight on the (Continued on page 16).
J On one occasion it was feared that he would die. Fight between deputies By NORMAÑ" MÓÑtéLLLIER ROME, July 16. (PU)- Premier Alcide de Gásperl "e proposes to file soon anti-strike legislation in Parliament, in order to deapojar " loa comunlataa of its most powerful weapon against the Government, he announced today. "Let us preserve democracy or we will regress to dictatorship," De Gásperlata warned. - The Italian people do not want a dictatorship, neither fascism nor communism," De Gasperl warned in the National Assembly, as the general strike, called by the Communist-controlled labor unions over the assassination attempt on their Mo'cu-trained leader, Palmiro Togliatti, ended in total failure. Togliatti, who is being treated at the Policlinico hospital as a result of three gunshot wounds, had a setback in his condition today, and for a moment he feared he was dying. His" doctor" announced in the morning bulletin that he had "developed bronchial pneumonia and was being given penicillin. A medical bulletin reported "l "l International News Service tonight at l "s eleven-thirty.
They will study the construction of a new municipal hospital.
They consider the current one inadequate. If the project is approved, they will invest $3,500,000. It will be installed on a 15-acre property at the end of Loíza Street.
Next morning, the Mayor of San Juan, Mrs. Fclisn Rincón de Gautier, the Director of the Capital Hospital, Dr. Roberto Jiménez, and the Administrator of said hospital, Mr. Jo "é Rivera Escalona, will meet to discuss the project for the erection of a new hospital for San Juan, at a cost of $3,500,000.
The aforementioned municipal officials made a study for the possible reorganization of the present Municipal Hospital and the improvement of its physical plant, for which $2,000,000 would be required; but they came to the conclusion that in spite of the improvements to be made, the work would not be satisfactory enough, according to the wishes of the municipal authorities. According to information revealed yesterday in the Municipality, if it is decided in the meeting definitively the erection of an egg hospital, in substitution of the already existing one that "is considered inadequate, the same will be located in a property located at the end of Lolza Street, in Santurce, *in an extension of fifteen cuerdas of land that would have to be located there. According to what was informed by the municipal authorities, if an agreement is reached "on the matter, the services of a well-known North American architect who has prepared plans for other hospitals of the Insular Government will be hired to prepare the plan for a hospital with a capacity of 500 beds. When asked by the Secretary of the Government of the Capital, Miss Josefina Lincoln Marrero, about the use that would be given to the old hospital, in case the new project was carried out, she stated that the buildings of the current hospital would be "put up for sale, to use the money to defray part of the expenses of the new building. The old hospital would be left for the service of the people with only one model hospital, with four others to be built in different neighborhoods. Ms. Rincón said that the present hospital, which has a capacity of 366 beds, is considered inadequate to provide the necessary charitable services. She also said that the buildings that make up the current hospital are dispersed. He indicated that some time ago it was (Continued on page 16)
UPR School Enrollment Begins on 20th Nine Industrial Courses Will Be Offered. Enrollment for the courses that will begin next semester at the new Industrial School of the University of Puerto Rico will begin on July 20, extending through July 21, 22, 23, 28, 29 and 30, according to the university administration. The hours for enrollment will be from 8 to 12 in the morning and from 1:30 to 4:30 in the afternoon. The courses to be offered at the center will be the following: refrigeration, radio, electricity, carpentry, general and automotive mechanics, air conditioning, blueprints and bakery, According to the University, only those veterans or civilians who have taken the orientation procedure and have been authorized to enroll must appear. Veterans must bring the certificate of eligibility authorized by the Veterans Administration and the enrollment permit from the School's Guidance Department. Enrollment will take place at the Administration Building of the Industrial School, located on highway number 32, from Rio Piedra" to Barrio Obrero. Although some of the buildings of the Industrial School are not finished, it is expected that they will be ready to serve when the courses begin. In (Continued on page 16)
Island's biggest investments were in food and vehicles
By Paul HARRISON WASHINGTON, July 16 (PU)- At least part of Puerto Rico's "unfavorable trade balance" with the mainland is the result of the "largest" dollar investment in food, motor vehicles and construction materials, with simultaneous declines in the value of rum, tobacco and textile exports, the Puerto Rico Trade Council reported today. The Council published its latest compilation of statistics on Puerto Rican trade with the metropolis, establishing a comp*raclon of the ten-month period between July 1947 and April 1948, with the ten months between July 1946 and April 1947.
This summary will be published in the Council's newsletter for July 1. Yesterday, the Council called attention to the fact d* that for the first time in all "u experience, the purchases" of the Island, of product" in 1* metropolis, "e have approximated double dollar value, * the" exports from the lal* * the metropolis. During the ten months" ending April 30 of this year, the study showed that Puerto Rican" shipments" to 1* metropolis had a value of $145,597." 000 and the mainland shipments to Puerto Rico were valued at $285,225,000. In contrast, the study of the (Continued on page 16)
Soviet to make maneuvers en route to Berlin It will be at times when planes are carrying supplies to the German capkal By WALTEÍFrÜNDIJÍ ' BERLIN, July 16. (PU)- Rü<1" warned today * lo" United States" and England that a large number of aviene" combat "ovlétlco will " Initiate "adle "tr*mlento" in lo" air" corridor" that u "an the "Hado" occldentale" to* enter Berlin, At the same time, the Allies received a report to the effect that the anti-aircraft batteries could start a practice round in the air corridors. The government's warning coincided with an American announcement that the B-29 B-29 "all-United States", with "full crews", were on their way to "temporary" bases in England. The" Soviet officers" of the Center for. Air Safety of the" four power" set a "vl "o in . notifying that Yak-type fighter planes will begin operations near Koethen, Brandenburg and Dalsow, to the west and southwest of Berlin. They said that the Soviet avlone will fly through the air corridor from eight o'clock in the morning until eight o'clock at night, at which time the Western Allied air transport service will be supplying the Berlin blockade readers with vital and vital airborne supplies. The British Royal Air Force received a report from a German agent inside the Soviet lajzan*soviatlc*. to the effect that the Red Army is planning to carry out practice" <J k " fire with ninety millimeter" antiaircraft" caftone" poderoto" in two" of the" three" air corridors" through which the" necessary" supplies" for the" western" zones" of Berlin" are being transported. Lot officials of the Allied Intelligence Service were not sure whether this information was correct or whether the Russians were trying to increase their war of nerves by means of a "bombshell". These rapid developments in the growing Berlin crisis followed the accusation by the Soviets that American aircraft fired rockets over a Russian airport at night, and a visit to Berlin by Lord Tedder, head of the British Royal Air Force. British Air Force. Tedder conferred with General Sir Brian Robert "on, British commander in Germany, who came to the interview from Frankfurt. Unfounded Complaint The Russians did not expand their complaint about the rockets, and officials said that an investigation had proved that the complaint was "unfounded". They considered the accusation a propaganda ploy. to give support to the possible Soviet attempt to conges- ' tlonate the air corridors, which constitute the last reliable route for the supply of Berlin, The Soviet officials limited themselves to stating that American vlone were firing at the Aldershof airport in the Soviet sector of Rar'in. This airport is near the bend, around *1 around which they turn the" American pilot" pa. r" landing at Tempelhof airport, located in the American sector of the city. In London, it was reported that a fleet of sixty American superfortresses was on its way tonight to Great Britain to fortify the Western allies in the Berlin crisis. Together with a fleet of thirty superfortresses now in service in Germany itself, the new group of planes will give the United States Air Force a powerful fleet of ninety giant bombers on this side of the Atlantic. Officially, "it was explained at Air Force Headquarters in Wahlngton and at the American Embassy in London" that the sixty superfortresses are going to England by virtue of "a normal air training program." But Lt. Gen. Curtís "E. Lemay, commander of the Tadounlden Air Force in Europe, announced in Wiesbaden, Germany, that the aircraft will be converted "provl "lonally" into "a Third Air Division. Three" gigantic bases of the British Royal Air Force in England have been hastily "prepared" to receive the "avlone". Even before Lemay's announcement, there was no doubt in London that 1* decision to send the "uperfort*. (Continued on 1* page 16)