THE
ai" during the day and for the umIioi W BAN JUAN. AYNRi TemparaHira "taima. Mi minimi. VA Proalón to* mmólriea at sea level. i laa <iM da la Varda. W.M inch" da morenHa.
48 Pages 5x
DUXI0 MAOAXA
YEAR XXIX
matter. Past Omoe. Ban Juan. r. R
AvtoaioviUataB., "MaMteraiM te cómate mdlHuñal dol nal*.
NUMBER - 11391
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MAY 1, 1948
Freight" on groceries will be higher 15% Shipping company* radicates new* type" in CM
De HoMoa believes there are big reasons for the hike * Protest continues Fnr FAuChARRIMON WASHINGTON, April 30. The" aela linea" da vaporea that ilrven to Puerto Rico deed* the mainland, have filed new* freight* cargo*, and the best Information he could get "* today *was in the "entide that the" freight* rate* will go into effect on the tenth of May in the Gulf aervldoa, and May fifteenth in the" western cnata. Spokesmen for the Government and the shipping lines refused to disclose how much the total freight rate will be increased by the new rates, which, although varying with the commodities, generally amount to one percent higher than the present rate. The Maritime Commission has received notice that the Island Chamber of Commerce is protesting against a certain increase in freight rates for the benefit of several of its members. But it was understood in official circles that there would be few, if any, changes in the proposed freight schedules as a result of these interventions. Flllpo de Boatos, president of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce, said he had found convincing evidence to support the freight increases in conferences held with shipping representatives in New York. He believes there is good" faaone"! Although he did not state *1 recommending that the Chamber of Commerce protest the increases in general, he indicated a belief that the shippers have good reason to ask for the increases. De Hostoa said he had received a request from a fertilizer blender" of Mayagüez, "asking it to protest the increase in the freight" in the case of the "sacks of fertilizer". The freight "would be from forty to forty sel" .* centavo" per quintal. There would be no increase" in the "tax" rate "on fertilizer" in large "quantities". De Hosto said he had referred 1" proteata to the Maritime Commission and notified the company to confirm it directly to the Commission. According to the circuios ln "ulave" one of the most unpleasant" factors" in the freight" scenario" is that the" biggest" increases" have been registered" on the" basic" import" products, such" as rice, beans, cod and" packaged" products. And it is in this category that increases exceed five percent. The new Atlantic and Gulf freight rate on rice and beans, for example, "raises to M cents* per hundredweight, compared to the current AS cents," an increase of about 34 percent. There is no hope of settlement: But, according to sources* lnguiare" and federates, there seems to be no way to .""capar to the alternative at this time. When asked "if there is no possibility of reducing the effect of the" increase" in the" freight* "on the basic" articles" of importation, while there is an increase" in the* insular exports, they said that the" products" of the Industrialization program are not yet appearing in sufficient volume, to "assure that resource. De Hostos agreed with this oplnlon. The sources also said that it would be a serious mistake to increase freight rates on the island's main export product. *One observer said that "there seems to be no alternative but to risk a slight increase in the cost of basic foodstuffs" and other "products that Puerto Rico imports from the mainland, in order to stimulate the industrialization program. The new freight rates do not increase, for example, the freight on artificial flowers, needlework, textiles, and other items that the island's industrialization program is "forcing to elevate to the category of major export product, Meanwhile, federal and island circles in the city are concerned about the danger of lobbying for additional increases in freight rates in the future, such as will arise from increases in operating rolls, which, according to the shippers, will be hatched as a result of additional increases in freight and salt rates. In Ban Juan, the Union of Dota" ▲ W "ta* da Puerto Rico held an extraordinary meeting yesterday afternoon, in order to raise its protest before the National Marltl "*na Commission, for the increase imposed on the maritime fleet, 1 Yesterday, "ertor Manuel I Borrero, honorary president of the la "tlluelón, reported that in said meeting "" * it was agreed to send, and so "a hten yesterday I miento, the following caMoipamai ▼ "Unión do Detallistas de Puerto । (Continued H page 18) fe"'A- * * *
San Juan paid tribute to elder."
Durant* loa act" celebrated" yesterday in the park Sixto Escobar in tribute to the old age", the elder Ramón Maldonado, who will turn d artos on January g next, danced a "el* with the Administrator of the Capital sertora Felisa Rincón de Gautier, In the photo they appear in the moments in which they found joyfully the traditional Puerto Rican air. (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Mayor Rincón danced with a man about to turn 100 years old.
Sixto Escobar Park was filled to capacity with old people who received a gift. - Lunch for a group at the Miñan Santurce Island Home.
By A. GALVEZ MATURANA Editor of EL MIJNDO Like everything else, the city of San Juan paid tribute to the elderly yesterday. Some of them" immersed" in the most" precarious economic situation, troubled* by the most painful helplessness.
Without relatives or loved ones to provide them with material and spiritual comfort to wait for the moment in which they have to end their passage through life. In the Sixto Escobar Park, the" municipal authorities of San Juan, headed by Mayor Felisa Rincón, paid homage to the elderly, providing them with a moment of solace and recreation, with the presentation of musical numbers and h*alles; and later offering them gifts and candies. The three central wings of the Park, which accommodate 1,782 seats, were filled to capacity, and the side aisles were filled with old people whose faces expressed a wide range of emotions, and the event began at ten o'clock in the morning. The Tipleo Ladl Ensemble performed several dances", which were found" by a couple" of old people*, whose* orgenlamo* ■* re "latian to the execution of the exercise that then* arto* back, with the vigor of latent youth, constituted the most pleasant rejoicing of what* they now longed for time* Ido", making good the old Castilian axiom that* "any time past was better? They have been married" M arto* Caused admiration among ej large number dt' pevaonas that priendahan e| ""pertáculn, a thin old man, ca*l blind, white-haired (Continued on page 11)
Fonfrías waits only for Pinero to sign La Perla funding bill The President* of the San Juan Homes Authority, Senator Ernesto Juan Fonfria", is waiting for Governor Plftero to sign the bill authorizing a $200,000 appropriation for the La Perla project.000 for the project for the elimination of the La Perla suburb, in order to begin the construction of the first buildings of the new hamlet, to be located on said site. Mr. Fonfrías reported yesterday that he is confident that this measure will become law, as a result of an interview he held several days ago with Governor Plrtero. He also stated that a section of La Perla, in the district known as S "n Miguel, has been completely cleared of shacks. The land is ready to begin the project, once the aforementioned funds are available". The San San Miguel Homes Authority (Continued *on page 18"
News Digest
Flotea "obre vivera" aeran" over 18 percent and will be in effect from" May 10. V'í - - - - Man Juan paid tribute to the elderly on the Day of the Veje". - * " l*wl" warned that mlnerna contract expires in Junin 80. - ♦ ♦ U. 8. Steel price reduction takes place today. * * - just waiting for Pinero to sign hill, to start ohras in the Pearl. * * * - Health investigates tainted glucose affair, - * * - Eastern pleads au request for direct route to New York not "atable?" competition. - Today employs* in Pone" the service of "modest" shift. - * - Completed the otaudln of "uníMrwíón of the metropolitan áren, ' i ' * AV anímela that is already paying loa increases" to loa veteran". - ♦ - Murray says Moteó inspired Tereer Party, - ♦ " x They continue to reelhléndn "* "felicitaclone" per the artistic teaHvál. * Dló ate the battle for the* ruadlon. - - "I bishop" accumulating a lot of antear on the lilac. - The American prnfaoor who was deported from Argentina arrives on the island. Romulo Itallogm said the (government will not persecute oemimle- * * * * * * * * * *.
The government will not prosecute oemimle- - - "Favor" subsidies to improve maritime transportation between Puerto Rico, Hawaii! and Alaska and the United States". - - - - Jue" Relava) amtuvn to the Alraldeaa in the impeachment caao । of the Ledo, del Toro Fernandez Low-cost home program for veterans, pata amena "ado of suspension. "Union suggested "A dMpIdo de trea trabajadores, por mutín en Puerto Nuevo. - Maria Esther Robles impressed the London critics". - * - - Cuban army arrested communist leader in "tarric*ns", * %* , Reynolds, of the Yankee", blanketed the Red Sox, 8 for "" Sox Rlanoae beat Tigers, 8 for 4| Bravo* to Giants, 7 for I, Pittsburgh to Cachorra", 1" for Cardinals to ClnclnnaH, 18 for 7, - - - - Today at the Kacoher, an exhibition sari* of a team of Estrella" de Mentóme" against the" novenas San José, Catarte and daneos, - - - - In Mayagltaa is celebrated today the Recolar Olympiad, Yesterday were issued arrest warrants against the four eatu* dlante" expelled" from the UPR. Gil de Lemadrid was arrested and taken to the Rio Pie* dree Landing jail, surrendered to the police, and tamhlán -was admitted to jail. - The liberals agreed to hold their assembly on the 18th of September,
Veterans' Homes Plan Threatened
Housing Act expired.
If Congress does not extend Title VI or pass law, program will be paralyzed By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA El. MUNDO The housing construction program" at low cost for veterans," which "UKplel" *| Gov. of Puerto Rico, returned "yesterday to the threat of paralysis, when it expired the 30-day extension approved last month by the Federal Congress, extending for that period the title "exlo" of the Housing Law.period the title "exlo of the federal d* Volandas Act, Hnntill yesterday, Congress has not taken action by extending again the dlad* "ection of the law, under which it has "Ido Initiated the lO.tXM) low-cost, fadlldade" housing* project, for lo*.It will be recalled that on two previous occasions this program has been threatened with being affected by the expiration of that part of the law, which was introduced into the statute by Congress with a view to providing housing for veterans of the last World War, which last expired in March last, The last time the extension of the title expired was last March, when the previous three-month extension granted by Congress expired. The island housing program was threatened with suspension, and a congressional measure was finally passed extending its provisions for an additional month while a new federal housing law was being considered. Extension expired yesterday This extension expired yesterday, and the San Juan offices of the Federal Housing Administration have no news of the passage of any measure extending the legislation. Title does not govern 'The aexto tltqjo .provides for the guarantee of 1 mortgage* loans, made" by lo* banks to veterans, for" the acquisition or conwuurtion d* vlvlvlendss. Under it, the Long Construction Company has taken over the erection of ten thousand low-cost homes for veterans as part of the Government-sponsored program to alleviate the housing shortage affecting ex-servicemen, If no bill is passed at the last minute to extend the term of this part of the law, the local office of the AFH will remain in effect. The local office of the AFH will be unable, as of today, Saturday, to accept applications to guarantee loans mortgaged to veterans under the aforementioned title. Therefore, the government program will be paralyzed, although the veterans will continue to have the opportunity to obtain loans under the other title of the law, which does not grant them the facilities of the annexed title. On this matter, said yesterday Mr. D. A. Carpenter, agent at the AFH hla, that he had received a cablegram communication from the" central" schedule office at Wáahlngtnn notifying him that before* I" conildaraclón of Congress speaks a new measure "obr* homes, Creen "e will pass law He added that he* does not speak alelo Informed to the a* speaks approved or not I*. "lalation extending the title annexed, He then reported that his "impr""lon was in the sense that at any moment, either it would proceed to pass the new v-lvien-das law or extend for a new term the aforementioned section of the (Continued "n p, 31)
Eastern claims its petition for direct route is not jurisdictional.
By JAMES F. CUNNINGHAM WASHINGTON, April .10, (PU)- Eastern Alrlln"" began yesterday its" first* paaoa tondlantea to what" the shared claimed as medid" that would finally reduce the time to five houra, *on the flighta dead* New York to Son Juan, and shorten the route d*the present Itinerary d* Miami by do" mllia". A spokesman d* i" shared" announced yesterday lord" to have "olh ¡todo Me la Junio do Aeronáutica Civil, permission to operate a direct service "in escola "in over the sea, doide Nutvs York to Man Juan, and do Wájinglen to San Juan. In discussion with the United Press on the probable arguments that the carrier might advance in support of its project, a responsible official of the company indicated that it would urge the breaking of the "present monopoly" enjoyed by Pan American World Airway over the route. Pan American executives, who will oppose the new venture, said that the competition, which has reduced the freight rates of a dozen airlines authorized to provide service, is already fierce, and said that not only would the breakup of the monopoly be sharply reduced, but it would also reduce the cost of the new venture. trsnrdlnsrla" "inn qu" repoltelón of the" facility"", come re "*'' 1 rnncedorl" the route to the Km ría counterproductive s Id ■■■■■ ■ -J
general established by the CAB.. The Eastern Airlines official, on the other hand, said that Pan American is in competition with United Airlines on the California to Hawaii route, and with Colonial Airlines and a British carrier on the New York to Bermuda route, and he also estimated that Pan American's current profitability on the New York to Bermuda route would be limited to the same route. current irátiro da Pan American with rus vualw from New York to Man Juan, "I bad Re *"tima in I.MO personHR meniuates. "a greater than "l tola) carried by the competing linea* to Honolulu, and greater still than the total of the competing Iré* linea* to Bermuda, "This heavy traffic, as "we "ntend, sartala that there is asparlo su*' flrient* for honorable competition," , said, The official d" the qu* qu* <1* ium icstfom > <iuc "<úh * \h" mift t . tin fisnz" Ifw* li HPrTnm "ii* une "cdon put an end to the gil" caliWrite "a monopoly", -V MÍonatemoR so that r" ro" tedlatam "nt" an audlenda", -Jimia on pg. l(b
The fight for Jerusalem has begun
U.N. discusses emergency plan U.S. diMpiimts to send troops* to enforce fhlelcomiAy in city By JACK V. FOX LAKE SUCCESS, April 30. (PU) - Running into so much* Inconvenience" in establishing a U.N. fldelcomiso d* in Palestine, the United States h" adopted today an -emergency plan which reduces the 'program, for "hour, only to Jeruaalen, In the meantime, Jewish" sources reported last night in Palestine that the Arab" commander" asked the English" to negotiate a truce with the Jews", after a day of violent" combat" that began the fornial battle for the Holy City. The" Jewish* army saeanm to the* Arabs* tonight from a suburb of Jenin in the initial battle for control of the Holy City. Meanwhile in Amman, TransJordan, the Arab countries (TransJordan, Iraq, Syria, El and Egypt) agreed on the development of a long-term military campaign to wipe out the Jews from Palestine. The new American proposal was presented to the Trusteeship Committee by Assistant Representative Benjamin Gerig, who said it was vital that there should be an interim authority to carry out the necessary administrative service in the city of Je1 "We wish to state clearly," he said."- "that "If the A "amh,loa decides to "try a trusteeship scheme for Palestine in general, a trusteeship scheme for Jeruaalen such as we propose, could, of course, be incorporated in that "As in the case of Palestine in general, F."As in the case of Palestine in general, the United States would be prepared to cooperate fully with the Trusteeship Council and, together with other members of the United Nations, take its share of the responsibility for the establishment and operation of an interim municipal administration such as we propose for the city of Jerusalem, which would necessarily have to be agreed to for access to the city, and food and water supplies."The Americans were confident that the Arabs and Jews would cooperate, but a senior North American official said that the United States was ready to contribute its "participation" in a fighting force to impose the trusteeship in the city of Jerusalem, whether or not the Arabs and Jews agreed to it. He said the U.S. would press for a quick vote, adding that he believed he could muster a favorable majority. A truce in the old walled city of Jeruaalen had already been recommended by the Arab* and Jewish* elders, and was not to be held there. But the Board of Trustees spent the entire morning session studying the same thing after Mosh" ShertQk, of the Jewish Agency, asserted that the Jews in the walled city were under siege and should be allowed to leave and enter the area. Jamel El Husaelnl, of the Supreme Arab Committee, objected and asserted that the Jews were backing out of the original truce offer. The discussion ended with an understanding between Arabs and Jews that they would not initiate any shooting in the Old City. In the meantime, it was decided to try to work out definite terms of the truce, but the negotiations will probably take place in Jerusalem, near here. In the main Political Committee, (Continued on page 21.)
Arrest warrants were issued for four expelled students.
expelled students.
(¡11 was arrested and J Landing surrendered' j Rector decreed to hear a* S' S MiiMpeiHsiones. lx "vanf" n ca*tigo a Ire* alumna*, By LUI* HERNANDEZ AQUlNO | Redactor rie KL MVNM The Municipal Judge rie Rio Pierfras, William Luyando Charneco, issued f yesterday afternoon orders ri" arre "lo contja lo" student" expelled* Jorge Lute Landing, Juan Mari Hra", Jose Gil de I<*maIrld and Pelegrln Garda, who were charged with a crime of riot, prir the university suceaos" riel rita April 14. José Gil de I."- * madrid was arrested and taken at half past four o'clock in the afternoon * *" the Municipal Jail of Rio Piedra"" > Five new* suspension*" of es- j ludíanles were decreed" in 1*' . yesterday afternoon by the Rector of K University, Lic. Jaime Renl- # tez, on the recommendation of the Dean's Committee i" which has been conducting the j investigation of the "ucesos of April 14 j tie at the University of Puer- E to to Rlpo. iEI Hector of 1a University ma-, p nifested that the University Board would not ask the student body to send its representative to that body, and that if the student body requested that his or her representative be present before the University Board, the Board would have the duty to know the qualifications of that representative. * The announcement of the orders rie arre" was Informed to this newspaper ml- t null* after the end of fls- 1 cal General Jose C. Aponte, a con- J ference which he held with the Colonel of 1a Police, Salvador T. I Roig, which meeting was attended by tarn- i blén y Ayudante y Jefbe Auxiliar, Guillermo Arroyo; Inspector Gm 31 neral, Antonio M on i osoi I n ; Jrfé'4jd de lu Dvtedjve, Rafael M er capitá* D. Ríos; District Chief* Bmigrto Soto, rom "**iB dupfe dr la Ddedfve dpi Are* "W M "tr?pof¡tin"; "l Captain Franctaco Véleí Ortiz; Chief José Barreda, and, Corporal Astol Ca-I" leró,' who aspects® related to ta r<"nudación des e.n ta University, La" arrest warrants rie cióapt' one tes fixes a bail rie $1,000 per fu ♦i alleged offense rie riot, nú* W¡ <la/ine the Penal Code, as follows: "Si rio" or more pevao- J na* reunited* and acting in accordance *. Attempting to or hlcleugg hlcleugg ademán de jíó commit an aviode realizar*" J would have character ® riot, such r "u- i nlón cónstltuirá T yn tumulto (Ar- 1 tirulo 361)" This d*llto *e conside- S the least serious, and rigs p "na dk" i jail for a níáx;mo term, d* ? j years, or a maximum fine of $230, t/1 or 'bmbñ" penalties; r v ' 'UM A lió" four and a half of Ir taró" j <le yesterday at the Cate owned by Miss Llíltan r Colherg, site rie meeting of lo" ea* * í tirdlMUes of ta University rie A to Rit o, was an estarlo Jose Git de , J Lamaririd, who was encbnlraba de"?' parjiendo there with some friends*. The* arrest was carried out by, the forty-A," Insular day Marcial Rivera. Gil was immediately taken to the Rio Piedras Barracks, and from there to the Municipal Cell, in Santa Rita. (As soon as the arrest was made, many friends visited Gil de LamarivMi®. unlversiiRi lo", who s* maintainedWs several" hour* in front of the jail, "á-w petando the arrival of lo" other" com- A' 1 pañero" against whom** s* speak* ■ Jury order** of arc "Mo, . *- When we visited * Gil de LanHk- w drlri, he was accompanied by Young Jos." Autet Conc*pclón\B recently suspended from ta 1 University. We turned tina vlgita pnr W la* dependencies rio the Mtl®., W nlcipal Jail, and could observe eight R free-living women sleeping "n- > the floor. In another delivery, they were ha- J dnado" about d" fifteen hdnt B brea. Before the" alarming" no* anllxanllm ia* rio the alluded* í S jail, We questioned him * Gil J Lamadrlri if he would have rio * 1 there long, manifestán^c-.' no": "I qued' to sleep here until my demá" com-' ; midwives come arroatado", Tomorrow yiqy). we will give some derla radones parr I* . Press". ' - V. Last night, at ta" eight and twenty, H , come Jorgo Lute Lairing, who Mipo qu* ta Police Databa de Seau-i * parlo pata his an""to, purflu í* My rate, acompañatlo (te his señobtp" , dr", Luí" Landing, and vmimRWmít; go",' tiara enlregai"" " I" Pdllfta 1 of Rio Piedras, Be informed nüb al f Jovén léiiidin? petmanareW* cán "u companion Gil de hO. ta morning in epan- 1 rio would decide to accept sel' *- " I ha Infnj marto qu* ei ,ra"<> d* Ht|" . J J Young habi-A of ""|Hoyado .phr * 1 the drowned Felix hjJJ.". . In glove to the jo\en J Br"", against whom ge "xpldijjj htlm of arrest, *- finds an ¡ir du-. In the last two years, the JotU greso de Juventudes rie America what sill be oelehra, in representaelOb ri" > I* juvanturi IndapenrienHiilM ri" Puerto Rica, Young Pelegrln llar- * ■ da, otr* de la" person*" who"" -- Sworn order ri" arrest, ■e enenntraha "ver in C*h* Retag \ having Informad* him that mIió pa- - i (Continued on page 13).
Arrives on the Island a professor who was deported from Argentina.
For CARLO* NIKVKM RIVERA Editor of KL MUNDO Yesterday arrived in San Juan, coming from Buenos Aires, the former professor of philosophy and Spanish and Latin American literature at the University of California, Mr. Joljn Frandi Grih flth, who was deported by plane by the so-called Revolutionary Government headed by General Juan Domingo Perón. Griffith was arrested and detained for over 15 days by the Argentine Police, and was exonerated by a court of law in connection with his alleged connivance in the organization of a bank employees' strike which paralyzed the foundations of the Buenos Aires area for some time, about a month ago. Mr. Griffith moved to Argentina about seven years ago, enjoying a sabbatical leave, to devote himself to research and scientific studies: then, at the expiration of that leave, he joined the American diplomatic corps stationed in Argentina, as cultural attaché, remaining there until about a year and a half ago. In the" last years" of his diplomatic service, he performed the duties of special assistant to the emEstán paying raises to veterans However, the work of authorizing it* has not been completed, says the VA Veterans students who, although they are eligible to receive the increase in subsistence up to $120 a month as of April 1, have not received it in the" che. qu "s corresponding to the month of April, should not go to the Veterans Administration or address correspondence "I effect to that agency, according to the announcement made n.\Berra Chavarry informed that the Education Division of the agency has been working extraordlnarlly to readjust the subsistence allowance to each veteran eligible to receive the increase, but that the work of calculating said increases has not yet concluded. Under the new congressional bill, every veteran in a full course of study at an institution of learning will receive an increase in his or her living allowance, effective April 1 next year, and veterans* without dependents who* as of March 31 were receiving $M per month for "uh "tetencla* began to receive $73 per month beginning April 1 next year. The law also provides that veterans* with a depondlrnt* will receive menauates, instead of $90 per month, as provided in the law. Veterans with one or more dependents will receive $120 monthly instead of $90. Mr. Juan B. Ferrer, Chief of the Division of Education and Vocational Rehabilitation of the Veterans Administration, stated yesterday that the increases for all veterans, including those with one or more dependents, have already been included in the checks for the month of April that are being received at this time. These checks are in the amount of $75. In the same way, he reported that the* increase* from $90 to $10S has already "been made automatically, in the* check* for the month" of (Continued on page 16)
John, France Griffith" down. In connection with the accusation which caused his deportation, Mr. Griffith told s this editor that he was surprised that after So long had elapsed since his voluntary separation from the diplomatic service (in which, he reported, he made manifest his opposition to the philosophy of the Peronist regime) and, consequently, the cessation of his anti-blernish activities, he was seized and I* prosecuted for a matter (Continued on page 16) Price refined sugar is to be altered . This was communicated by Vicén" Río* following a meeting of parties* in conflict Everything seems to indicate that the General Administration of Supplies will fix, within the next few years, a new price for refined sugar sold in the local market, according to a statement made yesterday by the head of the government agency, Antonio Vicén" Ríos. This measure was adopted yesterday, after a meeting held by said agency and attended by exporters of refined sugar and representatives of the five refineries operating on the island. The meeting was called by Mr. Vicéns Rio* at the request of a group of Puerto Rican industrialists, who complained to the Administration, alleging that the price of refined sugar sold in the local market is higher than the price at which the product is sold in the United States. At the meeting held yesterday, the spokesmen for the refiners furnished statistical data to justify the present price at which such product is sold on the Island, arguing, among other reasons, that the cost of refining sugar on the Island has been rising lately, and that the quota for such product for Puerto Rico has been reduced conalderahtomente this past year. Arguing in this connection, Mr. Agrlplno Rolg stated that the refiners "make a decrease" in refined sugar when there are marked and sustained "decreases" exceeding 13 cents, but that "we cannot make a decrease" in this price in accordance with fluctuations of a few points. The "ofior Rolg stated, likewise, that in computing the price of refined sugar going on the local market, transportation costs are taken into account. "To the "traders" who go to the refinery to buy the sugar," he said, "a special price is charged." Mr. Rolg further expressed his Disconformity ron the method used by the Government rie "c "rearno* the (Continued on page 16)
The Liberals will hold an extraordinary assembly on 16 May.
Ti'M ung a prolonged meeting v "labrada in 1 the" oflrlnaR of the Jun* la Cetilralf the KJerutKo Committee of the tlheral aror(Óttarhe reopen the extraordinary aiámhlea ri" dlch< collectivity *1 rila 16 moyo, in the city of San Juan. To the etecto was aprokoda a" rn "olurtón that prqvoró extensive* riterualqnoi between Jos member* of the Committee, some* of lo* rúale* were parti* ri" that the alambica"- efectuar* in the city ri* Ponee the rila JA of May, On *1 today, the leadership of the Liberal Party will begin the preparatory work for the "-"amble" and will immediately ask the Committee for the name* of the "-"ri" Jm d*le"". rio", Al i'Molver celebrate the Alambica
Liberal on til* May 16, i.e. o] rila.rie*pué" (te cetebigdi la ri* the Progressive Republican Union, the Committee EJerulho riel Farildn passed the "Igulent resolution. "llahlenrio agreed lo* Committee" de Contarlo de ln* Partido" l.jhcr "l Puertorriqueño and Unión Hepuhllrnn* to manage the" presidents" of both eotectlvldado" that" they will summon to a meeting re "p "cllvamenlc to the Central Board and TerH* lorlal Committee for an internal date and in a mtema location, with the proposal that said" organism" dir "cilvo", a "u ve", agree to the c "lehrovlón of t as*mblea" ilmultAnea" d" said" grouping*" also *on Identical date and locality, with "1 purpose d" Hlarutlr and i""olv*r the pertinent "obr* *1 Imp*"* extetente *n mM*rh prngramáticai ' "Hahl*nrinheñido évlln *1 Cnmllé (Continued on page ) 1