EL NANDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy with occasional light showers*. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 82: low, 75. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.91 inches of mercury.
THE WEATHER IN THE UNITED STATES - NEW YORK, Nov. 19. - (United Press) - In the afternoon today m recorded the "Igulentaa temperatures: M degrees in New York; 84 in Washington; 84 in Miami and 55 in Chicago. At La Guardia Airport, flight conditions at 8:00 P. M.t maximum altitude, 2,800; visibility. 8 miles; wind, from the Southeast, 17 mi Ileo.
MARAÑA JOURNAL
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan. P. B.
SAN JUAN PUERTO RICO -SATURDAY NOVEMBER 20, 1948
NUMBER
FIVE CENTS
Judge Corrects Article 39 Penal Code
Translation Was Bad, According to Snyder Ruling Interprets Pharmacy Law in Cano Ms. Haydee Marrero 1 By Angel CRUZ? CRUZ EL MUNDO Staff Writer For the first time in Puerto Rico, the Supreme Court has just interpreted Article 39 of the Puerto Rico Penal Code, as well as the new Pharmacy Law. In the opinion, issued by Associate Justice A. Cecll Snyder, "the Supreme Court amends the text of the Penal Code, in the mentioned article, for having been incorrectly translated. Judge Snyder translated the English text of Article 39 into Spanish, amending it in some respects. The case of reference was the one followed by the Public Prosecutor's Office against Mrs. Haydee Marrero. This lady was charged in the Municipal Court of Arecibo with a violation of the Pharmacy Law of 3945, which, in pertinent part, provides as follows: "Any establishment engaged in.... the sale,..., of medicines... shall be personally attended by a pharmacist duly authorized to practice his profession in the Island of Puerto Rico", Allegations of the Appellant - The defendant was convicted and sentenced to pay a fine of S1QO. or in default of payment, to a penalty of 90 days in jail. Not satisfied with the sentence, she appealed to the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico. Among others, the appellant pointed out the error that the lower court improperly rejected the contention that the defendant acted under threat, coercion or command of her husband and that, therefore, she could not be convicted of the crime charged in this case, pursuant to article 39 (9) of the Penal Code. The Supreme Court goes on to quote, correcting the Spanish text, article 39, which reads as follows: All persons are capable of committing crimes, except for those belonging to the following classes:.... (9) Married women, except in cases of felonies, (the text of the Code says "except in cases of felonies) when they act under threat, command or coercion of their husbands. But in cases of felonies (the text of the Code says "but in cases of crimes) the wife shall not be exempt from punishment for having submitted to the power of her husband, unless the proven facts show a case of intimidation". (The Code translates the English word "duress" as "violence", but Judge Snyder corrects it to "intimidation"). Not Present The Court states that the defendant invoked the majority doctrine under the Common Law to the effect that when a married woman commits certain crimes in the presence of her husband, she is presumed to have acted under duress. The Court further states: "It appears from the evidence that the husband was not present when the inspector caught the wife operating the business. However, this doctrine has not been included in our Penal Code. The article does not provide for presumption based on the presence of the husband". The defendant's counsel in this case was attorney Guillermo S. Plerlulssl, and the prosecutor was attorney José N. Rivera Barreras, prosecutor of the Supreme Court. Reuther Predicts New Increase Warns Industry to Prepare for Fourth Spike in Wage Rates
PORTLAND, Oregon, Nov. 19 (BU) - Walter Reuther, president of the United Auto Workers (CIO), today told U.S. industry to prepare for a fourth general wage increase. Reuther spoke before the City Club of Portland, where he and other CIO leaders have gathered to prepare for next week's national convention. Reuther wore a sport shirt and carried his arm, disabled when he was shot several months ago, tucked inside a yellow cloth sling. "Eitamoa already talking about a general increase in aalarloa in the postwar period," - said Reuther. - "If you haven't heard anything about it to date, you'll hear about it next week. We are talking about a fourth general increase because our people really need it." They want 15 ct*. Hora Reuther said auto plant workers need a 15-cent-an-hour wage increase to reach the purchasing power they had in June 1948, and a 43-cent increase to reach the level of what they earned in 1944. He stressed, however, that the United Automobile Workers are left with a wage increase without raising prices at the same time. He said that the prices of the automobiles would be increased without raising prices at the same time.)
The photograph shows the U.S. presidential family resting in the gardens of the Little ('")
of Little White ('"""a, in Key West, Florida. From left * right, are: the Mrs.
JIE Has Not Finished Aguadilla District Recounts in a College in Utuado and in another in Quebradillas were Í4< (¿lusa de Varias Discusiones Yesterday at two o'clock in the afternoon, 1" Junta Insular rio Elections, without finishing the senatorial district of Aguadilla, in which it has been working for the last few years, was recessed in its work of the electoral canvass.
tional district of Aguadilla, which has been worked on for the last few years, was not completed. Two discussions arose in the session when a polling place in the town of Utuado, which had been counted the previous day, was rechecked, but there were differences in the collation sheets, and on the occasion of three popular ballots protested in Isabela, The polling places counted yesterday corresponded to the electoral precincts of Camuy, Quebradillas, Hatillo, Aguadilla and Isabela. The result on Camuy was the following: popular votes 4,323, statehooders 1,102, soriallsia 521, raformiala 191 to Indapendentlatan 780. The protested ballots were adjudicated as follows: populare 33 and 2 to the reformists. The electoral result in Hatillo according to the scrutiny was as follows: Popular 3350, Statehooders 427, Socialists 1003, Reformists 146 and Independent!"!"!" 95R. The following protest ballots were awarded: Popular 20, Socialist 9, Reformist 2 and Independent 5. The Quebradillas precinct yielded the following results: Popular 2,596, Statehooders 276, Socialists 39, Reformists 32 and Independentlstas 1,539. Protested ballots were distributed as follows: Popular 6, Reformists 2 and Independentlstas 7. The Aguadilla precincts yielded the following results: Popular 5,953, Statehooders 3,785, Socialists 433, Reformists 110 and Independentlstas 953. Protested ballots were adjudicated as follows: Popular 30, Independent 2, Statehooders 9, Socialists 2 and Reformists 3.
Judge De Jesus Is Likely To Be Appointed Judge De Jesus Well-Informed People Expected To Be Appointed Chief Justice Yesterday "and reported that according to indications," Judge Angel R. Rie Jesus "will be appointed Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, from a moment's notice by President Truman. Judge De Jesus was submitted in a line-up of the Bar Association, together with Attorney General Luis Negron Fernandez and San Juan District Judge Luis R. Polo. The slate was sent to President Truman and U.S. Attorney General Tnh Clark several weeks ago. The presidency of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico has been vacant since August, when Martin Travieso resigned. Mr. Travieso resigned to accept the candidacy for the governorship, for the partisanship of the Opposition, Pnrtavo speaks* A spokesman for the Bar Association said yesterday that there is no doubt that Judge De Jeau will receive the news of his appointment in a moment. Judge da Jesus is the most senior member of the Supreme Court, and for that reason he is acting as interim Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.
The result in Isabel* was as follows: Populares 6,155; estadistas 3,403; socialistas, 282: reformistas, 106; and Inriepenrientistas, 600. There were twenty mixed votes and 36 spoiled ballots. Discussion Sohre Tre" Ballots Three ballots that were proletarianized at Colegio 55 of Isabela by rccusadores de lo" partido" rie Opo(Continued on p. 14)
News Digest
Judge* de Jesús to be appointed to preside over the Supreme Court. - New entity will give loans for homes. * Belgian Premier and Cabinet resigned. * - - Pona announces campaign to immunize all Puerto Rican* children against consumption. * * * - The King of Egypt and the Shah of Iran, * * * - The coffee growers have reduced the number of crops, and it is believed that sugar production will be reduced in 1950. - The Navy completed testing* of a new jet plane. - The "Citizen of the World," Garry Davis, interrupted yesterday's meeting of the United Nations. - - - Settlers complained to the Commission against Central San José for liquidation of miele*. - - - U.S. spending" in Puerto Rico in five years" is "789,718,000. " - - Kaiser asked for more stimulus for the industry. - New York investigates increases in *1 hotel fees. - Russian plan to reduce armaments rejected.
 " - - - A" snowstorm makes "■trago" in United* States*. * * * * Kasánklna bid farewell to the hospital with a small fle "t* for ln* employees and their* guardians. - - - Salazar favors a broad Atlantic swell. * Supreme Court corrects translation of Article 39 of the Penal Code. * On Tuesday" the National Assembly is expected to grant a vote of confidence" to Queilla. - JIE has not yet completed the Aguadilla district. - - - Israel accepted the order for an armistice in Palestine. ♦ ♦ - They will discuss the eetableclmiento of the medical school, during the assembly of the "medical". * President of the Leonlemo calls for the organization of civic criticism to the "actuaelone* of the Popular Party. * Ortiz Stella suggests homage to Piftero. * McGrath thanks the cooperation of the "Democrats" of Puerto Rico. - - - Judge Chávra m inhibited from hearing a case by alleged letter lnjurioea.
The Trumans enjoy their vacation in Key West.
I 1 jjByr. r - W O B 9 B vJH B
r* Truman, the President and his daughter Margaret. In the background can be seen the Little White House.
Physicians to Discuss Medical School Round Table to be Held at Annual Meeting. -The establishment of a "martyr school" in Puerto Rico will be one of the main topics to be discussed at the Inaugural session of the annual meeting of the Puerto Rico Medical Association, to be held on December 1, next year.
rio Puerto Rico, which will be held on December R rie. All aspects of the matter will be the subject of a panel discussion. Prominent figures belonging to the Puerto Rico Medical Association and others in public life will discuss the case from various angles. Dr. H. G. Weiskotten, dean of the College of Medicine at Rio Siraqu "e University, New York, and chairman of the American Medical Association's Council on Education and Hospitals, which is the body that recommends acceptance of medical schools, will speak about medical education and its responsibilities in the public's medical care. The participation of the Cawti*lmi|¿ai of Health, Dr. Juan A. Pona, will be on the theme Why Give a Medical School. Dr. Pon" favors the establishment of a medical school on the island. Oscar Costa Mandry, M.D., who made a study in 1944 on the establishment of a medical school in Puerto Rico, when the matter was first considered on the Island, will speak on the efforts that have been made to establish such an institution in Puerto Rico. The subject to be developed by Dr. Guillermo Arbona, chief of the Public Health Division of the Department of Health, will be the present facilities for the establishment of the school. Mr. Roberto Cie Jesus, who heads the Budget Bureau of the Island Government will address the issue of resources and financial limitations for such a school, while Dr. Enrique Kopplsch, head of the School of Tropical Medicine, will present other solutions to the problem. University Rector's Topic The Rector of the University of Puerto Rico, Mr. Jaime Benitez, who has recently been making arrangements in the United States for the establishment of the medical school in Puerto Rico, will speak on the University's position on the matter. The Rector is currently studying a new proposal that has been made in connection with the establishment of the medical school, as he announced at the Board of Trustees meeting, during the discussion of the Sixth Economic Program of the Board. Under the plan being considered, "-- as reported, next year has (Continued on p. 14)
The Colonists Have Reduced Their Plantings
Sugar Production Would Be Affected 1950 González Quiñones Asks Federal Administration to Give Fairer Treatment Expressing that, "in fairness to the cane harvester, the price of sugar must be kept at a level parallel to the cost of living and the increasingly high cost of production," Mr. Manue+González Quiñones, president of the Colonist Sector of the Puerto Rico Farmers' Association, appeared before the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The Department is holding a hearing" on the determination of national sugar consumption needs to be estimated in 1949. On behalf of the "colonos rie cafta dej pals, sefior Gonzalez Quiftones appeared at these hearings, requesting, as he informed EL MUNDO, "a reasonable determination, which will guarantee an equitable price for sugar next year, which will allow to pay better wages to the workers while assuring an equitable profit for the farmers rie cafta". In the particular case of Puerto Rico, "whose sugar industry is the main source of life for the people," Gonzalez Quiñones stated that "the reasonable benefits" that our coffee harvesters are entitled to were wiped out by the low sugar prices prevailing during the harvest period, as a consequence of the excessively high determination of the sugar needs for 1948. 'As a result riel fact rie that the determinations of lo" salarlo" "e issued for the current year, while lo" arto" of eo "ech" extend from 1 rie July to 30 ri* June, Gonzalez Quiñones pointed out that the 1947-49 crop was obtained * a high cost, with high salarlos established pure a price level of $6.32 for 1947. "To this and *1 low price prevailing* during the period rie the harvest from February to June 4" 1948." ¿- said the spokesman of" the" cane colonists, "s । owed the critical flnandcro result of the last harvest." An Irreparable Error Stating that his constituency hoped that "the irreparable error of 1948 would not be repeated in 1949, Gonzalez Quiñones requested that the initial determination of sugar needs for 1949 not exceed 7,000,000 tons, "It is unfair," Gonzalez Quiñones said, "that the Puerto Rican people should buy rice at 14 cents a pound, as against the prewar level of 5 cents, and be forced to sell their sugar " five cents a pound, as against the prewar level of 3 cents. "With its limited land area, rapidly growing population, and chronically high unemployment, Puerto Rico needs, more than any other domestic sugar-producing area, a thriving sugar industry. "Not only do we have to provide reasonable wages to workers affected by the high cost of living, but we are also forced to pay constantly increasing prices for equipment, fertilizer and materials imported from the continental United States. "For example, fertilizer prices have risen 22 percent in the last two years, and machinery and equipment have been gradually increasing in cost due to relative increases in the price of steel and steel products. Daaaliento en lo* Colono* Expressing that, by next year, the Island will have a record-setting harvest, estimated at 1,300,000 tons. Gonzalez Quiñones ends his statements with these words: "Not only that, but we must con(Continued on pg. 14)
Israel Accepts U.N.-Ordered Armistice in Palestine
By ROBERT J. MANNING PARIS, Nov. 19. (PU)- larael today accepted the order issued by the United Nations Security Council for an armistice in Palestine and said it was ready at the "earliest possible date" to enter into peace negotiations with Arab states. In a telegram* addressed to Acting Mediator Dr. Ralph J. Bunche, Israel also announced that it had withdrawn certain military forces from the Negev in accordance with Security Council orders, leaving them in the desert area, at the "ur of Palestine, the" troops" who were there on October 14, when the truce was broken. Bunche said that Israel's reply, sent hours before midnight, was "encouraging". He interpreted it to mean that the Jews were inclined to settle the Negev question by following the guidelines laid down by the Security Council.
The "Arab" not Reapponden. The Arab states have not yet replied to the armistice order. However, the Egyptians had earlier accepted the decision taken by the Council on November 4 for the Jews to withdraw from the newly occupied positions in the Negev and for the two sides to negotiate, directly or through Bunche's mediation, for the establishment of a demilitarized zone in the Negev. Israel's message, signed by Walter Eytan, director general of the Foreign Office, was a lengthy document in response to both the November 4 order of the Council to withdraw from the newly occupied positions in the Negev after October 14 and the Tuesday order to declare a full armistice between Arabs and Jews. It has gone beyond the reach of United Nations diplomats.
Ortiz Stella Suggests Pinero Governor be Honored
Cruz Ortiz Stella, re-elected senator for Humacao, yesterday launched the idea that a "tribute of public recognition" be paid to the current governor, Mr. Jesú" T. Plflero. The Idea Ir proposed "eñor Ortiz Stell* in a telegram* that send* to EL MUNDO, eq which die* Jo following: "Piftero has repeatedly enunciated his purpose rie reintegrarle * private vid* as soon reza in "u charge of Governor of Ruarte" Rico. "I have always thought that Plñero should "eguirle prestarle aus ser-.
I have always thought that Plñero should continue to serve the people, and it seems to me advisable to insist on dissuading him from his purpose. Acojan Ide* "In any case," Piñern should not leave office without receiving a tribute of public recognition for his work as Governor of Puerto Rico. That work compares favorably with the work of other Jos governors before Piftero. "The work done by Piftero in his "two" year" term as Governor exalts and honors him, and gives prestige to his country."
Campaign Planned To Immunize Island Children Against Tisisis
Construction of New Villages to Begin Mid-December 1 - ■
Fonfrías Announces That He Is Preparing Legislation For Home Projects By S. GALVEZ MA TURAN A Editor of EL MUNDGi At the beginning" of the next mA rie diciemhrir.will begin construction rie 1a" last" unldarie" rie of the Caserío Las Casa" Extension, in Sanlurce. As reported yesterday by Juan Fonfrla" Erneato, president of the Capital Homes Authority, with the construction of these last 332 units of housing, the Las Casas Extension project will be completed, with a total of 600 units. This last phase of the project will be carried out at a total cost of about half a million dollars, and will be completed by the middle of 1949, according to information provided by Senator Fontria. Also in Puerta de Tierra On the other hand, Senator Fonfrías informed that at the beginning of December the construction of the Caserío Puerta de Tierra, in that sector of the Capital, will also begin. The total project will cost 400 houses. The new hamlet will be started with the construction of half of this total, that is to say, with a total of 200 houses, and will be built in the area of Ledo.
- i - Ledo. Erneito Juan Fonfría* vi en de. u Tierra" y Utilidades Senator Fonfrlas stated that, in his opinion, the problem of slum elimination in Puerto Rico will not be solved with the construction of a certain number of concrete units. It is his belief that a land and utilities program, which would improve the quality of life of Puerto Rico's residents, would not solve the problem of slum clearance in Puerto Rico.
Mediation Failed Maritime Strike Margolii ea of Opinion Negotiations May Take Days Yet NEW YORK, Nov. 19 (PU) - Representatives of the 65,000 striking East Coast dock workers and the shipping industry met today to try to find ways to end the maritime strike, but mediators said there is little hope for an early settlement of the labor-management dispute. As the group met for their first joint session since last Friday, the day before the strike began, virtually all Marshall Plan aid to Europe had been blocked. Thousands of railroad workers, who handle rail cargo to East Coast ports, tugboat employees, and employees of allied industries have been furloughed. Sugar refineries and woolen goods factories indicated that without raw materials on hand, they will soon be forced to close their doors. Postal Service officials said that 150,000 parcels destined for overseas have piled up at New York docks, and airlines operating between New York and Bermuda said Bermuda is facing a food shortage. William N. Margolis, assistant director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, who promoted the resumption of strike settlement talks, said he expects the negotiations to continue for several days. The striking dock workers are demanding an increase of 50 cents an hour in their wages. The shipping industry has offered an increase of only 10 cents an hour. The strike has sealed the ports from Portland, Maine, to Hampton Roads, Va. Virginia. With Jos. ports on the Pacific Coast also idle because of another strike that began 60 years ago, the Gulf Coast ports are the only ones currently in operation. Retaliation Will Be Taken* Joseph P. Ryan, Chairman of the U.S. (Continued on page 14) I
Snowstorm Wreaks Havoc U. S. Has Incommunicated One Hundred Towns. CHICAGO, Nov. 19-(PU)-The worst snowstorm of the season swept eastward across the Plains states today, paralyzing railroad and highway transportation, wrecking lines of communication and isolating more than 100 towns. A* portion of the storm struck a* region 85 miles wide, northeastward into Nebraska, northwest into the lows and southwest into Minnesota. Elsewhere the storm, driven by very fast winds, spilled over Kansas and southward to Lubbock, Texas. Storm warnings were issued for Lakes Michigan and Superior, and the Midwest, where thunderstorms fell in large amounts today. Weather forecasters in this city said the storm has gained enough strength since it hit Colorado yesterday to reach the Atlantic coastal states in a dilute form by the end of the week. Estimates of snowfall in the East were revised, but temperatures were said to be 10 to 15 degrees as the storm passed through. The weather was bad in general, A new storm lashed the Pacific coast, a haze tucked * New York from the Atlantic Ocean, and a tornado ripped apart houses" and injured 19 people in Mlsislpl. The storm, with winds reaching nearly 70 miles per hour, turned the rain into dry snow as it moved through, and carpeted roads" and communications with ice. Several aiitomobile rn reported being rn hindered," stuck" on a long stretch, and trains were delayed. The Rock Island Railroad reported that it did not know where its "brakes" were, due to communications being interrupted. In Denver, a military plane went up * to search for the Chicago * Denver rie train, the Rocket, of the Rock Island Railroad, believed to be stuck in the vicinity of Colhy, Kansas. (Continued on page 14)
Federal Service To Give BCG Vaccine. í Pon" Discusses Details.Work To Begin In Mid-1949 By JAMES F. CUNNINGHAM WASHINGTON, Nov. 19 -- (PU)-- Dr. Juan A. Pon", Puerto Rican Health Co missioner, said today that "his department will probably launch a campaign in mid-1949 to immu" nize tuberculosis in most Puerto Rican nlftos." In the long run, said Pon" a Preñad Unida, the campaign will do much to control tuberculosis, Puerto Rico's number one disease problem. About 4,200 Puerto Ricans died of tuberculosis last year, Pon said. He said the disease "tares between 40,000 and 50,000 perso" na". At a conference held ".ver. aegún reported, officials of the federal Public Health Service agreed "caal finally" to provide the "BCG'* vaccine and some rie Ja technical assistance needed to carry out the anti-tuberculosis campaign. Bacillus Calmette-Guerln, - BCG, as it is called, is a serum developed by the French and used in many parts of the world for more than 25 years. They leave for New York _Pons, accompanied riel doetog Guillermo Arbona, director of 1* Insular Division of Public Health, and Julio A. Perez, chief of the Negociado rie Hospitales, left for New York today. All three came to attend the annual conference of state and territorial health officials, which ended yesterday. But they apparently preferred to spend more time on a number of other activities. Dr. Arixma, for example, was elected vice-president of the American Association of Public Health - an honor not bestowed on a Puerto Rican since Resident Commissioner Ane ionio Fernrt" Ane ionio Fernrt" of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Ane ionio Fernrt" Jsern, held the post three years ago. Additional Federal Aid Fon" reported having made a* visit to the Children's Bureau of the Public Health Service, and revealed that the island will receive an additional $96,000 in federal aid for its children's health and nutrition program for the year ending next June. At the office of the Displaced" Person" Co.nlslon," he had mono* luck, he added. ""There are serious obstacles that probaMomento prevent us from ever getting modic* or nurses through (1N displaced persons program as it now operates,'* he explained. The technicality of the law is that it would be impossible to examine these ere* rioncialo" rio displaced persons. until they have arrived, Pon" said. 5 there is a technicality in the law that provides that loria riesplazaria person, must have a sponsor and should not become a* public charge. Pon" said he expected to confer with the New York Health Commissioner, Dr. Harry 3. Mustard, on the question of an exchange of New York and Puerto Rican health employees. The exchange, he said, would give urban nurses working in the Puerto Rican community an opportunity to learn something about the conditions prevailing in the place where most of their patients come, and would give Puerto Rican employees an opportunity to learn something about the metropolitan method of sanitation. The idea has been under consideration for some time, he added, but there have been difficulties in salting them. Pon" and Perez sn propose to return to San Juan by plane on Sunday morning. Dr. Arbonn. he said, will remain in New York until next week. Appointed Smith Dr. Pon" said fln "lm "nf* during the interview that he had appointed Dr. Robert Smith' for Chief of the Tuberculosis Bureau in the Department; and that the said official has already been oriented as to the work to be done on the Island, directing it for the next year.
TOKYO NEWSPAPER PUBLISHES MUÑQZ PHOTO WASHINGTON, Nov. 19. - (PU) - L* photograph <lel Governor-elect of Puerta Rico, Lula Muñoz Marin, appeared in the center of 1* front* page of the "Pielfie Star" and Strlpa"", a newspaper published in Tokin. F.l foot of the engraving riwñ* me: "The first Governor who h*"Ido elected by the nuehln rie Puerto Rico, in 500 afio*."