THE NflNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy with scattered light showers, mainly during the early morning hours. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 80; low, 71. Barometric pressure, 80.04 inches of mercury.
38 Pages
MARANA JOURNAL
iÑO XXIX
Entered at second dam matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
.... MARCH 13, 1948
Motorists, let's show the traditional courtesy of the pala
NUMBER 112
Government asks for $75 minimum wage
Petition for several raises was also filed yesterday with ODP Private industry payments compared Several officials in favor of the demand made. A letter from Jimenez Pnr DARIO CARLO . A general mood in favor of setting at least $75 the salaries of government employees who receive less than that amount prevailed at the public hearing held all afternoon yesterday by the Office of Personnel in connection with the new uniform compensation plan, a hearing which was also characterized by the tendency to increase the compensation assigned to certain positions in the Government of Puerto Rico. One of the most newsworthy notes was the intervention of the President of the Island Minimum Wage Board, Mr. Cándido Oliveras, to point out, on different occasions, the difference between the salaries paid by private industry and those paid by the Government, in a number of specific cases, with the Government paying a considerably lower remuneration than the Private Initiative. The recommendation that the salaries of the small employees be fixed at a rate of not less than $75 was originally launched by the President of the Federation of Employees of the Insular Government, Mr. Justo Pastor Lozada, with whose recommendation Mr. Candido Oliveras openly expressed his solidarity, stating that he had originally thought of a salary of not less than $100 for these employees. Other officials of other agencies also expressed solidarity with the recommendation, as the work of the public hearing progressed, a letter from the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Jorge J. Jimenez, which contained a criticism of the procedure to be followed in the hearing. In his communication, addressed to the Director of Personnel, Mr. Manuel A. Perez, Commissioner Jimenez, in regard to the discussion of the compensation plan, was read in the course of the public hearing. In his communication, addressed to the Director of Personnel, Mr. Manuel A. Perez, Commissioner Jimenez stated that "having never had the opportunity to discuss the manner in which the grade is assigned, within the uniform immunization plan, to a specific position within the classification plan, he believes that any public hearing held will not fulfill its purpose. He added: "The truth is that the assignment of the grade to a clamp is never open to the public at a public hearing and until this is done, the dissatisfaction of the public employees" toward this plan of re- ¡ muneration and uniform classification which our Government desires will continue,"The Director of Personnel took the floor to clarify, among other things, that the plan is public knowledge and that all departments and agencies of the Government had in their possession documentation showing the classification of each position and the grade to which each position had been assigned. He explained that the purpose of the hearing was none other than to discuss the type of compensation or grade assigned to the different classes of positions, as previously announced, and that therefore the classification was not going to be discussed. Then Mr. Pastor Lozada also spoke, to express his solidarity with what was expressed in Mr. Jimenez's letter, in a part of which he stated that the compensation of the chauffeur in the Government should not be less than $100. The need for an improvement in the salaries of doctors, stiflers, clerical stenographers, and stenographer reporters was raised in general by various speakers, as the difficult situation of obtaining these personnel was becoming untenable. Some were of the opinion that the day would come when the Government would not be able to obtain these professionals and employees to render the corresponding public service. As for the employees within the group referred to above, it was pointed out that at present it is extremely difficult to get efficient and qualified personnel to work for the salary offered by the Government. Some agencies did not appear by their representatives, but presumably sent written recommendations by mail. Others sent representatives, who gave brief depositions, announcing, in addition, that they were submitting their recommendations in writing and had sent them by mail. About eighty 'repn "" ntante" of . - (Continued on p. 14)
The rate of cases of phthisis is low, says Pons i If he refers to those <¡ne arose in schools. The Commissioner of Health of Puerto Rico, Dr. Juan A. Pon," said.Juan A, Pon", referred yesterday morning, when asked about the cases of tuberculosis that have been registered in schoolchildren in seven schools in San Juan and Santurce, stating that the number of cases of tuberculosis in schools is very low, He expressed that a voice that will be organized by the Tuberculosis Bureau of the Department of Tuberculosis: de Tuberculosis of the Department of Health, for which he will appoint an American doctor, the plan of study* en masse will be carried out in all the schools of Puerto Rico, According to the statistics offered by the Department of Health, three? According to statistics provided by the Department of Health, three active and eleven suspected cases, which are under treatment, were located in the Raldm loty schools. Pa- ! ore Rufo. Goyco, Lincoln, Acostn. I Barbosa and Eleanor Roosevelt. In j lia Escuda Raldorioty two other cases were recorded postoriormcnP to the taking rio the fluorogiTifins, \ I I I which were not officially reported, Still fail to be completed, of fluorographs rio , four other schools do Capital, i The rioctor Pon,*, speaking on । this problem, stated that in rea(Continued on p, 14)
The Senate of*' Puerto Rico approved bills in its Thursday session, which allocate to the University the sum of $3,750,000 for improvements in the Institution. These legislative measures will have to be considered ¡ finally by the House of Representatives and the Governor of Puerto Rico, before the funds provided for them will go to the University. A commission of the House of Representatives, accompanied by the Rector of the University and other officials, visited the Industrial School, and was very impressed with the possibilities of the University. She also visited the Experimental Station, where the directors of the same explained to the commission the experiments that they have been carrying out with the ! ! country, and on the functioning of the pilot plant and the technical* i to determine the ingredients ' of the various rodents, their exceptions, deficiencies and shortcomings, For these two facilities, allocations are included in the approved bills !
News Digest
The Elected Governor's Act was invoked in Federal Court in a case filed by Eastern regarding the payment of taxes by nonresident shareholders. - ♦ - 1.a University celebrates its tfto, anlveraa rio. * * * * ('omission of the ( aribe discussed the possibility of using funds from the International Bank for Reconstruction. * . * SAA awarded the auction of the mechanical equipment for the filter plant of the new Loira aqueduct. * Eapaña made a proposal to strengthen relations with Washington. - - - Brazilian Jnsen makes the greatest of physics discoveries after the disintegration, clone of the Atom. ♦ - ♦ Neis ice plants and a water bottling plant were out of federal standards in February. - - - Cámara Ruja Insular was in session for only five minutes, - - - - They will hold on Tuesday a hearing on the project creating the Puerto Rico Sugar Board, ♦ * ♦ ♦ Hospital Plan was explained yesterday to the House Treasury Committee. They expect the next sew, cha de arro" to be. abundant. Tona thinks the number of cases of phthisis in Kan.
of phthisis in Kan Juan e* hnjo schools. Points out study will be effec. tuará in all* ln* Ir l*ln campuses. - ♦ - The Attorney (ienevAl assures that his department has always complied with the provisions of the law, sending n Legislature statistics* on crime. - " " Minimum salary of $75 for lo* employee* of the Insular Government. - Do* Puerto Rican* engineers* object to new Isla Verde airport. - Presidents and foreign ministers of the American countries will be invited to the Cnngrcsn of History. - The mutual military aid pact between France, England and Henelux has been completed. England and Henelux. ♦ * * Thousands of Czechs wept yesterday by the corpse of Jan Masaryk. ♦ * * * Spreads the conviction that ios United States* has desisted from the partition of Pales, tina. * * * * ('hile formally accuses before UNO Ins ruana, dn usurp the noberanía of - ..*lovaqula. * ♦ * Plftern visited Truman pnr surprise; says found his Interest in Puerto Rico doubled. - - - Situation of the drop in ej price of sugar will be discussed on Ifl.
The University of Puerto Rico has been celebrating since its 45th anniversary with a program that includes various activities. J.a fotograba shows an aspect of the illuminated tower last night, showing the year of the foundation and that of the celebration. Last night, under the auspices of the Office of Social Activities, the band gave a concert and fireworks were set off on campus (EL MUNDO photo by Casenave).
! A commission of the Legislature made a visit to the campus and the tower were decorated with a special humiliation. - Colegio de Mayagüez has joined in the celebration - Replica of Normal Yesterday the University of Puerto Ríen celebrated its 45th year" of existence, commemorating the date with several public events, sponsored by the university administration, which took place in the tower of our first educational center. Coinciding with the celebration of the ruadragéslmoquinlo anniversary.
There is hope for an increase in the rice harvest ('átnara Commerce says in the Americas* will be 260.000.000 fanega* .The Chamber of Commerce of Pucr- ' lo Rico in informing its* associates about the* prospects* that exist ¡ in the future rice market, extends the -manifestations of its ¡ President Mr. Fiüpo de Hos-j los which were published yesterday in i EL MUNDO. "The current situation as regards stocks is not riel torio .satisfactory, - he says -. There is little rice left in the hands of the harvesters and the Administration is making efforts to avoid price increases. To this end, exports are restricted or eliminated altogether to European countries interested in buying. It says, I" Chamber qt.e Cuba purchased its full allotment of the crop and requests extension pRia the summer inllante. The holders of the grain are striving to obtain higher prices. In this they are aided by the fairly active demand in the domestic market." (Continued on page 14' >
The University celebrates its 459th anniversary
Completion of the five-nation pact
Provides mutual military aid for 50 years in the event of aggression Is the answer to the Reds' advance Italy* would be invited after the election result is known By HERBERT G. RING BRUSSELS, Belgium, March 12. -<PU)-Britain, France, Belgium, the Low Countries and Luxembourg today concluded a 50-year treaty which is supposed to be an alliance to offer military aid to the United States in response to the spread of communism in Western Europe. Italy may join the group of signatory nations of this treaty after the critical elections on April 1, in which it will be decided whether the country remains in the Western family of nations or leaves the communist one. The Foreign Ministers of the five nations are to sign the treaty here next Wednesday. The treaty contains clauses which hang economic, social, cultural and mutual assistance issues, and bind the participants in a seeming alliance of the Western nations to oppose the Russian Eastern invasion. Reliable informants said that the military clause provides for automatic military aid to any of the nations attacked. The treaty covers ammonium plots within the limits of the "United Nations" without exception, and determines that the disputes between the signatories will be settled by the United Nations. A communiqué issued after the signing of the agreement was signed by the signatories to the agreement, states that disputes between the signatories shall be settled by any means at their disposal or otherwise by appeal to the International Court of Justice at The Hague. >- A communiqué issued after today's final meeting said: "The diplomatic representatives of the five powers who met in Brussels from March 4 to 12 have concluded their agreement and drafted a treaty to be submitted to their respective governments, including clauses relating to economic, social and cultural matters, as well as to the promotion of peace and security. The treaty will be signed next week by the foreign ministers of the five nations, with each of the governments of the five nations to publish the substance of the treaty after its final adoption. | Although the communiqué did not say so, it was learned that the treaty will be signed on Wednesday, the traffic was urgently notified and most of it was delegated. [InrnodlRtamonto boarded the planes that would take them to their respective capitals, so that the draft would be studied and approved immodlat-'monto. The Belgian authorities reported that it had not been necessary for the delegates to put their initials to the draft, but they were happy and smiling after having succeeded" in preparing a treaty which is calculated to be the most effective blow - still putting the Marshall Plan - against Russian expansionism. A permanent advisory committee, probably based in London, will be responsible for implementing the provisions of these clauses (continued on page 14).
Hearing on Puerto Rico Sugar Board to be held Tuesday
At the hearing to be held next Tuesday to discuss S. F. 239, which creates the Puerto Rico Sugar Board. 239, -which creates the Puerto Rico Sugar Board in the Department of Agriculture, announced by the Senate Committee on Agriculture, and regulates the relations and contracts between settlers" and millers for the milling of sugar cane-, This bill repeals Act 221 of May 12, 1942, which declares sugar mills to be public service enterprises and places them under the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission. S. 229 was filed by Senator Juan Dávtla Díaz, and has the endorsement of the Puerto Rico Land Authority, as reported yesterday. It contains in its provisions the manner in which the participation of sugar belonging to a settler shall be determined when its price is less than $5 C.I.F. in New York, or when it is $5 or more. In this respect, it is provided in the first paragraph that this liquidation shall be as follows: "In cane" producing a rum.
In cane producing a yield of 19 percent or monns of 19 percent sugar of 96 degrees of polarization, the settler's share will be 63 percent of the total sugar production", as indicated in a table included in the project. On canes producing a yield greater than 19 percent of sugar of 96 degrees of polarization, the settler's share will be increased as follows: For each hundredth of one percent of the yield in excess of 19 percent, one hundredth of 63 percent shall be added, and the total of the sum thus obtained shall be the percentage corresponding to the settler in the total sugar production; Provided, that in canes producing a yield greater than 14 percent of sugar of 96 degrees of polarization, the settler's share shall be 67 percent of the total sugar production, as indicated in the table included in the project. The settler's share of the sugar produced by his cane", provided that the price of Puerto Rico sugar is $ñ or more C. I. F" New York, shall be as follows: (a' On canes producing a (Continued on page 12)
Eastern invokes elective governor's law in a tribute case.
Spain makes overtures to closer relations with U. S. Foreign Minister expounded point of view in aftermath of events in Europe.- He pointed out detriment of democratizing too much, ¿
By RALPH FORTE MADRID, March 12 (PU) - Authorized sources reported today that the Spanish government has told the American Chargé d'Affaires in this capital that closer relations between Madrid and Washington are vital to Western civilization in view of recent events in Czechoslovakia and Finland. The sources said that Foreign Minister Alberto Martin Artajo communicated the government's attitude to Chargé d'Affaires Paul Culbertson. At a 45-minute conference held at the Foreign Ministry last Monday, Martin Artajo told Culbertson that Spain was as anxious as the United States to improve all kinds of relations with his country. Artajo was said to have expressed the conviction that a close rapprochement would not only be beneficial to both countries, but an urgent necessity in view of the usurpation of power by the Communists in Czechoslovakia and the request sent by Russia to Finland for a friendship and defense pact. The conference was arranged at the request of Culbertson, according to informants, Mariano Itu- ; naide, Director of Political Economy in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who was formerly attached to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
■F n W 1 | El. GENERAL FRANCO to 1!" Spanish Embassy in Washington, said, in accordance with the fílenlo* rio leferencia, to have served as Interpreter, The conference was described as the termination rie a meeting between Culbertson and Martin Artajo ol last month, during which the American official made pro- [ oral positions to the Minitsro rio lo | Exterior. j These were said to speak Included (Continued on p. 14)
Negrón assures that Justice always complies with Law 42 of April 1929.
Section 7 of Law 42 of April 26, 1929, requires the agency to send to the Legislature statistics on crime - Drowns for establishment of new bureau / Attorney General Luis Negrón Fernández, Attorney General of Puerto Rico, assures that his department has always complied with the precept of law contained in section 7 of Law 42 of April 26, 1929, requiring that, as of said date, the Department
1'4*1 " 11 of Justice shall prepare statistics on crime in Puerto Rico, to be sent to the Legislature on an annual basis. In order that a study may be made that is more than "a mere compilation of data," the Attorney General advocates the establishment of a Bureau of Crime Statistics and Statistics. In his column Del Palacio al l Capitolio, published in today's El Univer-! sal, journalist Carlos Re- [ chani Agrait asks if the precept of law contained in section 7 of Law 42 of April 26, 1929, which definitively abolished the death penalty in Puerto Rico, has been complied with, said section 7 required that <! Department of Justice, since the approval of said law, to prepare capital statistics on the crimes* of n.The said section 7 required that the Department of Justice, after the approval of said law, shall prepare capital statistics on the crimes of n. osinalo, homicide, assault with intent to commit homicide, which "shall include the essential data to determine the course of criminality on the aforementioned crimes," and shall also contain a comparative study of the crimes of n. osinalo, homicide, assault with intent to commit homicide, a comparative study of the crimes of the same nature committed from April 30, 1921 (date on which the death penalty was again effective in Puerto Ríen after having been suspended since 1917) until the date of the approval of the aforementioned Law 42 5 a, that is, April 26, 1929. "The said journalist affirms that in no delivery of the House nor of the Senate does any of the essential data mentioned in the above-mentioned law appear, and that it was never prepared in Justlci. The Department of Justice, beginning with Attorney General James R. Beverley, under whose purview (Continued on p. 14)
(III a * i 4" |>ni IHIIIVIIIW Com balen vicious use of appeals To prevent them* judges are imposing harsher penalties on appellants The rise of what Iqs judges laugh- : nominate "vicious appeals," is. The rise of what judges refer to as "vicious appeals" is being combated by San Juan District Court judges by imposing harsher penalties than those imposed on appellants in the San Juan Municipal Court. According to what we were informed yesterday, such practice is intended to stop a series of vicious appeals that are being made on a daily basis in the different chambers of the Municipal ('orlo Municipal for the District Court, with no basis for such appeal. The determination of the judges to । put an end to this practice, which costs money to El Pueblo do Puor- [ to Rico, according to our informant, [ was made palpable yesterday when Judge Jesus A. Gonzalez, acting [ interim in the San Juan District Court, imposed one and a half years in jail in each of [ six cases of petty theft in which he found Emilio Moreno MoJíca. He was sentenced to serve one year in jail in each case by the Municipal Court. Municipal Court, having now to serve three years" more" than what was imposed by the tribu, nal inferiqr. Moreno \fojicA was convicted on the" sol* crsox he appealed, "iendo é". (Continued on p. 14)
PIÑERO HAS DOUBLED THE PRESIDENT'S INTEREST IN PUERTO RICO For PAUL HARRISON . WASHINGTON', hand 12 (PU). - The Governor paid an unannounced visit to President Truman at the White House, and said he found that the President's interest in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands had doubled since his last visit. Plftero said he had spoken to the President about San Juan's need to expand and the proposed airport at Isla Verde, and found that the President had already been informed of the matter, Plftero said he intends to leave Washington tomorrow, Saturday, if the weather is good enough to fly. He said mu trip to the capital had been of great use, but that o* may have need to return on April. He said that I* looks as if he will have to return to new* discussions on the Isla Verde airport matter, the* cuate* have *ldo* been deferred* for tro* wm "na*, at the request of the Navy. He said, not ohMantc. that pro*eguiri onn the* pertinent* legal* action*, for the acquisition of fierran for the airport location The government has money available and the* expropriation* proceedings* will comment in l "* Court*, Plftero said.
Invites decision on law enforcement May affect government revenues from Income Tax collection LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA F.L MUNDO Staff Writer The loy enngresionAl which amends Ia .Charter, granting i Puerto Rico's elective governor and its effects on the Insular Income Tax Law, was invoked in a lawsuit filed in the Federal Court by F>"ten Sugar Associates, through the law firm of attorney E. T. Flririler. The suit lists as defendants the Treasurer of Pirertt Rico, Rafael BuscagliR, and the National City Bank, and the purpose of the suit is to sue the Treasurer of Pirertt Rico, Rafael BuscagliR, and the National City Bank. The purpose of the suit is to determine by the Court whether, under the law amending the Charter, the shareholders of the Eastern Sugar Associate, residing in the United States, must pay the 29 percent tax on their profits," the Eastern Sugar Associate appealed to the Court in its decision in its appeal."The Company appealed to the Corto on its ('Mllcind d( trustee and requested Instructions as to whether it should pay Air" dedor of $50,000 of the profit" o! had" by its" Shareholders residing" abroad, for Income Tax", or whether such." The Court ruled that under the law that amended the Charter, they are not obligated to make such payment. If the Court ruled that under the Charter, as amended, the 29 percent deduction on the profits of Eastern Sugar's stockholders could not have been made, the $5O,0O() which would have returned to the public treasury,  The complaint states in part that "the plaintiffs are engaged in the cultivation of cane* and the manufacture of sugar cane" in their own "territory," in their capacity as doicomisArio" and that as such they distribute a certain portion of their "income," not "income" from their operations in the United States. The "Income" note" on the amounts paid to the Treasurer of Port Elio, among its beneficiaries; that during the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1947, the HemanriAnte" orrionAton paid in the "tenedme" of the "Atríones prcf" i! nda". at the rate of $1.25 per car* ao irion, the" amount having served the ' for caria Shareholder delivered" to | National City Bank in San Juan J that the holders rio this" accionel [ preferred stock are in part citizen! and residents of Puerto Rico, and ciw riadanos rie United States not rest ■ tients in Puerto Rico, and in part i corporations organized in i two United States, which do not do business! in Puerto Rico." It is further reported that "I virtue rie the rie law rie cpntrlbuclonRl on income, the bank had doducl' rio and retained 29 percent of thei amounts paid" to each di ln" preferred shares of ins ten*doro" nonresident" in Puerto Rico, to be paid to him in turn to the Te< surero de Puerto Rico, on or before" June 15, 1948. in compliance with the law." The 1* > sections of the statute providing for the payment of the income tax by the nonresident shareholder in Puerto Rico, as well as the one providing that no deductions shall be made to the nonresident lot. i More" ariolan'c is quoted then" ll part of the loy passed in 1947 by Congress, amending the Charter' , i which states that "the rights, privileges, and immunities of the" citizens of the United State" shall be respected" in Puertí Rico equally as "the Puerto R!< co were a state of the Union and subject to the provisions of the first paragraph, second section of the fourth article of the Constitution of the United States" . Allege then that It Contkk tution in "u section 2. Article IV, prevents a state from discriminating against citizens of another state in its favor, with respect to income taxation, and that by the cited amendment to the Charter, the same prohibition applies to Puerto Rico, The plaintiffs say that "as a result of the provisions of the Insular Income Tax Act, in the" sections cited above, the" United States citizens not resident" in Puerto Rico are obliged to pay a higher rate of tax than that paid by the" citizen" resident" in Puerto Rico, denying" them, in addition, the" credit* and deductions" allowed to the latter." DecláraNe further stated by the plaintiff" corpnraclüh that" "as trustee" and in ; "u trustee capacity, they owe to their" beneficiaries the obligation to protect(Continued on /page 14)