THE WNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy to cloudy with scattered showers and isolated thunderstorms. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, low, 76. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:30 p.m., 29.86 inches of mercury.
40 Pages 5/
DAILY NEWSPAPER
TOMORROW
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 1948
Those On Foot Should Also Cooperate To Avoid Traffic Accident".
NUMBER 13480
Still in Doubt District Number 32
According to the" latest official data from the Insular Board of Elections, the Popular Democratic Party won the representative district of Juncos San Lorenzo and Gurabo, by only three votes, which will be subject to review in the final scrutiny, which will begin to be carried out next Monday at ten o'clock in the morning. Originally, 3796 votes were reported in favor of the Popular Party in San Lorenzo. According to a last telegram, said party obtained all! 3206 votes. Dr. Leopoldo Figuerna, representative of the Partido Estadista in the Junta Insular, when he made the tallies yesterday afternoon was able to verify that the Popular triumph there was by the mentioned votes. Dr. Figueroa stated that said representative district could very well correspond to the allied parties, since there are ballots pertemeciente" to these parties protested in the different schools of the three towns. Official Data of the Representative District The official data corresponding to the three towns are the following: Votes for the Popular Party obtained in Gurabo 3150; popular votes obtained in Juncos 3,593: popular votes obtained in San Lorenzo. 3206, which makes a total of 9,949 votes in favor of the Popular Party for the representative district, gives San Lorenzo, Juncos, Gurabo. The votes obtained by the Statehood party were the following, in Gurabo, 327: in Juncos 228 and in San Lorenzo 899, totaling 1454 votes". The votes obtained by the Socialist Party were 679 in Gurabo The votes obtained by the Socialist Party were 679 in Gurabo, 2471 in Junco" and 1867 in San Lorenzo, for a total of 5017 votes. The votes obtained by the Reformist Party were as follows: 356 in Gurabo. 883 in Juncos j 2236 Jen San Lorenzo, for a total of 3475. The votes of the three allied parties totaled 9946, with the difference between the votes obtained by the Popular Party and those obtained by the Opposition party being only three votes. As for the town of Juncos, which belongs to the aforementioned representative district, it was won by the Popular Party by only eleven votes, since the Opposition parties there obtained 3,582 votes. The Latest Figures of the Parties Based on the computation of the official data received at the Jnsular Board of Elections, the political parties have obtained to date the following votes: Partido PopuJar Democrático 386,992: Partido Esladlsta, 86,279: Partido Socialista, 62,977; Partido Independentista, 63,132; and the Partido Reformista, 62,977. 63,132; and the Reform Party, 27549. According to what has been reported by the Insular Board of Elections, there are still some polling stations in three towns that have yet to submit their reports on the votes obtained by the different parties. It was reported that in the town of Rio Piedras, 30 polling stations have yet to report, indicating that the officials of said polling stations put the collation sheets in the closed sacks that were sent to the Insular Board. Also missing in the town of Arecibo are 21 schools to be reported; and 8 schools in the town of Co (Continued on page 18) Tegel Aerodrome Inaugurated Will Allow Increased Food Supply To German Capital BERLIN, November 5. (PU)-A four-engine American Skymaster" air transport landed today amidst a haze and driving rain that barely made it possible to see, at Tegel airfield, to inaugurate the terror airfield for the transportation of supplies by air to Berlin. The North American, British and French military governors, who were there awaiting the arrival of the plane, praised the opening of the new airfield which will guarantee supplies by air when bad weather delays flights bringing food and supplies to Russian-blockaded Berlin. Built in 2 mane* General Lucius D. Clay. American military governor, said the camp would be ready for full-scale operations within a week or 10 days, a month earlier than originally scheduled. It was built in two months, with 1* cooperation of 15,000 Berliners, half of whom were women, who worked with shovels, brooms and even their hands to help overcome the Soviet blockade;
By JAMES F. CUNNINGHAM WASHINGTON, Nov. 5-(PU)-The report prepared for Governor Piftero by the Advisory Committee on Rum seems to underline the need for an intensive promotional campaign to stimulate the sale of Puerto Rican rum. Alt said Maurice Filliui, Wáshlngton representative of the Puerto Rican Rum Institute, in an interview with the United Press. The "1 report of the Consultative Committee has not yet been made public. And Fllllu," who has read it, declined to go into its details. - "It was a very good Report," he commented, "because it includes recommendations aimed at avoiding the collapse of the liquor industry in Puerta Rico." He concluded with "I think the report should have indicated the need for a public campaign to prevent the collapse of the liquor industry.
Committee Recommended Avoiding the Collapse of the Liquor Industry
happiness and sales promotion" on the Continent. Fllllu" has consistently argued that this" measure" are the" only" that can prevent the total collapse of the Puerto Rican liquor industry. Last year sales of Puerto Rican rum on the Continent were only one-fifth of what they were in the pre-war years, and much less than they were during the war, when other beverages were in short supply. In 1941 and 1942, for example, 2,600,000 and 2,700,000 gallons of rum were sold on the Continent. Last year only 500,000 gallons were sold. Recent informal reports from San Juan indicate that rum shipments have increased, in a flat manner (Continued on page 20).
The Contrast Between Triumph and Defeat
í ' ... wile SiS ■ K fe A 1 c
Engravings" show the" family" of the victorious and defeated candidate in Tuesday's U.S. election. Above, the triumphant President Truman shares his rejoicing with his wife and daughter Margaret as he arrives at the Jsckson County Courthouse in Indepen-
The day after the election, Truman returned yesterday to WA, where a hedge party was to be held in his honor. Truman returned to WA "hIngton yesterday. In the photograph below we see the defeated Republican Party candidate, Governor Thomas E. Dewey, with his Mrs. mother, his wife and hl-
Jo" as they arrive at Grand Station ( enter!, in New York, on their way back to Albany on Wednesday. From left to right: John Dewey, Mrs. Dewey, Governor Dewey Mrs. George Dewey (Governor's mother), and Thomas, Jr. (Associated Press Photo)
Muñoz Announced Plans É. Ü. Asks Nationals For Industrialization To Leave China
Will Also Ask Congress To Allow Island To Draft Constitution. - Other Status Efforts
Over 200,000 Reds Threatened The Capital, Nanjing. - Communist Army Reconcentrates Forces
The announcement "to devote all its efforts to the Industrialization of the Island in the next four years" was made by Governor-elect Luí" Muñoz Marín to the editor of the United Press in San Juan.
By ARTHUR GOUL , SHANGHAI, November 5. - (PU) - The powerful Chinese Communist armies north and south of Nanking today threatened the capital of Generalissimo Chiang Kal-"hek. The U.S. Embassy warned more
The agency reported the following, which was published by hundreds of newspapers in the United States and Latin America: "Luis Muñoz Marín, the first governor elected by the people of Puerto Rico, said he will ask the U.S. Congress to allow the island to draft its own constitution. He will also ask the U.S. to promise to grant Puerto Rico independence or statehood when the people are in a position to request it. The Popular Democratic Party candidate, Mr. Muñoz Marin, was elected in an election that has given him an overwhelming command of both houses of the island Legislature. Industrial Effort The governor-elect told reporters that, in accordance with his party's program, his administration will concentrate all efforts during the next" year" in rebuilding the Island industrially, so that it can reach an economic position that will allow it to petition the United States" for Independence or statehood. The party's program favors the continuation of Puerto Rico, for the time being, as a territory of the United States, until such a position is achieved. 'Continued on page 20)
- Agreement Discussions Will Vary This Year
-Me 4,000 Americans in the Shanghai-Nanking area to fan the country while there was still time to do so. More than 200,000 Red troops were advancing from "Shangtung province toward Hsuchow and the vital rail line linking Hsuchow with Nanking, 240 miles to the southeast. Other battle-hardened veterans, who fought against the Japanese and then had to hide in the mountains 40 miles south of Nanking, were being concentrated here for a possible attack, a spokesman said. Large" Communist Forces" Large Communist forces in the mountains a hundred miles south of Nanking, inactive except for occasional Raids on (Continued on Page 16)
Sugar Union Summons Union Council For 11th By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA Editor of EL MUNDO The" negotiations between employers and workers" of 1" Puerto Rico's sugar industry may undergo a radical change, as to the manner of approving the contract for the next harvest, depending on the" agreements to be reached by the General Council of Unions of the Sugar Union. All indications are that the negotiations will not be held by the Union and the Sugar Producers Association, as has been the case during the last few years. The recent decision of the Junta Nacional d* Relacione" del Traba, jo, recognizing the validity of central-by-central bargaining, has (Continued on page 16)
News Digest
More than 800,900 people gave Truman a rousing reception on his arrival in Washington. - Muñoz announced plans for "InduatrlaJI Melon. Petition to Congroao "ohre Insular Constitution, * " " " Advisory Committee report calls for preventing collapse of the redwood industry. * - - - Senate Committee to investigate alleged fraud in the election of Vito Marcantonio. ♦ " - The New York Times asks Truman to remember the "promise" made to the island. "Dr. Juan B. Soto denied having insulted a police officer in Rincón, * * - Dulle accused Vishlnsky's statement before the UN of being false. - They allege that Israel is receiving arms from Czechoslovakia. - A new drop in the stock market was recorded. - The 32nd representative district, won by "populare" by only 3 votes, is still in doubt. - The "United States" asked its nationals to leave the territory of China.
800,000 People In Washington Gave Harry Truman a Clamorous Reception.
Second Stock Market Decline Recorded
T W. KIEN'LEN United Press Financial Editor NEW YORK, Nov. 5 (F. U.)- A" statement by Representative John Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, announcing that he intends to introduce a bill against excessive profits as soon as the Eighty-first Congress convenes," spurred the second stock market slump since Truman's surprise victory. The shakeout approached Wednesday's low v the individual artion losses were as much as 9 points. The market lost about $2,000,000,000,000 overall. Selling boomed shortly before noon. There was a time when the quotation boards were not able to keep pace with the transactions because they were too fast, but at half past twelve the quotation boards normalized, and volume remained high throughout the remainder of the session, and the quotation boards indicated that the pace was over 2,000,000 shares per session. As in Wednesday's session, all of the listed Isa sections experienced declines, Amerada Corporation was down more than eight points, Santa Fe about seven, and Superior Oil of California and National Steel five or more points. As the close approached, activity increased and losses widened. f Grain futures affected The disruption at the Exchange affected grain futures. Wheat and corn were the only ones that were able to close with some gains. In Chicago, wheat ended with a gain of 518 to 1 cent per bushel and corn was up 12 to 1-78 cents per bushel. Oats were unchanged and rye was up half a cent. Cotton was down six points. (erds rose in Chicago, closing at t.n high of $24.50, for a gain of 25 cents. Agricultural markets have been strong since the Democratic victory in the belief that agricultural commodity prices will continue to be supported. Some" Examples Superior Oil of California closed ron 168. losing 14 Du Pont led the downward movement in its group, losing sois to 173. Allied Chemical dropped four to 181. In the steel group. U. S. Steel lost 4-78 to 74-3 4, Youngstown Sheet and Tube, 77-314, losing 5-3¡4 and Wheeling Steel, 49-3¡4, down 4-l¡4. Chrysler lost 2-3'4 to 55-34 and General Motors dropped 2-1.2 to (Continued on page 20).
Charged with larceny by e.""o of Lopez Opero Jewelry store raised a ruckus in court. ♦ * * Hideki Tojo M was reeponanhle of Japan's declaration of war against the United States. - * - O National Guard eatahiecló a new rank alaterna*. ♦ - "Rice crop will not be enough to meet world demand. - * - The people" who are discharged from the National Guard must register for military service. * - - Next Monday "e will meet the panel that will discuss the price of milk. * The English Leftist Press says Truman represents liberalism. - - - New airfield inaugurated in Berlin. * - - . Capital is being raised to acquire the Textron factories in Nashua. * In Flannel "e commented favorably on Truman's re-election. - - - Record me various air disaster, with loss of 75 victims.
NEW YORK, Nov. 5 - (PU)-In an editorial published today by the New York Times, the paper calls on President Truman and "1 Democratic Party to remember to fulfill the promises they made in the party platform, to give the people of the Island a chance to "immediately determine their form of government and their ultimate status in relation to the United States." The quote e" from the 1948 Democratic Party platform. However, the newspaper says that the Puerto Rican problem is not as urgent as the issue of new legislation for Hawaii, Alaska and the Pacific possessions. This conclusion is the result of a reasoning which states that since Governor Lula Muñoz Marin "ran on a platform that
Truman Asks People's Cooperation To Solve Serious Problems WASHINGTON, Nov. 5. (PU) - President Horry S. Truman pronounced the following words from the portico of the White House:
Thank you very much. I cannot tell you how much I appreciate this warm and cordial welcome from the capital city of the greatest nation on earth. It is overwhelming. It forces a man to think and ask himself whether he is worthy of the trust, worthy of the responsibility that has been thrust upon him. I will say this to you: that I trust to work as hard as I have worked for you heretofore, and to work to the best of my ability. "I am happy to say that I will count on the coope-
I am happy to say that I will have the cooperation and help because we have one of the greatest vice presidents the country has ever had and a great leader in the Senate and in the House. One of the greatest legislators of all time is d vice president. That is one of the most fortunate things a man can have when he takes on this tremendous task. "I will expect the help and cooperation of all the people, because we are confronted with great problems today, which I believe we can bring to a satisfactory conclusion. At least we will do everything in our power, to bring them to a satisfactory conclusion. "I want to say now that I am grateful for the presence of so many people here in this great capital city. I have been in Mexico City and Rio de Janeiro and Ottawa, Canada; in almost every capital of the United States and in every large city in this recent campaign and no turnout has been better than this, or more enthusiastic. "I can't tell you how much I appreciate it. Thank you from the bottom of my heart."
Truman to Submit Old Legislative Agenda to Congress
Will Include Repeal of Taft-Harlley Law, Household Legislation, Civil Rights, Health Insurance, Education and Wages WASHINGTON, Nov. 5. - (FU) - President Truman was finally assured today that the "average man" program on the basis of which he ran for the Republican presidential nomination, Thomas E. Devvey, will have the strongest Democratic congressional support since the last few years.
-- - - s last rilas riel New Train. I"-" S courageous Missourian who ImLjíI I. O1JI lit JL IIU ' rerered the presidency riej finarle Franklin D. Roosevelt nearly 4 "Rntí Mníln A x/n"- a* 0 *' HSX)nin his post this time cnItVlll clllit /X VLl ¡ nio triumphant in his own right ¡ and as undisputed head of his parDe University Has he an emphatic manriatn pe. j pular that will have to be fulfilled _ j ns Democratic members of Congress, whom he led to do so after the election. The results rie the polls, A": "i A .. "t n virtually complete, compilaThere was Scant Attendance two by p rensn United, show . ,, . T.,-*. - And -Z , " that he will labor with a Congress The University rie Furrio Rico, niAs solidly Democratic that neither at the beginning yesterday of the classes" of the current any other time since 194.'. academic semester, dawned without " A , , , ,,,, police" island. The authorities Seats in the university Chambers speak Informed The new House rie Represenque when passing" the rlec- i lante" period will have at least 262 dodonarlo, would have rie sor withdrawn the múcratas: 171 republican" and 1 laFolíela of the University. It caused surprise in some of the ¡ of New York, students, although for other pa- ¡ This means a net gain only unnoticed, that he would not have j do 73 seats. And the Democrats have only one police officer on the entire campus, as well as in another seat in Colorado, where the gates of the campus were in front of the Folíela had remained in ra. "n the only case do a seat the University-since the events riel /n the House that has not yet been decided. 14 April next past, when decided. a group of students invaded I The Democrats also won the offices of Rector Benitez, pl- our 9 seats in the Senate, ariodiendo the latter's resignation. Subsequently, the Eightieth Congress took place, which gave rise to other events, on the occasion of the clean-up strike organized by Cruzada Unt- ! The congressional sweep was due In police surveillance in our 1 largely to the campaign rie luprimer educational center. There were mo- ] cha conducted by President Truman, and he is not inclined to let Congress forget about the Island police, as well as the staffs and prosecutors, who investigated the various events" at the White House. (Continued on 1" Page, 16> (Continued on 1" Page, 16)
Times Asks Truman to Remember Promises Made to the Island
"ostieno that the island's present status should continue until it becomes more economically capable, legislation regarding Puerto Rico can wait. The paper, often regarded as the most authoritative in the United States, says that the Puerto Rican elections were forgotten amid the excitement produced by the Truman triumph. "The passage of the Butler-Crawford bill, which gives the people of Puerto Rico the right to elect their governor, and the governor, in turn, the right to choose his own executive aides, was one of the most progressive measures adopted by the Eightieth Congress".
The President Met With His Executive Cabinet He Was Humbled And Grateful For Signs Of Affection For LOÜÍS~CASSELS WASHINGTON, Nov. 5. - i (PU)- Nearly a million residents of Washington greeted Harry S. Truman today with cheers and clamors as he returned victorious from the presidential battles. i The picture was different a dozen days ago, when he left on his final campaign trip, with all the trappings of a lonely figure, almost abandoned by those unwilling to honor a "sure loser. Today, it was a happy, if humble, man who trlunfonly approached the White House, waving his hat and smiling at the restless, exuberant crowds who shouted at him; "You showed them off, Harryl" If the President remembered that only a handful of those same people had bothered to come to see him out at the start of the campaign, he kept the thought to himself. Expresses Appreciation "Thank you very much," -said Mr. । Truman to the huge crowd, in an impromptu speech on the steps rio the White House. "I have no words to tell you" how mu- < ho grateful I am for this warm and cor- ! dial welcome. It makes one I think and wonder if he deserves this trust, this responsibility that has been entrusted to him." It was Harry Truman's gian day, í He did not cease to smile from the moment his special train returned to Union Station, at ente o'clock in the morning, The Vice President-elect, Alben W. Hrrkley, was the -third to come aboard ,and Mr. Truman, without a shyness embraced the distinguished seventy year old ! sonator," from Kcn- ¡ tucky. t Then the other friends came aboard. | One of the first was Senator Olin D. Johnston, South Carolina Democrat and states' rights advocate, who several months ago had chaired the party's banquet in celebration of Jefferson's birthday, attended by Mr. Truman in this city. They expect Change" Nearly all "riel members riel Ga- । bínele were there, including some who remained silentI ció during the campaign, and who j may not remain in the official fa' milia for long, The bands played "We Are Just. Wild About Harry" (We Are Just. Wild About Harry). The locomotives in the station unleashed : a shrill symphony of ! whistles. Nervous Secret Service agents began the almost impossible task of pushing their way through the crowd, but those interested in greeting Mr. Truman continued to huddle until "the champion" begged them to withdraw, i Raising his joined hands above his head in the traditional gesture of winners, Mr. Truman shouted, "Look, I'm shaking hands now. The Triumphal March It was at 11:22 that Truman and Barkley took the waiting limousine for the triumphal march down Pennsylvania Avenue. Truman called on his Campaign Director, Senator J. Howard McGrutlt of Rhode Island, and insisted that his staunch supporter sit between him and the Vice President. Mrs. Truman and Margaret sat behind him. ! Margaret invited BarkIcy's daughter, Mrs. Max Truitt, to sit next to her. A military band played the first notes of the Mtsuri Waltz, and the limousine began to walk. It was preceded by scores of police motorcycles, and was followed by two full carloads of prominent Democrats and government officials. The people cheering in the streets had eyes for nothing but Truman's limousine. "Hey, Harry!" shouted the people. -You're still the champ, Harry!", "Go ahead, Harry!". Jocular Incident No one called him Mr. Truman, not even the thousands of school children and Government workers who had half a day off to watch the techlmlent. The only formal greeting was a gigantic cloth forming an arch in front of the White House. Lela, "Welcome home, Mr. President". In front of the Washington Post building another large banner speaks" (Continued on Page 16).