THE
44 Pages 5/
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND, HOT*. Partly cloudy during the day and evening, with occasional showers in the afternoon and early evening, IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 88; low, 78. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:00 p.m., WJH inch" of mercury. % . \ í
MARANA NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXIX
Entered aa sacón/ clam matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 23, 1948
Puertorrlquefio, exercise your right to vote on November 2.
NUMBER 13466
Agreement On Preferential Votes
Was Reached Last Night At La Fortaleza Provides For Their Concession By Local Boards. - Appeals Submitted At a lengthy meeting held yesterday at La Fortaleza, members of the Island Board of Elections last night unanimously agreed to instruct all local boards that they may grant preferential votes for the November 2 general election, provided that the granting of such votes is approved by the local board president, the local board chairperson, and the local board's president, the local board's secretary, and the local board's secretary.The agreement, which virtually invalidates the agreement, was approved by the local board president, the People's Democratic Party representative, and at least one representative of any of the minority parties. The resolution, which practically invalidates TEB Circular 78, further provides that all "certificates" of preferential votes issued to date must be validated in the new form agreed upon, or else they will have no value whatsoever. Another agreement taken last night, also unanimously, was to extend until October 28th , the term to "ollcltar certificates of preferential votes, and to grant until the 28th to the local boards to issue the same, if they so agree. On the 28th the local boards shall send to the Island Board of Elections a list of all the applications they have received for preferential votes. Beginning of the meeting At 11:30 a.m. yesterday morning, all the representatives of the local boards met at La Fortaleza, with Governor Jesús T. Plftero. Plftero. all the representatives of the different political parties in the Insular Board of Elections, and the president of said organism, Mr. Charles II. Terry. Said political representatives are Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones, for the Partido Insular de Elecciones. Quiñones, for the Popular Democratic Party; Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa Carreras, for the Puerto Rican Statehood Party; Mr. Bolívar Pagán, for the Socialist Party; Mr. Antonio Qulrós Méndez, for the Puerto Rican Reformist Party; and Mr. Eugenio Font Suárez, for the Independent Puerto Rican Party. Discussions began around an appeal by the Insular Board of Elections, of the agreement that in the electoral scrutinies, the votes of all those voters who made a cross on the ballot, under the insignia of any party and voted at the same time for a candidate of another party, the vote would be valid for all the candidates of the party under whose insignia the cross was made, except for the candidate of that party, opposed to the other candidate next to whose name a cross was also made by the voter. . Another matter discussed A motion was then presented, that the crosses made by the electors under the insignia of a party having only local candidates, and simultaneously under the insignia of other parties with insular candidacy, should not be counted, invalidating all ballots so marked or voted. After an extensive discussion on both matters, the Governor reserved his ruling as the judge who must rule on the appeals of the IBE. The chief executive invited all the members of the body to lunch at the Palace, and at about half past three in the afternoon, the session was resumed, with an impressive show of hands among the members of the Island Board of Elections, in a new effort to achieve unanimity among them on the agreement on the preferential vote. The problem of the preferential votes was raised as follows: Exl "t.> a circular of the Insular Board of Elections authorizing the local presidents of the organism to certify "preferential vote". The day before yesterday the IEB agreed, by majority vote, to rescind the circular. The members of the defeated body within the Board, opposing the agreement, appealed to the Governor. Before the appeal reached the Governor's consideration, there was a "gentleman's agreement" among the members of the Board to request the return of the appeal file, in order for the Board to make a new effort to reach a unanimous agreement on the matter. * Early last night at La Fortaleza, the members of the Board unanimously agreed that preferential votes could be issued by the local boards of elections - presided over in each municipality by the municipal judge and composed, in addition, of a representative of each political party - provided that they agree to grant such preferential votes to the President of the local board, the popular representative, and a representative of the minority parties. A problem then arose as to what to do with the preferential votes.
Maritime Workers Offer Endorsement to the PJP
V I v v ¿u Iw " ' u Kvl ▼ r ? Tí 1 Wl JfUsMbH J "# i . á Mr á a * i SBKT JOAUtai?/*
A group of San Juan dock workers visited Dr. Gilberto Concepción de Gracia, president of the Puerto Rican Independence Party, to offer him their personal support for the upcoming elections. Dr. Concepción de Gracia was not at home, and was represented at the meeting by Dr. Francisco M.
Fonfrías Said Island's Slum Clearance Program Will Be Funded With Island Funds There is no hope of obtaining new federal allocations for the Slum Clearance Program, according to Ernesto Juan Fonfrías, who returned from the United States yesterday. Fonfrías said that he attended with Carlos Clausells and César Cordero Dávlla the conference on the problem of slum clearance and low-cost housing construction held in Washington and that the situation found there, in light of his own conclusions, is completely adverse to the slum clearance program in Puerto Rico with the help of the federal government. Carlos Clausells and César Cordero Dávlla, who are still in the federal capital, will submit a complete report to the Governor regarding the existing situation. Senator Fonfrías added that everything that has to be done on the Island in relation to the Slum Elimination Program, will have to be done with island allocations; therefore, he proposes to discuss with Governor Plftero, together with Mrs. Clausells and Cordero Dávlla, the measures that in his opinion will be necessary to take in order to continue the program that has already begun. Yesterday, Senator Fonfria stated his intention to request a substantial appropriation from the next Legislature to carry out the program, this being one of the main points to be discussed with Governor Plftero during his conference. Fonfrías' purpose is to request an allocation of $6,000,000 from the next Legislature. During the last few years, according to the Director of the Capital Homes Authority, the Puerto Rico Legislature has not made substantial allocations for slum clearance, depending on federal appropriations that were expected to be authorized. Lack of funds" Studies have been made for the back side of the families residing in El Fangulto and La Perla, but due to lack of funds, it was necessary to interrupt the cleaning of La Perla, -until they can be obtained (Continued on page 16) Columbia Group Arrives Tonight By BENJAMIN SANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO Five pedagogues and five research assistants from Columbia University arrive tonight, who intend to make a study of teaching on the Island. Tomorrow another four will arrive, according to the Interim Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Francisco Collazo. In a letter addressed to Commissioner Collazo, the educators have expressed their desire that all activities be carried out normally, in the schools they are to visit, and that their interest is to learn about our educational program as a whole through different typical situations on the Island. The Columbia educators will meet on Monday morning with the Acting Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Francisco Collazo. They will discuss different phases of the program (Continued on page 16).
They declare that the solution to the port problems lies in Independence. Dr. Concepción Residence visited
A group of San Juan dock workers visited yesterday afternoon the President of the Puerto Rican Independent Party, Dr. Gilberto Concepción de Gracia, to offer their personal support and let him know that a considerable number of the dock workers of Puerto Rico are with him.
dock" workers of Puerto Rico are with the" PIP, and will vote for said Party in the" upcoming elections." The workers, presided* by Mr. Carlos Juan Recio and Mr. Miguel Zayán, visited Dr. Concepción de Gracia in the house I of the latter's mother, where he resides, but the President of the PIP was not at that time at his residence, since he had been out since the morning on a political campaign in favor of his party. However, the PIP gubernatorial candidate, Dr. Francisco M. Susonl, and the candidate for Resident Commissioner, Rafael Arjona Slaca, who were at the house of Dr. Concepción de Gracia, as well as his wife, Mrs. Abigail Díaz de Concepción de Gracia, attended to the workers on behalf of the PIP President. (The dock workers had an exchange of impressions with Dr. Susonl and Mr. Arjona Slaca, who explained the reasons why they believed that "voting for the PIP is voting for the safety of Puerto Rico's dock workers. Ambo* Ifdre" inde- . pendentista" thanked, in nomhre of the Party, the ndheslon "of the workers to the rau "a of 1" lr<- ' dependence", and 1e testified *their confidence at the same time that they exhorted them to fight for 1" in- ' dependence from the ranks of the PIP. । Hacen dadaradone" I,o" worker"" ant "* menclo. nado" "ntr "g "ron a lo" dírlg "nt "* d"! PIP the following statement: "We, the undersigned workers of the mu "ll "s, hereby give our support to the Puerto Rican Independent Party in its struggle for the emancipation of our country. As workers of mu "U"". personally believe that the solution to the problems of our class and of all Puerto Rican workers, we will find it by voting for the PIP. We believe that with the triumph of this party, all economic obstacles will be eliminated and all the laws that burden us, such as the Cabotage Law, whose disposition does not allow ships from other nations to reach our beaches, unless they abide by the restrictive cabotage laws. "Asf_e "tamo" thinking, and so we have learned from the reality of -port life, as the" he- ' choa prove. We do not wish ' to remain a colony because under 5 it we are presented with a picture ' of hunger, misery and cao". A 7 t (Continued on page 16) í
A total of 1,827 dock workers voted in favor of the unionized shop yesterday in elections held by the San Juan office of the National Labor Relations Board. The elections were held among the dockworkers employed by the shipping company in Puerto Rico who are members of the International Longshore and Warehouse Association's (ILA) District Council Number 2. The same" ll "vahwi "l in order that the workers" rtecidi "r "I authorized or not the Union to n "goclate a union shop clause, by virtue of which the" workers" employed by the employer must affiliate" with the Union, as a condition to "r "t "n "r "r "their work. The number of votes cast was 2,700, of which 1,982 were cast, with 18 votes annulled. In favor of" the proposition voted 1,S27 and "n against 6.1. The union shop clause is inserted in the collective bargaining agreement governing the relationship between the ILA and the shipping company, but it was necessary to hold an election to comply with the provisions of the Taft-Hart Act. The clause had been agreed to by the longshoremen and the company before the statute became effective. It provides that such a shop may only be established and put into effect with the express authorization of a majority of the workers affected. Up to the present, the election held among the workers for the aforementioned purpose has been the largest on the island, since the greatest number of workers have voted in it. Other elections with the same purpose were held by the JNRT among the members of the Unión de Empleado de Muelles, and among the workers employed in the sugar mills, affiliated to the Sindicato Azucaran.
El Mundo will publish from next Monday the story of Marshal Hermann Goering.
EL MUNDO will begin in next Monday's edition, the publication of The History of Goering, one of the most transcendental historical documents of our days. The intimate confession of the Nazi Air Marshal to one of his defense lawyers at the Nuremberg trial amounts to an astonishing exposition of the inner structure of a regime which terrified the whole of mankind, and the details which answer the following questions which the conscious and concerned observer of all peoples has been asking: "What caused Hitler to break with Goering, why did the Luftwaffe fail, why was England not invaded at the right time, and others which have been the cause of deep and profound questions, and others which have been the subject of profound speculation, even after Democracy had then annihilated Totalitarianism,
M 1 t " '.Ü HERMANN GOERING
Rusonl, candidate for Governor; and by Rafael Arjona Slaca, candidate for the Cominería in Wáshlngton. In the photograph appear Dr. Stieoni and Lic. Arjona Ñisca (in the center, dressed" d" white) surrounded by lo" workers. J Photo El. MUNDO),
Roig Instructs On Duties In Elections Orders No Passes Or Licenses For Now. Exhorts to Comply with CoroneT7" 7th Police. Salvador T. Rolg, gave yesterday the pertinent Instruction "*, in relation to the duties to be fulfilled impartially by the members of the Uniformed, and the conduct to be observed during the next elections"". The J "f" d" the Uniformed, in a circular authorized yesterday and directed to Jos Chiefs and District Chiefs, and Chief" d" Negociado" and DIVi "lone" of the Insular Police, authorized a message and gave Instructions to the Force. Ceronel's message "The election campaign has entered its final stage, a situation that demands special attention from the entire police force. "Considering for this reason that we are going through a period in which we must necessarily make use of all the personnel and material resources available to us in the Insular Police, in order to guarantee in a positive manner the normal order and development of the upcoming elections and, taking into consideration the needs of the service, hereby, and as of this date, the provisions of Article I of Law No. JO, approved on June 7, 1948, are hereby suspended. JO, approved on June 7, 1948, which establishes the legal eight-hour workday for the members* of the Insular Police, until the end of the electoral campaign on November 1 at 12:00 noon, "Likewise "" orders all" Zone and District Commanders not to grant pass" or leave to any member of" the Force, except in cases of extreme and proven emergency."" Instructions for campaign "I wish to make an appeal to the Police in general in relation to the* Instructions already issued by this Headquarters on the service to be carried out by Ja Fuerza throughout the Island, during the present electoral campaign and on election day"" g "neral "s, November 2 d" 1948, and "on the objiervanrla of the strictest impartiality during the present campaign. as well as the fulfillment of our obligations with the customary efficiency which has always distinguished this organization in periods such as this one. "Each and every member of this corps will stand firm in the duty incumbent upon him as such an agent of law and order and will carry out his duties with the utmost impartiality.
"The history of Goering may contain ideas to be taken into account in the eventuality that an aimless movement of totalitarianism attempts to re-establish itself in the world. The figure of the arrogant Nazi leader number two is of too much interest, both political and human, for his confession, before appealing to the dramatic recourse to suicide, not to arouse the most exciting of claims. In view of the value of these invaluable confessions, EL MUNDO has spared no effort to acquire the exclusive publicity rights and provide its readers with such invaluable reading. We do not think it necessary to emphasize the interest that "Goering's Story" will arouse in each of its chapters. Be sure to read the first chapter in next Monday's edition of EL MUNDO.
Hope Has Arisen Of Fixing Crisis Over Berlin Blockade
Congressional Inquiry To Be Held Monday Bow Had Interview With Governor Yesterday. Visiting Bishop Davis Frank T. Row, pr""ld "nt." d "lnv""tigator committee that "e hall" in Puerto Rico making an "ohre cu""tlon"" communications inquiry on behalf of two* congressional committees". conferred with "1 Governor Jesus T. Plftero "n "1 day d" yesterday, mlantra" his Investigators are preparing to take statements, beginning "1 lune*. During his meeting with Piftero, Bow also met with Resident Commissioner Antonio Femó" Isérn at La Fortaleza. Later in the afternoon, Bow visited San Juan Bishop Jame" P. Davi" and, it is understood, discussed the letter sent by the latter to the committee in Washington, requesting a study of what the Bishop called the "low morale" of certain radio programs, Roy said he intended to visit Episcopal Bishop Charles F. Boynton at the earliest opportunity to get his views on local radio programs. Preparations are underway for the leaders, Oacar L. Hum and Thomas P. Simpson, meanwhile, to meet with interested parties on Monday who can provide information pertinent to the Inquiry. One of the main reasons for the investigation was the granting by the Federal Communications Commission of a commercial permit to the island government to operate the WIPR radio station. The investigating committee was sent to Puerto Rico by Representative Forest A. Harness, a Republican from Indiana, who is chairman of two House committees concerned with communications and federally funded government advertising and propaganda. Bow made it clear at a press conference upon his arrival in Puerto Rico, *1 Thursday, that his group had no authority to deal with the issue. (Continued on p. 16) CSP to Suspend Franchises on 2 Convened by its Chairman, Mr. Jorg" V. Toledo, the Public Service Commission agreed to suspend franchises on 2 Thursday. Toledo, the Public Service Commission agreed yesterday to relieve the bus companies and carriers in general, from the obligations of their franchises from the eve of the elections until the day after the election, so that they may, by contract with Jos. different political parties, transport voters to the polls on November 2, 1948. The agreement of the Public Service Commission reads as follows: "Considering that the greatest transportation facilities should be provided, so that the electors of Puerto Rico may duly exercise their civic duty of voting in the next general elections to be held on November 2, 1948, it is agreed to authorize all bus companies and bus companies (Continued on page 16).
I Denounce Misuse Of Municipalities' Property Auditor Received Complaints That They Ceded This For Politics, Sends Circular The Auditor of Puerto Rico. Rafael do J. Cordero has called the attention of the mayors, the auditor, the auditor's office and those in charge of municipal property, in relation to the improper use of official vehicles in political activities. The circular to that effect, sent yesterday to the aforementioned officials, reads as follows: "This Office is receiving a "Innumber of complaint" coming* from Individual* and particular entities about various" Irregularities qu* are being committed at present, consisting of ceding office* of the City Hall for use of the political" committees", providing trucks and ambulances to said organizations to transport voters to political"" meetings"" and rally "*, and other analogous lrr "gul "rid "d "s*. S" Deteriora Property "It has been ascertained that di(Continued on page 16) Health Requests $5,614,856.00 For Projects Plans Board Ends Appropriations Hearings 1949-50 With the administrative vl "ta held *1 Thursday, at which the Health Department submitted "tt solldtuH of appropriations, the Planning Board ended the hearings for the preparation of the Sixth Economic Program. The Health Department requested appropriations amounting to $5,614856 for the fiscal year 194950. For the construction of the Hospital for tuberculosis patients in the city of Ponce, the Department requested $1,667,000. It also requested an appropriation of $357,000 for the expansion and reconstruction of the Industrial School for Young People, located in Mayagüez. La.* "iguienle* allocations were also requested* by the Department of Health, for Health Centers: Aibonito $33,300; Guayanilla, $54,000; San Lorenzo $67,000; Cidra, $54,000; Juncos $27,000; Hatillo, $64,000; Catafto, $40,000; Toa Alta, $40,000 and Coamo $60,000. For Health Centers* and Hospitals, the Department requested the following appropriations: for San Germán, $1R7,OOI); Utuado, $214,000; Cayey, $150,000; Humacao, $184,000.Tuberculosis and Psychiatry Hospital, $234,000; for central facilities for the Ponce District, Tuberculosis and Psychiatry Hospital, $667,000; for the construction of the Ponce Juvenile Home, $667,000; and for the construction of the Ponce Juvenile Home, $667,000.
Borirua Employment Office to be Considered in Chicago
By Luía Sánches Coppa EL MUNDO Staff Writer The establishment of an office attached to the Department of Labor in the city of Chicago, which will be in charge of processing the employment of Puerto Rican workers in the industrial zone adjacent to said city, is a project being considered by the Government of Puerto Rico. This was revealed yesterday by Mrs. Pelro America Pagan de Colon, director of the Bureau of Employment and Immigration of the Department of Labor, after returning to the island from a trip to the United States. Mrs. Pagán de Colón arrived on the island at noon after having spent several weeks in the United States visiting the industrial centers and agricultural zones where Puerto Rican workers are working, and who were hired with the authorization and approval of the Department of Labor. She visited the cities of Rochester, New York, Buffalo, Washington, Gary, Lorain and Cleveland, to observe the work and conditions of the Puerto Rican workers who have migrated to the United States to work. In New York, Mrs. Pagán de Colón inspected the office of the
In New York, Mrs. Pagán de Colón inspected the office of the Bureau of Employment* and Immigration, and in Washington she discussed with federal officials related to the U.S. Employment Service the national employment program, by virtue of which Puerto Rican workers will be able to go to the mainland to render service*. He received a report from the functionary on the "work and conduct of the new" workers in all the "Jugare" he visited, which reveal that "they are honest, capable and very responsible. He said in this regard that "everywhere I found that our" workers have earned a magnificent reputation, both for their hard work and for their conduct". He further stated that Puerto Rican workers are in great demand by employers everywhere he visited. Demand for Puerto Rican laborers To this effect, he informed that "in the agricultural zones of the eastern states of the Nation, there will be job opportunities for more than ten thousand Puerto Rican laborers next year". As for the demand for Puerto Rican arms that he said exists in Chicago's industrial zone, he said that this makes it necessary to open a new labor pool for Puerto Rican workers.
(PU)-A three-point proposal, which may put an end to the Berlin crisis, was submitted today for consideration by the four great powers, by the neutrals, at a dramatic meeting of the United Nations Security Council. Responding to an "ojlcltude from the Soviet delegate, Andrei Y. Vi ahinsky, the Security Council recessed at three o'clock next Monday afternoon to give the Russian Government time to consider the proposal. The proposal requests from the United States, Great Britain, France and the Soviet Union. That they immediately lift all travel restrictions imposed by the Russian blockade and the counter-measures adopted by the Western Allies, and arrange an agreement by November 20 next, agreeing to the German currency issued by Russia as the official currency for the four Berlin sectors. 3. Within ten days from November 20, or at any date fnutuously acceptable to the four great powers, to "* hold a Council of Foreign Ministers on all major problems relating to all Germany." Jubilation at the U.N. Under this proposal, if 1" miama" succeeds, the" foreign ministers of the four great powers will meet probnblemanto next November 30, for a d*clsive and possibly historic attempt to resolve the dangerous differences which" have long been accumulating between *Has. The so-called "neutrals" of the eleven members of the Security Council offered their proposal, fearing that a new war might at any moment engulf the whole world. The sudden hope that the resolution of the "neutrals" might at least form the basis for a resolution of the Berlin crisis provoked among the delegates of the 58 nations assembled at the United Nations General Assembly something like "carnival" glee. The Allied delegates, however, were not so optimistic. The delegates tentatively accepted the proposal, but feared that Russia might make some diplomatic ploy. There is no doubt, however, that Vlshinsky has shown great interest in the proposal. Day of great export The Western Allies believed it possible that Russia was feeling the pressure of world opinion and might be willing to accept a conciliatory measure. The developments* in the Security Council were accompanied by another weight in the UN Political Committee. This committee unanimously adopted a Mexican resolution inviting the Great Powers to settle their differences and terminate their treaty with Germany and Japan as soon as possible. Indeed, the meeting was delayed 58 minutes," while waiting for the delegates, The Argentine Juan A. Bremuglla. acting pre "ident" of the Council and leader of the* neutral delegates, began "1 die with a conference with the delegates of* the three Western Allies. Phillip C. Jessup represented the United States. Vlahlnsky to consult Kremlin Then Bramuglia talked with VI'shlnsky. In earlier conversations, the proposal of the "neutrals'* had been altered somewhat, to suit his sights. S" spread immediately, and the rumor was verified that Vishinsky had asked for a postponement of the vote, in order to be able to ask the Kremlin for new instructions. The Western delegates said at once that they would not oppose the postponement, although they wished to see it s* votra "fairly soon." It was rumored that the "neutral" nations were making substantial changes to their resolution, based on Bramuglia's talks with Vishinsky and the Western countries. This proved to be true. At one extreme, the resolution "1 principle only granted a term of 15 days" to reach an agreement "on the Berlin monetary problem. That would have set the ninth hour as November 9 or 10, assuming the resolution was passed, instead of November 20.