THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: Partly cloudy with scattered showers. Generally clear tonight. IN SAN JUAN YESTERDAY: High, 31; low. 7L Barometric prealon at sea level, at 4:30 p.m., 29.93 inches of mercury.
38 Pages ■I
LA MARANA NEWSPAPER .
VO XXVIII
Entered as second class matter, Poat Office, San Juan, P. R.
SANJUAN. PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 24, 1948
AutomoviUBtaa, demoetremoB the traditional corteáis of the pala,
NUMBER 11194
Eisenhower would not accept nomination
Definitely withdraws his name from pool of possible candidates Does not want any political office Further advises military men to stay away from such offices By RONALD G. VAN TINE ..WASHINGTON, Jan. '3 (FU)-General Dwight D. Eisenhower at last today definitively and positively removed himself from politics for the purpose of a presidential candidacy by indicating to his Republican parti- ■ darioa that he would not accept. the nomination even if it were offered to him. He blasted his supporters' scattered propaganda of "Eisenhower for President" by stating flatly that "I do not and could not accept a nomination for any high political office." He said that this had been his position from the beginning but that he had been unable so far to convince "intelligent and faithful men" that he was sincere in his statements. "My decision to withdraw entirely from the political scene is final and positive," he said in a letter to Leonard V. Finder, editor of the Manchester Union. Finder, editor of the Manchester Union Leader (New Hampshire), who has been proclaiming the Army Chief of Staff's candidacy for President. And he goes on to give some words of advice to other career military men that. except under the most extraordinary circumstances, they should stay out of politics, too. He makes no mention of names, but the only other military leader whose name figures in the political calculations is General Douglas MacAr. thur whose Republican friends have included his name in the Wisconsin state presidential primaries. Finder indicated in New York that Elsenhower's name could not be withdrawn from the preferenclal primary for President to be held March 9 in New Hampshire. In spite of the position in which the forces now find themselves that have been unfurling the Tke for President banner," Finder said, however, the General's letter has "further convinced" him that Eisenhower is "the best qualified candidate for President." A list of delegates committed to vote for Eisenhower at the Republican National Convention has already been entered in opposition to the candidacies of Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York and former Governor Harold E. Stassen of Minnesota. That list is headed by the ; son of Senator Charles W. Tobey, an ardent supporter of the General. ¡ The "definite and positive" ded- - gion is the culmination of a long- 1 ga series of more or less vigorous ' refusals on the part of Eisenhower : which will probably be interpreted- 1 given as giving a boost to Dewey's candidacy. Dewey's candidacy. The Governor of New York, ( who won the nomination, but lost the election to the ex- । red FDR in 1944. possesses । drawing strength among Republicans, j being considered second only to the Five Star General, who was the mastermind behind the Allied invasion of Europe. In Albany, Paul Lockwood, Dewey's secretary, said he had "no comment" on what the Governor and his campaign managers would do. 1 Rep. Clarence Brown, 1 Ohio Republican, who is di- 1 governing the campaign for se- 1 nator Robert A. Taft. 1 of Ohio, admitted that the dW la ration 1 made by Eisenhower was akin to that famous 12-word refusal by Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman, in 1884. Sherman said, "IF I am nominated, I will not accept. If elected, I will not occupy the car. go." The Democrats have made few, if any, statements about Eisenhower's move, but there were broad smiles on the faces of White House officials. Popular polls conducted throughout the nation indicated that there was a basis for predicting that, under current conditions, Eisenhower could have defeated President Truman if he had headed the Republican ticket. Eisenhower uses 804 words ' to explain to Finder why he has so far refrained "from making a terse statement that I would not accept the nomination, although that has been my intention since the matter was first communicated to me." Army public relations officials today released a statement to the public. Elsenhower ' trusts, by these means, to inform any person or group interested in the matter that he is not involved in politics and that he would refuse the nomination even if it were offered to him" Elsenhower tells Finder that his conclusions about the policy "are not only reasonable, but that he has arrived at them objectively and have not been unduly influenced by my own desires and convenience". (Continued on page 14)
Consumers object to hike in electric rates.
Jk le* i !■"' ;■ 2 í BiwL. í ífej nim r Bh Bf M B B W ín.. -
Loa grabtidoa offer aspect" of the xIsla held yesterday at the Department of Agriculture in connection with the readjustment of electric power rates. Pictured above are, from left to right, facing the camera: Antonio l.uechetti, Chief Engineer and Director of the Water Resources Authority; Joaquin Ugarte, stenographer; Elmer Ellsworth, Sergio Gelpi and Frank Martocci, selected to conduct the hearing; and Gabriel Guerra Mondragon, BPP legal counsel. The photo below shows the attendees at the hearing (Photos EL MUNDO).
rX JOSE M. UFRKT EL MUNDO Editor Mr. Oscar Girod, administrator of the Ponce Cement Corporation, announced yesterday while testifying at the public hearing to consider the proposed readjustment of electric power rates, that if the increase is approved, the price of cement will increase five cents more per sack, resulting in an increase in construction costs.
construction costs. Mr. Girod suggested that the Water Resources Authority study the means to take advantage of the energy produced by sugarcane bagasse, saying that it is a raw material that costs relatively nothing compared to the high cost of fuel oil. On the other hand, Mr. William Fleming, administrator of the Yauco power plant, said that in the power plants, and in the
He recommended that the Authority also study this matter to see if this energy could be used for the benefit of the consumers. Mr. Fleming announced that his company, which buys electric energy from the Authority to resell it in the towns of Yauco and Guayanilla, will be forced to request from the Commission that it be reimbursed for the energy produced by the boilers, and he recommended that the Authority study this matter as well.
Mr. Fleming announced that his company, which purchases electric energy from the Authority for resale in the towns of Yauco and Guayanilla, will be forced to request that the Public Service Commission authorize an increase in its rates, if the proposed increase or readjustment is approved. The public hearing for the consideration of the readjustment in the rates for the sale of electric energy, began to be held at ten o'clock yesterday morning, in the conference room" of the Department of Agriculture and Co(Continued on p. 14)
Luis Negrón Fernández, Attorney General of Puerto Rico, received yesterday an official communication from Governor Jesús T. Plñcro, in which the latter notified Negrón about the purchase of a farm in Río Grande. Plñcro, in which he informed him that he had definitively approved the purchase of the Zarzal farm, in the municipality of Río Grande, for the establishment of a penal farm. The farm, consisting of 100 acres and owned by Mr. Carlos Rivera Matos, was appraised by the Department of the Interior in the amount of $1510,200. The crops of the same, consisting of bananas and sugar cane, were appraised by the Land Authority in the amount of $3,127, being then the total appraisal of the farm, with the fruits, of $13,327. In this farm will be established, as previously reported, the second camp or penal farm of minimum surveillance. The first, of a series of 5 camps included in the 6 Year Program of the Board of Plans, was inaugurated a year and a half ago on the farm (Continued on page 12).
There are strong indications of an Anglo-French military alliance with the U. S. They consult between British officers and the French! - There is talk that the United States would equip Gallic force By Kingsbury SMITH General Manager in Europe of SIN PARiS enrío 23 (SIN)-In cierloa errculot diplomatic dr Paris, niuy digiK s of credit, it was confirmed today the news that the United States <win "aian closely with Great Britain and France, to the
The experiment of measuring the variation of atmospheric neutrons will be carried out tomorrow, according to Dr. Amador Cobas, director of the Department of Physics of the University of Puerto Rico, by Dr. Soign A. Korff, of the University of New York, in cooperation with the University of Puerto Rico and the Weather Bureau. This" apparatus, weighing 25 pounds, will be attached to eleven balloons containing hydrogen. The balloons in question will be inflated at three o'clock in the morning at the Weather Bureau offices, since this work must be done before the sun rises. Recently mechanic Louis C. Collier, of New York University, recently arrived in Puerto Rico. Collier, of New York University, who will be in charge of adjusting the mechanical instruments to be used in the experiment, among which is included a small photo-graphic camera, in which the neutrons are recorded, at certain points, on film. The U.S. Navy, the Coast Guard, the Radio Club of Puerto Rico, the Yacht Club and others, including Dr. Sein and Dr. Gelpi, who have volunteered their airplanes, will assist in the search for the 1 apparatus* when it lands on land or at sea. The scientist's belief that (Continued on page 12"
 The very organization of the plan for an intimate Franco-British plane cooperation to the establishment of a defensive bloc of the Atlantic nations, has advanced much further than is generally supposed- in the opinion of the sources quoted. The plan has developed to the point where it is possible that consultations will soon be held between members of the French and British general staffs, on the one hand, and U.S. military strategists, on the other. The consultations of the French military with those of Great Britain, have co(Continued on p. 14)
11 for Western Europe. Peanuts$ - ■ -■- .- - - - Barbey saw Crawford v a i - Fernós Isern Discussed location of new airport.- Returns next week By JEAN VAN VRANKEN WASHINGTON, Jan. 23.-(SIN)-Rear Admiral D. E. Bhrbey, commander of the Tenth Naval District, conferred today with Resident Commissioner Antonio Fernos Isern and Republican Rep. Fred Crawford regarding the construction of the new island airport at Pain Seco. Barbey arrived in Washington last Wednesday to discuss the proposed airport and other issues related to the defense of the Caribbean. He plans to return to San Juan within the next week. Next Monday, he will receive the decoration of Honorary Commander of the British Empire in recognition of his services to the (Continued on page 12)
News Digest
There is strong indication that they prepare Anglo-French and American military alliance, - ' ♦ ♦ Miguel da Rumania and Ana de Borbón confirmed their engagement, embracing in front of journalists. ' * * * ♦ Court grants ten wings to file pleadings, in the case of students expelled from the UPR. - ' - Admiral Barbey discussed with Femós Isem and Representative Crawford the case of the new airport. ♦ * * Elsenhower definitively rejects to run for president. * * " New York police official praises Boricua's respect for authorities. ♦ * ♦ Loo Jeteo CedeAo and Guadalupe were exonerated by the Insular Police Commission. - * Churchill declared that an understanding must be reached with Russia to secure a lasting peace. ♦ - e Submit hotel plan, amounting to M4,310,OOO. I see J1E announces that it has found many ballots defective,
which it will promptly return to the Local Boards. - They plan to establish on the island an air freight distribution center between the two Americans. - Criollos leaders clash with last-place champion Ponce; Nanturce starts today to be vital against Tiburones Mayagüez, a year and a half behind the leaders, faces San Juan, in second-to-last place. * * * t Salaz will pitch against Ortlz or Smith; Davis against Federico and Lint vs - Ruben Gomez in today's games. - - - Almendro returned "u contract signed to the New York Giants ♦ * * * * * Consumers object to rate increase* by the River Source Authority. * * * ♦ APA and Sugar Union reached agreement on collective bargaining agreement for 1943. J " " v Tomorrow takes place the experiment on the measurement of the variation of neutrons, by Dr. Serge A. Korff. * ♦ ♦ ♦ Governor approved purchase of another farm for inmate camp.
New York Police Official Praises Respect For Boricuas
NEW YORK, January 23 -(By Benjamin Arnaldo Meynert, Staff Writer of EL MUNDO in New York), -(By Teletipo)- An extensive official report, personally presented by Commissioner James B. Nolan. President of the New York Police Athletic League, and who is also in charge of the Juvenile Aid Bureau of the police department, reveals that the Puerto Ricans residing in this city, show, in their great majority, a great respect towards the authorities, to the point that many times they request the intervention of the Police to solve family or personal problems. Extending in considerations on this point, Commissioner Nolan said before a group of Puerto Rican journalists and teachers, who met last night "nor the Benjamin Franklin School, at the invitation of Dr. Leonard Covello, principal of that school, that my conclusions are the product of a "long" year of experience, that my conclusions are the product of a "long" year of experience.
of many "years" of experience, observing the horlcua conglomerate of the metropolis. "The high concept that Puerto Ricans have of the NYPD," said Commissioner Nolan, "is revealed in insignificant events, such as requesting the help of a member of the NYPD to control an unruly or disrespectful child. This implies that Boricuas in general consider the police officer as a friend and protector, and not as a fearsome representative of the law and public order". Commissioner Nolan, seconded by Lt. John J. Sexton, also an officer of the Police Juvenile Aid Bureau, said the overcrowding of families, created by the shortage of housing, and the instability of homes. "He said that the overcrowding of families, created by the shortage of housing, and the instability of homes, are, in his opinion, the fundamental causes of juvenile delinquency. (Continued on page 14)
Sugar Union and APA reach agreement on 1948 agreement.
Martocci proposes to JP to use land in Escambrón and Condado Before the Planning Board is a comprehensive report by its consultant, "eftor Frank Martocci, on a project for the promotion of a hotel construction program in San Juan. This plan involves an investment of public and private funds of $34,310,000, and utilizes one* 55 acres of land extending from the Escambron to the present Navy officers' residence on the shores of the Condado lagoon, as well as the entire Condado peninsula, extending from the Behn brothers' properties to Del Cax.se Street, east of the Condado hotel. The recommendations of the planning technician of the Planning Board, Mr. Martocci, are also before the Tourism Development Board, which is a subsidiary organization of the Industrial Development Company. It carries with it the recommendation made, a new location pna Ashford avenue, and the acquisition by the Government of numerous" private properties, located on a tartan tract of about 39 acres of land, extending from the north end of the County lagoon, to the Atlantic Ocean. Mr. Martocci's opinion, as expressed in his Report, is based on the premise that if Puerto Rico is to derive substantial benefits from its tourism industry in the near future, it will be able to do so only with a "conciBt program, concentrated in a speciBc area. It is also added that the Island in "its present state of economic, social and physical development is not propitious to face tourism in the classic continental or European way, because "certain fundamental changes are required in its economic, physical and social aspects". He further states that the realization of changes requires a long term development, related to governmental standards and long range planning, "taking therefore several generations to bring Puerto Rico to the level where it can compete with surrounding islands," He also expresses that the main opportunity for the Island to presonir, they wish"" in its invasion of the tourist market!"'Ico following an organized plan, which tends to provide high quality luxury fadllde", at prices lower than those of Miami or adjacent islands: based on the rxplolaclón of a resource n, Hural Incompaiahle, consistenpe in a combination of waterfront and climate, located in the heart of the metropolitan area of San Juan, According to the report, this Implies a financial investment by the Island Government, with the purpose of attracting private capital. -It also analyzes the development of Miami Beach, Florida, "where during a period of less than twenty years*, a limited ark was developed with an intensive program for tourists, in an educated beach zone", indicating that Puerto Rico also "could have this type of integrated zone of lyricism, within which tourist activities could be developed separately from the rest of the city" For the development of the project a strip of land of two miles of ocean front is proposed, and of the lagoon that extends from the Eícambrón, to a point to the east of the Condado hotel, for having the* "l- | guíente" advantages: It has aprsximadamenle two miles" of ocean frontage and 1.5 miles of ftenl" to the lagoon; it is a central location, ten minutes from old San Juan and 5 minutes from the heart of Santurce; it is surrounded by an atmosphere of refinement and potential luxury in its present physical development: it is naturally isolated from the rest of the city, and such isolation can be increased with the proposed development of the parkway. It is added that the main passage (Continued on page 12)
Many of the ballots are defective JIE announces that it will be necessary to return them to the local Boards quickly The" official" of the Insular Board of Elections expect to finish today the revision of all the registration ballots received from the 79 electoral precincts of the Island, which until yesterday had sent to this organism the corresponding documents. The documentation related to electoral precinct number 24, which includes the island of Culebra, has yet to be received. It was reported yesterday that in the review of the registration certificates received, many "defective ballots" were found, which will be returned to the Local Registration Boards, so that they may be corrected according to the Electoral Law. The errors consist mainly in the fact that none of the 10" members of the Local Registration Board sign the certificates; in other cases*, only one of them has signed. There are also a number of ballots in which the Board has not taken the corresponding oath, or in which other candidates are found with delecto* that need to be corrected. The ten days" that the Insular Board of Elections fills to review and return the" defective" ballot" to the local Boards, began to count from the date and hour in which it received the" package" and documents of each electoral precinct, 'as they were the" same" noting it. The returns are expected to begin to be made as the preparation of the lists and summary of the defects found in the certificate is completed. The Local Boards, in such case, shall be convened by the President immediately upon receipt of the returned certificates, and shall remain in permanent session until the corrections noted are completed, which shall be made by the appearance before such bodies of the person* enrolled with the defectively filled out forms. CIO passes endorsement for Marshall Plan Resolution passed over opposition of left wing sector of body By CHARLES H. HERROLD WASHINGTON, Jan. 23. <PU>.The right wing forces" of the Congress of Industrialists* (CIO) gave another thrashing to the left wing opposition today by passing a resolution in support of the Marshall Plan for the rehabilitation of Europe. The labor organization's president, Philip Murray, told a Piensa conference at the end of a four-hour session of the C1U Executive Board that the resolution passed with "only a few" voting against it. The CIO leader, who set a precedent Thursday by citing the names of those defeated in trying to get the organization's official endorsement of Henry Wallace's party, said he would not mention by name those who opposed the resolution backing the Marshall Plan. But Harry Bridges, leader of the western dock workers, made it clear that he was one of them. Bridges denounced the aid program as inspired by "an administration dominated by Wall Street and the military and by a reactionary Congress" in order for big businessmen to gain control of Europe. A spokesman for Bridges said the Western leader had told Murray at today's meeting that he would ignore the Executive Board's policy and would ask the "longshoremen to fight the plan in his capacity as Chairman of the Executive Board.
Inspector warns of fraud in letters from Mexico
The "Mail Inspection Service" yesterday called attention to the fact that "again "e "e "e "t are receiving by mail. u "ually from Melico, letter" attempting to defraud the public by the medium known by the name of "Spanlah Priaoner Swindle. The seftoi Harrv Stolberg, in "pector of Mail", has received Information that several" person" in Puerto Rico have received letter" of this kind. "In the event that the person receiving such a letter answers it," says official note, "many" times he receives again a three-page letter, including "articles" of this kind.
The Inspector requests that any person who receives such a letter reply to it," says the official note, "often returns to receive a three-page letter, including newspaper articles and forged legal documents, which are sent to "standardize the fraud and the victim's arrival in Mexico, where the victim will be defrauded. "The Inspector requests that any person receiving a letter in the above terms, please deliver it immediately to the nearest Coneo" Administrator or at his office, number 225, Post Office Building, San Juan". The couplet forwarded by Inspector Stolberg, of a model of these (Continued on p. 14)
Provisions of the latter will now be submitted for ratification. Nogueras Rivera alleges that they are 35 c. hour and less than the minimum Ln" representative" of the Aioelaclón de Productores de Azúcar yde! Sindicato Azucarero, reachqpB* an agreement as to siclone" of the collective bargaining agreement which will govern relations inKa amha" entities during the za/ra and growing period of the year 1943. The parties concluded the negotiations which they have been conducting for the past five months by reaching an agreement on the wages to be paid to the workers affiliated to the Union. The agreement as to the type of wages and other working conditions, reached by the producers and the workers, was not made public yesterday, the representatives of the APA and the Union having decided not to report on the matter until the agreement is ratified by a meeting of the Union and a meeting of the APA. The Union, according to "e reported by said grouping, has summoned the filíale unions" for a congress. to be held next Sunday, for that purpose. In an official note issued by the Union, signed by the "eñs. re" Pedro Vega Rerrio" and Armando Rlvero, president and "ecretary, respectively, of the Union, é". The union's president and secretary, respectively, report, referring to the terms of the agreed agreement, that "the working conditions have been notably improved" in the new collective bargaining agreement; the working clyiricacione" have been ai W- । rada", in a large number of ca" for the benefit of the worker"", and 1a "cala of increase in Jornale" in accordance with the price of sugar, to nue "tro understand, represents all the more" that materially e" poíihle realize, under the" conditions" actuale" of the market." The following is added in the note: "This year, with great difference from previous years, the negotiation was carried out under extremely abnormal conditions. The' reduction in the tariffs for sugar produced in other countries, the enormous quota of national consumption signed by the Secretary of Agriculture of the United States, the fulla of a fixed price in the price of sugar, (which is equivalent to allowing the speculators of the stock exchange to determine by means of speculative transactions the price of sugar), the increase in the price of commodities, which constitute the basis of the sugar market, the increase in the price of sugar, and the increase in the price of the sugar. The "sugar worker's die' ria, which constitute the most important factors, served as a) rl climate of uncertainty under which the negotiations were conducted during their long process, but we had to struggle through the negotiations until we reached an agreement which we considered satisfactory, under the existing abnormal conditions. This in no way means that the agreements we have reached represent the highest aspirations of the sugar workers of Puerto Rico, just as we have not achieved the ultimate objectives of the working class of the sugar cane fields and factories. In accordance with our standards, we will continue to fight in the coming years to secure more and more new ■ conquests that will bring more justice and more rights to our members. ' | tro* affiliates. "We are calling for an extraordinary convention of the" - 121 unions affiliated" to the Sugar Union, and we trust that the" delegate* attending the same in. We trust that the delegates* attending the meeting in . We are confident that the delegates attending the meeting will be able to clearly understand the current situation of the working class of our basic industry, and of the country in general. As you know, a few days ago the producers and the workers signed an eitlpulaelon which made it possible to start the sugar harvest while the parties continued to negotiate the contract. The stipulation in its fundamental part provided that the rolado" nes between the parties, during the days in which they were negotiating, would be regulated by last year's agreement, and the wages to be paid would be those stipulated by said contract during the first two weeks of January. Wages would be paid in accordance with the sugar pro" cedure, and would be readjusted in accordance with the final wage agreement to be inserted in the agreement. The agreement between the APA and the Sht" dicato" was reached by both parties a few days before the start of the harvest in most of the sugar mills. With the exception of some of the "central" ones, which have begun* (Continued on p. 14)