THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR PARÍ LA ISLA, TODAY: - Partly cloudy to cloudy with scattered showers. Showers and thundershowers possible in the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temp. M¡ minimum, 11. Barometric prealon at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., M.08 inches of mercury.
40 Pages 5/
DIARIO
MARANA
SO XXIX
Enterad aa second elan matter, Pott Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO-SATURDAY, JULY 10, 1948
■taMvtitotM. dran iteraran te eortraía tradletoaai M pato
NUMBER 13S61
Pessimism in Democratic ranks.
Ike remains only hope Dan a O'Mahoney as surprise candidate. (N. of R.- William Dorvllller, correspondent of EL MUNDO in Washington, who covered the recent Republican convention for this paper, "is again in Philadelphia to report the details of the Democratic national convention exclusively for the readers of EL MUNDO. His dispatches will appear daily in this paper during the convention). By WILLIAM DORVnjJER Correeponaal of EL MUNDO in Wáahintton PHILADELPHIA. July 9. (Special to EL MUNDO)-A deep sadness hangs over Fiiadelfla tonight as Democratic delegates from every state, from Puerto Rico, Hawaii and Alaska, arrive in this city to attend the Democratic national convention which opens its sessions on Monday. The contrast with the atmosphere of optimism that prevailed at the start of the Republican convention two weeks ago is almost palpable. The Democrats are greatly divided in every way. They give the impression that they are in this town to set a lost cause in motion. Despite his outright rejection of the "nomination for public office,'' General Dwight Elsenhower remains the only hope of the dissident anti-Truman forces, represented by rebellious Southern Democrats, by big-city political bosses, and by novotratlstaa, all of whom have particular reasons for repudiating President Truman. Douglas second selection Ia second major selection of anti-Truman delegates remains Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas, who may or may not be "available." A surprise candidate of remote probability, known in Puerto Rico for the interest he has taken in island issues, is Senator Joseph C. O'Mahoney, Democrat of Wyoming, who has already expressed his willingness to accept the vice-presidential nomination. Those backing O'Mahoney, however, have established their offices in the BellevueStartford hotel in this city, with the frank admission made that they have their eyes first on the top honor, and will only accept the second position if the presidential nomination does not go to O'Mahoney. Meanwhile, the battle rages over the wording of the Democratic platform with its disputed civil rights postulates, and labor demands that the platform contain a promise to repeal the Taft-Hartley Act. The final form of the platform on Puerto Rico's political status depends on the final action of the Resolutions Committee, which has been holding public hearings on the various proposals throughout the week. The platform, after being approved by the Committee, will have to be accepted by the convention itself on the floor. In view of the recent speech made by Senator Luis Muñoz Marín during the Fourth of July celebration, it is considered likely that the Puerto Rican delegation, led by Governor Piftero, will request the inclusion of a platform that identifies with the policy formulated by Senator Muñoz Marín. Despite the platform, however, it is impossible to find Democrats who are optimistic enough to dare to predict that the name the convention nominates will be the next President of the United States unless (and that is the main issue being discussed tonight in Philadelphia), Elsenhower can be recruited and forced to accept the nomination. Lack of enthusiasm Perhaps the main reason for the lack of enthusiasm and activity, as compared with the Republican convention, after the general conviction that Truman could not defeat the Dewey-Warren ticket, is the paucity of candidates, openly committed. When the Republicans met in this city to hold their convention, they had Dewey, Taft, Stassen and Warren with their respective headquarters on the campaign trail; with all the apparatus of a village fair, in their efforts to secure delegates for their candidacies. Other headquarters, noisy and active monkeys, sponsored MacArthur, Speaker Martin, Senator Vandenberg and a few minor candidates. Now there are the same headquarters, but they are simply meeting places for the Southern Democratic bloc, O'Mahoney backers, or James Roosevelt's anti-Truman forces. And on top of all that there is (Continued on page 18)
give it too much of a foo aspect. It is the same story, in a small way, of the beauty and the beast, with one difference; that the beast serves as an experiment for the scientist in this case, to indicate to him the use of some facial creams which it is believed would develop in the beauty the erectile dysfunction of certain glands. If susceptible to cancer, according to a scientific theory under study, but not yet proven, there is a possibility that the beauty could contract the disease. The preamble to this story is most graphically explained when one speaks with Dr. Evelina Ortiz, an endocrinology specialist, and sees the experiments* that she and her ten students at the University of Puerto Rico have been conducting for the past three weeks*. Only in this way can one believe what would seem to be a fairy tale, that is, a baby chick, which at eight days* old, launches a metallic Ki-ki-ri-kl. although like the swan (in this case it was by mere accident) it dies after singing. Dr. Avelina Ortiz belongs to the faculty of Natural Sciences of the University of Chicago, where she teaches the general course of Biology; but she is now a visiting professor at the University of , her pals. She graduated from that university two years ago, obtaining a B.S. degree in Biology from the University of Chicago, where she teaches general biology.
Hormone-related experiments conducted at UPR
X Mr.-* M \ lii jr F'm wMM 4 - ■ v > f .SIL x / Mrs. Graciela Casanova de Candelas observes the difference between two three-week-old chickens, one of which has been injected with male hormone*, developing crests and beards* enormously, almost the size of a rooster's, while the other does not grow at all. This is part of an experiment in the endocrinology class taught by Dr. Evelina Ortis at the University of Puerto Rico (EL MUNDO photo by Casenave). An eight-day-old chick crowed like an adult rooster after being inoculated. - Possibilities on the use of facial creams are under study By Luis Hernándes Aquino Editor of EL MUNDO A facial cream for the beautification of the complexion L-n-.vi.no can smooth the epidermis of a woman and give it a temporary beauty, but when the same cream is made based on certain hormones", and is applied to the back of a rat, certain glands develop in this one that develop in the rat that can be used as a "hormone".
TA Director Summoned by Longshoremen They will file a complaint before the Puerto Rico Labor Relations Board *if he does not discuss contract amendments The Union of Longshore Employees will file a complaint before the Puerto Rico Labor Relations Board against the Director of the Transportation Authority. Salvador V. Caro, if before August 1 he does not agree to meet with the dock employees to discuss the amendments to the agreement that will be in effect as of that day. Yesterday the Union of Dock Employees sent the following communication to the Director of the Transportation Authority: "Under certified cover we had the honor to address * you on the first day of June next, submitting amendments to the collective bargaining agreement in force between the Authority of your direction and this labor organization, and then in ocr(Continued on p. 14)
Compendium of News
Experiments on hormone use conducted at UPR*. - The Health Department ignores "l Health will not use plans for Ponce District Hospital. . * . - * - * The "United Nations" face the problem* of one* Mó,000,000 of hRbltantea. Order * I* CA to cease unlawful" labor practice*. Study sTte JNRT has Jurledlcclon on Fomento plants. - . * . --- Elsenhower reaffirms his political attitude. Veteran pilots exercise in handling the world's largest commercial airliner. Post Office employee* expresses his regret to "EL MUNDO". TafLHartley bill was rachaad* in American Federation of Labor poll. t t Longshoremen summon Director of Transportation Authority. Wáshlngton "tries * through U.N., to bring about settlement in Palestine. - U.S. has plan to apply unctions to Arabs if they do not agree to extend truce.
Expropriation Tribunal expected to begin work" on July 19. Interior has no specific plans on storm drainage improvements. - Ramo* Antoninl will be elected Speaker in property on Monday," - - * - They believe it is possible that doctors serving the government will resign en masse if they hire certain foreign* doctors. - - - State* United* warned* Russia that the* amen**** will not I* get out of Berlin. - - - URP delegate* to meeting in lo* liberals make revelation about agreements on new party's name. - The Russians imposed new restrictions on traffic in BarAttribute to 'Muño* Marín adverse criterion to the State. - There is pessimism in the* Democratic* ranks. - The Herald Tribune of New York edltoriallied the arrival of Satchel Paige in the* Big League*. Cubs of* Chicago beat Pittsburgh and Elmer Riddle, 2-L.
Russians tighten blockade in German capital; U.S. does not yield to threat
Marshall hopes that a settlement will be reached by peaceful methods* WASHINGTOÑTjvíto 9. (Pin - State" United States has warned Russia that neither "threats, pressure" or other "actions" will force this Government out of Berlin, the State Department disclosed tonight. j The American position was stated in a strongly worded note addressed to Moscow. Similar views were expressed in notes from England and France protesting the blockade of Berlin. The American note was sent to the Soviet ambassador, Alexander S. Panyushkin, last month by Secretary of State George C. Marshall. George C. Marshall. Marshall insisted that the Soviet blockade of Berlin be lifted immediately. He said that the restrictive measures imposed on the sectors of Berlin occupied by the United States, England and France had led to an "extremely serious national situation". - The United States Government cons tiers these blocking measures as a clear violation of the existing convents in respect of the ail-
The United States Government has not yet been able to do so, but even if it has not been able to do so, it has not yet been able to do so. However, even if the third member has not been appointed, the two Judges already appointed will have to commence work in the new judicial body as soon as possible. Judges Tilen and Santos Borges have already requested that the different Clerks of the Island's District Courts refer to the Expropriation Court all cases filed in said Courts regarding compulsory expropriation. This is determined by the law that creates said Court. With the exception of the cases that have already been heard before the District Judges of the Island and are pending sentence. These rosos will be finished by the district judges who heard them from the beginning. According to the judges Santos Borges and Tilen, who explained yesterday, they do not have an exact list of the number of cases to be referred by the District Courts to the Court of Expropriations. However, it is estimated that there are currently between 400 and 500 compulsory expropriation lawsuits filed in the various District Courts of Puerto Rico, which will be referred to the newly created Court. In addition to the two Judges mentioned above, other officers of the Court have already been appointed, including three Deputy Clerks and a Marshal. At present, Judges Tilén ¡ and Santos Borges are working on the drafting of the Rules of the Expropriation Court. The offices of the new government agency will be located on the third floor of the New York Department Store building at Stop 18.
Muñoz's opinion adverse to statehood is attributed to him It was allegedly issued at a meeting of popular leaders in Trujillo Alto, giving basis to the agreement to request the inclusion of the plebiscite in the Democratic platform.
By 8. GALVEZ MATURANA ' Editor of EL MUNDO That Independence would not* be granted any time we request it, but not Statehood, which is a dream, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín more or less said to a group of leaders of his party, among whom were several founders of the Popular Democratic Party, when he was talking with them at his residence in Trujillo Alto. Our informant, who is one of the founders of the party and a person very close to Mr. Muñas Marín, added that "in view of the conviction of this palpable reality, expressed by the President of the Senate", it was agreed to instruct the island delegation to the Democratic National Convention to include in the platform of the United States Democratic Party a statement in favor of a plebiscite in Puerto Rico, to decide whether the Island should become a State of the Union or an Independent Republic, with the friendship of the United States.
! Questioned by our informant on the scope of the qualification LUIS MUÑOZ MARIN
When asked by our informant about the scope of the qualification of "a dream" given by Mr. Muñox Marin to the attainment of Statehood for Puerto Rico, he replied that it would strengthen the principles sustained by Mr. Muñox Marin in favor of Independence for the country, when this is found in the best conditions and economic development for reei- : birla. Upon our inquiry as to whether Mr. Muñoz Marin's statements implied that he would advocate the establishment of an Indo- pending Republic, once the plebiscite was granted, he informed us that no one can predict what action Mr. Muñoz Marin may take, when the time comes, although he has repeatedly stated that he is in favor of Independence, even though he considers that the time has not yet come to request it from the U.S. Congress. We requested our informant to authorize us to use his name for the purpose of strengthening our position. 1 name for the purpose of substantiating this information, in view of his con(Continued on page 18)
State made public last night the energetic note sent to Moscow.
"■_ Genrge C. M "r*h*ll ministration of Berlin by the* rua' tro occupying powers," Marshall said. "In order that there may be no misunderstanding as to this point, the Government of the United State* Government* categorically. states that it is occupying *its sector of Berlin, with li(Continued on page 18"
Expropriation Tribunal expected to begin work on July 19 Judges Federico Tilen and Pedro Santo* Borges have already requested compulsory expropriation cases before the District Courts. - Jurisdiction of the Tribunal is likely to be extended to the newly created Expropriation Tribunal in the week commencing July 19. Federico Tilén and Pedro Tríbura? 0 AúV'ffiT ¡ 9ush "brán de formar parte del nuevo Tr.ounal, Aún aún por nombrar tlá
No plans for sewage works Interior reveals improvements ie made as road reconstruction is undertaken The Commissioner of the Interior. I "eftor Jorge J. Jimenez Lopez, disclosed that the agency he heads has no specific plans* regarding storm sewer improvements on those* urban streets and highways under the jurisdiction of your Department. Mr. Jimenez stated that the storm sewer systems on such public roads are under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior, and that improvements *are undertaken as such roads are reconstructed or widened. | It will be recalled that the Director of the Aqueduct and Sewer Service, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustsmante, made it known that the Department of the Interior and the Government of the Capital are responsible for attending to these needs, with sanitary sewerage being exclusively under the jurisdiction of the SAA. Regarding the overall improvement of the storm drainage problem, the Department has no specific project. Commissioner Jimenez said that (the sewerage problems ¡ (Continued on page 14)
Ike reaffirms his , political attitude He thinks his present position i is all he needs to be useful to democracy CLEVELAND, July 9 (FU)-" Gen. Dwight D. Elsenhower ee- í eribled today to a Cleveland friend dictating that he ne has sitie in the world of politics. Herbert Petley. a designer who. knew the General in Kansas City, many years ago, said that hsee va-1 rious days 1* wrote Ike the *1- i guideline: "You had better stay out of this mess. It is worse than any person could ever dream of." This morning, as he was leafing through the day's letters, Petley was surprised *1 to find General Eisenhower's reply. "I thank you very much for your letter," j ; wrote the General- "And I am relieved to know that someone com11 parte my statement that I have no place of my own in the world of 1* politics. J ' "It is my conviction that I form- . command a part of one of the great, - Influential universities of EsI (Continued on page 18).
Allied personnel now required visa* Government* of* the* Allied* zone* ordered a reduction in gas consumption BERLIN, Julle | (PU)-Lo* rulo* Imposed new restrictions on Allied transit in Germany tonight, and North American. British and French officials* indicated belief that the "ovléttee excuses for closing the" torrovlarlaa and river routes linking BerHn with the West were "fraudulent*." The Soviets tightened their grip "on blockaded Berlin by requiring all all Allied personnel to obtain Soviet vtaaa* before traveling to the ne*t" * in automobiles. The edict leaves the Western aiiadoa can abandoned* in Berlin. To date, the tied traffic has moved along the international highway under orders "atritas -n English and ruto by the three" Western" government**. Now allied* coughs have to obtain e| permission directly from the eoyletic" gas consumption On the other hand. "" Reports quo lo* government* of The" (rea western" zone "* of the German eopital ordered e*tonight an aecent percent reduction in the consumption of ga*. while the United States. England and France were preparing to defeat the Ru*o blockade. Tonight, at twelve o'clock, drastic reductions "n-l supply of electric power will begin to take effect. Both the reductions in the power supply were ordered to shorrar coal- Be raduetrá te transportation by streetcar* and subway railroad, as well as toe power supplies for industrial use. As a result, thousands of people will be left in the slum. According to a brltanice announcement, violators of the gas curtailment order will face । up to one year of imprisonment, a fine of $1,000, or amnesty penalties. By reducing coal supplies in the Western sectors from *000 to 1,800 tons per day*, the Western allies agree to supply the minimum amount needed by air. The air transport service is bringing to Berlin hundreds of tons of supplies daily, but so far most of it has been food. Aeon feet mi en too In addition to this announcement by the Western powers, the following *eontedm!"Bts were recorded: 1-v-The German People's Congress, led by the* Communists, demanded the holding of a plebiscite in Germany in the month of eetiember. The demand was formulated in a letter addressed to all four occupying powers, in which it called for an "undivided democratic republic in which all Germans would have the same privilege as provided for in the 1919 Constitution of the Welmar Republic. The letter alleged that about : fifteen million Germans had signed a petition for a "popular pleb- ] cite." 2-The National Zeitung newspaper. circulated by lleenda rus*, said "ditorially that the* new* restrictions of the *11 "ds" powers were "criminal political acts" and would "completely paralyze the economy of the western sectors" of Berlin. 3-Soviet officials said they could not permit the transport of coal and foodstuffs by barges to Berlin because one of the canal gates was broken. In a letter to the British," the Soviet Transportation Bureau said: "At present, due to the repair work being carried out on the gate in the Rath on ow region, there is no technical possibility of allowing passage to those boats which will be on Wittenberge." Trae ranortee In Koenigstein, Germany, te Fuorsa Air "rtadounldenM today appointed a special board d* officers to Investigate the ser!dent , of a C-47 transport plane on I which perished three people last night. The C-47 ostab* driving "umlnlstroo to Berlin when it crashed into a mountain near Xo*nlgítein, northwest of Frankfurt, in the Northamorlean occupation s*na. This was the first casualty of the airlift service which has been supplying Berlin since the routs began their blockade of the city on June 1. Another American pilot said he spoke of fog and rain last night at Wiesbaden when the plane took off. For his part, the International News Service reported from London that England has indicated to Moscow that it is willing to enter into negotiations between the four powers to settle an "extremely serious international situation," but only if they end the blockade of UniThis was revealed early today when the Government told the I (Continued on page 15),
There is a threat of resignation of doctors
It would be in protest P for legislation They are opposed to the hiring of certain foreign doctors By JUAN~MARTINEZ CHAPEL Editor of El. MUNDO Much* of the* siunto* to be dealt with by the special session of the Legislature, called by the Governor to begin next Monday, 12. ■* refer *amendment" to laws whose* purposes are not clearly expressed in the call. The laws to the* which amendments will be proposed which are not clearly stated in the call are:1-L* Land Law, as to 1* Imposing a special assessment for a bond issue in the sum of 83,000,000. 2-Amendments to the Reasonable Rents Law. 3-Appropriating funds to operate 1* Sugar Industry Jobs Insurance Act. 4- Re-enacting the law authorizing a bond issue" for 88,000,000 to cover any deficit in the Government works programs or in the general expenses of the Government during the fiscal year 1948-49. 5- Pars to amend Act 53, 1948, a" so-called gag" law, in the sense of deleting the word "cripple" and further to grant those accused of violating 1* law. the right to be TRIED by a jury. The decision of the jury need not be by unanimity of the 12 members, but the verdict may be by thre" quarters, that is, . nine members. In the governmental circuits . . it was said yesterday, d" a matter which was not included by Governor Piñero in the convocation but which may be included at any moment, for which the Acting Governor, Lula Negrón Fernández, has authorization. Matter of foreign* doctor* This is an amendment * to the law authorizing the contracting of the services of foreign doctors. As will be recalled, the assembly of mayors* held* a few days ago, raised with Governor Piftero loa iDconvents that confront* the municipalities to obtain doctor* to provide charitable services. They requested that means* be sought to have them brought to Puerto Rico* ready to serve the municipalities*. Governor Piftero reportedly asked the Acting Speaker of the House, Ernesto Ramos Antoninl. to prepare a bill to that end, which would be studied by the Commissioner of Health and if an agreement was reached between the latter and the mayors, then the call would authorize legislation to that effect. As Governor Piftero left the day before yesterday for the United States, the bill was not completed: but if it is completed while the Legislature is in session and an agreement is reached with the Commissioner of Health, the call will be extended by the Acting Governor for that matter only. Opposition of Medical Association It has been learned that the medical class is opposed to the hiring of physicians under special laws, although it agrees to the extension of the present contracts of physicians and other graduates of recognized and accredited universities who are rendering service to the government and municipalities. Some legislators and many mayors are pushing for the passage of a law permitting mayors to hire foreign physicians to provide municipal* service; authorizing them* also to practice privately after hours to the poor. The Medical Association is completely opposed to this procedure and, as reported by members of the Association, it is likely that the associated physicians will resign en masse all the time (Contlr.ua *r page 18).
URP delegates speak about meeting
According to Luis A. Ferré and Rafael Rivera Santiago, the unlorrepubllcana delegation accepted the name Unión de Puerto Rico and the * hand* as the insignia for the new collectivity that liberals and unlorrepubllcana were trying to create, we* csmblo de Ir Rceptaeión liberal del Ideal de estadldad. In a* statement, the first part of which appears below, Mr. Ferré and Mr. Rivera Santiago explain the discussions in the . Rivera Santiago the discussions between the delegations of both parties: "Because we consider that it is in the public interest, mainly for the affiliates of the Puerto Rican Statehood (formerly Progressive Republican Union) and Puerto Rican Liberal parties, to know the facts of the recent negotiations between representatives of both parties, as those facts are known to each of said representatives, we have decided to authorize, jointly, the following statements: Desirous of enlarging the party which, for fifty years, has defended the ideal of statehood for - Puerto Rico, by opening the doors of that party so that in it could fit, with full dignity and dignity, those of our compatriots who, while they were citizens of the state, were unable to join a party which had the Ideal of statehood as its sole and definitive orientation. । no" proposed to" spontaneously' । make a modest but Mncero es- , effort with a twofold purpose: Prl- ■ mero-To prevent the conflict which the proposition of l* truce of the Ideal 5 of statehood spoke created in the 1 1 Republican Union from taking on the character 1 1 of dangerous dlvísionism; and. Se-| tundo-Seeking a formula which. ¡ ■ in rendering the ideal of statehood. To have a bridge for the Puerto Rican Liberal Party to merge with the Progressive Republican Union, in the struggle for the sovereignty of Puerto Rico, as another state of the United States of America. "With such purpose, and with the con- - sentiment of our president, Don Celestino Irlarte, we went last Sunday, at about one o'clock in the afternoon. * To interview the group of co-religionists who, under the leadership of Dr. Figueroa and Dr. Soto, were advocating the truce, to propose that we discuss a formula that would eliminate the serious objections that had been raised against the truce and could receive the unanimous support of the Republican Union, bringing together once again the forces of the Republican Union in a single bundle. In a single bundle, the forces of our psr- i tirio Visit liberal assembly "At the indication of Doctors Figueto* and Soto, and considering that ¡ e "te purpose had to interest i also the Liberal Party, which,' *1 wished to form a new party, i habtla of preferring to do so with another . We agreed* to go in commission, on Sunday afternoon, * the ! Liberal as "mble, there to request I ,' that a commission be appointed which, together with our co-religions- ' I rios who advocated the ' truce, would try to find the means to harmonize the differences of the three groups. The Liberal Party consented to appoint 1* commission. i and, President Irlarte being warned of i the conciliatory efforts* that reai lizábsmos, commissioned, at e*o of dn- ■ co of the afternoon, Messrs. Lecompte, Rivera Cabrera. Garzot. I Parkhurst, Gélgel. Rivera Santiago and i Ferré, to conduct talks with the other two ' ■ groups. Moments later, we all! - I no" we were meeting at the El Patio hotel, ■ । to discuss formulas for svenen- ' i cía. i! Propositions made by Ferré "Mr. Luís A. Ferré, a nom(Contlnued on page 16) ;