THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy with scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temp. low, 71. Barometric pressure at sea level at 4:00 p.m., 80.04 inches of mercury.
40 pages 5/
MASANA JOURNAL
anoxxvui
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO- SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 1948
Motorists, we demonstrate the traditional courtesy of the country.
NUMBER 11215
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
Boricua Migration Report Issued
* The New York Welfare Council suggests it - believes federal agency < Puerto Ricans ( in urbe aqn 230,000 ! They report that 70 percent of emigrants ' support themselves r NEW YORK February 13 (PU) I -The Welfare Council of New York City recommends a federal migration office to handle the problem of Puerto Rican migration. c The Cornejo's recommendation was made after more than a ' year's study of the Puerto Rican problems in New York City. . f The Council stresses that it is neither to stimulate nor discourage migration, but to alleviate what it would mean to the human misery and civic distress being caused by the con- P tlnuo Influx of Puerto Ricans, t Under the Council's proposals, the recommended federal immigration ofl- or ciation would eatu- d daily employment opportunities for Puerto Ricans in the United States. It would also prepare areas for the establishment and provision of educational, health, recreational, and readap- 1. It would also prepare areas for the establishment and provision of education, health, recreation and retraining facilities for emigrants. . The Council's Report was hailed as an encouraging sign by Governor Jesus Plflero. of . Puerto Rico. He said that the Island Government has initiated training schools and study projects to assist the federal government in the resettlement project. Plflero said that one of the important reasons for leaving Puerto Rico is the large amount of unemployment on the island. He said, however, that Puerto Rico has an industrial. Industrial!- : zadon program that is attracting many t industries from the mainland, opening t new jobs* on the Island and raising the general level of vi- , da. He assured that the Puerto Rican Government would do everything possible to accelerate the normal assimilation of Puerto Ricans into their new environments on the mainland. (In its report, the Welfare Council indicated that Puerto Rican migrants tend to congest the poorer parts of the city. A specific study was made of a section of East Harlem. j Regarding this study, the Council said: "The study corroborated the findings on crowding, overcrowding, age, deterioration of living conditions and lack of facilities. However, the Council refuted two so-called misconceptions about the Puerto Rican problem. Said ] the Council: 'Contrary to the general impression, 70 percent of the ( migrants are supported at the same ]mo completely* already aea from aus , salarlos or unemployment insurance ( and other Income other than direct aide- ( da" , i The Council also said that the ( estimates that have been published about the Puerto Rican population in New York City have raised the figure to between 350,000 and "00,000, and । adds that in reality there are only about 230,000 Puerto Ricans in the city.000 puertorri- i queftoi. i The greatest needs of the < migrants, according to the Con- i sejo. are to learn English, relat- 1 ng to community facilities in regard to adult and child health as well as education, and to learn a gainful ofldo. The Council recommends that the proposed federal immigration office provide facilities to address these needs. The following is a summary of the report: A federal office for Puerto Rican migration, with the object of helping Puerto Ricans to adjust themselves in this country under reasonably satisfactory conditions, is recommended by the committee of the Welfare Council dealing with the case of Puerto Ricans, whose report, based on my of a year of study and interviews conducted by lldereg in social and civic affairs, was released yesterday. In this first general study completed on the Puerto Rican situation in New York City, several facts were revealed, as well as corroborating several facts already reported. The study, released to the public at a press conference held in New York City, was I d at a press conference held jointly by C. Howland Shaw, chairman of the Council, and Adrian B. Burke, director of the Puerto Rican Committee, covered the size and location of the Puerto Rican population in New York City; the problems of Puerto Ricans in their neighborhood; education and employment; and the question of migration and resettlement. The main recommendations were as follows: 1, On migration: The creation of a federal office with adequate funding and personnel to perform the following functions; the conduct of a continuing study of employment opportunities in the United States suitable to the needs of Puerto Ricans, and a study of the areas in which such opportunities exist in order to determine whether or not they are available (Continued on page 18).
Control of synthetic rubber distribution reinstated
The measure was taken because of the shortage of tire supplies WASHINGTON, Feb. 13. The Government today reimposed its controls on the distribution of synthetic rubber for general use to insure a more equitable distribution of scarce supplies for automobile tires and other essential needs. The Secretary of Commerce, W. Averrell Harriman, ordered that "the distribution system be revived on the recommendation of the Rubber Industry because supplies of synthetic rubber for general purposes are not sufficient to fill an uncontrolled demand. The main result of the order will be that the Department of Commerce will allocate synthetic rubber to various manufacturers and control the amount that can be used of each class of the product. Earl Glen, head of the Department's Rubber Division, said that about 73,000 tons of general-purpose synthetic rubber would be marked for distribution through the end of March. Most of it "will be destined for transportation lines," mainly for tires. He said that the manufacturers will be able to maintain, under the distribution system, almost the same production average that they reached during the last three months of the year. Rico With the purpose of recommending measures to lessen the problem that has begun to intensify with the shortage of fuel oil on the island, the Director of the Bureau of Docks and Ports, Mr. Manuel Henriquez, has been conducting a survey among the different gas stations that serve this product in San Juan, and the shipping companies that operate cargo and passenger ships that regularly take this fuel on the island. Mr. Henriquez informed yesterday morning that several barges have had to discard the port of San Juan as a port of call due to the shortage that prevents them from taking fuel on the island, preferring to go to the ports of Aruba and Curacao. He also indicated that this determination of the shipping companies is affecting the revenues of the Island Government in terms of the collections of its Bureau and at the same time this decision constitutes a threat to the economy of] pals, if this situation is prolonged. As will be recalled, the gas companies informed that the request made to the shipping companies to divert their ships from the route with Puerto Rico, is due to their interest in conserving the greatest amount of fuel oil in reserve, for the use of the industries established on the island whose machinery operates on the basis of this fuel oil. Yesterday officials of the gas companies reported to be making a careful study of the situation, anticipating that during today, Saturday, they would be in conditions to be able to offer ample information to the public, on the prevailing situation,
0 and jIN MMH Secretary Harriman i . 1947. i The Department of Commerce . abandoned controls on go- > ma for general uses in the past i month of July. The Bureau of Financial Recons- . trucclon, through its - rubber stockpile, has been dlstrl- > fleeing this kind of rubber since : then, loosening the system of . control, i Gln explained that the Department 1 (Continued on p. 16) : He Dr. Fernós i returned yesterday to ' Puerto Rico He said reorganization of the Washington office i is nearly completed already r On the Eastern Air 1 Lines plane which arrived late yesterday in the - Island, returned the Commissioner Re- - Bident of Puerto Rico in WA- * shington, Dr. Antonio Fernós z Isern. At the Isla Grande airport, Dr. Fernós reported that the reorganization of the Puerto Rico Office in Washington, D.C., has been practically completed, and that the Executive Council has only to appoint the person who will be in charge of it. Asked about candidates for the position, Dr. Femó" limited himself to stating that so far he has no candidate to recommend, but he immediately added: "I may have someone in mind, but I am not in a position to publicize it yet. 1 To a question from THE WORLD, ¡ in connection with the ■ recommendation 1 which has been made by the Property Council- ' tar of the. City of New York. 1 for the establishment of a Federal Immigration Bureau in that city, for the purpose of dealing with the immigration of Puerto Ricans to that city, Dr. Fernós stated that he was not in a position to make any statement to that effect since, until his departure from the city of Washington, he had not been sent a copy of said recommendation and was therefore completely unaware of said project. However* Dr. Fernós added that he was aware that the Welfare Council of the City of New York had been making a New York City Welfare Council had been making efforts to >o- . channel the flow of migrants from Puerto Rico to the United States.
Compendium of News
Primitivo Torrea convicted for the death of Nasario Confesor Garcia, in Ponoe. - ♦ * Committee to draft aid bill for the coffee industry. Committee that will analyze inveetigaclón on the mechanlsación in M was agricultural of I* cañe, u meets on lunee. - The number of cases of tuberculosis on the island has reached 294. - Dr. Podro Conde proposed a plan to improve traffic in San Juan. Jues Ramires Pabón said that it depended on the Juries that Justice would be served. - - - - t Banks are authorized to segregate a reserve from their profits for bad debt*. Governor's changes to Fifth Economic Program to be submitted to JP on Monday. Federal immigration office suggested for understanding with Puerto Ricans in the United States. - o * Forrestal imposes censure on statements made by the high chiefs of the armed forces. AH will build* in Roosevelt a housing development for moderate-income families. * Dr. Fernós returned to the island. - - - - River flow is normal, but
Insist that water be economized. The Public Health Association discussed the crime problem. F - - - - Marshall praised Bevin's proposal on the political union of Western Europe. Gas stations report fuel oil situation today. Ship diversion to Aruba is affecting the island. - The Chicago grain market showed some improvement; "1 wheat recorded a rise, although corn fell to the highest for the seventh consecutive time. Control is again imposed on the distribution of synthetic rubber. O i o Sa finds millionaire shipbuilder Fred Peterson on the island. Admiral W. H. P. Blandy and other prominent Jetee militants visit the Island on their way to Viequee, where they will preeencie lee manlobraa do guerra. nstelaron un régimen alemán en eu sona da ocupación. | The Junta Universitaria publishes a document prepared for the students. The Civil Aeronautics Administration withholds airport funds pending the Navy's decision.
Grain market improved yesterday
For the first time since the downturn began wheat recorded a rise There was firmness in N. Y. stocks, Corn had maximum decline in Chicago market for the seventh consecutive time By JOHN BARROW United Press Correspondent CHICAGO, Feb. 13.~(PU)-The" grain prices *moved in a wide curve today and corn recorded I* maximum allowable low for a-- trading day, but there was some evidence that'the unprecedented decline in commodity prices, which was reflected in the decline of many food commodities, presents a leveling trend. For the first time since the decline began last week, July wheat posted a rise at the close of trading. The price rose by one and a quarter cents. One of the major grain dealers said that despite the day's nervous trading "the market seems to have improved, and the end of the decline, at least as far as wheat is concerned, may have occurred." Stocks held steady amid thin trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange. Algo, dun, bond and "Curb" futures were Irregular. Hog prices held steady between the previous price and a little higher, but wholesale butter prices in Chicago and New York recorded declines of three and a half to six and a half cents per pound. Several other firms announced reductions in items for housewives. * In Chicago, corn for May and July, two of the main contracts, fell to the limit at the market opening, fluctuated up and down, and finally closed with the maximum loss. This is the seventh time in eight days that the meit recorded the maximum allowable low. May corn is down from the highest price of $2.70-% a bushel, reached on January 16, to 61.97-H today, representing a loss of 73 and a half cents a bushel in less than a month. July wheat advanced somewhat, despite the fact that the government has not entered the market to make purchases for the European program. Other wheat contracts had losses ranging from five cents to fractions of a cent. Corn closed down the most at eight cents; cottonseed was up half a cent to three cents; soybeans were down eight cents, and butter was up about half a cent. One of the causes of the reaction at the Chicago Board of Trade at noon was the introduction of a bill by two Republican senators from the trlgueroe states of North and South Dakota. The bill repealed the law requiring the Nation to maintain a wheat reserve of 150,000,000 bushels as security against depletion of the domestic supply by Government exports. The bill, which counteracted a steep decline in prices, was introduced by Senators Harland J. Bushfield, Republican, of South Dakota, and Milton, Republican of North Dakota. In the Kansas City grain market, wheat fluctuated between a loss of four cents per bushel and a gain of two and one-quarter cents. In Minneapolis, July wheat closed at par and May wheat was down three and three-quarter cents. tnvos In Kansas City, corn posted the highest decline of eight cents. The total number of hogs shipped to markets in corn-producing regions was 35,000, well below normal, and prices were steady to up 25 cents per hundredweight. In some eastern markets, increases ranged from 50 cents to a dollar per hundredweight. Several market analysts said that farmers are "Continued on p. 16)
A.H. to build development for moderate-income families
The Planning Board in its meeting of Wednesday, November 11 approved a project of the Puerto Rico Homes Authority for the construction of a housing development on land purchased from PRRA in the Eleanor Roosevelt Neighborhood, in Hato Rey, where lots will be sold by the Authority under a plan to provide housing facilities for moderate-income families. The construction works include main and secondary streets, equipped with curbs and sidewalks, water and sewer services, and electric power. The development will consist of 30 blocks, with a total of 329 lots. Each lot will range in size from 300 to 348 square meters. There will also be an 8.2 cuerdas parcel for an athletic park. The board also approved the aji
The board also approved the acquisition of a parcel of land adjacent to this development by means of an exchange with another Authority parcel, in order to make better use of the land and to form a suitable thousand-square-meter solar farm. The Authority's new Homes project has the fundamental purpose of providing housing facilities for middle class families who do not have the right, according to the regulations, to reside in the Authority's homes, and who, however, do not have the resources to build expensive homes or to rent expensive residences. It is understood that the PRRA, in ceding these lands, made a special effort to ensure that they would receive the purpose for which they were intended, so that they would represent a relief for the housing shortage faced by the middle class in the country. -
Admiral Blandy visits Puerto Rico
■ B To witness the largest* maneuver to be held since*after*World War II, Admiral William H. P. Blandy, Commander of the Atlantic Fleet and also of the maneuver*to be held in Vieques, arrived yesterday in the capital city of Trinidad. The military diatlnguld was yesterday the object of the honors befitting* his high rank in the Naval Bear, and in the photograph are shown with the Admiral (a la Isqulerda), Captain Jack Lyon, Acting Commander of the Big Island Naval Base, and Lieutenant General King E. Porter, who welcomed him. Porter, who welcomed him (Photo by EL MUNDO).
By Eliseo Comba* Guerra On his way to a war maneuver zone where all kinds of weapons will be tested, except the atomic bomb, yesterday afternoon he arrived in San Juan, and is still in our port, on board the "Pocono", Admiral W. H. P. Blandy. Commander in Chief of the . The members of the Committee of Advisers investigating the effects of the use of mechanical devices and yerbloldae in the agricultural phase of the Aíucai'era Industry, have been summoned to meet next Monday at 3 o'clock in the afternoon. In this meeting will begin the final analysis of the results of the investigation carried out by Mr. Wilfredo Santiago in the southern part of the Island, where he has been testing the use of devices such as the planter and mechanical weeding machine and other machinery that can be used in the work of the sugar cane fields, which will have to displace workers. The mechanization of the sugar industry, as well as the use of yerbields, has been recognized as a necessity, both by the Legislature and by Governor Jesús T. Plflero, in order to reduce costs. Plflero. to reduce production costs in the industry. According to information supplied a few days ago by Mr. Wllfredo Santiago, director of the Bureau of Statistics, established by the Legislative Committee on Unemployment, 1* mechanization of the work of cutting and hauling coffee will result for the sugar industry in an economy of approximately 400,000 days' labor. Likewise, other aspects of the agricultural phase, as expressed by Mr. Santiago, can be done with an important economy of wages, once mechanical devices are used. The House of Representatives, as ae Mbe, when ordering the Investigation of the effect of mechanization and the yerbldda* made clear its position supporting the use of mechanical equipment in the sugar cane fields, notwithstanding the displacement of workers, because it understood that the sugar industry could not otherwise meet the competition from areas such as Cuba and Hawaii, which allegedly produce sugar at much lower costs than Puerto Rico. In order to avoid the social problem that mechanization will create, the Government has been studying a method or rule to reserve public works for the periods of seasonal unemployment in the sugar industry. This method has been (Continued on page 16)
The method has been used in the Atlantic and also in the maneuvers being carried out on the shores of Vieques Island. Admiral Blandy, whose arrival was originally scheduled for shortly before noon, arrived by plane from the base in Trinidad at 1:00 p.m. He was a little tired from the trip.
Immediately after having received the honors inherent to his rank at the Isla Grande naval station, Admiral Blandy took a launch which took him aboard the steamer "Pocono", which was located at the base in Trinidad.
I Judge Ramirez Pabon said that justice depends on the jury He criticized the citizens who try to evade the jury service and those who do not comply with the oath to impart justice with rectitude MAYAGUEZ, February 13 -(By Ricardo VlllamlD- At the end of the reading of the criminal calendar of jury trials to be held before the District Court during the months of March, April, May and June of this year, the Judge of said Court, Mr. Roddfo Ramirez Pabon, Lic.
Roddfo Ramirez Pabón, addressed the jurors present, who would hear the hearing of the cases indicated pmk' place today. The referred magistrate stated in the record that the Jury Institution is called to function in such a way that avoids the high rate of criminallded prevalent in Puerto Rico. Judge Ramírez Pabón stated that on the occasion of a recent bloodshed in San Juan, several civic entities* have expressed the opinion that their action was necessary to prevent crime. But that is* not the reality, commented the magistrate. The reality is that it depends on the proper functioning of the jury to "impart the best administration of justice in Puerto Rico. He complained that those same representatives of civic entities, when asked to serve as jurors*, have used all available means not to act, putting "their personal interests before the administration of justice. And that at other times these same representatives of civic entities, either by ntatlvos of religion, politics or friendship, did not comply fully and faithfully in their capacity as jurors and failed to the oath taken to judge the causes* with Impartiality and rectitude. He then added that we were close to an election campaign and these would be difficult times for full JuitlclR ImpartlK. He said he knew 1* politics for having been in it for thirty years and knew its science and art, but also its* shamelessness. i Those shamelessnesses on more than one occasion were enthroned in the Judiciary. No obitant. said, that with rare exception, he was satisfied with the work of the jury in eite district and that he was proud of it. He went on to say that he had obtained that jury service by selecting all those unwarranted excuses that were asked of him. He ended by saying that on the first of April he would appoint the nine commissioners who would select the 300 new jurors, and that he hoped that Dloa loa Uumlnaae would appoint another 300 citizens to serve with equal rectitude and efflclgnda as those who preceded him.
"New cold wave is sweeping the United States Snowstorm hit Ohio valley and was moving eastward CHICAGO, Feb. 13. (PU).A tornado "e unleashed today over Mislslpi a snowstorm ezotó the entire Ohio valley moving into the eastern states and a* serle of Floods left "ln home to thousands of people in Tennessee as the Nation entered its "e second consecutive month of severe Winter weather. The tornndo roared over an agricultural dls* trito near Newton. MIslslslpi. Seven persons were killed, fifteen seriously injured, and many houses were washed away. . _ , Rivers and creeks in Tenesi, Mlsisipl, 1*' West Virginia and Kentucky overflowed their" bank". More than three thousand people* were left homeless in Tenesi! Several* towns* were cut off. The water supply to the fifteen thousand inhabitants* of Shelhj*vllle. Tenei!. was interrupted. Freezing rains and below normal temperature! ""pelarleron a sheet of ice from St. Louis to Illinois. Indian*. Ohio and Pennsylvania. The storm was expected to hit New York State tonight. Temperatures" in the Midwest were generally higher today. but a new cold snap "was breaking southeastward from the Dakotas and was expected to hit the central Midwest tomorrow night. The explosion of an oil stove and a subsequent fire destroyed a fall of trei plioi apartments in Utlca, New York, killing eleven people. Fourteen people escaped, but three received severe burns. The fuel situation P®* ra industries brightened considerably today with the announcement that gasoline shipments to the Detroit area will be resumed Tuesday, allowing one hundred and fifty thousand people* who have e "ta(Continued on page 20)
River flows normal; but insist no water be wasted
The water supply in the metropolitan area is remaining normal, and the flow of the Piedras and Bayamón rivers has continued at a fairly favorable level in the last few days, according to the Director of the Aqueduct Service, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante. However, this official's recommendation that the water not be wasted, so that the Laa Curiae and Cidra Lake reservoirs, which supply the 31 San Juan River aqueduct in times of extreme drought, are not quickly depleted, remains unchanged. In recent days, the flow of the
Bayamón river has been reinforced with two million gallons of water from the Cidra reservoir. The daily total available at this time for the consumption of the population varies between 27 to 30 million gallons per day. It should not be understood that this situation is likely to continue permanently. It will be recalled that the Aqueduct Service warned the public about the onset of the drought and asked for cooperation to prevent a disproportionate decrease in the reserves accumulated in the lake. / *
Public welcomes theWEMB
The inauguration of the station WEMB, Radio EL MUNDO, was warmly welcomed by the radio audience of Puerto Rico, which has expressed its satisfaction with the inaugural program broadcast last Thursday night, through telephone calls, telegrams and personal expressions. Several distinguished personalities of the aHíatlco and cultural world, made statements about the impression they received from the first program transmitted by WEMB. All of them expressed that they listened to the program with true delight and praised the artistic quality of the program. Here are some of them: Don Emilio del Toro Cuebaa, Retired President of the. I enjoyed listening to this splendid program. The new station. Radio EL MUNDO, is in harmony with the constant progress of that company. And having brought so many of our artists and so distinguished, has given us double satisfaction: the inauguration of a new station, and to have with us our best artists. I enjoyed listening to the Figueroa brothers and Riña de Toledo, and so many other good artists who participated in the program". José Enrique Pedrelra, composer and director of a music academy. "'I consider the WEMB station as one of the most modern in the world. Its perfect broadcasting and the praiseworthy purpose of offering the best music and sponsoring Puerto Rican artists with preference will make this station one of the most popular, not only in Puerto Rico, but also abroad. I congratulate Mr. Angel Ramos, for the success obtained and for his great contribution to the musical culture of Puerto Rico, wishing him once again the greatest triumphs". Carmellna Figueroa, (Director of the Figueroa Music Academy):- "I think the program was excellent because of its variety and tone, and how well combined it was, which placed it at the height of the programs that are transmitted by the best stations in the world. All the artists were determined to make the program a real success. It was a well chosen program: the best of classical music and a selection of popular compositions. Riña de Toledo was a revelation for me. I also liked very much the baritone Luis SagiVela. From every point of view it seemed to me a perfect program". Emilio Belaval, aacrltor and judge of the Tribunal de Diatrlto de San Juan: "I simply thought it was splendid. It was a varied program, of good artistic quality, where all the musical genres were well balanced, and of course, I especially liked Pepito Figueroa's interpretation of the Fuente de Aretus and Narciso's interpretation of Chopin's Nocturne. The vox do Riña d" Toledo was a pleasant surprise for me." Doña Elisa TavArw, (Director of the Tavárez Academy: "I liked the inaugural program of the season very much. The artists performed very well, the broadcast was clear and the program was well combined." Mr. Manuel Barasoain Julbe, musicologist: "I thought it was perfect. The program in general terms was very good, especially the performance of the baritone Sag! Vola. He is the best in that genre that has come to Puerto Rico. It was about time that something was done to improve the radio programs. Radio EL MUNDO has a good teacher: maestro Joaquín Burset, who can do a lot in that sense." . Rosita Escalona de Nln, director of the Escalon Academy*: "I enjoyed it very much. I liked it very much. It was a varied program. Last night I called the station to congratulate them. This morning I tuned in to the station again and I really liked the pianist who was participating in a program of good music. I congratulate you most heartily, it was a great program." Mrs. Ella* Mora de Gadea Pleó, School Director of the Capital: "I listened to the Inaugural WEMB program and it was magnificent. My only wish is that it will be maintained, as I hope, * that same artistic level." Don Conrado Asenjo: "I regret that I could not hear the whole program. Riña de Toledo has a very beautiful voice. The part of the program I was able to hear I liked very much. Ramos revealed himself to me as a good speaker. I congratulate him on his success." Don Antonio Reyes Ruis: "The program was very well chosen, and both the modulation in the technical part of the radio station, as well as the contribution of the artists, were in my opinion perfect. And as an indication that its purpose is to bring the great art to the people of Puerto Rico and to tend to increase the musical educational flow, is why the new station (Continue on page 16).