THE NANDO
nONMHCOI OF THE ISLAND'S FAMA TEMPO, HOT: Generally deepeJado. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: Maximum temperature, SI: minimum, M. Barometric pressure at sea level, at <:M in the afternoon, M.M inches.
9 40 pages 5/
MORNING
A MORNING
YEAR XXIX
Enterad aa second elaaa matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 6, 1948
Motorist*, demoatremo" the traditional courtesy of the pala
NUMBER 1123
Five Finnish matches against Russian alliance
Paasikivi makes eefuerxo . to draft reply , which will satisfy Stalin Believe appoint delegates to Moscow today Will receive instruction to keep country out of Soviet bloc For MATS LUNDQUIST HELSINKI, March 5 (PU)™ Five of the political hall parties, in whose hands are 148 of the two hundred seats in Parliament today came out against any military alliance with Russia which would tie this pals to the Soviet Eastern bloc. Accordingly, President Juho K. Paasikivl conferred arduously and at length tonight with Foreign Minister Cari Enckell in an effort to draft a satisfactory reply to Premier Joseph Stalin's personal request for a Russian-Flanders mutual aid treaty. Well-informed sources express the belief that Paasnikivl would appoint a delegation, poslblcmen.te tomorrow, to go to Moscow to take charge of the treaty negotiations: but the delegates would be instructed to do their utmost to keep Finland out of the satellite bloc's close ties with Russia. The leaders of the three right-wing parties visited Paasikivl at his residential palace today and expressed their firm opposition to any treaty that would make Finland a military ally of Russia. The leaders of two moderate parties of the Left made it clear that, while they favored negotiations with Russia, they were opposed to a treaty that would tie Finland militarily to the Eastern bloc. Thus the People's Democratic Union, which includes the Communists, was left alone, unconditionally in favor of a military treaty with Russia. The Democratic Union dominates fifty seats in Parliament. The Sweden Democrats, with 48 seats, and the Swedish People's Party, with fourteen, favor negotiations with Russia because Stalin requested them: but they say that such negotiations must not result in a military pact tying Finland to the Russian bloc. Spokesmen for these two parties said they hoped Paasikivl could draft a counter-proposition that could result in a treaty without the military alliance. The Conservatives, with twenty-nine seats, the Agrarians, with 48, and the Liberals, with nine, are opposed to a military treaty at this time. (Continued on page 24) Eleven ships come to visit the island They will participate in other amphibious maneuvers Eleven other ships of the United States fleet in the Atlantic will visit the island's ports during the next amphibious maneuvers which will follow the others recently held in the Vieques area. During today's day there will be 2,000 officers and sailors in San Juan, and 1,200 in Mayaguez. The ships in San Juan will be the following: the transport New Kent, which brings, in addition to its own crew, 3,400 Navy troops. 3,400 troops of the Navy: the landing ship Catamount. 1ns other rie rie landings Medium 397 and 398. and the Insignia ship LC(FF)783 and the hospital consolitatlon." They will visit Mayagüez, the Winston, the LSTS 980. finí and M2, the Gordius and the ARL 36. In addition to their own crews, the Barros carry 700 troops, Plans have been made to entertain the visitors, including an official reception at City Hall, tour of the most picturesque sites of the city, sports, dances and other activities. The officers will be guests of the Rotary Club of Mayagüez, at a luncheon next Tuesday, followed by a parade of the local RQTC battalion. On Wednesday they will be guests of the Lions Club. Many recreational activities have also been organized in the capital for the period from 5 to 10 March. During all those days there will be movies, dances. sports and games at the YMCA. The. Ronrlco Company - will offer, free of charge, admission to its bar. and drinks to officers and sailors. Other clubs and places of entertainment which will offer amusement facilities to visitors in San Juan will be the following: the Officers' Club, the Recreation Center, the Enlisted Men's Bar, the CPO Club, and the various Navy courts, all at the Naval Station: the amusement facilities at Fort Brooke and at Buehanan: the Union Club at Santurce; the Berwind Country Club, between Carolina and Rio Piedras: the San Juan Country Club, in *1 County: and the San Juan Yacht Club.
Inauguration of immigration office in N. Y. The event was attended by 150 members of the Puerto Rican colony and authorities By JAMEsTbTcANEL NEW YORK, March 5, (PU) - The Government of Puerto Rico today inaugurated an employment and immigration office in Manhattan, aimed at diverting the immigration of Puerto Ricans from New York to other parts of the United States. The inauguration was attended by about 150 representatives of the Puerto Rican colony, and several city and state authorities. £1 Resident Commissioner, Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern, considered the Inauguration, in a press conference, as a precedent in the intergovernmental efforts to orient and help immigrants in their adaptation to the new environment. Noting that hundreds of Puerto Ricans have already been diverted from New York's congested centers to other cities and to farms, Fernós said he was confident that the orientation efforts of the employment and migration office would result in a better distribution of immigrants; "Puerto Ricans," he said, "are now discovering the rest of the United States. Hasla makes a (Continued on page 13) There will be a medical center in Barrio Obrero It will be the first of five to be installed by the Municipality of San Juan By Carina Nieve" Rivera Editor of EL MUNDO The Government of the Capital will establish a medical center in Barrio Obrero at a cost of $50,000, as reported yesterday by Mayor Felisa Rincón de Gautier, during a conference she held with representatives of the press. This medical center will be the first of five that the municipality of San Juan intends to install in different points of the Metropolitan Zone, which will be equipped with facilities to provide dispensary services. X-rays, laboratory for analysis, dental medical attention, pharmacy and social service. On the other hand, answering a journalist's question, the Mayoress informed that by virtue of the agreement tentatively drawn up between the Government of the Capital and the Island Government (according to which the Tapia Theater will be used after its restoration to hold the lottery drawings, in exchange for the Island Government's investment of $ 100,OOO in its reconditioning), the Lottery Bureau will compensate for the loss of the building's original construction, which will be used to hold the lottery drawings.
Frocunidor General repudiated the Intervention rie loa Interese" politico* on the judiciary, in rejecting acuMclone" against Justice made by the Mayor of Yahuena. Sunnnl Reports there will be a casorio for veterans of Arecibo. _ a ♦ - Medical Association will give cursillo" to its" member*. - * " Arreatan ganga that had stolen milliona of merchandise from the railroad. - ♦ - If bill is approved in Congress, they will present hill in the Legislature creating a Merchant Marine Academy on the Island - - - Employers are satisfied* with the domestic" boricua" sent* to Scarsdale. - The Capital Government will establish a medical center in Barrio Obrero. Additional study will be done on the Ponce Bonus. - - - - Another one tenth of one percent increase in price* on the island was recorded - - - - - Five admit guilt in drug trafficking*. Sentencing set for Friday. * * - The committee that governs the training program for hotel* and restaurant* employees* met at the Health Department.
News Digest
Cincn de lo"- six political parties in Finland "a demonstrate against any military alliance in Russia, - ♦ - Today m> held at Krug's office in Washington, a* meeting on the international airport. - ♦ - Another ve* * cattleman* will be summoned to* discuss milk prices. - Health finds the hygienic condition of many industrial plants unsatisfactory. - Gottwald began his duties as Czech Premier in the midst of a purge that includes students. - - - Chet Brewer, of the Criollos, and Johnny Davis, of the Mayagüez, will face each other tomorrow morning in the Paris League in the resumption of the Final Series which is favoring Caguas-Gua-yama, 8 games to do*. * * - A fire destroyed yesterday afternoon the building where Nu-Treada, Inc. was located in Santurce. - - j Krug testified before * Senate Subcommittee on Curry's Aisaka contracts. " " - Arjona Slaca presented a bill to prohibit the holding of land* in excess of 500 acres, to natural and juridical persons*. - Juan Marinello will not be able to come to the island because he was denied a visa by the American consulate in 1* H "b "n*.
This photograph was taken on the occasion when the former U.S. Ambassador to Russia, William C. Bullitt, was testifying before the Foreign Relations Committee of the House of Representatives. Mr. Bullitt, who had resided in Moscow for several years and had had the opportunity to interact with the official machinery of the United States.
The Scientific Committee of the Medical Association of Puerio Rico will give courses to the members of the Association, according to a program which it has outlined for these professionals. The committee has interested the faculties of the various clinics in the metropolitan area to hold their scientific meetings at the home of the Medical Association, so that the greatest number of physicians may benefit from the meetings. It has also been informed that the Public Relations Committee of the Medical Association, under the direction of Dr. Roberto Francisco, has already organized the activities to be carried out by the Committee, as well as ordered films to illustrate the dissemination conferences among the rural population of the Island. The associated doctors who will be in charge of the outreach programs are being selected. The campaign that the Módua Association proposes to develop for this purpose will not only be carried out in the rural neighborhoods, but also in all the cultural centers of the country. It will be recalled that the President of the Medical Association, Dr. Manuel A. Asior, recently announced that in order to raise the standards of medical practice, the Public Relations Committee would develop a campaign aimed also at raising the advancement of medical education, for which it was necessary "to convince the community to stop supporting quacks and spiritualists, and resorting to remedies and patents that are advertised as wonderful cures through advertisements. As a countermeasure, Dr. Astor proposed to counteract the situation, to bring (Continued on page 13)
The buildings in which these factories and workshops operate should be provided with adequate ventilation and humidity. As for the measures rio segu-i ! । rielad measures that can be taken to protect workers from the risks involved in industrial processes, he stated that they are conspicuous by their absence in most factories, and that the risks to workers from industrial processes can be classified as noxious substances, dust, fumes, gases or smoke. The Chief of the Industrial Hygiene Section, in an interview granted to EL MUNDO, also stated that very few establishments in the country have the necessary facilities to deal with these risks, and that the risks to workers in industrial processes can be classified as harmful substances, dust, fumes, gases or smoke, infections and exposure to abnormal conditions of temperature, humidity, noise and pressure. The head of the Industrial Hygiene Section, in an interview with EL MUNDO, also stated that very few industrial or factory establishments offer additional medical services to those provided by the F'ondo riel Seguro riel > State. - ! Mr. Gon1 ' zalez. also stated that the Section is enriching laboratory equipment and apa- " ! ! ralos to carry out a technical "turiio" 1." to determine if the con- > with (rations of dust, gases or harmful sub- . tandems" in the various industrial pro- . coso" rie factories on the Island are over" . . on the occasion of the visit to Puerto ' Rico of Dr. Norbert Enzer, who is a specialist on the pulmonary affections produced by dust, which are known as niiecomoniosis; the Industrial Hygiene Department, as reported by Mr. Gonzalez, had the opportunity to offer his services on the subject, had the opportunity to offer its services in a study of silicosis, a disease due to the inhalation of air containing silica, in which the air is made up of silica.
Susoni informs that there will be a hamlet for Arecibo's veterans*.
The speaker of the House of Representatives, Dr. Francisco M. Susoni, said yesterday that the Planning Board is awaiting approval of the plans and specifications related to the construction of a veterans' home in Arecibo. These plans, according to what we have been informed, must be approved before March 31 of this year, in order for the project to be executed. Mr. Susoni's" statements on this matter were as follows: "The program for the construction of housing for veterans has interested me deeply since it began to be discussed in the official circles of Washington; and as soon as it was discussed, I initiated negotiations with the Governor for the construction of a hamlet in Arecibo. "The officials of Long Construction, the Governor's Office and the Federal Housing Authority, at my invitation, have inspected different sites in Arecibo, and have finally approved a farm in the Hato Arriba neighborhood, where between 800 and 1,000 houses are to be built. "Today I can assure you, as I have been informed, that the Board of Directors has approved the construction of between 800 and 1,000 houses in Arecibo.
Today I can assure you that the Planning Board is awaiting from Long Construction the plans and specifications related to the veterans' housing project in Arecibo, in order to approve them as soon as possible, so that work on these projects can begin before March 31 of this year. "I wish to place on record rie a clear and emphatic manner, that the problems rie the veterans have my greatest sympathies, for obvious reasons, and because I understand that this class represents a section of opinion which is entitled to the consideration and protection of our Government." Referring to the Areciboí port railroad works, Mr. Susoni declared that he is promoting the prompt start of the works. To the realization of this project - he added - "the Insular Government and the interests of the industry and commerce in Areciboí will contribute". The plans and specifications for the Areciho harbor works have already been approved, and it is expected that the Treasurer will make available to the Railway Authority the funds to begin them. (Continued on page 13).
The Treasurer is expected to make available to the Railway Authority the money for military supplies destined for China. In this connection, he accused the State Department of "blindness and apathy" because, in his opinion, it is not in a position to provide the Soviet military supplies to China.
He accused the State Department of "blindness and apathy" in this regard because, in his opinion, it is not as much of a "blindness and apathy" because, in his opinion, it is not as much of a "blind and apathetic" as it is now. He charged, trida as now, he called the State Department "blind and apathetic" because, in his view, it is not preparing to attack the United States. The former ambassador to the U.S. urged the Congress to seize, in full, the government to allocate the sum of one hundred million non-Chinese,
The hygienic condition of some industries is found to be unsatisfactory Chief <le Industrial Hygiene Section states that the buildings do not have adequate ventilation and lighting. - Safety measures are lacking By LUÍS HERNANDEZ AQUINO Editor of El. MUNDO The Chief of the Industrial Hygiene Section of the Health Department, Juan A. Gonzalez, stated that the sanitary conditions of the industrial establishments in Puerto Ríen. inspected" to date, are in most cases" unsatisfactory, not being
Today's meeting on airport i - Representatives* of the* agencies involved will attend. By JEAN VAN "VRANKEN WASHINGTON, March 1, (SIN) - Secretary of the Interior J.A. Krug has called a meeting of prominent naval and civil aviation officials for tomorrow to discuss the Navy Department's objection to the location of the Puerto Rico International Airport on Vorrie Island. Headlining the list of speakers are Secretary of the Navy John L. Sullivan, Assistant Secretary of Commerce in charge of Aviation John Alison, and Governor John Alison. John Alison, and Governor Jesus T. Pifloro. Pifloro, Other officials invited to the meeting to be held at Krug's office at 11:00 a.m. are Secretary of the Interior Oscar Chapman, Director of the Territories Jamo" P. Dnvls, and the Department's legal counsel, Irwin Silverman. ' The conference constitutes the re1 sult of a controversy rie me' rilo year between Vice Admiral Da1 nial F Rnrbey, commander of the Tenth Naval District, and the Insular Government, Governor Piñarn opened this week o] matter to a - final decision. He has discussed the matter for several" days with the Do- # parliament rio lo Interior in order rie to prepare a vigorous argument favoring the continuation rie construction of the airport rail on I"- , the j- According to the Insular Govt, *1 point in controversy cons(Continued on page 16)
By LEO TURNER SCARSDALE. New Yñrk. March 5. (PU) - Alda Diaz Algarin, 18, who came to this country to replace another Puerto Rican girl in a domestic job, was homesick today. "I'll be lonely all the time," she said in halting English, "I'll work for a year, but when I finish I'll go back to the island." Alda is five feet three inches tall, weighs US pounds. She accompanied 20 other Puerto Rican women brought" by the State Employment Service hired for a year. The" employer" advanced her $7S to defray airplane expenses and $45.27 for clothing.
For next week, probably Thursday morning, the Board of Directors of the Cattlemen's Sector of the 1* Farmers' Association will be summoned again for a meeting, and the farmers intend to make a detailed study of the situation now confronting the Puerto Rican dairy industry, In view of the order of the Supply Administration, lifting the "control" over the price of fresh cow's milk in Puerto Rico, it will be decided whether or not to call a general meeting to adopt the definitive attitude of the dairy industry with respect to the price of milk.
Bill of Arjona extends the Lev -/ of 500 acres The explains it to natural persons. The P. of S 64, Senator Rafael Arjona Sines, provides for the procedure to be followed so that no natural or juridical person may possess as owner, lessee or by virtue of both concepts, more than 500 acres of land. It also declares the measure to be of public utility, the extension of land owned by natural persons, in excess of 500 acres, and provides for the acquisition of such excess by the Land Registry to be used for the development of the agrarian policy set forth in the legislation creating said Authority. The text of the aforementioned bill reads as follows: . "Article 1-No natural or juridical person may possess as owner, as lessee, or by virtue of either concept, more than one hundred acres of land, "Article 2-Whoever presently possesses more than 500 acres of land, in either or both concepts, shall limit his tenure to such land, within the term of one year granted for that purpose, as from the date of the approval of this Law. "Article 3-If within this period, which is called the readjustment period, the holder of land in excess of 500 acres has not disposed of the excess of the land owned by him, he shall inform the Executive Director of the Land Authority of the fact, which may then acquire said excess to use it for compliance with the law creating the same. To such effect, the lands possessed in violation of Article 1 of this Law are declared of public utility, and the Land Authority may proceed to take possession of the same and to carry out with them the aforementioned purposes, once the owner has made the notification referred to in this Article, or if, after the period for readjustment has elapsed, the contravening party has not made said notification, and has satisfied the requirements of the law creating the same. The owner shall pay the price thereof by means of a prior deposit and following the procedures prescribed by Articles 14 to 19 of the Puerto Rico Land Law. "Article 4-The lessee shall likewise notify the Executive Director of the Puerto Rico Lands Authority, if he has not disposed of the lands he owns as lessee and whose possession, considered separately or in union with the others he may have as lessee or owner, determines his tenancy of lands within the limit fixed by Article 1 of this Act: and likewise, the lots constituting said excess shall be considered of public utility, and the Land Authority shall proceed, as provided in the immediately preceding Article, to take possession thereof and dedicate them to the fulfillment of the purposes for which said Authority was created, paying the amount thereof to the owner thereof by means of the procedure established in the Puerto Rico Land Law; Provided, that, in such cases, when the owners of the land so leased recover the amount thereof, they shall be entitled to the payment of the amount thereof to the owner of the same by means of the procedure set forth in the Puerto Rico Land Law.
Employers are pleased with their new Boricua domestics
The service is trying to figure out how five young women, who did not take the three-month training course, boarded the plane to replace sisters who regretted it. Aida wakes up at 7:15 a.m., a little later than Aida. Aida gets up at 7:15 a.m., a little later than her employer, Mrs. D. R. Parman, wife of the director of an advertising agency and a graduate of the University of Missouri. Aida sets the table and prepares the coffee. Mrs. Parman finishes breakfast for herself and three children: Bob, 11; Miguel, 7; and Martha, 3. Alda is free to spend her time as she pleases, from 1 to 3 o'clock in the afternoon. Every night she is free, unless (Continued on p. 16)
Krug testifies on contracts from J. Curry
Said to Senate subcommittee that he discussed with him Alaska matter Interior said Interior was investigating case Explained asking him not to oppose factory role in territory By WILLIAM DORVILLIER (Special to THE WORLD) WASHINGTON, March 5. (PU)-Interior Secretary J. A. Krug told a Senate subcommittee today that he had discussed with attorney James K. Curry the advisability of having him play a role in the territory. Curry, the advisability of his not opposing the establishment rie a paper c* rie mill in Alaska, "but they preferred to go to court." Krug was called upon to testify concerning contracts signed by Curry with various Indian tribes in Southeast Alaska to represent them in their claims to recover timber lands from the U.S. Government. Senator George W. Malone, Republican of Nevada, questioned Krug intensively in an effort to draw from the Secretary statements about what Malone called an alleged "conflation between Indian drowners and persons within the Department of the Interior or persons who had recently left the Department. Malone said there was "obviously some relationship in the transaction" involving "a large amount of money, a large tract of land and a large fortune." Malone was referring, he said, to a contract signed by Curry, on behalf of the Indians, at the Maritime Development Company, New York. Krug replied, "We are investigating and will continue to investigate the relationship." Interior agent Mastin White said Curry and the New York company "had no authority to make such a contract." Krug testified that no such contract was ever received by the Department of the Interior. White averred that in his opinion "the contract is not legal, as it requires approval by the Department of Agriculture to be valid. The contract in question involves more than one million acres of timberland in Alaska, which is valued at $10 million. Curry testified at the hearings that he would receive up to 10 percent of the money obtained by the Indians for the land. Krug explained that Interior approved Curry's contracts because "we believe that counsel for the Indians has a right to believe that an act of Congress is subject to legal review." The chairman, Arthur V'. Watkins, R-Utah, said "this was rie a very serious matter" in view of the fact that Curry's contract with the company prevents the Department rie Agriculture from accepting proposals for timber, in an area rie a million rie acres. "This is awkward for the Department of Agriculture, for the government and for Congress." In the hearings," the senators have emphasized the fact that the Curry contract prevents development in the Alaskan area by firms wishing to establish newsprint mills there. Krug said he believes that it is "a (Continued on page 14)
Bullit accuses Russia of preparing attack on U.S.
Negron repudiates!
politics influence! the judiciary!
ü I The Attorney General! rejected the* accusations! of the Mayor of Yabucoal Cites report of the Ledo. Umpierre El Ledo. García Cintrón denies the accusation made by Carrasquillo The Attorney General, Attorney General Luis Negrón Fernández, expressed yesterday that he repudiates the undue intervention of political interests in the exercise of judicial power, even though he recognizes the legitimate influence of political power in the constitution and integration of four courts. The Attorney General described as "unfair" and prejudiced certain accusations made public by the Mayor of Yabucoa, Mr. Ernesto Carras-] quillo, in connection with charges made by the Mayor against the Municipal Judge of Yabucoa, Mr. Ru-I bén Pérez Pórtela, to the Department of Justice. The Attorney General warned! ! that "he has rejected any attempt to submit the courts to the influence of outsiders". He informed about the proceedings" in relation to the resignation of the Justice of the Peace Judge of Yabucoa, Mr.] Raimundo Suarez, and denied, qualifying as "unfounded and gratuitous" the accusation made by the Mayor of CaJ rrasquillo against Raimundo] García Cintrón, of having "tried to influence the Department of Justice not to give course to the charges made" against Judge Pérez Pórtela. On this matter, the Attorney General authorized the following statements: "The Attorney General recognizes - under our democratic system of government and our laws - the necessary role and legitimate attributions of the political power in the structuring, constitution and integration of our courts": "but repudiates anything that could constitute an undue intervention of political interests" in the exercise of judicial power. "The Attorney General will investigate, as he has been doing, the actions of judicial officers and will make, as he has done before, his" determinations 1 responding to the" highest aims । rte a good and sound administration of justice. The Attorney General is to reject all pretensions to subject the courts to spheres d" influences extraneous to their functioning as such. "The accusations made by Mayor Ernesto Carrasquillo in today's El Imparcial against the Department of Justice are uncertain, unjust and prejudiced. I transcribe below the report on such imputations submitted to me by the Court Administrator, Mr. Angel Umpierry: "On February 3, 1948, at 4:40 P. M., a report was received in this Department on February 3, 1948, at 4:40 P. M., a report was submitted to me by the Department of Justice, Mr. Angel Umpierry. M. a telegram was received in this Department sent by the Justice of the Peace of Yabucoa, Mr. Raimundo Suarez, which reads as follows: " 'From today by recommendation doctor Haddock, h" had to confine myself in cania, urgent medical treatment. send white leave.' "El di" de ferebro rip 194>j sent ni Juez rio Paz de Yabucoa, the following telegraphic dispatch. "Please send medical certification to consider license for (Continued on pg. 16) Ponce zoning study to be done Purpose is to locate land for public use A new study on the Ponce Beach zoning with a view to relocating the land for public use. - The study is to be carried out by the Planning Board, at the request of the Leoncio Sentadla representative and a commission of the Municipal Assembly and neighbors of the district. The commission met in this!" sense with "l Acting President of the Board. s*ftnr Santiago Iglesias. The population of Ponce Beach has increased in recent years, he explained, making it necessary to provide greater school and other public facilities, as well as a better location for such services. Mr. Iglesias discussed this situation at length with the Pone* commission, and it was agreed to hold a conference with officials of the Department of Instruction to solve the problem related to land for new schools* in said Playa. In addition, Mr. Iglesia* said that this implies a new study on the zoning of the beach, which will be conducted in order to solve the problems presented to the Board by the Pone* delegate. Officially, the Board has not promulgated the zoning map of Ponce Beach. Therefore, any agreement adopted now will not be subject to approval by the Executive Council, and the requested changes may be made through administrative channels.