THE
42 Pages 5/ I 4
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR LA ISLA, ROY: Partly cloudy with scattered showers; partly cloudy at night. IN8AN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 85; low, TL Barometric pressure at sea level, 29.98 inches of mercury.
LA MAÑANA NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 14, 1948
-utomoriUates, demoetremoa the traditional eorteoí" of the p "la
NUMBER 13398
Piñero nominates Muñoz as candidate for Governor.
* He gave a report on his work. He explained the tax revenue situation and the basic achievements of the island.
In a message to the people of Puerto Rica on his activities in the conduct of public affairs, Governor Jesus T. Piftero last night proposed Sonado and Popular Party President Luis Muftoz Marin as his candidate for the elective governorship of the island. "I nominate the great Puerto Rican Luis Muñoz'Marín," Governor Piftero said as the last sentence of his 26-page message. The Chief Executive outlined the work and program of the current government, ending his speech with the following paragraphs: He feels satisfied "In broad strokes I have given you a Report of my administration in the governorship of Puerto Rico. It has been two years of hard struggle, of continuous effort, which at all times have given me the satisfaction of having fulfilled my duty. As far as I am concerned, if my work has been poor and ineffective, it has been only because of the limitations of the team that God gave me to serve in life. You can be sure of one thing: that my work has been animated by the deepest desire to serve my people, to make good the trust placed in me to carry out the work. I have had the cooperation of the Puerto Rican legislators and of the officials and public servants of my country. If anything fruitful and good has resulted from my administrative management, it has to be attributed - mainly to that cooperation. / Ready to hand over "As I told you last year, in the relay race for the derail iOf and justice of the people, I received the baton and have run my plot to, maintain its pace of progress. I am ready to hand it over to my success- ; or,- that the people elect in the elecclones of this year of 1948. He will face it with honor. - I "Citizens of the various political parties will choose their candidates for the office of Governor of the Island for the next four years. Every citizen of I 'uerto Rico has the right to express his or her opinion on such an important issue. Some citizens will express their opinion in the assemblies to nominate those candidates; other citizens will express it in the shelter of their homes, in conversations with their friends, wherever it is possible for them to do so, even if only in the majestic solitude of their consciences. I tremble .I have the right to express my opinion, if not with the authority of an assemblyman, with the sincerity of a simple citizen of this land. What I think in my conscience I will express it now in a loud voice, before the people of Puerto Rico as a whole. Pnafula a Muño" Marín "That program of which I spoke has supporters and opponents. The opponents will think of a representative of their opposition. Those who favor that program will think of the one who best embodies it and can execute it. I, who favor that program with my heart, nominate before the people of Puerto Rico, to be its first elective Governor, to whom I have been linked in mind and heart for 13 years in the most arduous struggle for the welfare of our country. I nominate the guiding force of that work, the forger of this extraordinary civic enterprise, the man who for the past eight years has had the greatest confidence of the people of Puerto Rico in the conquest of their justice. I nominate the great Puerto Rican, Luis । Muñoz Marín." At the outset, Governor Plñero referred to the life span of the Puerto Rican, since rl 1910. in which he said was 38 years on average. "When the people, backing a unified program of economic and social justice, entered the scene in 1940, that progress accelerated even more, and from then until 1947, the life expectancy of the inhabitants of this island rose from 46 and a half years in 1940 to 57 and a half years in 1947," Mr. Piftero said. Such basic achievements are both economic and political progress, culminating now in the election of the governor by the people. "Such basic achievements were attained when we knew how to separate abstractions from realities," the Governor commented. The Chief Executive went on to explain the large decline in federal Internal Revenue Revenues. He said that from 1943-44 to "the last fiscal year, the drop has been of more than sixty million dollars. On the other hand, he pointed out, since 1945-46, the tax revenues from income taxes have increased, in relation to the 1947-48 tax year, from $18,744,000 to $31,000,000. As to property tax, from $9,400,000 to $10,300,000. The most remarkable thing about these results is that they were achieved without increasing the tax rates," he stated (Continued on page 18).
Officials reveal that part of the cow patty for sale does not meet Health requirements. "Housewives address the Governor. Iden da strike gains ground in protest against the increase in the price of milk, - - - - riflero nominates Muñoz for governor. - Triarte officially convenes FEP assembly. About $200,000,000,000 will flow to Alaska this year under a federal plan to improve its economy. . . . . American Legion's annual convention begins today. - ... - - A Philippine legislator will study the home building program on the island.  * - - - - New York State has eliminated the minimum charge on the liquor ? uao. Truman did not act on the bill iintl-inflate it. - - - - UPR organizes office at UPR to provide employment" to students". - Rolg denies that he had a disagreement with Piftero and Guerrero. - Moralea Otero raises the question of assignment for Tropical Medicine. - The ' Busos withdrew normally.
The UPR employment office would look for jobs for students to help them pay for their expenses.
Mr. Enrique Vllella, assistant to the Dean of Students" of the University of Puerto Rico, informed yesterday morning that the Office of Student Services of the Institution is trying to organize an employment service office for the benefit of university students. Mr. Vllella informed that the University has communicated with the heads of the different departments and agencies of the Government, as well as with commercial and professional firms, in order to find out the possibilities of obtaining employment on a part-time basis for some UPR students. These jobs would be for those students who cannot be placed at the University, but who could get an opportunity outside. Mr. Vllella has prepared a special formulation for government agencies and commercial houses. requesting to know if they can be employed in a part-time schedule for some of the UPR students. Editor of EL MUNDO The tie between the candidates for senator for the Popular Party in the Humacao district, Mr. Pascaslo García and Mr. Ernesto Carrasquillo, has provoked deep displeasure among the masses of Yabucoa, which has broken a resolute thing r! triumph of its current mayor and leader, Ernesto Carrasquillo. Disgruntled elements of the Popular Party in Yabucoa accuse Senator Cruz Ortiz Stella of having abandoned the leaders of Yabucoa, who they allege have always given him their fullest cooperation. The tie between Carrasquillo and Garcia has caused an impasse in the selection of the candidate for the 31st district, Humacao-Yahucoa. The convention held at the San Rafael Theater, in Yabucoa, to select the candidate to represent the aforementioned district in the House, had to recess without reaching an agreement, due to "the manifest antagonism between the Popular Democratic Party of Yabucoa and the Popular Democratic Party of Humacao. In that convention, as reported by members of the Humacao delegation, it was agreed that the candidate proposed by Humacao would be elected. In 1944' the candidate was Mr. Cruz Ortiz Stella, from Humacao.
7== I: ==== ::: ===== : == : == :::: = :::::: Compendium of News
Berlin Command. Threat arises to declare a maritime strike in the Atlantic next August 22. The President of the Reformist Party believes that the Opposition parties can unite. - In September the air service of postal parcels begins. Prayda launched an attack against Soviet ministers. Cuban police conduct largest manhunt in their history in the theft of $500,000 from a local bank. Tobln sworn in as Secretary of Labor. Wallace fought communism and "uhveralva" activities. Baez Garcia was nominated representative to the House of Representatives by the Reform Party. - Thirteen university students convicted, seven acquitted *, accused of disturbing the peace and unlawful assembly. Supreme Court declared itself without Jurisdiction in the PIP case. Seoane Initiated Registration of his new party in Caguas. - - - Seflor Prudencio Rivera Martinez was appointed to a high position in the State Fund. - Seoane has been left out of the Popular Party, says Soli Morale".
Supreme Court has no jurisdiction in PIP case
Judge Marrero Could Not See Evidence
Lawyers could not find any District Court judge available By ANGEL CRUZ CRUZ EL MUNDO Staff Writer Associate Justice Borinquen Marrero Ríos, of the Puerto Rico Supreme Court, yesterday declared himself without jurisdiction to hear the injunction filed by the President of the Independence Party, Dr. Gilberto Concepción de Gracia, in relation to the use of government automobiles. The Injunction was filed by the Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Jesus T. Piñero; -! President of the Senate, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín; Agustín Mercado, Chief of the Transportation Department of the Insular Government; Rafael de J. Cordero. Auditor of Puerto Rico; Felisa Rincón de Gautier, Administrator of the Capital; Andró" Grillase", Mayor of Ponce; Augusto P. Alvarez, Mayor of Río Piedras; Ernesto Ramos An. tonlnl, President of the House of Representatives; and Salvador T. Rolg. Insular Chief of Police. The petition was in the sense that it was not allowed to use government automobiles to go to assemblies or political acts. In resolving this case, Judge Marrero did not enter to consider the evidence in its merits, since he declared himself without Jurisdiction, he could not enter fully into it. Moments after the resolution of the Supreme Court magistrate, Francisco M. Susonl, son, attorney of Dr. Concepción de Gracia, went to the District Court of San Juan to file the same petition with the same allegations. At half past four in the afternoon, Dr. Concepción de Gracia and Mr. Susonl arrived at the Trl- ' hunaT. However, the Judge who hears the extraordinary appeals in the Court, attorney Joaquín Correa Suárez, was not present. Both attorneys then requested Judge José M. Oldenjn. Jr., who was present, to hear the] course, but he excused himself because he was on vacation. Judge Calderon suggested that they file the petition before Judge Antonio R. Parteo, Jr., but the latter said he had a lot of work and could not hold a hearing today, as requested by the petitioners. In view of the impossibility of finding a judge in the District Court to hear the case, attorneys Concepción de Gracia and Susonl, Jr. visited Judge Correa Suárez at his residence. The said magistrate refused, however, to order a hearing to be held today, so that the petitioners could present evidence that would provide the basis for the issuance of a restraining order directed to the defendants so that they could not hold the meeting tomorrow. Judge Correa, according to what Mr. Susonl said last night, argued that he did not see in the allegations of the petition such an urgent matter that would require such a quick hearing, offering to hold the hearing next Monday. The attorneys Concepción de Gracja, Arjona Siaca and Susonl, who formed the commission that visited Judge Correa Suárez, rejected the proposition, understanding that of (Continued on page 10.)
Milk not meeting Health requirements is being sold to the public; housewives address the Governor.
W I *1 - W aJ vin' ' .V I bBl M I- ; ■-f \ H I I A 4 WMlr IB i M a t "al - la Km B X -i
The engraving gives an aspect of a meeting held at the Health Department to discuss problems related to the milk industry. In the background (to the left), appears se-
Figueroa, Chief of the Health Department's Bureau of Health; to his left, Mr. Carlos Rivera, Chief of the Food Sanitation Section. Standing, on the left, Mr. Carlos Rivera, Chief of the Food Sanitation Section.
Oswaldo Rivera, Sanitation Officer of the Santurce Public Health Unit (left) and Miguel Martín, officer of the same department, the other gentlemen seated at the table.
The other gentlemen seated at the table are owners of dairy businesses and representatives of firms selling products for the industry. (Photo EL MUNDO).
Russians left the coman da n cía' cu zone Berlin Revélase down ensign of the building. By Walter Rundle BERLIN, August 13 -(PU),--Ofl-cialea Americans revealed that the Russians today did not hoist their flag in front of the Four Power Command building, and that the Soviet guards had been removed from the building. It was revealed that members of the Russian occupation government and Soviet guards left their homes near| the Commandant's building last night, after telling the German landlords that "we may need this house again." Russian action is presumed to signify the formal termination of Soviet involvement in the Command, the body which governs the city of Berlin. The Soviets actually withdrew from In Coman- | dancership on July 1, but* to this day the Russian flag floated over the building, June to those of the United States. England and ¡ Flannel, and Soviet guards were kept in that building. Two American planes of the C-54 type. loaded with supplies for the blockaded German capital, crashed on landing at Tempelhof airfield, but none of the crew was injured. One of the planes caught fire after skidding off the runway due to poor visibility. The other landed on the runway and flipped nose-first into a rock pile. These were the fourth and fifth accidents since the start of the Berlin air supply service. Thunderstorms and heavy rains today delayed the air service to Berlin.
Telephone strike idea gains ground in protest of hike Mrs. Otero de Lopez reports organization <|p several neighborhood committees. - Vicéna awaits data. - Consumers Association does not comment Fnr SANTIAGo7.ALVEZM.ATl RAN A Editor of EL MUNDO The Administrator of Supply",- seflor Antonio Vlcéns Rior, has not received until yesterday any reply from 1as dairies, in relation ron his request for data concerning nor reason for the rise in.
i The Supply Manager stated that he expects to have a report on Monday. Supply that he expects to have the replies from the dairies in his possession on Monday, and that he will try to speed up the investigation in order to decide as soon as possible whether or not the increase is appropriate. On the other hand, the housewives continue to organize themselves, in order not to buy the product as from the 20th of this month, if the price itself is not lowered to the level below the increase. Mrs. Copelia Otero rir Lopez, who suggested the iriea rir a strike by telephone, to force ]ss dairies it lower the price, in| formed yesterday that during torio rl rila ' speaks rstario cnntrstanrio call them , telephone, rie housewives rir Intercsarins in sumarae to the movement. They organize In strike -Ha sirio necessary - manifested ' 1n Mrs. Lopez. -We are organizing in different sectors, so that each area of Santurce has a person to call for information or to join the movement. The following housewives have promised their cooperation for this purpose: Mrs. María Reyes Dr. OJeda, telephone 2-9033; Mrs. Catalina Sánchez, telephone 2-9433; Mrs. María Torres, telephone 2-8755; Mrs. Paulite Rivera, telephone 2-5276; Mrs. Rosa Mangual de González, telephone 2-99654; and Mrs. Llahrés, telephone 2-8736. Mrs. Otero rir Lóprz estimates that no less than 400 people have called since she suggested the idea. 'ConHhúa on page 18.'
Morales Otero raises lack of asignaeión Says if Ir Legislahirir not <h< funds will reduce hospital service Focusing rl rronómlI problem ('o dr the hospital brnrf iccncin in Puerto Rico, Dr. r "ah1o Morales Otero, director of the School rie Tropical Medicine, ur referred n a deficit, in the Institution oim é| directs, covered with the School's reserve funds, without the Legislature assigning funds for rilo. Dr. Morales Otero stated that the Legislature should increase the funds of the School of Tropical Medicine, because otherwise, in the future, it will be necessary to partially discontinue the services of the dispensary, where 12,000 patients are attended each year, and another 70o are hospitalized. Speaking on the cost of hospital welfare, the Director of the School of Tropical Medicine said that it has risen alarmingly in recent years, and that the salaries of all junior staff have doubled from 1043 to the present. Giving examples, he said that a nurse's assistant who earned twenty dollars a month in 1943 now earns $65, and that a laundry clerk who earned $25 now earns $57 a month. Likewise the kitchen employees, who earned $2Q per month, today earn $57; and the nurses who earned in 1943, $83.33 per month, today earn $125, with meals and lodging, which totals $175 per month.
Opposition will insist Travieso to run as candidate for Governor
Yesterday afternoon a conference was held between leaders of the Statehood. Socialist and Reformist parties, to try to reach an agreement on the nomination of a common candidate for Governor " Resident Commissioner. None of the heads of these parties have authorized any statements regarding this meeting, limiting themselves to say that they do not know anything 'although there is something certain". In spite of this reservation, it was learned yesterday that the candidate chosen for Governor is Mr. Martin Travieso, President of the Supreme Court, who was visited by a commission composed of Mr. Celestino Triarte. Bolivar Pagan, Santiago Iglesias Silva and. Rafael Rodríguez Pacheco to offer him the candidacy. If Judge Travieso accepts the candidacy, then Mr. Luis A. Forré would be the common candidate of the three parties for Resident Commissioner, and Mr. Bolívar Pagán would occupy the presidency of the Senate, if a majority is obtained in that legislative body. Judge. Travieso, according to reports, has stated that he is not willing to accept the candidacy, but the "leaders" of the three parties will insist that he is not willing to accept the candidacy, but the "leaders" of the three parties will insist that he is not willing to accept the candidacy.
The three parties will insist on this, for which it is believed that in the assemblies to be held today and tomorrow, these parties will adopt the agreement not to nominate candidates for these positions, authorizing the party leaders to fill them in the manner they deem most convenient. It was learned that Mr. Travieso does not believe that there should be a common candidate for Governor, "but that there should be common candidates for the Legislature, puts in case the candidate for Governor of the opposition parties should triumph, and in the Legislature there should be a Popular majority, then a disadvantageous situation would arise for the Governor, and for the best interests of the people. Among members of the Socialist and Reformist parties, it was said yesterday that if the acceptance of Mr. Travieso or another common candidate was not obtained, it would not be strange that the name of Dr. Francisco M. Susonl, candidate of the Independentlsta Party, would be placed in the column of those parties as a strategy to defeat Mr. Muñoz Marin. (Continued on page 18)
Dr. Morat also saidContinued on page IR)
Atlantic Maritime Strike Threatened for August 22nd
NEW YORK, Aug. 13. tSpecial to the New York Times) With the expiration* of the contract between the Atlantic coast longshoremen and the employers only eight days away, it seems likely that a federal injunction, in line with the provisions of the Taft-Hartley Act, will be sought to prevent a strike on the docks. The International Longshoremen's Association, affiliated with the American Federation of Labor, and the longshoremen's companies contracted by the Union, were urgently urged yesterday by Commissioner Thomas R. Steutel, of the Regional Office of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, to extend the present agreement for 30 days, thus giving them the option of extending the current agreement for a further 30 days.
Today begins the Legion's convention Governor Piñero and other authorities are to participate in the event.
The twentieth annual convention of the American Legion will begin today, Saturday afternoon, at 2:00 p.m., at the Department of Puerto Rico's Department of Puerto Rico, in the assembly hall of the Central High School in Santurce, under the presidency of Commander Oscar L. Bunker. The election will continue until tomorrow, Sunday. The program includes speeches by e] Piñero, the Commander of the Military Department of the Antilles, General Ray F. Porter, the Commander of the Tenth Naval District, Rear Admiral D. E. Ra r bey and other officials of the federal and insular governments. The delegation of Post No. 1 of the San Juan post yesterday announced the resolutions it proposes to submit to the convention. One is to seek congressional approval of a bonus for World War II veterans. Other resolutions to be moved by the assembly are to "request that the orphans and widows of World War II veterans receive their pensions on equal terms with those of World War I veterans," to request that a Legion Youth Athletic League be organized and operated locally under the auspices of local posts, and to "request that the Legion arrange for the organization of a Legion Youth Athletic League and that it be operated locally under the auspices of local posts," and to "request that the Legion arrange for the organization of a Legion Youth Athletic League and that it be operated locally under the auspices of local posts; "to request that the Legion arrange with the proper authorities that the children of the hospitalized veterans be benefited on the same principle as they are by the efforts and activities of the 'Child's Welfare Officer' of the Community Fund, which operates under the auspices of the governmental authorities"; and "that the Executive Committee be instructed to arrange for the publication of a Legion organ not less than six times a year. The delegation is composed of Colonel Col. The delegation is composed of Colonel César Cordero Dávila and Messrs. Luis Morales, Gilberto Font, Miguel A. Casanova and Vicente Reyes Fitzpatrick, as contact officers. Juan E. Cordero, Carlos (Continued on page 18)
additional mediation skills. There were indications, however, that neither side would agree to an extension when their representatives met separately today to consider the proposal. Union officials, it was said, believe that an agreement prohibiting strikes or lockouts for 80 years is inevitable, and that a 30-year extension would not produce a compromise. The main point of difference is the basis for computing overtime pay. The current agreement stipulates hourly wages for night work, and on Sundays and holidays. The union has also requested an increase (continued on page 18).
Plant owners promise improvement In a meeting held yesterday at the Health Department, several owners of pasteurizer and milk vending plants in the metropolitan area met to discuss various sanitary aspects. It was revealed that some of the pasteurization plants and raw milk exporting businesses are putting on the market a product outside the bacteriological standards required by the Health Department regulations. The meeting began around 9:00 a.m., convened by the Chief of the Sanitation Bureau of the Department of Health, Mr. Juan G. Figueroa, and by Mr. Carlos Rivera, chief of the Food Sanitation Section. The meeting was initially closed to the public. After several minutes of discussion, journalists were allowed to enter the meeting and missed part of what was discussed. The meeting was attended by the following persons*: Juan G. Figueroa, Chief of the Sanitation Bureau of the Health Department; Cario* Rivera, Chief of the Food Section; Jorge Mejla* MaMei, Sanitation Officer of the Health Department; Osvaldo Rivera Felix Astado and Miguel Martin, Sanitation "finíale"; B. Sheppard. rio Sheppard Creamery Co ; J. jlamói Rosario, rie the Caribbean Dairy; J. Fonalledas, rie the" Trm F. Alhandoz, of the Company rie Pasterización, Ine.; J. N. Ossorlo, of the same company; Julio - Pérez Rosado, of the San Lula Dairy; J. López del Valla of the Puerto Ríen Dairy; Juan J. Pars! and Jorge L. Benero, of the Casa Parsí; Jorge C. González, of the Caparra Dairy; M. C. Brown, Héctor G. Nevares, of the Sulza Dairy; Ramón R. Nevares of the United Dairy' Arthur Wiedner, and Arturo Diaz, of PRACO; Andró* IZpez Ciiret, of the Puerto Rico Dairy; Raúl P Nevares, Dr. Pablo Morales Otero, rie le Unit'd Dairy and Ramón L- Nevare", ri" the United Dairy, Health Department officials acknowledged the interest that the owners are taking rie the pasteurization plants rie milk, They also acknowledged the increase in the amount of milk to be pasteurized, which now stands at 66,500 quarts a day in the metropolitan area, where eight pasteurization plants are in operation, with another three to be installed soon. The Department of Health officials then referred to the fact that several milk pasteurization plants, as well as raw milk plants, are not producing food within the standards set by Jos health regulations, in terms of bacterial contamination. It was indicated, that the conlajr in. rl produced by certain businesses *s too high. According to "1 Regulation No. 7 of the Department of Health. on the legal and standard type of milk and cream, all raw grade milk shall have a bacterial count of not more than 300,000 colonies per cubic centimeter. Pasteurized grade milk must have an average bacterial count before pasteurization of not more than 50,000 colonies per cubic centimeter and after pasteurization and before delivery to the consumer, the count may not exceed 50,000 colonies per cubic centimeter. Raw and pasteurized grade B milk, as well as grade C and D milk, have other standards. A milk <ort excess of bacteria, above the levels fixed* by "1 Department of Health. nu "ri* be harmful to the pubic, producing gastric diseases. An excessive increase in bacteria can be prone to the development of some pathogenic bacteria that cause disease in humans. Those businesses, according to the aforementioned regulation, that repeat the sale of a product at levels below those regulated, are subject to the cancellation of their license. The owners of the businesses of leehe present there committed themselves to improve the transportation of the product. "They committed to improve the transportation of the product and to provide better refrigeration so that the bacterial count of the milk does not increase. In the discussion on the problems of the milk plants, one of those present said that there are pasteurized milk plants that buy clandestine and grade D milk, when this is prohibited by the regulations, which do not allow the pasteurization of lower grade milk. Dr. Pablo Morales Otero indicated that if the milk is pasteurized it is still bad, and that for it to be a good product, it has to be produced in a sanitary manner. Mr. Carlos Rivera said (Continued on page 18>)