THE NANDO
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND TODAY*. - Partly cloudy with showers and thundershowers in the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 85; low, 77. Sea level barometric reading at 4:30 p.m., 20.84 inches of mercury.
40 Pages 5/
DIARY OF^^S^LA MARANA
Motorists, let's show the traditional courtesy of the pals.
NUMBER 13347
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P, R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JUNE 26, 1948
Dewey Offers To Run On GOP Platform; Warren Nominated For Vice President
Campaign leader < patronage a n Would consult repul fuñe nominations esteem election would create By WILLIAM DORVILLER PHILADELPHIA. June 25. (Special to EL MUNDO)- Puerto Rican delegates to the Republican National Convention did not hide their jubilation at the promises received from the men who have eneabesado the Republican ticket, in the upcoming November presidential election. Both the presidential candidate, Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York, and the man chosen for the presidency, Governor Earl Warren of California, pledged their full support for the efforts of Puerto Rican statehood advocates. Dewey and his running mate conferred with delegates before the Convention made nominations. Meanwhile, in the political circles it was said that Senate President. Luis Muñoz Marín, as well as his Popular Democratic Party, will face problems if the Republicans emerge victorious in the November elections. It was recalled that Dewey, in his statement to the Puerto Rican delegates, promised to do everything in his power to cooperate with the Island's Republicans in correcting the "mistakes" of the Tugwelllano regime. He also pledged his unconditional support for statehood, as did Warren yesterday, The role played by Puerto Rico in the convention, Dock workers will demonstrate - ... "Ml M-< ~ Act takes place on the 30th. - After agreeing to invite the shipping companies to resume negotiations on their demand for an increase in wages, the leaders of all the maritime workers' organizations in Puerto Rico resolved yesterday to organize a workers' demonstration next Wednesday, June 30, which will go through the streets of San Juan and will end with a rally in which the workers will decide whether or not to go on strike if the shipping companies do not accede to their request for an increase. Both agreements were reached yesterday at a joint meeting held by the two district councils of the International Labor Association (ILA) and the Longshore Employees Union. The meeting was held at the Labor Temple of Council Number 2 (formerly UTM). The meeting was called to consider the whole situation between Dewey's (Continued on page 16)
The meeting was called to consider the whole situation between Dewey's Island Island I iblicans in the federal cionaires. - The Populares issue had intense drama, even though its only two votes made it the smallest delegation in the crowded convention hall. Prior to the first vote, the Puerto Rican delegation conferred with all the major candidates. * Puerto Rico's position, last on the list, gave the island a privileged position in certain respects. Efforts were made to get the Puerto Rican delegates to cede their right to another state, provided the relinquishment of that position would have favored Dcwey. It is true that no such necessity arose, but there was a moment in the second vote when it seemed imminent. Another moment of intense drama arose on the second ballot, when a quick recapitulation of Dewey's votes implied the possibility that Puerto Rico would be called to vote with only a few votes left for the nomination. In fact, the "dream" situation - two votes to decide the nomination - might have arisen had the states preceding Puerto Rico not voted for Taft. Puerto Rico voted for Taft on the first ballot and split on the second: one for Dewey and one for Taft. The delegation had pledged to support Taft on the first ballot, but made no commitments for subsequent ballots. The results proved that the split votes, (Continued on page 16) New Compensation Plan Promulgated Varies 76 class* positions in present plan with $300,000 increase in salaries The Director of Personnel, Mr. Manuel A. Péresf yesterday promulgated, in accordance with law, the new -Uniform Compensation Plan for all classes of positions within the competitive and non-competitive service of the Insular Government. The new plan, which will become effective on July 1, 2008, will cover a total of 76 classes of positions in the vlgen:e plan and this change results, as reported yesterday, in an increase of approximately $300,000 in the current salaries of the said number of classes. Also, it was reported in 1h Oíciña do Persona), by the Assistant Director, Mr. Ramon Torres Braschi, that of the aforementioned total of $300,000, the sum of $230,000 corresponds to those employees whose salaries will be increased by law, as of July 1, automatically, from $55 to $60.
Crisis in welfare services Mayors summoned for Wednesday There are 33 municipalities on the way" to lose Unity aid. By Lula Sánchez Cappa EL MUNDO Staff Writer A "serious crisis in the public welfare services in Puerto Rico" was denounced yesterday by Mr. Ernesto Carrasquillo, president of the Mayors Association and municipal executive of Yabucoa. The situation was described yesterday by Mr. Carrasquillo as "very serious" as he announced that he will urgently convene the Mayors Association for an assembly to be held next Wednesday in San Juan, probably at the Mayor's Office in the capital city. Mayor Carrasquillo announced that during the assembly of municipal executives, he will raise with them the serious problem that he believes the great majority of the municipalities are facing regarding the provision of medical assistance services. The problem, he said, has reached its most critical point with the announcement by the Department of Health of its intention to withdraw the public charity services provided to many municipalities by the physicians of the Public Health Units. It has been reported that the decision of the Department of Health was made on the grounds that those municipalities that are financially able to pay for a doctor do not need to use the services of the physicians of the Units. This determination of the Department of Health "has created great concern" among the mayors of many municipalities that, according to Mr. Carrasquillo, "lack a physician to provide medical assistance to their inhabitants. The President of the Mayors Association informed that 33 municipalities are about to lose the services of the doctors of the Public Health Units, who have to give up their time to give attention to the municipal welfare services. In addition to this, he pointed out, there are currently 16 towns whose public units do not have a doctor, while other towns, which do not have units, although they have municipal hospitals, do not have the assistance of a doctor. He also revealed that in the Island's district hospitals, there is currently a serious shortage of doctors. He cited the case of the Aguadilla District Hospital, where he said there are only 4 doctors, "and three are on loan, and one of them is Director of the Hospital and at the same time Director of Beneficencia de Aguadilla." He announced to have reliable information, in the sense that "there are plans to close the hospital of (Continued on page 16)
Earl W arrea dislikes mudu> of. pomp of nial He is pleased to be frank and shows informality in his public and private dealings.- Most notable successes of California Gov.
Earl Warren, the wiggish Governor of California, came to the Republican national convention strictly as a "favorite son" candidate. controlling only the 53 votes of his State's delegation, for the Presidential nomination, and emerged as the unanimous vice presidential nominee to join Thomas E. Dewey, Governor of" New York, on the ballot which the Republicans will present to the people in next November's election. Warren did not seek votes from delegates from other states, nor did she campaign formally for the presidency. But after her election and re-election in California, as governor, she was unopposed in terms of her state's delegation votes. Warren's ability to get votes in his home state was first demonstrated when he won the governorship in 1942, defeating a Democrat, Culbert L. Olson, even though three out of every 0 votes in the state's electorate were registered as Democrats. His reelection in 1946 made state history. He easily won the Republican nomination as well as the Democratic nomination. His electoral victory over the nominal opposition of a prohibitionist candidate was a mere formality. In reality, Warren has never won an election.
ever won an election. He began winning in 1926 when he was elected president of Alameda County, which includes the city of Oak Land in eastern San Francisco. He was reelected in 1930 and 1934, and earned the reputation of being a "cracket-breaker" > a persecutor of corrupt public officials. jSBjhk4ÍsMHfi B" \ B K-'AJ 1 K A EARL WARREN
In one case he sent a county sheriff to the bench for engaging in an illegal bail bond operation. He obtained the conviction of a city commissioner who had facilitated the awarding of a contract. In 1938 he decided to run for State Attorney General, an important and influential office in California. He was victorious even though the Democrats elected almost all statewide officials that year. The Governor of California was born on March 19, 1891, in Los Angeles, to Scandinavian immigrant parents. He attended public schools in Bakersfield, Calif. California, where his father was a foreman in the railroad shops. He later graduated from the University of California and its law school. He entered the Army in 1917 and became a first lieutenant, but was not sent overseas. Warren married Nina Palmqulat Meyers, a widow with one son, in 1925. The son, James, was accepted by Warren, and later the couple had five other children. The Governor is sincere and likes Informality in his public and private dealings, and dislikes official pomp, During the Rose Pageant parade held in Pasadena (Continued on page 16).
■r \ Bk Wl -- w ... ' "a. - k I í' ''f'V'X 5 ■ Bk ■' B IL. vi IIb ' *
With the Republican Party's nominations for President and Vice President of the United States already decided at the Philadelphia convention, this photograph, taken very recently, is a very timely one as it depicts the elected candidates shaking hands at the Governor's Conference held in New Hampshire yesterday. Governor Thomae E. Dewey (left) Mluda n his running mate, Governor Earl Warren, of California, nominated yesterday as the Republican nominee for the United States Senate, 1.a lady at Governor Dewey's In e "po "a. (Press Photo A "ocladn).
Youth enrollment in 6 weeks Government begins recruiting efforts. Will call for ages Pnr LEE NICHOLR WASHINGTON, June 25.-(PU) -♦The Government set in motion today the new pnz times recruitment. Within six weeks it will begin to enroll all" Included between the ages of 18 and 25 and the first contingent will be in uniform by the end of September. Royull communicated today with National Guard aides throughout the Union and in Hawaii and Puerto Rico, ordering them to suspend all recruiting if they have exceeded their quotas. The Secretary of War stated that all future recruiting in that corps must wait until "normal attrition" has reduced the state units below their "maximum". Many states had exceeded even a quota in the belief that Congress would allocate additional funds for the recruitment of a larger National Guard. Royall stated, however, that the leaders" of the" Armed" Service" Committee" in the" House" congressional" caucus" indicated today" that they oppose" additional spending. However, he said, it has not yet been decided which group will be called up first. The armed forces believe they need about 225,000 conscripts during the first twelve months. It is possible that the total may be increased if the expected" voluntary enlistments do not occur. President Truman conferred today with James Forrestal, Secretary of Defense, and Kenneth C. Royall, Secretary of the Air Force, on the new draft law. Forrestal reported that it is likely that next week there will be a (Continued on page 16) First convicts under Bolita law Humacao District Attorney Benjamin Guerra Mondragon yesterday obtained the first guilty pleas against defendants accused of violating the new Bolita law. Six days ago, as reported yesterday at the Justice Department, Andres Cruz Peña, Ramon Carrlon Gerena and Rufino Viera Pagan were denounced before the District Court of Humacao, for violation of the new law called Bolita, in the town of Juncos, According to the terms of the aforementioned law, preference was given to these cases, which were cited for trial yesterday. After hearing the evidence, the court found the defendants Andres Cruz Peña and Rufino Viera Pagan guilty, imposing the minimum penalty that the law determines, or "ea, the minimum jail sentence for each one. Defendant Ramón Carrión Gerena was found not guilty (Continued on page 16).
He accepted under the condition that the position be an effective position. Dewey promised him complete partnership in the administrative management of his election. - He added he will have to reorganize system to convert chaos into order ci tter NATIONAL REPUBLICAN CONVENTION HALL. Philadellia, June f. - (PU) - The Republican Party today nominated Governor Earl Warren, of California, for the presidency of the United States, and Thomas E. Dewey, the presidential candidate nominated yesterday, promised him a "complete partnership" 1.
Warren was elected by acclamation as the Republican National Convention sought to put together a geographically strong two-governor ticket for the 1948 political campaign. Then, at 1:30 p.m., his work completed, the 24th Republican Convention passed into history. Dewey told a press conference shortly thereafter that, if elected, he intended to reorganize the federal government to give it "1 vice-presidential status as a member of the Cabinet and a full partnership in the administration of the Nation's affairs. He said he would use Warren's "administrative skills". At a separate press conference. Warren said that the prospect of the presidency acquiring Cabinet post status was a major factor in her acceptance of the second post, which she turned down four years ago. He said it always speaks to the weakness of our government that the vice president, who traditionally merely presides over the Senate, "has so few duties to perform. Dewey told reporters that Warren was the "near-unanimous" choice of party leaders in virtually every state for the presidential nomination. The delegates, weary but jubilant, were confident that their five-day caucus had produced a combination that would give them a win in the November election, regardless of who the Democrats nominate in (Continued on p. 10)
806 families receive safe home exemption Treasury Department continues to study other recently submitted cases The Puerto Rico Treasurer's Office reported yesterday that it continues to study and resolve the cases in which requests for tax exemption on Hogair Seguro have been filed. During the period from Monday, June 21 to Friday, June 25, the Treasurer of Puerto Rico has granted tax exemptions to 806 families under the provisions of the Home Insurance Act 27 of 1941. The amounts resolved are distributed in the following manner: In Aguas Buenas, 82 exemptions were granted: Aibonito, 105; Añasco, 40; Arroyo, 69; Barceloneta, 48; Maunabo, 164; Morovis, 75; Naguabo, 81; Naranjito, 46 and Orocovis, 96; The tax exemption was granted to 284 families retroactive to the 1942-43 fiscal year; in 73 cases the exemption begins dead* the year 1943-44: in 124 cases, from the year 1944-45; in 247 cases, from the year 1945-46; in 247 cases, the exemption has been granted starting with the fiscal year 1946-47; and in 20 cases, the exemption will be effective from the year 1946-47.
Order set for parade next Sunday, July 4
The parade commemorating the Independence of the United States is to be held next Sunday, July 4, at 9:30 a.m., and it has been announced that all participating organizations will be at the assigned parade site. According to the office of the Grand Marshal of the Parade, Col. J. Cesar Cordero, the parade will consist of four divisions, constituted as follows: First division: The head of the column of this Division will form at the corner of Alien and Cristo, extending towards the North, by the street of Cristo and around the barracks of Santo Domingo, and towards the East along the Boulevard del Valle,' and will be composed of the following" organizations: 1. Escort of the Insular Police, 2.
Cordero. 3. Assistant to the Grand Marshal: Major Gilberto M. Fónt; assistants. 4. Troops of the United States Army, a. Military Bandq, b. Infantry Troops, c. Mechanized Cavalry. 5. Tenth Naval District Units: a. United States Army Band, b. Marine Corps, c. United States Army Corps, d. United States Marine Corps. Retired Association, and U.S. Navy. American Red Cross. Second division: The head of the column of this division will form at the corner of Alien and San Jose, running northward on San Jose street to San Sebastian, and eastward on the same street. It will include: 8. Assistant to the Grand Marshal: lieutenant colonel Jacinto Cnstrlllo, National Guard of Puerto Rico. Assistant: Captain José Luis Flgue(Continued on pAglna 16)
It would be a cornerstone for his government He called for national union Concord is the basis of peace and freedom for man, said CONVENTIOÑIFÁLLL. Flladelfla, June 25.-(PU)-The following is the text of the acceptance speech delivered by Governor Thomas E. Dewey, of his nomination by the Republican Party, for the Presidency of the Nation: "You, the" elected representatives of our Republican Party, have again bestowed upon me' the highest honor with which I can be invested-your nomination for candidate n President of the United States. "I thank you from the bottom of my heart. I realize the profound responsibility that such a nomination carries with it. I accept the nomination you bestow upon me. In all humility, I pray to God that I may be worthy of this opportunity to serve my country, "I come before you devoid of the slightest obligation or promise made to any living being, to bring together the best men and women, to serve the Nation, free to unify our party and our country, to meet the grave challenge of our time. Appeal to the Union "United we will be able to face that challenge with knowledge of cause and greatness of spirit; with the unity that ¡ is above all recrimination, above all partisanship, above all personal interests. These are articles of faith, from which the greatness of America has been formed. Our people are anxious to see that the power of that faith has arisen from nowhere. They turn to us to give us that faith with all the heart of our national life. That is what is expected of us. That is what we will do. "At this historic convention, you had before you six other candidates, all of them magnanimous men of character and ability, and deeply dedicated to serving their country-Senator Raymond E. Baldwin, General Douglas MacArthur, Governor Harold E. Stassen, Senator Robert A. Taft, Senator Arthur Vandenberg, and Governor Earl Warren. It has been a difficult selection, in an honorable contest. It has been a stirring demonstration of the life and vitality and Ideals of our Republican Party. "There was an honest contest, spirited disagreements, heated arguments. But let no one be deceived. You have given living and dramatic proof of how Americans, who honestly disagree, close ranks and march forward, for the good of the Nation, shoulder to shoulder. Party Responsibility "The responsibility and opportunity resting upon our party today are the greatest in the history of free government. For tonight, our future - our peace, our prosperity, the very fate of liberty - hangs in the precarious balance. "Delayed victory in an election does not constitute our task or our purpose. Our task is to impress upon our victory that slgnlílcado that humanity all and everywhere, sighs for freedom, to go forward wholeheartedly turning away from this desperate tlnlebla pure find the light of 4a promised freedom. "Our platform promulgates the points we are to follow in our unchanging and sure endeavors in a world without fear. This magnificent statement of principles is concise and to the point. You adopted it out of unanimity. And I will proudly uphold it. She will be the heart of the message I will carry to the pals. After January 20, it will be the cornerstone of our Republican administration, "We are a united party. Our nation is tragically in need of that same concord. "Our people are moving away from those little things that do not divide. It is leaning in a movement toward higher things, in order to find common purpose in the higher things that unite us. We are to be the instruments of our aspiration. We are to be the means by which all the powers of America are set free, and that this insecure future crystallizes anew, in its time. This is our commitment, that ae(Continued on page 10.)
UPR rejects admission of 2,000 students
Only 1,500 of high school graduates accepted By LUIS HERNÁNDEZ AQUINO EL MUNDO Staff Writer Two thousand students from the Island's high schools who have applied for admission to the University of Puerto Rico for the next academic year will not be able to enter the institution, since there is no room for them. The university administration will admit only 1,500 new students for the next academic year, which begins in August 1948, and among other conditions imposed on them are that they must accept and abide by the rules and regulations of the institution, and be free of contagious diseases that could endanger the health of their fellow students, or any other disease which, while not contagious, would significantly hinder their academic achievement. As disclosed yesterday at the University, the Office of the Registrar, Ms. Stella M. Pagan, studied the academic record as well as the results of a general achievement test to which 3,500 high school graduates with an overall average of "C" or better applied for admission to the University. Of the 3,500 applicants, 1,500 were provisionally classified for admission to enrollment in the General Studies course, the 1,500 mentioned above were provisionally classified for admission to enrollment in the General Studies course. As for those admitted, they have been informed that their admission will be perfected upon completion of other requirements, including acceptance of the University's rules and regulations and freedom from disease. They are also notified that no student may enroll until they have passed the medical examination. They are also offered a copy of the regulations for university students, which will be submitted for public discussion on the 30th of this month by the Superior Council of Teaching. A provisional identification card has been sent to them for their use during their enrollment. Those students who were not accepted were informed by the Registrar that, "in order to choose the best candidates for admission to the University, the applicants were subjected to a proficiency test and those who in their high school studies scored less than 2.00 were eliminated" and "that the results of the exam and the academic indicators were grouped in a complex note that came to determine the order of merit of the applicant for admission". Then the Registrar adds: "I regret to inform you that in the list formed according to this procedure, your name does not appear among the admitted candidates. I am sorry that your aspirations have not had a happy outcome and I am sure that you will understand that for the benefit of the students themselves it is not possible to consider the admission of a number of candidates [ nur exceed the already overloaded enrollment of the University". In addition, the university administration has not been able to determine the number of students to be suspended this year due to academic deficiencies, since many students have not submitted their grades to the Registrar, nor have they passed the university semester, for various reasons. According to the rules approved by the University Board, which were used for the first time in 1047 and which will be applied this year, any student who does not meet the following requirements will be dismissed from the University: to have an Academic Index of 1.4 at the end of the first year; an Academic Index of 1.7 at the end of the second year; an Academic Index of 1.8 at the end of the third year; and an Academic Index of 1.9 at the end of the fourth year. The above rules apply to the number of years the student is enrolled at the University, i.e., the time during which he/she has been a resident student, and apply in all cases, regardless of the number of credit hours that the student must pass.