THE NfiNDO
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND TODAY. - Clear. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY. - High, 82; low, 71. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:30 p.m., 29.88 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Dec. 10. (FU). - This afternoon the* United States* the* *1 guien tea temperatures were recorded this afternoon: New York, 40; Washington, 43; Chicago, 21: Miami. 78. I-aa conditions* for flight* at 1a Guardia airport: maximum altitude Unlimited: sky clear; visibility, 23 mile*. The outlook for tomorrow was for no considerable* change*, decreasing in wind* speed.
DIARIO la maraña
SAN JUAN PUERTO RICO -SATURDAY, DECEMBER 11, 1948
FIVE CENTAVOS NUMBER 13514
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, t Post Office, San Juan, P. B
UPR Appoints Admissions Committee
Applications For New Students Begin To Be Received By Lula Hernández Aqulnn Editor of EL MUNDO Applications for admission to the University of Puerto Rico have already begun to be received at the University of Puerto Rico from those high school students who wish to enter the UPR for the first time. On the other hand, the Department of Education estimates that 8,700 high school students will graduate this year, while a university committee is studying the policy to be followed for admissions, announcing that enrollment will be restricted. Twenty applications have been submitted to date to the University Registrar's Office from students wishing to take courses at the University. The "efior Harris F. Run- f ker, who heads the UPR's Oflclná de Ext- j menes y Estadística*, has sent the applicants* a communication informing them that all applications for admission must be processed with the UPR Registrar. Mr. Bunker indicated that "*preference' in admission will be given to those candidates* who meet the entrance requirements, which are: application accompanied by two one-inch by one-and-a-quarter inch photographs: certificate from the director of the High School, indicating graduation, with an index of 2.00 or higher: satisfactory grade *on *1 entrance exam, and a health certificate. i Examination Requirements Candidates* are instructed to report for examination before the time appointed for the examination, and to bring no books, notebooks, or other papers. The examinations will last approximately three hours, with consideration given to the following factors*: mental ability independent of high school teaching; proficiency in Spanish; proficiency in English; and willingness to seek out and take advantage of learning opportunities in and out of high school. Mr. Harris F. Bunker, has ' Reported that this year, for the month of January, or five months before , graduations, entrance examinations will be held in al- , some high schools of the ls- . la. These will be in a different form from ' past years. Those candidates who do not come from the high schools where the above-mentioned groups will be examined, will have to be examined at other places where they will be informed. 1 8,700 will graduate (The prospects for the total number of graduates are higher this year than in past years in the Island's high schools. The Puerto Rico Department of Education reported that 8,700 students will graduate next June. The number of students referred to is broken down as follows: veterans to graduate 1,250; students of the Adult Education Bureau in the evening high schools 550; students of the Island's high schools 6,000 and students* of private high schools 900. It is believed, and has been so in practice, that the majority of these students will apply for English at the University, although some of them will pursue university studies in other* colleges on the Island which provide this kind of education. Of these schools there are only four which are: Polytechnic Institute, Santa Marla University, City College, in Hato Rey, and Hostos College, recently recognized by the Department of Instruction, and in which the teaching of university courses has begun. Committee to Study Admissions When asked by the Dean of Administration of the University, Dr. Ramón Mellado, about the problem of admissions at the UPR, he stated that a committee was appointed to study the same at our first teaching center, made up of himself, Mr. Mariano Villaronga and Dr. Ismael Rodríguez Bou. The committee will outline the policy to be followed. Regarding the quota of students who will have the opportunity to be admitted to the UPR, Dr. Mellado said that the situation this year is the same as last year. Last year, 8,200 students took the University's admission exams, the highest number of students since the admission exam system was established. Of these, only 3,000 applied for admission. Graduating More Students The problem facing the University, as explained by its directors, is that the high schools continue to graduate more students than the Institution can accommodate. Of the 3,000 applicants last year, the University admitted only 2,531, distributed as follows: Rio Piedras Colleges 2,007 and Mayagüez Colleges 524. Of the 2,007 from Rio Piedras. 1,431 were admitted in Es- ' (Continued on p. 18)
Legitimate Mayor of the City of Berlin
Jí * ■fe i flL Erneef Reuter (right) exchanged a handshake" with Dr. Suñr. president of the Berlin City Council, Aleinanla. after the former had been sworn in as Mayor of Berlin on the 7th of the current. The Berlin anti-Communists installed Renter in the mayor's office in defiance of his opponents and in spite of the Russians" having prevented him from taking office when he was first elected in 1946. Reuter, who was elected in the current municipal elections, will complete his first term and begin his new term on January 1. (Radlophoto by Associated Press). There are 325 Special Invitations for Muñoz's Inauguration are for Government Guests of Honor, including 5 of the Former Governors. Tugwell Received Invitation, May Come
Lo* former governors of guests of honor at the ccrcmonl dor elect, Senor Luis Munoz Mari There will be, *however, two exeep in the lisia of Guests, these are4 those of E. Mont Reily and Robert H Gore. Mr. Esteban A. Bird, chairman of the Executive Committee which will be in charge of the inauguration of the first elected Governor, in a press conference yesterday at La Fortaleza, stated that 325 special invitations have been extended to personalities from the United States and Latin American countries to be guests of honor of the Government of Puerto Rico between December 30, 1948 and January 4, 1949. Invitations have been sent to President Truman, his wife and daughter Margaret, to the Secretaries of the President, to members of the President's Cabinet and other distinguished executives of the Federal Government, to the Chairmen of the Senate and House Committees, and to all members of committees directly concerned with Puerto Rican affairs, as well as to other Federal legislators who have shown friendship toward Puerto Rico. Members of the U.S. Supreme Court and other judicial officers have also been invited. Also invited are representatives of the U.S. Press and other writers who are friends of Mr. Marin and Governor Piferio. Five Former Governors The former Governors of Puerto Rico, still living, Messrs. William H. Hunt, James R. Beverly, William D. Leahy, Guy Swope and Rexford Guy Tugwell, have been invited in an express letter. Mr. William H. Hunt came to Puerto Rico when the Civil Government was established in 1900. He served as Secretary of Puerto Rico from June 1 June 9, 1901, to September 15, 1901, when (Continued on p. 24)
Puerto Rico, which *still live, will be those of the inauguration of the Gobernaín. clone* whose name* will not appear CSP Will Explain Petition Made The Telephone Company Summons Press and Various Entities to a Round Table December 29 The Public Service Commission agreed yesterday to invite the Press and various civic and commercial entities to a round table to explain to them everything related to a petition for a rate increase. The resolution of the Collision Inviting for the round table is related to the petition filed by the Puerto Rico Telephone Company to be allowed to increase the rate of its service. The resolution of the Public Service Commission reads as follows: "The Porto Rico Telephone Co., which is a public service company providing telephone service* on the Island of Puerto Rico, has filed a request for a rate increase. Pursuant to the provisions of the Rules of Practice and Procedure of this Commission, the required edicts* have been published so that the general public may be informed of said petition and may intervene in said proceedings if so interested. Invited* to Meeting "Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Commission, desirous that the public be duly informed and participate effectively in the proceedings, has published the following edict* (Continued on page 18)
Compendium of News
Mrs. Chiang held a conference with Truman. - The downward trend continues in the price* of nursery* stock in the Nation. - The President will certainly not come to Muño* Marin's inauguration. - The Statehooders* request entity to take official action on the inauguration of the new Governor. - The Secretary of Agriculture has indicated that he is interested in appealing the decision on the refinery cessation. - Fernos reiterates his endorsement of the migration of borleuas to the South of the United States. - Fourteen governors of the South discuss the training program. - ♦ - They lead a campaign to improve the quality of Russian products. - Christmas gifts are prepared for hospitalized veterans. - Churchill called for recognition of Israel and resumption of relations with Spain. - The Judge Santos Borges increased the value of expropriation of a building of the Igteala in San Sebastian.
The "Moldado" who had escaped from the post were interrogated at the Ramey base. - Toledo favors the extension of the vehicle insurance project to both government and parsreularea. - - - Oscar Figueroa Bocanegra was convicted of voluntary manslaughter. - The CSP will explain in a round table the request for an increase in the Telefonica rates. - - - Accused of picketing Selective Service made plea of innocence. - - - - Commission of entities will visit the CSP to study arguments for and against the increase in telephone rates. - A UPR committee will study the admissions of new students. - The UPR expects to be informed after the 15th about the payment of the 25 percent differential to federal employees. - Judge has not yet decided if Parnell Thomaa will be prosecuted. - There is no seriousness in the condition of Roy Jnrge. - - - There are 325 special Invltadons for honored guests of the Government at the Munoa Inauguration.
It is already certain that Truman will not come
Delegated Island Visit to Chapman Resident Commissioner Discusses Legislation With President 10. - <PU)- The Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico, Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern announced today that President Truman will not be able to attend the Inauguration of Governor-elect Luis Muñoz Marín. Fernós announced the news after seeing Mr. Truman at the White House. Dr. Fernós explained that the President expressed that he was sorry to be prevented from attending the event, but that his duties would not allow him to go to San Juan in January. The inauguration of the governor-elect of Puerto Rico falls on the day before the meeting of the new Congress here. The Commissioner spoke to reporters at the White House after speaking with the President this morning. He said the President will be represented at the inauguration ceremonies by Deputy Secretary of the Interior Oscar Chapman. Fernós noted that today was the fiftieth anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Paris, under the terms of which Puerto Rico became part of the territories where the U.S. flag flies. The Commissioner stated that he was pleased to have been able to see Mr. Truman, and to have been able to invite him to the inauguration ceremonies, precisely on this date. He said he was sorry that the President could not accept the Invitation. The inauguration is on January rio" rio. Congress meets on January 3. The President's presence here on January 3 is not essential, but by that date he will have to be preparing important messages" that he will address to Congress a few days later. As for the Congress "a refiere, loa Democrat"-4a Ja CámaráVde Representante* they have a caucu* appointed for the first of January. They also have to devote themselves to * organizing committees*. The latter also occurs in the Senate. It is likely that these matters will also prevent Vice President Albern Barkley and members of the House Public Lands Committee and Senate Insular Affairs Committee from going to Puerto Rico. Senator Joseph C. O'Mahoney, who will probably be chairman of the Senate Committee and who will be one of the most important leaders of the Senate, will also have to escort a new Democratic Senator from Wyoming, Lester Hunt, O'Mahoney's office said that for these reasons the Senator would probably not be able to leave Washington. For similar reasons, it is doubtful that other Senate and House leaders will be able to make the trip to San Juan. Asked about other matters" he discussed with the President, Dr. Fernós said he briefly mentioned, in general terms, the legislative program that Puerto Rico intended to present to Congress. Legislative Program This program includes the request that the Island be allowed to re. enact a constitution to replace the present Organic Law; extension of social security benefits which do not apply to Puerto Rico; legislation to prevent quantltlvss restrictions on trade between the Island and the Mainland such as that now imposed by the sugar law on shipments of refined sugar; a subsidy on shipments between the Mainland and overseas territorial ports; and the program of rehabilita(Continued on p. 18)
Herald Supplement Circulated Yesterday
Describes Work of Government Discusses Muñoz Marín Personality. The New York Herald Tribune newspaper dedicated a 24-page supplement to Puerto Rico in yesterday's edition of the New York Herald Tribune. Twenty-four articles analyze the political, economic, electoral and educational problems of the island. The "uplemento" was published by the New York newspaper to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Paris, by which the Island became a possession of the United States. The material was prepared by John J. Durtton, editor of the New York Herald Tribune, who recently spent several days on the island. There are also in the supplement numerous* advertisements from Puerto Rican and mainland companies, both private and governmental. The first page of the supplement is entirely devoted to the most important articles. There are seven rie ésto* and a small box in which the newspaper explains the motivation of the supplement. On this first page appears a photograph of Don Luis Muñoz Marin, at the "river" column, and four other photographs on the "appearance" of Puerto Rico's "virfa," In the "latter" ** capture the following "Ituaclones: a shipment of sugar to the U.S., through a lilac port; an operator working in ceramics; a worker cutting cane for the 1948 harvest; and a partial view of the Puerto Nuevo farmhouse, in the calce rie whose photograph is reported to be the largest in the world. An eight-column headline," at the top of the page, reads as follows: "Puerto Rico, at 59 years" under the United States flag," on the way to a new progress". On this first page of the supplement, seven articles" are published under the following headings: 1- 117 industries apply for tax exemption benefits; 41 are already established on the Island; the New York Office of the Puerto Rico Development Company receives two inquiries a day. 2- The Island is striving to increase its sales in the United States: the Government joins Industry in this effort. 3- Muñoz says that Industry must surpass the population increase. 4- The world's largest housing project is underway near the San Juan River. 5- The Government is realistic in its approach to solving the problems; still involved in big business, it still offers tax breaks to attract new industries that can sustain its prolific population. fr- The overpopulated island is counting on migration: with the highest birth rate in the world, it has doubled its population during the last 50 years; 90 percent of those who have left live in New York City. 7- The "strike threats" and strikes reduce the year to a half, offer tax exemption and cheap labor to attract new industries, Palabra* Sobra Muño* In the article accompanying the photograph of Mr. Muñoz Marin, it is said of him that "he moved in the political life of Puerto Rico, during the elections last November, with the irresistible force of a Caribbean hurricane". It is added in this article that Puerto Rico could hardly have found a more appropriate person to be its first elected Governor. (Continued on page 23)
J.I.E. Certified Yesterday the Election of the Successful Candidates
Yesterday afternoon the Chairman of the Island Board of Elections certified the election of the successful candidates in the 1948 election. The Governor will proceed to issue a certificate of election to all successful candidates before the new public administration of Puerto Rico begins on January 2. After several days of discussion about the 32nd representative district, which includes Juncos, Gurabo and San Lorenzo, where the popular candidate Rafael Aponte Sanchez was elected, yesterday the Board proclaimed his election. The Board continued yesterday morning to investigate some polling places corresponding to the three towns of this district, where discrepancies were registered. The Board proceeded yesterday to open the ballot packets of the polling stations number 27, 28 and 35 of Gurabo, in the first one there were no discrepancies.
the first of these" nothing abnormal was found; but in college 28 the statehooders obtained one vote less, the reformists one more, and the Independentlsta" lost one vote. In polling place 35, nothing abnormal was found either. There was no abnormality In the Juncos precinct, the opening of the voting packet from precinct 48 was carried out, and the leftover material L was also examined without any abnormality being registered. This was also the case with the material "left over" at school 18 of San Lorenzo. In college 69 of San Lorenzo the statehooders added another vote, and the reformists lost one. In that college there was a discrepancy, but since a blank ballot was found, the discrepancy was eliminated. The election canvass of the 1948 elections has officially ended, as reported by the Insular Board of Elections.
The "'-i" Trend Continues. Downward Trend in Nation's Food Prices I
January Appeal to the Colors Will Include Only One Hundred Conscripts
R. Gimenez de la Rosa Reports on Convention Held in Washington By airplane he returned from the United States, where he attended a National Convention of State Directors of the Selective Service, the head of the Organization in Puerto Rico, Colonel Rafael Gimenez de la Rosa. At the airport, where he was welcomed by a large group of personalities from the official and social world of San Juan, Colonel Giménez de la Rosa made the following remarks*: "I return very favorably impressed from my trip to Washington. It was for the purpose of attending an assembly of all the state directors of the States and Territories of the Nation. And from the fruitful exchange of impressions which we had, I may say that the purpose of the assembly was fully accomplished. We discussed in general terms the problems to be faced by the directors.
We discussed in general terms the problems faced by the state directors, in order to apply the provisions of the Federal Agriculture Law, and the problems faced by the state directors, in order to apply the provisions of the Federal Agriculture Law, in order to apply the provisions of the Federal Agriculture Law.
Secretary of Agriculture Would Appeal Refineries Case
Island Government Would Have New Opportunity To Raise Constitutionality Of Sugar Law. Department Attorney Studies Appeal
WASHINGTON, Dec. 10 (Special to EL MUNDO) -The Secretary of Agriculture has asked the Solicitor General of the Department of Agriculture to appeal from the opinion of the Federal Court of Appeals** on November 24, 1944, in the case of Central Roig Refining ■ --- Company and the Government of Puerto Rico against the Secretary of Agriculture of the Department of Agriculture.
Rico against the Secretary of Agriculture and the mainland rail refining companies, it was learned today from a reliable source". 1 ¡ IF *1 drowned decides to appeal *1 case to the Supreme Court, it will give the Government rie Puerto Rico and the Rolg )a chance to appeal in turn and request a decision on the conslilutionality of the Sugar Lev, which authorizes *1 Secretary of* Agriculture to limit the amount of sugar he can r*fine "e on the Island for consumption on the Mainland. The court's decision on November 24 declares that *1 Secretary did not observe the provisions of the law, and therefore abrogated the order and remanded *1 the order to the Secretary for review. The case involved two issues: 1. The distribution among the various Puerto Rico refiners of the 126,000 tons of refined sugar that Puerto Rico was permitted to sell on the Mainland, 2. The constitutionality of Section 207 (R) of the Sugar Act of 1948, which limits the amount of refined sugar that Puerto Rico may sell on the Mainland to a fixed amount of 126,000 tons. Although the court decision resolved the first issue, as to part of Roig's claims, it gave Roic a larger share of the 126,000 tons, leaving the second issue unresolved. The second issue concerned Rolg's efforts* to be allowed to compete freely. *The second issue concerned Rolg's efforts to be allowed to compete freely in the sale of refined sugar. If the court had decided on the freedom to compete for refined sugar up to the total limit of 901,000 tons, it would have resolved the issue of the constitutionality of the Sugar Act in which the island government had an interest. The Government of Puerto Rico showed no interest in the distribution of the 126,000 tons among the various refiners on the Island. Government's Interest When the Government asked the court for permission to intervene, the court did not (Continued on p. 18)
Toledo In Favor Of All Vehicles Being Insured Would Create New Agency. Says Current Premiums Are Too High The Chairman of the Public Service Commission favors the creation of a government agency to insure not only government vehicles, but also private and public ones. Commenting on an information published in the newspaper osle and the editorial of EL MUNDO yesterday, *1 Lic. Jorge V. Toledo stated the following: "The study we wish to initiate in relation to automobile insurance is not limited to vehicles belonging to the Government of Puerto Rico, but the fundamental idea is to determine the possibility of creating a special agency that would operate independently or under the jurisdiction of the State Insurance Fund, so that such agency could be created and operate under the jurisdiction of the State Insurance Fund, so that it would not be limited to vehicles belonging to the Government of Puerto Rico. State Insurance Fund, so that said agency may implement and enforce compulsory insurance for all motor vehicles traveling on the public roads of Puerto Rico, including buses, trucks and public or private automobiles, as well as vehicles belonging to the ? Island Government. Prlmaa Son Alta* "As I have previously stated, I believe it is convenient to make this study, since the premiums demanded by the insurance companies for buses, cabs and public service automobiles are so high that they make the public transportation business onerous. It is undoubtedly that the increase in insurance premiums is due to the growing number of accidents and the amount of indemnities granted by the courts of justice; however, it should be expected that by making it compulsory for every vehicle to carry an insurance policy, the volume of business would make possible substantial reductions in the premium rates to be paid. i "I understand that it is reasonable and convenient that the government itself should establish this compulsory insurance since it is a (Continued on page 18)
25% differential payment expected to be reported before the 31st
The Civil Service Commission in Washington, D.C., is expected to issue its decision on whether or not to extend the 25 percent differential payment to federal employees in Puerto Rico by Dec. 15. A spokesman for the Federal Employees Federation of Puerto Rl. co reported yesterday that Mr. Mei" win Peake, is in vVáshlngton. Reporting to the Civil Service Commission on the study made in the Island on the cost of living. By virtue of the result of this study.
The Commission will determine "I should continue the payment of the differential on the salaries* of federal employees beyond December 31. As "c is known, on this date payment of the differential will cease. -The federal employees some time ago sent their officials to Washington to demand that the payment of the salary increase not be continued. Economic Conditions Were Studied* It was decided then" by the federal authorities to realize' - an en.(Continued on p. 18)
Congressional Subcommittee Hears Statement On Excessive Profits* By WARREN DUFFEE 1 WASHINGTON, WASHINGTON, 10. - (PU) - A prominent businessman* said today that prices are falling, and will continue to fall, if a downward trend in agricultural commodities persists. Clarence Francis, chairman of the Board of Directors of the G*nt" ral Foods Corporation, a company responsible for 2% of the food produced in the United States, told a committee of both legislative bodies that the industry, in general, has encountered some "weak points," particularly on the "seller's side," which has kept prices high since the attack on Pearl Harbor. It is post ble. he said, that "more weak point* urges. - But the trend toward high prices has stopped," he said, "and we will continue to see a downward trend, such as we are seeing at the present time. The subcommittee of both legislative bodies which heard France's testimony is chaired by Senator Ralph E. Flanders, Rd publlcan of Vermont, The subtx mlté was created to investigate the business" income, as to the future economic pattern. Francis stated that some industries will maintain high prices as long as a semblance of peace does not descend upon them. But he said he expects lo" a! memo" to continue to fall, "because it has lowered the cost rte production t lo" agricultural commodities." "Corn has gone down, wheat 1 halted, the* potatoes have gone down," he said.- "Paro we don't "abo if the b. ja"- will hold." Mr. Francis "e stated that he was opposed to the reimposition of trl tax* on excessive profits] stating that Congress r] should take action" aimed" at preventing industry from making a profit*. If industry had not made money in recent years, the Government would have been in a very difficult situation. Labor's views The organized labor representatives will also use the day to make known their views on the imposition of taxation on excessive profit. The labor leaders" attacked 11 businesses, "because they are acquiring their new capital from the" con"] midores." through price* altr] "instead of acquiring it through prfl tamos to those interested in live] tir." "This a* a ciase of tributacifl by a corporation, without repres" taclon,"--said Nelson Crulkshatw of I* American Federation (■ Labor. Stanley Ruttémberg. director I economic research of! CoJ gress of Industri® les Organizations, appeared before subcom" Flanders, to "legar qu* no (Continued on page IR) I Fernós Idea of MitcheM Believe Workers BnncuA Will Replace MejicanoB By WILLIAM .1 dÓRVTLLIEbB WASHINGTON, Dec. 10. (]■ pecial)-Residential Commissioner Dr. Vintenio remos Isern, today welcomed the proposal made by H. L. MKchell. pH "¡dente of the National Union ] Agricultural Workers, affiliated with the American Federation of TB low, that no foreign agricultural workers be brought into the Nation, while M ja " hand Puerto Rican workers to fill the demand. Mitchell made the statement Wednesday at a meeting of the Special Committee on Farm Labor of the Bureau of Employment Security held in this capital.7 Mitchell said that any ultramari® labor must be done in Puerto Rico, because (Puerto Ricans) are American citizens. Before plans are prepared for 1* 1* ® portation rie citizens ros. the thousands of Puerto Ricans who are citizens must be enlisted and on the farms." Project Favors Boric ua* ua* ¿ '3 The head of ia Union de res Agricolas said that foreign tn® jadores constituted "a supply of braceros, bordering on peo® je." Fernós said he was pleased ■] to be aware of the proposal." He recalled that the year (Continued on pg. 14)