THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR LA ISLA, ROY: Partly cloudy with scattered showers in the morning. Clear to partly cloudy in the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 78; low, 74. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:00 p.m., 19.91 inches of mercury.
38 Pages
MORNING NEWSPAPER
Motorists, let's demonstrate traditional country courtesy.
NUMBER 11187
kño xxvin
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SANJUAN PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 17, 1948
. Housing Program Accelerated
421 purpose is to file documents before the Federal Housing Administration before March 31 They want to secure federal funds High prices of urban land may delay the projects The housing construction program sponsored by Governor Pifiero is being accelerated, with a view to file the greatest number of necessary documents" before the Federal Housing Administration before March 31, according to the President of the Planning Board, Dr. Rafael Picó, who informed yesterday. Dr. Picó said that with respect to the plan in several towns on the Island, developers are facing the obstacle of high prices being charged for urban land, a situation that could delay the start of important projects in those towns. Dr. Picó urged joint action by civic and local government leaders to somehow "avoid these inconveniences, which could jeopardize this important program. "The Planning Board is extremely interested in facilitating all the procedures so that all these houses can be built," commented Dr. Picó, "not only those designated for the metropolitan area of Juan, but also for other towns on the Island. We are aware that we have to act quickly in view of the need to secure the necessary federal funds before they run out again, and we are working day and night to review the projects submitted for our consideration by the Everlasting Corporation. Dr. Picó also said that the Everlasting Corporation's 4,500 housing project, to be built in Puerto Nuevo, near San Pablo, is well underway, "and we hope to have it all finished by this month." According to Federal Housing Administration regulations, all documentation related to this vast housing program must be filed by March 31. It will be recalled that recently, the federal funds assigned to the agency for the acquisition and guarantee of home mortgage loans were depleted mainly due to the great national demand for projects of this nature. This affected the program in Puerto Rico, which was unable to receive sufficient funds before the federal allocation was exhausted. -Dr. Picó said that in anticipation of a similar situation arising again, the Board "is also assisting in the selection of sites for new projects in various towns on the island. All of the Board's information, gathered through local studies, and all of its mar pas and designs, have been made available to Governor Pifiero in order to make it easier for developers to choose sites quickly. Similar facilities have also been offered with regard to land development permits and standards for the development of new developments. "The Board is in the best disposition to cooperate, and is doing so, so that the projects can be carried out as quickly as possible. I am meeting with the Board's officials on a daily basis, in order to overcome difficulties as they arise". The President of the Planning Board also stated that no project has been started yet (Continued on page 14) Muñoz will travel to Venezuela He will attend the inauguration of President Gallegas Sertor Luis Mufloz Marín, President of the Insular Senate and of the Popular Democratic Party, has accepted a formal invitation from the Government of Venezuela, to attend, together with his wife, the inauguration ceremonies of the newly elected President of that republic. * The Government of Venezuela, provisionally presided over by Romulo Betancourt, leader of the revolution of October 18, 1945, invited Mr. Mufloz Marin and his wife, through the consulate of that country in San Juan, to attend the inauguration ceremonies of the newly elected President, Mr. Romulo Gallegos, a well-known South American writer whom Mr. Mufloz Marin met in New York City while the former was living in exile. Dr. Aquilea Certad and Mr. César Montes, Consul and Vice Consul, respectively, of Venezuela in Puerto Rico, visited Mr. Mufloz Marín last Thursday to extend an invitation on behalf of the Government of that republic. The representatives of the Venezuelan Government had a discussion with the President of the Seoul (Continued on page 14).
ovement of troops in the Mediterranean
USEES' a °° W V \ A, ¡IRAQ? m CYPRUS fjbmssco t x M L % El Ala^i^^^ltTA0 BasraX LIBYA i ' SAUDI f' arabia Africa f ;4 Š ECUATORIAL VA ' K >AHRAN . Khartourri* /.. North African aviation officials in Europe said Wednesday that the strategic base at Mellahu. in North Africa (indicated by the number 1 on this map), has been reopened "because of additional supply flights" for American missions in the Middle East, and at the Dhahran base (8), in Naudl Arabia. The Grand B reta fia revealed that "large numbers of the 70,000 troops in Palestine will move toward Cyprus (3) to outflank Gre' a and the Dardanelles in the east, while Malta (4) forms a flank in the west. (Associated Preñas Map, Fitarfli's arrangement.)
WASHINGTON, Jan. 16. (S. E. M.)-Dispatches dated London just 72 hours ago, indicate that the United States Air Force has proceeded to reopen the gigantic air base it had during the war near Tripoli, Libya, only 800 miles from central Italy and the balaya fields of Greece across the Mediterranean. The official announcement of the reopening of the haae was made by the American headquarters Fennell is said to be leaving CA Fortaleza and Edwards know nothing of the case - Board meets on the 21st A credible source reported yesterday that *1 seftor Tomás Fennell, manager and general administrator, of the Compartía Agrícola de Puerto Rico, will resign his position within the next few days, to move to reside permanently on the mainland. To succeed Mr. Fennell in his present position, it was said that Mr. Paul Edwards, who holds the position of Treasurer of the Compartía Agrícola, will be appointed. When asked about this matter, the Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Compartía Agrícola, Mr. Arturo Roque, stated that he was per(Continued on page 22)
The Foreign Office of the United States, in Germany, reported that Lieutenant General Curtis Lemay, the late commander of the groups of planes which attacked Japan, had left for the purpose of inspecting the new installations at Mellaba, which will be used for the supply of planes from the United States bound for the Middle East. The British Foreign Office, when asked by the United States whether it had any objection to the reopening of the Mellaba airport in Mellaba.
reopening of the Mellaha airport by American logisticians, granted permission. Mellaha, situated in a strategic location on the northern coast of Africa, 800 miles from the battle fronts of Greece, was abandoned by the Americans a year ago. During the past summer, the United States offered the base for sale, but no government wanted to buy it. (Continued on page 12)
Sierra dcniéga*pet curtain ¡tara emigration due to low wages Recalls experience suffered for this reason jeor workers who went to Chicago - Agent says could employ ten thousand Puerto Ricans
Efforts to hire about 10,000 workers for agricultural, industrial and domestic work in midwestern states of the United States are at a standstill because the wages offered are not in accordance with the provisions of Law number 25, of December 5, 1947. These steps were started on the Island "I La. I-- - - - - - - -▲ L -
Mr. James Raizara no. a nom-1 bra of the International Overseas Employment Agency, after having remained in Chicago for several weeks, Mr. Falzarano met last Thursday with officials of the Department of Labor, informing EL MUNDO "not having obtained the necessary cooperation for the success of this migration," He claimed that the Department objected to the wage scale for unskilled workers and women to be hired. The wage offered by sefiqr Falzarano is $15 sema(Contlnued on page 10).
♦ - - - - ■■ --- -- Seeks to postpone trip again No measure against clandestine rum prepared for next session The Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Rafael Buscaglia, has postponed once again his trip to the United States" because the conferences for which he has been summoned by the Governor and the" legislative majority leaders, for the purpose of studying certain bills" to be presented" in the next regular session in February, have not yet taken place. The Treasurer stated that he expects to be able to leave for the North of the country on February 1, 2010, to be presented at the next regular session.
Compendium of News i ■■■■ n,. ■ . .■■■
American authorities will restrict the activities of foreigners in the national territory. -- - Antonio Véles Alvarado died in Manatí. - - - New cold wave is hitting several states of the nation. ♦ - "Six sugar mills" have already begun the work of the sap. Planning reports that m is accelerating the program of conatrucelón of the diñe thousand rivlendas. Picó and De Jesús discuss various aspects of the spending plan for the coming year. - Because of the low wages offered, Sierra denies permission for the emigration of 10,000 workers. Criollos in pursuit of increasing their lead over Indios in their night game against Ponce tomorrow. - - - A player who died in Santo Domingo was the son of a Borneo father. ♦ - - The Insular Chess Championship begins today. About 130,000 new voters are expected to turn out to register today and tomorrow. - - - Clarence Senior resigns his position at the UPR Institute of Social Invest' rations. ♦ * * Tomás Fennell is said to be stepping down.
will soon leave the direction of the Compartía Agrícola. - - - Sierra's report on the dispute" over the traha- " - - Employees" who handle food" are examined at UPB. - - - Group of 30 Cuban rotaries arrives for a visit to the lala. - - - Risk of national strike in the railroads arises again, as the government fails to settle the wage dispute. - Mullos will attend the Inauguration of the new President of Venice. - The Navy definitely in favor of building the new shipyard. The Navy definitely in favor of building the airport in Palo Seco. - Health prepares program "on the activities to be developed by visiting doctors. - - - Buscaglla has again postponed trip to the North, has not prepared project on clandestine rum. - Four of Savannah's "wounded" arrive today from Miami. Dewey decides he will accept nomination, though he will not actively campaign now. - Automobile industry workers ask for a 30-cent raise.
Expect 130,000 new voters to turn out at the polling places today and tomorrow.
Six mills are already working in the harvest Villaniil optimistic about labor negotiations. Six sugar mills, including two of the most important ones on the island, have begun the work of cutting and milling their canes, thus increasing the activities of the present sugar harvest. The employers' and workers' difficulties which threatened a paralyzation of the agricultural and industrial activities of the sugar industry, have been satisfactorily solved between the producers and the workers' unions, and the prevailing impression yesterday in the spheres of labor and industry was in favor of an uninterrupted continuation of the activities of the present sugar harvest. In addition to the Plata and Equal plants, whose work began before the beginning of 1948, the Rochelaise, Mayagüez, Machete, Guayama, the important Guánica plant, and the Cortada and Aguirre mills have begun their activities. Other mills are ready for the beginning of milling, having already taken steps to cut the raffias and transfer them to their industrial plants. It was observed yesterday that the hiring of workers is being carried out gradually, as the agricultural and milling activities increase. It is very likely that the total number of laborers will reach 140,000, the number employed during the last harvest, since it was indicated that all the cutting of letters will have to be done by hand, since no procedure has been introduced at this important stage of the present harvest. Talks with the "labor unions" have continued to proceed satisfactorily, after the signing of the preliminary stipulation between workers and employers" which facilitated the start of cutting operations in many mills. The signing of stipulations on wages is now pending, which will definitively seal the collective bargaining agreement with the Sugar Industry Workers' Union and thus eliminate any future threat of paralyzing the" insulates' activities. - The Vice-President of the Sugar Producers Association, Mr. Fernando A. Villamil, declared yesterday that he feels "highly satisfied with the way in which the negotiations between the labor leaders and the employers have been developing. He expressed that the final stipulations of the agreement "are almost finished." "I feel very nptlmisi ta," he commented, "of the final outcome 'of these" talks, "about which only the final clause on wages remains to be determined. I can say that there is no indication that any major difficulties could arise, or any threat of a strike that would paralyze the talks and obstruct the development of the zafia. We have been discussing all" these aspects in a very friendly and cordial manner, an acknowledgment which I think it necessary to make to the labor leaders." Yesterday was also dispelled the possibility that the obstruction of the Cuban sugar harvest would force the Puerto Rican producers to accelerate their shipments of sugar to the mainland refineries, in view of the fact that the Cuban sugar cane industry is in the hands of the Cuban sugar industry.
Foreigners' activities in the U.S. to be restricted
By MARTHA KEARNEY WASHINGTON, Jan. 16. (INS) - U.S. Attorney General Tom C.-Clark today approved the toughest peacetime rules ever invoked by the United States regarding the movement of foreign nationals during their stay in the United States. The new provisions constitute amendments to the Nation's immigration laws; they will apply to aliens now residing in the United States, and will probably be enforced within a month. The Secretary of Justice states that the primary purpose of the new provisions is "to maintain close supervision of the entry of alien visitors and their movements while in the United States. First, aliens must communicate by mail every three months with the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization, giving their personal information. Second, one-year permits issued to foreign visitors shall be reduced to six months if the Interested Party remains in the same Immigration sector for the entire time; they shall be reduced to three months if the visitor moves from one actor to another. Third,
for the purposes of the above provision, 16 immigration districts shall be created. In each of them there shall be offices in charge of investigating the movements and activities of foreign visitors under their Jurisdiction. Such offices shall exchange among themselves information concerning the movements of visitors moving from one district to another. Four, every visitor, before being permitted to enter the United States, must promise that he will not engage in activities "not specifically authorized" by the Immigration Service authorities. In addition, in the case of a business trip, the applicant will be required to demonstrate that it is a "legitimate" business requiring only a "temporary stay" in the United States. It is also provided that any visitor wishing to apply for an extension of his or her permit must do so 30 days prior to the expiration date of the original permit. The district offices listed above will handle matters relating to such permit extensions. Extensions will be granted for a period of three or six months, depending on the term of the original permit. From (Continued on page 14)
Navy definitely in favor of airport in Palo Seco
Barbev sent report to Washington - Alégase saves $2 million For Benjamín SANTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer Definitely, as far as the Tenth Naval District is concerned, the International Airport will be built in Palo Soco and not in Isla Verde, "according to Vice Admiral Daniel E. Barbey, who said, among other reasons, that the airport in Palo Seco will cost $2,000,000 less than in Isla Verde. The Vice Admiral added that this was the conclusion of engineers from the Tenth Naval District, after an extensive and thorough study carried out at the request of the Secretary of the Navy in Washington. "That study," - said the Vieealmiral, - "is independent of that which has been done or is being carried out by the Government 1-nsuíaj-engineers, whose conclusions I hope they will soon be able to report and which will coincide with ours." In his conference with the Press, Vice-Admiral Barbey referred to the statements authorized by him, and by Governor Pifiero, jointly, on January 6, last, in connection with the location of the
. ... Vice Admiral Daniel E. Barbey referred to the international airport. In those statements the Vice Admiral and the Governor had made mention of the fact that the Cival Aeronautical Authority had selected Isla Verde as the most suitable and most economical site in the vicinity of San Juan for the airport.
Risk of national railroad strike again arises Government failed in efforts to end wage dispute - 125,000-member union does not accept original settlement CHICAGO, Jan. 18 (PU)- Frank P. Douglas," chairman of the National Railroad Mediation Board, announced today that the Government h* failed in its efforts to mediate in the wage dispute between the Nation's railroads and three important" union"" of the men who operate the trains.
The unions have already voted to strike, if necessary, to win their demands for a thirty per cent wage increase. Douglass said the unions had rejected a proposal for arbitration in the dispute, and the next step in the dispute appeared to be the selection of an investigating jury by President Truman in an effort to prevent a nationwide railroad strike. The unions involved are the Brotherhood of Locomotive Mechanics, the Brotherhood of Stokers and Machinists, and the North American Switchmen's Union. They called for a thirty percent increase in wages, a minimum increase of $3 a day, and a large number of changes in employment rules. The failure of the Mediation Board to resolve the dispute brought the nation closer to the possibility of a railroad strike. Under the Railway Labor Act, Senior Truman has the power to select an investigating board, which would have thirty days to hold hearings and make a report. After the investigative hearing'. the Act provides that a strike cannot be ordered until a period of thirty days has elapsed. The Board of Mediaeion has been attempting to settle the dispute since November 24, after the three unions had rejected a wage increase which had been accepted by nineteen other railroad unions, representing 1,200,000 workers. The unions which have been creating the conflict represent only 125,000 workers, but these are the men who actually operate the trains. * The last major railroad strike occurred in May 1946 and paralyzed national life. One of the unions in the current dispute, the Brotherhood of Locomotive Mechanics, participated with the Brotherhood of Locomotive Employees (continued on page 22) in the strike.
4 Hearing called on BPP rate increase To be held on 23rd in Agriculture hall.Based on oil price By JOSE M. i FRET ' Editor of EL MUNDO The Water Resources Authority has called for a public hearing to be held on the 23rd of this month, in the conference hall of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce, to consider the proposed adjustment of rates for the sale of electric energy, based on a clause of readjustment which reads as follows: "For each incremental increase over the price of $1.60 in the selling price of each 42-gallon barrel of fuel oil, or its equivalent, delivered to the fuel tanks of the Santurde Steam Plant, a readjustment charge of $0.00004 will be added to the price of each kilowatt-hour consumed." If this rate readjustment becomes a reality, an average consumer would see an increase of approximately 17 percent in his or her monthly electric bill. The base price of $1.60 per barrel of fuel oil used for this increase is that which prevailed in 1943, according to data supplied by the Porto Rico Gas and Coke Company to the Public Service Commission. It is assumed that the present rates were fixed on the basis of said price, which is indicated in the aforementioned clause, since since that date, fuel has had increases (Continued on page 12").
UPR Medical Examination for Food Handling Personnel
The Medical Department of the University of Puerto Rico and the Office of the Sanitary Engineer of the University of Puerto Rico are conducting a medical examination of those employees of the institution who handle food in the cafeteria and in the residence halls. Mr. Vileha. explained that to date, 60 people have been examined. Regular examinations are done every three months and chest and blood examinations are done on a semester basis. A flurograph has been obtained from the Health Department for this semester's examinations, with which chest examinations have been made. Mr. Vllells has asked the Health Department to permit *1 use of the fluorograph for an additional time, so that 200 employees of the Physical Plant Division of the
The "person" of the Masonic Home, an institution where female students reside, who deal with food, may possibly be tested. The" examinations practiced in these days were to the" employees" of the residence" Carlota Matlenzo, the Pensionado Católico, the Casa de Práctica, the Casa de Huéspedes and the Cafeteria Universitaria, In the" first two dependencies there are 234 Jóvepet pensioners, the cafeteria provides services to all the population univentilarla. Mr. Vilella indicated that he had submitted the University's code to the Dean of Students for his approval and submission to the University Board. The code of reference includes the rules by which the boarding houses operating at Rio Piedra shall be governed.
I The Board of Elections will remain in session to resolve consultations Mrs. Barceló makes an exhortation No person will be admitted after 1 PM. Police organization Yesterday were finalized" all" preparations of the Insular Board of Elections and the" political" party" j of Puerto Rico, in relation to the general registrations" to be held today and tomorrow, in all" the" electoral" precincts of Puerto Rico. These i. .scripclones will be held in 1,454 registration polling places, most of them located in the urban area of the Island. In the Insular Board of Eleeclo* ! ne" it was informed yesterday that said organism will be in permanent session during the whole registration period, attending to the requests and consultations made by the officials" in charge" of carrying out the registration and resolving those" problems" that may arise" in the course" of these" activities. The political party leaders sent their final instructions to their respective local bodies, and to their representatives in the registration col©- - lections. Four political parties of the island will have representation in the said college, namely: Popular, Unión Republicana Progresista, Socialista and Liberal, It is expected that 120 to 130,000 new* electors will attend today and tomorrow - lo" colegios, to accredit themselves as recognized electors during the general elections next November. The polling stations are located in public schools, a public health unit and another building belonging to the Inaular Government. In addition, inacrlpclon "schools" have been set up in public schools" in the rural area of Puerto Rjeo in order to facilitate this work for new voters in distant areas. 1 The registration "polling stations" will be open from the "first hoib" of this morning. An official of the Insular Board of Elections explained that the new voters will be seated inside the polling stations, when they have facilities, or they will line up in front of them, in strict order. The registration meetings will begin to organize their work at ten o'clock in the morning, and the polling stations or lines will close at one o'clock in the afternoon. After that time, no person will be admitted to the lines or into the schools. Therefore, persons entitled to register must be at the schools before one o'clock in the afternoon, at which time registration will begin. The officers of the polling stations will remain at the polling stations until all persons present have ■ finished registering. - The Jophers of the Popular. - Republican Union and Liberal, made exhortations yesterday to the new voters to register today and tomorrow. They advocate i in such statements for an - orderly registration, making hin- ■ tapié that every new voter " fulfill pon ei civic duty of inserí- ■ blrsc. Yesterday, the president of the Puerto Rican Liberal Party, Mrs. Josefina Barceló de Romero, and the Vice-president, Mr. Luis Pérez Matos, stated the following: 'The love for our Party, its clean history and our civic responsibility point out our obligation to defend our votes through the registration of our electorate. । "Every voter who registers means a conscience, openly at the service of our cause; to preach the contrary implies to co or to fight with the adversary, betraying our collectivity. > To the enthusiasm and spirit of struggle > shown by all the organizations and committees, as the election day approaches, must be added that of those of our" . co-religionists who have not contributed their efforts." The Insular Board of Elections has made arrangements to dispatch a special function on Sunday night to all the police stations on the island to pick up the ballot packets and documents delivered by the local registration boards. These officers will depart by separate routes in special vehicles. The Board expects all general registration documents to be in its possession early Monday morning. As of Monday, the Board will begin the work of reviewing, sorting and balloting the registration ballots. The necessary measures have also been taken by the Insular Police Force. To this effect, the Police Colonel, Mr. Salvador T. Rolg. has made a distribution of the force under his command. High-ranking police officers, moreover, will be "attentive" during today and tomorrow, to the development of the "Registration" in all the "villages" of the Island. At the request of Governor Pifiero, no public performances will be held at the Sixto Escobar de' Park.