THE NANDO
NEW YORK, didembra 8, (PU) - Today m recorded the" titúlente" tamperaturu: New York, 81 j Wáahinr* ton, 48; Miami, 84; Chicago, 81. In d airport 14* Guard the" weather condition" for flight" were inform "d "a as "igue: sky doopejado h "tta a" "Hura da 8,000 foot"; visibility 2 mile* and a quarter. Forecast: good weather for tomorrow.
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND. HOT: Generally cloudy, with scattered rain showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 831 low, 74. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 10.98 inches of mercury.
MORNING JOURNAL
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN 1UAN PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 4, 1948
NUMBER 13507
FIVE CENTS
January 2 Parade Plan Drawn Up
200,000 Expected At Inauguration Mayors and Entities Join in Tribute to Governor-Elect Lortlcalde", as well as civic, cultural and labor societies, will take prominent part in the parade to be held at the inaugural ceremonies of Governor-elect, seftor Luis Muñoz Marín, on January 2, 1949. The President of the Parada Committee, Mr. César Cordero, summoned the mayors of all the towns and the civic and workers' societies to a meeting held yesterday afternoon at La Fortaleza. All the mayors appeared by themselves or through representatives, and most of the societies sent authorized delegates. Mr. César Cordero explained that the purpose of having summoned them was to know in what way the municipalities and the particular societies could help the splendor of the parade that will be celebrated as one of the main members of the inauguration ceremonies. He stated that it was indispensable to coordinate and channel the great representations that will attend the event. He added that in this parade the representation of the civilian element should prevail, although the military element will also have an outstanding part. Suggestions Made Suggestions were made and approved in principle as to the way in which the municipalities will organize the transportation of the greatest possible number of people: and ostensibly the genuine representation of peasants. The public service companies that transport passengers will be asked to obtain permission to leave their routes between towns to come to San Juan on special trips. The railroad will be asked to make extra trips to San Juan and anyone who has vehicles will be asked to help bring and carry as many people as possible on that occasion. The municipalities and railroad labor unions and other societies, offered to attend in large numbers, carrying banners and banners, and bringing artistically decorated floats. Nifloo of Schools On the special recommendation of the Governor-elect, no small children from the schools will attend. The only exception was made for loi Nlftos Escuchas, because due to their training, they can withstand the fatigues of the parade. The mayors were instructed to inform n as soon as possible, the number of people who will attend from each population, taking into account the means and means of communication available at each site. After it is known approximately how many people will come, instructions will be given as to the time at which the groups from each town should leave for San Juan and the routes to be followed, in order to avoid traffic jams and obstacles on the roads. The number of people coming from outside the metropolitan area is tentatively estimated at about 200,000. The parade committee will take measures so that this huge crowd does not suffer unnecessary disruptions in the Capital that day. t Time of the Parade The parade will begin at 8:45 o'clock sharp, according to seftor César Cordero, and it is estimated that it will take three and a half hours to pass in front of the pavilion from where the Governor-elect and his entourage will watch the parade. After the parade, the President of the House of Representatives, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the Governor-elect and his entourage will speak briefly after the parade (Continued on page 14.)
Populars Lead Last Night in District No. 32
.■Ha It" A ■1\1 , am v : vfl < 'i- -^514 . i' Wk Jr * "zF B *¿/t i ti'JhVBV Wy i í * i c A ¿"Mt, fifi "y k 'flRW 3 m w** fl I 14 / ■"/ : W V iMVk - fe "wE r % ' mEBBRa I -.r |J| j ■t "'* Jai 4
Samuel R. Quiñones, representative of the Popular Democratic Party in the Insular Board of Elections, was speaking during the session held at yesterday regarding the canvassing of the ballots of the Rio de Janeiro district.
the ballots of the San Loronzo-Juncos-Giirnbo district. Seated are, from left to right, Licentiates Do Figueroa, of the Statehood Party, and Bolívar Pagán, of the Socialist Party, and Mr. Charles If, Terry, General Superintendent of the Statehood Party.
With his back to the Chamber, seated is Mr. Eugenio* Font Suárez, representative of the Independence Party.
New Source Of Vitamins Against Anemia
11 San Lorenzo Schools Still To Be Reviewed
BI2 Expected To Be Used Soon On Commercial Scale By Paul F. ELLIS NEW YORK, Dec. 3 (PU)-It was revealed today that the new vitamin P-12, used in the treatment of pernicious anemia, has been found in a fungus - a development that paves the way for increasing its production and reducing its cost. The announcement of the isolation of R-12. found in *1 liver last April was one of the major scientific discoveries of the year. Today's revelation adds further significance to 1" new vitamin. The new source of B-12 was disclosed by Dr. Karl Folkers and a group of associates of Merck and Co. in the journal Science, the official publication of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. They said that in their search for new R-12, they found that similar crystals were produced by streptomyces griseus, which belongs to the same species as the fungus that produces streptomycin, a drug effective in the treatment of certain types of tuberculosis. Effective Against Neurosis The R-12 found in the fungus is a red crystalline compound, just like the original R-12, and runic tests have shown it to be powerfully effective against pernicious anemia. In some cases of people, the disease disappeared a few days after treatment. In addition, treatment with B-12 was effective against neurological symptoms. Merck scientists said that further evidence indicates that the new vitamin is an important factor in nutrition. They stated that B-12 accelerates growth and improves the health of chickens and other animals, and is one of the animal protein elements". During the past summer, a group of scientists from Lederle Laboratories also found a new source of B-12.
(Continued on page 14). '* However, the candidate for popular representative to 1A House, seftor Rafael Aponte Sanchez, nan. had his original majority of totos. The election of the Popular Party candidate for Mayor of Juncos, Mr. Victor Lanza Méndez, who, according to preliminary data, obtained 14 majority votes over the Opposition candidate, was also assured. The canvassing of the 32nd representative district began around 9:30 a.m. in the morning with the population of Gurabo. Many people from the towns of San Lorenzo, Juncos and Gurabo, which make up said district, were present, among them Mr. Pedro Borges, mayor-elect for the Opposition in the town of San Lorenzo; Mr. Víctor Lanza Méndez, mayor-elect for the Popular Party in Juncos and Mr. Rafael Aponte Sánchez, candidate of the Popular Party for representative to the House of Representatives for the 32nd representative district. Discussions began Discussions among the members of the Board began when a ballot appeared with a small mark or scratch on the Popular Party insignia, when it was counted at the 24th school in Gurabo. Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones, Popular Representative, expressed that the ballot was valid for his party, because the voter had marked on the insignia. Due to the smallness of the mark, the members of the Opposition stated that it was not valid, because the stripe was not perceptible. As the Socialist representative, Mr. Bolívar Pagán, passed his finger over the mark, Mr. Quiñones asked that this be recorded in the record. Finally, Mr. Charles H. Terry, Chairman of the Board, declared it valid.
There were discrepancies between the tally sheets and the total votes counted. - Popular Majority Confirmed in Juncos, Gurabo By T.UIS HERNANDEZ AQUINO 1 EL MUNDO Staff Writer The canvassing of the San Lorenzo, Gurabo and Juncos district had not been completed last night at eight o'clock, at which time the canvassing of eleven polling places in the town of San Lorenzo began. In them there are discrepancies between the votes counted and the sheets of paper.
Industrialists to Consider Gasoline Case Secretary of Entity Believes Additional Tax Would Be Harmful The "Asociación de Industríale" will consider the projected increase in the price of gasoline, at its next Board of Directors meeting. Mr. Vicente Leon, Jr., Secretary of the entity. He informed yesterday that since the Board of Directors had not yet met, the action to be taken had not been determined. However, Mr. León stated that from the Association's Secretary's point of view, the Drivers' Social Security fund could be raised without further taxing transportation on the Island, through any other plan. Furthermore, Mr. Leon continued, the increase in the price of gasoline would also result in an increase in the production costs of several industries that use this product in their operations. No date has been set for the next meeting of the Board of Directors of the Industrial Association at this time. As is known, the additional tax was discussed during a public meeting held by the legislative committee in charge of studying the problems related to the chauffeur class. During the meeting, it was suggested that an additional penny be levied on each gallon of gasoline sold on the Island, to accumulate a welfare fund for the drivers.
The Inauguration Parade is organized
ai I i Igik t * h ¿jflUgMGu rl I I I zMI a OI. <0 ■ a - ■ BJ B bbUSSSbKSS& . | £ am , cSbtS! < r* u tiM! : A. 9* " z; ." v d a r Vr r i A" J ■ , 001 **ó '.' '. '. "filli 'W. w '
B w w jfl Bk aBwiSh' <" wBaHMBMHIBk Yesterday afternoon a meeting was held in La Fortaleaa, with the purpose of discussing the plans for the organization of the parade of next January second, when the Governor-elect, sefior Lula Muñoz Marín, will take office. The event was attended by all the mayors of the island.
k - L ,r. 3 o aua representatives, as well as delegates from a number of civic, cultural and workers' organizations. The photograph on the left captures the moment when Mr. César Cordero Dávila, director of the program of the parade, was addressing the attendees.
..' ... z-U^. caldea" of San Juan, "eAor" Felisa Rincón de Geutler. and to her left aeflorea Lula F. Cuchí and Mario Marrero, the latter Director of the Emergency War Program. To the right aeAor Conrado Aaenjo. On the right engraving mayor" and municipal funcionarlo", and.
1 ■ J? . k delegate" of different organlwcione" of the country. The problem of the transportation of about 200,000 people, who are expected to visit the capital next January for the event, was discussed at the meeting. (Photographs from EL MUNDO).
Fly Pest to be Combatted Starting Monday
Municipality Will Use Tifa Machine
Atomization Will Begin In Crematorium. By BENJAMIN SÁNTANA Editor of EL MUNDO From next Monday they will use the Tifa atomizing machine in a campaign against the flies in San Juan, it was informed yesterday. The Administrator of the Capital, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier, learned about the plague of flies that has invaded the city of San Juan during the last few days from EL MUNDO, while she was on vacation on the Island. The Mayoress immediately went to San Juan and ordered an investigation, and it was discovered that the crematorium was the main source of the plague. Numerous brigades are already visiting all sectors of the Capital to determine other forums. The work of the Tifa machine will begin in the crematorium on Monday, and will extend to all the sectors of San Juan. In one of its editorials last Wednesday, entitled "We live in Mosropolis", E LMUNDO pointed out the need to take adequate measures to combat the extraordinary invasion of flies and mosquitoes that have been plaguing the different areas of the Capital lately. As soon as the Mayor learned of this situation, while on vacation on the Island, she contacted the Commissioner of Saluri, Dr. Juan A. Pons, to plan a joint action between the Government agencies of the Capital and the Department of Saluri. The Commissioner rie Saluri pujw" at the Mayor's disposal the Tifa atomizing machine to start the campaign at the crematorium. It is reported that the campaign carried out not long ago, in one of the neighborhoods of Rio Pledra, with the Tifa atomizer, had such good results that the authorities of the Department of Saluri have decided to do the same in other places, such as in San Juan. Garbage" rie Bayamón For the past few weeks, s" reportedly, the Municipality rie Bayamón has been depositing its garbage at the San Juan crematorium. The method used so far has been to spread a thick layer of zahorras over the crematorio every time garbage is dumped at this site. As a result of the excessive amount of garbage deposited at the crematorium lately, which is much greater than the amount of gravel, the waste decomposed rapidly, creating a fly breeding ground that has spread throughout San Juan. The Mayoress has also communicated with the Mayor of Bayamón so that this other municipality will contribute, at least, with a certain amount of composting material. However, they will try to locate other breeding places of flies and mosquitoes in the Capital, in order to combat them with the Tifa atomizing machine. After the last rains, these insects have reproduced in an extraordinary way, invading cafes, restaurants and other public establishments. In addition to the Tifa machine, the Tifa insects have also been spreading to cafes, restaurants and other public establishments.)
Russia Accused Of Not Following Berlin Pact
Colonel Howley Makes Statement Mayor of Russian Zone Claims to Have Control of Entire Capital By Walter Rundle BERLIN, December 3. - Colonel Frank L. Howley, mmnndante rie the United States troops *in Berlin, said today. after Russia backed the government **"- tablecirio a brava by the Berlin Communists, that "Russia now appears in the nude, as a government whose word cannot be trusted." Colonel Howley, in his third strong statement of the week, had this to say: "IF there is anyone who still believes in the words of the Soviets, this latest act must disillusion him.... Russia has broken all agreements towards peace, beginning with those of the Teheran, Yalta and Potsdam conferences and ending with those concluded at the Allied Control Center and the Berlin Command Committee." Howley's statement appeared in the Berlin Observer, a weekly published by the U.S. Army in the capital.¿ After the Communist Party lost the October 1946 Berlin municipal elections, Howley said, "Soviet instigation, began to develop a systematic program of terror, implemented by kidnapping, intimidation and threats." Ebert's "phrase" The new situation caused by the establishment rie of a rough-and-tumble government in the Soviet sector, has taken a new turn when Fritz Ebert, the pelele mayor, told a press conference that he was mayor of the whole city, but that he was only taking orders from Russia. "As far as "I am concerned, the (Continued on page 12) Quota For Sugars From Puerto Rico Was Raised There Was Also Increase In Cuban. Due to Beet Deficit For PAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, Dec. 3. - (PU)- The Department of Agriculture today announced an increase of 44,505 short tons of sugar in Cuba's quota for the continental United States, and another increase in Puerto Rico's quota of 15,495 short tons. This was due to a shortfall of 60,000 tons in domestic beet sugar supplies this year. This raises Cuba's quota to 2,940,467 tons and Puerto Rico's to 1,023,756 tons. On the basis of the original distribution of sugar in the continental United States so far this year, and the predictions of the Department of Agriculture, there will be no significant change in per capita consumption in the United States for 1949, as compared with 1944, and it was strongly indicated that the Department will fix the initial estimate of domestic consumption for 1949 at a figure very near 7,200,000 short tons, gross value. In the opinion of a number of statisticians in the sugar-producing circuits here, a national consumption estimate of about 7,100,000 tons would definitely boost sugar prices; and an estimate of 7,200,000 tons would hold them steady and possibly boost them slightly. It is considered likely, however, that the Department (Continued on page 12)
New Postal Rates Go into Effect January First
4,014 AUTOMOBILE ACCIDENTS IN 4 MONTHS The Island Police Statistics Office reports that in the first four months of the fiscal year that began July 1 through October 31, the following occurred in Puerto Rico. 4,014' automobile accidents. 82 persons were killed and 2,367 injured. According to this count oflc' there was an average of 20.5 people killed monthly, and 591 injured. FAT President Wants to Visit Island Nogueras Rivera Makes Invitation During Union Convention The President of the American Federation of Labor, Mr. Wilham Green, intends to visit Puerto Rico in the near future. Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera, secretary general of the Free Federation, who together with his wife Mrs. Berta C. de Nogueras. attended the last national convention of the FAT held in Cincinnati, informed Mr. Francisco Taz Granel", interim president of the FLT. In a report given by Mr. Nogueras Rivera, to Mr. Paz Granel, he tells Mr. Paz Granel that he invited "Mr. Green to come to the Island. Mr. Green invited him to come to the island to greet the Puerto Rican workers. Mr. Green, in accepting the invitation, stated that "I will continue to lend my cooperation to the affairs of Puerto Rico. At the invitation of] Mr. Green, Mr. Nogueras Rivera delivered a speech before the delegates to the FAT convention. In his speech, the federation leader made a presentation on the progress made in Puerto Rico in the areas of labor legislation, organized labor and the industrialization and public health plans and programs being carried out by the island government. Convention Approved Resolutions The annual meeting of the American Federation of Labor concluded its work on November 22. It passed several resolutions presented by the island delegate. One of these resolutions was to request that Puerto Rico be authorized to draw up its own constitution. On such action taken by the FAT, the Secretary of the Free Federation sent a cable to Mr. Luis Muñoz Matin, informing him of "1" democratic artion rie the convention," Mr. Paz Gránele said yesterday. The resolution related to the refining of sugar in Puerto Rico, passed to the Executive Council of the FAT for its consideration and study and appropriate action. The resolution calls for the lifting of restrictions on the refining of sugar from Puerto Rico. On Social Security The FAT also approved a resolution demanding that the benefits of the programs or laws on education be extended to the Island, and another to also extend to Puerto Rico the benefits of several titles of the Social Security Law. (Continued on page 14)
The Airfare Shall Be 6c* Ounce or Fraction Increases Cover Third and Falling Gasea, Drafts and Special Services. In accordance with 1" Federal Law No. 900. domestic postage rates and" additional "enricement" charges will be increased" as from January 1, 1949. Airmail As reported by the San Juan Post Office, domestic air mail up to eight ounces will pay postage at the rate of six cents for each ounce or fraction thereof. However, postcards sent by air in domestic service will pay four cents per card. The one-cent postage postcard may be mailed via air mail with the addition of three cents postage and marking the card "Via Air Mail. These new airmail postage rates (up to eight ounces) will be in effect for mail carried in the continental United States, including Alaska, and mail exchanged between the continental United States, including Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Canton Island, the Canal Zone, Guam, and any other place where the U.S. Postal Service is in operation. Mail transported within and between the aforementioned territories and possessions is also applicable. These domestic airmails are also applicable to Canada and Mexico. With respect to domestic airmail, the current postage already proscribed for the domestic parcel post service is payable on domestic air mail weighing more than 8 ounces. Domestic airmail postage for parcels may be requested at the San Juan post office. Third Class Matter The rate for third class matter whose weight is limited to not more than eight ounces will be as follows: v For circulars, printed matter in general and merchandise, two cents for the first two ounces or fraction thereof, plus one cent for each additional ounce or fraction thereof. For books and catalogs with 24 pages or more and for seeds, bulbs, stems, shoots and plants, one and one-half cents for each two ounces or fraction thereof. Third" Claae in Bulk Quantity"" In Bulk By payment of an ear go] amount of $10 for each natural aff-| ral or fraction thereof, article"! Identical" of third* cl*J "e matter may be "rept" by co-1 rreo in * bulk quantities (Inl hulkV-flo less than 20 pound" or nol less than 200 Identical pieces, at the rate of 14 cents per cari* pound or fraction thereof when the third class matter consists of clr-| rular, miscellaneous printed matter ne" or merchandise; and at the rate of loi cents for each pound or fraction thereof! when the matter gives clieJ "e ronsilfe of books and catalogs of 24 pages or more, seeds, bulb"! roots, shoots and plants. There is a minimum charge of one een-| lavo per piece when the material classified as circular blunt, Printed J merchandise has a maximum piece weight of 1,143 nnzas. There is a minimum charge of One cent per piece when the mM tari* classified* as book" or ca4 catalogs of 24 pages or more, "e9 mile", bulbs, racce", renuevo" plant", has a maximum piece weight poJ piece of 1.6 ounce". Bulk mail must be presented and handled in accordance with the "provisions prescribed" by Section 562 of the Postal Laws and Regulations of 1940. (Continued on page 14) I