THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST! WEATHER FOR THE ISLAND, ROY: - medium cloudy to cloudy, with occasional "scattered" showers. IN SAN JUAN. AYECt Maximum temperature, 82 degrees: minimum, 75 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:39 o'clock, 28.94 inches of mercury.
NEW YORi, May 13. - Lu -igulentea temperature" -- regiatraron at I* afternoon today: Chicago, M; Miami, 18; York, 87; Wáahington, 70. Predloolone" for* tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities": moderate and somewhat warmer than today; Wind" moderate" from noroaate to oeate.
DIARY OF^"3®^THE MORNING
<NO XXX
Entered as second class matter, Poet Office, Sen Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -SATURDAY, MAY 14, 1949
NUMBER 13665
FIVE CENTS
Incidents in Berlin Have Not Been Serious
■MkJH : 11H Wk mHkBt i ■Wt ? ¿i ;i -■.V/'. ,.v®' /
Guard" tunm Inspecting a vehicle while lifting "# the driver's hinquen of a locomotive*. The city paaó twenty-four hours" do Berlin, while" a German jnven ewpreaa "u rejoicing kissing the party, (Photo" by Associated Press).
WASHINGTON, May 13. <P.U.)-General Lucia" D. Clay, American commander in Alemanla.informed the State Department today that loa ruaos have removed existing restrictions in Berlin "on a large scale and good attitude." Clay telephoned Robert Murphy, director of the Germanoaustliaco Office.
Asunta" Germanoaustliaco" to Inform!" that "are Inevitable" the" petty differences", but that "it is too early to consider them of a serious character". He also said Clay that talks have already begun on trade relations between the representatives of East and West Germany.
The East and West German representatives have already begun talks. Another United Press dispatch dead# Berlin reports that during a Pronta conference in Berlin, General Clay said that Rusta's main objective was to consolidate the pata. Reiterating a statement he made yesterday before the Berlin assembly, Ctay added:. -;""
"The powers" "criden tata" also desire a unified Nation, but Anta can only be obtained by ta ""Ivaguardia of a" free" elections, and the preservation and protection of tas basic" rights which exist today in West Germany." (Continued on page 18. Col. 5)
Editor & Publisher Magazine Highlights Case of Insular Press
Council Summoned To Discuss Medical School Villaronga Reports They Will Discuss Tropical Medicine The Superior Council of Education will meet after May 15 next, according to its President, the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano Viltaionga. During this meeting they will discuss the situation related to the School of Medicine due to the resignation of Dr. Pablo Morales Otero, as its director. Mr. VII1*rong" reported that the school did not accept the 1* letter* that 1" had sent asking him to confirm*, r* 1* notice* published* by 1* Frenes "obre "u resignation. " ' ' He added that he also had no knowledge of the resignation" of 1o" doctors" Guillermo Arbona and Cerrion Morale", as doctors of 1* School, as reported by the Press. Appointment of Knppisch The notification of the appointment of Dr. Enrique Kopptach, as acting director of the School of Tropical Medicine, arrived in the hands of Commissioner Vlltaronga on Monday, May 9, although it had been sent to him on April 29. Signed by Dr. Albert Jacobs, provost of Columbia University, the letter states that the President of this plant, It adds that this appointment will be effective until the existing relations between that University and the School of Tropical Medicine cease, relations that will be broken as soon as the Superior Council of Teaching assumes the direction of the School, if the Governor signs the project that reorganizes it. During the announced meeting of the Higher Teaching Council, the new budget for the University will also be discussed.
Says that if Munoz Signs New Statute" 'robably Would Be Challenged in Supreme NEW YORK, May 13 <PU) - "Newspaper" owners" are e". ♦án preparing for a fight against government domination of Puerto Rican journalism, that it" consider a clear prospect ní ní Governor Luí" Muñoz Marín approves the legislation Tiue (¡ene
on his desk in that regard."' says today 1" magazine of I" Newspaper Industry. Editor and Publisher, in a dispatch from Wáshlngton. Announcing that "interest has been heightened by the fact that the statute may be tested in the Supreme Court," the dispatch adds that the bill "would create, as a quasi-public agency, the Instituto da la Prensa de Puerto Rico. Its powers would include the authority to promulgate a code of ethics and to demand its compliance. Not Active Journalists* "The code would be drafted by members of the Institute, but enrollment is open "to all "Puerto Rican journalists," v on the Island that term goes beyond the active Press, as it is known here; and accept any" who write incidentally. or have written at any time in the past, for any newspaper." "Eligible, according to that" term," and probably ron almost ah "olute domain by virtue of their political Influencie"-he says emphatically rl naked-"would be Governor
The Chamber of Commerce will proceed to carry out a legal study to determine if it is possible to file a class action lawsuit to prevent the collection of taxes on those items that are already taxed by the Island Tax Law. The Chamber of Commerce in assembly of purely informative character, agreed that the guidelines adopted there were put in knowledge of the other members interested in the case. By unanimity of the concurrence. It was agreed that the following steps should be taken;
Fren-
Muñoz, editor and one of the owners of a daily newspaper; Samuel R. Quiñones. president of the Senate and journalist; and the Attorney General, Vicenta Gélgel Polanco. The Leg'statur" is also full ri- 'per.odists." Reports Protest Declaring that the Institute would be established as a court to decide grievances against members while practicing In profession. Editar and Publisher says that "although bound "I free Press mandate of the U.S. Constitution, the insular possession extend it the right to proscribe from the profession any journalist who failed to d" cover 1the ethical standards established by the Institute." "The San Juan newspapers. EL MUNDO and El Imparcial", -says the] dispatch- "are in the forefront of the opposition against the aforementioned legislation, and have hinted that they will not accept its mandate, on the grounds that the constitutional guarantee of a free press will be ignored". In yesterday's edition, the New York Times also published a rather extensive two-column article on the proposed Puerto Rico Press Institute.
Protest before the Board 1.-All the firms affected by the provisions of the resolution of the Board of Commissioners, shall file individually before said Board, as soon as possible, and in any case before the 20th day of the present, a protest of the patent that has been imposed, based on the fact that the Board of Commissioners of San Juan does not have the power to impose patents on those businesses that deal in articles that are taxed by the Island Tax Law. That in the event that the protest is dismissed or denied by the Board of Commissioners of San Juan, that payment of the imposed patent be made under protest and that the pertinent action be filed before the District Court to obtain the reimbursement of the amount paid. In accordance with the criteria of the assembly, Mr. Filipo de Ho "tos, president of the Chamber of Commerce, informed that a legal study will be made to see if it would be possible to file a collective recourse of interdict to prevent the collection of such patents. As soon as the legal advisor of the Chamber of Commerce has evacuated the consultation, it will be communicated to the interested members, as stated.
Proposals For TA Loan To Be Made Tied
By José M. García Calderón Editor of EL MUNDO ' The day before yesterday, an auction was held in New York for the loan 1 to refinance the loan requested by the Land Authority for its 1949-50 crop gas- ' cess. At the auction on the said . loan, in the sum of 7,000,000., , two groups of banks, ■ and the Chase National Bank, alone, competed. The first group of Banks, inte- ■ degree by the Bank of Ponce, Crái dito y Ahorro Poncefto and The Che- . mlcal Bank A Trust Co" made a . proposition to charge Interest of 2.49 percent. The Chase National Bank, and the - i other group of Banks composed of the Guarantt.ee Trust Co., the Flrt National Bank, of Boston, and *1 Banco. Popu- - lar de Puerto Rico made equal quotations of 2.25 per cent. "I The adjudication of the auction will be - made by the Board of Directors of 1 the Land Authority, advised by the directors of the Government Barro.
by the directors of the Barro Gubernamental. To Banco Popular According to what was expressed yesterday by the Director of the Land Authority, Mr. José Acoe/a Velarde, there being a tie in the quotations, the good pro must go to Banco Popular de Puerto Rico. He added that although this was his personal criteria, the Board of Directors of the TA would be the one to finally decide the issue. Mr. Acos. ta Velarde also stated that in previous loans, Banco Popular's proposals had been lower, and that on this occasion it also contributed to the fact that the quotations were low. In an auction held in May 1947 for another loan to the Land Authority for $85,000,000, Banco Popular offered the lowest price, and the same occurred in (Continued on p. 18, Col. 5)
New Motion Sickness Drug For Sale
Tests Show Dramamine Produced Satisfactory Effects By BENJAMIN SANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO An effective drug against all types of dizziness has just been launched on the market in Puerto Rico. It is about 1" drug Dramamine, product of the Searle Research, day-> t-i run in 1" Island by Pelegrina A¡ T''rens. When questioned about 1a same. They reported that it had been a fortnight since the drug had been introduced in Puerto Rico. According to information published by newspapers and magazines । in the United States, the drug was subjected to a rigorous test, for which 1,366 soldiers of an American transport were loaned, with "dramatic results". The drug is a highly active, relatively water-insoluble therapeutic and prophylactic agent whose results in the treatment of motion sickness have been described as "unusually satisfactory". The Ballou Trial Some 38 trials were conducted on the U.S. Navy transport Ballou within ten days. The ship was making a voyage from New York City to Bre- ¡ merhaven. "The ship was making a trip from New York City to Bremen, Germany, where troops had been assigned to serve. The structure of the transport made it possible to place 500 men in four compartments in the bottom of the ship under similar conditions and subject to the same motion. The second group was given another drug identical to Dramamine, following the same rules, and the third group was given the drug only after they felt dizzy. The results obtained from this test were as follows: None of the 134 soldiers in the first group felt dizzy, although two claimed to feel some faintness. When the drug was discontinued, 41 became ill and when it was used again 98 per cent recovered within half an hour and two became partially dizzy. Of the 123 in group 2, 28 percent reported dizziness, but when the drug was taken, they recovered within half an hour, except for one who reported fainting despite the disappearance of the other symptoms. Of the 129 in group 3, five were dizzy during the first twelve hours of the trip and when ingesting Dramamino 14 recovered completely in less than half an hour and the rest improved partially. In group 4, composed of 99 shoulders, 33 became dizzy during the first 12 hours of travel. Some 19 improved with another drug, while the other 14 only recovered with Dramdlno. Some 195 of the 881 who were not part of the study group became dizzy. Ninety-six percent recovered with Dramamine. Although this drug is not dangerous and can be purchased without a doctor's prescription, it is recommended that you consult your doctor first before using it. It is sold in bottles of 100 tablets, at 84.20 cents a bottle for pharmacists, and about 10 cents for the consumer. At the inauguration of the Profe. Profe. sional Building on May 29, on De Diego Avenue, the Pelegrina Lloréns House will present an exhibition of Dramamine.
Funds Given To Milk Stations
Also $600,0(H) For Aqueducts Muñoz Gave Approval To Numerous Projects* Granting Appropriations The government machinery is running at high speed in the approval of bills. The Governor's "aides" are working fourteen and twelve hours a day, presenting for the Executive's consideration all the bills with an explanatory memorial, and with petitions in favor or against which individuals or entities have expressed their support. The Governor yesterday signed bills allocating 81,055,000 for milk stations; 8450,000 psrs I" Land Authority; 835,000 for Transportation; 850,000 for the Isabela Irrigation; 815,000 for Cooperatives; 8211,820 for the Service Office, 847A9R psra ta Home Authority. $500.000 for the General Supply Administration; $55,000 for the National Guard; $40,000 for a building in Coamo; $8250,000 for the University; $20,000 for the Lottery; $62,000 for Vieques; $85,000 for the Insular Police; $75,000 for the Communications Authority; various allocations for public works in towns in the district of San Juan.
Bill" Signed" Yesterday the Governor signed into law the" "following bill": House Bill 343 - To regulate the operation of 1a" fumigation plants of the Government of Puerto Rico, etc., etc., To authorize the Commissioner of Agriculture to issue his regulations, etc. (Act number 281) Senate Bill number 389 - To transfer the surplus fund of the $40,000 allocated for the construction of a building for the office of the Insular Government in Conmo, allocated by Act 194 of 1946 to a fund for the expansion and reconstruction of the Municipal Hospital of Coamo. (Act number 282) Senate Bill number lit -*~A*ign*ndo B2M.00O d" fund" gene*!** * !* Univocidad da Puerto ( Rleo. bar* purchase of land" and property"". (Act number 283) House Bill number 900- 820,000 for expenses" moving to Santurce del Negociado d* Ixiterl". (Act number 284) House Bill number 840- $30,000 for" the reconstruction of the Municipal Hospital and 1a Plaza d# Recreo de Vleque", (Act number 285). Senate Bill 694 - To add Section 5(d) to the Act establishing the compulsory expropriation of private property (Act 286). This Act authorizes the Government to desist from using properties it does not need, returning them to the owner through the payment of damages caused by the expropriation. Senate Bill 209 --To exempt from the payment of the tax "on contracts to all" persons who enter into contracts for the supply of romeatihtas with the P. E. G. (there is number 287) Senate Bill number ?87 - To amend articles 2, clause "h"; 4, clause "d"; 5, second paragraph; 10, clause "A"; 11; 13, clause "A"; 14, clause (s); 16; 23, the General Law of Cooperative Societies (Law 291 of 1946) (Law number 288). House Bill 755 - To amend Sec. 3 of Act 16 of June 10, 1939, "An Act to prohibit false labeling co/Continued on page 18, Col. 6).
Actor José Ferrer To Be In Puerto Rico On The 30th
The University of Puerto Rico will confer during the next collation of degrees a doctorate in Fine Arts (Honoris Causa) to Puerto Rican actor José Ferrer, who will come to receive such distinction. Another honorary degree will be awarded to the famous Spanish-American novelist and former President of the Republic of Venezuela, Rómulo Gallegos, who will deliver the graduation speech at our first teaching center. It is a Doctorate in Humanities (Honoris Causa). The graduation ceremony has been postponed to May 30 by the university authorities. It was to be held, as scheduled, on May 27, but because Mr. Ferrer will be receiving another award in the United States on that date, the date was altered. On a recent date, the Rector of the University wrote to Mr. Ferrar, telling him of the UPR's intention to confer an honorary academic degree upon him. Among other things, the Rector said in his communication: "The University wishes to reflect the cordial appreciation of the people of Puerto Rico.
1 JOSE FERRER people it serves, while expressing its particular esteem for your dramatic work. I am pleased to inform you that this Institution wishes to extend to you the highest recognition that it is in "your hands to discern. Consequently, and by order of the Consejo Superior d* Enseñanza requested your authorization and appearance to confer upon you the degree of Doctor en Bella" Arte" honoris causa in our" (Cent en 1* p. 18. Col. 8)
8,000,000 Bond Issuance For $8,000,000 To Be Issued For Works
Sam Rayburn Scolded by Truman 'He Says in Letter He Received No Consideration For GEORGE E. REEDY, Jr. WASHINGTON, May 13. (PIT)E1 President Truman publicly scolded Speaker Sam Rayburn and another House leader for trying to stop a bill to repeal the Taft-Hartley labor-management law, "I have received no consideration," the President said. Mr. Truman used such language, usually used in a letter to A. F. Whitney, president of the Brotherhood of Railwaymen, to emphasize his refusal to accept any compromise on the Taft-Hartley bill, saying that he shared Whitney's view that "it is far better to fall out than to compromise on principle. Predicts Passage But the President, who said recently that there is plenty of time in his four-year term to fulfill "our campaign promise" to repeal the Taft-Hartley Act, confidently predicted that his original repeal bill would pass. The letter was publicized by Whitney at a time when Rayburn and other Administration sympathizers in the House were trying to work out a compromise which the Democratic "urefto" supporters of the Taft-Hartley Act could accept. Hartley, could accept.
CIT i yM 9 HR I - % Leader arrives. 8ERAHN0 ROMUALDI Romuaidi Says Reds Labor Latin Countries Denounces Movement That Sponsors in Mexico Lombardo Toledano Fnr U I* SANCHEZ CAPPA, (Editor of EL MUNDO) "No program of Industrialization can succeed unless it is accompanied by a gradual increase in the purchasing power of ta" workers," declared seftnr Serafina Romuaidi, international labor leader who" arrived in Puerto Rico yesterday. The eeftor Romuaidi. representative for Latin America of the American Federation of Labor and R*. r orotario da Rebelón*" 1 n tern teiorí*-' le" of the Interamerin*n* d* Workers Confederation, came to the Island by invitation of the Free Federation. He was on his way back to the United States, after having participated as a delegate of the ILC in the regional conference of the American palm workers affiliated to the International Labor Organization. He was met at the airport by a large labor representation of the FLT, headed by leaders of that union, and the Labor Commissioner, Mr. Fernando Sierra Bordéela.
A card* eit* crossed out on May 4 - di* of the coalition between "urefto" and Republicans that defeated by a margin of 28 votes the first" attempt at compromise, a bill jointly sponsored by Rayburn and Representative Hugo Slms, Democrat of" South Carolina. The proposal, which would have retained the 80-day "injunction" clause contained in the Taft-Hart Act and several other features of the labor law passed by the Republicans, was offered as the headline of Mr. Truman's repeal bill on the theory that some concession had to be made to the Southern votes. Mr. Truman clearly stated in his letter to Whitney that he wanted no part of this strategy - and strongly implied that he had tried to plant it, over his objections. The President told Whitney that he had never believed in "any compromise on the labor program other than the amended Wagner bill which I sent to Congress and which was reported by the House and Senate Labor committees. "We will continue to fight," the President wrote, "and we will fight because we are right." While concerned officials of the CIO and the American Federation of Labor have said they would accept some features of the Taft-Hartley Act to get the Taft-Hartley repeal bill passed by the Congress, Whitney's union is standing firm behind Mr. Truman's original bill to repeal the Taft-Hartley Act. Whitney told reporters after a conference he held yesterday at the White House that the President agreed with him that he should not back down in the struggle.
íghnr Held At a press conference eelebrnd* at the Condado Hotel Game of his arrival, Mr. Romuaidi reported on his work at ta regional HIT conference in Montevideo, which was also attended as a U.S. delegate, Commissioner Sierra Bordéela. He said that the ILC's major achievement at the conference was the approval of a resolution calling on "the ILO Governing Body to conduct an investigation into the violation of trade union rights" in Peru and Venezuela. In both countries, the government reported, the government has "ratified the" workers' organizations, imprisoned "their leaders and frozen the funds of the" trade unions, and the ILC won a resounding triumph at the conference over the Latin American Workers' Confederation. The ILC was represented by 10 members, while the CTAL, presided over by Mexican labor leader Vicente Lombardo Toledano, had only 3. The CTAL had so far been the dominant labor organization representing organized labor at the conference. Regarding the development and achievements of the labor movement in Latin America, Mr. Romuaidi said that "■ despite the prevailing situation in Peru and Venezuela, the trade union movement has done a satisfactory job and has been responsible for the promulgation of a new labor movement" (Continued on page 12, Col. 4).
Ramos Says Why He Left Chamber; Judge Publicizes Record Incident
Ernesto Ramo" Antonlnl, who with prosecutor Angel Viera Martinez was the protagonist of an incident last Thursday night at the San Juan District Court, yesterday gave an explanation of the incident in open court, after requesting, and being granted, permission to do so by Judge Julio Suarez Garrlga. He began by saying the Speaker qu" he spoke out while" the prosecutor Viera Martinez rendered his last report to the Jury, with the purpose of recruiting the" service" of" a colleague "uyo to represent him in tala until finishing* the ftacal Report. I then" "- I started talking on the phone from Jim's office. At that time your secretary arrived to tell him that the trial was adjourned because of your absence in Tallahassee. He asked for a prescription. He went on to tell Ramos Antoninl qu* m*nded him to say "1
magistrate qu" decreed a rsceao to explain the reason for his absence. - In another part of his statements in Court, the President of the House of Representatives said that he did not speak of the incident (he said that he had been induced to abandon the practice of criminal law in the case in which he was involved). He added that he had decided to abandon the practice of the criminal aspect of his profession and that the case he had taken after becoming Speaker had already "gone that way" in which he had already been a contractor. He also said that he was liquidating the cases he had left so as not to devote any more time to the criminal aspect of his profession and that the cases he had been involved in had already been handled after becoming Speaker, and that the cases he had handled had already been handled.
The $18,000,000 __-.000,000 __-;-;- * Informs the Project" De Obra" a Coótearse." Norma rld Governor By Juan Martinet Chape) Editor of El, MUNDO The bond issue" for permanent" public works" will not "be poj a major sum ri" $18,000,000 ri" according to the Government's plans. The $8,000,000,000 issue which was authorized by Act No. 1 of the Extraordinary Legislature on May 15, 1948, shall not be carried into effect. Within the $18,000,000,000 authorized by Act 270, approved the day before yesterday, are included all appropriations for public funds approved by the Legislature during the years 1948 and 1949, The Act provides that the $18,000,000 (1,000,000) borrowing is subject to provisions differing from those in the borrowing laws. This new law does not include, as part of the contract with the bond purchasers, the imposition of a determined tax on the property, to form a special fund for payment of principal and interest on the bonds. The Ltahierna rie Puerto Rico pledges its good faith; but the payment of such bonds, or any other bonds, shall be paid into a fund to be created by another law, in which a tax of 31 hundredths of one percent shall be levied for the payment of bonds and interest of the Pus. blo. ri" Puerto Rico. May Use Surplus
A"), any surplus may be used for whatever is deemed convenient, or the collection of the contribution may be suspended when it has* produced enough, without waiting until the last year in which* -- "v "nz*nz*n all" the bonds. This issuance of 818,000," < 000 "will be ]a: Brtmera sn Puerto Rica that will not "igntfirsrá un* imposition of" contribution *"Mel*L exclusively pin respond to the payment of the capita! I Intereiss. The law for the bond issue* for 88,000,000 approved last year has a clause of the lm" position of contributions, and that -" one" of the reasons why it will not "- make" the issue and the law "will be repealed. Projects * Rea Hear Lo" projects " to be financed by 1a bond issue" of $18,000,. ooo under the law "proved the day before yesterday, are: 1*-Construction* and improvements in highways, bridges and roads, $5,628,000. 2-Construction and facilities of hospitals and Health and Public Welfare Centers, $3,870,000. 3-Construction of school facilities, including funds for vocational schools, laboratories and purchase of land for the University of Puerto Rico, $2,107,000. 4- Public works for government agencies, $832,000. u-Construction and improvements for* airports, improvements to marine ports and racuiaaqcs for maritime transportation, pj,.,&,uOu, b-Construction, improvements and ex. tension for water and rural electric services, *1,060,000. 7-Program for hamlets, low-cost housing developments, $l,228,0UU. The works listed above are not in addition to others for which the Legislative Assembly has approved appropriations. These works are part of the general plan of the Government and the $18,000,000 to be borrowed is for the purpose of providing funds for the" appropriations previously approved by the Legislature as recorded in laws signed by the Governor. All" the projects with earmarks, clones which the Governor has signed and all those which he signs up to "1 day May 15, will be projects eu* yo financlamlent will be secured by the "bond mission for lo* $18,000,000. Fendoa guarantee L* policy that has been dizzy "I governor Muñoz Marín is that of not signing any public works project for euya realization ne exist fund". Every project signed into law has the guarantee of funds to carry it forward. Law 270 of 1949, which authorizes the issuance of $18,000,000,000 bonds, provides that the bonds will mature in 40 years; but they may be redeemed before maturity, at the option of the Treasurer. The bonds will bear interest at a rate of not more than 5 percent. From the general funds of the Treasury, $28,000 is appropriated for the expenses incurred in the issuance and sale of the bonds. According to information, a syndicate of American banks has shown its intention to bid for the purchase of the bonds to be issued. That syndicate has invited Puerto Rico's banks to join it in the negotiation. Some financiers" have expressed the view that the" bond" of! (Cont'd. on p. 18. CoL 8)