THE WEATHER
WEATHER PBOROSTICO8 FOR THE ISLAND, TODAYi Do medie cloudy to imN*d* fltm mu** jy*o ROOM, RM BAN JUAN, AVIWU Tempo* stauea minimum, M nadas i minima, 74 gmdaa Pnalfa hasemétslM at mail level - las 4iM da la UMM pulHdai da miwnla.
NEW YORR. June A (FU) - MU tardo today -- Informasen la" atantantantM tamFeratWM: CWmh", 1 "i Mtarnl, Mi Nuovn Vaste, M. Wtangtan, ta ITI*ft*ll* FB WWHHI * "Fw ' W ™WWWwWWI * WvwwVvTwWWWftTW high anta" AsM UMtai mMwtita"
MAZIO Bl
"U MASAN A
ano m
Matt muí a* Maaui alaaa MHWlP RwwWU) liMHlRi FHi
* IAN JUAN, PUBRTO MC0 - "ABADO 4 0* JUNE DI 1141
NUMBER ISMA FIVE CSNTAVOI
Mayors Call for Greater Autonomy
Amii'taddii Kima Pelklóii m Murton Plantean a liislrurrldn NwMhhtl da Interwnlr In Ewnlaiw Matters WMW Vimi MUHlvIllfflH, "-" tapmaMHi'lrtii fl" I" AímMbHóm H" AieaM"" ti" Musita Ri?g ( vhH""""n il eemiileniih ft" ! HsirupriAH, -" Aw Mirlmi VlIlifMiii and "I a fafhAdnr ""ñnr Luu Muftnn Marin, Al prlm "M I" nodtarnn qu""l 1""> partam "nta fl" Inmiwr'idn I "a die ra uni mi, see nirflNrirlón "n U .admlnlBlBlrifldn do the oseuetat, partlculirmml""n In quo " tai nom bramiéhta" d" miHlrni and construí! don!" i" r "fl "r". A) Governments asked that the Loglslatiira, the "probaclón d" a hy autortaandn to the municipality" to acquire oquipo clean and build roads, on credit, CMtimkn My" Authority Dude some Hampo, loa al esletas come fighting for qua 11 di to the" municipality" a greater ln> tervonefón an loa school affairs. They "want my authority and greater autonomy" in the struggle to "see much" of the "co* lar" problem, such as that related to the "appointment" and construction of schools. The group that visited the Commissioner of Instruction and the Governor forms the Legislative Committee of the Mayors Association and is composed as follows: Felisa Rincón de Gautier (president), of San Juan; Félix Binchas, of Rio Grande; José B. Garceló, of Adjuntas; Luis Rivera, of Dorado; Luis Rivera, of Dorado; José B. Garceló, of Adjuntas; Luis Rivera, of Dorado; José B. Garceló, of Adjuntas; and Luis Rivera, of San Juan: Luis Rivera, of Dorado; Narciso Figueroa, of Altase©; Efrain Suárez, of Villalba; Leandro Cabra■ ne", of Corozal; Francisco Morales, of Naranjito: Natalio Aponte, of Trujillo Alto: Modesto do León, of Humacao; and Félix Alvares, of Gua yema. The mayors were "very satisfied" with their conversations with the Commissioner of Instruction and the Governor, stating that both promised to carefully study their recommendations. One of the mayors reported that the Puerto Rico Mayors Association is alert to attempts to strip school principals of many of their powers and give them to the superintendent of schools. They are interested, for example, in the school district having the power to administer funds in trust, and that this power not be passed on to school superintendents. They also object to the fact that school principals are ignored in the preparation of shifts, in the proposal of teachers, in the acceptance of resignations, and in the appointment of Ucencies. The councils are appointed by the school principals and the mayors. The latter wish to prevent this power from passing to school superintendents. During a recent assembly, the Chaldean Association agreed to seek my authority and greater autonomy in school affairs. x Position of the Directors The school directors also recently raised their grievances during a visit to the Commissioner of Instruction. At a general meeting held a few weeks ago, the Association of School Principals discussed at length the relationship between the Department of Instruction and the municipalities. Among other things, those who visited the Commissioner of Instruction, under the direction of Mr. Rl zai Patán, school principal of Gua yarns and president of the Association, raised the following problems "1 Department: 1-Need for greater ease and speed in the acquisition of school equipment, from the fund of $1,200,000 which the Legislature annually appropriates to the Department of Instruction for these purposes. Payment of Laborers 2-Need for greater ease in the payment of laborers who work on the payroll in the repair of the school building. 3-Need to build the school canteen facilities, "at the lowest possible cost, without failing to meet the requirements of the school canteens," 8o suggesting that those designed by the Government at $11,000, could be made at the rate of *3,000 each. 4- Greater faeilldade in the purchase and payment of groceries and equipment for school commodores, from the funds which the Department of Instruction remits to the municipalities by means of the auporintondontes. / 8-Need for greater administrative coordination between the Department of Instruction and the municipalities in order to achieve more effective cooperation by the mayors and municipal assemblies concerning the school system in each municipality. A
Pnr Juan Martinas Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO To José Forrar's great skills as a teacher, we must now add his exceptional"" knowledge of psychology. e When both he and his wife, upon leaving for the U.S.!
These can get a high school degree under Law No. 170 A *ta"" next July will be offered exams, X AquiHoií, adult" interested" in a diploma n n do "uerto year of school, who will: avail themselves of the benefits of Law 170. Applicants must be no younger than 23 years" and must have been no less than five consecutive years out of the classroom. In accordance with the Act, they may enjoy all the facilities provided by the Department of Instruction's "Negociada do Estudio" Libro" to prepare for these examinations. Rico accept those diplomas for admission to any of your colleges, he quoted that part of the law which says that the diploma awarded "shall be equivalent for all academic and legal purposes. Dtsposiclonoa of the Act The purpose of the Act is to direct and empower the Commissioner of Instruction to issue a diploma legally and financially equivalent to a high school diploma to any adult of not less than 25 years of age, of good moral character, who has been out of school for the past 5 years, and who has passed an examination with a favorable prognosis of success in higher education. z । This is a just measure for many adults who, although they were unable to complete in a timely manner the regular course of secondary education, almost always for economic reasons or for similar reasons, later acquired through their own efforts enough basic knowledge to undertake higher education studies.
Moment" before leaving for the United States, Puerto Rican actor José Forrar (center) rambla Impresione" ron our colleague Juan Mar.
were treated inconsiderately and discourteously by an employee of the Federal Department of Agriculture; and when Don Rafael Ferrer, father of the adorer, spoke, the great artist said: "Do not dlscutas, Dad, that these señorea never recognize 1" reason, and always win".
Instruction Sierra to Favor Will Examine Transferring Corporal Ortis For Adults
Recommends Police Salaries Not Paid By The Cement Plant The Commissioner of Labor, Marin, said that Corporal Americo Ortiz, who serves at the police substation, should be transferred to the Cement Plant. - Ortiz, who serves at the police substation in front of the Cement Company's cement plant, be transferred. The Commissioner also recommended that the practice of having the Development Company pay for the services of the agents stationed at that substation be discontinued, and that their obligations and duties be separated from the administrative functions of Porto Rico Cement. The" recommendations are contained in the Report that he rendered to the Governor, after having conducted an Investigation on the controversy that existed between the workers of the cement factory, the Development Company and Agent Ortlz. The Commissioner was appointed by the Union de Canteros, Operadores y Demás Empleados de la Industria del Cemento to investigate the controversy, which threatened to degenerate into a strike movement. The controversy arose when the workers demanded that Corporal Ortiz be transferred from the substation. The workers complained about Corporal Ortiz's actions and filed complaints with the police headquarters. Corporal Ortiz was exonerated of the charges. The Union then demanded that the Porto Rico Cement and the Compañía de Fomento proceed to arrange for the transfer of the agent. Both companies refused, on the grounds that the case had been heard by the police headquarters, and the agent was exonerated. (Cont. on page 18, Col. 6).
tinea Chanel (right), accompanied by Rafael Forrar Otero, father of the brilliant artist (Photo EL MUNDO).
D"""pués de leer leí manifeetacione" que acere" del incidente hace el jefe "n Puerto Rico, del Negociado d# Entomología y Cuarentena de Plantas, del Gobierno Federal, señor William T. Owrey, tengo qu"" reconocer qu" José Ferrer, a pe""r de sus (Cont. en I" página 18, Col. 1)
Géigel Orders Release of Defendant
Investigan Si Arresto Fué Legal.-* Detenida En Parada de Guaguas By M. NIEVES RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO; Mió. ñora! Iimwemo Vicente UÓii"! Polanco, yesterday was released. under the custody of attorney Tomé" Aeost* Ramia. Mrs. Carmen Marta Rivera Méndez, euyo arre" to is under investigation by the Department of Justice. With the apparent intention of settling the matter once and for all, Carmen Mari" has attempted to make admissions of guilt on two different occasions, refusing to do so. when she responded to interrogation by declaring that she had not committed the crime with which she was charged, Case Hysteria Carmen Marta Rivera Mendez was arrested at ten o'clock at night on May 30, while waiting for a bus, according to her statement, on Comercio Street in San Juan, near the Post Office building. arrest two members riel squadron against the vice, qbe commanded "t sergeant Luis V, Costas, and that to that hour hadan the round for the capital, in a yip, In the mlsm" raid in that they arrested Carmen Maria, lo" agents of the ordnn apprehended Edna Rosa Torre" Cemacho. including both muleras in the mlima denunciation, under Imputation of alteration of the peace. Faced with the allegation that she was arrested illegally, having been mistaken for a woman of angry life, the Attorney General, Vicente GéigeJ Polanco, ordered an" investigation of the facts to make the corresponding determination of responsibilities. (Continued on page 20. Col. 4) Arrival of 44 Chinese* Form Guirigay At Airport By S. GALVEZMATURANA Editor of EL MUNDO The arrival of forty-four Chinese citizens at the airport of La Granda, yesterday, caused several incidents yesterday, as they were waiting for their arrival at 4:40 am. M.- awaited the arrival of the Constellation from New York. Upon arrival of the plane corresponding to flight 223 of the Pan American World Airway, coming from Miami, a group of children whose ages fluctuated between one and ten years, another group of youngsters, about 20 years old and the older ones, called the family members of the group, "IGAJES DEL OFICIO", began to get off the plane, apparently excited! The poripeciae that a photographer or a poriodiota often has to suffer in order to obtain information reached yesterday (Cont, on page 18, Col, I).
Mrs.! '
Pal Inohleiile Forrar sHmammmsmmonmammnmimmmmmmmmmpmi Talgos PrMNmdabi íp Reaffirm vi I import A Federal grlcullura Had Improper Conduct.
Seized I 70 QuInUlei keheenPolvo
They did cnii She Maulwado. Cheese Funrlnnarlo dr Aahid KrHA Obhwr Addenda Dél Almhlr CabrmiM PW Ul" MERNANDW A<tUNO Redact do RL MUNDO ttapaclmes ta health of Ron Juan amhMtgawn al di" vfiVn "m da le" cnttiania" 70 quíntale" do lacho an powder daociemad*. a vary c "mi impnrladora" d" ama produced that the ulllléon par" the pi appearance da minlotttdó and of au""a meet so al "ga, ran the Lay M, that tegula au usa, The Commissioner d" Health, flaciar Juan A. Pana, a rah d" the complaint hacha pm* ol Mayor of CacamaU señar Leandro Cobran"", "n ol a "nllda de qu" a" vl "n" adulterating l "ch" fr""ra d" cow can 1 "ch""n palvn skimmed, nttanó jiña Investigación aohr" la situación d "l d "l usa d" la lech""n pslva desflemada utilizado en San Juan, El Jefe de la Sección de Ahaato d" Lech" del D "p*rlam "nta d" Sa lud, a "ftar Jorg" M "jia Mattel, salló ayar para Corozal, in order to obtain the "vld "nria rorrosnondienf" of the Cahranes oetar, on the "l use of skim milk powder for the adulteration of fresh cow's milk, Inspectors of the Santurc Health Office seized 70 quintals of skimmed milk powder from several importers in San Juan. According to the reports, these importers do not have the corresponding license, in accordance with Law 38 of April 25, 1929. The aforementioned law prescribes that any natural or juridical person who wishes to introduce powdered milk into Puerto Ríen. In such application he/she shall state his/her name, profession and place of residence; the purpose for which he/she intends to use the powdered milk he/she intends to introduce; the origin of the same with an expression of the manufacturing plant and the site and place where he/she will introduce the powdered milk; the place where he/she intends to use the powdered milk. (Cont. on page 18, Col. 7) Mayor Presides Meeting in Municipality Yesterday a meeting was held in the Assembly Hall of the Board of Commissioners, with the participation of health inspeo tors, ward commissioners and the cleaning personnel of the Municipality, for the purpose of coordinating the cleaning work. The meeting, which was chaired by the Administrator of the Capital, Mrs. Felisa Rincón ta Gautier, was well attended. Mr. Osvaldo Rivera, Sanitation Officer of the Santurce Sanitation Office, took the floor to guide the different works. In this meeting, health inspectors, public cleaning employees and neighborhood commissioners met. Each commissioner was introduced to the health inspector who will develop the cleanliness education campaign in his area. A plan was outlined for everyone to work in coordination. It was agreed at the meeting to organize courses on the work to be done by street sweepers, cleaning drivers and supervisors. The courses will start soon. The possibility of a general clean-up campaign was also discussed, for which the cooperation of the public and the various sectors will be sought.
While waiting in line at the Pan American Airways ticket counter in Is- \ \ la Grande for the passport examination, Chinese citizens wore a wide variety of expressions on their faces. In the group traveled M manoroa children of fifteen aloe. The identification of the Chinese produced moments of hilarity,
anta the difficulties encountered by the F.A.A. employee in pronouncing his name". In the photograph at left, Soon Young holds in her arms her five-year-old nephew Frederick Young Winstoa, born in England during the U.S. war. (Photograph* by EL MUNDO)
Long Raises His Problem With the President
üiiéjMin tie Train Heclhldo on Island Will Say Housing Plan De|wndrr4 rn rl Fiiturn" That Government (himpla Pa" William 4. WASHiNflTHNi liinló 1 norial par" EL MUNDO" - L. n, Lnng, HtMtruclar of the prny "rtn of housing" do Ruarlo New, "tuitive ayar a" rnnhronela "iib rnamsal" nlaoantera and satisfacía* ría" inn the pieaitaiil" Truman, "n relation ran to the piahlema do vivían* da" in Puerta Rirn, said there is prapla Lnng to THE WORLD. Long's" future plans in Puerta nica will depend, na chatant", "d" qu" the Onhlerna Insular fulfills its" qompromlRO" and raaper" with him in au program par" the construction of thirty-five thousand units of low-income housing to Julleres, which he submitted "I gohernaor Muñoz Marín. Declining to give details" of his con* ferend*" with the President, Long said qu" ''much will be qu" resuLt at a later date, of es* con* ferend*" ron the President". He said that he is committed to financing the construction of five thousand additional "Puerto Nuevo-type" homes, and another thirty thousand units in all the towns on the island, to replace the shacks in the slums. $100,000 Remanales in Fagoa "If they don't give me a tax exemption, I won't pursue the projects," Long said. He added that he has sustained a weekly wage payment of $100,000 for 24 months of work, although he has been operating on the island for nearly three years. He explained that the loss of time was due to bad weather conditions. His plan of thirty thousand units includes, he said, houses for sale, with payment" ranging from eight dollars to $17.50 per month. He said he had not received the cooperation he was offered, and added that he had had to resort to the court to have the garbage collected in Puerto Nuevo. He said the bureau had rejected a request from him to build a 2,600-unit apartment hotel in San Juan because, according to Tourism, it was "not within the radius of the program" to accommodate tourists. Wants Equal Treatment He said that if the HUton and Condado are granted tax exemption, he should deserve it too, for his proposed hotel. He said he had announced the same apartment hotel project for Atlanta and Georgia, and that he had received 1,789 apartment applications in the last week. ■- Long' is negotiating a program of 2,700 low-rent homes to consttuirts in Atlanta, he said. He intimated that he had told the President of his housing construction problems in Puerto Rieo, and that he proposed to extend his activities on a large scale to Latin America. "But I will leave Puerto Rico for good if things are not fixed as they should be," he said. The Piftero-sponsored mass housing construction program in Puerto Rico was originated by former Governor Jesus T. Piftero. Piftero. Piftero was mainly involved in the Puerto Nuevo project, and made available to the Long firm all the facilities of the government. After Governor Piftero left office, some difficulties began for the Long firm in Puerto Nuevo. However, it is known that the Banco de Fo- < mentó Gubernamental supported the project and that the Planning Board offered technical assistance. j
Dr. Fernós Creé
Independence Is Not the Solution
Hfritan Allegation Dr Marrnntonlo PnftoM na Manlangaa RplacínnMi Snhra Rabí IgiiNldNfl rn CludRdanÍA Fu" JAMEN V CUNNINflMAM. WASHINGTON, A. (FU) - The Militant uniilsihn "rtn ita ?UM" ta rich in Washington, dwiae An" tanta Mnó* hern, aituvn dé leuif" do do yesterday ron the renrewntantf Vil" Marrantanm, d" New York, réti P "*ta that# Puerto Rico necealta urgmtamanta fédér"! aid for edurartan. But i achiró |"s ilagtrionss dg Mavcartonta al ofer t" d" qu # i" i n . dependence resolverla ta" probiR" mas da Puerto Rico, _ . "Un* constitution of its own adoption, and. a complete" government manta demoerétleo within the "Si" tem* economic and political da lo" United" States, is what" Puerto Rico needs" said Firnó". "It is a good practice of gobler. no." amagó "1 leader Popular Domo* crát'co, "to believe and develop a pattern da relations, capable da ostallecer Equality in society, with >a nahid* consideration to the" special clrouns*anclas"" da Puerta Rico." Marcantonio Testified Testifying before a Subcommittee on ' Education d* i" Cámara da Repro" ; sentante* yesterday miimo, al represen" Marcantonio made an appeal for federal aid for education in the territories, "on exactly the same basis" as the states. But Marcantonio accompanied his ¡ request with denunciations, "n térml- , nos tuerta", of ! current poli- i tical status . 4 * Puerta Rico. He alleged that the Federal Government treats Puerto Ricans as "second-class citizens," Under the Senate bill currently pending consideration by the House Committee, the states of Puerto Rico are "second-class citizens. House Committee, the states would share a 97 percent share of a $300,000,000. allocation according to the population-need formula. Puerta Rico, Hawaii, Guam, Samos. Alaska, the" Virgin Islands and the Canal Eon" would split o! remaining 3 percent. Because of its large population. Puerto Rico would get d" sel" to new million dollar-, Marchitarlo argued that "it is me" ridic'anamente evident" that this e" a fóimula especia! "I explicitly aimed at discriminating against" I tra'' the territories". Aid - Terrltorloe "The states would receive aid according to their relative needs as determined by their income", -d'.lo éL- --and the territories", according to the rebellion between the population and the national population. "If the same formula were applied to the territories Equal to the States. Puerto Rico would then receive between $24 million and $27 million in federal aid for education," he added. Marcantonio contended that this means "discriminating against the children of Fuerte Rico, allocating funds in accordance with the political status of the island, instead of through a *detailing of the needs of the children. The aid project, therefore, according to Marcantonio, violates the United States" 1 " " United Nations" " treaties, to the effect that the interests" of the inhabitants" 1 sort out the piineipaltalmo" in the administration of the Territories."" 1 ' We can give a great pa "o." - | said. - "I believe that only this 'ndepondency could solve the basic difficulties of the island." I hornos supported I Marcantonio's testimony before the Subcommittee, in I favor of federal aid for education. I ditiendn that the statistics* I provided by Marcantonio were the I mUma a that he (Femó") had already I -um'rusirado to the Committee. And esti'vo counted in quo "no do- I hah "r discriminated against any I territory" American Citizens "Le" American citizens"." di- I jo. "lo,* American" citizen" with I Equal attire wherever I e "tén." ■ ' I I And ta nation, he continued, I do,o izconocor that while" any" I want oato pata parto live on do" I proaldu au" condicione" will affect" I to all ti pal"." But Femó" vigorously "e 1 manifested in disagreement with laa 1 asoveraciono" do Marcantonio *1. I affects of quo "the liquidation of the" I political and economic relations"; I i* adequate solution for the Island's I proHoinse." - I "In isolation." added Fe" I nós. "Puerto Rico will not be able to afrons I tar sns problems. 'On the o! contrary, I croo that the so- I ladino lution in perfecciona "ion- I to do a pattern of relaciono" between I the tala and #1 Continent in order I that the people of Puerto Rico pus" I I da elvü under a con "tituclon of I its own adoption, and organize a I Goviorr.o sohrw a complete baso- 1 democratic mount, and maintain I (Cont. on page 18, Col.8) ?|
■ ■ . I ■ Ov W COMMISSIONER FERNOS ■su"' .* Jury To Be Indicted In Humacao Case Justo Figueroa Admitted He Voted For Acquittal Because He Had Commitment A judge in the Humacao District Court voted to acquit a defendant and later admitted that he did so because "he had a commitment to acquit the defendant." The Attorney General instructed the FUc-il to file a complaint against the aforementioned juror, as soon as possible The following are the statements authorized yesterday by the Department of Justice in connection with this case "The Prosecutor General instructed the Fuar(o Rico, Vicente Géigal Potanóo to file a complaint against the aforementioned juror. Modesto Velázquez Flores, Humacao District Attorney, to file * 1* as soon as possible a complaint against Mr. José Figueroa, for his actions as a member of the jury that intervened in the case of El Puebib vs. Amador Santa, for the crime of extortion. Committed Acquitted Acquitted ' , "After the trial was held i con'ra Amador Santo", there was ñeca- i sldad to dissolve the Jury, for not having reached an agreement after long deliberations. "The attitude of the juror Ju "to Figueroa during the deliberations was denounced, and the Department of Justice carried out an investigation of the case, and it turned out that Figueroa had ac- . tioned an inesponsible attitude, contrary to the duty he had assumed, by forming part of the jury that was to judge the accused in the extortion case. ("During the" deliberations, Mr. Figueroa kept away from the rest of the members of the Jury, the time 1' smoking 1 and k "r newspapers, "without participating or ' listening to the analysis of the evidence ' carried out by the other 1 members" of the Jury", admitting fl- ' nairnen.'e that he was committed to" acquit the defendant. The Department of Justle,a "e e dispon" to indict any juror । acting under slmlla- r res circumstances, * based on the jurisprudence of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico ' j in the case of Bigio v. Corte, 46 . D. p. R 448 and El'Puebtn de Puer- } (Continued at p. 16 Col. 6) .