THE N®ND@ f|/■ DIARIO MARAÑA
weather noxosneos pama LA ISLA, TODAY: Medium cloudy, with isolated showers, becoming generally cloudy, with downpour" dio* persoa and a few thunderstorms duran** the night. IN SAN "JUAN, YESTERDAY: - Maximum temperature, M degrees: minlma. U degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 1"" 4:SW of the ter". of. 79.M pnlgadan of mercury.
NURVA YOU, aapttaabN 88.(FU). - In 1* t "rd" 4* there is ae to report in the* alruteatea temporaturaa: New Verb, M; Chicago, 88; Wáahlnrtan. ttl Miami. M. Predictions for* tomorrow at Nine York and elud*dm veeina": ooleade, and tamo" per 1* tarda. Highest temperature, "orea of 78. ylenro" fréseos of the Oeoto.
DAILY MORNING
MORNING
Ro XXX ' SAN HJAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 1, 1949
NUMBER 13801
FIVE CENTS
Tokyo Rota Appeal" the Guilty Verdict.
-j ;/ *■ ®u< ¿ : - i ; 'W'-yS ■*-'-* , * SL - -y ' ; I L : emotion nlguna in her roofro, eeAnra Iva Toguri D'A/ii- ¡ ■UjMDsa of Tokyo), left hi" hi "wing of the Federal Court on the night rt ' ' ' I*** September, accompanied by waterman Herbert R. Cole, to hear the jury, after two days of deliberations, explain to the jury that he was unable to reach the verdict. The jury continued for two more days and finally brought in a verdict of guilty of having betrayed his country during the World War II (Amelada Press Photo).
The new case of Tuerto Nuevo Ponce Cement is expected to be decided on Monday.
Ademág Extends To Other Neighborhoods. - Demands to Alvarez In "u meeting of marte? 27 <L "eptiambre, the Committee of Protegía against Isa contributions and h falta ta da Adequate" public services, in the urlrffijaciones of Copina Heights and Vtfrrtp Nuevo, aettrdó ¡lo Wgujmfer Interview with Mayor áu taste P. Alvarez, da Rio Piedra.', to require him to establish the following within a reasonable period of time" wrvlcloan public cleanliness: first aid room or public health unit. a police station in Puerto Nuevo * another one in JCaparra Heithis; v adequate public schooling. * The Cbmlté also agreed to meet with the representative to the Chamber of Deputies. Rubén Gaztanib'de Atrillaba. to request that he manage the Establishment in pleura rnzunable, ale the same services requested To the Mayor Alvar eg; tesrualaa Public" | They will also have to meet with the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano ViHaronga, to requerirlé that he establishes school" public in said urbanizations. To the President of the Public Utilities Commission, they will request the construction of a park and the preservation of the public order, and to the President of the Farnue" and Recreation Commission, the construction of a park" and the preservation of the public order, to Mr. Rafaej Ramos, the Commissioner of Education of Te Uros, xa JL B" rw to build and < r "r* | Ütm in the urbanizations ! Miadas. Fight .* - ■ - . i r Rabilantes of this" new * ||as have been fighting - long ago to see indis "les public services. You will recall that a meeting was held in Puerto Nuevo a few years ago, and several demands were made to the corresponding authorities. - It should be noted that Mayor Alvarez, > Piedras, maintains that Puerto Nuevo has not been officially approved by the Long j ruction, which is partly responsible for the current lack of telephone service, public lighting, adequate transportation services and adequate police oversight. We know that this is not the first time that these problems have been brought to the attention of the appropriate authorities, and that, so far, nothing practical has been done to remedy the situation. This situation, it was reported, has principally affected Puerto Rico.
Island Ended Late Yesterday, as JNRT, Unión Obrera Po" Luis Sánchec Cappa Editor of EL MUNDO At half past four o'clock yesterday afternoon, the hearing concluded in the Federal Court, before Acting Judge Luis Ncgrftn Fernández, retacionsu" non the petition for injunction. Incoad" par i® Junta Nacional de R*lat ions del Trabajo contra Ja Unión d* Trabajadores, da Ja Industria del Cemento de Ponce y su preside" na, "oñor Luis Olmo. The petition, the first in Puerto Rico under the Taf (Hartley Act against a labor organization, seeks to restrain the Union, its president and its agents from continuing and furthering the strike of the Ponce Cement workers. * The Court decreed the termination of the session without issuing its ruling, the case of the JNRT and that of Ja Union being submitted. The Court will resume 1" session on Monday, January 1, 2010. "When Judge Negron Fernandez is expected to render his decision. On Monday will also be heard the ! rrder issued by the magistrate! oontr" a striking worker and secretary of records of the Union, to appear to show cause why he should not be convicted of contempt of Court. The worker cL 1 "do "*> Rama Antonio Lanauze, and íuh requested by the Court to appear at the hearing of the In.'tincllon and produce the minutes of the Union's assmhléa dr celehrai Ca the di" 10 d" August, in which I ao \otó in favor of the strike. However, when called to testify, he did not produce any minutes, and alleged that they were not taken or given to him. Clerk Felix Rodriguez Plata, secretary of the Union, testified anonymously that he had taken the minutes of the meeting and had delivered them to Recording Secretary Lanauze. \ The injunction hearing ended without the Union's and Olmo's defense counsel, attorney Santiago de la Fuente, making an analysis of his evidence or submitting any arguments, In turn, attorney Samuel Roes, who, assisted by attorney Lewis Moore, represented the NLRB, analyzed the proof and evidence submitted by them, argued that the same justified the issuance of the injunction order, clarifying that the motives for requesting the order had been proven. L" presentation of the' case of the Un|6n and its president, Mr. Luis Olmo, by "i licenciado De la FuenCont. at pg. 13 col. 1)
- J .--■■-- . _- -- ■ . __ - 25,000 U.S. Steelworkers go on Strike ijD Steel Workers.
AHsBURGH. pensilvanla. september 30. (FU)- Twenty-five thousand shoulders left their" tra9ko" in My Nation's steel mills today ,1the vanguard of half a million my who are to go on strike at midnight after three and a half years of pa" tn ,a ln * thutna. i 'While the" big furnaces were cooling down, Government conciliators were struggling to bring about an enLtsmdtdo between the steel industry FF luíraros united workers. A spokesman for the united workers at ClevaíWid accused the Industry of going cues|ta "low" by allowing 1" strike. The assistant chief of mediation, Federal
- ral William Margoltz. It appears that the strike in the steel industry has begun," he told reporters, "For the first time since January and February of last year. 1" Nation is en- , facing " a stoppage in the basic Indústria that provides material for , lo" automobiles, lo" skyscrapers, ma. > । quinarlas and thousands of eseni cial products -e| 40 percent of North America's heavy pro- . i ducts and . consumer products. I ¡ Margolis from the room where ha. -1 (Continued on p. lá Col. 81 Fí l " - R
By DovW 4. too, ard SAN FRANCISCO, Cali ornia, Sept. 30, (Pl>r- The eftora Iva ¡ Toguri D'A||ulnc planned i today to fight the veoHBct of guilt ibllldad of treason, cm "o I* Tokyo Rota that ■ radiodifundíi mmsajee to' troops I war. His lawyer|K>? iMMOf- Collins, said he would apePy to the Court of! i Circuit <W ¿pteetaeeel for a new trial. Tjjo qu® H will try to get it out under Rama. l IF his moiHon fpc""a, Collins will plan- 1 will plan a "gelaion dlregta. alleging that the DuTer a F Miehsel J. i Roche instructed / Improperly if I Jury, jf. lAmbiJo ep other technique," ! that e|mwWWen "ammission of the evi- [ denelA ■, 3 * "Nn guedo "fmptánderlo, I can't cdaMMMCtaPA-- said betweendiente" cea tos "entrecortada la acusaáa'de Años >de edad y natural dqLos Anales, when the jury of seB hombrts and jala women preveredicto" after four dlMMN.tfl iMFlonea, in the longest pair trial regiatrado in State*Unkm" The Jury ! encentró guilty in a <- the oc o eaisaclonea of tralRq<me to ■ accused that re "res* - the caríe eÉ Thursday S of October, the sentence. Minimum do áAAoe L< sentejéla minimum is clncn priáón olma $10,iY)0 fine and 1a stuyancialnmaxlma is the penalty , of mii "r "Wo Untante, the Government has not denytdfdtwla death penalty and it is believed liprobahle for the court to impose it. ' i Ei jury" 1" found not guilty of the five prinrifos ctrgos, of the eight counts of treason. But he found her guilty of the sixth, charging her with broadcasting the loss of a Navy ship in the Navy in the United States.
Veterans' Certificates Declared Null and Void Veterans' Certificates Required to Indicate Nature of Course Suspend Payment The Veterans Administration said that all supplemental certificates indicating the name of the course the veteran must take have been declared null and void. Dr. Jaime Sorra Chavarry made the announcement adding that the Veterans Administration will not pay neither the veteran nor the Institution for the admission of veterans through the use of supplementary certificates that do not indicate the name of the authorized course. The announcement adds that veterans who possess a supplementary certificate of eligibility that does not indicate the name of the course to be taken, must immediately return it to the Veterans Administration, in order to request a new one. Dr. Serra Chavarry said that it is imperative when returning a supplemental certificate of eligibility which does not indicate the course to be taken, the veteran must inform the name of the course he wishes to take, the name and address of the school in which he wishes to take it, and submit justifications showing that he will take the new course in connection with his employment or occupation. Dr. Serra Chavarry emphasized that supplementary certificates of eligibility, which do not indicate the course to be taken, shall not be accepted by the Institutions as authorization for veteran to study under the federal legislation. | It further stated that supplemental certificates of eligibility which have been issued indicating the course authorized shall be valid only until the day before the first day of November, 1949. Finally, the Veterans Administration stated that both veterans and the directors of (Continued on p. 14 Col. 4)
Boston to A! Game Over Lo§ Yankees I
Beat Senators. Athletics Won ' í'ardenalen Down r 1 Game Dodgers, Con! New York Yankees suffered another blow to their championship hopes today, losing to the Philadelphia Athletics, 4-1, dropping to within one game of the Boston Red Sox in the American League lead, with the final two games of the season to be played tomorrow (today) between the two teams at Yankee Stadium. In the National League, St. Louis came within one game of the Dodger", if losing to Chicago, 1 6 V । Boston, which rataha tied with the" Yankee" by drawing the" games ¡da today, "plunged to the lead by vanear i A Wáshlngton. As a result, if bad weather does not prevent the Red and Yankee from holding In" the" pending" game, there will be no tie at the end of the" American League race on Monday. At the start of tomorrow's vital two-game series, which would have to be swept by the Yankees. >As tomorrow's vital two-game series begins, which would have to be swept by the Yankees to go to the World Series, the day will be especially dedicated to Joa DIMszglo, the shining star of the Jiaoynrquino team. Dink Fowler, who was sent in to pitch by interim pilot Earle Mack of the Athletics when Connie Mark suffered an indisposition or lntestina1 that forced him to leave for Philadelphia, started in place of the loyalist Phll Marchlldon, who had originally been selected. Earle Mack decided to make the change after numerous messages to that effect. The burly Fowler, who suffers from chronic arthritis, got off to a bad start when the Yankees went ahead by a run in the first on a grounder to Cliff Maple and a double by Bobby Brown between right and center field. Fowler was nearly knocked off the mound in the second inning when he was again out on the mound by a sensational catch from keeper Elmer Vale on a long line drive by Phll Rtasuto with two on board that he won to avoid a home run and eventually saved his game. Because "from then on he only allowed two hits to the Yankees. The Athletics began to set their sights in the second inning, when Sam Chapman tied the score with his 24th home run of the season into the left field bleachers on a 3-2 count off Ed Lopat. Then, in the next inning, they clinched the game. Buddy Rosar led off with a single and Fowler, trying to sacrifice- ¡ se, forced him at second. Eddie Joost fired another swing, sending Fowler all the way to the anteroom, and then Ferris Faln-also on a 3-t count- ripped a homer into the right field bleachers, his 3rd of the season and his second for the Yankees, the first of which also gave the Athletics a bases-loaded victory over Joe Page on Connie Mack Day at Yankee Stadium. Scoring per inninga: Flladelfia *13 <HM 000- 4-4U " New York 100 000 000 000-t-4-0 F*wler (1!5"-11) and Rosar; Lopat, Porterfield (3), Sanford (RL Hood (8) and Berra. .Tontons: Chapmsn ("u 24th) and Fain (his 3rd), Beaton Up a Game í WASHINGTON, Sept. 30.-PU) - Boston Red Sox moved back into the league lead by a game today by beating the Senators eleven to 1 eight when MasI terson. relieving Kramer in Ha ¡.(Conlinila on/Ja page 13, Col. 3) I
Police Officer Punished After Accusation of Perjury He Was Stripped in Public of Weapons.
1 J The guard Jacinto Caldero, who was accused of perjury by the District Court of San Juan, Luis R. Polo, during the* ( process followed against Arcadio । Mojica Sosa for the alleged purchase of 28 tickets of the Loterfa was yesterday stripped "fie sift armasgen si cusrtel de la Polickl de Rio Piedras. Police Colonel Salvador T. Roig yesterday ordered Captain Carmelo Corres, Assistant Inspector General, to visit the District Juta Luis R. Polo, and once he obtained the information, he ordered him to visit the Police Department. Polo, and once he obtained from him an exact version of what happened in the courtroom, in relation to the policeman Caldero, to go to Rio Piedras and in the presence of members of the Uniformed, to proceed to strip Caldero of his weapons, suspending him from his job and salary, and to charge him with the corresponding charges before the Police Commission. k - -- .M3
I Yesterday, Police Assistant and Assistant Chief Guillermo Arroyo informed EL MUN- * DO that the orders of the Chief of the Uniformed had been carried out. Cuo dt Mojíes Arcadio Mojica Sosa, trader of Río Piedra" who was prosecuted the day before yesterday in the District Court of San Juan, alleging that he had bought 28 lottery tickets that had been stolen if Mr. José Pabón. continued yesterday in provisional freedom when the ' judge Luis R. Polo had to dissolve the jury that was hearing the case. The jury was deliberating until late Thursday night, without being able to reach a verdict. The case against Mnjic" Sosa led to "a trial । for assault against "the policeman.
Truman Says Democrats Must Win
Proposes Keeping Congress Together Would Be Hanta To Pass 'Fair Deal' Plan 'Pending' By Merriman SMITH ¡ KANSAS CITY. Missouri, Sept. 30 (PU)- President Truman intends to keep Congress in session until the House and Senate pass the bulk of his "Fair Deal" program. The Chief Executive made his position clear last night when he addressed a monumental Democratic demonstration, saying that his party will prevail in the 1932 presidential election. President Truman made lk" I interior remarks in the course of a luncheon to WHUam Boyle, new chairman of the National Democratic Committee. More than three thousand citizens of Kansas City paid $13 to dine with the President, and with all members of his Cabinet. The general public numbered over 13,000. Mr. Truman spoke about his "Fair Deal" program and how it will work to promote the "general welfare". The program has not been very well received in Congress. ' "I have told the Congress and the" Hderea in Congress," he said, "that we will fight for the program, even if it takes "all summer and winter, and all next summer." These remarks by the President provoked loud applause among the diners. "Let's get to work," he said. "If we do, we'll win with this program in 1950, and we'll win- ■ moa with it in 1952, too." 'He also said he believes the Nation needs a "free Press". The Chief Executive aa manlfe"'(Conllnued on P. 14- Col. 5) C.G.T Says Exhte Unity pn Fila* Executive Committee Demands That Members Fulfill Their Obligations The Executive Committee of the CGT Ine.' authorized a" declare it yesterday, nes affirming that "no differences of Indole exist among its members as the Press of the country has pretended to give the Impression." It asserts, however, that "analyzing all the circumstances" that led to the "last information" of "the Press of the country", the Executive Committee has agreed to demand from each member the fulfillment of "their" statutory obligations". The note to that effect was signed by Messrs. Tomás Méndez Mejla, Pedro Vega Berrios and Armandó Rivero. president, general secretary and executive vice-president of the union, and reads as follows: Official Note: "The Executive Committee of the CGT, Ine, wishes to inform the public opinion of Puerto Rico and the affiliated unions, that there is no difference" of any kind between the members" of this Executive Committee, as the Prenia del pals has tried to give the impression. It is also false, the propaganda that the CGT and the Sugar Union are in the process of distanclamlento. The CGT and the Sindica. ♦ o Azucarero are one and the same entl v i dad and therefore there can be no division whatsoever. "The Executive Committee of the CGT j (Continued on Pg. 14-Col. 2) |
Insular policeman farinta Caldero accompanied by m" drowned, Lic. Ruhr tu GutamHde *AxrHtagA The nolicíh Caldero was amwadn of nerjux. "X"! .luce Luí" Wfgl"' Wiwmet da 1* Police, señar [Of -
Governor Accepts Bird's Resignation In Tourism Jurita
Incidents On Campus : University Group of Students Booed the Guard Who Dispersed Them Numerous students" of the University of Puerto Rico booed the university guard yesterday morning and apparently shouted at the Assistant Dean of Students, Mr. Enrique Vllella, when the authorities tried to disperse them while they were holding a "Friday Social" near the Tower. The incident occurred around a quarter to ten in the morning, when numerous students of those who meet at the site known as El Palito, which is the site of sports discussions, took possession of the "ltlo called ' Broadway, displacing other students who remain on Broadway when they do not have classes. The reader who does not know the university life nctuql I could never know the preferences that exist among certain students for places where they hold their meetings during the" hours that there are no classes. These places are always invaded by students who stay there during free periods. Of these places there are three that "e distinguished by the very crowded. They are Harlem, located in the" surroundings of the Theater of the University, where the" colored students meet; El Palito, located in the university quadrangle, and. where there is a flamboyant tree, under which the sportsmen meet, who discuss the" sports news of the day; and Broadway that a" considered the most distinguished, where groups of wealthy students meet. It was a VI>rnM Soelal One of the students of Broadway, assiduous concurring to the site of reference, manifested that it was a visit of social character that the students of El Palito had made to Broadway. The fact is that about forty students sat in two rows on the floor of the Broadway corridor and began to whistle at every living being passing by. The Broadway "students" disappeared as if by enchantment. A tremendous uproar broke out. 1 to the point that the place was invaded by about two hundred students who took up positions at each end of the corridor. A university guard arrived to impose order, but was turned away. He went to look for reinforcements and the reinforcements were also shot down. When Mr. Enrique Vllella, assistant to the Dean of Students, arrived to impose order, some whistles were heard, although less accentuated. Nervous and active at the same time, Mr. Vllella managed to clear the atmosphere, being favored by the ten o'clock bell, which called those students to class. No Investigation Asked if the matter would be investigated, Mr. Vllella said that there would be no investigation. He also said that he did not interpret that he had been whistled at, since it could have been the whistling at the students who were passing by, and not at him. Likewise, Mr. Vlleíla said he does not - believe that there is any conflict between the students of El Palito and those of Broadway; that if there could have been । a slight tension. "Lo qt??? pasa", I, (Cont. on )a page 13, Col. 4).
[ Appointed - in Tejen i' CART.OB VRLEZ i Dr. Carlos Velez Will Lead Plan On Ja BCG i i i Will Conduct an Ealudium ¡ Among the Híspana Population in San Antonio , ... By BENJAMIN SANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO A Puerto Rican physician-technologist, Dr. Carlos Velez, 27, has been appointed Director of the Public Health Education Program in San Antonio, Texas. The "Periódico de Tejas recibido" in San Juan, highlights the work of our compatriot. Dr. Velez has been entrusted, in the first instance, with the "upervlalon of a vast project aimed at reducing tuberculosis mortality in the Spanish-speaking population. From the study made by "an expert, imported from Puerto Rico", according to ¡ 1" called a newspaper, it will be determined the convenience of applying the BCG vaccine in that sector. It is believed that more than half of the population in San Antonio is Spanish-speaking. One-third are Mexican, and the remainder are Spanish, Cuban, Puerto Rican and South American. Mortality Reduction The San Antonio Express newspaper, of this Texas city, published at the top of its front page and in three columns, in its edition of September 26 last, a photograph of Dr. Velez, talking to a Health official, In this photograph appears our compatriot showing on a map, to Dr. E, G. Smeltzer, a sector of the city in which he is carrying out an intense work to reduce mortality from tuber- : cosis. Dr. Smeltzer is President of the Bexar County Anti-Tuberculosis Association. The associate Pre- 1 sident is Dr. M. ¡ Donaldson, Jr. The San Antonio Express reports that the program will be sponsored and carried out by the aforementioned anti-tuberculosis aao- ! elation, "in an effort to reduce the high Incidence of mortality, from tubercle-1 sia, in San Antonio." Velez is a native of Puerto Rico and a graduate of the Polytechnic Institute of San-Germany, where he continued his studies at Columbia University, New York, where he majored in science and public health. Dr. Velez, who is 27 years old, was born in Yau- | co, where he attended elementary school. His parents are Carmelo Vélez (deceased) and María Irizarry, of Sabana Grande. He studied at the San Germán High School and played at Poly, where he taught Biology; one of his brothers, Dr. Ismael Vélez, is a professor of Botany there, and another, Raúl, is an official of the Authority of Fluvial Sources. In a letter he writes to his brother Raul, Carlos recounts his impressions of life in San Antonio. * (Continued on Page 14-Col. 5)
The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Francisco Collazo, denies that he has informed that the Department will investigate the alleged actions of a teacher from Toa Al. ta, who is accused of having made propaganda against the BCG vaccination. Mr. Collazo hastened to s ha. I cer the referred clarification, due to the fact that Dr. Gilberto Concepción de Gracia, president of the PIP, snU> I quoted one of the apunto,
Gus Laiíandé Is Appointed President Approves Regulations' On Casinos. - Bird Wanted to Retire Aysr-sl Governor accepted Ja f|. nunela of Mr. Esteban A. BM and appointed Mr. J. Güs Lalland". for "u "tit lirio romo presidenta d" 1" Junta Cnnuiltlv" d*l Turismo.' The gentleman is presently one of the members of that Board. The Tourism Advisory Board, upon learning that the Governor accepted the resignation tendered by its chairman, Mr. Bird, issued to the press an official statement expressing the work done and Mr. Bird's desire to retire from office. i The Tourism Advisory Board, at its meeting the day before yesterday, adopted regulations to govern the granting of gaming franchises to certain establishments, and will also serve to guide the manner in which such gaming franchises are administered. R The Chairman of the Board.' "d<" ñor Esteban A. Bird, stated " that there exlate codipleta harmony in- I tre the policy followed by the Board, and the" provisions of the new* ! regulations, and that the Governor has approved eia policy. It does not appear, therefore, that the Governor will object," but that he will approve, giving it the force of law, the above-mentioned regulations. No new license has been granted to operate gambling saloons, but there is an application from the Zero Club, which undertakes to build a small hotel with rooms on land mntigúo "J a! Casino d" Puerto Ricq. This project has the approval of the Board of Plans. pot'S -o croo quo if it were to obtain it® Ja franchise of game it would be da "1 da, nue" sal will comply with the "xl.v genclav of the new regulation. The Hilton Hotel has also applied for a gambling franchise. The Tourism Board will consider the request at a future meeting, and it is almost certain that it will be granted. Mr. Bird said that in November, 1948, he had presented the petition to the Governor's office, and that the Government had been asked to review it in November, 1948, and that it had continued to be considered by the Government. It believes ol Mr. Bird qu" that problem is * ! solved, by approving it and the policy followed > Board and that therefore, therefore 1 that "e will accept said renSÍH". \ The Board's statement'*wpr". \ m: 1 "Governor Muño* Marín accepted yesterday the resignation of! dente of the Advisory Board dotTtt. ri "mo, Mr. Esteban A. Bird, %e*. since said body has Rejado established the "policy" that ae"- gulrá in lo" matters more te" of the program on which it has been working. "Mr. Bird resigned his position in November of last year, having expressed to former Governor Piero Piero that in " ucrlterjo there was a conflict between his" duties as vice chairman of the Governmental Bank and the chairmanship of the Board. Mr. Piftero then asked him* j to leave his resignation pending until some litigation" and other matters related to the "When a few mea" law were resolved, Mr. Bird resubmitted his resignation again. When Mr. Bird again submitted his resignation, Governor Muñox Marta hfzole hfzole Equal request, asking that he remain chairman of 1* the Board until legislation was finally adopted to encourage 1a. tourism industry in Puerto Rico. Aeñqr Bird agreed to allow him to remain in office. ( / Reiterates Ranunoia "Since "n the meeting of 1* Junta Turismo was adopted* < mentó d" game and qujMMriu pending matters" - (Continued "n the
Collazo Denies Going to iñvcmpu* A Maestra Que Atgcó lamCG .j
The glfulent" mjKm d" lu n * labras del - "Durante d" Pm<i. I "a, ''elebcpda ?o x, pp . I redoclor -Irxi's , I "* a * him, -'J "Unda UWHrf d" PénrM. del nioh No. U5l " - Na. 26'A, Santurea, P. R. 1 I ' '