THE NANDO
NEW YORK. xah" (FU). -' Ea the afternoon* do boy will report in the" sigtdeateo temperature"; Chicago. 83; Miami. 83; New York. 71; Wellington. 75. Forecast for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities": Partly cloudy Highest temperature below 70 at the coast and 75 to M inland. Moderate winds from the south.
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY: - Generally cloudy, with scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High temp. 84 degrees; minimum, 77 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:30 p.m., MAS inches of mercury.
DAILY "
" THE MORNING
4*0 XXX
Entarad aa aaaand alaaand alaaa mattae. PUAS OHípo, Man Im, P K
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY JUNE 11, 1949
NUMBER 13698 FIVE CENTAVOS
AGS Freezes Cod Stocks in Island
Aba" what " Paro EvilHf Kspeoubn Na Ksnbi a Kmlmniu" Kl hl" lili. Gnhwnailar InveMlgs "CtiHvay" CM * n*lVM MATORAM Mart-lnr lia "I, MWim til ti" Mil mlnlMMk h* vhh""imHh Im mmmi 8RÍ|l!H "lM HS hAOOklHR MI pHllM 1 H" IM miWlklMi llMM* láHlH I" FU cihsñ num* emhsiuiiM, En I" hmanhn de el señói* , AHtaHta VlfAm Mina MBl Ih iHltmnh m the Pmmi") MHUHdinHo "1UM Mi A order was par" mvIIrí* Iai specule* cieno ron si "Hlt'iiln, Says si tenor Mirona RImi "Debíde to have encallario si vapor GalioW Kant, which tesla a caifa* important* mantle* of cod, there will be a small interruption in loa shipment" da elle mtlvuln dr peí- > mere necessity and as such, aurglrá r a shortage for a very 11* > mlted period, which could fluctuate* between । days and fifteen days, depending on whether a subsequent shipment that . i Arrival will be SO J "IF the connection will be made in time, for which everything necessary is being done, the next arrival of the codfish will be about the 20th of the present and the period of oseases will be shorter. If on the other hand it does not arrive in time, then this period will last about a week or more. | In the meantime, a small shipment having arrived, the Administration has frozen the dlstrlbu-' ction of the same in the hands of the im- ® carriers, the distribution in the course of this week ahtran-! Rl te, among the wholesale trade of ,a la in order that no hapf o "pe-1 culadonoo with the item Q is re- r< parted eato eato small shipment here- n tatively throughout the lela." the Governor Investigates For another part it was revealed yesterday in San Juan that Governor Muñoz w Marín is making an investigactón do the accusations quo a * group of retailers has made, in the sense ~ do that it is read is being forced to buy the cod "convoya- . The Governor has appointed several persons to keep him fully informed on the matter, and documentation of alleged irregularities committed by the distributors in the sale of the product has reached these persons, I r I r As reported yesterday, copies of invoices showing these "convoy" sales have been shown to the Governor. ' . Also, one of the person de- t signed by the Governor to >j loyal ¡zar the work of reference, has! f been able to verify that the trade and retailer so is forced to comprnr. ( a dried fish, substitute for cod, r cargándosdosele on invoices, at t price of cod legitimate. ( They asked for Intervention < The retailers, through a campaign throughout the Island, headed < by the firm Nieves y Hermanos, do, । San Juan, speak requested of the Go- < bernador that it was the*Goblerno the < entity in charge of acquiring and 1 supplying the cod, to avoid ' the speculations of which they allege । they are being victimized. Mayor Requests Salary Cut San Sebastian Mayor Gives Difference to Employees SAN SEBASTIAN. (By Antonio Sagardla, Jr.)- (Correspondent)- The mayor of San Sebastian, Mr. Arcadlo Estrada, demanded from the members of the Municipal Assembly that his salary be reduced by $300 per year for the next fiscal year. At present, the salary of the municipal executive is $3,600 and for the 1949-50 fiscal year it will be $3,300. Despite the efforts made to get Mr. Estrada to change his attitude, he remained steadfast in his resolve. The $300 was then distributed among the junior employees who were earning a very low salary. As the Mayor's gesture was well known to the people, he* was highly congratulated. Mr. Estrada gave up his farms in 1944 to attend to the problems of the poor community. Mr. Agustín A. Vélaz, representative to the House of Representatives, told us the following: "Don Arcadlo Estrada has just written one more page of civility and pride, which should serve as a stimulus to all the people of Plano to help him in the task he has set himself of making our people great. The people were right to reelect him by an overwhelming majority at the last election.
MK# - ' i i, ' - - - -i n "■ I ■ I ■k The General Administrator of Auministros, Mr. Antnnln Virón* Riñe, whose resignation is demanded today by EL MUNDO in its editorial column. t Triples are born! At Bayamon Hospital Mother Had to Undergo a Cesarean Section. They are 2 Females, 1 Male For Lula HERNANDEZ AQUINO Editor of EL MUNDO Another triple birth took place Thursday afternoon at the Bayamon District Hospital, this being the second one to occur at the aforementioned institution. In some circumstances this birth is similar to the one that occurred recently at the Municipal Hospital, since the father of the new triplets is a carpenter and two of the babies are females and one is a boy. But the most important thing is that the new triples came into the world in the manner of Julio "ésar. if the term can be used, since a resárea operation was necessary for them to see the light of this world. A Trilogy of Doctors When Mrs. Juana Baez, a 15 year old woman from the Maguayo neighborhood of Dorado, was brought to the operating table, three doctors were needed to assist her because her condition was delicate. The patient was suffering from a heart condition and the specialist considered that there could be more than one child in the delivery. Doctors R. Pifiare Fernandez, director of the Bayamon District Hospital, Angel Cestero, head of the Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, and Hector M. Sampayo, resident gynecologist, attended the patient and after consulting in the operating room, they came to the conclusion that it was necessary to perform a cesarean section. This operation is so named because the Roman emperor Julius Caesar, according to the annals of medicine, was brought into the world in that way, is well The Director of the Bayamon Hospital, Dr. Pifiero Fernandez reported yesterday that the triplets are in good health and that all probabilities are that they will live. Two are females: one is male. Each one weighed two pounds and eight ounces, and it was necessary to place them in incubators, where they are still being counted. Dr. Pifto also reported(Cont. on page 16. Col. 8)
rI i I IHr a The engraving illustrates the moment when the destruction of the clandestine farmhouse El Ultimo Chanco began yesterday (Photograph by EL MUNDO).
Iam MoIoitm will be dealt with today.
Ln LmImh* KelMi'A A A (targo ñ Huans No Umi Hallaih. Tnilsvls de hit Paaojerna Del Avión NIhImIimiiIii ho Mi NImm NI MriImIhi* lia Mi MUNÍIO Ia Mariitn! al MpvIhIh iIh Hiirp> HauHalNN and al MairitH aiiahaiitlisPHii ayat 1 Im HHarRHlnitas tie iwm* tlal llÚh'tt MVÍAH Hita llavaiÁ a la tririo" la a M HHRFIhvFIiiORGM RH Im mus" da hiHla NMllHMi! The atiNiteiiiliiii da the ImIihion aunt iWMa hh alliilfluR al fiaría mKih. 1 lulu tta the HitaiáflnHóM, tie Mtmmlfi mh In iRformadfi pm* the Mriihh, ya । that nóiten remain Hueve itaHuinev that a have ApHterldn, despite the IH" lenaa lahnr do sonden and paaqulaa. Yesterday were localiaadna by loa Navy spindles WMlofM of the nvlon, whose whereabouts ae ignored after its original location on the first day da search. Despite the suspension of operations, the Navy, acceding to a request from the Civil Aeronautics Board, is keeping six divers under the command of Administrative Officer Bosun Steals, all from the crew of the Oportuna. The Navy divers will join P.R. Lighterage personnel, under the command of Captain Frank Crocco, to carry out today's search for the wrecked plane's engines. The work of salvaging the engines should have been carried out yesterday but had to be postponed until today because of special preparations which were being made yesterday by the F.R. Lightrage Co., 1 as Captain Crocco informed EL MUNDO. In a special plane of Strata Flight, the company which owned the tragic plane at Punta Salinas, the body of the pilot Al Cockrill was sent at 10:00 o'clock Thursday night. Accompanying Cockrill's body was the rest of the living crew, which included pilot Leo H. Wakefield, pilot George S. Cary, co-pilot John Connell, stewardess Judith Hale, and Ismael Arroyo Gonzalez. They should be back on the Island to testify at the public hearings which, according to the Civil Aeronautics Board, will commence "within ten days". . The following is a list of the names of the nine persons whose search for their bodies has been abandoned, at least temporarily. We can only hope that the evolution of the waters during the swell changes will bring some of them within reach of human rescue. The tragic list is ephilogued with the following missing:; Angel A. Ramos, 36 years old;! Eduardo Isaac, 72: Cecilia Torres. 18: Luz Celia Roque, .18; Braulio Castor. 32; Tomas Enrique Garda, 11; Lula Jaime Enrique, 18; Cartas Encarnacion 27 and Angel Montafiez Cruz, whose age is unknown. Captain Frank Crocco, of the Tuerto Rico Lighterage Co., whose company has been in charge of the rescue of the plane, in close cooperation with the Mnrlnn and the Coast Guard, made statements yesterday for EL MUNDO Captain Crocco said that in the early morning of the 7th Captain Sweeney, of the Navy's Naval Operations Section and Captain Dexter of the Coast Guard contacted him successively to obtain his cooperation in the salvage of the stricken aircraft. Croccq ordered the immediate unloading of the K-lñ crane of the P. R. Lighterage, which lifts up to 50 tons in weight and was loaded with 100 tons of coal, as it was about to leave for Guanica on the morning of the same day. This trip was (Cont, on page 16, Col. 7).
Sñyder Says Eitá Lej "nn Deflation I
A Nlwlwi lword | i KniiIIcm Ruló Driicrlendo Un HcajnMe {¡omMflal Da MaludaldR XfR'lm i'HM.mw KamK*Wim , r "i|Ii h" i "Ir III, iRH M MNMÍM h*I TIMMi lÍHhhH W, WfWi fl" i la HHHlia s Im qu" day I flOlAHi iHhhrhHh bita NMmi UHldM ASIA all HHR PMIpIRH flHRHa I 6lM% MMItalHMilffláHll" flIM'léi Mi iriiiIh "RiHjillamiHls 1 .liiilIfléiHii iHtlai las HhMltaflññM ""llHilálWi Nhvósi 1 IimHIA aula a HUtfweH" , fll da lldat-si del muiiIHihíh, Lm WfléHlM iHfnrms" dal Gm ktarun han horbn hinrapiá in haja su e| HÚmaM of rmittaadns, । al desraban in prnótirrlón Ih* i duatrial and in Im IngrssM persona* i les, i 1 Indicating that some business shoulders insist that deflation is afoot, and that they cannot therefore contribute to Im ( groups bluntly, Snyder said that it is necessary to com- / hatlr those arguments, Trade Readjustment "The facts show that we are going through a healthy ! | trade readjustment to* return to a normal buyer's market and Uber competition," he said. "These are Ins conditions that, in the past, have served as hase for our historic economic progress." / He asserted that people who talk about t "deflation" are overlooking the fact that businesses are operating near record levels after three years of unprecedented production. The latest figures show, he continued, that the main economic "thermometers" are very close to last year's levels, and in some cases are only at last year's levels. (Cont. on page 16. Col. 8) Two Typhoid Cases Reported । In Adjuntas i Health Department Yesterday Dispatched Personnel To Screen Area Two cases of typhoid fever were reported in the town of Adjuntas, causing the Health Department to initiate an investigation yesterday. One of these cases died in the District Hospital of Arecibo. The Director of the Department's Epidemiology Bureau, Dr. Ahel da Juan, was questioned about the causes of the cases. He informed that the information received to date is very scarce. He also reported Dr. De ■ Juan that the deputy chief of the Bureau 1 of Epidemiology, Dr. José Her- ( I nándtz Matos, went out yesterday afternoon to Adjuntas to proceed with the corresponding investigation, Dr. Hernandez carried with him vaccines for the prevention of this disease. On the other hand, our correspondent in the town of Adjuntas, Mr. José A. Márquez Matos, went yesterday afternoon to Adjuntas to proceed with the corresponding investigation. Mr. José A. Márquez, informs that Mrs. Luisa Torres, of that population, 20 years old and mother of two children, died on Thursday, the 9th of this month, from a fever at the District Hospital of Arecibo. J Also reports that there is another case of typhoid fever hospitalized in Ponce, where he was transferred, and that hundreds of people are flocking to the hospital. * He adds that hundreds of people are coming to the Public Health Unit to get vaccinated. - The outbreak's proi cedencla is unknown, and it is expected that the corresponding precautionary measures will be taken to avoid an epidemic. He says that the population is calm. *
JAC Secret Report Indicates
Deficiencies of the C-46 Aircraft; * I Investigations are being carried out by Ticket Agencies.
l EIschIm GiihrImii Utiu Gfhii Hwmti Kl Prmmi'Mihii 1 Góltfd AiiiiiioIn nn Pi'omlNró (.onlru IInmnIm Fhv NNNNJAMtN MNTANA MilaMHi* da NL MHNnñ Ln IñViilllielAñ rial GñhléFHR iMUlléP létai'taHárig mH al riasMlra ri" Puní" íUIIhm in which M pltab iniTlñitaftM pei'ñtafóH irlitaamRhla his vines* al Iuhm by mariinga* tta, Ita exlébrtirio a lorias Ir" ageHOia* rie pásnle", ¡ Lm ftattalea asitaclale" generalsJosé U. Aponía and Guillermo A, (III, They based lodo the day ed yesterday toman* ño statements to numerous" "u* pervivors and another" witness", The prosecutor Gil said that "have appeared new" complications", adding that the course of the Investigations is developing normally and that there is progress in the effort to clarify the altuaI clón. The Attorney General, Vicente Gélgel Polanco, said that he was satisfied with the results obtained so far, and that he hoped that the facts could be clarified as soon as possible. Prosecutor Aponte limited himself to informing that he was "working hard" in the investigation of the case. l*ia Faaajea Agencies Yesterday at about 3:30 in the afternoon, Prosecutor Gil went to the Isla Grande airport to investigate a complaint related to a certain agency that was trying to ship a group of workers in an independent "Une". We asked Prosecutor Gil to give more details related to this new angle of the Punta Salinas investigation, but he refrained from doing so for the moment, promising to do so later. It is reported that there are numerous ticket agencies on the island operating without a corresponding Department of Labor license. It is also said that some of those authorized to operate these businesses are not complying with the provisions established by law. A senior Justice Department official revealed that there is some responsibility to point out to these agencies that operate in this manner. He added that the unlawful practices they are carrying out in dealing with the public make them culpable, in a way, for any air disaster that may occur. It has been assured that one of the new angles of the Punta Salinas investigation is that: to discover which agencies, and to what extent they are responsible for an incident such as the one that occurred on Monday morning, 400 meters from the island. The Attorney General informed EL MUNDO yesterday that an agency in Arecibo, the Valentín Bello ticket agency, is already being prosecuted for alleged violations of the laws that regulate the operation of these agencies in Puerto Rico. There is also another agency, Agencia Dónale, of Areclho, against which another indictment will be filed, according to the Attorney General, for alleged violations of the aforementioned laws. The Attorney General added that this In(veitigaclon will be extended to all" ¡ ticket agencies throughout the island, in order to proceed judlclally against those that are operating in violation of the established regulations. The Public Service Commission recently filed three complaints against the Capitol Travel Agency, which sold tickets to the victims of the plane crash at Punta Salinas, as reported. I*>a Regulations 1 tCont. on page 16, Col- 8)
fe I K Rhk. II I 1 K \ - : B-Hi <v'- : IKU, k \ á'- K X X X The photograph captures the moment when Governor Muño" Marín, with his spyglasses makes an ocular Inspection of the Mitin where a" sank the airplane and of the" nearest" coast". This inspection is part of the investigation carried out by the Island Executive. (Insular Government Photo), Muñoz Orders Protective Measures to be Taken on Isla Grande I , - Instructs Caro to Rigorously Conduct Inspection of Uncertified Aircraft T' by Juan Martinet Chapel Rwtactor of KL MUNDO The Governor requested from Mr. Salvador V. Caro, administrator / have" 1 of the Transportation Authority, that immediate measures be taken for the protection of persons traveling in airplanes of airlines that are not certified to carry out inspections of the aircraft.
i "i aHaHMl Murttanlnnio Pido (longrMfi Proceed (IIImii tiue Hlalrllmrlén Ib au i'sao Kr" Pulir" Y au Kqiilpti Insilrmisiln . Fm F (iiNklNGMAM WANMINGTONi jiiñlñ W. tpin -- The ISpiMSHIRHI! Vita M "iMHtaHlñ t tic Nitav" York. rirtMiirifi h "y rus si ttaiigié*H tav""ltan""l "ééiñcHls Aéiro upo rosta ■' viril! frsnls 8 Fuhi" Mitas", turro ds Men Juan, si mortal by I" m "ñ roared". In a" certa dirigid" to Rnhsrt CróMér, d* Ohin. pmittanta ñ "l Cñ* mllé d" Cnmsrrin Intarostatal y Exironjoro, Mareantanlo srguye qu" "Im ItachM enn qu" -- account Jusilfirnn a rompl "a ta d" investigation parta d" "u Committee." "Estay ronvsncldo ñMpué" ñ" ñ" read mm inform""", agr "g", "quo hay siso rotten oh ronoxlón con es" "ecldenta." Meanwhile, the Junta ti" Asronáutlca Civil announced late today that it will hold public hearings on the accident -of the nvlón fle 1" Strato Freight, in San Juan, "within 10 days." A CAB spokesman today declined to comment on Marcan's lawsuit, but said he would not comment. All survivors and interested persons will have the opportunity to testify at the public hearings in San Juan, the board said. Later, it added, the hearings will be transferred to the metropolis to investigate the technical aspects of the accident. In his letter to Grosser, Marcantenlo said the "crashed plane [ 1 was carrying 82 people. Including the crew and IR infantrymen. Clecuen. ta and four men and women re. howled dead." Marcantonio says he obtained those figures da a aecret informo aecreto da la ' Administration d" Aeronautica Cl. ■ vil to the rongreslonal committee, I The JAC said today, however, that on board spoke 81 personae -57 adult- . tos. 14 children and five Infants. I| Marcantonio said that the Infnrm" ' someto showed quo the recent InspoeI ¡ dones" of the stricken C- ■! 46, revealed the following: - 1-Pohre weight distribution and ■ balance on the part of the crew ' of the Strato Freight aircraft. i 2-The eomhustl- , ble needs were kissed in the" past .maximum requirements. -| 3-First aid material ■ । Inadequate. 4-Emergency kit was undated (Mareantonlo claims that it was dated). Part of the Report 1 Quoting from the Report, Marcantonio ' copies: "While the number of birds on board is too high and would ordinarily have caused doubt as to the gross weight (in the metropolis), the average weight of a Puerto Rican appears to be about 105 pounds. . to be around 105 pounds, although this must be produced in an official in- . vesliffation, which must also contain the total time of flight of the plane and the engines, and also the date on which both were last repaired." Congressman d>l Labe- ! rlsta American Party says that e" "rldleu- , lo" calculate the average weight of the , Puerto Ricans, at 105 pound." "Puerto Ricans are tall and short." i fat and thin, just like any , other people in the world," he argues. Ca. । llflca such calculations of "excuses pa- , ra to load Puerto Ricans on Im planes as if they were cattle." J There should have been rule" con- ,,, tra e "o, ends MarcanIonio. JAC Official To Arrive Meanwhile, the Puerto Rico Office in Wáahlngtnn announced that a JAC official will arrive. > Meanwhile, the Puerto Rico Office in Washington announced that a CAB official will arrive in San Juan next Tuesday to investigate the accident. to investigate the accident. The Puerto Rico office said that William K. Andrews, director of the Safety Information Bureau of the Civil Aeronautics Board, has informed Resident Commissioner Dr. Antonio Fernós-Iaern that he will arrive in San Juan on Tuesday. Anderw" told Femó" that immediately of au arrival to San Juan, confer with the governor Muñoz Marín and cooperate it in the Invrotliricldn "ohre the accidenta that comes realizing the Governor, "st as with that of the Board. Investigation in Kan Juan Meanwhile, in San Juan yesterday continued the investigation that the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB) has been conducting into the Punta Salinas air disaster under the direction of Mr. Gus Loazar, CAB Inspector, who came from the offices in Atlanta, Georgia, to be in charge of the investigation. The Board's officers have strict confidentiality about the details of the investigation, he explained. They explain that the investigation must be conducted on a confidential basis. However, Mr. Leszar told EL MUNDO that he has given statements to several witnesses, including 1o" the offices of Strato Freight Ine. airline, 1 (Cont. on page 16, Cob 8).
l - $ Witnesses Cited On José Ferrer Case Federal Inspector Dean (Inquiry To Begin Monday In San Juan On Monday, the 13th of this month, Mr. II. S. De "n, of the Federal Department of Agriculture, who has been appointed by the United States Secretary of Agriculture to investigate the incident involving the actor José Ferrer and his wife Phillis Hill, at the Isla Grande airport, will be in Puerto Rico on Monday, the 13th of this month. e i The Report of the Investigation carried out by the inspector in charge of the Bureau of Entomology and Plant Quarantine in Puerta Rico, Mr. W. T. Owrey, in which he exonerated "1 Inspector Caleb Daley of any fault, was received in Washington, but did not fully satisfy the higher authorities. It was therefore agreed to broaden the investigation by hearing persons who wished to testify as to what had happened on the afternoon of the departure from Puerta Rico of your husband Ferrer, or about any incidents which had occurred earlier in the day. T, Owrey has । addressed by letter to Jas persons, i who, according to the Press, witnessed - the Incident on the afternoon of 31 Ma- - me, requesting their appearance before- ■ you Mr. Dean on Monday next, at 10 o'clock in the morning, in he apar-' tamlment 305 of the New York Building I (Cont. on page 16, Col. 7) . I M-"i-"W - * * r T"" 1 '' ■
éno certified. ■ "The inspection of aircraft," says the Governor in a letter to Mr. Caro, "should be carried out by the Authority and should include the carctar "ra" that no airplane carries more weight or number of passengers" than is au-, torted by Jey and that the weight of the passengers" be accurately ascertained," Governor Muñoz Marín continued yesterday to give preferential attention, among au" multiple" occupations, to'that concerning the Punta Salina air disaster." (The investigation will continue to be directed by the Governor personally, and through other" officials, who must constantly inform him of all" circumstances of the case. It will take Time The impression is that it will take a long time before conclusions are reached and the investigation is finally completed; but in the meantime the Governor desires that drastic measures be taken to secure the lives of those who fly on uncertified airlines. Yesterday afternoon the Governor held a conference at La Fortaleza with Messrs. Salvador V. Cnro, General Administrator of the Transportation Authority; José Acosta Velarde, member of the Board of Directors of the same Authority; José Trias Monge, first Attorney General, and Eli Beléndez, attorney of the Transportation Authority, x Mr. Caro reported on the measures taken by the Authority to avoid future air disasters, with the acceptance of the concurrence of those present. on page 16, Cob 3)
Last Chance to Destroy Government Eliminates New Arrabal in Las Casas
By S. GALVEZ MATURANA Editor of EL MUNDO The Insular Government began yesterday the destruction of 13 ca"-8 and 27 replanting! da solaras, where ee had begun to raise the arrabal El Ultimo Chance. According to a report of the Chief of Police of Barrio Obrero, Mr. Juan Rodrífuez, the Health Department sent to the Rexach farm, in Lea Cacao, the officer of Sanitation Mr. Osvaldo A. Rivera, to investigate the information offered by the Chief, in the sense that a slum had begun to rise in that area. This official did so and the Department of Health notified the Chief immediately.
The Health Department notified the Bureau of Permits, so that it could take the pertinent action. A Plan Is Adopted Yesterday afternoon, several representatives of the Home Authority, the Health Department, the Planning Board and the Inspector General's Office met at the Permian Bureau's office to determine what action should be taken to prevent the birth of a slum. Reports eeñor Héctor Delia, head of the Negociado de Permiaoa, that ae agreed to immediately begin the demolition of said caaaaaa and loa replanteo!; so! yesterday miamo, 1 (G "nt tn page 16, Col. 7) ? "