THE NANDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Generally partly cloudy, with scattered showers*. IN SAN JUAN, AER: Maximum temperature, M degrees; minimum, 76. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:86 I* afternoon, 39.M inches of mercu/o.
NEW YORK, Augato 1J. - (PU) - In the afternoon today m regiatraron laa algulentoa temperature": Chicago, M; Miami, M; New York, 84; Washington, 98. Predictions psra tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: Considerably cloudy; showers - occasional electric discharge*; temperature higher below 80; moderate winds from the northwest.
DAILY TOMORROW
YEAR XXX
Entered as second clam matter. Port Office, San Juan, f. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 1, 1949 .
NUMBER 13753 FIVE CENTAVOS
Ferré Says Cement Is Not Scarce
Vicéns Doubts AGS Must Act Capital Contractor Claims Paralyzed 3 Works. Bayamón Plant Stopped By S. Gálvoz Mataran* El Mundo Editor The General Manager of Suminlitroi, "efior Antonio Vicén" Rfoi. He reported yesterday that loe demanding problems in relation to cement, have not been brought before him, as should have been done by contractors or persons affected by Ja alleged shortage of this product. Mr. Vicéns Ríos said yesterday that he is in the best disposition to solve all the problems related to cement as soon as they are brought before the Supply Administration, but that to date "he has been beating around the bush, without going directly to the trunk.** Receives Telegram Mr. Vicéns Ríos reported that yesterday he received a telegram from the Vice President of the Contractors Association complaining that he has had to suspend three projects due to lack of cement. He added that this is the only complaint received on the matter, in spite of all that has been published in the press. When asked by this editor about the action that could be taken by the Administration to solve the problem, Mr. Vicéns Ríos answered: "I do not know yet if it will be necessary for the AGS to take action. Up to the present both factories, according to my reports, are working and delivering cement in the most normal way. "All this is due to the atmosphere which has been formed without the first steps being taken in the right direction, and I do not see why, when the contractors have problems, they have not brought them before the Supply Administration before taking them to the Press and forming that atmosphere." Works Paralyzed On the other hand, the cement shortage continues to increase in the metropolitan area, according to what was alleged yesterday by the Vice President of the Contractors Association, Mr. José A. Hernández. In a telegram addressed to the Supply Administrator, Mr. Hernandez informs him that three works have been paralyzed due to lack of cement and asks him to act quickly to solve the problem. The telegram reads as follows: "I object to your statements about the shortage of cement. Do your duty by ordering an investigation first. You will find that it is easier to get a dollar of silver than a sack of cement in the metropolitan area. I have at present three works paralyzed for lack of cement bought fifteen days ago, and not yet served." On the other hand the Bayamon Concrete Industries, through the voice of Mr. F. W. Parkhurst sent yesterday to EL MUNDO the following telegram: "Contrary to the normality that* has been reported by the General Administration of Supplies, for three weeks this factory has not been working due to impossibility of obtaining cement." No Bajó Cuotas El seftor José Ferré, director of 'a Ponce Cement Corporation informed EL MUNDO yesterday that said factory has not lowered its delivery quotas to customers. In the specific case of San Juan Trading, who alleges that deliveries have been reduced, Mr. Ferré said: "The factory has not reduced its deliveries. What is happening is that San Juan Trading is sending orders for much larger quantities than we are accustomed to request, and we have been forced to return the excess of those orders to them. If we were to supply all the cement that the said firm orders, we would have to reduce deliveries to the other customers who are keeping within their usual orders, which would be to their benefit and to the detriment of the other customers of the Ponce Cement Corporation." Regarding the factory's production, Mr. Ferré said that it is absolutely normal, producing at full capacity, and serving the prunings with the regularity that is done in normal times.(Cont. on page 14, Col. 9)
Cement Plant Prepares for Strike; Negotiations Failed
By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA Staff Writer of EL MUNDO * When Porto Rico Cement rejected yesterday the demand for a wage increase made by the workers of the cement plant, the negotiations that both parties had been holding were definitively broken, and the strike that the workers are threatening to begin on Monday became imminent. The Union of Stonemasons, Operators and Other Employees of the Cement Industry rejected yesterday morning the offer of an increase in wages and other salaries made by Porto Rico Cement. On the contrary, it demanded that on top of the increase offer and other concessions, an increase of 25 percent in wages be granted, or
through a bonus on the company's annual payroll. In the afternoon, in a letter sent by Mr. Joeá R. Benitez, vice president and general manager of Porto Rico Cement, the latter demand of the workers was answered in the negative. He reaffirmed his original offer, arguing that the company is not in a position to agree to the payment of a 25 percent bonus on the annual payroll, or payable as an increase in wages. The company's offer of a raise ranged from 18 and a half cents per hour to 40 cents per hour, and included a Christmas bonus, a production bonus, and other measures beneficial to the workers, such as a Christmas bonus, a production bonus, and other measures beneficial to the workers, such as a Christmas bonus, a production bonus, and other measures beneficial to the workers, such as a Christmas bonus, a production bonus, and other measures beneficial to the workers, such as a Christmas bonus, a production bonus, and other measures beneficial to the workers, such as a Christmas bonus, and a production bonus.
Alleged Buscones Leader Jailed
1 IÍ3SX MM ' % r iBiy-y-| OB' g | - i i tu w i w í Judge Alma Delgado of 1* Sal* Segunda del Tribunal Municipal de San Juan, ordered the imprisonment of José Ramo* Melecio (■) Capulllto on charges of having entered the Court in "atado de embriaguez. Meanwhile, the judge opened an investigation into Capulllto's activities as an alleged "seeker", and* he went to the court to seek* an order of appeal of a* sentence* handed down* by Judge Botando Martine* Ramirez. (Photographs from EL MUNDO, by Casemvel
Judge Alma Delgado Ordered that a Complaint against José Ramos Melecio be Sworn and Initiated an Investigation Editor of EL MUNDO José Ramos Melecio (a) Capulllto, alleged leader of the Calóme "buscones" whose expulsion from the Court limits was recently decreed by the San Juan Municipal Judicial Council, was arrested yesterday
and taken before Judge Alma Del-' gado, who ordered his incarceration and initiated an investigation. The complaint sworn against Ramos by bailiff Enrique Orengo, of the Second Chamber, included a violation of municipal ordinances, for having entered the Court in a state of drunkenness, initiating the investigation when he went to one of the Chambers of the Tribune! in efforts to free a convict. Bailiff Felix Rivera Torres, of the Fourth Chamber, proceeded to arrest Ramos Melecio, *1 finding him in the process of processing an appeal order at the Clerk's Office of that Chamber. Rivera Torres took him before Judge Rolando Martfniez Ramirez, who ordered that in compliance with the orders of the Judicial Council, he be expelled from the Court. The bailiff Rivera led Ramos before Judge Alma Delgado who, says Rivera, has specific orders from the Attorney General to proceed against the individuals who are trying to eradicate from the limits of the Court for carrying out the work of buscones or intermediaries. Judge Delgado ordered a complaint for drunkenness to be sworn against Ramos Melecio, setting bail at $200 and contacted the Department of Justice, immediately proceeding to take sworn statements from different people. Ramos refused to give a sworn statement before the judge, stating however, that he has been an agent of different attorneys for 17 years* and that the appeal brief that he had filed belonged to a relative of his. He further stated that they, the "busconea, or intermediaries, intended to prosecute in court certain lawyers of the Municipal Court. Judge Delgado took affidavits from Carnten Perez Guardiola, undersecretary of the Fourth Chamber; Francisco Machado Corchado, clerk of the District Jail; Balblno Gonzalez, warden of the District Jail; and Emilio Valentin Mangual, the convict whose appeal Capuilito had handled. No Era Pariente La Subsecretaría de la Sala Cuxrta declaró que, al serle entregado por Capulllto un sobro conteniendo el escrito de apelación, ella llevó lo ante la Secretarla, seftor* Medarda Román, quien a su vez se lo entregó al Juez para que dispusiera, ya que sabia Ramos Melecio estaba incluido en la lista de "buscones." Machado Corchado declared he had taken to the Mayor for* his flram the appeal brief already signed by the inmate .Valentin Mangual, certifying that the latter was (Continued on page 14, Col. 7)
-* " , , , ■ , : Customs Says ; There Are Banknotes : Counterfeit on Island Agents Have Several In Possession. They are $10. Ponce Case Investigated T-Customs officials in Puerto Rico revealed yesterday that a number of counterfeit ten-dollar bills are circulating in Puerto Rico. The matter is under investigation by the Bureau of Customs Agents, which already has in its possession several of these bills. The agency reported yesterday that a few days ago it received a complaint from a local bank about the receipt of one of the bills. The agency immediately initiated an inquiry and was able to collect some specimens. Yesterday he authorized a note, in which he reports the following: "They are circulating for several days an increased number of banknotes falalflcodos of the United States. The description of the bill is as follows: denomination, ten dollars; drawn on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; the serial number of all these counterfeit bills is B05730062D. "The serial number of these bills does not vary as on the legitimate bills. The place number on the front (where Hamilton's portrait appears) is K513. This number is found in the lower right-hand corner, "The back plate number is 12. (This number is found in the lower right-hand corner on the back of the bill. Brought* from Abroad Reportedly, s" estimated that (Cont, on page 14, Col. 4)
Caio Ponce
Bank Will Borrow S10,000,000 To Loan
Buscaglia To Leave Tomorrow For U.S. o Credit To Be Used To Aid River Springs Program By Juan Martínez Chapel EL MUNDO Staff Writer With the sale of $22,700,000 in Aqueduct Authority bonds, verified the day before yesterday in New York, the Government Development Bank's activities for Puerto Rico have not ended on the mainland. According to reports, the Governmental Bank is arranging a temporary loan, for three years, in the amount of $10,000,000. Negotiations are under way in New York to arrange the operation with the Chemical Bank and Trust Company of New York at an interest rate of 2-l|8 percent. The President of the Bank, Rafael Buscaglia, "e proposes to leave by plane tomorrow for New York, to join Mr. Donald R. Bonnlwell, the franc's financial advisor, to continue negotiations on this loan. The Government Bank, in addition to the $10,000,000 which it will borrow, will receive the "urn of $7,500,000 which it had advanced to the Aqueduct Authority, vows to be repaid to it d" the ventt of the bond issue, Economic Challenged According to the financial reports of( Government Bank, the financial condition of the Institution is very "atiafai 'orlo. This bank began with a capital of $20,500,000 which )- was appropriated by law from the general funds of the Government. Through June thirtieth, 1949, the accumulated profit* amounted to $3,707,449, making the Bank's capital at that date $24,207,449. In the last year of business, the Bank's reports show a profit of $930,840.71. From July to September 23, 1941, -1 Banco de Fomento earned A215/> 360.61. From September 24, 1948, to June 30, 1949, transformed into a Governmental Bank, it earned $715,480.10. The Bank's management is arranging the loan of $10,000,000, as expressed, to "support the expansion program of the River Springs, principally the Lajas project, It will be a temporary financing while the River Springs Authority is ready to issue new bonds. The Governmental Bank also proposes to have cash available to temporarily finance the municipalities* and to attend to housing* problems. The Government Bank *proposes to make a loan of a few million dollars to the Industrial Development Company to continue its Industrialization program. -All the Bank's operations," said its directors, "are of a routine nature. Taking money at low interest, and then lending it at higher interest. The same guarantees that are required for lending, * are used as collateral for borrowing", "The main purpose of the creation of the Bank was to assist in the industrial development of the Island", the directors added, "and the institution wishes to expand as much as possible to meet those ends", "It needs to borrow money and lend money, and thus to push forward, increasing Industrialization". .
Playing K Ball Detective Agent Testifies So In Court
By J. García Calderón EL MUNDO Staff Writer Playing "bolita" may be common among community citizens, but not among members of the police force. However, an agent of the Detective, assigned to the Squadron against Vice, said yesterday in short that he has also played sue vellones and cantavoi, but he has never been lucky enough to win. The ineaperada confession was made by Corporal Diego Ortis, mi "ntraa declared in relation to a casó de bolita followed against Juan Benedicto Lebrón Rodrigues, who finally the judge Julio Suárez Garriga declared guilty of the crime that was imputed to him, sentencing him to a deacanao forzoao da 6 mssssss, in the Cárcel do Distrito de San Juan, Intonso Interrogation The lawyer of the accused, lawyer Guatavo Jiménez Sicardó, submitted to Corporal Ortis to
The defendant's attorney, Guatavo Jimenez Sicardo, subjected Corporal Ortis to an intense interrogation, trying to demonstrate that the law enforcement officer did not know what the game of bolita was, and that he was incapable of testifying on the matter. After asking numerous questions, the attorney admitted that the witness had complete knowledge of the game. The defendant Lebron Rodriguez, besides having to spend against his will a period of time in jail, lost a bicycle that he used in his work, when the court ordered its confiscation. The bicycle in question was examined by detective Ortis and prosecutor Suarez Garriga, and after defendant Lebron Rodriguez gave his statement, he proceeded to confiscate the vehicle. This was done after proving that it was used as a work tool by the convict, to operate in relation to the prohibited game of bolita.
Attorney General Announces Dismissal of Employees for Irregularities in Prisons
2 Polio Cases Reported On Island 1 * Occurred In July. - B-Month-Old Child Died. Two cases of infantile paralysis were reported in the metropolitan area at the end of July, with one of the victims of the disease dying and the other undergoing treatment. These cases, according to reports, have no relation to the many cases of the disease which have lately been recorded in New York, and which have had no repercussions in Puerta Rico because of the migratory flow between the island and that city. According to the Chief of the Bureau of Epidemiology of the Department of Health, Dr. Abe] de Juan, at present no outbreak of infant paralysis is expected in the Island. E" his criteria one for e| year 1950. during e| summer, e* the date when more" cases* of this disease, which "e occurs in cycles of every four years," might "ur*. The last epidemic outbreak here occurred in 1946. During the eight months of the year only nine cases of the disease have been recorded in La Tala, distributed as follows: January 4, February 1, May 1, June 1 and July 2. In the months of April and May no CMOS were recorded. One of the cases* recorded* last July corresponded to " Santos, daughter of your" miMtzr, from! Barrio Sabana, GwayiWrflb. This girl was >-m*wa years old and died at* 38 hours* after contracting the disease. She was attended at "1 Hospital Genera! nndr'guaz. certifying Dr. F. Dldrblnskl that she died of acute poliomyelitis. The other case e* that of nlfto Arthur G. Lee, son also of a military man. Eata nlfto, who is under treatment, is eight years* old and resides at Fort Buchanan. Four die. The United Press reports from New York that Cardinal France Spellman, Archbishop of New York, has asked all prelates to request the faithful at the Mass to join in private triduum at their homes on Sunday, Monday and Tuesday, praying for the end of the polio epidemic. The Cardinal made the request as the Health Department announced that four more deaths from polio have been reported and that in the last 24 hours five additional cases have been reported, bringing the total number of deaths this year to 66 and the number of cases of infantile paralysis to 856. Dr. Marcus Koge!, Commissioner of Hospitals, reported having managed to recruit 192 of the 200 nurses requested by the Municipal Government to combat the disease. Municipal Judge Hyman Bushel, meanwhile, stated that the "continued on page 14, Col. 7).
Authorities Already Have Public Housing Program Targets in Place
Now Must Submit Advance Reports on Island Needs for Next Two Years
By RURICO E. RIVERA F,L MUNDO Staff Writer Puerto Rico's housing authorities already have in "their possession the application forms and instructions sent by the Federal Public Housing Administration" to implement the new housing program in line with the new legislation recently approved by Congress. Public housing agencies* in Puerto Rico must submit advance information on housing needs for the next two years. According to the General Instructions of the submitted form, only duly organized and constituted authorities may apply for low-income housing units. The bogar authorities must submit a single application for either the one-year or two-year program. However, for those cases in which an authority covers towns or areas outside its legal boundaries, it may then submit an application for a low-income housing unit.
An urban area is considered to be those places where there was, by 1940, a population of 2,500 persons or more. First Step The application for the reservation of low-income urban public housing is the first step to be taken by the housing authority in the development of low-income housing developments. The Reservation Program, to be issued by the Public Housing Administration* after reviewing the* application* of the* local* authorities, will cover a specified number of family* housing* units. The reservation may be more or less than Ja stated in Ja request. It would indicate the number of housing units* for which the financial assistance application is to be submitted, for one program year or two, as the case may be. The exact number of units (Cont. on p. 14, Col. 8)
Bonds To Be Used For Loíza River Dam Will Be First Work To Be Accepted By Aqueduct and Sewer Authority* Unless some unforeseen inconvenience arises, the first major work to be undertaken by the Aqueduct and Sewer Authority when it has the money from the sale of the bonds will be the construction of the dam on the Rio Grande de Ixiba. This was reported yesterday by the office of the Authority's Executive Director, "eftor Sergio Cueva* Bu "tamante. There is still some paperwork to be done before funds can be made available to finance the project. As "e "abe, the $22,700,000 will be secured" by 22,700 bonds" of $1,000 each, so far what "e "e has done is to close the tranaarclon. The "egulrán lo* trámite* d* rigor tal* romo 1a Impression, and Ir signature of ]n* bono* by the Executive Director of the Aqueduct* and Sewer Authority*, *eftor Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, and the Secretary of the Authority. One million dollars will be deposited in the Chase National Rank, syndicator of the issuance, as a revolving fund. Uao de lo" Fondo* When *the work" whose" expense" is charged against the" fund, the Authority's Consulting Engineers certify the amount, and the bank returns to the Authority the amount invested, as explained. (Cont. on p. 14. Col. 7).
Géigel Urges Peace In Prosecutor's Office Viera _ Martínez Denies . District Court personnel friction Prosecutor Angel Viera Mártfnez denied yesterday that there is friction between him and the other members and employees of the San Juan District Attorney's Office. To this effect, Mr. Viera Martinez authorized the following statements: "La* actuaciones y manifestación "* que me "tribuye El Imparciel, en su edición de ayer, son totalmente falsas", "Nunca he tenido Incidente alguno Incidente legal ni personal, ni con el fiscal Freyre ni con el fiscal Miere* Callmano, de quienes "oy amigo y con quiene* estoy, como he estado siempre, en completa armonía, al igual que con lo* demás empleado* y funcionario* de fiscalía," "Nunca he he lirado ron pistola ni con nada al fiscal Miere* Callmano ni a nadie; and I have close ties of friendship with him and his family. "I do not "é how to qualify attributing to me manifestations such as those I comment on, which are not proper* to my lexicon", "Whoever has taken that Information to El Imparrlal "*is delirious and the newspaper, whose right to Inform made" certain* nobody dl "cutlrla, should be held accountable for his own prestige", Géigel Urges Peace For his part, the Attorney General, Vicente Géigel Polanco, urges the prosecutors of the San Juan District Court to put an end to the exlatent* disagreements between them. at page 14, Col. 6)
H-mee""
tarfl K 1 U.W& M ' MR iw t lilililí / . £ I The flaca! Vl*r" MarHne* (d* foot. Isquterda) and Detective Diego Ortis. throat, ezamlnan 1* occupied bicycle ■ Jose Benedicta Lebron Bodrigues (seated), arrested in connection with a bolita case.
Removed Two Officials In San Juan One Gave Phenobarbital To 2 Inmate* rn Capital District Jail By Benjamin Santana F,T. Staff Writer. MUNDO The Attorney General, Vicente Géigel Polanco, yesterday dismissed Alfredo González Acevedo and Vicente de] Valle, hospital assistant and assistant surgical technician respectively, from the San Juan District Jail. In a letter addressed to Mr. Gonzalez Acevedo, he said that he did not accept his resignation submitted on July 15 nor the one-month leave of absence requested on the same date, "On the contrary," he added, "the undersigned, in his capacity as Attorney General of Puerto Rico, dismissed him from his position as hospital assistant at the jail, effective on the date he receives the letter. In the] charge sheet sent to him ]e explained that the dismissal was due to the following reason: "for illegally disposing of property belonging to the People of Puerto Rico, in contravention of the orders of his" superiors". According to the Attorney General's Office, in the indictment, Gonzalez Acevedo stole from the prison medicine cabinet, last July 7, a bottle containing about 100 phenobarbital pills, property of El Pueblo de Puerto Rico. He accuses him of having emptied the contents into a piece of cloth, pre. parando do" paquetea diferente", conteniendo uno parte de la* pastilla* y el otro el resto de 1** mismas. He adds that he took the two packets to the galley of the jail, "where he gave one of the packets to Joaquin Sanjurjo and the other to Juan Gilberto Herrera. He concludes by declaring that "this action of yours constitutes a serious offense in the service". The other defendant, Mr. Vicente dej Valle, is accused by the Prosecutor of having refused "to render full time service". He accuses him of having disobeyed orders from his immediate boss Ralbino Gonzalez and from prison superintendents J. Antonio Aivarado and Antonio Monrolg, to render services seven and a half hours a day for five days a week. "In spite of these requests," says the Attorney General, "you have stubbornly refused to render the requested service and only attend the San Juan District Jail for half an hour or one hour, at the most, in the morning of working days, limiting your work to only giving injections to some of the patients in the hospital of the aforementioned jail,
Alteration s! Order "This action of yours* has caused the medical service of] penalty! to function in a deficient manner and * that Irregularities occur between )o" auxiliare* of hospital of es* prison, which you are supposed to supervise, among rilas 1a subtraction, clone of a bottle of pástila* d" fenoharbltal, on July 7, 1949. and whose content was used in Improper form by several* reel use* addict* * drugs". Others of the funcionlos under Investigation and whose dismissal is expected from one moment to another, according to Informó yesterday e! Attorney General, used to dress Jo M "rl* Felix, altering e! order and diaclpllna of! penal. The Attorney General also said qu" "e are Jnv "*tlg*ndo another* Irregularity "* in the Cárcel d" Dlitrito de San Juan and in another" pénale" as 1* Penitenciarla Inau"' * More" De "titueione". He announced that there will be more "de*tlh> done" to functionally "accused" of abnormal sexual practices and that he will extend his investigations "until he eradicates the" illicit "practice" of "all" the "penitentiary". Infor* marion has reached his office in the *understanding that there are inmates" who "alen del pena! as often as" they want, dressed" in "pal "anos, "in open violation of 1oa regulations and with the apparent approval* of the authorities". The dismissed officials* have ten days" to appeal before the Board of Persons, according to Act 345 of May 12, 1944, Section 31. The action of the Attorney General is based on the same law and on circular number ten of the Office of the Attorney General of Puerto Rico, dated August 10, 1947.