THE WORLD
NEW YORK, May 98. (FU) - In IX late today, the following temperatures were recorded: Chicago. 58; Miami, 88; New York, 58; Wáahlngton. 78. Forecast for tomorrow in New York and surrounding cities: scattered showers in the morning, sunny weather in the afternoon. Highest temperature, 85 C. Moderate wind from the southeast.
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY: Considerable fog with scattered showers: partly cloudy tonight. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temp. 87 degreest low. 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level at 4:80 p.m. was 29.88 inches of mercury.
MARANA NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY MAY 21, 1949
NUMBER 13672
FIVE CENTS
Council Requests Cooperation Of Physicians
In a statement of principles the Higher Council of Teaching declares that it assumes the direction of the School of Tropical Medicine * Invites all members of said school to forget the incidents of the past debate, provoked by the Senate Bill 493. According to information from the Chairman of the Board, Mr. Mariano Villaronga, the Rector of the University will soon be leaving for the United States on behalf of the School of Medicine of Puerto Rico. He also informed that he has instructed the Rector of the University, Mr. Jaime Benitez, to maintain close relations with Columbia University and with any other North American and Auramerican universities that may be necessary, Letter to Dr. SuAm The President of the Board made public yesterday a letter acknowledging receipt of the resignation of Dr. Ramon M. Suarez, former head of the Department of Clinical Medicine of the School of Tropical Medicine, in which he hopes that the mentioned physician will resume his relations with the School. Part of the letter reads as follows: "Personally and as Chairman of the Board I infinitely regret this resolution on your part which deprives the School of Tropical Medicine and the nascent modic school of its services and the scientific prestige of its name. ' I am sure that Messieurs Con- ' Mjeros, danto as I, would look with the greatest favor if at some momtntq in the future, you altered that decision and set out to ,rear nudar alie vipculionrt aeadémleaá and with !n Sequel." Frtndploe Statement The following is the statement of principles addressed by the. With the Governor's approval of Senate Bill 493, unanimously endorsed by both houses in the last legislative session, the Government of Puerto Rico places directly on the shoulders of the university administration a grave and important additional responsibility: that of establishing a School of Medicine as soon as possible. In order to better fulfill this responsibility, the Superior Teaching Council receives legal authority, nonexistent until now, to unify all teaching and research activities in any of the university divisions, including the School of Tropical Medicine. We understand that the Government is right when, at the same time that it entrusts an enterprise of this magnitude to the University, it empowers its governing body to obtain the maximum use of all the resources subject to its jurisdiction. The first article of the new Law provides that in the establishment of the School of Medicine and in the use of university resources, the Higher Council of Education will ensure the continuation of the scientific research work and the current graduate work of the School of Tropical Medicine. It is our firm purpose to honor this important legislative statement The people of Puerto Rico feel justifiable pride in the work done in Tropical Medicine. The Superior Council highly appreciates the importance of this work and the scientific "merit" of those who have helped to accomplish it. In the debate prior to the approval of the new law, distinguished members of the administration and faculty of the School of Tropical Medicine held a different view from that of the 493 Bill or vehemently opposed it. To this we have no objection. "The existence of dissenting points of view is perfectly legitimate and even healthy as long as there remains an attitude of fidelity to the basic objectives of the Institution. In the present case, there is no difference in the basic objectives. We are all united by a will to serve the truth and, through it, to serve the people of Puerto Rico. "The discrepancy is due to a difference of criteria on the best way to organize administratively an educational service that the people of Puerto Rico imperiously need. In democratic communities, there is an established procedure for the existence, presentation and resolution of disagreements between people called to cooperate. In our case, the process has required legislative action and has culminated in the approval of Senate Bill 493. Calls for Cooperation 'The Superior Council of Education Invites all members of the university family to forget the indifference of the past debate. For the benefit of all our people urges the greatest cooperation in the (Continued on page 14, coi.4) WL í
Two Presidents Savor Biscuit
President Truman (left) and Brazilian President Eúrico Gaspar Dutra celebrate the latter's sixty-fourth birthday by eating traditional cake during a welcoming ceremony in Washington, D.C., in honor of the South American President. (Asoclagh Press Photo) A.T. Board of Directors Awarded Good Pro to Banco Popular Native Sanitary Entity To Make $7,000,000 Refi Loan For Zafra 1949-50 By JOSE M. GARCIA CAI,DERON EL MUNDO Staff Writer
The Board of Directors of the Au Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, approved the $37,000,000. loan needed by the agency for the 1949-30 sugar harvest. The auction for the aforesaid loan was held in New York City on Thursday of last week, with the participation of Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, Chase National Bank, Banco de Ponce, Crédito y Ahorro P "w "o and Che míe al Bank and Trust Goz - ? There was a tie in the proposals between Chase National Bank and Banco Popular, both quoting 2.25 percent interest on the loan. Awarded to Banco Popular As reported yesterday, the Board of Directors of the Land Authority made the award to Banco Popular following the recommendations of the Government Bank and the Executive Director of the Land Authority, Mr. José Acosta Velarde. The Board is made up of Mr. Acosta Velarde, who chairs it, and the Commissioner of Agriculture, Mr. Ramón Colón Torres; the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Jorge J. Jiménez; the Commissioner of Labor, Mr. Fernando Sierra Berdecla; the Director of the Aqueduct and Sewer Authority, Mr. Sergio Cue. vas.Bustamente; Mr. Jorge Barmúdez, Manager of Poncefto Credit and Savings; Dr. Pablo Morales Otero and Mr. Orlando' R. Méndez./ Banco Popular de Puerto Rl. co has been financing the Land Authority since its foundation. having made, on all occasions; the lowest quotations. resulting in substantial savings for the aforementioned Government agency. Satisfied to Serve Upon learning yesterday that Banco Popular had been awarded the auction. e| Manager of said institution, Mr. Ramón Magriflá, declared that he felt "aLtlsfeeho because besides being Banco Popular: a native entity, it has been related to the Land Authority since it was founded, having served it satisfactorily at all times. "The auction for the Land Authority loan, held in New York, was attended by the Executive Vice President of Banco Popular, Mr. Rafael Carrión.
.oridad de Tierras awarded yesterday to the lena pro for the loan for the refaccionaf Mayor Cayey Appeals Fine For Assault He Did Not Bring Proof To Municipal Court. - The Mayor of Cayey, Mr. Francisco Colón Jullá, was sentenced the day before yesterday afternoon to pay a fine of one hundred dollars, or in default of payment to serve 90 days in jail. Judge Frank Vizcarrondo, specially appointed to hear the case, found him guilty of the crime of assault and battery in the Cayey Municipal Court, where the trial was held. At the request of the victim's family, Guillermo S. Pierlulssi, a lawyer from the Capital, was appointed special prosecutor to accuse Mayor Colón Jullá. The defense was in charge of Lionel Fernández Méndez, Herminio Concepción de Gracia and Miguel Rodríguez Alberty. ...They had a few words According to the evidence of the special prosecutor Guillermo S. Pierlulssi, the only one presented at the trial, on January 8 of this year, Mayor Colón Jullá ran into veteran Antonio Rodrlguez Fouchet, leader of the local Independence Party, in the street. The two had a few words there, without further consequences. Moments later, however, Mayor Colón Jullá allegedly went to the Plaza Bar in Cayey, where Rodríguez Fouchet was, and with a piece of pipe he hit the veteran several times in the head. This was two days before the mayor's inauguration. Appeal Decision Due to these facts, the mother of the injured party sent a telegram to Governor Luis Muñoz Marín, requesting an investigation, which was immediately carried out. The defense of Mayor Colón Ju(Continued on page 14, Col. 7)
Decision on Sugar Harvest Expected Soon
By PAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, May 20. -(PUJ) - The Department of Agriculture is expected to decide soon whether part of Puerto Rico's sugar crop will be declared surplus and sold under the European Recovery Program. The Department of Agriculture may devote more attention to this matter now that negotiations for the purchase of a substantial amount of Cuban sugar for overseas use have been completed. ? The best available information is that Cuba will not have too large a surplus from this year's crop. Therefore, it will be easier for officials here to consider Puerto Rico as a source of sugar for the Pim Marshall, even though island sugar will probably be much more expensive than Cuban sugar. X '
Doubts About Price It is considered doubtful that Puerto Rican producers will sell for a price comparable to the Cuban price of about four cents per pound. But it is the general policy of the Economic Cooperation Administration to purchase domestic goods at the market price. However, there is another factor in the picture now. The distribution of sugar has been extremely rapid. It is therefore conceivable that the Department of Agriculture may find it necessary to increase, the estimate of domestic consumption of sugar, which is now 7,250,000 tons. - The price of sugar in New York has been steadily rising. It rose to 35.85 per hundred pounds, raw value, duties paid. It is below that now-about 35.78-and the May (Continued on page 14, Col. 5) r
Instruction Announces Teaching Plan
Elementary School Capacity To Increase " । á- ■ ■ - Teachers Will Enjoy Scholarship Program On Island And Abroad For BENJAMIN SANTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano Villaronga, is concerned about the growth of the secondary school at the expense of the growth of the elementary school. Commenting on a speech he recently delivered to school superintendents, he said that "the high school has grown and multiplied at the expense of a minimum instructional program at the elementary level. He announced that his administration intends to adopt, as one of the basic "purposes" of the system, the development of an elementary education program for the majority of school-age children in Puerto Rico. He hopes to achieve this objective with the prospect of federal aid, adding that this aspiration "is affirmed in a good sociology of Democracy and should prove, therefore, invulnerable. Commissioner Villaronga reported having discussed with the school superintendents numerous problems related to the organization of the next school year. He announced that starting next year he will periodically visit the districts to study and "check on the ground" the development of the school program in all its aspects. In referring to the work program in general, he pointed out the following purposes of his administration: 1 - To make a comprehensive study of the prevailing school organization, with the purpose of making the most efficient use of the "human" and "human" resources within his reach. 2 - To encourage the professional advancement of teachers by means of an advanced scholarship plan in Puerto Rico and abroad. 3 - To provide a place for the best professional talent, entrusting the most capable with important tasks and functions, in a spirit of school renewal. 4 - To provide means for the evaluation and examination of the curriculum, with a view to determining the extent to which the school contributes to the preservation and enrichment of the values that our civilization aspires to perpetuate. - 5 - To arrange for the formulation of a definite program for the improvement of the teaching of English, after a careful study of the objectives, content, methodology and teaching staff assigned to such a program. 6 - Introduce the use of Spanish as a vehicle for teaching at all levels of schooling. 7 - To expand and enrich the educational program for veterans. Explains legislation Analyzing the "objectives" that have been achieved so far in his administration, the Commissioner of Instruction explained the "laws that were passed" by the Legislature in favor of school education. One law created a special commission for the education of children in the schools.
Fernós Denies Statement Attributed to Him
Says He Did Not Speak About New York In His Talk He Described Only the Conditions Prevailing on the Island f' - . mu "i- iiimi" i - By Juan Martines Chapel EL MUNDO Staff Writer Resident Commissioner Dr. Antonio Fernós I "ern, emphatically denied upon his arrival on the Island, having said that the problem of consumption in New York originates in Puerto Rico. He also denied having commented on the living and health conditions of Puerto Ricans in the big city. In his speech before the Anti-Tuberculosis Society, he said, he referred to the social and economic conditions" in Puerto Rico, according to official data. At eleven o'clock Thursday night Dr. Ferqós arrived in Puerto Rico by plane. 4 Waiting for him at the airport were the Governor's aides, Messrs. Gustavo Agrait and Raúl Canelo, and this editor. Immediately after getting off the plane we questioned him about his speech before the New York Anti-Tuberculosis Society. We showed him a copy of EL i MUNDO and other local newspapers, which commented on his speech. Alleges Erroneous Cable The Resident Commissioner expressed surprise and displeasure at the attitude assumed by the Press, in commenting on "an erroneous and incomplete cable communiqué." He postponed us for the following day when, knowing what had already been published in Puerto Rico, he could make public statements on the case. (The information referred to by the Resident Commissioner, which appeared in EL MUNDO, was sent by the Prensa Unida news agency. On the same matter, the New York Tlmea published an information on page 29, edition of Wednesday, July 1st. One of my paragraphs says: "Dr. FornM Isern said - that the threat of an increase in the tnherculnsls* in New York" posed by an influx of immigrants from Puerto Rico, is 'a problem that must be attacked by improving the economic status of the island."Yesterday he received us at his home "in ol County and summarizing the con(stations to our various questions", authorized exclusively for EL MUNDO, the following statements: "Yesterday, Thursday, May 19, I flew via Miami from Washington to Puerto Rico. The weather was absolutely normal all the way, however, upon arrival I found on the island, what appears to be a storm.... but in a water hole. He does not believe it "As when cyclones . originate beyond Saint Kitt" and "e announces only a disturbance in formation, this storm seems to have started in New York, with Ja lecture "was before a group of men of science pronounced I on Tuesday of this same "emana. The communiqué synthesizes my statements and attributes to me concepts that in reality I did not express. "I have not said that there is an acute tuberculosis problem in New York City, nor less (Continued on page 14, Col. 6)
Roosevelt, Son, Congratulates Boricua Artist
I ■ H Al 1 0/ wl Mil W : |M M" ■ ■ ■ rZB | > ''Obr
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Jr., who was overwhelmingly elected to fill the vacancy left by Rep. Sol Bloom, enjoys great popularity in the Latin American colony in New
York, as evidenced by this photograph of the new congressman congratulating Puerto Rican arriata Doria Scotollff during the annual La Prensa festival recently held at the U.S. Congress.
Va Acto Dermatologist
jM 1 DR. ARTURO L. CARRION Dr. Carrion to Read Paper in Virginia Former Professor of Tropical Medicine is the Only Boricua in Association Today Dr. Arturo L. Cerrion, former Professor of Dermatology at the School of Tropical Medicine, will participate as a member of the Annual Meeting of the National Dermatology Association, to be held at the Homestead Hotel in Hot Springs, Virginia. Dr. Carrion, as we reported in our Friday edition, declined to continue his position as Professor of Dermatology at the School of Tropical Medicine, due to a disparity of criteria as to the way in which the cessation of relations of said Institute with the University of Colombia has been handled by the executive authorities. The resignation, which was presented to the Super'lqk Con "e.|o Super'lqk d< Rsqaeftanza. Carrión was elected a year ago as a member of the Ammeatia Association of Derrtiatology, being the only Puerto Rican member of the Association. The invitation made to Dr. Carrlói to attend this act was directed by Dr. Rhnda W. Benham, head of the Department of Medicine at Columbia University. The well-known Puerto Rican scientist will read on this occasion an important scientific paper on chromoblastomlcosls, one of the diseases studied with strict scientific rigor by him. Dr. Carrión put the final touches to that work during ♦"-this week, having it Hato to read it at the Annual Assembly, which will be held one of the remaining days of this month. Only 120 Members The American Dermatological Association is a grouping composed of only 120 members", and vacancies due to death of some of these, are filled only by election and Invitation. Once elected, members are required to attend all meetings and to present any communication otl-(Continued on Ja page 14, coll
füé elected- heve 1
Muñiz Souffront Says He Is Likely to Resign Position
New Resignations Tropical Medicine Maria Enther Belaval And, Dr. Margarita Silva Resigned mig Carpos Two other resignations have occurred in the School of Tropical Medicine lately, making a total of four, eon those already submitted. ' -- . The last two'resignations correspond to Dr. Margarita Silva, assistant professor of Dermatology, who has held that position for some time, and Miss Marla Esther Belaval, master of science. These resignations were addressed to Dr. Enrique Kopplsch, Acting Director of the School, who will submit them to the Superior Teaching Council for final action. The first to resign from the School of Tropical Medicine were Dr. Arturo L. Carrion, head of the Department of Derma tato' gla of Ir Institution, and Dr. Ramon Suarez, of the Department of Clinical Medicine, who have served the School of Tropical Medicine since its founding. Judge Admonishes Father Who Denied Help to Son Who Was Abandoned and Most Often Stole for Eating Judge Luto R.~Poto, of the San Juan District Tribuifsl, yesterday sent for the father of an 18-year-old boy, convicted of first-degree assault, and gave him a severe reprimand for the neglect in which he has kept his minor son, despite his lack of financial resources. The reprimand, bitter and severe, was made in full court, when the room was crowded with the public. Victor Cifre, Jr., a handsome 18 year old boy, came to the Court to hear the sentence in a first degree assault case.
in a first-degree burglary case, in which he was found guilty. The case has been referred to the Court's probation officer for a report on the juvenile in order for the Court to determine if the defendant is eligible for the benefits of a suspended sentence. After reading the report, Judge Foio sent for all the minor's relatives, including his father, Victor Cifre, a well-known Santurce merchant: *I wanted to send for you to speak to you with the frankness that characterizes me. You have not behaved like a true father to this boy. "I wish there was a law in Puerto Rico at this time that would authorize me to send you to jail; for you, and not that minor, are the one really responsible for the crimes he commits. You have not known how to comply with the sacred commitments that your condition of father Ir has imposed on you". Judge Polo further revealed that the probation officer's report showed that the accused, son of Victor Cifre's first marriage, had been abused from a very young age by his father, not going to school, and lacking the most indispensable food to be able to subsist. From the same report, according to the magistrate, the accused stole to eat, most of the time. Suspended Sentence After this reprimand to Cifre's father, Judge Polo imposed on the defendant a sentence of one to one years.
Health To Determine Incidence Of Tuberculosis In Children
The Department of Health's Tuberculosis Bureau is conducting a study to determine the incidence of tuberculosis in children. The last study on this subject was completed ten days ago. For this purpose, tuberculin is being applied to groups of children between the ages of 6 and 12 years old, in the towns of San Juan, Santurce, Arocibo and Rio Piedras. It is not known if this study will be extended to other towns on the island. According to information obtained, Dr. Robert L. Smith, new chief of the Tuberculosis Bureau of the Department of Health, has an exact criterion about the incidence of tuberculosis in the infantile population. Dr. Smith himself, with his assistants, makes observations of the results of the tuberculin in those children to which he applies it. < é
The tuberculin being applied to the children in this study is known as PPD, which is a purified form of the product. This product is being used in studies in the United States, and since it is an exact dose, as pure as possible, it allows comparisons with other studies that have been done. Results obtained here could be compared with those obtained in some regions of the United States. Ten years ago, the then Chief of the Tuberculosis Bureau, Dr. Jose Rodriguez Pastor, did a study on the incidence of tuberculosis in children, using the PPD product. Speaking on this matter, Dr. Rodriguez Pastor reported that "it is to be expected that children react more positively than they did years ago. It will be valuable to study "A three-month term of application 1 (Continued on p. 14 Col. 8) A . * ■ I
Expects to Act i Before Assembly Raised Question of Personal Privilege at Teachers' Meeting By Benjamin Sontono Editor of EL MUNDO ' The San Juan Local Board of Teachers yesterday voted against any increase in dues paid to the Puerto Rico Teachers' Association. After a stormy discussion, the assembly defeated, by a vote of 210 to 80, a motion to increase the dues from 32.50 to 33.00. The meeting also agreed to provide that the delegates to the special meeting of the Association will attend the meeting pledged to oppose any proposed increase in dues. The Local Board of San Juan, which met in the assembly hall of the Santurce High School, yesterday appointed the 32 delegates to which it is entitled. The discussion of the increase of 50 cents in the dues paid by teachers to the Association was heated and stormy. Mr. José B. Acevedo, president of the Local Board of Ran Juan, presided over the assembly. Mr. Luis Muñiz Souffront, president of the Insular Association and member of the San Juan Board, was seated on the proscenium, in addition to other officers. Mr. Carlos. Maestre Serblá , consumed an extensive turn to dsi fender" the proposal of increase, . having already analyzed all the services that the teachers derive i d" the Association. Another turn, also extensive, was taken by Dr. A. Bernabé, who assured that the Association had previously offered, with less money, more and better services. - He explained that the Association's medical services could be better served "if savings were made in other" "superfluous expenses," such as the Bulletin, the Public Relations Office, the Tourism Office, and others. He also attacked the insurance program offered by the Association, stating that it is inadequate and insufficient. The motion was discussed at length, with several turns of rectification consumed by delegates from both sides, and the chairman put the motion to a vote, with the two aforementioned results. Mr. Luis Muñiz Souffront, president of the Puerto Rleo MaM "ros Association, then took a turn of privilege. He said that, although he favored the motion for the increase, he did not wish to intervene in the discussion, although he could have done so in his capacity as a member of the Board of San Juan. He added that he wished, however, to make several remarks, as a matter of personal privilege, for having been alluded to during the discussion. He referred to some words of Dr. Bernabé in which he explained that Miss Mabel Studebaker, president of the National Educational Association, did not receive a single cent in salary. Mr. Muñiz Souffront said that the Executive Secretary of this entity, Dr. Willard E. Givens, has a salary of 89,000 per year, and he, as president, had one of 36,000 because the Association agreed to it in consideration of the fact that he does the work of an Executive Secretary on the Island. He explained that he had no interest in o! aargo and that he was likely to leave it before the meeting (Continued on page 11 eo!. 8).