THE NANDO
NEW YORK, June 17. (FU) - Late today the following temperatures were reported: New York, 76; Washington, 75; Chicago, 75; Miami, 77. Forecast for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: cloudy, scattered thundershowers. Strong, damp winds. Highest temperature, 75 to 80 degrees.
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR LA-ISLA, TODAY: Cloudy weather with scattered showers, turning cloudy occasionally during heavy downpours and some scattered thundershowers in the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M degrees; low, 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m. 80.00 inches of mercury.
MARANA NEWSPAPER
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -SATURDAY, JUNE 18, 1949
NUMBER 13699 FIVE CENTAVOS
1Ñ0 XXX
Entered as second class matter" Poet Office, San Juan, P. R.
Mother Of 5 Children Charged By Bolita
!■& : ¿ig g" - y , i wf< ■./. i v sf /< / y 4 "■pl Hr EKir ■ 1 ML " - w > W ir / / / > ♦ i ■ül ... 3 IH ■ .yyBJM/t :' I "> J
I "abe1 Altare" Días, cradled in connection with the law banning the Bolita Game, is pictured with one of even five hijon, Gilberto Alvares.(Photo by EL MUNDO)
Judge Suarez Garrida Appoints Lie. Acosta as Court-Appointed Attorney
Appeared in Court Accompanied by Four-Year-Old Child. All Indications Point to Another Baby
By ANGEL CRUZ CRUZ (EL MUNDO Staff Writer)
Lm redentea manifestations of Judge Julio Suarez Garrlga, District Court in the sense that loa banker" .le the ball in San Juan have put into play a macabre ability
-Tü IB WIIV" W ""n vhwii w "s to violate the new Law against the*>Bolita. was revealed yesterday when a emaciated, anemic and sad woman, appeared to face the reading of the indictment for . Isabel Alvarez Dias appeared before the court holding the hand of the youngest of her five children, all minors. In the four year old boy's sad face, was portrayed perhaps the misery of the mother, who appeared completely alone to the Court to face an accusation that can send her to the women's prison in Arecibo, for at least six months". Since she did not have a stifler, Judge Suárez Garrlga appointed J. J. Acosfa, who pleaded her innocence on her behalf, and the case was set for a future date. Mother Again Everything indicates that Isabel Alvarez Diaz is going to be a mother again soon. In addition, she has five minor children. Isabel Alvarez Diaz is a very pale woman. It can be seen that she has hardly any blood. At present she is "311 years old, although she looks much older. After the reading in this ca- ¡ co, and while in his office, Judge Suárez Garrlga stated that notwithstanding the efforts being made by the Government to put an end to the illegal game of bolita, the public was still in defiance of these efforts. He added that he had no choice but to send to jail all those convicted of violating the law, no matter how distressing their situation. Repeated in Ponca PQNCE, June 17. -(By Miguel] Rivera, correspondent of EL MUN-, DO) - Pathetic and exciting scenes took place today in the District Court of this city, on the occasion of having been sentenced to serve 6 months in jail, for. Infringement of the Bolita Law, a mother of six children, one of whom suffers from tuberculosis. The sentence was imposed by Judge Lorenzo Lagarde Garcés, who at the time of pronouncing it, declared: "This is a mother of six children, one of them suffering from tuberculosis. But I have to strip myself of these human feelings and comply with the law, because the administrators and owners of the "bancas de bolita" make use of these people in these circumstances, with the deliberate purpose that the feeling is imposed to the law, and finally they continue mocking the Justice, exploiting and exploiting the people". Evangelista Marrero Torres, 27 years old, is the mother found guilty of the aforementioned crime charged by the prosecutor Salvador Veray, consisting of the fact that on March 28th of this year, in the Barrio Real, in Pone", she carried on her person 68 quintos of bolipul. The defense was in charge of the defendant Luis A. Noriega, who alleged that the search of the person of the accused was illegal. The convict, her sister, her husband, Miguel Angel Torres, and other family members, upon hearing the magistrate's sentence, burst into tears in the courtroom. The tearful scene was repeated in the courtroom for detainees, and in the courtroom" (Cont. on page 16, Col 8).
Polo Punishes 5 Overly] Carrying Weapons Imposed Maximum Penalty On Accused Of Selling Revolver Without Registration Judge Luí" R. Polo, of the San Juan District Court, yesterday imposed the maximum penalty set by law on each of the three crimes to which a defendant pleaded guilty. Francisco Santiago Diaz, a subject wearing dirty and shabby clothes, appeared to plead guilty to three related offenses: sale of a firearm, carrying a firearm, and failure to register a firearm. In the first case, the magistrate sentenced Santiago Diaz to one year in prison. In the other two cases, six months in jail each. Santiago Diaz, according to the evidence, sold a firearm to a friend of his. For the sale "he was charged with a crime. And for transporting the firearm from his house to the buyer's house, two other crimes. An Epidemic in the Capital Judge Polo stated that in the case" of illegal possession of firearms" he would have to be as severe as possible, since the illegal possession of firearms in the district of San Juan was becoming an epidemic. On other occasions," the magistrate has said that it seems paradoxical that sometimes people who do not have enough to eat and yet carry new, top-quality revolvers appear to defend themselves from carrying prohibited weapons. With the severe penalties, Judge Polo said yesterday, the gigantic wave of illegal gun carrying in the judicial district of San Juan may stop a little. Fernós Responds To Mason's Allusion By Paul Harrison WASHINGTON, June 17. -Puerto Rico's Resident Commissioner in Washington, Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern, said today that he believes Maritime Commission Chairman Philip B. Fleming will support in principle the idea of extending federal subsidies to U.S. vessels operating between the mainland and the territories and possessions. Fernós has filed legislation to that effect. He intends to testify on that matter before the House Maritime Committee next week. The Committee has before it the । legislation providing subsidies jJfor American vessels engaged in foreign commerce. Fernós visited Fleming yesterday to discuss the general question of subsidies for maritime services" to the territories. But he indicated that he did not feel he should speak on behalf of Alaska, Cuba and other regions. He was merely presenting the views of Puerto Rico. Fleming's response was that (Cont. on page 16, Col. 3):
CSP To Issue Order Regarding Porters
To Take Effect In July First Sets Penalties For Carrying Passengers Without Permits In Metropolitan Area By Jos* M. GARCfA~CALDERON EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Public Service Commission will issue a final order providing for severe penalties for owners" of motor vehicles who after July !- 1949 engage in carrying passengers in the metropolitan area without being duly authorized. The Commission's order, as reported yesterday, will provide for a minimum of $50 and a maximum of $1,000 or .3 months in jail for violators. The order will take effect July 1, 1949, which is the date on which the law restricting public transportation between the municipalities of San Juan and Rio Piedras will go into effect. The Commission will need to certify that it is working to resolve the requests of more than 500 public carriers, owners of vehicles with public insurance licenses, who claim they have the right to continue operating in the metropolitan area. The Commission is also working on the resolution of another 614 cases of non-resident public vehicle owners of the metropolitan area, who obtained public licenses for their automobiles after April 1, 1949. The issuance of licenses to the latter will not be made by the Department of the Interior until the Public Service Commission has authorized it by granting the corresponding certificates of necessity and convenience. As of yesterday the Commission has seen one hundred cases of applications from persons who acquired automobiles with public licenses after April 1st. Another 60 cases have been "ometldos" and will be considered next Tuesday. Resolve before June 30. so that persons affected by the legislation lately passed, restricting the issuance of license plates and the transit of public vehicles in San Juan, may obtain their licenses at the beginning of the new fiscal year. Notwithstanding the interest with which the Public Service Commission is working in the consideration of the number of applications pending its action, it is feared that many cases may not be resolved by July 1. The legislation restricting the transit of public vehicles between San Juan and Rio Piedras came as a result of the Transportation Authority's insistent demand that it be protected against competition from independent carriers, which it held responsible for the more than $500,000 in losses it has been suffering annually. For Private Use With the restriction on the issuance of licenses to public vehicles purchased after April 1, 1949, it is believed that numerous carriers on the island will have to abandon their automobiles or devote them to private use. It is also believed that several hundred automobiles that circulated since 1941 between San Juan and Rio Piedras, dedicated to passenger transportation, will be withdrawn from service after seal 30. (Cont. on page 16, Col. 6).
Eddie Waitkus Improves
Welcomed Reporters; Gave Impression of Case
CHICAGO, June Ü, (PU)- Baseball star Eddie Waitkus underwent an operation today for removal of a blood clot that developed after a female fan tried to kill him. Doctors said he is "much better." | s Waitkus, first based on the Philadelphia Phillies, was in the operating room for about 1 1/2 hours. Doctors said he was j breathing much better and des* tiring comfortably. a Waitkus said that Ruth Steinhagen, 19, his frustrated asssina, ara completely unknown to him; and qus ' couldn't explain why he hi* zo a rifle shot. "I went to his bedroom out of cu* K riosity,"-he said. - "The much* i- cha said she had something impor* ■ as much to tell me. I went there and ó told me to wait a minu* >' to." The Vine Helping You ' He went on to say that he looked out a window, "and - when I turned around, I saw her pointing* | tandoms with a rifle."
Waitkus quoted the girl as saying, "You won't keep bothering me." At first he thought it was all a joke. But then she pulled the trigger on the .22 rifle and Waitkus was knocked unconscious to the ground. The 29-year-old athlete was strong enough today to talk to reporters for five minutes during his hospital stay at the Masonic Hospital. The girl is on bail pending mental examinations. Wsitkus said the girl's expression was normal when he entered the room, but "when he shot me she had the coldest face I have ever seen in my life." Will she be able to return? She said the doctors have assured her that she will be able to return to the ball diamond, and that she hopes to be in uniform as soon as possible. Meanwhile, the carcaleroa said that the young lady (Continued on p. 6. col. 3
Rafael Carrión Speaks to Los Soldados
A < ■ A ■■ \ j ■ i X 4 " Al I f
Mr. Rafael Carrión, executive vlcepreNdente of Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, is greeted by General Edulno G. Albert, on the occasion of the former's visit to the camp where he delivered a lecture.
General Edulno G. Albert, on the occasion of his visit to the camp to give a talk to the students studying English (Army photo).
Exhorted Military to Learn English Without Abandoning Spanish Recited Décimas Jíbaras de Luis Lloréns Torres - General Edwin Sibert Presented it in Spanish. By José M. GARCIA CALDERON EL MUNDO Staff Writer "ehor Rafael Carrión, executive vice president of Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, yesterday urged the soldiers" stationed at FuerBuchanan to learn English without giving up speaking Spanish, as a means to progress and for the benefit of the Island,
3E1 Mr. Carrion, who was introduced by General Edwin Sibert at an event to encourage Puerto Rican soldiers to take an interest in the 10-week program being developed to increase their knowledge of English, drew loud applause from the 700 men who listened to him. Speaking of himself, as an example of what knowledge of the English language represents, Mr. Carrión recounted how from a simple errand boy of American officials in Caguas, when the change of sovereignty, he learned the language of Shakespeare to rise from a humble messenger to the position of office manager, beginning a rapid rise to become a high figure in banking and commerce. Mancha del Plátano Expressing his feelings about the event Mr. Carrión said he felt "a lively joy and very intimate satisfaction for the opportunity offered to me with this talk and for the genuine pride that reverberates in my soul as a Puerto Rican. as "I was contributing to the conquest of the noblest ideals that our beloved Puerto Rico is fighting for". Mr. Carrión described his birth "in the Machucha! neighborhood, in a coconut farm in Cangrejos". He received a long ovation when he said the following: "The banana stain reaches my bones: and for me, there is no tastier land than Puerto Rico". The speaker interspersed in his diary some jibara tenths of the late and excellent poet Luis Lloréns Torre" and expressed that as a good jibaro "I like to verse; and at parties I prefer the tenths of the countryside, the aguinaldo, the seis chorreao, the mariandá of Caguas and the vlllarán of Arecibo", Porvenir de Puerta Rico Later, expressing his opinion on the future of Puerto Rico, Mr. Carrión said the following: "I hold as a fundamental point of view that the future of Puerto Rico is now in our hands and that the degree of progress that we Puerto Ricans will achieve from Wy onward will depend exclusively on our own" efforts. We have the (Cont. on page 16, Col. 2)
(By R. Concepción de Gracia, F.L MUNDO correspondent)- This small town, with approximately 18,000 inhabitants, distributed" among seven rural "barrio" and the urban area, has a miniature insane asylum. . . In its "¡minute municipal jail, ♦ lene this population of third ca. tegorla, confined no less than six madmen. Of those" insane, curtro are peaceful and are together with the prisoners, but the other two are furious madmen, for which reason they have had to be confined in separate cells. The madmen have been denounced for various offenses, since, in order to be detained, an insane person must be denounced for a crime committed. Loe Detained" T.a following is a list of the mentally deranged Infelices, detained in the municipal depot: Francisco Oquendo Santana, Enrl. que Uharrl and Alda Santiago Carabailo, for "disturbing the public peace"; Agaplto Oquendo, "for malicious da 1 ños"; Miguel Angel Mo. lina and Vicente Lopez Santiago, for "acometimiento and serious aggression." We know that the Mayor, Mr. José Vega Nevares, is managing the solution of this serious social pro. blem, by transferring the insane to the Hospital Insular de Psiquiatría. As it should be known, a similar problem exists in other municipalities of the Island, as revealed by the investigations and personal visits made to the prisons by the Attorney General, Mr. Vicente Géigel Polanco. (Cont. on page 16, Col. 8).
Two Plants Sell Pasteurized Milk 18/ Liter in Santurce '
Ferrer Says The Incident Was Gratuitous
Muñiz To Leave Magisterio Presidency ' Board Of Directors Meeting Called For Today. Resignation Expected By BENJAMÍN SANTANA El Mundo Staff Writer. Yesterday the resignation of Mr. Luis Muñiz Souffront, as president of the Teachers' Association of Puerto Rico, was received after 8 years" in that position. । Although quite improved from his recent illness, Mr. MuDiz Souffront continues to be confined to bed, on the recommendation of his physicians, Dr. José N. Gándara and Dr. Mario J. Tomaslni. The Board of Directors of the Puerto Rico Teachers Association has been summoned for today at 5:30 a.m. to discuss ex-1 elusively this matter. It is reported that the resignation of ] Muñiz has created a serious problem for the Association, in connection with the projected extraordl- ¡ nary meeting which has been called for next July 3. ' For the discussion of only two matters that meeting has been called: to discuss possible reforms in the administrative government of the Association, and to decide i on the increase in dues, Resignation was Expected । It is scarcely a month since the. (Cont. on p. 16, Col. 7) Board of Directors of the Association.na 16, Col. 7) Board Approves $3,051,867.83] For San Juan i _-_ । Spending Program* Contains Less Funds For Hospital And Streets The Board of Commissioners of the Capital Government approved at its session Thursday night, e) ] new municipal budget, amounting to 83,051,867.83. This will come into effect on July 1, next. The current one amounts to $3,105,820.54. According to information supplied by the Municipality, during the year ¡ 1948-49 there were non-budgetary allocations made by the Legislature for the Municipal Hospital and for street repairs. The sum appropriated to the Municipal Hospital by the Legislature amounted to $152,108.79 and that appropriated to the callus program to $285,000, of which $50,000 remains. This year the Legislature made no appropriations 1 to the Hospital. Less Funds F ' ( The new budget is less in appropriations for the , street work and general expenses, i i i As to the" appropriations for 1 the Hospital, there was a reduction 1 of $75,000; in the street program there was a reduction of $100,000 ¡ and in general expenses there was re- < duction of $25,000. The Board of Commissioners, at its meeting on Thursday was devoted solely to the study and consideration of the budget, which was approved without 1 amendments.
No ObAtant Sorry That AaiiiHo Has Reached Stir 17.-(Espe-cial to EL MUNDO).-José Ferrer, famous Puerto Rican actor of stage and screen, said today I that "I am sorry that the Incident of May 31 at Tal* Grande has been stirred up to a stir," and that neither he nor Mrs. Ferrer, "we wish to turn it into a controxersla." In a telegraphed reply to a request for a statement made by THE WORLD. Ferrer said that, like the Agriculture inspector involved in the affair, "I cannot help being human and I am sure that on mu- i ch occasions I have been as rude as he." Horace S. Dean, a Department of Agriculture investigator who] went to San Juan to talk to witnesses of the Incident, was, meanwhile, preparing a written report for the Bureau of Entomology and Plant Quarantine, having made an oral report to his superiors. Ferrer's statement was made available to the Bureau by EL MUNDO, and will be made 1 । ' part of the Report," as stated by i Dean. The following is Ferrer's full statement: "The facts" are the "Igulento": While our luggage was being examined before we boarded the plane from San Juan to Miami on the afternoon of May 31, the Inspector behaved, in my opinion and that of Mrs. Ferrer, with unnecessary rudeness in dealing with the contents of one of her suitcases. "He took things and threw them on the counter in a manner that was far from the full discharge of his duties. Mrs. Ferre" he protested. He then said, and I quote him as literally as memory permits me: 'IF you wish, I can suspend the examination of your luggage and then you will not be able to board the plane.' He avoided further discussion "My father, Mr. Rafael Ferrer, then intervened in the discussion, but I restrained him, as well as my wife, indicating that this kind of discussion was completely fruitless, and that we could not do anything before a Government inspector. "I then turned to the Inspector and 'asked him, in the most polite manner I could, to have the goodness to continue the examination. He repeated that he could prevent us from boarding the plane if we did not want our baggage examined, and I asked him to continue to carry out his work. "This happened in the princi- i । pal lounge of the baggage department, i To get to the plane you have to pass i through a narrow corridor. At this place we were again stopped by two other, , two Inspectors, who very politely explained to us that they had orders to re-examine my briefcase and Mrs. Ferrer's evening bag, which I was carrying.
■ "'.io "* ' ~~- * - - - ■ lit < A údK i - WW jAhBw ® " n '"I
Mrs. Edith Rtalnhager (right) caresses " her daughter Ruth, 1" years old, (center), for comfort as they wait in the courtroom of a Chicago, Illlnola, courthouse before which Ruth was arraigned last Thursday.
Thursday, accused of attempting to murder baseball player Eddie Waitkus. At the left is Walter, Ruth's father, and in the background is 1" sheriff's deputy, Jennie Do Br "y. (Associated Press Photo)
Creéese Continuará Todo el Verano Un Obrero de Bayamón Revela Llevan Leche Fre*ca Toa Baja a By M.NIEVÉA RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO Two pasteurizing plants in Santurce have put on sale the pasteurized milk at eighteen centa* vos a liter, in all the public vending stands that they maintain in operation in San Juan and its neighborhoods. This was confirmed yesterday by a reporter from EL MUNDO, during a visit he made to various points in the capital and neighboring neighborhoods, after receiving information about the exil* tence of the situation before the spun* tads. The Caribbean Dairy, a pasteurizing company which has a chain of milk outlets, has been offering pasteurized milk with a quart of cream in sealed containers at the price of eighteen cents a liter for the past three days. The Pasterizadora d" Puerto Rico Company, originally known as San Luis Dairy, which also has a chain of stands to dispense the product to the public, has offered for sale pasteurized milk in sealed containers at the price of eighteen cents per liter taken at its stands. The home delivery service, however, only suffered a drop of one cent in relation to the price * that these companies used to offer this service to their customers. Previously they charged twenty-three cents per liter, while at present they charge twenty-two cents. *In one establishment of the Ce* rlbbean it was reported, when asked how long the price of 18 cents would be maintained, that it would possibly be maintained "as long as the abundance of milk" that now exists. t -;,H "ta abundance'se proion taré while the summer lasts? we asked, and were answered in the affirmative. In the meantime, in a store in the Calta del Sol, San Juan, which sells milk from cows owned by cattlemen in Manati, and which is pasteurized in the plant of the Agricultural Company, the product is sold to the public at a price of 20 cents per liter. This milk is identified as a PRACO product, since it is capped and is marked with the stamped material of this government agency. Puerto Rico Dairy, Ine. n" does not maintain retail outlets, but sells its product to private establishments, which resell it at a price of 22 cents per liter in its pasteurized form. In its home delivery service, this company offers the product to its customers at a price of 2.3 cents per liter. At this price it also sells homogenized milk, according to information supplied by its offices. From ta vaquería Las Tre" Monjiles they reported that they sell their product to the partí, routine vendors, since they do not maintain vending stands for the public, at the price of 21 centavo" so that they resell the same to the public at the price of 22 centavos, which according to it" is the price set by the AGS, Obrero Extrañado
Rafael Rivera Perez, a worker residing in Loa Millones, Bayamon, is surprised by the attitude of the authorities regarding the milk problem. Rivera Royes relies on the revenue scales to support itself. For this reason, any movement aimed at lowering the prices of staple foods has his sympathies. So he made it known yesterday to EL MUNDO) in visit that gave us", he thought, to endorse the campaign" conducted by this newspaper to lower the price" d" basic food". As his street is also home to low-income workers, he decided to visit EL MUNDO, representing his fellow workers, to raise the issue of low prices for basic foodstuffs. There is a great abundance of milk in Toa Alta, and we workers are benefiting from it," he said. "But it seems that the Department of Health will not allow the sale of cheap milk to continue on Loo Millones Street, where many of us poor workers live. Rivera Pires relates, very surprised, the following: -"Every day, early in the morning, a bus from Toa Al. arrives at Nuoatra Callo with a load of fresh cow's milk. This milk comes conveniently packaged, and we can buy it at the price of 18 cents a liter. "We all benefit from the vice of having this locho delivered to our homes, a luxury we could not enjoy in the past. We also benefit from the price. (Cont. on page 16, Col 5).