THE WORLD
NEW YORK, Dec. 9 (FU). - This afternoon the following temperatures were recorded: New York, $4; Chicago, 27; Washington, 84; Miami, 80. Forecast for tomorrow in New York and neighboring clouds: Increasingly cloudy and continued cold weather, with rain and snow in the evening. Highest temperature above 80 degrees.
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Patchy to occasionally cloudy with scattered showers. IN 8 AN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - Maximum temperature, 88 "radoai minimum, 70 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.95 inches of mercury.
MORNING JOURNAL
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH CIRCULATION CERTIFIED BY THE ABC.
YEAR XXX
Entered aa second class matter, Poet Office. San Juan, P. A.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY DECEMBER 10, 1949
NUMBER 13871
FIVE CENTS
Prominent Film and Financial Figures Arrive
áa/ WBfMi-.B*- f i / - r'iOr ik ■- .-Ja ■ ' **w - & JB > f ¿ íflv ' VBuJK ib<.®3t ? r __ z AA, ' ~ J " |Msv " f ' w i . <w z / >C- f -Wn I aiSte. í-sl J i" ' rl * , jfr / *' W ■ JK "to* i" Jvw&JlwVHS ■f V IImWÍmmí . ---'■♦ k . ,_ _ I E f Luz Maria Garda, Puerto Rican WAC who lent "ervlclo" in New Guinea, pona accompanied by Conrad N. Hllton and Gloria Swanson (far Left). to my arrlho at 1 "la yesterday afternoon. The young horirua came as a guest of the Hilton ardor from California, where she was confined in a military hospital, to visit her relatives in Santurce and to participate in the inauguration of the Caribe Hilton hotel in San Juan. (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Fortune Smiles On Puerto Rico's Aunajovchcita Former WAC Returns To Island In Group Members Of Hollywood Actors By S. GALVEZ MATURANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer Fortune smiled on a Puerto Rican girl who, confined to a military hospital in California. v|6 made rus Rueños to return to the side of.The Puerto Rican girl Luz Maria Garcia Young, a Puerto Rican girl who served in the WACS corps in New Guinea, was confined in a military hospital in California, longing to return to Puerto Rico to be reunited with her relatives, residents of 406 Bartolome Las Casas Street, in Las Palmas, Puerto Rico. Reading in the American press all the propaganda made in relation to the inauguration of the Caribe Hilton Hotel, and lacking the necessary means to return to the pals, she thought of writing to the President of the corporation, Mr. Conrad N. Hllton, requesting his cooperation to see her wishes come true. She wrote nine letters to Mr. Hllton, one to each of the hotels of the chain that operates them, and the one she addressed to the city of Miami reached him. As soon as Mr. Hllton received the letter in question, Luz Maria's problem began to be solved, as if a fairy godmother had taken her protection into her hands. Mr. Hllton did everything in his power, through his secretaries, to get in touch with her, until he finally succeeded a few days before leaving for Puerto Rico. A new inconvenience arose because Luz Marta needed a permit from the Veterans Administration to be able to leave the hospital. Luz Maria made many requests, but to no avail. But again Mr. Hllton appeared on the scene who, like the Fairy Godmother in our story, took matters into his own hands, using his personal influence and relationships to obtain the necessary permission. Several days later, the Military Hospital granted .the. permission to Luz (Continued on p. 16. col. 8).
Gloria S wansorc John IIall Among Those Who Arrived Late Yesterday The Public Dispensed Grand Welcome Reception To Guests For Hilton Hotel Inauguration Since Thursday night began to arrive in Puerto Rico the "artistic" personalities of the financial, official and social world, who were invited for the inauguration ceremonies of the Caribe Hilton Hotel. --
Film and vaudevillian artists, bankers and federal government officials arrived Thursday night and yesterday, Friday, shortly after noon, on Pan American World Airways and Eastern Airlines planes. At the Big Island terminal on Thursday night there was unusual movement. Numerous public went there to witness the arrival of the personalities of the artistic and social world. From eight o'clock in the evening the public began to arrive at the airport, interested in seeing the North American film artists up close, among them the great Puerto Rican actor José Ferrer, whose arrival was scheduled for that night. The Reception A committee of government officials arrived early to welcome Jo" Guest". The committee included the Director of the Budget Bureau, Mr. Roberto de Jesús; the Superintendent of Insurance, Mr. Jorge Font Saldaña, both accompanied by their wives; the Deputy Treasurer Francisco de Jesús and wife; the Vice President of the Governmental Bank, Mr. Esteban A. Bird, and the rector Jaime Benltez. Around eleven o'clock Thursday night, the first plane from New York landed. The visitors were received by the aforementioned "funcionarlo" on the runway, while the artistic group Los Romanceros, using pavas campesinas, sang Creole songs. The new arrivals were taken to a Transportation Authority facility, where they were treated to refreshments, while they mingled with friends and members of the receiving committee. Among the "artistic personalities" arriving on this first plane were Hollywood stars France Langford and Pauline Frederick. Both actresses said they were grateful for the opportunity to visit the island. Second Plane Minutes after the arrival of the first plane, the second arrived bringing on board another group of guests. The receiving committee welcomed the guests and Los Romanceros let their interpretations blr as they descended (Continued on p. 16, col. 7).
Betatron Cures Malignant Tumor Of One Patient 3 Others Have Improved. Doctors Don't Judge Cancer Cure Definitive Yet CHICAGO, Dec. 9 (PU) - A type of atom-bombing machine known as Betatron and rated at 25,500,000 volts has cured the tumor of the first cancer patient treated with the device, scientists at the University of Illinois reported yesterday. The "super revo" x" machine was first used three months ago on a 77-year-old man suffering from an inoperable throat cancer. Today, a spokesman for 1" Un'vetsldad said the patient "was up and performing his" normal" aclMdade." George A. Harvey, M.D. Head of the University's radiology department, said the results have been "encouraging," but cautioned that the man may not be permanently cured. He said the "doctor" did not consider a tumor cured until he found that it had not "appeared to have recurrent symptoms" during the subsequent "five years" after the operation. "We have had too few cases" to properly evaluate It position of the Betatron in cancer therapy," Harvey said. So far only four people have been treated with the help of the giant machine. All of them" volunteers. The second person has a large cancer of the jaw, which is considered inoperable, garvsy said that all the damaged tissue has been healed by the Betatron's rays with the exception of one small spot. Improvement was also reported in the case of a third nschuio who had an operable cancer of the throat, who speaks InvMdtdo his vocal cords. Results in the fourth patient, who had a brain tumor, have not been fully determined, Harvey said. Superiority of the Betatron The physician said the results demonstrated so far proved the Betatron's superiority over the X-ray device's ability to penetrate deep into the body without losing power. The X-rays, he said,' generate their greatest intensity in the skin auyorfidtf and could cause the Joño (Continued on page 16, Col. 6) CHRISTMAS READING The School Page to be published next Monday by eate newspaper, as official text material for public schools, contains intereaantíalma reading of N '.vldad that will be very useful to teachers for their programs of the week. This page initiates the plan sponsored by the Department of Instruction to provide supplementary reading for the schools. We refer the reader to our editorial column:
My 3 Years in Moscow The Voice of America Had A Large Audience in Russia
By Lt. Gen. WALTER BEDELL SMITH XIV । AMERICA MAKES ITS HEARING The Voice of America first spoke in Russian on February 17, 1947. Several days earlier I officially notified the Soviet Foreign Office v eacribl letters to the newspapers Pravda and Izvestia, asking them to publish the date, time and frequency of our initial program. These letters were ignored. We did not expect the first programs to be perfect. We all expected flaws to be, but we thought that once the broadcasts were *on the air we could correct any defects. Arrangements were made at the embassy to follow the program and note its merits and shortcomings and nata to be able to check the reaction of
We sent the Department detailed reports and criticisms of the program. We sent the Department detailed reports and criticisms on all aspects of the program. From the beginning we liked the voice and manner of speaking of the participants, and the way the news was presented. The reception, however, was poor; the topics were not sufficiently light and entertaining; much of the music was bad for shortwave, and the flow between the various parts of the program (news, technical topics, light topics, dance music and serenity music) was poorly coordinated. We forwarded these criticisms to the Department and suggested changes. As we had planned, once the programs were started and after studying them in operation, the improvements were carried out quickly and safely. The (Continued on page 10, Col. 1)
Certiorari Case In Coamo Lawsuit Ruled Unmeritorious
A F Distribu ve Bonus Applications This Benefits Veteran* Residing* in City Before Enlistment Pnr Kurico E. Rivera Editor <le EL MUNDO The Veterans Administration has distributed the rl* applications for payment of state bonuses approved by the State of New York, and which are exfensiyos to Borlcua" who resided in that city for a period of six months before being called to the-. Armed Forces. Dr. Jaime Serra Chavarry informed this to EL MUNDO, expressing that the files speak of Syrian ri ri i s s t r i bu I ri os between the different contact offices that the Veterans Administration has on the Island, and in its central office in Santurce. According to what has been revealed, this bonus will benefit numerous Puerto Rican irieranos or their dependents, if any of them are deceased, From $29 To "'5O The" bonuses will be from $20 to $250. and will be paid out as a result of the elections held in New York poro ago. Voters in New York State approved a constitutional amendment, allowing the payment of bonds to all veterans in the state and to the immediate relatives of deceased veterans, regardless of where they now reside. Dr. Serra Chavarry, upon learning that the New York State legislative measure benefited Puerto Rican veterans, requested that the bill be sent to Puerto Rico for distribution (Continued on page 14. col 8) 4 Boricuas Arrested in N.Y. With Marijuana Detective" Angel Ortiz Followed Lead.- Business* Amounted to Millions* By DAVID C. WHITNET NEW YORK, Dec. 9. (PU) - A dashing Broadway hustler was jailed today on charges of being the leader of a gang of narcotics dealers whose turnover amounted to several" million dollars Angel Ortiz, 27, was arrested by detectives last night. The agents said they had been following him for seven weeks as he partied in exclusive nightclubs on Gran Via Rio de Janeiro. Detectives said the defendant offered them $25,000 to leave him alone. The detectives* said that Ortiz had taken them to his apartment, where he had hidden several shipments of marijuana and cocaine, valued at over rie million dollars. He was also hiding drugs in a store in the Bronx. D">" Women With Ortiz were arrested his wife Rosa rie 21 years; Jose Rorirfguez. rie 40; and Lidia Zaya". rie 26, (Continued on page 16, Col. 6).
- ■ ■ . . - । - mi i,-| -- - - |r - - - - - - - - ■ ■■ _ .1 !■! - - - - - ■ - ~ Mayoress of San Juan Was the Object of a Warm Reception Yesterday.
Mrs. Rincón de Gautier Addressed the Public from City Hall By 8. GALVEZ MATURANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer One hundred" people, Capital Government officials, political leaders, public employees and legislators came yesterday to welcome Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier, Administrator of the Capital, at the Isla Grande Airport. Mrs. Rincón got off the plane, which arrived at the airport at one o'clock in the afternoon, and was received by her husband, Mr. Jenaro Gautier, the President of the Senate, Mr. Samuel R. Quplñones, and several members of the Board of Commissioners of the Capital. The large audience gathered in the airport waiting room burst into cheers and applause when Mrs. Rincón left the baggage screening room. Police had to intervene to keep the Mayor from being suffocated by the crowd that swarmed around her and materially carried her through the lounge in a sl(Continued on page 18, Col. 4)
' díSB '****$>> : - rZ* WIU. / jgj.. z írBf" La-* xMLWüí áÑ-M ■ SSIMHHMH" IC ~ ■ i*™ V" fu B ; IHm? - ? - it ; The Administrator of the Capital, aeflora Felisa Rincón da Gautier, was the object of a warm welcome yesterday upon her return to the can, after several weeks of absence. At the center we see the Mayoress in the" moments in which she embraced the President of the Senate, Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones, upon her arrival at the air terminal of Isla Grande (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Judge E. Belaval Entiles His Opinion, Says Legislature Can Delegate Power To Impeach To Governor. By Losé M. Gn reía Calderón ] Rrrindor ri? EL MUNDO Judge Emilio S. Relava!, ri" K Rala ric Extraordinary Resources! riel Tribunal del Diatrito rie. rie San. Juan, declared "to be without place the petition ric Certiorari riel alcalde dsj Coimn, scfmr Carlos Vázquez, ai ! who d governor I.uls Muñoz Marín rtrslltuyó rie his office r| 28 ' ' ' de jumo de este afro. The removal of Mayor Vázquez from office came as a result of an investigation by a Senate committee into alleged friction between the executive and the Munkl , cipal Assembly of Coamo. The senatorial commission, after holding a private roll call, s la CUal| compatecicron Vázquez Vélez and lo" ' asnmblelslns, and functioning them riel municipality of Coamo, recommended to the Goi j bernadnr to declare" vacant the office of Mayor ric said city. In the sentence issued yesterday, Judge Relnval makes a broad study of the allegations and states that Vázquez Vélez, during the hearing held by the Senate Committee, abstained from presenting evidence and requested permission to file a plea within 10 days from the date on which he was served with the record. The allegations of the petitioner were, among others, the following: that the senatorial commission erred in holding a private hearing in the case; that the senatorial commission committed errors in the appreciation of the evidence and in the conclusions of fact reached; that the Governor committed error in resolving the case without hearing the petitioner. Another allegation of the deposed official is that in the proceeding against him there was a violation of his constitutional rights, and that Law 428 of April 23, 1946, amending Article 11 of the Constitution of the Republic. amending Article 11 of the Municipal Law (which provides the procedure for the Intervention of the Senate in cases of friction between the Mayor and the Assembly, and the subsequent Intervention) is unconstitutional, among other reasons, because there is an improper delegation of powers, since "the Puerto Rico Legislature delegates to the Army the power to remove a public official". This attack, like all the others, Judge Belaval declares it unsustainable. He tells the magistrate in his ruling that - "There is no prohibition whatsoever *in our Organic Law "as to the Legislature . of Puerto Rico to relegate to any administrative agency of the executive branch, or to the executive itself, the powers that the Legislature has, as long as it does as it did in the case of Act 428 of 1946. for the clarification of a fact, discovered) 1 which, the provisions of the statute apply. The only prohibition 1 by Implication that has 1a rorfI titurlón rie United States, and perhaps ■ 14 Organic Law of Puerto Rico, is that e, Congress rie United States : United", and perhaps the Legislature of . Puerto Rico, cannot delegate et . fundamental legislative power! that is to say, the act of legislating, which. In its most ctan- , tific terms, it means to establish the public politics (standards) rie] the people it represents, in the flisttntas relations riel man ron the State and rie the governed among themselves, 7 1 Another Contention Judge Belaval further contends that, we have found nothing to be interpreted to the effect that under either the Constitution or the Organic Law of Puerto Rico there is any prohibition against the Legislature delegating to the Governor of Puerto Rico the powers of impeachment, which by 1o generates!, The Legislature may delegate to other administrative agencies its own executive branch, provided that it does so within the general limitations of the delegation of power, that is, <1>to discover a fact, !" existence of which makes the provisions of the law applicable, (in this case, the state of frlcdón between a municipal assembly and a mayor, and (2) that the delegation be made by setting certain conditions (stanriars) for the exercise of the delegated power. The rest would be to make valid a theoretical residue of Montcaquieu's time, whose functioning would have no justification within the complexities of a new constitutional time". Judge Belaval's ruling elucidates a controversy between two groups of Populares in Coamo, one led by Senator Francisco L. Anselmi, and the other by Mr. Carlos Vázquez Vélez, who in the last general elections was elected mayor of the aforementioned city. Supporters of Mayor Vazquez have been urging the resolution of the case, and to that end held a public meeting last week in the Plaza de Coamó.
They challenged the legality of the judicial act
Andres Garcia Asked To Be Released From Jail Habeas Corpus Appeal Raises That Bail Is Null And Void' By Jose M. Garcia Calderon Editor, EL MUNDO At 3:00 p.m. yesterday, a petition was filed at the clerk's office of the Criminal Section of the San Juan District Court. District Court of San Juan a petition of Habeas Corpus challenging the imprisonment of Andres Garcia, master builder of the Municipality of Rio Piedras, who is being held in the San Juan District Jail, for not having been able to provide the $40,000 bail set by prosecutor Baldomcro Freyre. When Dr. Sanios P. Amadeo notified yesterday in person 1 nitrito to the prosecutor José C. Aponía the petition for Habeas Corpus, the latter expressed his desire to discuss it immediately; but the lawyer had already requested Judge Rodolfo Ramírez Pabón to set the hearing for next week. In the habeas eotpus petition, attorneys Rafael V. Perez, Marchand and Armando Miranda claim that the bail set for Andres Garcia is null or ineffective because the function of setting bail is a strictly judicial one, which according to 1a I.oy Orgánica, is the responsibility of the Judges and the courts. The habeas corpus petition, which also alleges that the bail set for the petitioner is excessive and prohibitive, is directed against the warden of the San Juan District Jail, Balhino Gon-' -zález, against whom it is requested. -The Court is requested to issue an order for him to appear and bring Andres Garria with him next Tuesday to the hearing for the discussion of the appeal. Andres Garria has been in jail since last Tuesday on charges of several infractions of Article 87 of the Penal Code for allegedly fraudulently collecting more than $1,000 from the Municipality of Rio Piedra. The imprisonment order against Andres Garcia was issued when the citizen appeared before prosecutors last Tuesday to retract a decoration that he had made in the previous row about the alleged irregularities existing in the Municipality of Rio Piedras. Alleged Threats Regarding Garcia's recantation, it was revealed yesterday that it was probably forced by threats. It was said that". Immediately after the circulation of EL MUNDO with news of his statement on Tuesday night, the witness was taken from his home in a car and taken to some place where he was threatened with physical harm if he did not rectify his statement. Another witness who, according to what was said yesterday, has been threatened, is Próspero Guerrero, who as a result of giving testimony before the prosecutor Rafael Padró Paré", about the events" that culminated in the death of Nicolás Díaz Jiménez, left the city of Rio Piedras, Endose to reside in Orocovis. It was formed yesterday that all necessary precautions have been taken" to protect the life of the witness. The investigation into the alleged administrative irregularities in the Municipality of Rio Piedras was resumed yesterday morning, with statements being taken from "the merchant Alfonso Pastrana; the Manager of Banco Popular of Rio Piedras, José Manusl OI veros, Nicolás Fuentes, collector of the Rio Piedras fish market; Santiago Brito, municipal auditor, (Continued on page 14, col 8).
They Enjoy the Rejoice of Being on the Island'.
a. < i i HBi z - JR' MB / A \ t \ . ■ W s IR n z wra mi The smoky Puerto Rican actor, José Ferrer, arrived on Thursday night to participate in the inauguration of the Hotel Caribe Hll5 ton. Here we see the actor, sporting the barha, which he needs for a new movie, as he embraces his father, Mr. Rafael Ferrer, at the Isla Grande airport. (Photo by EL MUNDO), Boricua Actor J. Ferrer Figures Among the Notable Visitors To The Airport He Was Welcomed By Various* Family, Friends. Time í'ontrato en Hollywood T'nr Luí" Sánchez Cappa Editor of EL MUNDO Accompanied by l? *His wife Phillis, arrived earlier in Puerto Rico and the acclaimed Puerto Rican film and theater actor, José Fer-er, Ferrer and his wife came to the island invited by the management of the Hotel Caribe Hiitón, for the inaugural events of the hotel, which began yesterday, Friday.
ron yesterday, Friday. At the airport, Ferrar and his wife were met by his father. Ferrar and his wife, his father, S'ñor Rafael Ferrer, and some relatives of the actor, Eate arrived at Sari Juan in the last plane of a group of four, of the Pan Am" rlcan World Airways, that brought to the Island part of the Guests for the ceremonies of Inauguration of the Caribe Hilton. Upon leaving the plane, our nr- ! fíala was embraced by his father and other relatives, while greeting friends who had come to welcome him. Lucia Ferrer had a beard that gave her an air of a foreigner. A| lie. gar to the place where Jos visitors were gathered, the public at the airport gave him a round of applause. The artist responded with greetings, while smiling gratefully. In an aside with the journalists, Ferrer, who seemed to have made a calm trip and "seemed" to be rested, informed that he had made the trip to Ran Juan after finishing a recent trip to Europe. The Ferrer spouses visited London, Paris, and Rom", psieanlo and resting, according to the nrtis- ' ta said. When asked about the reason for the beard he had grown, Ferrer, stroking it, declared that in his next film he would have to wear it. He preferred, he added, to grow it out and wear a false one during the filming of the play. Starts 14ibor in January The play to be filmed will be entitled Crisis, and will be based on South America. It will begin production next January. The last film in which Ferrer took part is entitled Whirlpool. At present our actor is under contract with Metro Goldwyn Mayer for five years, pm" acting in two films a nuil mente. The Inauguration of the Tapia Ferrer said he was looking forward to being in Puerto Rico for the inauguration date of the Tapia Theater. In response to a question about whether or not he would like to perform for the audience, Ferrer said he would like to perform from the stage box (Continued on 1" page 16, col. 8).
Morovis Still Without a Mayor In Ownership ... Assembly Rejects Nne$n (Candidate.5 Executive* in a Year MOROVIs7(By "luün Charnsco) --At the meeting held by the Municipal Assembly on Wednesday night to discuss the appointment of the Mayor of this town, the motion to confirm Mr. Marcelo Medina Melecio for said office was defeated. Out of nine members" of the Assem. well, seven attended the meeting and the following was the result of the secret ballot: 4 votes against, 2 in favor and one blank, Pnr rio" ocasione" the compromisario" rie harrlo and local leaders have voted by majority ni señor Marcelo Medina as the only eandl. dato, and his confirmation was considered certain, Last Sunday, according ! Last Sunday, as we reported through EL MUN' DO, again ¡o" compromisei rivers were ratified in the vptaclón in his favor. The sympathizers riel candidate, intend to continue fighting until "ararle triumphant, There is speculation about the formation of a wing fzqulerl da in the party. A lot of people have been "close to both sides to try to harmonize, but far from achieving this end, the situation is becoming more tense. Five Mayors" In the short period of one year, it can be said that Morovis has had five mayors. The first was Ramón Zambrana, elected by the Popular vote in the last elections, and who never occupied the office. The second was Mr. Eduardo Laureano, now retired from all political activity. The third, Mr. Félix E. The third, Mr. Félix E. Rodríguez, who during the vacancies has occupied the interim offices. The fourth, Mr. Antonio M.- Colón, whose resignation was (Continued on page 16, role. 8)