THE MlNDO
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND TODAY. - Patchy to occasionally cloudy during scattered light showers, becoming clear to partly cloudy this evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, 71 degrees; low, 68. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 30.00 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Jan. 28. (PU). - Temperatures: New York, 51; Washington, 51; Miami, 1"; Chicago, 21. At La Guardia airport, at íu 1 P. M : clear sky haata 4,200 ft.", cloudy; visibility 4 miles, smoke; winds from the west and southwest 1 milisa per hors. There will be no change" spradables during the next two hours. Notes: good weather in general for flights with Instruments.
MARAÑA DAILY
4 Cm VVTV Entered ■* second claw matter, AHU A Al A Fnet Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 29, 1949
m. NUMBER 13561 --
FIVE CENTS
Moscoso Says Washington Seeks Help
Will Connect Island With Truman Plan Believes It Should Include U.S. Overseas Areas For JAMES fTcUNNINGHAM WASHINGTON. Jan. 28. (FU)- Teodoro Moscoso, director of the Puerto Rico Industrial Development Company, said here that he was exploring means of connecting Puerto Rico with President Truman's "bold new" program to help the "undeveloped" area of the world. In his Inaugural Address, Truman recommended last week that the United States begin to put its capital and technical expertise to work in the development of such areas. In an exclusive interview with the United Press, which covered many issues, Moscoso asked: "Where better and more logically should such a program be initiated than in the overseas areas under our own ban* ry?" A recently organized firm, with headquarters in New York, for international study and development, Moscoso added, already agrees that Puerto Rico provides an ideal climate for industrial development. And this firm, which is headed by a well-known New York business executive, Moscoso said, is already equipped and dedicated to promote and carry forward a development program, like the President's. Moscoso reported that he has been in talks here with half a dozen entities that will soon send representatives to Puerto Rico to decide when and where to locate new factories on the island. The new industries in the offing, he said, include the manufacture of rayon yarn, perfumes, ties, cast iron sewer pipes, cigars and deodorant disinfectants. The manufacture of deodorants will be doubly beneficial, he added. It will mean a new and unique crop to help vary the island's agriculture, and a processing plant at the same time. The plant, on the other hand, would be a spin-off of the Insular bottle factory, he added. Moscoso Rum Campaign Begins Moscoso reported that Puerto Rico's long-running, multimillion-dollar program to induce mainlanders to consume more rum began operating this month. But the program will not gain full momentum - until next spring, he said. He said the first advertising campaign in trade magazines began this month. And the first of a series of four-color ads in Collier's Life and Look will begin in March. He predicted that the newspaper ad campaign will increase during the year. Moscoso said that final arrangements are being made with liquor industry executives to grant Island Government approval for all Puerto Rican rum and to require that it meet the stipulated quality standards before it receives that approval. He added that the exact economic details of the program are still flexible. But he predicted that by next spring, Puerto Rican rum will be served in major hotels throughout the country. Rum recipes will be widely circulated, and spectacular new liquor combinations will be helping to popularize rum on the mainland as well as in Puerto Rico. Workers Report Strike at Plazuela Yesterday afternoon Salustiano Nieves Vargas and Gustavo Vidal Rulz, president and secretary respectively of the Union de Trabajadores do Factoría do Barceloneta, reported that the workers of the Central Plazuela mill suspended work yesterday. The aforementioned workers' leaders said that they suspended work "in protest against the importation of workers, in clear violation of the collective bargaining agreement, displacing the organized workers, without having given our organization the opportunity to obtain them within the term established by the agreement". They further state that "we hold the management of the Central Plazuela responsible" for the strike. Despite repeated efforts, we were unable to contact the administrator of Central Plazuela in order to obtain information about the reported protest. Nor were we able to locate officials of the Land Authority, which owns Central Plazuela.
65th Troops Made a Trial Landing
-- "aX CjL ffi - a a " a "*v . -■***-, Wii . - r W ¿Wy. -. -■ i- - ¿áhSÉMW wl ' t-fUr ... :: --.W
The photograph shows soldiers of the "8" Regiment learning to use their life preservers in in-water operations. The "ducks" in the background
-(Photo EL MUNDO, by C "senave). ¡
~ New York NEW YORK, Jan. 28 (PU)- The Roberts organization, made up of consulting engineers, will conduct a study of San Juan transit service for the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority, according to an announcement authorized today. (Transportation Authority Director Salvador V. Caro reported yesterday that the study has begun, and work is now underway to organize the work that will lead to the completion of the plans). The purpose of the investigation is to draw up plans for the improvement of bus service for 1o" 350,000 residents in San Juan and its environs. The Puerto Rico Transportation Authority has for several years been operating a large part of the local bus service in San Juan, and now wants to develop this service to the point where it compares favorably with the best transit systems in other" large" American cities. The study to be conducted by the Robert" organization will be led by Walter Carr, who until recently served as executive vice president of the Twin City Rapid Transit Company of Minneapolis and St. Paul, Minn. Carr was also executive vice president of the Connecticut Railway A Lighting Company from 1938 to 1947. For the latter company he reorganized the transit systems of Bridgeport, Waterbury, New Britain and Norwalk, after the New Haven Railroad abandoned its rights to these Connect!cut cities in 1936. The announcement said Carr is currently in San Juan directing the initial phases of the investigation. '
Preparing for Maneuvers to be Held on Vieques General Sibert and Officers Praised His Performance. - Next Drills Will Be Realistic. Within the next two months, the waters off the island of Vieques and the island itself will serve as the stage for one of the most important military maneuvers of the Atlantic Armed Forces, considered the largest and most significant to be held since the beginning of the war.
The group of drivers and mechanics of the Transportation Authority, presided by Mr. Juan García Maldonado, won the elections held on Thursday to determine the leadership of the Union with the right to bargain collectively with the TA. The elections were held under the supervision of the Labor Relations Board, to settle a controversy between three antagonistic groups of workers who disputed the right to represent all employees. The election was held between a group presided over by ex- aeflor José Avila*, known as the uniflration group, and the group presided over by Mr. Juan Garcia Maldonado. This last group, it was alleged, was the board elected by the Union in a recent assembly, in which the board presided by Mr. Raimundo Lebrón was deposed. Mr. Lebrón's group did not participate in the election. A total of 7R2 votes" were deposited in the ballot box. The winning group obtained 560 votes", the losing group 193; 22 votes" were challenged"; 4 were spoiled in favor of none of the group", and three votes" were declared nyloa. The voting ended at ten o'clock in the evening, and at that time the officers of the Board proceeded to count the votes. Mr. Carlos Qulrós Trujilto, the agency's chief examiner, represented the Board. The Board will then proceed to certify the winning board as the workers' representative to the end of collective bargaining with the TA. Board Certified Yesterday at a meeting of the two groups participating in the election held at the Labor Relations Board, the parties signed an e "tlpulaclon and agreement waiving the right to file any objection to the outcome of the election. The Board then proceeded to issue a certificate of representation in favor of the sector presided by Mr. Juan Garda Maldonado, who obtained the majority of the votes. The new board proposed to hold an assembly last night at the Union's Hato Rey office, to take possession of the Union's properties, and for the directors to take possession of their positions,
Tenants Demand Payments From North Avenue Tenants Judge Orders 2 To Vacate Housing By Early March Special Judge 3""d" A. González, presiding over one of the" civil chambers of the San Juan District Court, yesterday issued an order directed to tenant María Cabrera, widow of Blane", to pay the" rental fees of the housing unit she occupies to the Government of Puerto Rico. The lawsuit resides in one of the properties acquired by the Government for the eonitrucclón of North Avenue. The order was issued, consistent with a prior order issued by Judge Gonzalez, against two other tenants living in expensive expropriated properties. The "Inquilino" rte this "reildencias" had failed to pay the rents after the expropriation of the property, given by the government. In this original order, the magistrate ordered the tenants to continue to pay the rent to the Government under penalty of contempt, and ordered them to vacate the houses by March 2, 1949. Affects 800 Families" This order affects about SOO families" living on property where the North Avenue is planned to be built. The defendant in both cases is the Government of Puerto Rico through the Commission (Cont. on page 16, Col. 6).
The defendant in both cases is the Government of Puerto Rico through the Commission for the termination of World War II. In these maneuvers 35,000 men and more than 100 maritime units will take part. Admiral Daniel E. Barbey said in a speech Thursday night at the Naval Reserve Office banquet that, coincidentally, the upcoming major maneuvers "will demonstrate to the world the strength and determination America has to offer to the proposed North Atlantic Pact. Admitted the admiral that preparations for a war are costly, but qus ->< for the sake of preparation is wlta i" "- war is won, if war is inevitable, then what we pay for the preservation of democracy turns out to be a very small price." Before the great combined maneuvers begin in the vicinity and in the territory of Visque", there are military units training on the same terrain where the events are to take place. Units of the 65th Infantry Regiment a few weeks ago were sent to Vieques to train in the new practices of war. A group of military men experienced in aggregation tactics is in charge of the training. It is commanded by Colonel C C. Sloane, and includes in the staff Lieutenant Colonel George W. Dickerson, Major Edward A. Caskey, Major Floyd D. Gatls, Major Henry F. Hauser, Major Loul" P. Te "ta, Captain John O. Dabinett, and Lieutenants Joseph L. Clouse, John R. Ro""kopf, and Frank D. Stevens. This group of officers was recently on the same training mission in the big maneuvers held in PaLo to prepare the soldiers to act as the enemy of the American forces when the landing is made on Vleque Island, which will take place on March 2. On Thursday morning, soldiers of the 65th Infantry Regiment, who are undergoing training, carried out a landing drill on a Vieques beach. General Slbert, commander of the Military Department of the Antilles, was present, and declared to the representatives of the 65th Infantry Regiment (Cont. on page 16, Col. 7).
Compendium of News
Supply does not intend to relax the price of food for the time being. - a - - Moacoso geatlona the lela to participate in the Truman Flan of aid to undeveloped areas". ♦ - - - Senator Green received permission to visit the Island on official geatlan. < ~ - - a - Signature of Ingeníeme amencanoa "atudia the trójialtc of San Juan by encomienda d" AT. - - - Sergeant borleua enaefiari in a military school in Bolivia. - ♦ - They sponsor a program of llúatradón for loa worker" of the Nation. The Treasurer set a revised income estimate" of 813,840,000. Borlcua" Marines charged in New York with Introducing Marijuana. - Radioactive test" performed on automobiles to measure rim wear. Only the Insular Tenancy Law could prevent mass evictions. - - - Directors of 1a Federation of Merchants" will discuss, tomorrow, legislation that will propel. - Garcia Maldonado's group won the elections among drivers of the Transportation Authority,
Yesterday they cancelled the "flight" to La Guardia. Femando Fornarl" was appointed assistant prosecutor of the Supreme Court. - Another delay arose for the repeal of the Taft-Hartley Act. No more typhoid "cano" reported in Patilla. Labor leader" reports strike at Plazuela. The miners' strike extends to Maryland. Senator Chives defended the President of Argentina in Washington. - A stalemate has arisen in the "pro pos" talks between Egypt and Israel Sonja Henle was robbed in New York. - The President wishes to increase the Air Force, when funds are available. - The President wants to increase the Air Force, when funds are available. * Troops of the 65th made a landing on Vieques in preparation for maneuvers in big island in two months. - - - Suggestions discussed "for coffee preservation project" in coffee growing region. - Australia and Swaziland recognized Israel.
For RURICO E. RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO The fact that in Puerto Rico there are two Tenancy Laws in force - the federal and the island - gives landlords the opportunity to withdraw their homes from the rental market, thus causing mass evictions of families. Under the current law, landlords in Puerto Rico can avail themselves of the "good faith" eviction cause of removal from the rental market provided by Federal law. The Federal Rent Law allows landlords to withdraw their homes from the rental market, as long as they are acting in good faith, and do not re-rent properties while rent controls are in effect. Ledesma commented We asked Mr. Ledesma Davlla, administrator of the Insular Rent Office, what remedies the Insular law offered in case landlords decide to withdraw their homes from the rental market. He commented the following: "The only thing that the Insular Law can do as a remedy is that the landlords can withdraw their houses from the rental market.
Ledesma Says There Is Conflict Between Laws On Evictions
It prevents landlords from evicting tenants violently. under that ground; i.e., to exercise that ground, the landlord must notify the tenant with at least one month's notice. In addition, once the landlord has obtained a judgment, and that judgment has become final, the Tenant would have 90 days to move out, starting from the date of the date of the judgment. Mr. Ledesma Dávlla also wishes to clarify that "the foregoing is the only protection that the local law can provide to the Tenant, under the prevailing law, that the Federal and Island law together, are in force in Puerto Rico on eviction matters." "But," added Lodesma Dávlla, "if the Federal law did not apply in Puerto Rico, the Tenant would have absolute protection, since the local law does not recognize the discussed cause of action, and therefore an eviction action could not be brought under that cause of action." Federal Law Objected As you will recall (Cont. at p. 16, Col. 1).
LiTsung Jen Accepts the 8 Points of Peace - Did Not Allude to Government Leaders' Surrender
Senator McCarran Asked To Be Granted Nationalist Government Loan For Arthur Goul NANKIN, Jan. 2sU (PU). - While in Washington Senator Pat McCarran, Democrat of Nevada, was advocating the granting of a loan of $1,500,000,(XX) to Nationalist China to meet the "challenge of Communism," the provisional President of the Republic of China, Li Taung jen, today informed Communist leader Mao Tse tung that his Government will accept the original eight conditions formulated last January fourteenth as a basis for peace issues. The Communists, on the other hand, accused the Nationalist Government of using leafleting operations to cover up "shameful dates for the beginning of the corqunlgta ge "territory. The acceptance of Ll Tsung jen was sent in a personal message to Mao, in which he again asked him to designate the place and date for the beginning of the peace negotiations. However, Mr. Tsung-jen informed the Communist leader that the Nationalist Government should not be expected to blindly accept the eight conditions, specifying that he accepted the eight points as a basis for peace negotiations. He did not allude to "Crlmlnaljea" Reported circuios indicated that Ll did not allude in his message to the demand expressed rilas ago by the Communist commentator rie rariio Shenshl rie that the Nationalist Government arrest and hand over to the Communists all those who appear on the list rie "war criminals." In the above circuits it has been asserted that the Nationalist Government has assumed that the demands described above constitute only the opinion of the Red commentator, and represent the official attitude of the Communists. However, the jlrlmera of Mao T "e fun" condition" demands "the punishment of all Nationalist war criminals," including Chairman Chlang Ka| shek, who is retired from the Government on "leave." It is believed that the acceptance of Communist conditions by Ll Tsung jen was hastened by indications that Red forces are massing men and supplies on the northern banks of the Yangtze, opposite Nankln. for a general attack on the Nationalist capital. Information from across the river indicates that 100,000 Red troops are massing 20 miles from the north bank of the Yangtze, and that spearheads have been sent up the river to test the Nationalist defenses. The main Communist force is advancing slowly southward by train, truck, wagon and on foot, while other means of transport are bringing in large numbers of supplies for a sustained attack. It is understood that the Nationalist Government has stationed 45 men at Fakkow. located a few miles from Nankln, to prevent the Communist artillery from positioning itself at a point from which it can bombard the capital. Before leaving, Chang said he would fly directly from Ijinchow to Pelpfn if the Communists accepted the Government's request and agreed to begin peace talks. The U.S. Embassy announced that some of its staff will remain in Nankln, but that a minister will go to Canton to represent the U.S. at the new Nationalist Government headquarters. Ambassador J. Leighton Stuart and Consul Leonard Bacon will remain in Nankln. English Ambassador Ralph Stevenson will do the same as Leighton Stuart, but Counselor John Percival Coghill will go to Canton. .J From Pelpln it was reported that in (Cont. on page 16, Col. 6)
AGS Will Not Review Food Prices For Now
Fernando Fornarls. son, was appointed yesterday as assistant prosecutor of the Supreme Court. The Attorney General, Gélgel Polanco, announced yesterday that from Monday to Tuesday he will appoint the third judge of the Expropriations Court. This one will act, mainly, in the District Court of San Juan, in order to risk the work in this court. (Cont. on page 18,~Col. 8) Senator Green Receives Permission to Travel Will Tell Muñoz It Is Not His Purpose to Harm For Pal Harrison Program WASHINGTON, Jan. 28 (PU) - Rhode Island's veteran Democratic Senator Theodora Francis Green said he has received permission to leave the capital "on official business," so he will leave for Puerto Rico on Wednesday, Feb. 2. Senator Green will visit Jsla as a guest of Governor Luis Muñoz j Marín. Commenting on his trip, Senator Green said he was interested in seeing the progress of the Puerto Rico Industrialization Program. In the first week of the first Congress, Senator Green introduced a bill to equalize Puerto Rico's wages with those of the mainland. Senator Green introduced the bill because he was extremely concerned about the exodus of industry from New England, where factories were being moved to Puerto Rico, where wages were lower than on the mainland. Rua ImprMlonra - Speaking on his bill, Senator Green said he could not approve "the Puerto Rican Industrialization Program if it was based on too low wages, and if it produced unemployment in . Rhode Island and other mainland regions. "I am not willing to approve low wages of any kind for any part of the United States, including Rhode Island," said Green. He added that low wages are not an "advantage. While Green is absent, the Senate Labor Committee is more likely to begin hearings on legislation to raise the national minimum to 75 cents an hour. "The Senate is not likely to take any action on the bill in my absence," he said. Public Hearings" The Labor Cornilé d" I" House began public hearings" yesterday on d" a similar bill. The bills now before -! The bills now before the Senate and the House would preserve the present system that allows special industrial committees to set minimums for Puerto Rico and the Vlrg "n "s Islands, as long as these minimums do not give the island's industries a competitive advantage over those on the mainland. In addition to studying Puerto Rico's economic problems, Green said, he proposed to visit Navy installations in the Caribbean. "But my primary objective," he said, "is to study Puerto Rico's problems to see what can be done to solve them. Green said he will talk a lot with the island's first elected governor. "I understand he is a great person," he said (Cont. on page 16, Col. 6).
Ways To Lift Control Studied Vicéns Alleges Local Market Has Been Down. Survey Does Not Reveal For ■. GALVEZ M ATUBANA Editor of KL MUNDO Notwithstanding the constant bullets "n tos prices ó" loe prlnelpsloe Articulo" alimentary", whose deieenso in the continental market began to mediado" del p*"ado me" de junto, todavía hay *n Puerto Rico Articulo" qu" se vendep * precio *" mayor"" o iguale" o lo" pre. valecientes en el me" de octubre d" 1947. There will be no revision in the prices of the main food items for the moment, according to Mr. Antonio Vicén" R!o", general manager of supplies, who reported yesterday. He added that he is studying the situation with a view to decontrolling the maximum prices of some items. Mr. Vicéns Ríos also reported that he was not yet in a position to say which items would be subject to price controls. (Meanwhile, a United Press dispatch reported that the Department of Labor in Washington has revealed that wholesale prices dropped three-tenths of one percent for the fifth consecutive week. The average is now 3.5 percent below ri" the corresponding week in 1948). I think there was a drop In relation to the prices of the main foodstuffs on the island, the Sumlnlstroi Administrator reported that the drops in the mainland market have been felt in the local trade, although their effects have been slower in Puerto Rico. । The eeflor Vieéne M . Rloa to the price rie the , which ae paid at 28 eentávns and a>b- . ra is paid at .23. arguing that in Equal proportion have fallen lovpre. rivers rie other items ~ ¡ although he did not list tos tos same. He further reported that statistics prepared by the Trade Division of the Department of Agriculture show that there has been a decline in the level of food pw cto" in the Island, Price" Major Notwithstanding the assertions of the Administrator General of Supplies, the survey conducted by EL MUNDO this week reveals that, with the exception of the" items" controlled by the AGS. The following prices prevailed in September 1948: garlic .35 cents, now .38; onions, =09, now .10; cooking ham, 85, now 72; bacon 26, now 28. 12; garbanzo" .17; and potato" .06. Large red beans fell from .17 to 13; white beans from .19 to .13 and butter ri" .28 to .23. These items were lowered in price according to the latest administrative order of the AGS. Even taking as a basis the next "eptiembr" month, the survey reveals that there is no downward trend in the touch market, even though this trend began to be felt in the continental market. according to the eahlegraphic information since June of last year. Higher than in 1941 Despite these constant declines in the continental market, having already reached levels equal to those prevailing prior to the establishment of the PTB, there are still articles in Puerto Rico whose wholesale prices were higher or equal -np o;p" ou u "p"[SA "jd "nb "o; " during the last fiscal year but for the month of October 1947. Such is the case of ham, which was quoted on October 29, 1947, at $43. quintal and is now sold at $52.; large imported potatoes, which were quoted at that time at $3.50 quintal and are now sold at $4.50; and rice, which was quoted at $10.50 in October 1947 and is now quoted at the same price.
COMPANY ANNOUNCES GASOLINE INCREASE An increase of one-half cent per gallon in the price of its gasoline will be established by the Esso Standard Oil Company, of Puerto Rico, to take effect on the 31st of the current month. An Esso spokesman informed that this increase is motivated by an equal increase suffered by the product in the market, due to shortage of supplies. On the other hand, the spokesman added, the price of Fuel Oil reduced by 25 cents per barrel of 43 gallons in the market, due to the abundance of the product, - a benefit that the company is passing on to its customers, establishing a corresponding rebate, also from January 31".
Sol Descartes Set Revenue Estimate of #73,540,000.00
By Juan Martine" Chapel EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Sol Lula Descartes, yesterday made a review of the revenue estimates to the general fund of the Inaular Government for the 1948-49 fiscal year. The estimate of Revenues determined yesterday by Treasurer Descartes increases by $798,755.50 the last estimate made on October 19, 1949 by the former Treasurer, Rafael Buscaglia. Yesterday's new revised estimate of revenues amounted to $73,540,000 against $72,741,244.50 which was Mr. Buacaglia's last revised estimate. The Distribution The income for 1948-49 was estimated yesterday by Treasurer Descartes.
Treasurer Descartes stated yesterday as follows: Property Taxes, Insular part, $600,000; Income Tax, $28,000,000; Inheritance and Gift Tax, $400,000; General Tax, $24,000,000; Insular Liquor Tax, $7,700,000; Federal Internal Revenue, $5,500,000; Customs, $2,400,000; Lottery Revenue, $3,640,000; Other Revenue, $1,300,000. Total $73,540,000. The revision made by Mr. Descartes alters the last one made by Mr. Buscaglia as follows: Rebates $100,000 in property taxes; $1,000,000 in Income taxes, $1,244.50 in Lottery Revenues and $100,000 rie miscellaneous revenues. Increases: (cont. on page 18, Col. 8)