THE KONDO
NEW YORK, Mptiambre 18. (FU). - This afternoon ** regiitraron 1a* aiguleate* temperature*: New York, 78; Chicago, 71; Wáahlagtoa, 71; Miami, 88. Prediccloaea for tomorrow in New York and neighboring ciudade*: Weather "oleado and pleasant tomorrow with the highest temperature near 75; wind* moderate* ea the coata, Saturday afternoon.
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Partly cloudy with scattered showers* tonight, except occasionally cloudy with showers and thunder during the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: High, M degrees; low. 77 degrees*. Barometric pressure at sea level, at* 4:80 o'clock this afternoon, 29.95 inches of mercury.
DB^aáÉ^iMARAÑA NEWSPAPER.
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan. P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 17, 1949
NUMBER 13787
FIVE CENTS
Puerto Rican Soil Will Be Carried To Fertilize Fraternal Tree
HL BSc r* i - * ú^hhvfs$ Mr L HH |m| StOM ■ Moment in which 1" soil was extracted by the wfior Zeno, in Vil Caparra (Photograph of the Government of the Capital, by Andréu).
Soil extracted from the site where the centennial ruins of the residence of Don Juan Ponce de Leon, in Villa Caparra, are preserved, will fertilize the Tree of American Fraternity to be planted in the city of Buenos Aires, "Republic of Argentina, on Tuesday, October 18, on the occasion of the Fourth American Municipal Historical Congress.
On Thursday at half past four in the afternoon, a commission presided by the Mayor of San Juan, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier, President of the delegation to Buenos Aires, went to Villa Caparra to extract said soil. The photo shows the moment in which the Historian of the Capital, Mr. Francisco M. Zeno, shovel in hand, poured the soil into an urn (Cont. on page 14, Col. 1).
Test Census To Be Initiated Tuesday In Four Towns
Twelve Persons Have Been Trained For Labor To Last Two Weeks. Observers Will Come By Rurieo E. River* Editor of EL MUNDO XI marta* next Tuesday will begin in San Juan, Rio Piedras, Isabela and Ría Grande the test census that will determine the plan to be followed after the official census of 1950. This was reported to EL MUNDO by Mr. Ortrult Branson, Jr., chief of the Field Division of the Federal Census Bureau.
of the Field Division of the Federal Bureau of the Census. Twelve persons* have been appointed to assist in this work, which will last two weeks. He said that the questions asked will be answered on a voluntary basis. However, it was pointed out that for the official work of the 1950 survey, everyone is obliged to answer the questions asked. Both Mr. Branson and Mr. Horacio Royo, Mr. Branson's assistant, have been explaining the work to be done by the interviewers. They will be distributed as follows: One on Intendente Street, in the Barriada Baldrich, in Hato Rey; one on Isabel Street, in Las Palmas; one in the Barrio Obrero neighborhood; one on Lafayette Street, in Condado; two in the El Pangulto neighborhood; and one in San Cristobal, in El Morro, San Juan. Other towns One employee will be sent to Isabela. Rio Piedras and Rio Grande, In Isabela and Rio Grande, the employees will provide, in addition to information on the pohladonal phase, information on agriculture. - According to the Information su-
Investigators Will Intensify Investigations into Scam Case They Will Study Whether Conspiracy Crime Would Play! To Defraud Several By BENJAMIN SANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO The Attorney General yesterday instructed prosecutor Baldomcro Freyre to intensify his investigations in the case related to the 'swindle for more than $300,000. Chief Justice Vicente Gélgel Polanco, special fiara! genefthJosé C. Aponte and prosecutor Freyre had an important conference yesterday at the former's office. They agreed to focus all attention. during the investigations, on a possible crime of conspiracy to defraud of which the alleged swindlers in this case will be accused, from one moment to another. In addition to Aristides Lube Sierra and Ellas G. Lopés, whom the prosecutors allege to be involved in the case, there are others involved in the case, according to the Attorney General's Office yesterday. Majority not Claiming During the conference held yesterday at Justicia, it was revealed that most of the alleged victims of the scam have not made any claim at the office of prosecutor Freyre or the Attorney General's office. It is believed that some of these have not dared to make any claim because they were among the few to receive fan1tastic interest in cash of *400 and ■ $500, a detail which formed part of a large part of the interest in the scam, and which was not paid in cash. Col. 5)
mlrHatted by Mr. Branson, seven Observers will participate in the test beginning *1 Tuesday. These are: Jaime Varas, of the Agriculture Division; Laura Heriot, of the Population Division; Doris Diaz, of the Bureau of Statistics Division; Dr. A. J. Faffe, General Observer; Wayne F. Daugherty, of the Households Division; Joel Williams, of the Population Division; and Ray Hurley, of the Agriculture Division. All these observers are expected to be on the Island from September 17 to 3. They are all officials of the Census Bureau in Washington. Mr. Branson himself will visit Mr. Luis Munoz Marin, Governor of Puerto Rico, just before his return to Washington. Mr. Branson expects to go on his visit to the Governor, accompanied by Dr. Rafael Picó, head of the Planning Board. It was revealed that once the official work of the 1950 census is completed, the local census officials will be able to inform the Press of the estimated population of the Island for the year 1950. No Applications Should Not Be Submitted Mr. Bertruit Branson wishes to inform the Press that anyone interested in submitting applications to work on the 1950 census work should hold them until January and not send them in, as they will not be considered for the time being, due to the limited time available for the trial work. The work of the census, as it is in- , formed, requires careful personnel, due to the nature of the statistics to be obtained, it seems to indicate that the population estimates for 1950 will be close to the figures that have been made known up to now by those persons who have studied the population progress of Puerto Rico during the last few years ' -í" ■ . j-
Muñoz Asked To Intervene In Lanchas Case
Neighbors Submit Document to him Coast Guard Commander Will Also Investigate By S. Gálves Matura na. A document with more than five hundred signatures, requesting government intervention to solve the problem of boat transportation between San Juan and Cataño, was submitted to Governor Muñoz Marín yesterday by residents of the neighboring town. Mrs. Olga Ochoteco, widow of Fergelec, submitted the document to the Governor yesterday, Friday, requesting that the Government take charge of the boat transportation services between San Juan and Cataño or that another company be authorized to provide said service. The document sent to the Governor arose as a consequence of the* alleged* prevailing* deficiencies* in the* transportation* services of the Popular Transportation Company, which enjoys the franchise to* operate the San Juan-Cataño-Bayamón route. Petition The petition presented to the Governor, which was preceded by more than five hundred signatures* of Cataño residents, is the following: "It is regrettable that the people of Cataño and Bayamón have to tolerate such a highly deficient service as the one provided by the Popular Transportation Company. It is necessary, Mr. Governor, that you please take the matter in hand and see that the Government of Puerto Rico or a responsible private company take charge of this infernal service to see if this situation, deplorable as it is, is resolved in a manner favorable to the employees, business people and the public in general who have to be on time in our offices in San Juan". See El Lonco . Next Monday morning, * a hearing will be held before the Public Service Commission, as announced by its chairman, Mr. Jorge V. Toledo. Toledo. He stated that this hearing will be held to inform the company of the result of the Investigation of its* Inspectors and at the same time to notify it of the conclusions reached by the Commission, in light of said Report or to impose on it the measures* to be taken by said company to solve the problem. In an official communiqué of the Commission, issued yesterday, the Chairman, Mr. Jorgo V. Toledo, invited the public to present their views on the problem. Mr. Toledo says: "The Public Service Commission will hold a hearing on Monday at ten o'clock in the morning, to which the Popular Transportation Company has been summoned to consider the deficiencies found in the service and the measures to be taken to remedy them. "Due to the urgency of the case hemds not had time to announce the hearing, but we invite the public to be present and present their views." Another Investigation It was also reported yesterday in San Juan that Coast Guard Base Commander Dwight H. Dexter will investigate the actions of boat captains who allow more passengers to travel on their boats than the boats can accommodate. Commander Dexter reported that no launch may start a trip with more passengers than those for whom a lifeguard is assigned, in contravention of the current federal regulations for transit in the waters of the bay. According to the regulation in question any pilot or captain of a boat who violates this provision (continued on page 14 - Col. 8).
Soto Zaragoza Convicted of Violation of the Bolita Law
José (Chichi) Soto Zaragoza was convicted late yesterday by Judge Julio Suárez Garrlga, of the San Juan District Court and sentenced to serve one year in jail for Violation of the Anti-Bolita Law. At the request of Gustavo Jiménez Sicardó, attorney for the defendant, the Court vacated the sentence to be handed down next Monday, in order to give the defendant the opportunity to provide the three thousand dollar bail that was set to appeal to the Puerto Rico Supreme Court. After sentencing, Judge Suarez Garrlga, stated that since the appeal *in this case raised a substantial question, he decided to grant bail to the defendant to appeal. Defendants Harry Lacks Penn and Jose Angel Santana, who were tried jointly with Soto Zaragoza, were acquitted. Both were acquitted.
Both were acquitted by a peremptory plea filed by attorney Jiménez Sicardó. Neither of them could be connected to the crime. The Public Prosecutor's Office was represented in the case by prosecutor Martín Almodóvar Acevedo. Its only witness was detective Rnmón M. Vlrella, who made the arrest of the three accused in 1* Monserrate Street, in Santuree. Vlrella testified that on the current day he was passing by Monserrate Street, and saw Santana with some papers in his hands, while he was talking with the other two defendants. When Soto Zaragoza saw him, he said to the other two: "Here comes Vlrella", and one of them* threw the papers in the Sotaillo. Detective Vlrella drove the defendants to the barracks, where he searched the automobile and the defendants' persons, taking all the papers he spoke of. These papers consisted of gasoline receipts, raffle tickets from a raffle for a (Continued on page 14, Col. 8)
Transit Has Caused A Problem
The application of the new Traffic Regulations, approved by the Department of the Interior, has been causing some inconveniences to drivers of motor vehicles who have not yet become familiar with its provisions. For the benefit of the readers of EL MUNDO who, for one reason or another, are not familiar with the parking regulations included in said Regulation, in spite of having been published previously, we repeat today the articles related* to this phase thereof, Prohibition Article 11-A. Parking of vehicles shall not be permitted in the following places: A. In those specifically prohibited by the Automobile and Traffic Law in force. B- In those specifically prohibited by these Regulations. C- Those marked for this purpose by official signs. D. Next to curbs* painted yellow by the Commissioner of the Interior. E. Those destined for bus stops. i F- At a distance of ten (10) meters from a corner, measured from the building line of the avenue. G- At a distance of forty-five (45) meters before a traffic light and thirty (30) meters after the same. Article 11-B. No vehicle shall be allowed to stop on sites where permanent parking is prohibited, except for buses, on sites for buses. Consent Article 12-A. It will be allowed to stop vehicles, with the exception of buses, during the time strictly necessary to pick up and drop off passengers in the places where parking is allowed. Provided that the loading and unloading of merchandise shall be done only during the hours when parking is permitted and for the time exclusively necessary to load or unload merchandise. Parking on the avenues shall be in accordance with the following rules: - Avenida Pono* do León a) In the section between the Plaza do Colón and the Guillermo Estoves Bridge, parking shall be in accordance with the notices posted by the Commissioner of the Interior. b) Between the Guillermo'Estoves Bridge and the Martin Peña Bridge, no parking shall be permitted on the North side of the avenue between the hours of 7:00 A. M. to 3:00 P. M. nor on the South side between 11:00 A. M. to 7:00 P. M.; dlsponsion. twoo, that during the hours when vehicles are allowed to park between the hours of 7:00 A. M" and 7:00 P. M" shall not be for more than (20) consecutive minutes. c) At 1a* hours and in the places where parking is allowed, it shall always be in the direction of the traffic and in accordance with the Automobile and Traffic Law in force. Avenida Fernandez Junco* a) Between Del Muelle Street and San Andres Street in Puerta de Tierra no vehicle shall park or pass except for that (Continued on Page 14-Col. 8).
Controversy Continues
Salinas Assembly Backs Mayor; Curate gives his Version
The Salinas Municipal Assembly gave a vote of support to 1* Mayoress, Mrs. Victoria Mateo de Esparra, according to our correspondent there, Mr. Vicente Ortlz. Mrs. Esparra alleges that Father José Torres Rodrigues demanded $120 for the* office*, but that she refused to give it* "because 1* law forbids it." The parish priest for his part rejects the imputation that he rebelled against the patron saint festivities "for "economic* motive," and assures that "on two occasions" he refused an oJerts of $273. He added that he felt Satisfied, because "we have succeeded in awakening the* consciences in keeping the tradition free of pagan influences." The parish priest of Salinas suspended religious services at La Monserrate Church, during the rotating patron saint festivities held there, "disgusted by so much paganism." As a sign of protest against the pikes and other "pagan artifacts,'' he placed a flag on the top of the temple tower. -
Version of the Mayoress Our correspondent Vicen te Ortlz sent the following telegram yesterday: i "The Municipal Assembly and the Mayoress of Salinas repudiate, as false, the manifestations of the local parish priest. "The Mayoress maintains that behind everything there are economic motives* and that* the pastor demanded $120 from her, taking to the Assembly the* documents* that support her words." "The Mayoress held a conference with the Bishop and he denied that he had endorsed the attitude of Father Torres. He also asked for copies in the Mayor's possession. "The Mayor refused to give the requested sum, as the law forbids it. The Chief of Police, Lieutenant Oscar Correa, maintained before the Assembly that his attention was never called to the disorders and immoralities denounced by the parish priest. "He maintained that *1 same parish priest marked with paint the area* in front of the Church, where they would not o* install picaa. "After the explanations of the Mayor and the tenant Correa, the Municipal Assembly voted to support (Continued on page 14, Col. 3).
Minton Congratulated On Appointment
Jé® Ot' vi ■■ e - i A ■ í. xa JwT* * ' * H -hL Jf A j y "r$ £ AÓW M A ' * i * * - TT \K '''' '.-j / । I ¿ i " sF x m I! K B i "F *.
Kl Federal Jues Sherman Minton receives congratulations by telephone from his* friends, eon the occasion of being nominated by President Truman for Jues of the Supreme Court of the Nation. Mrs. Minton said he had been notified of the appointment through a telephone conversation he had with President Truman on Thursday. (Press Photo Aaoclada).
Prisoners Destroy Municipal Court Records, Records of Court's Work for Several Years Were in Room Adjacent to Detainee Cage
Prisoners taken to the San Juan Municipal Court's detention cage caused destruction" in a room next to the cage where abundant material consisting of record books, files and evidence was kept. Upon learning of the" facts in 1* yesterday afternoon, officials of the Tribunal
of the Court contacted the Department of Justice, from where the Court Administrator, Mr. Angel Vázquez Tébar and the Special Prosecutor, Mr. Manuel Royos Serrano, began the corresponding investigation. The door of the room where the referred documents were kept had been broken into; the room was adjacent to the section of the cage destined for the male prisoners, and numerous fragments of files and other documents of the Tribunal corresponding to the work carried out by the Court in previous years appeared on the floor of this section. Several employees of the Tribunal testified before the court administrator Vázquez Tébar and before the prosecutor Reyes Serrano. Among these employees were Evaristo Morán Portalstln, assistant bailiff of the Fifth Chamber; Alberto Iriart*, janitor of the Fourth Chamber; and Dagoberto Orengo, janitor of the Second Chamber. The investigating officers* of the Department of Justice intended to investigate each and every one of the male prisoners occupying the cage yesterday morning, before being taken to the Municipal Jail. It is estimated that at the above period there were about 23 prisoners in the male section. Eighteen of them belonged to the Third and Fifth Courts. Of the 16 from the Third Chamber, 12 were from the Kings Bar case. (Continued on page 14. Col. 1)
Mathews Calls for Cessation of Navy Criticism Orders South Navy Officers to Discontinue Practice and Submit Briefs WASHINGTON - (PU) - Secretary of the Navy Francis P. Matthew today ordered Navy officials to cease public manlfeatándoae over the unification controversy brought by Captain John G. Crommelln, Secretary of the Navy. Crommelln, the secretary said that officers who hold Crommelln's views on the Navy's future can say what they think - as long as they submit their views to headquarters through "proper channels, But au strongly worded" order to all naval commanders" said that the success of the unification program and the continuation of "harmony between loa aervicloa" have "Ido Ido obataculleda by a aerle of unauthorized publlea publicaclonea statement issued" by Crommeiln and the naval officers who" have endorsed it. (Continued on p. 14, col. 2)
JNRT Delegate Seeks Cement Shutdown Settlement
A Reduction in the Cost of Living in the Price of Rice is Sure to Be 0.7% Mrs. Ana C. Irizarry, head of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, reports that the recent order of the Supply Administration, reducing the price of rice, will be reflected in a reduction in the cost of living. The said decrease, which would be 0.7 percent, is explained by the said lady as follows: "The Cost of Living Section of the Bureau of Labor Statistics has calculated the effect that the order of the Administrator of Supply" lowering the maximum price of rice exerts on the cost of living (Continued on page 14, Col. 6) Vaccination To Continue Monday In Santuree Health Officials Explain BCG Vaccine To Instructional Personnel Next Monday, the BCG vaccination of school children who have tested negative for tuberculin will be carried out at the Luis Muñoz Rivera School, on Fernandez Juncos Avenue, in Santuree. Yesterday, the second tuberculin test was performed at the aforementioned school in the school population. The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano VULarong*, took his son Lula Mariano Villaronga, eight years" old, to undergo* the second tuberculin* test. Several groups of trained nurses, under the direction of Dr. Harold S. Barret and nurses Helen Gertz and Elizabeth Leeds, read the tuberculin tests given one day ago and reapplied a second ten-unit dose of tuberculin. In the morning the Program Director, Dr. Eduardo Garrido Morale", reported that in the annex of 1* Escuela Muñoz Rivera, out of 98 children, only two refused to receive the aforementioned test. It is unknown" how much" they relimaron by 1* afternoon, and how much" they were vaccinated, since the statisticians, * 1* hour in which "" they finished the trahajo", about d" five o'clock in the afternoon, were not available, t Cite Teachers Expressed yesterday Doctor E. Garrido Morales said yesterday that Dr. R. Varela Canos* and Dr. Carlos Armstrong Ressy, of the RCG Section, will meet with the teachers in Arecibo and Caguas, respectively, in relation to the work "" developed" in the schools of said localities, on vaccination. The Director of the BCG Program also said that the program will begin on September 23rd in the aforementioned towns. The application of 1" tuberculin test will be made to the schools (Contlnú* on page 14, Col. 7).
Mrs. Victoria Mateo de Eaparra. mayoress of Salinas, has been supported by the Municipal Assembly, in the controversy with the parish priest. In the photo she appears when she took the oath of office.
The National Labor Relations Board in Washington appointed Mr. Winthrop Jones, an official of that agency, to intervene in the settlement of the labor-management dispute that has paralyzed the cement factories of Ponee Cement and Puerto Rico Cement. In the midst of the greatest reserve, Mr. Jones, who arrived on the island three days ago, began his efforts, together with Mr. Salvatore Cosentino, JNRT's agent on the island. They are trying to reach a settlement of the dispute. Yesterday afternoon, Mr. Cosentino, questioned about the steps taken by the JNRT official who did not" vi "ita, declined to report, saying that "we have nothing to report on the matter for now." It is known, however, that aeftor Jones, accompanied by Mr. Cosentino, met with Governor Muñoz Marín to discuss the case. Although Mr. Cosentino refrained from disclosing anything on the matter, it was indicated that yesterday Mr. Jones held a conference with officials of 1* Ponce Cement. Strike in 8ta. Mr. Cosentino also declined to disclose whether Mr. Jones is seeking specific instructions from the NLRB to intervene in the controversy that motivates the strike, which will enter its sixth week next Monday. As is known, before the consideration of the General Counsel of the NLRB in Washington, Mr. Paul Denham, is a report rendered by Mr. Cosentino on the Investigation he conducted into the charge filed by Fonc" Cement against the striking unions, accusing them of having violated the Taft-Hartley Act. In said Report, Mr. Cosentino has qualified the strike of the Ponce Cement workers as illegal, and has been waiting for the NLRB to order the petition for a restraining order in Federal Court against the striking workers to return to work. The NLRB's ruling was expected to be rendered by the end of this week, but by yesterday it had not happened. Arrives Máa Cúnente On the other hand, yesterday arrived in San Juan a shipment of 80,000 aaco" d" cement, coming from Germany, consigned to the firm San Miguel y Compañía de San Juan. On this matter, Mr. Marcelino San Miguel, official of said firm, informed that the steamer Le Couvre, with French registration, arrived at Acedo at the Jala Grande dock in the morning with the aforementioned shipment. The steamer arrived in San Juan on a direct voyage from Bremen. The cement will be distributed, mainly among the customers" of the San Miguel firm, and part of it will be sold to the Government. The price of the cement will be similar to that of the one imported a few days ago by Ponce Cement, that is, approximately $1.50 per sack. The "eftor San Migue! also says that the firm intends to continue importing cement from Germany if the strike continues. This is the second shipment of cement to arrive at the lila after the strike began at the lócale factory. On the other hand, a group of workers yesterday circulated a leaflet condemning the strike of the Puerto Rico Cement workers, especially the union leaders. The sheet was signed by 64 personnel, and at the top of it they report that they have a plan to hold a public meeting to protest against the strike, and a public demonstration." Economy Affected The economy, of Puerto Rico has continued to be seriously affected, by the closing of both cement plants. Thousands of workers throughout the Island's construction industry have been affected by the shutdown. Although the desire to return to work has prevailed among many workers, so far nothing effective has been done to achieve this purpose. The future attitude will depend, it was reported, on the steps taken by the representative of 1* JNRT on the island, about which, it is reported, absolute reserve is being kept. Among the factories that have been forced to close as a result of the strike are those of concrete blocks, some of doors and windows, others of ironwork. On the other hand, it is reported that some services of transportation of materials, as well as of stone and sand for construction work* have had to be suspended.