THE MIANDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, HOT: Partly to mostly cloudy with scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: High temp. M degrees ¡ minimum, 76 S two. Barometric pressure at sea level, 4:99 p.m.. "M inches of mercury.
NEW YORK. Mptíembr" U. (PU) - At 1" o'clock today m rotístraron tas following" temperature": New York, M; Chlcogo, M; Wáohlngton, M; Miami. M. Forecast for tomorrow in New York and the surrounding area: Fair and cooler weather: highest temperature from M to M; cool wind from the northwest.
TOMORROW'S NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXX
Enterad a" second daw matter. Poet Office. San Juan. P. *.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY SEPTEMBER 24, 1949
NUMBER 13794 FIVE CENTAVOS
Storm Damages Crops
Yabucoa Mayor Asks for Muñoz Help Several Areas of the Island Announce They Have Suffered Property Losses By Lula SANCHEZ CAPPA EL MUNDO Editor Lot of reports auminl "tradoa yesterday - this newspaper by our" correspondents" on 1* Island reveal eonslderabies property damage, dea* aloned by the gusts of the storm that passed along the south coast of the Island last Wednesday. As of yesterday, however, no deaths have been reported, although there have been injuries from downed trees. The news also revealed that small fruit crops were seriously affected by the storm, as well as sugar cane crops. The storm caused great damages in the area of Yabucoa, according to Mr. Rosa Sánchez Vargas, mayor of that town. Mayor Sánchez Vargas told this newspaper that "many houses were damaged. Vargas told this newspaper that "many houses were partially or totally destroyed, while a great number of small fruit plantations were lost, as well as sugar cane. "The municipal roads were left impassable, interrupting the work of taking the sick to the municipal hospital", according to the Mayor of Yahucoa. The roads of Limones and Guayabotas, currently under construction, were left unusable, and the bridge and retaining wall over the Guayanás River in the Calabaias neighborhood, was on the verge of collapse. In his communication to this newspaper, Mayor Sánchez Vargas urged the Governor to provide immediate help for Yabucoa. In Other Towns From Toa Alta, our correspondent Mario Morales reports that Wednesday's rains caused flooding when the La Plata River broke its course, flooding large extensions of land. EstMjjpupdacinnoa.causaron oom" lideramos pérdidas a las fincas cercanas al rio. Communication and transportation routes were interrupted on Thursday. The population took precautions, not to be alarmed, while listening to the news about the storm broadcast by Wemb Radio EL MUNDO. There were no casualties. In Morovis, "as reported by our correspondent Julio Chamaco, a flock of seabirds crossed over the town, landing some in the town. They were fleeing from the bad weather, and it seems that the resistance offered by the wind to their flight tired them, and they flew to land in search of refuge. Many of the birds fell on the center of the town, and about 21" of pots were collected by the inhabitants. They are known by the name of "tijerilla" and are a rarity in this town. Injured in Sabana Grande One person was injured in Sabana Grande as a result of the storm, according to our correspondent Samuel Irizarry. Mrs. Julia Ortiz Pacheco, 55 years old, resident of the Santana neighborhood, on the farm of Dr. Enrique Laaslase, was injured when a tree fell on her. She was taken to the municipal hospital. The National Guard took an outstanding part in the work against damages and misfortunes, as well as the municipal and police authorities. Poor people were housed in public buildings for their safety. Our correspondent in Santa Isabel. Slgfredo Alvarez, reported that in that town several houses were knocked down by the winds. A tree in the public square was knocked down Gayándole over the ""■ ñor José Rodríguez Garda, ocaslonándole contusions in different parts of the body. Another tree interrupted traffic on one of the streets for half an hour. The damage caused to the lighting in the plaza is estimated at $100. The telephone, telegraph and electric service was interrupted for several hours. S houses were lost in the Descalabro neighborhood, one in the Ollas neighborhood, and two in the Playa neighborhood. Reports from Caguas Our correspondent Andres Martinez Garda informs that according to the reports sent to the police headquarters of the district, in Cidra the tobacco ranches and seedbeds suffered damages due to the strong winds of Wednesday, In Juncos some ranches were dismantled as well as cases of poor families, registering, in addition, damages to the crops of minor fruits. From San Sebastian our correspondent Antonio Sagardla. son, reports that the municipal authorities, police and Red Cross, took appropriate measures to avoid misfortunes and give help to the inhabitants of the town and neighborhoods in case the storm hit the island. Only strong gusts were felt there but no loss of life or property was reported to the police headquarters. Losses in Salinas A storm surge wrecked part of the Salínaa-Ponce road, as reported by our correspondent Vicente Ortlz. The winds caused (Continued on page 14 Col. 1)
Two Ponce Cement Furnaces Already Working
r I 1 1 r B M MR ■fcrtffyOL, ' and I I I 1
The engravings capture two aspects of the work at Ponce Cement, as 125 of the workers who were on strike resumed work yesterday. On the left, Mr. Luis Ferré, from the company's management, manipulates one of the machines. On the right, a worker handles several buckets of cement.
3 Municipal Secretaries Resign from Office Géigel Recommends Dismissal of the Mayagüez Court Court Judge Several municipal secretaries and undersecretaries in San Juan, Ponce and Mayagüez have resigned from their posts, according to the Attorney General, Vicente Gélgel Polanco, as reported yesterday. Mrs. Austria Rivera de Alfonso, secretary of the Third Chamber of the San Juan Municipal Court, presented her resignation yesterday and her resignation was immediately accepted. The Attorney General informed that in the Secretary of the Third Chamber of the Municipal Court of San Juan, several irregularities have occurred, according to the investigation carried out by the Auditors of the Island. The Acting Clerk of the First Chamber of the Ponce Municipal Court, Mr. Juan Rivera Colón, informed the Attorney General yesterday by telephone that he was sending his resignation by mail. The Deputy Clerk of the same courtroom, Mr. Lula A. Plneo, also submitted his resignation, which was accepted by the Chief Justice. The Secretary of the Second Chamber of the Municipal Court of Majagüez, Mr. Ambrosio Rodríguez, resigned, but the Attorney General did not accept his resignation, recommending his dismissal. Governor Lula Muñoz Marin decreed his dismissal and filed nine charges against him, accusing him of imposing fines without authorization and appropriating part of the money obtained from them. Ambrosio Rodriguez has not, as of yesterday, answered the charges filed by the Governor. If he does not do so on or before July 3, he will be definitively removed from office. When the Attorney General was asked if he intended to recommend other dismissals of Judiciary officials, he replied that he expected several resignations in the near future. As will be recalled, the Attorney General recently made statements on Irregularities in the courts, recommending to the Judges that a list of persons declared fugitives from justice be posted on the bulletin boards. He also summoned the municipal judges of San Juan to a special meeting at the Department of Justice, to be held from Monday to Tuesday. During the referred meeting, it has ( Cont. on page 22, Col. 7 )
Possibility Arises That JNRT Appeal Will Now Be Academic Injunction Against Company's Laborers Union. Cosentino Transferred to the North poTluuTsanchezcapp to Editor of EL MUNDO Ayeí I* possibility arose that the injunction appeal filed by the National Labor Relations Board against the Ponce Cement workers' union and its president, Mr. Luis Olmo, may become academic.
People related to the Taft-Hartley law and the labor-management conflict in Ponce expressed their opinion that, if the controversy has been definitively settled in one way or another, the appeal will not have the expected results when it was initiated. It was indicated that since the strike ended in Ponce, with some of the striking workers returning to work, the situation has been normalized, and therefore the injunction, if issued by the Federal Court, would become academic. In addition, it is believed that the return of the striking workers to work would mean the disappearance of the union as a contracting union. The fact that the president, Mr. Luis Olmo, one of the defendants, has been removed from his job also means that he is no longer liable in the case as president, since he has been tacitly repudiated by a part of the union that decided to go to work. To that effect, it was reported that officials of the National Labor Relations Board intend to go to Ponce today to learn about the situation on the ground. It was assured that the trip of the NLRB officials to Ponce is linked to the strong possibility that the injunction will be granted. As is known, the injunction is directed that the union, its members and Mr. Olmo refrain from continuing the strike, or encouraging it in any way. Ponce Cement resumed work on Thursday, after talks between union leaders and company representatives to reach an agreement failed. | These talks were held at the urging of the NLRB officials, who, when the talks failed, initiated the injunction. The Ponce Cement, the next day after the failure of these negotiations, recruited workers, and began its work without commitments to any union, but granting the workers the guarantees and provisions of the agreement that was in effect at the beginning of the strike. For their part, the leaders of the CGT, Mr. Tomás Méndez, Mr. Pedro Vega Berrios and Mr. Armando Ri-1 veto, met with the union officials to discuss the union's position on page 14, Col. 1.
Veterans' Teachers' Pay Reduced Villaronga Believes Ex Ale Neceñidad de Reajustar Programas de Estudio It is expected that before the next few years, the 14,000 veterans currently studying in the academic groups will have lost their eligibility. As eligibility expires, at an average of 300 veterans per year, it will become necessary to readjust programs, reducing teaching staff and compensation. The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano Villaronga, made the above manlfeatactanea yesterday to explain the reasons why it has become necessary to reduce the salaries of the teachers of special groups of veterans, from $33 to $30 per month, for each period of work. The" CompenaaclonM Compensation for school principals, according to the number of veterans enrolled in each organization, is as algue: For 115 veterans or more; $150 per month; 80 to'114 veterans, $125; 60 to 79, $100; 59 or less, $100. The principal shall teach two class periods and assume administrative and technical responsibility for the organization. The assistant directors and librarians ceased as of July 29 last, and the salaries of the clerks were computed as follows; organizations with 115 veterans or more, $75; organizations with an enrollment ranging from 80 to 114, $60.50 for each organized group, but the maximum will be $50 and the minimum $25 per month. j They are trying to obtain reimbursements which will enable the Department of Instruction to establish some compensation to the superintendents (continued on page 21 Col 3).
Help for Bnricuas
Mayor O'Dwyer of New York City Swears in Advisory Panel
At a ceremony held on September 17 in the New York City Hall auditorium, the Mayor's Advisory Committee on Puerto Rican Issues was finally organized. In addition to the members of the committee sworn in by Mayor William O'Dwyer, numerous Puerto Ricans and members of the Latin American colony, interested in the problems of the Puerto Ricans, attended the event. Mayor O'Dwyer addressed the gathering, declaring that "this is the first of a series of measures that the city government intends to take for the benefit of Puerto Ricans". Also speaking on the occasion were Raymond H. Hilliard, Commissioner of Public Welfare of New York and chairman of the Puerto Rican Committee, and Manuel Cabraneo, director of the Puerto Rican Office of Public Welfare.
Associate Director of the Puerto Rico Office in New York and Vice Chairman of the Advisory Committee. Committee Members The following persons are members of the committee: Luigi Antonini, leader of labor and civic organizations; Benjamín Arnaldo Maynors, editor of EL MUNDO and the Puerto Rico Ilustrado, a newspaper and a roviota published"" in Puerto Rico, with a large circulation in New York; Adrian P. Burke, lawyer and leader of many civic and charitable activities: Raquel Campoll, prominent Puerto Rican lady interested in employment opportunities for Puerto Ricans. José Negrón Csstsros, doctor of medicine, very active in all movements to improve the living conditions of Puerto Ricans; Edward Covsllo, Commissioner (see page 14, Col. 8).
Truman Reveals Russia Has Atomic Bomb; Serenity Called For
ei r
HARRY S. TRUMAN
President Didn't Panic at Soviet's Reaction on World Ages By Merriman SMITH and Joseph L. MYLEX WASHINGTON, Sept. 23 (P. U.)-President Truman shattered the illusion that the United States has a monopoly of the atomic bomb, announcing today that the Russians recently carried out an atomic explosion. Similar announcements were made in London and Ottawa. FLUSHING, New York, Sept. 2*. - (PU) _ Kl Mlnlatro of the Russian Foreign, Andre! Y. Viahlnaky, told the United Nations today that Russia did not prtiMiba to attack anyone, and ignored President Truman's announcement of atomic mus explosion ea Russia. On the contrary, Russia called on the five great powers to enter into a new pact to "strengthen peace. In one of his early speeches to the United Nations General Assembly, the fiery Russian politician condemned "the preparations being made in some countries for a new war, particularly in the United States and Great Britain". And although the Nonviolent Union is ready to return "blow for blow," he said, it does not intend to threaten or attack anyone, and is willing to negotiate a peace treaty between Russia, the United States, Britain, France and China. Vlshlnsky spoke for over thirty minutes and did not even once refer to the Washiu<> anund<>toii "about the atomic bomb. He had said before that he would mention it if he was "in the mood for it". Apparently he was not in the mood to mention it, Bu only reference to the atomic bomb was contained in a demand that the General Assam-' Idea declare ''Inadmissible'' to stop any longer the proscription of atomic weapons, the Soviet Union, Vlshlnsky said, still stands by the statement made by Ntalln in l "S4 that "Russia does not intend to threaten anyone, much less attack anyone." The American Pi jsldent did not say that it was a stromicn bomb that exploded in Rusta, setting off a wave of explosions that will certainly be felt in every capital of the world. But Mr. Truman did not have to say that, An atomic explosion is not caused by the mere act of lighting a fuse. It requires the most elaborate and complex kind of detonating equipment, and if Russia has ex- j ptaslvos and equipment to set them off, she has the essential fac- : toras for the bombn. President Truman's brief and calm disclosure has put to rest the widespread belief that the United States still had several years' lead before the Soviet giant could produce the most destructive weapon ever made by man. Most U.S. defense officials have calculated that Russia could not initiate a major arms race with atomic instruments before 1951. They said that the Soviet Union would certainly not be able to manufacture atomic weapons by 1951.
Yesterday's Favorable Reaction On Stock Market Truman Report On Soviet Atomic Did Improve Stocks NEW YÓRkT'settambre 2.1. - President Truman's revelation that Russia is planning an atomic explosion today broke a downward trend in the stock market, sending stocks up for the third consecutive session. The financial community concluded that the nation will now strengthen its war potential and that the process will raise the number of employees and prevent a recurrence of a downturn in the economy. Before Truman made the statement, the List had been in an irregular downturn, with a reduced volu- । men. Transactions aui ment as stocks rose. New Highs Railroad issues started among the stocks ntas strong. Utilities, which were strong all day, established nu"" ■ vos highs for a period of ' more than three years. Si* cial stocks recovered from their early lows, and some ended with gains. Automobile stocks were [ firm. Oil companies had ga- ¡ nancies of several points. Aircraft manufacturers rose as a group, on the prospect of higher defense orders. The strength in earnings was helped by an increase in profits reported by Commonwealth & Southern and by a higher dividend announced by Commonwealth Edison. The American shipyards reported [ large profits and their shares rose, D. S, Smelting took a substantial loss on the issuance of its dividend. The stock of the National Dept. Stores lost as they reported lower than expected earnings. The Average Man The average man calmly received President Truman's announcement that Rusta had caused an atomic explosion. Here are some of the typical comments: Henry Geller, Navy veteran and truck driver - "So what? We'll take care of ourselves. Walter Kuzmlcq, elevator handler""-"M" surprised, but I (Continued on page 6, Col. .1)
- ■ SKs out ' $ T 1 'Bkü ai m R "HE KL. í BBh " í' $■ ■ ■ ■ ' ' ' ■ ' ■ a 4.
In the Assembly Hall of the New York City City Hall, Mayor William O'Dwyer swore in the group that constitutes the new Mayor's Advisory Committee on Puerto Rican Issues in New York. The Committee is chaired by the Commissioner
of Public Benefits, Mr. Raymond M. Hilltard, and its Vice-Chairman, Mr. Manuel Labranes, Associate Director of the Puerto Rico Government Office in New York. It is expected that the Committee will make a recommendation soon. (Photo by EL MUNDO).
i Acneson Authorized Similar Announcement Adds Event Does Not Change U.S. Foreign Policy WASHINGTOÑTsettambre 23. - (PU) - President Truman today informed the Cabinet qu" his' Government fills evidence "that dy- ¡ ranle tas last weeks has neuj rrrrido an atomic explosion in Russia." President Truman made the dramatic announcement in a statement which he said was carefully worded, because the American people "have a right" to receive such information. The President pointed out that since atomic energy was unleashed by man, it became inevitable that other nations would learn to use the new force. < "We have evidence that in recent weeks an atomic explosion occurred in Ruala" - said President Truman. Text of Statement The text of President Truman's statement, announcing a recent atomic explosion the Soviet Union Ju/ as follows: "I believe that the American people, to the fullest extent compatible with national security, have a right to be informed of all developments in the field of atomic energy, and for this reason I am issuing the following information, "We have evidence that during the past few weeks an atomic explosion has occurred in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. "Since atomic energy was released for the first time by man, the eventual utilization of this new energy by the United States has always been expected, and this probability has always been felt. Scientific Opinion "About four years ago, we indicated that "scientific opinion seems practically unanimous that *1 essential theoretical knowledge on which the discovery is based is widely held. There is also a belief that foreign Researchers will be able to attain within poeo our theoretical knowledge," In a tripartite statement, the President of the United States and the Prime Ministers of Canada and the United Kingdom emphasized on November 15, 1945, that no individual nation could exercise a monopoly over atomic weapons. "This recent development underscores again, if e" qu" -" necessary additional emphasis, the need for the truly effíi ve and practical International control of atomic energy which this Government and most d" members of the United Nations endorse." There Was A Russian Among the reporters present, * [ when President Truman announced today ta occurrence of an" "x- - atomic plosion in the Soviet Union, was a correspondent d" j Tais, the official agency of the Russian Govter* । no. The Tais correspondent, like all the others, rushed to the newsroom of Cosa Rlanca, where he immediately transmitted the news to the offices of Tas here. In Flushing, Secretary of State Dean Acheson said today that he assumed the Russians had successfully exploded the atomic bomb, Acheson told a press conference at United Nations headquarters that he was not aware of any other atomic explosion - in Russia or elsewhere. He said he would not disclose exactly when and where the Russian atomic explosion occurred. Stressing that the United States was still insisting on its policy of effective regulation of atomic energy, the Secretary of State said he could not speculate as to what the Russian Government had in mind, but added that perhaps the possession of an atomic weapon would provide a very important proof of its intentions with regard to atomic weapons. Acheson said that the Russian explosion* caused no aorpraaa. and "uhrsyó that President Truman and ln" prime minister" d" Ingla- : torra and Canada have been advlrtlling the world since 1945 that I* Soviet Union getla "1 . But it was revealed that the Western powers had no knowledge of the Russian explosion when the famous midnight conference between Mr. Truman and his Cabinet on atomic energy was held at Blair House in Washington, D.C. (Continued on page 14).
AFH Authorizes Homes Plan for the Island
Investment Will Be Of $32,(MMMMNI Cordero Dávila Assures Work Could Be Tripled. $10,000,000 to Arrabal By Rurlco E. Rivera EL MUNDO Staff Writer The public housing and slum elimination programs sponsored by the Island Government through its housing authorities have received a boost of considerable importance with the allocation to Puerto Rico by the Federal Housing Administration of the first 9,000 homes. These will be built during the first two years of the six-year program. The value of these units amounts to $32,000,000, as reported yesterday to EL MUNDO by Mr. César Cordero Dávila, upon his return to the island from Washington. Mr. Cordero Dávila said that every effort will continue to be made to at least triple this allocation. If this is achieved, and all probabilities are that it will be, the total of the program for the next six or seven years would rise from $90,(XX),(XX) to $100,000,000". Cordero Dávila said that the 9,000 homes allocated for the first two years of the program will be distributed among the different Homes authorities, in proportion to the needs of the Island's population. He added that according to an original study, the Insular Homes Authority may receive 60 percent; 25 percent to the Municipal Homes Authority of San Juan; X percent to the Homes Authority of Ponce, and 7 percent to the Homes Authority of Mayagüez. He also said that the Federal Homes Authority assigned 4,500 of the 9,500 homes to the Island Authority for the first two years, while the balance is being distributed equitably. He added that data to be provided by the Planning Board will be taken into account. However, despite the allocation of 9,000 housing units for Puerto Rico, it was reported that the Federal Authority does not have an approved budget to operate its offices, and that is why it has not yet been able to organize itself to speed up the processing of the documents necessary to authorize the construction of said housing units. Cordero informed that the Insular Authority is ready to begin the work as soon as it is authorized to do so. Later, Mr. Cordero Dávila said that the Island Government will continue to manage the projects with the necessary promptness", to ensure that this allocation that we have received now will be tripled during the rest of the six-year program". The approximate cost estimate per unit has "been set at $3,500, which yields an initial two-year program cost estimate of $32,000,000, Other Benefits of the Act The Federal Homes Act of 1949 offers other benefits to Puerto Rico, according to Mr. Cordero Dávila. When asked about slum clearance loans, he said that Title I of the Act authorizes loans for slum clearance and for improvements in backlogged areas. Cordero made representations to the A. F.H. to initiate this part of the program now, but the A.F.H. is not yet ready to do so. H.F.A. is not yet ready to receive applications for this part of the program. The program authorizes loans of up to one billion dollars, and Mr. Cordero stated that "we would like to see no less than $10,00ü,0(X) of that amount allocated (Continued on page 14, Col. 7).