EL NANDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLANDS, TODAY: - Gusty weather is expected throughout Puerto Rico during the morning hours. This condition appears to be unaccompanied by gusty winds, although winds may gust to a few thousand per hour during squalls.
NEW YO1K, Sept. 1 (FU) - Late today the following temperatures were recorded: Chicago, 78; Miami, 86; New York, 71; Washington, 77. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: Weather mostly sunny and warm; highest temperature near 86; light to moderate winds from the south.
MARAÑA NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXX
Entered as i Post Office,
d "lasa matton Juan, F. B.
aacond
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY SEPTEMBER 3, 1949
NUMBER 13774 FIVE CENTAVOS
Muñoz Sends More Matters To Chambers
One Requests Funds For Judiciary - Another Relates To Amount For BCG Vaccine. Beach Use Rule By Juan Martina" Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO Expanding on the call issued on August 28, the Governor yesterday submitted 18 new items of business to the consideration of the Legislature, meeting in special session. The most important of these matters refer to: To authorize the Governor to receive land, buildings or any other property that the U.S. Government may cede, gift or sell to the People of Puerto Rico; to provide funds for expenses incurred in case the bill reorganizing the judicial branch becomes law; to initiate livestock improvement projects through artificial insemination; to allocate funds for vaccination against tuberculosis, BCG system; to develop beaches for recreational purposes and tourist attraction; to increase penalties for the illegal use or carrying of firearms. It is my belief that two or more important matters, the study of which could not yet be completed, will be submitted at an early date for consideration by the present special session of the Legislature, Proclamation of Mullos The proclamation omitted yesterday by the Governor, reads: "Several important matters of public concern, in addition to those specified in the ori* Rlnal call issued on August 26, '949, require action by the Legislature at this special session. NOW, THEREFORE, I, LUIS MUÑOZ MARIN, Governor of Puerto Rico, pursuant to Article 33 of the Charter, do hereby submit to the Legislature, for its consideration and action, the following additional matters: L To empower the Governor of Puerto Rico to acquire, in reneaentaclón do and on behalf of The People of Puerto Rico, by donation,* exchange or ert any other form, any right, interest or mule on any property belonging to the*United States Government or to any of its agencies, instrumentalities or political ti ¡visions, or belonging to any natural or juridical person and to allocate funds to carry out said purposes. To amend Act No. 387 of May 15, 1949, which provides for the General Budget; to provide appropriations for the salaries of regular employees for the Justice of the Peace of Puerto Rico, the Municipal Court of Puerto Rico and the District Court of Puerto Rico; and to allocate thirteen thousand (15,000) dollars for the expenses of installation, equipment and building construction of new courtrooms in Puerto Rico. To amend Act No. 368 of May 14, 1949, which refers to the payments to be made by the Treasurer to the municipalities of Ponce, Mayagüez and Caguas in connection with athletic parks. To authorize the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce to establish an artificial insemination service for livestock; to repeal Act No. 83 of May 7, 1947. 83 of May 7, 1947, and 34 of April 14, 1949, and to allocate the forty thousand (40,000) dollars originally appropriated by Act No. 83 of May 7, 1947, to carry out the purposes of this Act. 5. To amend Sections 1 and 9 of Act No. 14 of July 8, 1936, as amended, regarding the sale of firearms. To amend Article 10 (Cont in page 14, Col. 3).
Muñoz Goes Out to Find "El Mundo*'' (Cont. on page 14, Col. 3)
Walks Streets With Wife and Daughter
By Enrique Ramírez Brau Editor of EL MUNDO When a journalist walks the streets of the city at night and meets an old man with his wife and daughter, he finds himself in the company of his wife and daughter. When a journalist walks the streets of the city at night and meets an old companion, the encounter is nothing special, but when that journalist, as in this case, is the Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Luis Muñoz Mari, who crosses Baldorloty Square accompanied by his wife, Mrs. Inés Mondo, Mrs. Muñoz and his daughter Munlta, the encounter is not only agribusiness, but also a news item of interest. Last night, at 11:30 a.m., while I was sitting on a bench in the Plaza Baldorioty together with comrade José M. Ufrot, I saw Governor Mu* ftoz Marin approaching the plaza, accompanied by his wife, Mrs. Inés Mendoza de Muñoz and his daughter Munlta. As a private citizen, without sor identified by the many porzonas circulating at that hour of the night, don Lulo Muñoz Ma. rtn, wife or daughter, they crossed the pia. M and continued along San Francisco Street. They change Salutation" As we paired up with this journalist and his companion, we exchanged greetings.
GOVERNOR MUÑOZ
Mr. Muñoz Mgrin passed to the sidewalk and went .alie down. Interested in this evening stroll of the Governor of Puerto Rico, we followed him at a discreet distance. Don Luis stopped at the Pasaje Motionzo, the old road that connects the San Francisco lie ca* lie with Luna Street. Then followed the distinguished friend and his relatives, until the ca. lie la Cruz. A guard who was on duty on that stretch did not recognize him. After the Governor stopped in front of a shop window, he turned onto San Justo Street and when he reached Fortaleza Street, he continued towards the Plaza de Colón. On arriving at For. taleu Street, corner of O'Donnell Street, the Governor stopped. It was here, in this place, that we shook hands with den Luis and greeted his wife Doña Inés and his daughter Munlta. ' - '■ ( , Don Luis said to us: "I have gone out for a walk, to feel free for a moment and to com. prar EL MUNDO." The Governor then walked a few steps toward the center of O'Donnell Street, and pointing his wife to house number 306 (new numbering), said (Cont on page 14, Col 1).
Cyclone Passed Long Only Caused Rains on Island's South Shore; Marx Explains Trajectory, Origin of Disturbance
1 - . r / I"' Ih? f" W- : : ...I"-- < II II II .1. . - .-I !■■■■ _ 001 Ql , M- MW*. __ | - - [ 4 1 ■ ' -i 3 * Si : Wl 9 * ■ -- i -: oM. *. E ■ | J v Cf " - n ;_ZÜ : III i 4 .1 i nr*l"|.
Course taken by the small tropical disturbance, dead e which was east of Barbada Island. I*" black circles mark Im different variations of the meteor, which was* located yesterday at sel" afternoon in latitude 16.0 degrees North and longitude 67.0 degrees West, moving at 1" miles per hour.
By Rurloo E. Rivera EL MUNDO Staff Writer The small tropical disturbance located at approximately 125 minutes south of Ponce yesterday afternoon, passed the Eito longitude of Puerto Rico during the night of Friday, causing heavy downpours in the area.
heavy downpours on the coast of the southern coast of the island. This was reported yesterday by Mr. Edward H. Marx, chief of the Weather Bureau, who added that as the disturbance moved westward, the weather in the area left behind, or to the east, would gradually turn more severe.
east, it would gradually become normal during the next two or three days. The 6:00 p.m. intermediate bulletin located the disturbance at latitude 16.0 degrees north and longitude 67.0 degrees west (Cont. on Page 22, Col. 5) 1 III. I I - --* -
Lula Blanco Lugo, one of the members of the opposition in the assembly of the Bar Association of Puerto Rico, sent yesterday afternoon to the president an amendment to the by-laws of the Institution, which would allow legislators and other public officials to belong to the Board of Governors of the Bar Association. At present, according to an amendment passed in 1945, legislators and public officials cannot be elected to the Board of Governors. This amendment was approved in a very difficult assembly held in Ponce, when Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones, then President of the House of Representatives, was President of the Colegio de Abo. gados. Blanco Lugo on the matter, since he was one of the lawyers who most defended the 1945 amendment, he stated the following: "Today I have proposed the elimination of the prohibition that prevents the election of members of the Legislative Assembly and public officials. Although I presented such a proposal in 1945, I am convinced that it is not in the best interests of our institution. "The participation of legislators, and public officials in the leadership of the Bar Association is desirable, for it places us in a better position to discuss certain problems with the government. "I wish to state, finally, that all my opposition to Mr. Benido Sánchez Castaño is reduced to the fact that my candidate for president is Mr. Gaspar Rivera Cestero". The maximum leader of the opposition movement, Mr. Edelmiro Martinez Rivera, commented yesterday afternoon on the inactivity of his group in the meeting held the day before yesterday at the Ateneo. Said lawyer expressed that "this was due to certain politicians who wanted to take advantage of the situation, (Cont. on page 14, Cob 4).
Statistical Analysis Clarifies Misinterpretation Regarding Wage Rates in U.S. Areas By R. Santiago Sosa Editor of EL MUNDO In the Sunday edition of EL MUNDO of August 28, we published information to the effect that Puerto Rican laborers working in the New York, Washington and New Jersey areas were being paid lower wages than the prevailing federal minimums for agricultural work in the United States.
prevailing federal minimum wages for agricultural work in those regions. The information was obtained from a table of prevailing wage "rates" in all states of the Union in July, 1948, which was inserted in the Congressional Record by Representative Reid F. Murray. The Labor Commissioner, Mr. Fernando Sierra Bordada, in an interview with this Editor, clarified that: (1) there are no federal minimum wages for agricultural work; (2) he understood that what the table was called "wage rates" represented average rates of pay for different farm activities. In his zeal to clarify a situation that could lend itself to erroneous interpretations, the Commissioner of Labor sent a cable to the Puerto Rico Office in Washington, requesting a copy of the Report from which Representative Murray extracted the table that served as the basis for our information. The Report clearly reveals that the classification of "types of wages" in the table was incorrectly stated, and should therefore be "average rate of pay" (Hourly composite wage rate). The Bureau of Labor Statistics prepared an explanation in connection with the interpretation given by Representative Murray in the published table which served as the basis for our information, and what is clearly stated in the official report of the Bureau of Agricultural Economics of the Department of Agriculture. This explanation states: "Prevailing rate of pay" is the usual or most current compensation for a given unit of time or for a unit of product, Since there may be higher and lower rates of pay in an industry or occupation than the prevailing rate, the "average rate of pay" (hourly composite wage rate) is the average of all rates in that industry or occupation, or the average of all rates in that industry or occupation.
' . - .... The Bar Association proposed numerous amendments to the bill establishing the Organic Law of the Judiciary, during the public hearing before the Special Committee of the Senate and the House. The amendments were explained to the Committee by the Vice President of the Bar Association, Mr. Félix Ochoteco Jr., who made his presentation from 5:30 p.m. until ten minutes past seven p.m. / Mr. Ochoteco said that the amendments were submitted based solely on the interest of the Puerto Rican judiciary in such a transcendental legislation as the reorganization of the judiciary, which has remained untouchable since the first true reorganization of the Island's judicial system was carried out in 902. "The Bar Association," said Mr. Ochoteco, "wishes that the members of this Committee comment on the resolution of the Assembly requesting that the consideration of this bill be postponed to the last regular session of the month of January, in order to study it in detail and make the pertinent suggestions. Cometo Amendments Ten amendments were suggested by the College to the original draft, all of which were submitted to the Committee for its consideration. Due to the fact that Mr. Ochoteco only spoke the couplet from which he was reading, it was agreed that the College submit them in mimeographed copies for each of the members of the Special Committee, in order to give them due consideration. Mr. Polanco Abréu asked Mr. Ochoteco if the College was satisfied with the fact that all the amendments were introduced to the project, for the purpose of * its consideration, in the ex' traordinary session that is being held, to which Mr. Ochoteco replied: "The College requests that the consideration of the project be postponed for the ordinary session of February; however, he believes it is a de- . The College requests that consideration of the bill be postponed to the regular session in February; however, it believes that it is important to attend here - rata tarde to contribute its cooperation so that the bill, which the College views with sympathy. College views with sympathy, given the efforts of the Attorney General [' to decongest the courts ini' zular of the cases which they have poni teeth, meets the high ends . which it pursues". Detail of Amendments One of the amendments submitted by the College tends to empower municipal judges to set bail in the absence of the prosecutor. As drafted, judges and municipal judges can only "admit" i- 1.78 bail bonds, without being granted the right to set them. (Cont. on page 14, Cell. 3)
Senate Defeats Motion To Investigate Cement Industry Strike
Party Endorsements Should Be Required For All Personnel Declared to Be Party Endorsements
Manuel Acevedo Rosario authorized statements yesterday demanding the reorganization of the government and requesting that all the* people who occupy positions in the government receive the endorsement of the Popular Party committee. Aaevedo Rosarlo said he "knows of cases" in which some department heads "have presented themselves to the House Treasury Committee to order the elimination of projects because they do not agree with such projects". Acevedo Rosarlo's textual statements read as follows: "The case of the strike in the cement industry in Puerto Rico was referred yesterday to the General Counsel of the National Labor Relations Board in Washington. Mr. Salvatore Cosentino, of the NLRB on the island, said that yesterday afternoon he sent to the agency's offices in the federal capital his report on the investigation of the charges filed in San Juan by Ponce Cement against the striking workers for alleged violations of the Taft-Hartley Act. If the NLRB finds merit in the charges against the two striking unions, it is expected that it will instruct its Puerto Rican operations to resort to the Federal Court with a writ of injunction against the workers to return to work. Direct Report Cosentino sent the report directly to the General Counsel (Continued on page 14. Col. 4).
Mother Allowed to Remain Free Without Bail While Awaiting Trial
sis, í' i i? - "m * A V ' ♦ '¿K - . "Yes I! M w® - ■ I jU
Isabel Alvares Day." I" woman who vló yesterday in the Tribunal MDWv óe San Juan how sometimes the rigor of the law yields to the dictates of nledad. The Jues Pablo Juan y Toro, in order not to see her go to jail with a creature of 15 days" of born in lo" hr "sos, pointed out to her a dollar of flan"" so that she remains in freedom mlentrz" "e ventila the "--"Po*' * n ' fraction to the Law against the Bolita. (Photograph of EL MUNDO)
Isabel Alvares Diaz, a poor woman who has just become a mother, saw yesterday how sometimes the rigor of the law, by Imperative of a healthy piety, has to yield a little so that justice achieves its luminous ends, Mother of 15 days*, the Alvarez Díu appeared at the Court* of the
San Juan District Court to face a trial for violation of the law against 1" bolita. And with her he took with him, wrapped in yellowish diapers, deteriorated by use, the fruit that was born from his womb 15 days ago". (Cont- on It page 14, Col. 5)
Acevedo Rosario Calls For A Total Government Reorganization
a
MANUEL ACEVEDO ROSARIO
Dates Set For Consideration Of 3 Island Bills Senate Boards Set For Discussion September 8 and 12 By JAMEs'fTcvÑNINGHAM WASHINGTON, Sept. 2. (P U)-Senate committees have already set a date for action on three Puerto Rico-related bills still awaiting approval by the Upper House. The members of the Interior and House Interior Committee told Preña* Unid" that they will consider Dr. Femó" Isern's citizenship bill at their next meeting, on September 12. Citizenship Bill This measure, introduced by Resident Commissioner Dr. Antonio Fernós Item, would grant naturalized citizenship status to certain Puerto Ricans who were naturalized under the terms of the Organic Law of 1917, or under certain subsequent amendments. Members of the Senate Agriculture Committee have set September 8 to consider another pair of Fernó's non-political bills. One is to ease the administration of the agricultural credit systems by allowing the organization of federal agricultural banks and agri-bank associations in Puerto Rico. Puerto Rican farm loans are currently handled by the Federal Land Bank of Baltimore. The other bill would virtually double federal aid to Puerto Rico under the Federal Agricultural Extension Service Act. It would increase insular benefits from the current $48,000 per year to a level of $8809,090 per year. All of these" three" measures have passed the House of Representatives, approval by the Senate Committee will" place it on the calendar for consideration" by the Upper House. Salarlo" n Supreme Court Justices Another bill by Fernó" e "lá a do" sticks forward to become law. The Senate approved Monday and sent to the House a bill authorizing the island Legislature to regulate the Supreme Court justices. The President has 10 days to sign it into law. This" action" by the Senate opens the way for Fernó" to begin "u" vacaclone" with another" member" of the House who began the "emana pgiada. The House voted a three-day recess series to extend until September 21. The majority of the members left for home or for a short trip (Cont. on page 14, Col. 8).
The name of a woman has been included in the list of "Persons who should not be allowed to intervene in the affairs of the Court". issued by the Municipal Judicial Council on Aug. 1. The new addition brings to fifteen the total number of persons" whom the Judicial Council has decided to keep in line in connection with the official activities of the San Juan Municipal Court. Judge Alma Delgado, in her capacity as Secretary of the Municipal Judicial Council, ordered yesterday the inclusion in the 1* Hite de Intermediarios or "bueconei", of the name of
Gutiérrez Franqui Against Intervening House Approved Five Bills in Third - Will Reconvene Today By R. Gálvea Mato rana Editor of EL MUNDO A motion to have the Legislature take steps to investigate what happened on the merits in the labor-management controversy between Puerto Rico Cement and its workers was defeated in the Senate. Celestino Triarte asked the Senate to appoint a committee which, together with one* from the House, would "demonstrate the interest of the Legislature of Puerto Rico in the solution of a conflict which affects thousands of workers" and which is causing "serious" damage" to the economy of the country". Triarte indicated that after three weeks of strike, "there is no solution in sight between the workers" of the Puerto Rico Cement and the employers, which in this case is a government agency," and added that "the Legislature of the demos--, trac its Inter*" in the matter, finding out what are the reasons that prevent the solution of the conflict," Majority "and Opposes The spokesman of the mavorla. Victor Gutterrez Franqui, "e opposed Senator Triarte's motion, although he stated that he agrees with him as to the interest of the people of Puerto Rico in finding a solution to the conflict. He indicated that he does not believe that the Legislature should act as conciliator in any strike, adding that, in his opinion, it would set a dangerous precedent to intervene in strikes through the Legislative Commission or any of the legislative bodies. Senator Gutiérrez Franqui also said that the executive branch is duly equipped with sufficient legislation to address and resolve the problem. He concluded by stating that in "tr ereencla. if the Legislature appoints such a Commission, which -" -" harta "orla delay the "elution of the conflict, inasmuch as both" party* find in 1* mlsm*n a body má£ to which to resort, in the hope d" that the same would rule in "u favor. Triarte Inalata Senator Triarte !n "l "fto in "his motion, calling the attention of his fellow" Senate members to the fact that his motion "olly was intended to * demonstrate the interest of 1* I.eglilstur* "in a problem affecting mlllerea d" fathers" of families". Said Senator Triarte that" it was not a question of determining on whose side was 1a reason in this c*"q, nor Investigate absolutely nothing, but to "find out what* e* 1n quo there is "n "l bottom of the question, qut Imnlde the solution of the conflict". X "On other occasions," Senator Triarte said, "the Legislature of Puerto Rico has intervened in strike problems, and I see no reason why the interest we all have in resolving the conflict cannot be demonstrated now. Barrete asked for an extension in the debate to Senator Ramon Barrete Perez maolfwtaníte that since the beginning of the extraordinary session *1 had been in requesting 1* Intervention of the Senate in the matter, but he did not find the appropriate means that would determine the intervention of the Senate. He agreed with Senator Gutiérrez Franqui that if the Legislature were to intervene, the conflict would be prolonged and asked Senator Triarte to wait until the end of this "emana to see the result of the steps being taken. The motion was put to a vote and was defeated, with the vote in favor of its author, Senator Iriarte. The House of Representatives resumed its work at 6 p.m. yesterday morning and approved on third reading five bills;* The session was scheduled for 9 o'clock, but had to be postponed. (Continued on page 14, Col. TJ,
A Woman Is Included In The List Of The "Buscones" Of Cortes
a* woman, who was reported to him as operating in the Municipal Court doing business, for which she received commissions and bribes in return, co. ¡ * - Bailiff Felix Rivera Torrea persuaded one* of the intermediaries" to leave the Court's premises, since her name had been included in the list of court "buscones," nothing. Among the" matters submitted to the current Extraordinary Legislature"' meeting is a bill to eradicate the "buscones" rule in all* the island's courts. ■ - - S
Riot Feared At Robeson Concert
Veterans To Make Gigantic Parade Admirers Promise To Gather More Than 15,000, Ask For Protection PEEKSKILL, N.Y., Sept. 2 (PU) - Veterans of the world war have called for reinforcements; of comrades from five states to "wave thousands of American flags in Paul Robeson's face" during his concert scheduled to be held here next Sunday. This quiet riverside town, population 17,000, is filled with excitement as veterans announce a several-mile parade to be held at the same time Robeson is singing at the gulf field at Old Hollow Brook, a mile away from the scene of the three-hour riot last Saturday. District Attorney George M. Fanelli said a full troop of State Police "and every person the sheriff can leclude" will be ready" to prevent violence between veterans and admirers of Robeson, who is an ardent Communist. Four veterans' groups - the American Legion, the Catholic Veterans, the Jewish Veterans, and the Veterans of Foreign Wars - pledged that they would not provoke any violence. They said that veterans from New Jer "ey, Connecticut, Maacachuietts, Pennsylvania and other parts of New York will come to the parade. The concert's sponsors, a group calling itself the Westchester Committee for Law and Order, were trying to get an injunction from the state Supreme Court in White Plains to ban the parade. No action was taken as of this afternoon. A dozen people marched today in front of the building where the county offices are located carrying (Metelons declaring "Let ' Robeson sing"; "Let the bells of the Ubfrtoó ring";. "Freedom df crosses set on fire." Demands Protection - Dr. Frederick Gottlelb, pre , sldent of the Westchester Committee, . sent telegrams to Faneill, the attorney general, J. Howard Me- ¡ Grath and Governor Thomas Dewey, demanding complete protec- ( don and denouncing the permission granted to veterans pura celebrate ( the parade as - collusion by the au- ( toridade" in an act of violence." ( He also published a manifesto calling the I" parade "an act deliberately planned to provoke violence, to prevent attendance at the concert and to intimidate and act physically, ( blocking ( Continued on p. 18, col. 1)
Twice Justice