THE WORLD
"RONO8TICO8 WEATHER FORECAST FOR 1A ISLAND, TODAY: -. Partly cloudy with scattered showers tonight, becoming cloudy with showers on Saturday. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: - High, 77 degrees; low, te. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 80.05 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Feb. 1L (PU). - temperature* d" today; New York, 84 deg*; Chicago, 86; Wáehlngton, 88; Miami, 78. At *1 La Guardia airport: al tur* max. Unlimited; visibility, quine* miles; wind, from the northwest, twenty-eight miltea per hour. Forecast for tomorrow: partly cloudy with the* fear*break* most* altea between forty and fifty degree*.
MORNING JOURNAL
Ai&n WTV Entered aa second class matter, AINU AAIA poet Office, Nan Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY FEBRUARY 12, 1949
NUMBER 13575 .
FIVE CENTS
Tax Increase Petition Postponed
Committee Provisionally Files Will Give Preferential Attention to Social Security Program By REX CHANEY WASHINGTON, Feb. 11 (PU)-President Truman's request for "quick action on his request for $4,000,000,000 in new direct taxes met with an official rejection in Congress today. The House Ways and Means Committee, which drafts all tax measures, temporarily shelved the tax question in favor of going ahead with hearings on legislation to reorganize the social security program. Hearings on social security will begin on February 28, and will likely continue for four to six weeks. That means that hearings on contributions cannot begin until mid-March. The Senate cannot discuss the tax issue until the House acts, because all tax legislation must originate in the lower chamber. Traman called for quick congressional action on his tax program. Traman told a press conference that the additional money is needed as much now as when he first asked for it. He said that the variable prices on consumer goods have not affected the costs to the government and that he did not want the government to run a deficit. New Taxes The President asked Congress to raise about half the money in the form of new corporate taxes, and the other half in higher taxes for those with income in the upper and middle income brackets. Treasury said that the upper and middle income levels start at $6,000 per year. In addition, the President called for an increase in Social Security payroll taxes from one to one and a half percent, which, he said, doubles the number of 25,000,000 people who are not covered by current law. He also asked for an additional $260,000,000,000 in payroll taxes to pay for the national health insurance program. His total request, in new contributions both directly and indirectly, amounts to $5,000,000,000,000. The Ways and Means Committee will begin consideration of the social security program by discussing old age benefits. Although Mr. Truman has called for increases in social security benefits and an extension of coverage to currently unprotected workers, he has not yet sent his detailed program to Capitol Hill. Several members of Congress, however, have filed individual bills outlining how they believe the system should be changed. The highest retirement benefit a family can get under the current system is $85 per month. The Administration will ask Congress to accelerate the proportion of contributions from workers and employees so that the amount can be increased. The current contribution is one percent of a worker's wages, up to $3,000. It plans to increase it to one and one-half percent by January 1. The Administration also wants the old-age insurance program to be extended to agricultural laborers, domestic servants, and workers in the employ of others. The Committee hearings on social security will not include the proposed national health insurance program.
Homemaker's Budget Has Not Been Reduced On Island
By AIDA TORRENT Redactors of EL MUNDO A survey conducted by EL MUNDO among housewives of San Juan and Santureo shows that the drop in food prices has not yet benefited families. The housewives interviewed said that despite so many drops in food prices, they are buying them at the same price as years ago, with the exception of some items, such as ham, lard and butter. All the housewives we interviewed said that horns are very expensive. 8o asked them if the same situation prevails now as a year ago. They reported that 80 percent of the items are still at the same price as a year ago, and that the situation is more or less the same. They say that there is a great abundance of foodstuffs and
The situation is more or less the same, and that there is a lot of foodstuffs, shoes and clothes. One of the housewives we interviewed, Mrs. Inocencia Aymench, Providencia Street, Santurce, said that "there is such an abundance of food, footwear and clothing in the market, that the store owners are using sales to attract customers 1 *. He added that clothing items have gone down very little; therefore, there is an abundance to choose from. In general terms, he stated that he has not had any notable economy in family budget expenses, due to the fact that one thing or the other is always increasing, citing electricity, water and milk. "Life is very expensive and we (housewives) have to do a lot of number crunching to stay within budget," she said. Another housewife, Mrs. Lila (Cont. on Page 14.- Col. 8)
Judge Luis R. Polo Investigates Illegal Bail Bonds
-1
Judge Lula R. Polo (extreme right, tm the toga) caneció yesterday all" Ian flansan that had p rentad an Ion acur¿don who appeared at the reading of the indictment. The said bonds did not comply with Ion requlnltos legajen. In the photograph, the Jues
Polo shows the Attorney General, Vicente Géigel Polanco (second from right to left) the registry of sureties he has to verify the legality of the bonds to be presented to the Court. On the far left is the U-
A, Caaablanca. who observes the register. He is accompanied by journalist Ismael Fernandez of El Imparcial. In the center, well in the background, is journalist Arturo Ramoa Llompart, of the Diario de Puerto Rico, (Photo EL MUNDO.
Vicéns Denies Increase of 4c. In Libra Café
Cancels Six Cases Before Its Tribunal
FEGI Submits Brief To Governor
Antonio Vicéns Ríos, director of the General Supply Administration, yesterday denied the petition filed by the Coffee Sector of the Puerto Rico Coffee Growers' Association, requesting that his administrative order setting the maximum prices for the sale of coffee on the Island be rescinded, stating that he has not been provided with demonstrative evidence that he "erred in his conclusions". With regard to the subsidies that the Legislature has twice granted to coffee growers, Mr. Vicéns Ríos maintains that, in both cases, these subsidies have been based "on a principle of aid to coffee growers, and in no case on the grounds that the maximum prices set by the AGS were not sufficient, fair and reasonable." "IF such had been the case," says Mr. Vicéns Ríos in his diet temen, "the legislative action would have so stated, and the coffee growers would have availed themselves of their rights to protection against arbitrariness or error by appealing to the Court of Supply Appeals. A Puerile Allegation Regarding the coffee growers' request for an increase in the price of coffee, the AGS director says: "To impose on the consumers of Puerto Rico a new increase of 4 cents per pound of coffee, as requested, to further benefit a certain sector, which in the criteria of the Administrator has reasonable benefits and enjoys privileges, has no justification whatsoever for the Administrator or for the consumers of Puerto Rico. "It is puerile to allege that an increase of 4 cents per pound is not a burden for the consumer. It is, all the more so for the poor consumer who possibly feeds himself with only one cup of coffee a day. Benefits of the Law Disregarding "polemics", Mr. Vicéns Ríos explains the benefits that coffee growers are receiving by law. "IF it existed" -he says- "the protection that already exists for coffee, by virtue of Law number 4, the inhabitants of Puerto Rico would today consume quality coffee between 8 and 10 cents less per pound, that is to say, at the parity of the price it costs (Cont. on page 14.- Col. 7).
Complaint That Guarantors Do Not Comply with the Law. - Judge Luis R. Polo, of the San Juan District Court, yesterday cancelled the bail bonds of all the accused - a total of "sel" - who were called for arraignment, because none of them met the requirements of the law. The Magistrate ordered in each 90so the incarceration of the accused until he furnishes new bail. These new bonds, according to an order decreed in Corto abierto, must be supported by property actually worth the sum stipulated in the bond. Likewise, the sureties must bring before him proof that they pay taxes to the Government of Puerto Rico. They must also bring the latest tax receipt and a certificate from the Property Registrar certifying that the property securing the bond is not encumbered with any encumbrance. Registry of Sureties Judge Polo has in his possession a registry of 1o" sureties of the District of San Juan. Each time a bond is brought before him, he checks the amount of the bond against the amount up to which the surety can be bonded, as shown by the record. Almost all the bonds that have been brought before the magistrate lately have been returned for not conforming to the law. Judge Polo said yesterday that he has encountered cases in which a citizen who owns a house for which he pays taxes for $2,000 appears as surety for more than $30,000. In other cases, guarantors appear who do not own any real estate, and therefore do not have any real estate (Cont. to P. 14. - Col. 3).
In relation to the allocation of $1,000,000 requested by the Director of the Office of Personnel for the operation of the increase plan, Mr. Justo Pastor Lozada, president of the Federation of Employees of the Insular Government, said that "due to the fact that the increase plan is not being implemented, it is necessary to provide the necessary allocation. He pointed out that "because the allocation fixed by the Uniform Compensation Law was used almost entirely for the purposes indicated in Section 5 thereof, the Director of Personnel was forced to promulgate a regulation providing "that in order to enjoy the benefits of a promotion, the employee must render outstanding services. The Division Chiefs interpreted the term "outstanding" in their own way, causing innumerable protests. It was then that the President of the FEGI addressed the Director of the PO first, and then submitted a memorial to the Governor, explaining the need for the assignment in order to implement the plan for in-grade increases. FEGI memorial "The employees en masse endorse the statements of Mr. Manuel A. Pérez, Director of Personnel, on the need to allocate no less than $1,000,000, and not the $350,000 recommended by the Planning Board, for the operation of the within-grade increase plan," says FEGI. in its memorial to the Governor, and states: "Precisely because of the insufficient appropriation which, contrary to the recommendations to that effect of the Director of Personnel, was made last fall for this purpose, the regulation to put the plan into effect had necessarily to be made (Cont. at p. 14.- Cal. 6).
Use of U.S. Boricua Workers To Be Encouraged
Sierra Signed Agreement Is Part Of It
Pact Gives Parity With Mainland Workers By PAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, Feb. 11. (PU) -Fernando Sierra Berdeeta, Commissioner of Insular Labor, announced today the approval of an agreement that places Puerto Rican workers on parity with other U.S. citizens "in the recruitment of agricultural laborers. Sierra announced the signing of an agreement along those lines with Robert L. Goodwin, director of the U.S. Bureau of Employment Security. Sierra also announced that he will go to California next week to meet with Governor Earl Warren and other California authorities about the possibility of stimulating the employment of Puerto Ricans in that state. The agreement signed today, Sierra said, does not necessarily mean that large numbers of Puerto Rican workers will be hired by employers in the metropolis. Nor, he added, does it mean that workers from foreign areas such as Mexico, Jamaica and other parts of the Caribbean will not be needed in the United States. New Standard - "Rather," he said, "the agreement recognizes as a matter of policy that Puerto Ricans, as American citizens, are part of the U.S. labor force." The standard for recruiting agricultural laborers in the past has not specifically stated that, he noted, although last year five thousand Puerto Ricans were hired on U.S. farms in various parts of the country to perform various tasks. During the harvest season in this country, and particularly during the fruit picking season, farmers often find themselves short-handed. The Federal Bureau of Employment Security is responsible for helping to find laborers and for directing them to the places where they are needed. If laborers cannot be recruited in the areas where they are needed, employers look elsewhere. Many workers have been brought into the country from Mexico and the West Indies. Under the agreement signed today, however, the Bureau of Labor and Employment instructs its regional offices to encourage employers to recruit Puerto Rican workers if it is economically feasible. Sierra pointed out that it would not be economically feasible, for example, for Texas farmers to recruit Puerto Ricans 1,500 miles away when they can recruit Mexicans across the border. Asked how many Puerto Ricans would be needed in the metropolis' agricultural operations this year, Sierra said he could not predict. The needs for workers in general are not yet known, he said. No Obligation Asked if the agreement meant that farmers in the metropolis would be obligated to hire Puerto Ricans, Sierra said it did not. He indicated that the main purpose of the Federal Bureau of Employment is to (Cont. on p. 14.- Col. 1)
Today's Europe on the Inside Yugoslavs Still Prefer Russian Side Though Break with Moscow Irrevocable
By JOHN GUNTHER (This is the sixth article in the series written by John Gunther upon his return from the European continent). The long talked-about rift between Tito and the Kremlin is irrevocable and complete, unless Moscow makes a sensational U-turn and retreats. The Yugoslavs will not give in. This is the dominant impression we got in Belgrade and Zagreb from our conversations with Marshal Tito himself and other leaders. We would tune other dominant attitudes in today's Yugoslavia more or less as follows: First, the boastful Yugoslavs do not believe in the possibility of war in the near future. They believe that if it breaks out it will be the Americans who will start it, not the Russians, and that it will be the Russians who will win it, not the Americans. Why will the Russians win? Because, say the Yugoslavs, the lesson of modern history is that the aggressors always come out on top. Daring? Falsehood? We imagine that many Americans will say something of this in praise of the above liness. We are merely reporting the Yugoslavian point of view as we hear it. Whistling in the dark to scare away fear?
fear? Perhaps. But let me continue. They prefer the Russian Side Second, although the gulf between Moscow and Belgrade is as deep as the Grand Canyon of the Colorado, with no other bridge between one side and the other than permanent* and grim tension, Yugoslavia prefers at this time to fight on the side of Russia rather than on our side, if war comes.
Why? Because the Yugoslavs, in spite of their quarrel with the Comlnform, continue to believe themselves not only communists, but even better communists than the Russians. However - third - Marshal Tito himself believes that peace can be maintained, that countries like Yugoslavia can become bridges between East and West, that the central and eastern European states can survive and live on their own without Moscow's control or interference, as independent and sovereign nations dedicated to socialism as an ideal but friendly to both sides. Caution Towards the United States . Fourth, he believes that good relations between the United States and Yugoslavia are possible on the basis of improved trade, provided that the United States does not attempt political intrigue or adventures to undermine his regime. Tito, however, has to be very cautious in his dealings with the U.S. because if he is courting the West too warmly, he may lose its support and drag it down among the Communist fanatics who follow him. Likewise, our overtures to him, if there are any, must be approached with great delicacy because otherwise we would drive him into the arms of his own extremists. (Cont. on p. It- Col. é)
. .. | KN
Géigel Promises Relentless Fight Against Organized Gangsters
Concepcion de Gracia Explains Incident Auditor Conference -■ । ■ * | I I I l" . - -
The Incident provoked by Dr. Ismael Rodriguez Bou in the moments in which I was formulating the last of a series of questions that with the permission of Dr. Rafael de J. Cordero I asked him last Monday in a conference last Monday in the presence of Dr. Rafael de J. Cordero. Cordero asked me last Monday at the University of Puerto Rico, after Dr. Cordero had finished his lecture on "The Economy of Puerto Rico and its Problems", did not occur exactly in the way it appears narrated in EL MUNDO in the review of the referred lecture published in yesterday's edition, said yesterday Dr. Gilberto Qon-epción de Grada. "The facts occurred as follows", added the President of the Indepondentlsta Party: "When Dr. Cordero finished his lecture, Dr. Ismael Rodriguez Bou, who presided over the event, asked the audience, in harmony with what was published in the Press, if anyone wished to ask the lecturer any questions. A great silence followed the invitation. Dr. Ro-
... -... - Dr. Gilberto Concepción de Gracia dríguez Bou, seconded by Dr. Cordero, asked again if anyone wished to ask any questions. "Then, I, who was standing in front of one of the doors of one of the doors of the en- (Cont. on Page 14.- Col 4.
Prosecutor Orders Arrest of Friend and Driver of Enrique Gomez Charges Ambo with Failure to Cooperate with Justice. - Interrogated A Brother Of Extinct In Relation To Car; An Incident Arose MAYAGUEZ, February 11 (By Ricardo Villamil)- The prosecutor Felipe Marchand González today charged Mr. Miguel Salgado, employee of the Royal Bank nt Cenada, and friend of Mr. Enrique Gómez Ontrón (who perished in the fire of his house in the Algarrobo neighborhood) and Gómez's chauffeur, Julio Amorós, with the crime of not cooperating with the justice system.
Gómez's driver, Julio Amorós, of violation of Article 37 of the Penal Code (failure to cooperate with Justice), setting bail for each of them at $10,000. Prosecutor Marchand Gonzalez, who continues the investigation of the fire at the house of Mr. Enrique Gomez Ontron, after questioning yesterday 15 persons of whom he had confidences that in one way or another they had communicated with Mr. Enrique Gomez Ontron during the last days before the fire, last night was personally at the residence of Mr. Luis Gomez Ontron, brother of Mr. Enrique, and summoned him to appear last night at the police headquarters in his car, to question him in relation to said vehicle. After interrogating Mr. Luis Gómez and several witnesses in relation to the acquisition and use of the automobile and when it was already close to 10:30 P. M. Mr. Gomez was about to leave, an incident arose with prosecutor Marchand when Mr. Gomez told him "to let him know when he was going to arrest him", the prosecutor then answered him, in a strong tone, "that if he expected to be arrested, he would arrest him if he had to do it in this case, and not only him, but someone bigger and more powerful than him, if necessary, and to each his own conscience". Incarcerates Two Late today, Prosecutor Marchand proceeded, personally, to confine in the Mayaguez District Jail, demanding bail of $10,000, for violation of Article 37, of the Penal Code, Mr. Enrique Gomez Cintron's driver, Julio Amoros, and one of Don Enrique's closest friends, young Miguel Salgado, an employee of the Royal Bank of Canada, who was in Gomez's company during the morning of January 16, on the night of the house fire.
 Transportation Authority Aviation Division Chief Eddie Hollohan said yesterday that he is confident airport managers in major U.S. cities will approve safety rules for non-route transportation similar to those established in Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico. Our rules, he said, have the full backing of federal authorities. Mr. Hollohan also said that the Transportation Authority would make the price of airline tickets "not a reason for differences in safety standards, which must be uniform. "* Mr. Hollohan also said that the new regulations for uncertified aircraft are not for discriminatory purposes, and that they only seek to establish safety standards 'for all people who have to use aircraft for transportation, especially people of limited means. Mr. Hollohan yesterday publicized the new rules promulgated for non-route aircraft using the Transportation Authority's airports. No inspection report from a mechanic will be accepted unless the mechanic has been registered and accepted by the Division of Aviation as a responsible person to perform the inspection of the airplane's airworthiness. (Continued on page 11. Col. 8)
In-Service Soldier Instruction Plan Formulated
The Department of Instruction and the Military Department of the West Indies have reached an understanding to offer educational facllldadases to soldiers currently serving on active duty. The soldier will pay only 25 percent of the expenses. A far-reaching plan was outlined, which will enable members of the Armed Forces to pursue primary or secondary education without incurring "lavish expenses". The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano Villaronga, yesterday addressed all school superintendents, assistant superintendents, principals, teachers of special groups and teachers of evening high schools, instructing them on this particular matter. In order to be eligible for this new curriculum, the applicant must be a member of the United States Armed Forces,
Prior to the date of enrollment for evening courses, the soldier must meet with the principal or teacher in charge of the school to which he or she wishes to apply for admission. If he meets the requirements, the principal or teacher in charge will provisionally mark him. Once this is done, the soldier will immediately write to the following address: United States Army Forces Antilles. Troop Information and Education Section, Fort Brooke, Puerto Rico. In his letter to this office, the soldier will indicate his desire to take advantage of the benefits of the new curriculum and request the official forms to sign a study contract. When the soldier receives the forms approved by the Departa(Cont. on p. 14.- Col. 2)
57 * Denounces State of Unrest ? - He spoke during the inauguration of District Attorney Freyre By ANGEL CRUZ CRUZ EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Vicente Géigel Polanco, said yesterday at the inauguration of District Attorney Baldomcro Freyre, that lately crime has increased in Puerto Rico, and that a "type of organized gangsterism, especially in the Commonwealth," is sowing unrest throughout the Puerto Rican community. I want to say," said Governor Géigel Polanco, "that the Department of Justice will deploy all its resources to put a stop to crime, especially organized crime. It simply will not tolerate this type of organized gangsterism. It is necessary to put an end to this state of affairs, and to assure the people the peace and order to which they are entitled. 1 The Procurador Genera! was the pr! 1 mer orator at the inauguration ceremony of the new District Attorney of the District of San Juan, Baldomero Freyre, who was promoted from the Prosecutor's Office of Mayagüez to that of San Juan. | The ceremony, held in the courtroom of Judge Luis R. Polo, was presided over by a collegiate court, composed of Judges Luis R. Polo, Julio Suárez Garrlga, Angel Negrón and Rodolfo Ramiros Pabón, the latter two from the Mayagüez District Court. Both magistrates came with the former Mayagüez District Court Judge to make their presentation. Inicia Géigel , / i The aeto gave eemlenM at half past ten o'clock in the morning, with the dla- - course of the Attorney General. ' 1 Est* began by saying that "the / appointment involves a high and well-deserved recognition to the fundo- . narlo, for his great dedication to! I public service." He went on to say that "the task of the prosecutor is arduous < Ungrateful", so that the ejer1 ce, écomo has exercised the prosecutor Freyre, deserves the public recognition of the entire community. Géigel Polanco concluded by saying that the winner of the appointment was not the prosecutor Freyre, but the people of Puerto Rico, "who will have in him a servant of capacity, diligence and experience in this hard task. i. Sánches Castaño speaks i- Judge Luis R. Polo, who directed .- the act, gave the floor i. then to the President of the Col*; a glo of Lawyers of Puerto Rico, 1& 1- 1-! rendered Benido Sánchez Castaño. - It is of great benefit," he said, "for the district of San Juan, that a man of the moral integrity of comrade Freyr* " should take the place that another man of great ability and intelligence, comrade Luis Apellánlz Storer, was about to leave." Sáni rhez Castaño went on to say that "the work of the prosecutor in San Juan is extremely difficult and arduous," but that prosecutor Freyre would know how to share this difficult task with his other competent and intelligent colleagues. i In another part of his speech, the president of the lawyers said: "It is true that lately a crime wave has swept through the country. On my trip to Rio de Janelrq । I remember talking to a dis- ) tlnguld magistrate, who told me that in that city a homicide occurred every six months. I answered him that in Puerto Rico, in ' a single puebleeito that I qulwo. much (Carolina) a felony crime is committed every month. ' "Puerto Rico -we must say it, blushing- has the record d* 1* criminality in the world. The percentage of crlmenea on Puerto Rico is higher than in New Yorl* comparatively. It is painful to say these things, psro osa ea the re*lity." Lic. Sanchez Castaño' ended - by saying that ol prosecutor Freyre "va jalda arriba, pero va * triunfar, como triunfar on Maya-, güez." ' Apellánls Satisfied The speaker alguionte was the outgoing prosecutor*,'licenciado Lula Apollánig Storer, who spoke of ou constant*, concern mlentraa performed' the office. He said he was pleased and proud of the work he had done in the Juan Prosecutor's Office, which he had totally reorganized. "I came here," he added, "with the m* jorer to give everything I had to my people. Now I am leaving with the full satisfaction of having done my duty*'. Apollánla said that when he was "recruited" for the position, he maintained a refusal for more than 24 hours. 24 hours, so that finally, "un-. that it was hard for him to get rid of 1** Corto Municipal, he agreed * to take charge of the San Juan Prosecutor's Office. "After a while," he said, "I give it to the comrade (Continued on page U, Col T>;