THE NfiNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Medium cloudy, with scattered showers". IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 84 degrees; low, 7 degrees. Barometric" pressure at sea level, at 4:00 p.m., 29.98 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, agoato N. ~ (PU) - In the afternoon today m recorded laa rigutonte" toas by" hunui: Chleago, M; Miami. 77; Nwva York, $4; Wáshlagtoa. M.
MARANA'S NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter. Poet Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 27, 1949
NUMBER 13767
FIVE CENTS
Lawyers' Ethics Committee Discussed Alvarado's Case'.
% OI I I I * W Jká Jf ' * ' I 1 Jfi 9- í í¿ í^-/ ' > '¿2 , waKmjwF' a a* v Al 1 1 1 vVnlVwJ^' Jk /f r ft I Jw M *4 ♦ ' r o , A ' 1 ¡L' - >í *lir Aam s k V V $ ' ' iü m ' \ ALv ' V . vw jbl Jl
In the photograph above are the members* of the commission of the drowned to con" dorar to the case. composed by Rafael Rivera Zayaa (president); Guillermo Gonsález, Dan Pellón and Raquel Nlgagllonl. Below, the stenographer Carmelo Pírea, below, Licenciado Arcillo Alvarado with au" "bogados, Ion licenciado" Víctor Gutierres Franqul, Edelmiro Martinet Rivera and Carlos J. Ortta.
Veterans and Teachers Accelerated Pay Deposit $503,281.13 To Cover Expenses and Salary Arrears By RUNICO R. RIVÍRA EL MUNDO Editor The veterans enrolled in the present school year, who number about 20,000, will receive the pay corresponding to the first three weeks of study in the month of August, at the end of that month and at the beginning of September. This was announced yesterday by Mr. John J. O'Brien, acting director of the Veterans Administration. It was also revealed that the Department of Instruction received and deposited yesterday at the Insular Treasury, an advance from the Federal Government in the amount of $503,281.13. for the payment of back salaries to veteran teachers. The VA indicated that most of the veterans who have recently enrolled study in the special groups for veterans that operate under the supervision and administration of the Insular Department of Instruction, Delivery of the Check Yesterday morning, Mr. Mariano Vlllaronga, Commissioner of Instruction, received from Mr. Juan B. Forrar and Eric Branham, of the Veterans Administration, a check for the amount indicated above. Commissioner Vlllaronga reported that the problem of veterans' teachers' pay has been solved. The veteran teachers should receive their paychecks for the months of June, July and August. The money delivered and deposited yesterday, as indicated, represents only 75 percent of the total amount to be contributed by the Federal Government to cover the operating expenses of the Puerto Rico veterans' program for the next three months. Subsistence Payments Mr. Juan B. Ferrer, head of the A.V. Division of Education and Vocational Rehabilitation, said that about 16,000 veterans have enrolled in special courses. These reports are provided to the A. V. by the Department of Instruction and are used to authorize payment to veterans for subsistence. The veterans under this program, according to Mr. Ferrer, generally receive between $105 and $120 per month for their subsistence while they are in school. Mr. Ferrer added that at the end of August, many veterans receive a subsistence allowance for their education.
The Investigation Of The Incident With Umpierre Was In Private
No Statement Authorized at the End of the Hearing. Judge and Legislator In Attendance
By JOSE M. GARCIA CALDERON EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Ethics Committee of the Bar Association, composed of 11 members Rafeel Rivera Eayes, Guillermo A. Gonzalez, Daniel Pellon Lafuento and 1" Miss Raquel Nigagllonl met yesterday for an hour investigating the incident* that occurred during the hearing.
an hour yesterday investigating the incident* that occurred several days ago between Judge Angel M. Umplerr" and Mr. Arcillo Alvarado. Appearing before the Ethics Committee on behalf of Mr. Alvarado were Mr. Edelmiro Martinez Rivera and Mr. Víctor Gutiérrez Franqul. The Investigation on the Incident that motivated the unexpected meeting of the Senate to confirm Judge Umplerro was held in private, attended only by the members of the Ethics Committee, Mr. Alvarado and his attorneys, Judge Umpierre and Prosecutor Rafael Padró París. As reported after the meeting, both Judge Umpierre and Prosecutor Padró París, ratified in all their parts the statements they had previously made before the special prosecutor Guillermo A. Gil Rivera, who by order of his superiors conducted an investigation of the incident. The last one to testify was Mr. Aivarado, and he sustained the testimony he had previously given before special prosecutor Gil Rivera. Alvarado is accused of having threatened Judge Umplerro with the intention of not having his appointment confirmed by the Senate, after the Magistrate refused to exchange for a fine, a prison sentence dictated against Marina Garcia, whom Alvarado was defending, who is also a member of the House of Representatives for the Popular Party. Before beginning the investigation yesterday, the Deputy Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Mr. José Trías Monge, paid a visit to the office of Mr. Rivera Zayas, where the Ethics Committee met. The meeting of the Committee lasted for an hour after the testimony of the various witnesses summoned. In the meeting that followed the appearance of the witnesses, the Committee agreed to prepare a Report to be submitted to the Board of Governors of the Bar Association, with the corresponding recommendations. In accordance with the provisions of the Rules of the Bar Association, if it is concluded that Mr. Alvarrdo has solved the facts that he is accused of, (Cent- on page 14, Col. 4).
Daley To Go To New Orleans Office East Had Incident With Husband" Ferrer. Mr. Caleb Daley, Inspector of the Bureau of Plant Health, who was serving at the air* port of Isla Grande, will be transferred to New Orleans for health reasons, as reported yesterday by Seftor William T. Owrey, chief of the Bureau of Plant Health, who is to be transferred to the New Orleans office. Owrey, head of the agency's office in Puerto Rico, was the inspector whose conduct led to an incident at the end of 1*1" Gr "nd* with Puerto Rican actor Tosi Ferrer, his wife and companions, while the Ferrers were away from Puerto Rico. Mr. Daley was accused of having treated the Ferrer couple in an uncivil and inconsiderate manner, while he was examining their luggage and protesting against the manner in which he was conducting the inspection. The officials of the Plant Health Bureau ordered an investigation of the facts. As reported by Mr. Owrey, *1 Inspector Daley "commented that he was suffering from nervous disorders as a result of the incident and the commotion it caused. On Vacation"" As of August 5, he began treating with Dr. Jose Melendez, of Rio Piedras, on sick leave from work. (Continued on Page 14, Col. 8).
Decision Reversed
Secretary Sawyer Calls for Lowering Wartime Taxes
By Raymond H. Wllaon WASHINGTON, Aug. 26: (PU) - Business leaders do not believe the job shortage justifies government initiation of a public works program, Secretary of Commerce Charles Sawyer said today. The Secretary gave President Truman a 6,000-word study of economic conditions in fifteen eastern and middle eastern cities, covering good and critical areas, and interviews with representatives of business and labor unions.
"I could not observe a general situation in any area which would signal the time for the Federal Government to rush into a vast public works program," Sawyer said. Suggestions as to how the government can help improve economic conditions include such items as: 1. Reduction or abolition of wartime contributions. 2. Tax credits to enable "industry to cover what (Continued on p. 14 ooi. 8).
Cement Distribution To Be Controlled
Vicéns To Act To End Strike _ . -~By Luí" Sánchez Capp" Editor of EL MUNDO L" Junta Nacional de ' Relaciones dei Trebejo is making efforts aimed at achieving a" solution of the" controversy" between p "Oonos and workers of 1" cement industry, which keeps the two factories of said product at a standstill. Salvatore Cosentino, head of the JNRT in Puerto Rico, revealed yesterday that as part of the investigation of the charge filed by Ponce Cement against the union of its workers, he was making arrangements for a settlement between the parties. The announcement was made by Mr. Cosentino at the end of a three-hour conference he held yesterday afternoon with the leaders of the striking unions. The conference is part of the NLRB's investigation into the case brought by Ponce Cement, charging the union with violating the Taft-Hsrtley Act by going on strike. He then informed that the conference has been suspended to continue next Monday in Ponce, when he will meet with representatives of Ponce Cement, and then with union leaders. The NLRB official indicated that what they are trying to achieve is a solution to the strike, together with a settlement of the charge filed by Ponce Cement against the union. On the other hand, Mr. Antonio Vicéns Ríos, General Supply Administrator, informed yesterday that his agency will regulate cement distribution when the strike is over in order to protect contractors or importers and distributors who want to import cement. The AGS will not authorize the export of the product when production resumes until after fifteen days. Nota da Vloín" In a note on the matter, Mr. Vicéns Ríos announced the following: "For the protection of those contratisUs or importers and distributors of cement who want to import this material while the current strike is being resolved, they are informed that when the factories of the pats resume their operations, the distribution of cement will be intervened by the General Administration of Supplies, and the factories will not be able to distribute the cement they produce before fifteen days after the current strike, The factories will not be able to distribute the cement they produce before fifteen days after they begin production, time necessary to reorganize and establish reserves and be able to have normal distribution in which time the importers will be able to suspend their orders of importance and liquidate any stocks they may have of imported cement of higher price than that produced in the country. "Because of the stoppage of work in progress, it is to be expected that excessive demand and accumulation of orders will arise, and in order to make distribution in the most equitable manner, the General Supply Administration will establish rules for distribution as circumstances may require. "In resUblecorse the production by both factories, this being as it has hitherto been greater than the local consumption, no export will be authorized until the local needs have been covered and there is a consequent reserve, which will limit the export of the surplus which cannot be needed in the country." No Agreement Taken On the other hand, ol seftor Tomás Méndez Mejias, president of the CGT, Inc. stated yesterday that the executive committee of said Oindlcal has not taken any agreement, nor autol Izado official or unofficial declaration on the cement strike. He added that the executive committee of the CGT Inc. has not had any official or unofficial (Cont. on page 12, Col. 4)
Court Annuls Bonelli's Divorce Ruling
By Earique Ramiros Brau EL MUNDO Staff Writer The San Juan District Court, presided over by attorney Podro Páre" Pimentel, declared yesterday that a motion filed by attorney Carmen B. Hernandez, on behalf of the defendant, was granted. Hernandez, on behalf of Mrs. Marianne Heinig, leaving without effect the divorce sentence dictated in the case of Mrs. Heinig against her husband, the late Mr. Napoleon Bonelli, ordering the judge to file and dismiss the divorce action. The divorce case of Mrs. Hoinig against her husband Bonelli took place on July 22, 1349.
July 22, 1349, with only the plaintiff appearing. The District Court, after hearing the testimony of the plaintiff (Mrs. Hoinig) and that of a witness, found the allegations of the complaint proven and rendered judgment declaring the marriage bond between Marianne Hoinig and Napoleon Bonelli broken and dissolved. It was not final, says the Court, that four days after the judgment was rendered in Court and when the orders in the case had not yet been filed and the parties had not yet been notified, the do* died (Cent, at page 12, Col. 3).
Governor Submits 42 Matters to Chambers When Convening Session
Rafael C. Benitez Saved - Only One Seaman Perishes WASHINGTON, Aug. 36 (PU) - The submarine Cochino, commanded by Lieutenant Commander Rafael C. Benitez of Ponce, sank in Arctic waters early this morning after an explosion occurred in the ship's battery room. A civilian technician from the submarine's crew was killed. Six men engaged in rescue operations were also killed when they were dragged from the bridge of the sister submarine, Th* Tusk. The Cochino and three other submarines left the submarine base at New London. Connecticut, July 18, for a transatlantic training cruise, including an informal visit to Londonderry, Ireland. Reported to have perished: Lieutenant (JG) Wilson Manley Shaffer, Jr, Melvin Buck Hennenberger, Jr, James Robert Miller, Robert Lee Pinney, Robert Francis Brunner, Jr. and John G. Guttermuth. The first communiqué does not give the name of the civilian technician who was killed. Txt Mandaba Un Boricua Lieutenant Commander Rafael C. Benitez of Pone", Puerto Rico, commanded the Cochino, and Commander Robert K. R. Worthrington, The Tuak. * The Toro and the Corsair were the other two submarines participating in the cruise. At the time of the accident the submarines were conducting training exercises in icy waters in the Arctic. -A brief dispatch states that Banitez is among the five other PRACO Plazas X _____ to be discontinued are those of Aguadilla, Comerio, Vega Baja, Jayuya and Gurabo, in accordance with the stated policy of discontinuing the PRACO Plazas which, having fulfilled the purposes for which they were intended, have been used for the purpose of the Navy. having fulfilled the purposes for which they were created, no longer fill a public need," the General Administrator of the Puerto Rico Agricultural Corporation, Mr. Arturo Roque, announced yesterday the closing of the PRACO Plazas of Aguaditla, Vega Baja, Gurabo, Comerío and Jayuya, effective as of the closing of operations on Saturday, the 37th of this month. "The Government of Puerto Rico - says the official note - initiated the establishment of the PRACO Plazas in the critical period of the post-flood, when the supply of basic necessities has abandoned its normal course. This determination of our Government coincided with the intense campaign against the black market, speculation and hoarding practices. The PRACO Plazas became, on that occasion, powerful agents that greatly helped to return the economy to normality". In reporting the discontinuance of the five aforementioned plazas, Mr. Roque stated that by "suspending the services of some stores of this nature, neither the Agricultural Company nor the Government of Puerto Rico is abandoning the policy of promoting and developing (Cont. on page 14, Col. 8) 1
i Don Napoleón BonaUL with his son Orlando, a few days" ratea 4" occur U tríele" muert" d "l coaocido hombr" d" business of" this Capital.
Boricua Commanded Submarine Sinking in Arctic Waters
RAFAEL C. BENITEZ, who was taken to Norway. Benitez is a graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy Class of 1939. During World War II he served as executive officer of the submarine Dace when it sank a Japanese cruiser in the second battle of the Philippines. He holds two Silver Star medals, a Bronze Star medal and an Honorable Mention. Grao 4o Worthington, Tusk's commanding officer, was born in Philadelphia. He graduated in the Naval Academy class of 1938. His service in the past war included: three years as executive officer of the submarine Sllversldos. He earned the Navy Cross as commanding officer of the submarine Balao during his eight tours of duty (Cont. on page 14, Col. 6). Thomas Long, Acting Chief of the Weather Bureau in San Juan yesterday authorized statements on hurricane safety precautions. 1. Stay tuned to your radio and listen to the latest storm warnings and advisories. 2. Do not listen to rumors. Rely only on official Weather Bureau bulletins. 3. Get off and stay away from low-lying beaches and other places that may be swept by high swells, sea swells, or river floods. If your only exit to higher ground is a road that may be underwater during a cyclone, then get out early. Don't run the risk of being cut off. 4. IF your house is out of danger from storm surges or rising rivers, and is well built (properly weatherproofed and with a good roof and adequate shelter), then it is likely to be the best place for you to get through the cyclone. Otherwise, seek shelter in a sturdy building, or a shelter selected by the local Red Cross, Police, or Mayor of your town. Food and Safety 5. Nail or secure the* windows and put hurricane fences or partitions in place. When securing doors and windows use good wood, and secure them well. Makeshift partitions can cause more damage than if they are not used. Use strong ties or bracing for exterior doors. 6. Obtain extra food, especially food that can be eaten without cooking or that requires little preparation. Remember that electrical service may be cut off and that you may be without refrigeration, without eo(Continued on page 14, Col. 7).
It is probable that layoffs will be decreed in the Treasury Department, following the recommendations made by the Public Service Administration after the extension made on the occasion of the administrative reform. This was reported to the press by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Sol L. Descartes, who also said that it is possible that the consolidation of certain departments of the Department will be carried out in order to achieve a coupling of the interests with the consequent economic benefits.
Believe There Will Be Additional Issues He would give them in successive Proclamations. - By Juan Martin*" Chapel Editor of" Rt MUNDO To begin on Monday, August 29th at ten o'clock in the morning, the Governor has called a special session of the Legislature, according to a proclamation issued yesterday evening. Forty-one are the items submitted by the Governor for the consideration of the legislators, although it is believed that new topics will be submitted by additional pro. clams during the end of that session. The most important topics to be submitted by the Governor are: Reorganization of the Judicial system. Permit pars Is round "1n payment of surcharges or interest on" properties "djudlcadsa" to the People of Puerto Rico for nonpayment of taxes. Punishing the intervention of non-attorneys in judicial proceedings by means of payment. Elfo eliminate it lefalmrnte - the so-called buscones. The other items relate to amendments to the liquor law, in the form already anticipated by THE WORLD; appropriating money for certain bills; amending laws lately "tried and tested, and which practice has shown to contain certain defects," and giving no opportunity to pass legislation which was vetoed by the Governor in the regular session because of defect in wording or discrepancies between the title and the body of the bill. Text of Proclamation The text of the proclamation issued yesterday by the Governor states "The public interest has necessitated action by the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico on certain matters of importance now pending. NOW, THEREFORE, I, LUIS MULOZ MARIN, Governor of Puerto Rico, in accordance with the provisions of Article 33 of the Organic Act of Puerto Rico, approved on March 2, 1917, as amended, do hereby summon the members of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico to a special session of said Legislative Assembly, to be held on Monday, the S day of August, 1949, at 4:00 P. M., at the Capitol of Puerto Rico. M" at the Capitol of Puerto Rico, in order to consider the following matters of public interest and to adopt appropriate measures for the attention thereof: ¿ 1. to establish the Organic Law of the Judiciary of Puerto Rico. To amend Sections 3 and 44(c) of the Alcoholic Spirits and Alcoholic Beverages Act of June 1936, as amended, relating to the exportation of alcoholic beverages. 3. To allocate funds to the Department of Health for the purchase of equipment and materials for the hospital units of the 1st Health Center. 4. To allocate necessary funds to the Transportation Authority for the reconstruction and operation of auxiliary airports and of the 1st" Grande Airport. To amend *1 title ▼ -! Section 2 of Act No. 388 of April 22, 1946, as amended, which authorizes the Administrator of the State Insurance Fund to build a Hospital of Industrial Medicine and Surgery and of Rehabilitation Ffsle" for the 1 1,000,000,000 inhabitants. To amend Section 388 of Act 388 of April 3, 1946, as amended, which authorizes the Administrator of the State Insurance Fund to build an Industrial Medicine and Surgery and Rehabilitation Hospital for the care of workers injured in accidents at work or suffering from occupational diseases, increasing the amount to be invested in the construction of said hospital. To amend Section 44(b) of Act No. 8 of June 30, 1936, as amended, known as the "Spirits and Alcoholic Beverages Act. 7. To allow the redemption without payment of surcharges or interest of properties adjudicated to the People of Puerto Rico for nonpayment of taxes, provided that the payment of 1" amount owed" for taxes. To amend Soedonn M and 60 and to add 1" Section 1S3 (a) of the Insurance Act (Cont. on 1" page 14. Col. 1).
Severance Provisions Likely To Be Decreed In Treasury Dept.
The Treasurer informed that efforts are being made to obtain the funds to begin the reform as recommended by the Civil Service. The aforementioned recommendations will be put into effect, in accordance with >c Reported by the Treasurer, with those approved by the Committee appointed by the Treasurer, as a* Informers "1 beginning of "their management. The Treasurer reported that he would not have (Cont. at 1" page 14, Col. 6).
Muñoz Alters Vehicle Regulations
Authorizes Strict Rules To Enable Better Control Of Use And Acquisition Of Government Cars -- By ENRIQUE RAMIREZ RRAÜ Editor of EL MUNDO As of August 18, the new regulation number 2. d* 1" Office of Transportation went into effect. For the acquisition, use, maintenance, sale and everything related to motor vehicles assigned to the executive and judicial branches of the Government of Puerto Rico. This new regulation was prepared because it was considered necessary to amend the existing regulations and to exercise better control of the vehicles, especially in their care and maintenance, according to the Chief of said Office, Mr. Agustín Mercado Reverón. The new provisions are intended to correct deficiencies noted in the past fiscal year, especially in the care and maintenance of the vehicles. The deficiencies that are corrected - now with Regulation number 2, are 8, namely: 1. - Monthly report on mileage traveled by each vehicle and the operation and maintenance report; 2. Written justification for the acquisition of new vehicles and the receipt for the acquisition of the appropriate vehicle for each service in 1" Office of Transportation. Establishing the procedure to be followed for the sale of surplus or unserviceable vehicles, - 4. - Fixing the responsibility for the appointment of drivers on the Chief of Transportation. 5. - Ordering the formulation of a plan of preventive conservation measures, and ordering periodic inspections. This plan is to prevent losses of operating efficiency and premature wear and tear, avoid inconveniences, ensure efficiency and prolong the life and usefulness of the vehicle. 6. - Fixing the penalties to be taken in the event of accidents caused by negligence of the drivers, drunkenness, or for any other reason for which the People of Puerto Rico suffer real monetary loss. 7, - Ordering the imprinting of an official seal on each vehicle, as well as the name of the Department, Division or Institution to which it renders service, and 8, establishing the procedure to be followed in the provision of automobiles for the transportation of officers and employees. The new regulations have been promulgated in accordance with Section 3 of Act Number 49 approved on the 4th day of August, 1947, as amended by Act Number 163 on May 12, 1948, and became effective upon the approval of the Governor. To the new regulation is incorporated, becoming a part of the mlomo. Article 3 of Administrative Bulletin number 6 approved by the Governor of Puerto Rico on December 33, 1919, which provides that every Head of Department, Negodaco or Office, or any other officer or employee, shall be obligated to account for the custody, care, conservation and use of all public property acquired by him, by virtue of purchase, transfer, assignment, donation or by any other means, and their sureties, shall be liable for the cash value of said public property. This regulation covers all" transactions related to the acquisition, use, maintenance, sale, exchange, and everything related to motor vehicles under the jurisdiction, administration and control of the Office of Transportation. Aloanee and Purpose" The scope" and purposes, according to (Cont. "n on page 13, Col. 6)