THE WNDO
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY: - Occasionally partly cloudy, becoming cloudy with scattered showers*. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, 84 degrees; low, 70 degrees*. Barometric pressure at sea level, at* 4:80 p.m., 29.88 in* mercury.
NUBVA YORK, oetubr* 18. (FU). - Bu the afternoon* today *- rorlatrarai the* "Ifuient* tamporature*: Nwa York, 88; Chicago, M; Wáahlngtan, M; MlamL 88. Forecast** for tomorrow *in New York and city** reelna*: Cloudy weather, possible* rain* Eor the morning; weather generally ueno with pleasant* temperature*.
JOURNAL OF X
MAtAWA
YEAR XXX
Entered a* second dam matter. Post Office. San Juan. P. I.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 29, 1949
NUMBER 13829
FIVE CENTS
Unemployment Insurance Law Under Consideration
Commission Outlines 12-Point Plan * Idea Is to Strengthen Existing Law - Increase in Sugar Quota To Be Requested By LUISSANCHEZ CAPPA Editor of EL MUNDO The legislative commission studying unemployment and the effects of mechanization in the sugar industry agreed at its last meeting "to evaluate the system of employment insurance in the sugar industry on the basis of present practical results and problems." . The agreement is part of a twelve-point work program submitted to the committee by its technical advisors. In order to conduct the inquiry on employment insurance, the commission will request reports from the agencies involved in the implementation of the law that created the insurance. It shall also hold public hearings to hear suggestions on the weak points of the insurance and how to strengthen them. The commission shall also prepare draft bills, if necessary, to improve said insurance. Last Meeting
The Commission met last Thursday under the chairmanship of Speaker, Ledo. Ernesto Ramos Antonlnl, also present were representatives Pedro Vega Barrio", Francisco Diaz MSrchand, Carlos Rahassa, Francisco Sanchez, Joaquin Torre Noriega, Candelario Arce, and Mr. Miguel Torres, assistant to the Speaker on labor matters. The committee of technical advisors of the Commission was attended by Mr. Ramón Colón Torres, Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, Mr. Fernando Sierra Berdecla, Commissioner of Labor, Mr. Cándido Oliveras, President of the Minimum Wage Board, and Mr. Juan Labadle, of the Budget Bureau. It was agreed to ask Mr. Gul. llormo Sorra, head of the Agricultural Economics Division of the Experimental Station, to join the body of advisors of the Commission, Agreements Adopted The Committee of Aeeeeree submitted to the Commission a work plan of twelve points, and the following agreements were adopted: To appoint a Committee of Advisors for the purpose of: reviewing the original report; directing any new studies that may be necessary; advising the Committee on the technical issues before it; and suggesting new recommendations and ratifying or revising those of the first report. It was further agreed to provide such additional information as may be available on mechanization and technological advances in the Puerto Rico sugar industry and other areas for which public hearings will be held to hear affected parties and interested persons, especially in connection with certain plans to initiate the manufacture of liquid sugar in Puerto Rico. Mr. Candido Oliveras, as Chairman of the Minimum Salary Board, shall submit to the House Committee a candidate who, acting as a technician, shall conduct any necessary surveys, such as a comparative study on the effects of the use of yerbiddas in relation to employment in the sugar industry. This technician will work permanently with the Commission. The technician will work with the Commission on an ongoing basis. The Commission shall also establish the basis for a campaign to obtain an increase in the sugar quota of Puerto Rico. It will also hear the president of the Development Company on the projects in force, or which may be put into effect, to industrialize sugar products, such as bagasse and honeys. The Commission's work program also includes the agreement to hold a meeting with officials related to the government's construction program. It will also hear from the Administrator of the Emergency Program, the Head of Title V of the Land Authority, and the members of the Planning Board, and any other agencies on the possibility of establishing a program for the development of small industries that could counteract the effects of seasonal unemployment in the sugar industry. They were called to discuss the possibility of coordinating the payment of proportional benefits with other programs aimed at correcting the effects of unemployment. The idea was to see that the proportional benefits be paid by the TA after the end of the unemployment compensation payment. The TA officials explained that this is neither possible nor practical, since the payment of unemployment insurance ends in January, and if the proportional benefits were to begin to be paid on that date, they would be paid during the harvest period. They added that the TA speaks of adopting (Contlnued on page 16, Col. 7)
to go into effect. * The ordinance*in question began to take effect on October 12, and on that occasion Mr. Miranda authorized the following statements: "Inasmuch as by virtue of the new ordinance the direction of traffic has changed on some of the public streets of the Capital, we remind motorists that before entering any street they should ascertain by means of the corr*spondlent*a aeflalea, the exact direction of traffic on that street to avoid incurring in violations of the ordinance and to save the other motorists coming in the opposite direction. "Among the most important provisions of the ordinance are the following: Important Provisions "With regard to the transit of vehicles on the streets, it is provided that, on all streets where the traffic runs in one direction only and where the parking of motor vehicles is not prohibited, they shall be parked on the Left side of the direction of the traffic. "In all streets and avenues of this-Capital, and sections thereof, where the traffic is in both directions, vehicles shall be parked on the side of the street where the houses have even numbers," 'Por 'otro Jado it is strictly prohibited the parking of vehicles at 1a entrance or exit of a public or private garage; at the entrances of public or private establishments, such as schools, Churches, theaters, banks, etc., or places where public events are held; in front of the doors of commercial establishments where goods are to be loaded or unloaded for this establishment; at a distance of less than ten feet from fire hydrants or that may obstruct free access to the same; in the surroundings of playgrounds, markets, or sities for bus stops, etc." "This ordinance encompasses all the provisions of the previous ordinances, which are repealed upon the entry into force of the present one."
The Government of the Capital will resume *1 service of collection of parro* and animals realengo* by the* c*ll "* of the Capital and the barriada* of Santurce. It has been stated by the* municipal** authority** that the suspension of the service was due to the damage suffered by the vehicle used for such purposes; therefore, a new one has been designated to resume the work. The Director of Public Works* of the Government of the Capital, Mr. Pedro A. Miranda, said the following yesterday: "Approximately one month ago we were forced* to suspend the collection of animals in the metropolitan area* *due to a lack of service.
Capital City Government Draws Attention to Traffic Rules - V, Explains Most Important Provisions to be Followed for Parking on City Streets The Director of Public Works of the Capital City Government, Mr. Pedro A. Miranda, said yesterday that ordinance number 8, which regulates the traffic of persons and motor vehicles, includes all the provisions of the previous ordinances, which are repealed when the ordinance was passed.
$ Géigel Explains Implications Sugar Case Says Status Solution Will Not Depend on Supreme Court Decision By Benjamín Santana EL MUNDO Staff Writer Attorney General Vicente Géigel Polanco reported yesterday that the matter brought before the National Supreme Court, regarding the refining of sugar .on the Island, "was a purely constitutional matter." ■ The Head of the Department of Jua "tlcla returned yesterday to his offices, to attend to numerous cases pending his study, in spite of being suffering from a strong flu. Expanding on some statements made earlier by Attorney General Jose Trias Monge, in relation to the sugar case, Géigel Polanco warned that the solution to the political status of the Island will not depend, in any way, on the decision reached by the U.S. Supreme Court Justices. In the case in question, brought by Central Roig, of Yabucoa, attorneys Géigel and Trias alleged that the limitation imposed on the refining of sugar on the island is unconstitutional. Both Attorney Géigel Polanco and Deputy Attorney General Trias Monge have refrained from predicting the possible ruling of the National Supreme Court in this case, since the case is "sub-Judice", that is to say, pending resolution". Géigel stated, however, that the least the judges could decide is that, although it is true that Congress has the power to regulate the Island's economic relations with the Continent, these have to be on a basis of equity and Justice. Whatever the final decision may be, however, it will help to raise the political issue (Continued on page 16, Col. 1).
A Service Resumes
The Government of San Juan Picks Up Again Stray Animals
The Government of San Juan has been in continuous use for the past few years. Municipal Problem However, the Government of the Capital, aware of the problem represented by these stray animals and anxious to put a stop to this evil, eliminating, in addition, the ungrateful spectacle that they* offer, has spared no expense to enable a new vehicle for this purpose*, and has increased the staff responsible for providing such an important service. "As a proof of the interest shown by the Government of the Capital in eradicating this evil, we must inform you. (Continued on page 16, Col. 8)
The Governor and his Guest at the Sixto Escobar Park
■■■■■h \ * ___- fl X. , & '■ r /Br n i & II . - . < ■■r wvr - s R '' x J Despite the serious responsibilities of his office, Governor Muñoz Marín has not lost his enthusiasm for the sport that most Puerto Ricans are passionate about. Here we see him in a box at the P "rqu" Sixto Escobar during Thursday night's game between Ponce and Santurce. The Governor takes advantage of the time between innings to discuss with his guest and companion, Norman Ware, about labor relations problems in which the visitor is interested and so, while the pnnceñna were making wonderful double plays on the field, the "cleaner of island politics" was making his own from his spectator's box. (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Law Benefits Housing Plan For Veterans
Uberaliza las Normas Para los Préstamos. - Puerto Rican veterans who have applied or want to apply for mortgage loans for the construction of homes will benefit from the new legislation approved by President Truman on home loans, to be processed through the Federal Homes Administration. This was reported yesterday by Mr. D. A. Carpenter, director of the agency inala. Mr. Carpenter explained that the new home loan legislation under the FHA liberalizes lending by allowing the Financial Reconstruction Administration to purchase 100 percent of mortgages from banks. Local banks have been reluctant to lend under the AFH to veterans because of the limited mortgage market in the Financial Reconstruction Administration. That agenda could only buy 50 percent of the mortgages. Mr. Carpenter said that banking firms will now have a secure and complete market for mortgages and will be in a better position to finance veterans' housing projects. Previous difficulties, he added that the "difficulties" encountered by "veterans" in obtaining home loans have been overcome by the new legislation. Many veteran" loan" applicants" had been unable to finance their homeownership" loans under the AFH. . He believes that there will now be an upsurge in veterans' loan "olidtudoi" through the liberalization of federal law. As for the" projects* of the" contractor" firm" that plan to initiate low-cost" housing constructions through the agency, this official said that they are under study and consideration. As is known, the Fullana Corporation, a native contractor entity, has proposed a housing project at a maximum cost of $3,700 per unit. He indicated that up to the present, there is nothing definitive about this project, which has been "submitted by the contracting firm for the consideration of Governor Muñoz Marín. $ (Continued on page 16. Col. 5)
Fomento Sells Factory To Joyce Firm
The price involved in the transaction is not disclosed. This Does Not Induce Building NEW YORK, Oct. 98 (PÜ)-The Puerto Rico Sho* and Leather Company, at Pone* has been acquired by the Joyce Incorporated, of Pasadena, California, it was announced today by William H. Joyc*, son. Mr. Joyc* also announced that the plant will be used for the manufacture of shoulder shoes under the name of Joyc* of Puerto Rico. The plant was built and operated by the Compartía d* Fomento Industrial de Puerto Rico. When questioned yesterday by the Compartía de Fomento Industrial on the matter, Salvador Tió, Public Relations Officer of said agenda, informed EL MUNDO that "the sale of the shoe factory to the Joyce firm is certain". He said, "What has been done is to lease the factory (the building) and the machinery has been sold to them, with an option to buy the building." When asked about the price of the transaction, Mr. TIÓ said that the contract had just arrived from the United States and did not stipulate the price. He further stated that the sales action was signed by Mr. Teodoro Moscoao, Jr. and Mr. William H. Joyce, Jr. in Pasadena. Mr. Tió added that the Compartía de Fomento sold the shoe factory because it "has in mind to sell all of its factories" to continue financing new enterprises. He said that the five subsidiaries of 1a Compartía de Fomento, the Cement factory, the Glass factory, Ja do Papel, and the Ceramics factory are to be sold, as was done with the shoe factory. They will enjoy tax exemption In response to our questions, Mr. Tió said that the new owners of (Continued on page 16, Col. 5)
Polio Cases Increase In Two Days
4 in Santurce; One in Rio Piedras
Next Year Expected to Register Strong Outbreak Epidemic. New Cases By Lula Hornándes Aquino EL MUNDO Staff Writer An increase in the number of cases of infant polio was registered during the last two days in the metropolitan area, where five of them were admitted to the Bayamón District Hospital and the Presbyterian Hospital. Four of the cases were registered in Santurce. The Chief of the Bureau of Epidemiology, Dr. Abel de Juan, said yesterday that these cases will be studied carefully to determine if some of them have been imported from the United States. There are at least two of the patients who are American. It is expected that next year there will be a strong epidemic outbreak of infant paralysis, precisely on the fourth anniversary of the epidemic that occurred in the island, of which 307 cases were reported, in some of which the patients died. The new Cauca Lo" new csso" reported on the" 27th and 28th are the following: Do. mingo Díaz Meléndez. street number 6, Barrio Obrero; Wllfredo Ocasio, enserio Villa Palmeras, street number 3, Santurce; Whitney Bourdman, Emajagua street number 3, Pun>" Las Marías, Santurce: Charle" Jame" Nolan, Pflnta Las Marias, Bucaré street number 30, and Félix Gómez Rivera, 16 months old, Bella Vista, Rio Piedras. All of these cases, with the exception of Whitney Bourdman, were admitted" and are under observation at the District Hospital in Baya, Mon. Whitney is confined at Presbyterian Hospital. The practice when a case of infantile paralysis arises is that the public health physician and the private physician immediately send him to the nearest district hospital, so that the case is isolated until it is finally determined whether it is positive or not and to what degree the disease has reached. Once *1 case is established in a district hospital, information is forwarded to the Epidemiology Bureau, which studies the clinical record of the case and determines the policy to be followed. As for the new cases, at least two of them, an attempt will be made to determine whether they are imported or not. The Chief of the Epidemic Bureau, Dr. De Juan, said that "it may be that people coming from abroad are more susceptible than the residents here, where there was an outbreak a few years ago, which has given some immunity". Thirty-five Caaoa So far this year, 35 cases of infantile paralysis have been re. glatred in Puerto Rico, distributed as follows: San Juan, 7; Isabela, 1; Rio Piedras, 2; Vega Baja, 1; Dorado, 1; Toa Alta. 1; Guayanilla, 2; Carolina, 1; Rio Grande, 1; Naguabo, 2; Vieques, 1; Caguas, 5; Cayey, 1; Santa Isabel, 1; Barranquitas, 1; Orocovis, 1; Ponce, 3; Guayanilla, 3. A study of the statistics of the Department of Health since the year of the epidemic indicates that in that year, 1946, 307 cases were recorded; in 1947 they dropped to 57 and in the year 1948 they were reduced to 30. So far this year the number of cases has risen to 35. During the 1946 epidemic, the towns most affected were the following, with the number of cases for the date of the epidemic: San Juan, .33; Rio Piedras. 30; Ponce, .41; Yauco, 14; Juana Díaz, 17; Guayanilla 16. In the following towns no cases were recorded in 1946: La. jas, Lares. Mlrlcao, Orocovl", Rin. cón, San Sebastián, Utuado and Vega Alta. The| remaining towns re. glstraro" few cases. Questioned by the Chief of the Negocia. (Continued on page 16, Col. 7).
-1 1 * W' ; < ; Z! .. .... - ■ i. :.:g" A. r M ♦ 'gW'Áy , I lilililí । - ihW Rfl twUI , i'" 1 ' -U, The Government of the Capital has enabled eete vehicle for the service of collecting anímale* realengo* in San Juan and its* barrio*. This service has been suspended, due to deeperfecte* in the vehicle previously used for this work. (Photo Government of the Capital),
Committee of Educators Opposes the High School Program ■ ' ■ -- -.■■■■111. I ■ ■ ■ .1 - ! A ■■
- ■ - ■■■■' ■■■■' ■ $14,000,000 Will Be Invested In Public Roads in Santurce
Muñoz Yesterday Approved 8-Year Inland Plan In Tune With Plan Board's Regulatory Plan
By JUAN MARTINEZ CHAPEL EL MUNDO Staff Writer Fourteen million dollars will be invested in urban public roads in Santurce and its surroundings in the next eight years, beginning with the current economic year 1949-50. The Governor yesterday gave his approval *- a plan for roads in Santurce, which was prepared by the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Jorge Jiménez, and in accordance with the Planning Board's Regulatory Plan. The money to be invested will be 8 million from Insular funds and 6 million from federal funds. This road plan in Santurce will in no way hinder the other public works to be built in other parts of the pals. Regarding this road plan, "n La Fortaleza authorized the following statement: "The Governor has given his approval to a plan for the construction of urban public roads for Santurce and surrounding areas that was prepared by the Commissioner of the Interior, Jorge J. Jiménez, which is, at the same time, in accordance with the Regulatory Plan of the Planning Board.
The program will be carried out over a period of eight years at a total cost of about $14,000,000, of which the Federal Government will contribute about $6,000,000. The plan includes the following roads: (1). Completion of Eleanor Roosevelt Avenue. (2) South Branch Avenue, from the so-called "des vio de Rio Peldras" to the Martin Peña pipe. (3) New Martin Peña bridge, as an extension of the previous one. (4) Isla Grande Express Highway. (5) Intersection number 5, at the Guillermo Esteves and Sa n Antonio bridges. (6) New bridge over the Martin Peña pipe, at the exit to Bayamón. (7) Avenida del Norte. (8) Martin Peña Express Highway. (9) Los Hipódromos Avenue, east of Santurce, from Borinquen Avenue to North Avenue. These works are to be carried out in their entirety by the Department of the Interior and will begin as follows: Works 1 and 2, in "I the first year of the program. Works 3 and (Continued on page 16, Col. 8)
Rules Affect Veterans' Eligibility
Serra Calls Attention To Procedure To Be Followed For Courses Of Study By Rimíco - e7rivera EL MUNDO Staff Writer About 26,000 veterans will be affected by the new rule imposed by the Veterans Administration, which states that as of next November 1, all supplemental certificates of eligibility for study that do not indicate the name of the course and the class will be cancelled. Dr. Jalma Serra Chavarry, director of the VA, informed yesterday that the Administration will not pay neither to veterans nor to the institution for enrollments whose certificates do not indicate the above. Dr. Serra Chavarry added that "this limitation will not affect veterans who possess original eligibility certificates, which are considered to be few. They must return it" Because " that with those certifica, two the" veterans" will not be able to" enroll"" the next marte", the Ad. mlniitraclón of Veterans recommends that they be returned with a letter in whered* the veterans inform the name of the course they wish to take, e1 name and address of the Institution in which they wish to take said courses, and reasons that de. The letter should show that the courses they wish to take are related to the studies previously taken or sponsored by the Veterans Administration. It was made clear that all original certificates, issued before November 1, 1949, would be valid even if they did not indicate the name of the course and the name of the authorized institution. Dr. Serra Chavarry added that for the purpose of granting additional educational benefits to veterans who have satisfactorily taken one or more courses, or who have dropped a course for any justifiable reason, the Veterans Administration will consider the fact that the new course requested is immediately related to the last course completed or interrupted by the veteran.
NEW YORK, Oct. 28. (PU)-The Civil Aeronautics Board has revoked the license of the Stratofrelght. airline after investigating the disaster of one of its passenger planes in Puerto Rico last June, in which 53 persons perished. It was reported today. The Board's decision revoked the company's operating certificate and will be effective November 8. The line, a New Jersey-registered corporation, has until November 7 to file a pleading. The Board's examiner let Board said.
Columbia L Group Finalizes Report Affirms That Puerto Rico Needs Higher Level Of Culture
Pnr Benjamín San tan" " EL MUNDO Staff Writer The final report r*. lated to the total reform of the school system in Puerto Rico is ready, Commissioner Mariano Villaronga said yesterday. The Report will be brought personally, by Dr. Gordon Mackenzie, on November 7, and delivered to the Governor and the Commissioner of Instruction. - The recommendations made in the Report are the results of a study carried out by a group of educators from Columbia University under the direction of Dr. Mackenzie. In the aforementioned report, the Columbia educators urge that all school-age children in Puno Rico have at least elementary school preparation. Although enrollment in public schools has increased steadily this year, there are still 243,000 children between the ages of six and twelve outside the classroom, and more than 300,000 between the ages of six and 18. Free Program""* According to preliminary data submitted to the Department of Instruction, the Columbia educators allege in their report that "the high school program on the island is unduly academic and bookish. It is urgent that greater vocational opportunities and community service experiences be provided so that young people will leave the classroom better prepared for the struggle of life. V This recommendation has already been taken up by Commissioner Mariano Villaronga in the Six Year Plan he recently submitted to the Planning Board, in which, among other things, he said: "Without abandoning progress and improvement at the other levels, s" emphasis is placed on the structuring of a basic educational service for all, or practically all children of Peurto Rieo. - It is infinitely better that almost all of our children receive a minimal but essential education for civic life, than that resources be dispersed in a few elementary and secondary schools. In this plan, Commissioner Villaronga points out two cardinal purposes: that of providing six years of elementary schooling to every child between the ages of six and twelve, and the expansion of the Vocaclonal Instru- . ction program. On the need for this type of Instruction, he said that "e" imperative in our environment, and all educators point out the results" Unsatisfactory" of an overly formal and academic education." Other Recommendations Puerto Rico needs a higher level of general culture, according to the Report, as a means to increase its productivity, Assuring him I that there is a high positive correlation between the degree of education rte a people and their productivity. The educationalists also point out the need to decrease *1 number of failures, particularly at *1 ; elementary level, claiming that such a * decrease is not only " Impresdn- I rtible as a measure of economy. 11- ! but ''it also ensures the admission to school of a greater number * of children". . Apart from these two powerful reasons, they suggest another no less important one for reducing the number of failures in the public schools: "a means of avoiding the emotional imbalance of the pupils" who are "not able to attend school. The emotional distress of students who see their hopes dashed". Other recommendations of the teachers, according to a preliminary report submitted to the Department of Education: 1- To give greater participation to the lay people in the school program, using the community as a laboratory. 2- Intensify the social and psychological lnve "tlgadon ' in Puerto Rico, I (Continued on page 16, Col. 8) |
Aeronautics Board Revokes Strato Freight's License
that the plane, which plunged into the sea six minutes after taking off from San Juan de Puerto Rico, was carrying 2,473 pounds in excess of the allowable weight. The Board said it found a ¡ "deliberate falsification" of the wavelength on the flight manifest. The Board also found that the aircraft's rudder cables had not been properly repaired. The plane was carrying 75 passengers* and "*l" crew when it crashed on June 7. Fifty-two* pa- I "ajero" and one crew member* ¡ation, perished,