THE NINUNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, ROY: Partly to occasionally cloudy, with some scattered showers during the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M degrees; low, JO degree* Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 20.M inches" of mercury.
NEW YORK, Nov. 25. (PU).-Today afternoon ee reported laa -Igulentaa temperatures: New York, M; Chicago, 27; Wáahlngton, 47; Miami, 78. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: Sunny and cold, with the highest temperature near 40.
TOMORROW'S DAILY
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter, ■ Post Office. San Juan. P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 1949
NUMBER 13857
FIVE CENTS
Plan Would Give Six Million To Puerto Rico
Money To Be Used For Roads Commissioner Jimenez Reports Action Pending In Congress Pnr S. Gálver Maturana, Editor Of EL MUNDO Would Approve 1" Rare Legislation, Sent To Congress For Its Next Meeting, Puerto Rico Will Receive $",700,000 For Road Construction Program. The Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Flor Jorga Jimenez, reported that the Amarinan Association of Sta. ♦ a Highway Official*, whose recommendations to the Congress regarding highway legislation have always been very con. The recommendations made to Congress by the Chiefs* and superintendents of all" the States of the Union, have been of great benefit to Puerto Rico, % Superintendent Angel (2) Silva, aiiperln. The Department of the Interior, returned from Chicago, where he represented the Department at the special meeting of the AASHO, for the purpose of determining the program of federal aid for the highways to be recommended to Congress. Among the items most favorable to Puerto Rico included in the recommendation to Congress, according to Mr. Silva's report to the Commissioner of the Interior, are as follows: Duplicate Appropriation The total appropriation to be reqommended, $810,000,000.000 annually for four years," is almost double that which was included in the $194 Act and which amounted to only $450,000,000. - Because of the way it is distributed, there is a probability that Puerto Rico will be allocated about $",700,000,000, and it will have to contribute $",000,000,000 to make up the funds. Commissioner Jimenez explained that the fact that Puerto Rico will have to contribute less than the federal assistance is due to the introduction in the program of a $210,000,000,000 line item for interstate highways to be distributed on a population basis, with the federal government contributing 75 percent of the cost of the highways to be built under this program. Since Puerto Rico has no interstate highways, the Commissioner of the Interior continued, these funds would be allocated to the island for the main highways that play an important role in national defense by interconnecting the bases of Rorinquen, Losey Field and Roosevelt Road, in Aguadilla, Ponce and Ceiba, respectively. In this case, $1,0(10,000 would be allocated to Puerto Rico, which would be matched with only $1,000,000,000 in. Other Benefits For the balance of the program, a total of $3,*700,000 will accrue to Puerto Rico, with the Island Government needing to allocate an equal amount to match such funds, and the contribution for the acquisition of easements will be raised from one-third, as at present, to 50 percent of such cost, as recommended. Certain amendments have also been included in connection with the advance study of the roads to be constructed under the program, as well as the advance in the form of a loan of certain funds* to assist in the acquisition of right-of-way for future programs. Mr. Jimenez indicated that it has also been recommended that the Public Roads Bureau be allocated $10,000,000 to be allocated among the different states and territories in the event of a disaster for the reconstruction of existing roads. He added that Mr. Angel (2) Silva took an active part in these discussions since only 42 departments were represented, out of the fifty-two states and territories that make up the association, and no less than 35 votes were needed to pass legislative recommendations. Visiting Roads During the day yesterday the Commissioner of the Interior was traveling on various highways in the United States.
U.S. Population Likely to Pass 150 Million WASHINGTON, Nov. 25. total on Oct. 1 represented (FU)-The population of the United States an increase of 13 percent over the 131,689,274 persons counted today from the one hundred dncuen. mark of April 1, 1940, the date of the last official census. The Census Bureau estimated The figure includes norhoy troops that the population speaks aseen- teamerlcanas serving overseas at 149,947,000 on Oc- j ero< a d "i A P"<iueflo army of enumeraNotado taníhUMÓn d ° rM Mt4 ,lendo or " anlzado P° r the '".-UAru 0 q r "An Census Bureau to Go home m(i n in during "1 next official X census, which begins April 1 íl "u SiSTú m u " f ? ' '" d ' marc. of one hundred and fifty million, very well prove that le pobla. The Census Bureau said that the cion had passed 151,000,000,
WASHINGTON, Nov. 25 (FU)-The population of the United States probably passed the one hundred and fifty million mark today. The Census Bureau estimated today that the population had risen to 149,947,000 on October 1. Recently a Bureau official estimated that the population was growing at the rate of one hundred and fifty thousand persons monthly. Denser agí. the number of perso. The number of people in the nation has passed the one hundred and fifty million mark. The Census Bureau said that the
Group of Congressmen Visited San Juan Municipality Yesterday
W bV a" fe x S r Sin IIIf? ' WV 33S ■ L ' ' '' "B" jJMi * ib . ■ । . Bb' / . ' L . . . .jr / iBR B / i , MB i ▼ "/ I r ff t f f ■ ■ W "íJwf.
During yesterday's reception for visiting U.S. congressmen* at the San Juan City Hall, Representative Carrol D. Kearns, Republican of Pensllyanla (right), has a pleasant chat with Senate President Samuel R. Quiñones (left) and with our great baseball player Luis Rodrigues * Olmo. (Photo by EL MUNDO).
U.N.O. Ratifies Its Magna Carta On Peace Thus Defeating the' Soviet By A Large Majority At Yesterday's Meeting
A Creole Reinforcement On the Terrace of the Building They Talked about Pelota with Jíbaro Rodríguez Olmo. Professor Ramírez Explained Ior Historical Values
Icano" d* ta commission that was enudlo of ta" problem" educational" and lón that in "u honor "e offered yesterday in Juan, had ta opportunity to -- --.
Verlns North American congressmen cuo'.tra in Jslc making a social security cstt, during ta r'cepcl ni noon in "1 Municipio de Ser comer barataos fritos y morcillas criollas, nal como de charlar sobre pelota con el Jibaro Luis Rodriguez Olmo.The congressmen were received by the Historian of the Capital, Mr. Francisco M. Zeno; the Interim Mayor, Mr. José Rodríguez Olmo; Mr. Rafael W. Ramírez, professor of the UPR, and the Secretary of the Municipal Government, Mrs. Josefina Rincón Marrero. The members of the delegation visited the Chapter House, where there is currently an exhibition on the history of the currency, prepared by Professor Ramírez. There they were able to observe several historical objects, explaining to them the meaning of the Sata Capitular in the times of Espafta and the use that was given to the objects preserved there. Later they went to other municipal dependencies. A Creole Lunch Then they went to the terrace of the municipal building, where they were offered a typical Creole lunch, consisting of fried "bacalao", "almojábana", "pástele", "morcilla", "jueye" al carapacho and another "dish" of "borlncana". During the aga "ajo an atmosphere of cordiality and animation reigned, which increased when the Jibaro, Lula Rodriguez Olmo, was the object of multiple" questions" by many" of the" participants, who were "Impatlzadore" of the" Dodger" of Brooklyn, ninth in which he played during the season the player cagúefto. Some of the congregationalists who know the player's story (Continued on page 16, Col. 2)
By Richard WITKTN LAKE SUCCESS, New York, Nov. 25 (PU)- The Western powers won an important victory over Russia today when their 12-point peace program was approved by an overwhelming majority by the United Nations Political Committee, and Russia's offer for a "peace pact" with the Big Five was rejected. The vote on the Anglo-American resolution, which presents a dozen points for peace in accordance with the United Nations Charter, was 53 in favor, the five Soviet bloc against, with Yugoslavia abstaining. This vote was far greater than the two-thirds needed for approval by the General Assembly. The Soviet plan, which called not only for a five Great Powers pact, but also for the condemnation of Anglo-American "preparations for a new war," was not voted on as a whole. But each paragraph was covered by such a wide margin that there was no chance for the Assembly to reverse it. This vote marked the defeat of Russia's number one propaganda effort in the current Assembly. Vlshlnsky on September 23, was immediately dismissed by the West as "bizarre" because it condemned the alleged "American war preparations" while offering words of peace by proposing the Great Powers treaty. Action Repaired United States and. The United States and Great Britain, separately" for the condemnation of the Soviet text, replied with "a 12-point program. The program declares that the Charter of Nations is "the most solemn peace pact in history" and then presents the principles of international cooperation by which all nations will agree to secure peace. One of the main points is an appeal to nations to unite their precious sovereignties in the dangerous field of atomic energy so that atomic weapons can be effectively banned. This was the West's reply to the clause in the Soviet version asking the United Nations to waste no time in adopting Russia's dual proposals for the simultaneous outlawing of the atomic bomb, and the creation of the Rusta-style international control body.
An Airfield Inspector Will Be Considered 1 t " To Inspect Non-Certified Airlines Travel. CSP To Hold Hearings The Public Service Commission will hold a public hearing on December 1, to discuss the advisability of appointing a permanent Inspector at the Tata Grande Airport, to deal with all problems related to passengers traveling on non-certified airlines. It is further considered to charge $1 per ticket agency license fee for the purpose of defraying the expenses of the appointment of the aforementioned Inspector. The matter for which the Commission will be summoned to the public hearing referred to is for the purpose of complying with one of the recommendations of the Special Prosecutor General of the Department of Justice, Mr. José C. Aponte, contained in the Report issued by the latter when the investigation of the Punta Salinas tragedy was carried out. The Inspector so named worked late and the Inspector so named (Continued on page 16, Col. 3).
Yesterday There Was a Shooting in Rio Piedras Fight Arose Due to Fight Between Opponents and Supporters Mayor
By Enrique Rsmírex Brsu EL MUNDO Staff Writer Nicolás Díaz Figueroa, collector of the Municipality of Río Piedras, assaulted yesterday, at 1:30 p.m., with a revolver. M., with a revolver, in the collection office of the marketplace, Nicolás Días Jiménez, known as Colito, wounding him with four bullets, one in the neck, another in the left side and two in the chest. Governor Muftoz Marin informed yesterday that he communicated with the Attorney General, Vicente Céigel Polanco, to ask him to appoint special prosecutors in the Rio Piedras case to carry out a complete and rapid investigation. I ask the Governor to be kept informed by the Attorney General, constantly, of the result of the investigation. The political differences that exist in the Municipal Administration of Rio Piedras had another explosion yesterday, as reported by some witnesses of the events that took place in the Plaza del Morcado, when Nicolás Díaz Figueroa, fired four shots at Nicolás Días Jiménox. This, as reported, was dismissed by the Rio Piedras Al-
calda of Río Piedras a year ago, while he was serving as the Municipality's tax collector. At the time of the shooting it is alleged that the wounded Díaz Jiménes had a 32 caliber pistol in his possession, which was seized, as well as Dies Figueroa's revolver. In addition to the weapons, the Rio Piedras Police also seized four casings and two revolver bullets. They also seized the piotola with a comb with bullets, three cuquillos and two leads. Leader of 1" Opposition Diaz Jimenez, the wounded, who is in the hospital where he was operated on yesterday afternoon, is the leader of the opposition against the administration of the Mayor of Rio Piedras, Augusto P. Alvares. One of the eyewitnesses of the events, Bonifacio Cedré, declared that in the morning hours of yesterday, Diaz Figueroa had attacked him. Cedré stated that he saw when Dia" Figuoroa shot Diaz Jimenez, who, upon being wounded, ran away and grabbed the gun.
Precedent Established In Germany
German Chancellor Participates in Meeting of Allied Commissioners For R. H. AHACKFORD United Press Correspondent LONDON, Nov. 25 - (PU) - The Western "powers" today put an epitaph on the principles of the "unconditional surrender" policy of the late President Franklin Delano Roosevelt and set a precedent by announcing that they will negotiate, not dictate a peace to western Germany. In Parta, earlier this month, the foreign ministers of the three great powers, with the approval of their minor Western European allies, decided to open the doors of their conference rooms to the new West German government. German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer then participated in the High Commissioners' conference in Bonn as an equal, and negotiated the new agreement with the Western powers - an agreement under which vast concessions were made to West Germany in exchange for German acceptance of the security system installed by the Western allies. For all practical purposes, the West German Government is today on an equal footing with a former enemy of the West. This position is far removed from the "unconditional surrender" days of the end of the last war, from the days of the pacification of Germany under the short-lived Morgenthau Plan, from the immediate post-war days of the Potadam Agreement, and, until very recently, from the days of plans for a dictated peace for Germany. The Western Allies blame Russia for the almost complete change in policy toward Germany. The failure to reach an agreement with Russia on the scraping of Germany has gradually forced the Western powers to regard Germany as a potential ally in a future war, in the voice of one of the West's principal enemies. The policy of "unconditional surrender" promulgated by Roosevelt at the conclusion of the White House conference in 1943 had been dead for some time. But it was not until this month that the idea of a dictated peace for Germany was formally abandoned. German reaction There is no indication of how the Germans will react to the Western demands at the Bonn conference. But there remains the fact that before making concessions to Germany in regard to disarmament, shipbuilding, etc., Adenauer had a free hand to negotiate with the Allied high commissioners. Roosevelt's "unconditional surrender" policy has been one of the most controversial of the postwar period. Even British Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin - who was a member of the coalition Cabinet that ruled Britain during the war - has recently denounced the policy, blaming it for prolonging the war (Continued on page 16, Col. 7).
Lesinski To Issue Bill Allocating Aid For Island Instruction
r E : - - lEB m JOHN LESINSKI Died Before Ending 100-Day Fast Obese Percy Copion Died A Pole After Falling in Bathtub BIRMINGHAM. Alabama. Nov. 25, (PID- Percy Coplon, *1 oheso man who flouted the warnings of doctors to the effect that he could not fast for one hundred days, died today, one "emana before" he reached "his goal. The exact cause of death was not determined, but a blow to the head he received in a raid was probably a contributing factor. Dr. A. H. Rtuakoff, who examined the body, said Coplon's death should "serve as a warning to those who initiate experiments without following proper medical advice. The patient apparently had hoped to demonstrate to the medical profession that his self-imposed and unsupervised fasting regimen would accomplish more than could be anticipated under proper medical care," Ruaakoff said. "He has made no contribution to medical science and his life has been needlessly and uselessly cut short. He began Aug. 25 Coplon, once a racing car driver and lately the owner of a resto, ran up a ladder to a cottage on a pole last Aug. 25 and announced that he would live on water, lemon juice and Epsom salts until Dec. 2. Weighing 357 llhras and measuring exactly five feet high by five feet wide *1 start. Coplon was set to lose 112 pounds before dizziness and loss of vision, common symptoms of starvation, forced him to starve, but stubbornly insisted on continuing his fast until the end of the hundred days, ignoring the Thanksgiving dinner prepared by his bulky wife (250 pounds). Last night, a modest ta examined him and is said ta found him in good con. I dlclone", in spite of his weakness. But a few hours later, the rotund Coplon fell into the bathtub. His wife and mother-in-law placed him on a bed, but he died twenty minutes later after he regained consciousness. "Ruiakoff said that his death was "probably due to his own cald and to undetermined factors." (
Democrats Refer to Ward Case Congressional Caucus Charges Republicans with Promoting a War for Jame" K. ROPER WASHINGTON, Nov. 25 <PU)- House Democrats today charged that Republican critics who accused the Secretary of State in his handling of the Angus Ward incident were proposing action that would have led to war with Communist China. In addition, State Department spokesman Michael J. Mr. Dermott replied with a resounding "no" when asked at a press conference whether the Department agreed with congressional Republicans that it had been "unbelievably clumsy" in handling the Angus Ward case. McDermott, meanwhile, reported that Ward's health is "good" and that the four aides to the Consul General who were confined with him in a Mukden, Manchuria, jail for a month are "doing better." He said Ward telephoned the American Consul General in Pelpln, Edmund Clubb. Ward told Clubb that there was "nothing slow to report in connection with the Consulate staff's plans to leave China. The U.S. began taking steps to recall all personnel after a Communist "people's court" ordered Ward and his aides expelled. Ward and his subordinates were accused* of beating a Chinese worker who was demanding back wages. Congreaistu's Demand Republican Congressmen, all of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, yesterday demanded the removal from office of Secretary of State Dean G. Acheaon and all Department employees connected with Ward. Acheaon's appeal to Ruala and twenty-nine other nations for help in obtaining Ward's removal, the Republicans said, "was one of the most humiliating chapters in American diplomatic history. This prompted an overwhelming confiataclon from Democratic Representatives Mik" Mansfield, of Montana: and Melvin Price, of Illinois. Price is a member of the Armed Services Committee and the Congressional Atomic Energy Committee. They were later joined by Rep. Laurle C. Battle, D-Georgia. The Democratic representatives praised Acheaon and said the "steady course" proposed by his Republican colleagues was a "muddled thinking" duo that would have ended in open warfare with the Communists. Richards said that these Republican congressmen were part of a "confused thinking" that would have ended in open warfare with the Communists.
The Venerable Mother Soledad Torre" Aceita, foundress of a Congregation of Nurse" Rellgioiai, and a nurse herself for several" years", will soon reach the summit of the glory with which the Catholic Church honors its" hero" in virtue: the victors in the fight with the" enemy" of human nature: the" saints. "After the long and complicated Process of Beatification, which came to a happy conclusion on the 22nd of this month, with the celebration in the Vatican of the Plenary Session under the august presidency of His Holiness Pope Pius XII, who fixed the date for the Beatification of the Venerable Mother for February 5th of the next Holy Year, it only remains for this ceremony to take place, to be able to venerate on the altars that humble religious, so well known in the Capital, who was born in the year 14 O 18 Millions of years ago.
Would Give 14 To 18 Million A Year * Announced His Purpose At Yesterday's Hearing, - Congressmen Leave Today By BENJAMIN SANTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer Representative John Lesinski, chairman of the Education and Labor Committee of the U.S. House of Representatives, will file a bill next January, allocating 14 to 18 million dollars for the Education programs in Puerto Rico. This congressman informed EL MUNDO yesterday, shortly after the end of the hearings that took place at the School of Tropical Medicine. Yesterday the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano VI. llaronga, the president of the Puerto Rico Teachers Association, Mr. Virgilio Rrunet, and the president of the Island League of Parent-Teacher Associations, Mr. Pedro Court, testified. Carroll D. Kearns, Republican, of Pennsylvania, criticized this type of program on the island and recommended that the course be reduced to nine months and that three months be devoted to theater training and building repair. Rep. Lesinski, Democrat, of Michigan, suggested the desirability of legislation allocating the federal cnntrthKdone" cnntrthKdone" of the rum for Instructional purposes. Vlltarnngu Report Commissioner Mariano Vlllaronga submitted relatively short, but very clear and concise testimony, for which he was publicly congratulated by Leslnakl. Congressman Kearn" I" said that, as it appeared from the taitlmonta, "it seems that you are well oriented as to the program of Instruction for Puerto Rico tn Ip" next "e|" "e|" afio"." In "u t""tlmonta Vlltaronga hlttorla milestone of the" advancement" aleantadog by ta I "la, as far as Inatrucclón is concerned, during tas last" Só'" afins. Whereas in '61o 10 percent of the school-age population attended school, the proportion now stands at 60 percent, - Illiteracy has been reduced from R0 percent to 22 percent, and the proportion spent on educational purposes has increased from 27 percent of the government budget to 36 percent. The Commissioner of Instruction pointed out, among other things, the following problems that require immediate attention: 1- The entire population of Puerto Rico, 15 years of age or older, has received, on average, a fifth-grade education. 2-More than 10 percent of this population has never attended classes or has not completed the first grade. More than 50 percent have attended school for only three years or less. 3-16 percent of children aged six to 18 in urban areas, and 53 percent in rural areas, are out of the classroom. 4-About 63 out of every 100 in urban areas and 80 out of every 100 in rural areas go to school for only half a day. Wage" and Goals The average wage of the mae "Iros *on the Island is $1,577-average lower than that of 46 states of the Union, as stated by the Comtatana. do. - "This evidence," he said, "should convince even the most skeptical of the fact that the school facilities in Puerto Rico are inadequate and insufficient for the needs of the people." - The Chief of Inítrucclón "eñaló lúago the following" objectives" that should be achieved in the Immediate future: 1-Build and equip sufficient" escuetas to accommodate all 1a. po. btactan from six to 18 years of age. 2-Experiment with new types (Continued on page 16, Col. 6).
Foundress of the Handmaids of Mary She will be beatified in February i
She was the "Mother of the Servants of Mary" in Spain, her homeland, in the past year for all those who were sick and suffering", who came to her "sure" to find in her inexhaustible charity the relief of their "sickness". Extreme virtues" "Candorosa and obedient in her youth, "her confessor assured, towards the end of her life, that she never stained "her soul with serious guilt; modeled by the divine Artificer in the crucible of tribute until she communicated to him that supernatural beauty that fascinated, and made her the prototype of the saintly nurse: served as cornerstone to the mystical building that was conceived under the influence of celestial Inspiration, by the venerable priest Don Miguel Martinez Sanz. and visibly protected by the Blessed Virgin Mary (Continued on page 16, Col. 4).
M . I A HnH I H| K H H B Rb & ¿ l ® i trí - - I 1- ' ® i \ ' ' ".T " - / I BmiI i / 1 r Z B x X I W ! Nicolás Día" Figueroa, collector of the Municipality of Bío Piedra" who is accused of the aggression of which Nicolás Días Jiménea, former collector of the same municipality, was the victim. (Photograph by EL MUNDO).