EL NANDO
nONOITIOOB D1L WEATHER PAM LA ISLA, HOT: - Partly cloudy with scattered light showers, becoming generally cloudy at night. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 88 degrees; low, 19 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:86 p.m., 80.11 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, June 24. (FU). - This afternoon m recorded the following temperautras: Chicago, 87; Miami, 84; New York, M; Wáshlngton, M. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring doubts: Sunny and hot, humid weather. Highest temperature, above 80 on the coast and below 90 inland.
MACANA DAILY
VVO XXX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY JUNE 25, 1949
NUMBER 13706 FIVE CENTAVOS
Santo Domingo Purchases Reflectors
./# ' b ?*VVV^US riM-'"-t \a 'wJLejJj ■ ti \Ll JMKjfMy um. ' ■■ rMb" k * ' rm y W "F Xff *, ■ The photograph captures the moment when one of two anti-aircraft searchlights purchased in Puerto Rico by the Government of the Dominican Republic was loaded aboard the ship that would take it to its destination. The powerful instruments were shipped yesterday (Photo EL MUNDO).
Government Acquires 2 Anti-Aircraft. From War Surplus on the Island
Attempt to transport them in 2 planes failed and they were taken on board the schooner La Dominicana í By A. Gálvee Maturana Editor of EL MUNDO The shipment of two anti-aircraft searchlights to the Dominican Government turned out to be a real odious event. Purchased as war surplus by the said Government, in Puerto Rico, the searchlights were supposed to leave by air bound for Ciudad Trujillo on" -i -- ■ -
Thursday afternoon. Two DC-6 airplanes of the Dominican Aviation Company, identified with numbers Hl-14 and Hl-18, arrived at the Isla Grande airport for this purpose. At the moment of loading the searchlights, it was noticed that they did not fit through the cargo door of the planes, making it impossible for the crew and workers to put them on board, no matter how much effort they made. They were unable to leave by air, it was decided that they would be shipped by sea, using one of the Dominican-registered schooners that were in the port of San Juan at that time. Once the matter was decided, the manifests and papers were given, so that they would leave on the three-masted schooner La Dominicana, which was loading at dock number five. All afternoon they were waiting for the arrival of the searchlights, to take them aboard the schooner, but they vanished from the maritime scene, and it is not known where they ended up. On Thursday afternoon, the Dominican finished loading her cargo at pier 5, without the searchlights appearing, and was moved to pier 2, where she was to load several boxes of fruit. Yesterday, Friday morning, notification was received at the dock that the searchlights were to be put on the dock in the early hours of the morning, but it was not until about noon that the searchlights were brought to the dock. Finally, the searchlights left for their destination in Ciudad Trujillo yesterday afternoon on board the schooner La Dominicana. Only Detainees On the other hand, Prensa Unida reports from Mexico City, that according to reports received from Merida, Yucatan, it was confirmed today that the leaders of the frustrated Invasion of the Dominican Republic have been detained in that city. It was learned that these alone are Daniel Martin, Carlos Gutierrez Ignacio GonsAloa Jose Rodrigues and the leader of the group, Eufemio Fernandez. According to the dispatches, the Mexican Air Force seized two amphibious planes and flew them to Merlda L These two planes were supposedly moored off the coast of the Yucatan earlier this week, under a terrible downpour that prevented them from flying over the Caribbean and reaching the Dominican Republic. It is reported that the planes were loaded with weapons and were carrying about 50 soldiers. It is added in the dispatches that two other DC-3 type airplanes, alleged to be Guatemalan registered, have been occupied in Merida. General Antonio Sanchez Acevodo, Chief of Staff of the Army, left for Merida to take charge of the situation. Although not officially communicated, we know that the situation created in the Dominican Republic by the recent invasion of its territory by rebel forces, forced the Dominican Government to arrange for the purchase of this equipment. The rvflectors will be used immediately upon arrival in Ciudad Trujillo, as part of the equipment to determine the approach of airplanes.
State Wants Puerto Rico Stenographers ..JV"- .? By Rurico E. Rivera Editor of EL MUNDO 14i Personnel Office reported yesterday that the U.S. State Department wishes to recruit Puerto Rican stenographers to serve abroad, especially in Latin America. It was announced yesterday through Mr. Manuel A. Perez, Director of the Personnel Office, that "there is a possibility that the Department of State may employ some Puerto Ricans in stenographer positions in the various offices maintained by the foreign service. Requirements i It was revealed that candidates to 1 work in the foreign service of the Department of State, must have the following requirements: Be a U.S. citizen and have been so for at least 5 years; be single with no dependents of any kind; and have a broad command of English and Spanish. It was also informed that for these positions, candidates with at least 3 years of experience in office work are preferred, which may be substituted by commercial preparation at the college or university level. Candidates must also be in perfect health and be able to adapt to different living, social and cultural conditions, to be able to live and work in a group. It was further stated that "an interest in foreign service and a willingness to work in a team are essential.
Work Resumes In Pellej as
Sierra Sent Report to AFF Engineers Re-examined, Advised Use of Isolation Net By S. GÁLVEZ MATURANA Editor of EL MUNDO The Water Resources Authority resumed work yesterday on the tunnel being built in Pellejas, after Mr. Antonio Luchettl, administrator of the Authority, received the report from the Department of Labor on the reexamination made by its engineers. Mr. Fernando Sierra Bordéela, Commissioner of Labor, said yesterday that he had communicated to Mr. Luchettl that by virtue of the safety measures adopted, according to the report of engineers Ramón Casanova Cano, Director of the Division of Industrial Hygiene and Safety of the Department of Labor, and Carlos E. Vega, Assistant Chief of the Accident Prevention Bureau of the State Insurance Fund, in the reexamination made, the BPP could continue with the work. The report of engineers Casanova and Vega, which is the result of the investigation carried out in the field at the scene of the accident, as reported by the Commissioner, contains a technical study of the event with its conclusions and specific recommendations and concludes that the accident did not occur due to local conditions during construction, and that it was a direct product of an electrical discharge. In this regard, Engineers Casanova and Vega include in their report an article entitled "Stray Electric Currents in Coal Mines", published by the bulletin of the Institute of American Electrical Engineers in which they explain the possibilities of an accident such as the one that occurred in "1 Pellejas Tunnel. Precautions Recommended Notwithstanding the difficulties in controlling accidents caused by electrical discharges, as reported by Mr. Sierra Berdeda in his press conference, the Engineering Investigators indicated in their report that there are a number of precautions that should be taken, which undoubtedly can avoid certain types of accidents caused by electrical discharges in underground works, adding that the prevention measures already in place at the Water Resources Authority should be reexamined to check their effectiveness. Specifically, Engineers Casanova and Vega made the following recommendations: As part of the preparations for tunnel construction, each of the tunnel portals should be equipped with a grounding network properly designed to provide a resistance of an initial value of no more than half an ohm and whose value should not exceed five ohms during construction. This grounding grid shall consist of a number of copper rods not less than one inch in diameter by nine inches in length, buried at a distance of ten feet apart, and interwoven with a conductor of not less than 00 copper. The number of rods to be provided should be that required to lower the ground resistance to one-half ohm. This network can be substituted by an artificial earth network of the coal and salt type in whose caao must be made an excavation of not less than 30 square feet and 10 feet deep, in the base of which will be buried not less than sets of rods of collection of one inch of diameter and nine feet long. For added security, 1 (Continued on page 14, Col: 7)
Thousands Await Public Patron Invaded Beach In Escambron Sector
By M. Nitvss Rivera Editor of EL MUNDO An unparalleled crowd gathered at the Escambrón beach on Thursday night, the eve of San Juan Bautista, to await the arrival of the patron saint of the Capital. . . A huge traffic congestion kept practically interrupted the free circulation on MuRos Rivera Avenue in the stretch between Porque Sixto Escobar and Officers Beach Club, due to the activity deployed by the Transit Police. The illumination of the sector of the beach that extends from the Officers Beach Club to the Army Beach, was an additional incentive for those who year after year have observed the tradition,
waiting for the arrival of the patron saint of the Capital with the classic bath of the sea. Confused with the public hullabaloo, sharing in the rejoicing of the people, representatives of the island's public life and foreign visitors joined the traditional homage that has always been paid to the patron saint of San Juan. Ten refreshment and candy stands, manned by the Ladies Volunteers of the Government of the Capital; a dance platform kept in activity by three string ensembles; and a Creole "vertedor" performing improvisations, all this combined to keep the popular enthusiasm latent, in an absolute void of cares and chores. (Continued on page U, Col, I)
Federal Judge Chavez To Be Rigorous Against Marijuana Use
Prices Drop In Major Groups Only Rents Maintain Level. Cost of Living Still Above '46 WASHINGTON, June 24 - (PU> - The cost of living fell three-tenths of one percent between mid-April and mid-May, but remained about 27 percent higher than when the controls on ms foot. were abandoned in June 1946, the Labor Dept. reported today. The retail price index on May 15 was eight-tenths of one percent of the index for May of the previous year. Prices declined in all major groups except for rents, which rose one-tenth of one percent over the thirty-day period. Fuel was down 1.5 percent, food was down "fractionally," furniture was down 1.3 percent, and clothing sold about six-tenths of one percent below the price of the corresponding period last year. Previous Figures In the month ending April 15, last, the cost of living was up one-tenth of one per cent over the March average cost. The Department's index has fluctuated, but almost imperceptibly, during the past few months, with food prices rising and falling, due to weather factors, and rents rising slightly, due to new regulations. {Department of Labor officials said there is no reason to date that the reduction in the number of employees has affected living costs. The Department indicated that clothing prices have been falling consistently since last October and are now almost at December 1947 levels. During the thirty-day period, the report said, prices were substantially lower for nylon stockings, men's and boys' shirts, women's and girls' dresses made of cotton, and cotton and rayon fabrics. The slight decline in food prices is due mainly to reductions in dairy products, meat, poultry, fish, and butter. Lower prices for coal, fuel oil, and natural gas contributed to the reduction in fuel prices. In another release on the Nation's economic conditions, the Federal Security Agency announced that claims for unemployment insurance fell during the week ending June 18. The number of ron- I tinued claims fell 100,539 to a total of 2,007,440. the Agency said, while the number d* new claims was 315,441, a drop of 47,631, compared with the previous week's figures. < During the same week of 19(Continued on page 14, Col. 6).
। There Is Difficulty For Increases To Employees The Number Available Will J ariar the Guideline > Followed by Personnel ) For Rurico E. Rivera Editor of EL MUNDO It is very likely that not all ' classifications of positions in the *Opposition Service and the Non-Opposition Service of the Insular Government, ■ will be subject to reassignment as of the next fiscal year. This is explained due to the short > allocation received by the Personnel Office to proceed with such reassignments. 1 Mr. Manuel A. Perez. He informed yesterday that he only has " $50,000 to reassign the classes. When specifically questioned on the case of the criminal guards, who sent a communication to Mr. Perez, through EL MUNDO, and in which they requested the Chief of Staff to clarify their position as to whether they will receive any increase for the next fiscal year, Mr. Perez stated that "the class of the Criminal Guards, which includes a total of 157 guards, is being studied, but it is very likely that (Continued on Ja page 14, Col. 6) Law Does Not Authorize Extensions For License Plates - Vehicles Cannot Turn July 1 Without New Licenses There will be no extension when the term for obtaining motor vehicle license plates expires on June 30, "according to Mr. Carlos V. Tallada, deputy chief of the Department of Motor Vehicles, who was informed yesterday. Tallada, deputy chief of the Automobile Division of the Department of the Interior. Mr. Tallada stated that the Automobile Law determines that on July 1, all motor vehicles will have to have their license plates corresponding to the new fiscal year, and that they will not be allowed to travel on the highways and public roads of the country after that date if they do not have the new license plates. Mr. Tallada pointed out that no one, not even the Commissioner of the Interior, can decree an extension in the payment of the license plates, and that unless the Legislature meets to amend the Automobile Law, it is impossible to grant such an extension. When told that in previous years this extension had been granted, Mr. Tallada said: "No extension has ever been granted upon the expiration of said term. What has existed is a certain tolerance in order to give the opportunity to the moro1 sos to acquire their new licenses," said the Deputy Chief of the Automobile Department that the payments for new licenses are very late due to the fact that almost all the people leave the payment of the same until the last minute. This has made it necessary to send a series of notices to all police stations reminding vehicle owners of their obligation to pay the new fees.
i jihiBÜk '■'-j ' 3 * E j s aS
An aspect of the celebration of St. John's Day in this city, when in the early hours of yesterday morning countless Carpel residents flocked to the beach" to take the sea bath "or figure among the traditional events of the occasion.
loe traditional acts of the occasion. Note how some of the "bathers" went into the water in full costume (Photo by EL MUNDO).
[ Sentenced Seven Ed Yesterday £ । Tutti Coll Will Fulfill S ¡ Añon. Joint Action ' With Island Government By Angel Crus Crus H| 1 Editor of EL MUNDO " l Judge David Chavez, ds the Federal Cor" < te, denounced yesterday in Certa abierta the boom that is taking marijuana in Puerto Rico, ai re" 1 nlgno in the sentence to be imposed on Arturo (Tutti) Coll Car" ■ pin tero. The Fe* deral Court magistrate said that the situation is such that he will have to impose the maximum penalty provided by law to any person who is convicted of trafficking or using ma" rlhúana or any other narcotic. He then sentenced Tutti Coll to five years imprisonment, the maximum that the law establishes for this crime. The magistrate ordered that the sentence begin to be served after the defendant extinguishes the one and a half year sentence he is currently serving for the crimes of carrying weapons, failure to register a firearm and bo" lita. In condemning the boom in the use of marijuana on the island, Judge Chavez said that the situation is so serious that in just one day -yesterday- he sentenced seven people for violation of the narcotics law, and that all of them received the maximum sentence established by the statute: five years in prison. In addition to Tutti Coll, William Alers González, Carlos Soto Ginés, Rafael Rivera Vázquez, Angel Luis Rodríguez Tirado, Antonio Rovlra José Manuel Nieves de Jesús were sentenced. Subsequently, Pascual Rivera, a federal court prosecutor, stated that the U.S. Attorney's Office had realized that the marijuana boom was taking on alarming proportions in Puerto Rico, so it will begin to attack the root of the problem. Rivera said that he had recently held a meeting with the island authorities in charge of combating the use of marijuana and other drugs prohibited by law, having found a great willingness on the part of the island authorities to exterminate the evil that is being enthroned on the island. He lamented, however, that the island government lacked the effective means to combat the problem as the situation demanded. (Continued from page 1) । Friedman Insists on Investigating Complaint The World Will Not Appoint Commission Requested The director of an employment agency asks that a commission be appointed to investigate the actions of the Labor Commissioner in snoring. Commissioner of Labor's actions in snoring agreements with fader*" Jes. agencies. Mr. Samuel G. Friedman, U" rector of the S. G. Friedman Lehoy Agency, has asked EL MUNDO to appoint a committee to investigate the actions of the Commissioner of Labor in entering into agreements with labor agencies. The report was published in the newspaper. Mr. Friedman considers that the "agreements have been "undignified, restrictive and depressing to the Puerto Rican people". The text of the cable dispatch received by our Director yesterday is as follows: t Text of the Request "Respectfully, but with great care, I request that you appoint as soon as possible an impartial commission to investigate the serious damages caused to all the Puerto Rican people and especially to the Puerto Rican workers. torriquefto and especially to the Puerto Rican worker, by the" actions of the Commissioner of Labor, Fernando Sierra, in entering into discriminatory, restrictive and arbitrary agreements with federal agencies, depressing to the Puerto Rican people. "We request that the Commission hear our statement of fact. I would appreciate what disposition you decide to take on this matter of such vital importance for Puerto Rico. El. MUNDO EL MUNDO does not intend to appoint the commission requested by Mr. Friedman, because I believe that the best judge for the cause he raises should be the Puerto Rican people themselves. In the columns of this newspaper, Mr. Friedman will be able to expose to the public the evidence he has to prove his assertion. This is a matter of public interest and we are willing to provide the columns of EL MUNDO to air it, within the rules and ethics that correspond to our functions as a vehicle of information for the public.
A Brazilian Mayor Breaks Piñata
* '"' 1 ♦ c - "c ' ®'r' - ■ - - - - - - JKSK . -- - - aMI h"; ' v >-yM| ' <'-'■■■■ Jb ÍX ' ' < A 4 ■ K¿ A'*' ' H. ■ - ■ . ■ 9 / w J Ji J t V , . . ...if 1 Moment in which Mr. Sylvlo Pedroza, alciilde of Rio Grande Donoeto, in Braall, was preparing to hit the piñata on the occasion of the inauguration of the patron saint festivities of the Capital. On the right, the Administrator, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier; on the left, her sister, Miss Josefina Rincón Marrero, secretary of the Capital (Photo by EL MUNDO). The Municipal Executive of Natal was visiting the island after returning from the Rotary Convention that took place in New York. He attended an event on the beach Por~M~NIE VES" RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO. On his return from the Rotary Convention in New York, Mr. Sylvlo Pedroza, mayor of Rio Grande Donosto, capital of the city of Natal, in Brazil, was visiting Puerto Rico,
Mr. Pedroza took part in the festivities for the patron saint of St. John the Baptist, which have been held in this Capital since Thursday the 23rd of this month. The Brazilian gentleman Sylvlo Pedroza desisted from continuing his trip to Brazil, stopping in San Juan in the early hours of the morning of Thursday, June 23, on his return from New York City. Mr. Pedroza was representing six Brazilian states at the New York Rotary Convention. The Brazilian visitor was the guest during his stay in San Juan of Mr. Alfred Hardesty, an American architect established for years in Puerto Rico. Mr. Hardesty reported that Mr. Pedro/a had visited Puerto Rico for the first time last year, when he attended as a delegate to the Congress of Municipal History held in San Juan. He liked the island so much, says Hadesty, that he made up his mind to visit it again, even if only for a day. On his return trip to Brazil, the mayor of Natal decided to stop in Puerto Rico to fulfill the commitment he had made to himself. His arrival in the island coincided with the beginning of the festivities of the patron saint of San Juan. | Mayor Felisa Rincón, taking advantage of the presence of her Brazilian colleague, included him in the program of the festivities, entrusting him to break the piñata, an act that initiated the true popular phase of the celebration in honor of the patron saint of the Capital. Mayor Pedroza was on Thursday night enjoying the festivities at the Escambrón beach, where he had the opportunity to listen to authentic Creole múilca and the Improvisations of a poet of the Puerto Rican mountains. After leaving this place, after midnight, Mr. Pedroza said he was leaving yesterday morning for his homeland, Brazil.
Four Children Die in Fire 1 In Salinas Mother Is In Hospital Suffering Nerve Attack SALINAS, June 24 (By Miguel Rlvere, correspondent in Ponce) - Four children died in a fire that occurred this morning at 11:30 in Quebrada Baja, in the Lapa neighborhood of Salinas. The fire s* developed in a thatched house roofed with zinc and cardboard, owned by Angel Aragunde i and inhabited by Ramón de Jesús and his family, composed of his wife ¡ Juana Rodríguez Román and their four children, Luis, 6 years old; Georgina, 4 and a half years old; Raúl, 3; and । Victoria, 7 months old. The value of । the house was $200. Ramón de Jesús 1 lost the trousseau and valued it at $150. 4 At the time of the fire, the four children were alone in the house and died as a result of the burns they received. The Absent Mother According to the investigation carried out by the Municipal Judge of Salinos, Carlos Manuel Davlla; Corporal Basilio Baerga and the guards Manuel Lebron and Juan Aislna, Mrs. Juana Rodriguez Roman had left at 11 A.M. to take her lunch. M., to take lunch to Ramon da Jesus, to the । farm of Angel Aragunde, where he works, leaving the mother, alone, to ! her four children. Their father reported that the eldest, Luis, had on other occasions struck matches and had been reprimanded for doing so. It is assumed that this minor, by lighting a match, caused the fire. In Hospital Juana Rodríguez Román was re(Continued on page 14, col. 6)