THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND TODAY. - Clear to partly cloudy with some light, fairly scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - Maximum temperature, 78 j minimum, 68. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 38.92 inches of mercury,
NEW YORK, Jan. L (PU). - This afternoon the following* temperatures were recorded at Eatadoa Unido* the following* temperatures: Nuev" York, 50 deg."; Wáshlngton, Mi Chicago, 48; and Miami, 72. At Ta Guardia airport: maximum altitude, 4,500 feet, ron broken clouds*; visibility, 6 miles, with smoke; wind*, from* the "udowest at fifteen mile* per hour. Mafiana. partly cloudy and clear in the afternoon.
MARANA JOURNAL.
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P, R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 8, 1949.
NUMBER 13541
FIVE CENTS
UPR Law School Recognized
Admitted To National Group Rodríguez Ramos Said It Will Result In More Benefits For Island By Lula Hernánrie" Aqulnn Editor of EL MUNDO The University of Puerto Rico Law School has been recognized by the U.S. Law School Association, as reported by the Dean of Law of the UPH, Manuel Rodríguez Ramo, Esq. The recognition was granted at the meeting held by the Association of Law Schools of the United States in the city of Cincinnati, Ohio, which was attended by Mr. Manuel Rodriguez Ramos, who had been making the arrangements for such recognition. In the year 1945, the UPR Law School was recognized by the American Bar Association. This recognition was practically only a step towards the recognition by the Association of Law Schools, which demands greater requirements. The Dean of the School of Law, Mr. Rodrigues Ramos, explained that among other things, the recognition by the American Bar Association and the Association of Law Schools is of triple importance. First, he said, "UPR law graduates will be admitted for revalidation in any of the states of the United States, and in the case of some states, they will be admitted without examination, by reciprocity, after a number of years of practice. Secondly, he added, "UPR graduates who are interested in pursuing advanced studies in Jos major U.S. schools will be admitted without any difficulty. In this regard. Rodríguez Ramos indicated that "until now, our students have been admitted to some of the major universities only on a courtesy basis, in many cases considering our school as a foreign one. Although admission to a university cannot be said to be a right, it is no longer a mere courtesy. Another of the advantages of the recognition are "the studies and reports that different committees of these associations, specialized in different areas of law, constantly provide to the University of Puerto Rico for the acceleration of the legal profession, Nearly 1,000 professors Rodríguez Ramos, apart from the satisfaction he said he had for the recognition of the College, described the interesting thing about the meeting of the schools of law. He expressed qu* hahla in the contention near 1,000 cstediátlvns, representing all the schools recognized in the United States. Among them also spoke numerous professors from foreign universities. He said that he "recalls the connoted figure in Ernst Rabel, European professor currently at the University of Michigan, where he does extensive work in ■the field of private international law". Dean Rodriguez Ramos mentioned the names of visiting professors, such as Dr. Hallstein, Dean of Law at the University of Frankfurt, and Dr. Dragsted, from Sweden. And among others, from North American universities, were the former judge of the Supreme Court of the United States and currently Dean of the School of Law of Pennsylvania, Dr. Roberts; Dr. Max Rhein "feln, from the University of Chicago, who during the year 1943-44 was a visiting professor in Puerto Rico and Dr. Elhrenzweig, and Dr. Joseph Kunz, from the University of California and Toledo, Ohio, respectively. Dean Rodríguez Ramos explained that during the convention important round table discussions were held on the following topics: Philosophy of Law, Business Corporations, Legislative Technique, Property Law, Criminal Law,. Labor Law and Actions for Damages, Public International Law, and Private International Law. On the last day of the convention, a meeting of the Lulslana State Law Chambers was held with several members of the Lulslana Legal Institute, including Dr. Rabel, Dr. Rheinsteln, Dr. Hallstein and Dr. Dragsted. He indicated that "because of the cordial relations that have long existed between the aforementioned Law School and that of the University of Puerto Rico, and in consideration of the similar situation of the Law in Lulslana and that of Puerto Rico, he was invited to actively participate in the meeting". The main points of the discussion were the reformulation of the Law of the State of Lulslana. In the opinion of Dean Rodriguez Ramos, this problem also "exists" (Continued on page 10).
Truman Nominates Dean Acheson For Secretary Of State
He praised the work done by Marshall, who resigned because of illness. President Affirms He Will Not Vary Present Policy Toward Russia
For Dnnald J. Gonsalr* WASHINGTON, Jan. 7 (FU)-President Truman "today accepted the resignation of Secretary of State George C. Marshall and nominated Dean Acheson to succeed him, firmly squelching any notion that the change presages a tougher approach to Russia. Acheson, 55, one of the architects of the "war of nerves" against the Soviet Union, immediately pledged to do his utmost to "carry out the policies outlined by the President" and to meet the "crushing responsibilities" of his new post. But he strongly supports the President's oft-announced goal of working through the United Nations for the sake of world peace. Lovett resigns The diplomatic change, precipitated by Marshall's failing health, also prompted the resignation of Under Secretary of State Robert A. Lovett, to be succeeded by Budget Director James E. Webb. Lovett, has directed foreign policy during Marshall's frequent absences. Lovett said at a press conference later that the change would not mean an interruption of Muñoz's 5u Coin tanza In Dr. Pons Asked To Continue To Head Health.Reorganization Plan The Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Luis Mufioz Marin, retained in his post the present head of the Health Department, Dr. Juan A. Pons, having so communicated it to him. Dr. Pons told EL MUNDO yesterday that he expects to present to the Governor, as soon as circumstances permit, the need for a reorganization of the Department of Health. Dr. Juan A. Pons was appointed Commissioner of Health on November S., 1946. by the former Governor, Don Jesus T. Piñero. The latter "gave him a free hand to act in the position". Repeatedly, recently, it was said that Dr. Pona would resign his post, which he denied. Two months ago, it was also said that for the position of Health Commissioner, other candidates were being considered in case the Popular Democratic Party won, and some names were even mentioned. Willingness to Help In view of the above circumstances, we requested a statement from the Commissioner of Health. Dr. Pona stated the following: "Governor Mufioz Marin has done me the honor of asking me to continue in the direction of the Department of Health. As I am willing to help the cause of the people of Puerto Rico, as far as I am able to do so, and I am also willing to assist Governor Mufioz Marin in discharging his new responsibilities, as far and as long as he thinks I can help him, I am prepared to accept again the (Continued on page 10)
' f fB Y BW B J™L ■ '■ DEAN ACHESON 1* foreign policy of the United" States. "The change," he said, "should be simple, since Acheson is familiar with the policy and Webb has a lot of administrative experience." He said that both could be brought up to speed "very quickly," and that he would remain as long as necessary to carry out the (Continued on page 10) Judgment Dam (bonillas Gran Paso Industrial Editorial 'New York Times' Review Advance New Era dr the Island NEW YORK "January 7.-(PU)-In an editorial entitled "New Era For Puerto Rico," the New York Times says today that the inauguration of the Caonlllas Dam in Puerto Rico "as *1 center of a modern electric power system, constitutes a great step forward in the industrial development of the Island." The newspaper, considered *often the most authoritative in the United States, says there is other evidence of the new period into which the Insular dependency is entering. It points to the 50 per cent decrease in the average d> deaths since 1940. the nearly 50 per cent increase in the number of teachers in Public Instruction, the improvement of the air transportation system with the projected opening of work on a new airport next month and the virtual disappearance of malaria, medianle the efforts of the Insular Gohlerno, the Federal Public Health Service and the Rockefeller Foundation. Time" says that the "problems of tuberculosis, social diseases and housing remain acute" and points to the Puerto Nuevo project, which it says has already sold or occupied half of its land, as evidence of the housing shortage. Speaking of the slums of Puerto Rico which "still disfigure San Juan on the island and abroad," the paper states, "a disturbing factor is the apparent desire of many families to remain in these shacks where they do not pay rent." The editorial concludes, "Puerto Rico e" tndavfa a poor territory, (Continued on page 10).
News Digest
Commissioner Pona will propose a reorganization of the Health Department. " " - Vlllarnnga is interested in getting more funding* for schools. - - - Plane wreckage sighted off Cuba's north coast. - UPR will receive a donation for primates. - Chief Soto was acquitted in contempt case and the case of aggression against Mr. Vlllamll was filed. Mauna Loa volcano is erupting in Hawaii. De Jraúa Inicia lo,y Itinerary da laa budget lectures. - Dean Achesnn replaces General Marshall as Secretary of State. - - - President believes current economic situation is dangerous. - - - Governor did not receive visitors yesterday. "Attorney General considers Freyre for San Juan District Attorney. - - - Hospital Association is against mandatory health insurance. ♦ - - - Dló comlenso la safra de 1949 en tres centrales.
The UPR Law School has been recognized by the National Association of Law Schools. - - - Russia feared to suspend shipments of manganese to the United States*. - M new enrollees to be called for medical examination on Monday. - The UN will not intervene in the Chinese conflict. - - - Sugar Union and FLT will not follow secretarial determination, when discussing Wages in sugar industry. "♦ - Unions of Japan against the 48-hour workday. ♦ - - The Federation of Commerce will promote several amendments to the Tax Law. * - - - Accusations for theft are filed against El Invisible and his brother. - - - About 800 motor vehicle drivers' licenses have already been renewed. - - - Petition on coffee price increase to be decided next week. - - - Communists appraised at the Tientsin front. ♦ - - . B Chase Bank will give credits to coffee growers* of the Island. - - - Yesterday m announced the com of the struggle in Palestine.
Russia Fears Suspension of Manganese Shipments to U.S.
PITTSBURGH, Jan. 7. (PU) - Steel industry sources expressed fears today that Russia may suppress vital manganese exports to the United States as a "cold war" move against American steel products. Sources who declined to be named said that shipments of manganese ore from the Soviet Union have been declining since January 1 and may be suppressed altogether, thus threatening U.S. steel production. Russia supplies about 35 percent of the manganese used by American steel mills. Other excellent sources of the mineral, however, are located in East Africa, Brazil and India, industry leaders say. But any sharp reduction by the Russians would leave the steel industry in a "serious situation" until new sources can supply its total production, industry leaders said.
Industry. Walter S. Tower, president of the American Iron and Steel Institute, said in New York that "no one knows how to produce steel on a commercial basis without manganese", "Under present practices, it takes 12 to 14 pounds of manganese to produce one ton of steel", Manganese is important in the manufacture of steel as a hardening agent. It is used in the production of most kinds of steel, although tungsten is used in the manufacture of tools and other similar items of steel. The fear that the Russians might cripple manganese exports originated, above all, when the Russians denied a strong importer here a new contract. Other companies reported that their imports have been reduced but not completely eliminated. Other companies have also received "confidential notices" that their contracts may not be renewed. (Continued on page 10)
Villaronga Interested In More Funds
Will Ask Legislature For Help Requested Cooperation On Federal Government Allocation By BENJAMIN SANTANA Rodactor do EL MUNDO The Commissioner of Instruction is requesting action in favor of including Puerto Rico, as a state, in the Federal Education Assistance Project. In his message to Congress, President Truman urged approval of the measure, which will be introduced in a moment. Commissioner Villaronga has spent this week getting acquainted with the problems of the Department of Instruction and familiarizing himself with the machinery in general. He is particularly interested in securing larger Insular and Federal appropriations, as, he said, he is greatly concerned about the fact that thousands of children are out of school for lack of educational facilities. Action Must Be Quick In view of the fact that President Truman has already recommended the approval of the Federal Aid for Instruction Bill, and in view also of the fact that this measure will be filed at any moment, it is necessary, according to Commissioner Villaronga, to act quickly in favor of Puerto Rico's case. The bill allocates about $4,000,000 to Puerto Rico, as a U.S. possession: but the allocation could be about $25,000,000 if the island is granted statehood treatment. "The measure is of extraordinary importance for* Puerto Rico," the new Commissioner of Instruction said yesterday, "since an additional $20 or $25 million from the Federal Government would almost double the present allocation for Instruction which, even so, would not be enough to solve the island's tremendous educational problems." Regardless of what can be obtained from the Naclonal Congress, Commissioner Villaronga hopes to get additional funds from the Island Legislature, The Rola Afin" He hopes that the Six-Year Education Plan can be carried out without any difficulty, since, according to him, it is the least that can be expected in the approach and solution of the" serious" educational" problem" of Fuerto Rico. This plan, which is to extend from fiscal year 1949-1950 to 1954-1955, allocates a total amount of $224,454,13.3 for new building, equipment and operating expenses. The Plan provides for the construction of 6,219 classrooms, 872 vocational units, 1,557 school cafeterias, 720 offices for school officials and 1,037 storage rooms. The additional 6,219 classrooms will be used as follows: 2,814 to admit new" students and increase the retention power of the school system, 799 to eliminate the "Interlockings" system. 707 to reduce dual enrollment or dohle session. 1,362 to replace an equal number of rented classrooms, for which the Government is paying more than $25,000 per month. 482 to reduce the number of schools in which one teacher is in charge of more than one grade. 256 to reduce excessive enrollment. Commissioner Villaronga requests the teachers, civic entities and the people in general to "hasten to request from Congress the greatest benefits for the Island from the Federal Aid Project, and to request from the Legislature the necessary funds to carry out the Six-Year Plan. In order for the Island to receive statehood treatment to the extent necessary to carry out the Six-Foot Plan.
President Believes Current Economic Situation Is Dangerous I A.,- I Calls for Price Control I
UPR Admits 24 Suspended Students Yesterday's Enrollment for 2nd Semester Was 1,3.30 Students Yesterday, 1,3.30 students enrolled at the University, who will follow courses during the second academic semester. The enrollment will continue today at 8:30 a.m. "Next semester will be able to study'21 Ins students who spoke "been suspended preventively, on the occasion of the events rie Ja university strike. The enrollment began yesterday with the students of ruarlo and torcer "ños and some" students riel first "fio. the latter did not enroll in the Theater 'of the University. 4 To be continued today Registration will continue today with the extension students, who are teachers of public instruction. The same will begin n n eight o'clock in the morning, extending until l"< twelve, It will resume at ln I one o'clock in the afternoon, untiltn ]"s four, and will be de "cuerdo with - shift ballots issued by the College of Pedagogts, During registration, yesterday, the Rector of the University, Jaime Renltez was in the theater, observing the work being carried out. According to the University Treasurer, Francisco Rivera Brenca, the work lasted until half past five in the afternoon, with no recess at noon. At that time, 1,3.30 students were enrolled, and the work would continue in the evening with the students of the Night Division. It was reported by the assistant to the Dean of Students of the University. sefior Enrique Vitalia, that 24 students of those who have "been preventively suspended because of the university strike, have been enrolled to continue their university studies" during the next academic year. However, three of these students" were not given their "Cadmium Index, so they will continue their studies next year. Five of the aforementioned students are veterans who have been reinstated in all their university rights". Federal Law Harmful to the Islal G. Polanco Refers Tenancy Statute The Attorney General. Vicente Géigel Polanco, declared yesterday to an editor of EL MUNDO, that -" his opinion is that the current E*d*ral Tenancy Law harms the functions of the Insular Law. Questioned as to what steps were being taken to ensure that the provisions relating to federal rent controls were replaced by local law, he said that "I believe that the Island's federal rent controls should be eliminated. To this end, he indicated that he had sent a memorandum to Mr. Tighe E. Wood, Housing Accelerator, requesting that the federal rent laws be eliminated during the 1949 fiscal year.
during aftn 1949. The Union and ln FLT. which this aftn are jointly negotiating the collective bargaining agreement for the coming harvest with ln Sugar Producers Association. "They will ignore the determination of the U.S. Secretary of Agriculture," said Mr. R-ivcro. For his part, Nogueras Rivera declared that "neither the Secretary's determination nor the insular decree in any way affects the demand being made by democratic organized labor, represented by the FLT, the Union, and the independent unions". No Hay No Mejor* In announcing that both sugar workers' organizations reject the determination to fix minimum rates of sour sugar and the system of workers' participation in the sugar price increase, Mr. Rivera informed that "it has not improved at all the determinations of the last four years". He stated that the workers have demanded a fixed minimum wage in both phases of the industry. Both organizations have demanded minimum wages starting at 50 cents per hour in the agricultural phase and 75 cents per hour in the manufacturing phase. He said that "we will fight both in collective bargaining and in the wage fixing system based on the price of the railroad. "We consider," he added, "that the great sugar monopolies and refiners who are directly or directly connected" with the Puerto Rican sugar producers have a great influence in the sugar stock market. For this reason, workers are at a disadvantage "1 adversely affect their" wages, with metivn tie the ups and downs riel price". Rivero revealed that "we will demand a fixed price for <*1 sugar, " through price control legislation" to be passed by Congress. Likewise, we will demand profit sharing through legislation, Insular clone, or in collective contracting". Position of the FLT The" statements riel Mr. Nogueras "on the" following: "The secretarial determination, so- ( (Continued on page 30)
- It is expected that next week the petition made by the AGS for the price of coffee will be resolved. This was submitted to the General Administration of Supply" by the coffee growers". Yesterday afternoon, Mr. Antonio Vicéns Rio", General Administrator of Supplies, informed that he is still studying the petition of the coffee growers. He added that he expects to resolve it in all likelihood during the next week.
Truman Addresses Congress ""■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■i
i I < R S |R I Jr * - BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBHBEsBR President Truman gestlculH with nnib hands mlentrRM delivers "u "State of the Union" address, ol Wednesday, before Congress, in Wáshlngton, D. ('. Senator Kenneth McKellar, president prn támpore of the .Sonado, is shown seated beside him. (Photo F. AJ Sugar Union and FLT Object to Secretarial Action Representatives Report They Will Not Follow Standards Set by Federal Agriculture for Sugar Industry in Discussion of Wage Rates The Sugar Union and the Free Federation, through their respective general secretaries, Messrs. Amando Rivero and Nicolas Nogueras Rivera, yesterday objected to the secretarial determination setting minimum wage rates in the sugar industry.
nxitxiin ue- m inUHaiiin flAUGR I I I R. The New Sugar Harvest Began In 3 Centrals Signed Provisional Stipulation ron Workers On Wages Three sugar mills of 1" Island have already begun the 1949 harvest, which is expected to produce an amount of L239.The start of operations at these plants was made possible by the signing of a stipulation under which the workers will receive the same wages as last year, until the signing of the new collective bargaining agreement which has already been signed by the Sugar Producers' Association, the Sugar Syndicate and other unions. The remaining 31 sugar mills on the Island will begin milling during the course of this month and at the beginning of February. Of the 1,239,000 tons of sugar expected for this harvest, 910,000 will be exported to the United States and 100,000 tons will be destined for local consumption. Surplus expected" The 1949 crop is expected to produce a surplus of 229,000 tons of sugar. This surplus, if it is not used to cover deficiencies in other domestic producing areas, will have to be allocated to the 1,50th harvest. The workers' organizations have demanded substantial wage increases. The Secretary of Agriculture has indicated the same wage scales that applied last year at the beginning of the harvest. The wage rates set by the Secretary are expected to help "clarify the true situation of the sugar industry as to its ability to sustain or increase wages for the past year. (Continued on page 10)
Vicéns To Decide On Coffee Prices Next Week
The petition presented by the coffee growers, in addition to the price increase, includes a request to prohibit the exportation of part of the insular harvest of the year 1948-49. As is well known, the coffee growers base their request for an increase on the high cost of production, due to the high wages and poor yield of this crop. In their opinion, this justifies an increase in the price fixed by the General Supply Administration".
Also Wages And Distribution Desra Have A Fretio Against Possible Sharp Inflation In U.S. | Tor Lnuta CASSF.IB I WASHINGTON, Jan. 7 (PU) - President Truman informed Congress today ■ that the United States" H is entering dangerous" B economic waters, having on one side "dangerous forces Inflation "* R rías", and on the other the threat Je a R ¡ depressionPar" to combat these threats, Ri the President called for control'e" over j tes .ternalcs and 1a distribution - with* R major, but "flexli R bles" trihutions; the continuation rie 1ns mns H troles on tas credit" bancarin" I í and ta" consumer credit". He also called for broad social welfare plans. Ens control" over Rl . prices, Wages and ta dis* - R trlhution, would be a way rta me* I (lirias rie omerg*neia, to "ar u.ta* Rl das at e| time required Inflation May Return R* Proscntanrin his third annual economic Inform* Rl to 1" House and R| Senate, President Truman said Bg j that cl 1949 will see "Igunn" Rh ! prices fall, while others conti* R| [ miarán ascending. R| He indicated Truman qu" some pre* I idos have begun to fall, and said it would be ''formidable," if this ■' gradual adjustment were to be sustained. But he stressed that teda- Rg via it is too early to rielar I to think of 1a inflation, because tes prices may very M-llmen- R He resumed their march Inflation "* i ria, । Moreover, he added, any "dess I abrupt census and designar' in Jos pre1 dos may be as serte as 1" I continuation d" ta inflation. As long as ta economic situation contains these "mixed elements," di|a seftar Truman, the Gablcrio I have to have parieres, cue. I give "to be applied as brakes to I accelerators, in accordance with the current" Realstencla n?* I cesidaries of the Nation. It may be necessary to use anti-lnfllfllact it.s and anti-de* pressure" at the same time, said the Chief Executive, The report was prepared by the R| Committee of Economic Advisers" (te! Picsirientc, headed by R ; riactar Edwin G- Noursa, The infor* me reflected much of Ja that ej se- I fiar Truman rilja the mlé-col"" in I his message I will know the astate rie Ja I i Union, and much rie te that" he will say in I his budget message! ni Congra. so, e| next Monday. The President rii.te that 1948 was afra afto of much prosperity. He reported that they were *rahaíing R | 59,400,000 persnnas (while he rie. M i seated that they smoked 60,000,000', that I ' production rose almost fourfold, that wages" were up, that profits were up, that the rie tas carpan* [ dones set a peak pa- BH 1 ra Indas the Hampas can $21,000,. 000,000,000 (riariudrias tas cantnbucln. ¡ncsJ; and that forte" tes prices onméhzaian to bn.tar, Ins of foodstuffs. ' He commented that ln Nation has da- R4 mostrararte caria rila more than nu "He EJ resisting tes blows with extern va- I ter, and quo nn there was a general Jepresián, but added; "The qn* we had passed 'a prl- Rl max ora riel 1948 without a general 'tepiesibq Rg does not mean that we do not voh e. Ionios to be in jeopardy So n a" EH has comed a momenta te relief, RH p'ro we will not be able to enjoy permanent oros- HH portead, if M9 tes eyes v Bhsndnnamos the attitude RB vigilant." He appeared Optimistic However, Seftor Truman s" BH niastró confident, "Croo that the p'uo "* portead puerte mant'nerso",_ dilo. --and outlined the .s¡gumn£q_pi¿ograms I to achieve: te: . Control "over te" prices-- peno- RB ved his request rie that Jelta be allowed to rigidly control the ; re. BR also asked for the authority to order a given industry to implement a price increase as long as a public MR investigation proves that the nu- RU mint is "Justified", IR (Cantlnua on page 10) _ _ _ HM Procurador Concentrará Juecei en San Juan El licenciada Vicente Géigel |Hi Pala neo Pracurador General rie Puerta Rica, anunció ayer que solicitará tes tes servicios do los jue- KR oes del Tribunal do Expropiaos- wgli nos, con el fin rie hacer "una ■3? cleanup riel calendar rio cases," 184843 in tas cortes rie San Juan. In a meeting held yesterday with the local judges rie riistrí- BW to. and with the three members "at- ■■■ large", cl Pmcutador General KM expressed that it was his intention to hold a concentration of judges. in order to update the work, especially tes of KM the Civil Section, where there are cen- llEE*! tenares rie cases pending to be held. He also informed the prosecutor that he has in mind to create rtes B ' ariicionales places of Judges, p". mg r" get that they do not accumulate lo" easns.