the World
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Cloudy and Hurlom during "I day, becoming partly cloudy with scattered showers in the evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - Maximum temperature, 84 degrees; minimum, 73 degrees. Barometric pressure, sea level, at 4:89 p.m., 20.81 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Nov. 18. (FU) - The following temperatures were recorded this afternoon: New York, 42; Chicago, 84; Waahington, 44; Miami, 67, Predlcdonea for tomorrow in New York and neighboring eludade" : Roteado, with the highest temperature between 48 and M. Moderate winds from the West,
MARANA NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXX
te red
Entered as second class matter, Port Office. San Juan. P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 19
IRE OF 1949
NUMBER 13850 CINCO CENTAVO
Farmers' Loans Available Now
To Be Used For Housing Extension Says Fund To Be Invested In 10 Months Is 8580,000. Requirements "The farmers of Puerto Rico are already applying for loans for the construction and lease of their vlvlends and other rural buildings," stated Mr. C. C. Stubha, regional director of the Farmers' Home Administration. He affirmed that "all the machinery is in place, and the agency's supervisors on the island are already accepting applications and filling out the necessary paperwork. Indicating that "Puerto Jileo's farmers have more need than anyone else to take advantage of this home construction loan plan because of the poor condition of our rural housing, Mr. Stubbs said the plan is not only broad in its purpose, but that the FHA has a wide discretion in the qualification of farmers who are candidates for loans. He said that both small, medium and large farmers can qualify for these loans, and that special attention will be given to coffee farmers. Farmers will not be limited in the amount of money they can borrow. In determining the amount to be borrowed, FHA will adjust only to the 'conditions and needs of the farm and the cost of construction. In other words, the farmer will be provided with the amount of money necessary for those home and other buildings that in FHA's judgment are in keeping with the needs, economic conditions, and environment in which each particular farmer operates. $2,820,000 Within Four Years Mr. C. C. Stubbs stated that the Puerto Rican farmer must prove this year that he needs this loan plan and that he can work with it. If the program works well this year, in 1950 Puerto Rico may be entitled to $1,160,000 with successive increases as follows: $1,740,000 in the third year and $2,320,000 in the fourth and succeeding years. Naturally, such increases will depend on future Congressional action, but this gives an idea of the importance of the program and the need for the Puerto Rican farmer to make the best possible use of these loans. Agricultural Agendas Will Cooperate "This program is urgently needed in Puerto Rico," says a note from the Extension Service, "Conditions are inadequate and unhealthy. In many homes there are not even the most basic amenities. In view of these facts, the FHA has lightened the implementation of the plan by providing its officers in the various districts of the Island with the corresponding application blanks and instructions on how to process them, "Likewise, the FHA will have appraisal attorneys, engineers and assistant supervisors to facilitate the processing of the loans. The Agricultural Extension Service of the University of Puerto Rico will also cooperate in this program. Extension will disseminate all kinds of information and guidance to farmers in Puerto Rico interested in the plan, and (Cont. on page 14). Col. 41
Morgenthau to Return to U.S. Today.
I I* Ml r á TWBIFf B '*WWW - X r 1 " t £? X >
Senior Henry Morgenthau, Jr. (right) while conferring yesterday with Governor Lula Muflo" Marin at the Torrase de La Fortaíesa (Photo EL MUNDO).
The former Secretary of the Treasury made i . Food Study on the Island
Tested Flour and Biscuits Produced in Hato Rey, With a View to Using Them for Displaced People
Pnr Juan Martines Chapel , Editor of EL MUNDO ' ' ' F' notable American dark horse, Henry Morgenthau, arrived yesterday in San Juan from the Virgin Islands. He was met at the airport by a representative of the Governor and by Rafael Fernández García, vice-president of the Industry Development Company. >" " "■>
Mr. Morgenthau, who served as Secretary of the U.S. Treasury during Franklin Delano Roosevelt's years as President of the United States, is dedicated to finding the means to provide food for many thousands of displaced persons from Europe, especially from Israel. He came to Puerto Rico to study the food value of certain products produced in a pilot plant maintained by the Development Company in Hato Rey. Invited to lunch with the Governor yesterday, Mr. Morgenthau arrived at the Palace at noon, accompanied by Mr. Rafael Fernández Garda and Mr. Norman S. Oí-son, president of the Virgin Islands Company. Before lunch, Mr. Morgenthau examined and tasted a certain flour prepared with yeast, made from cane molasses, wheat and sugar, and some cookies of a similar composition with a pleasant taste, which according to the technicians have a high nutritional value that can be an advantageous substitute for meat. The product being manufactured contains a large quantity of proteins and is rich in protein and vitamin B-l, and should help to improve the physical condition of the malnourished inhabitants of the regions of Europe entrusted to Mr. Morgenthau. Speaking of the physical condition of most of the inhabitants of Israel, Mr. Morgenthau reported that the average weight of the adults who occupied a plane in which he came was no more than fifty to sixty pounds. - To supply protein by means of a meat diet to these people, besides being very costly, seems very difficult because of its high cost.
Colón Torres Asks for Refinancing System Advocates Before Planning Board For Funds For Soil Conservation Plan The Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, Mr. Rafael Colón Torres, has asked the Planning Board to include in the Seventh Ecological Program an allocation for the establishment of an Agricultural Refinancing Credit System. Before the end of the public hearing held yesterday, Mr. Colón Torres also advocated the allocation of funds for the Inaular Soil Conservation Program. He also explained the great need to expand the office facilities of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce through the construction of a third floor for which no allocation of uncommitted funds is required, since the Lands Authority is committed to supply these funds provided that the building it currently occupies on the grounds of the Department of Agriculture is transferred to it. L Against 1* Elimination The Mayor, Mr. Rafael Colón Peña, expressed his opposition to the proposed elimination of the self-renewable allocation to the municipalities for having transferred their aqueducts to the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority. He also requested the inclusion of an allocation for the construction of the Aguadilla ballpark in 1950-51. University professor, Mr. Reece Bothwell, advocated for a (Cont. on page 18, Col, 7).
Alben Barkley Marries
Vice President's Wedding (It was a Simple Ceremony)
SAN LUIS, Nov. 18, (PU)- Vice President Alben W. Barkley and Oofiora Carleton S. Hadley became husband and wife today in a simple ceremony at the St. Louis Methodist Church. Dr. Ivan Loe Holt, Methodist bishop of Misurf, officiated at the simple intercom/ bio of vows. Only members of the immediate families were present, along with fifty or more porters and members of the Secret Service. The wedding ceremony began at six minutes past eleven in the morning, Central Standard Time, and ended quickly. The groom's son, 'David, was the best man. Mrs. Hadley was presented by her brother, William W. Rucker, of West Palm Beach, Florida. A crowd of about two thousand people, composed mostly of women, gathered outside the chapel to see the bride and groom. Many of them arrived early in the morning.
After the ceremony the bride and groom and their relatives attended a luncheon at the residence of the bride's friend, Mrs. T. M. Sayman. Anochocho, the now husband and wife Barkley dined, at the home 9 of Mr. and Mrs. Marion Niedringhaus. First tn Ctstrss The septuagenarian and cheerful Vice President has been the first Vice President to marry during his incumbency. Coincidentally, the same date was the wedding of a man who became vice-president. This was Schuyler Colfax, vice president-elect and running mate of President Ulysses S. Grant, who married Ellen Wade in November 18, 1868. He was sworn into office in March of the following year. - Ooflor Berkley, who will be 72 years old on Thanksgiving Day, arrived at Lambert Municipal Airport forty minutes late (Cont. on page 12, Col. 8)!
Congressional Committee "Stunned" After Visit To El Fanguito Sector
Travel in Russia
There Are Always Obstacles to Making Visits to the Provinces
By JOSEPH NEWMAN -xmPARIS- Members of the diplomatic corps in Moscow have had a better opportunity to observe the Soviet Union since a year ago, when travel to certain places was authorized. Conditions varied considerably from place to place, showing great progress in reconstruction work in some places and great backwardness in others. The people, too, seemed better fed and clothed in some places than in others. The people, as far as the officials and agents were concerned, were cordial and friendly. Since the limited vlA jes were authorized, members of the diplomatic corps in Moscow have been able to travel short distances* to Yaroslav and Vologda; south to Kursk, Kaharkov and Odessa; southeast to Saratov, Stalingrad and Astrakhan on the Volga River: to Makhakala by the Caspian Sea and further south and inland to Tbilisi, capital of the Caucasian republic of Georgia; and south to Tbilisi, capital of the Caucasian republic of Georgia.
Caucasian republic of Georgia; westward to Smolensk, eastward to Ufa and Chakalov, in the Urals, and beyond the Urals to Omsk, and Novosibirsk, in the Far Orlente. These facilities have not yet been extended to foreign correspondents. With one or two exceptions, they are still restricted to Moscow. We were, therefore, limited to learning about these areas by talking to those who had visited them. Still, however, it was impossible to send dispatches about them because of Soviet censorship ... . In Stalingrad, which was badly devastated by the war, visitors found considerable activity in reconstruction work, especially of government buildings and factories. More than a score of North African trucks (probably two during the war) were continually on the move. People were extremely sensitive (Cont. on page 16, Col. 2).
Minimum Wage Hearings To Be Held Tuesday, Nov. 29 To See Evidence Of Highest Possible Minimum Wage In Various Industries On Nov. 29, public hearings will begin in San Juan before a committee appointed by the Wage and Hour Division to make recommendations to that agency on the minimum wage to be set in various island industries connected with interstate commerce. The San Juan office of the Wage and Hour Division yesterday issued a notice informing of the members of the committee, the industries to be investigated and other details of the hearings. McComb, Administrator of the Federal Salt and Hour Division, announced that public hearings will be held, beginning November 29, 1949, at 10:00 a.m., at Ip:00 a.m., in Ip office 412 of the New York Department Store building in Santurce, for the purpose of receiving evidence to be considered by the Special Committee on Industries number 6, upon this committee making its recommendations of the highest minimum wage 1 which may be paid by industries in Puerto Rico (nq greater than 75 cents an hour to begin to take effect on a date after January 24, I960) to employees of. Industries in Puerto Rico engaged in interstate commerce or in the production of articles for commerce Interest alai. The room- , rivers recommended by this committee, shall be based on economic and competitive conditions, so as not to cause unemployment in the industry or to permit any industry in Puerto Rico (Cont. on page 16, Col. 5).
Brannan Says No Fear Of Depression Declares Postwar Readjustment No Harm OMAHA, Nebraska, Nov. 18 - (PU) - Secretary of Commerce Charles A. Sawyer said last night that the Nation's business was in "good condition," and that most Americans who talked with him during his fourteen thousand mile trip no longer feared a depression. "I see no reason Indicative that the upward commercial trend, begun last summer, cannot continue," he said, "if we succeed in settling the strikes in the coal and steel Industries, and no others arise." His conversations with two thousand five hundred businessmen and one thousand labor leaders convinced him, Sawyer said, that, generally speaking, the postwar readjustment had not been "severe or detrimental to business." "This is my last stop on my four-month tour," he told a Chamber of Commerce luncheon. "I'm pleased with what I've seen. I can tell you' honestly that business is in good .condition." National Economy "There is nothing wrong with the national economy. I said a year ago that there is no reason to complain. But the shoulders of business were terrified last winter and reduced their inventories; when they began to buy eggs, business improved, even all summer, until the strikes came. "Those who were pessimistic acted intensely. The businessmen do not now expect a (Cont. on page 16, Col. 8)
Members of the Ways and Means Committee of the National Chamber of Representatives were stunned yesterday when they visited the area known as El Fangulto. On board two boats of the Nautical Club, the congressmen, presided over by the sefior Sidney Camp, and several government officials, as well as of the Company of Industrial Promotion gave a tour from the mentioned club to Martin Peña. Another boat following that of the congressmen carried on board the photographers of the local press. Photos on Page 7 Other journalists accompanied the congressmen on their trip to the Martin Peña channel. Surprised As the Deseu pero and Camalegin'boats passed near the shacks surrounded by water and pestilence, the congressmen showed in their faces their displeasure at seeing human beings living in such a place. Their surprise increased as they observed children, women and men*, scantily clad and with hunger on their faces, walking on the wooden bridges that connect one house to another. - One congressman ventured to comment "how is it possible that in Puerto Rico there is money to invest in such expensive construction as the Carlb" Hilton Hotel, and at the same time allow the existence of such a ridiculous picture of misery". The representatives" of the Government scarcely had the word" to answer adequately the representative's intarro" gatlva. Lns congreslstar'ob "ervaban carefully every place that was" shown to him. I-questions were asked one after the other. The foul odor emanating from the co* lectoras made their presence in that place more nauseating. However, the "congressmen" greeted effusively the "reildente" of the Fangulto, for whom Ja visit of "the Americans" was like a holiday. ¡t Visit San Joaé Then the "Congrealitaa turned a" visit to the project of public home"" that built the Island Homes Authority: the project of San José. The visitors were interested in the construction of the YoYo type, the minimum type of housing built by the Authority. Mr. César Cordero Dávlla, who accompanied the group, explained the program that is being carried out and the one that will be carried out with the new homes law recently approved by Congress, and in which Puerto Rico will benefit fundamentally, . j., Among the island officials who accompanied the congressmen was Dr. Antonio Femó" Isérn, who, when asked by this editor, said he was confident that the congressmen would take the information to Washington to promote the measure he presented and another that currently exists (Cont., on page 14, Col. 8).
4 v ; j a'k limes B b EM ' r X 1 ' K ।-flBff iíírfff?l fl , \ i! 1 The j nlB*! "i HHNL bB E f - wL 1 IB/Ol : CT5WB "Mjp ffl;; ■ I V iB i jéBI B$ BIr* t "HB HUB.
■ Usía, where the ceremony took place yesterday. In 1a center photograph, i wia view of the main facade of the chapel of the Methodist church i <e St. John's, St. Louis City, where the ceremony i Ruptial was held. Eh the one on the left we see the bride, Mrs. Carleston &.
Vice President Alben Barkley, smiling broadly, as if showing himself to be a happy man on his last day of bachelorhood. Here he is preparing to board a plane at Waahlngton National Airport, on the eve of his wedding, to head to St.
Hadley, today Mrs. Barkley, "heridey* blue" wool suit. special creation she selected for her wedding yesterday to the Vicepree|aente. (Photo by Frensa Associated)
Air Force Downsized In Pto. Rico
Johnson Order Urges Economy Affects Roosevelt Base And San Juan - Further Reduction Expected November 18 (PU) - Admiral Forrest P. Sherman, Chief of Naval Operations, ordered the disbandment of 35 naval and naval aviation squadrons and the halting of operations at six air bases, two of them in Puerto Rico, to adjust to budget reductions. * The reduction of about 20 percent of the Navy's air power has been anticipated. It will be implemented within the next four months. Secretary of Defense, Louis Johnson, has ordered the Navy to economize $350,000,000 of the funds voted by Congress for the current fiscal year, The Army was ordered to economize $357,000,000 and the Air Force $185,000,000. > Senior Navy officers protested the limitations at. recent public hearings of the House Armed Services Committee, saying they would "necessarily" drastically reduce the Navy's air potential. But Johnson countered that it is essential that all the services begin to economize now, to gradually prepare to operate within the still more limited defensive budget proposed for the fiscal year 1951. The reduction in Naval Aviation was announced exactly two weeks after the Navy reported that thirty-five warships, including five aircraft carriers, would be withdrawn from active duty by July 1 next under the economy campaign. In addition, forty-eight auxiliary ships will be withdrawn. Four airlift groups, of five squadrons each, will be disbanded, leaving the Navy with ten carrier groups only. The carrier groups to be disbanded are eLCG-9 at Charleatown, Rhode Island; CGV-8 at Jacksonville, Florida; and CVG15 at Alameda, California. Three transport squadrons, not assigned to groups, will also be disbanded: VA-3S and VA75 at Quonset Point, Rhode Island, and VA-174 at Jacksonville, Jacksonville, Florida. The plan also calls for a reduction in bombardment and patrol squadrons from 30 to 25, and fighter squadrons from 23 to 16. Details of these reductions will be announced later. Five naval stations will be placed in reserve. These are Roosevelt Roads, Puerto Rico; Trinidad, Coco Solo, Panama Canal Zone; Bermuda and San Juan, Puerto Rico. The Naval Aviation facility at Charlestown, Rhode Island, will be closed. In San Juan = The Tenth Naval District Public Affairs Officer informed EL MUNDO that the order from the Chief of Naval Operations placing the Roosevelt Roads Base and naval aviation facilities in San Juan on standby does not mean that the naval facilities or the Tenth Naval District will be discontinued. Civilians currently employed by the Naval Aviation Facilities in San Juan will be (Cont. on p. 16, Col. 8)
Insurance Sets $25 Minimum Pension,
Advisor Myers Explains Bill Worker Would Be Insured After 10 Years in Employment By Luis Unchex Cappa EL MUNDO Staff Writer The manner in which social security as provided for in House Bill 6,000, currently under consideration by Congress, would operate in Puerto Rico was explained in detail yesterday by Mr. Robert J. Myers, head of the Social Security Division of the Department of Homeland Security. Myers, chief of the Actuarial Division of the federal Social Security Agency and an advisor on Social Security to the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Ways and Means, which is in Puerto Rico. In response to questions from this editor, Mr. Myers, who arrived in Puerto Rico last night, explained the application to the Island of the federal old age, dependents and disability system provided for in the aforementioned bill. Mr. Myers said that under the House bill, not only would Puerto Rican workers be covered, but the basic system would be revised and liberalized. In order for the legislation to be extended to the Island, the Legislature would have to pass a Concurrent Resolution expressing its interest in Puerto Rico's inclusion. The Governor would then have to certify this fact to the President and the Act would then be extended to the Island, to take effect ninety days after the President's receipt of such notification. Benefit to Laborers As to the workers to be covered by the law, the federal official explained the following: "Under this insurance system, all workers in Puerto Rico would be covered, with the following exceptions: agricultural workers (including both laborers and farmers), casual domestic service employees, priests and members* of religious orders, federal employees, island and municipal employees (except that the island and municipal governments may opt to accept such inclusion), self-employed persons and certain professionals such as doctors, dentists, lawyers in general and publishers. Those who are self-employed and have an income of $400 or more per year are eligible for Inclusion. Also eligible for inclusion are domestic service workers employed by a private employer for a term of not less than 26 days during a quarter, if they receive at least $25 in cash during such period. The manner in which pensions would be paid to insured workers was explained by Mr. Myers as follows: "Monthly pensions will be paid to insured workers who reach the age of 65 or older and who are not earning $40 or more per month in insurable employment (this same income restriction applies to all ln"-Hpoi monthly pensions). If the insured worker's wife is age 65 or older, she also receives an annual pension, as is the case for a retired worker who has a child under age 18 (in which case the wife receives the pension regardless of her age). If the insured worker dies, either before or after he or she has (Cont. on page 14, Col. 1)